

THE ARTIST'S AND ILLUSTRATORS'S MAGAZINE NOVEMBER 1992 ISSUE 74 £1.95 Covering New Zealand landscapes — with gouache!
Your best buys: liquid acrylics and the brushes to use them with Watercolour paper — we offer hints on the latest tints LOOKING AT ART ON THE UNDERGROUND PLUS NEW TECHNICAL ADVICE PAGES, ILLUSTRATING LONDON UNDERGROUND, WINDY SCENES IN WATERCOLOUR AND THE LATEST ART NEWS
CONTENTS
WE LOOK AT AND USE
WATERCOLOUR
In the final part of his Watercolour Master Class Series, Tom Robb combines dry brush techniques with other methods to create a windy scene.
GOUACHE
The horizons of New Zealand captured the imagination of Michael Vincent, as he displays in a landscape painting.
TINTED WATERCOLOUR PAPER
Using shades of watercolour paper will offer you a whole new range of opportunities.
Terry Harrison shows how.
WE FOCUS ON
ALLAN RAMSAY
An 18th century portrait artist with a true eye for painting women, Allan Ramsay is reappearing in the public domaine.
Andrew Lambirth examines his life and work.
JACQUELINE BLACK
A self-sufficient artist with her own business to run, we profile Jacqueline Black from her home in France.
STAINED GLASS ARTISTS
Philip Vann enlightens us to artist concentrating on work in stained glass.
NEW PRODUCT TEST
The new Pro Arte Acrylix brush comes under close scrutiny from acrylic expert Richard Smith.
EVERY MONTH
IN CONVERSATION WITH THE ARTIST
John Blockley and Moira Huntly work together in Gloucestershire, Faith Glasgow pays them a visit.
INSIDE ILLUSTRATION
The Underground has become an alternative gallery for artist's work.
We go down the tube.
SHOPPING FOR MATERIALS
Art materials expert Martin Child discovers which acrylic brushes you should be buying.
THE ART MEDIA FILE
Martin Child reveals the differences in liquid acrylics and advises on the most suitable choice for your specific technique.
REGULARS
LETTERS
MIXED MEDIA
MIXED MEDIA PROFILE
Dariusz Romanowski and painting from the imagination
QUESTION TIME   
Focus on Allan Ramsay — an artist whose work is all grace and delicacy.
(ABOVE)
Inside illustration: why is art going down the tubes?
(ABOVE)
Shopping for materials: choosing the right acrylic brush.
(ABOVE)
John Blockley and Moira Huntly talk from their studio in Gloucestershire.
(ABOVE)
LETTERS
LETTER OF THE MONTH PRIZE
This month's Letter of the Month writer will receive a Rotring 600 Series fountain pen.
The pen is manufactured using the high technology of Rotring's artist's designer's pens and is the ideal precision instrument for all your graphic needs.
For further information on this, or other Rotring products, contact: Rotring UK Ltd.
LETTER OF THE MONTH
During the summer, thousands of artists up and down the country queue up with their paintings on handing-in days at local art exhibitions.
The serious artists travel far and wide, seeking to hang and hopefully sell their work.
An increasing number of these artists have an incurable malady.
The symptoms are at their worst on preview nights when sufferers have an uncontrollable urge to rush round the exhibition, doing their best to display casual indifference, until their own work has been located.
Sufferers are agitated and resist contact with others, some pace up and down by their work, others keep away but take frequent peeks.
Hopefully, someone, somewhere will find a permanent cure from this debilitating malaise, known only as Red Spot Mania .
SUITABLY ENCOURAGED
I have been reading AIM as long as I can remember, and over the years have gained great inspiration form it.
I live in Scarborough, and some time ago enquired about leisure art classes; this led to me taking an interview for a full-time art and design course, which I have been accepted for.
I would like to thank all concerned with your magazine especially the readers who sent letters of encouragement, because whilst I was struggling to paint, I read AIM and took heart from all those like-minded people!
I would just like to say that I am 44 years of age, so art has no barriers.
It's never too late to start painting.
SCIENCE AND ART
I have been extremely fortunate to have worked in three scientific spheres: botanical, paleontological and malacological, over 19 years and even luckier to have been able to do scientific illustrating for publication, on subjects as diverse as grass flowers and tiny rodent jawbones!
Field work to acquire the specimens that I drew took me scuba-diving in the warm, subtropical waters of Natal and Zululand and braving seasickness on a research ship off the Transkei coast.
What fun it all was!
My work was executed in pen and ink, mainly stipple, and with this background and my interest in black and white work, I would love to see more articles on this aspect of illustrating.
Welcome also would be hints and tips from scientific illustrators and examples of their work.
Or is this considered non-U in the world of art?
VANISHING ARTISTS
After many years without lifting a paint brush, I am now ‘into art’ as my family call it!
Not as much as I would like to be, however, as the night class I joined in September 1991 did not have enough support to run again at the beginning of this year.
What happened to all those budding artists who came to sign on last autumn and arrived with their brand new paint boxes and paper?
The tutor is good, so too are the facilities and the company.
Did they need but one term to teach perfection, I wonder?
However, thanks to AIM, I have kept going.
The magazine is a constant source of information and encouragement from the first article to the last advertisement.
My only gripe is the size of the page numbers: like my criticism, minute!
NEGATIVE QUALITIES
As a painter, I have become somewhat dismayed about the potentially bleak future of acrylics.
I have recently heard, and read, several reports about the paint ‘peeling away’ and have even heard rumours that a few of David Hockney's originals are peeling away from their canvases, causing chaos with their owners, who are apparently demanding refunds!
I am hoping, with all my artistic heart, that this report turns out to be a myth, as I have tested a whole range of media including oils, only to discover what could be considered a negative quality in me: I am too damned impatient to allow the oils to dry before continuing with the painting!
For my benefit, and other young impatient artists everywhere, here's hoping that journalists and art critics prove to be a bunch of  gossiping Hilda Ogdens.
No offence, mind.
HANDS-ON LEARNING
After years of thinking that I could not draw or paint, I decided to have a go.
Armed with books from the library and a copy of AIM, I began to learn watercolour painting.
It was not as difficult as I thought.
With just a few basic materials, I now have paintings hanging on walls in relatives homes.
This summer, I visited the Art Materials Exhibition and, to my surprise, I learnt more from watching paintings in action than I could ever have learnt from the so-called Teach Yourself books.
So it's less time in the library, and more time with a brush in one hand and this month's copy of AIM in the other.
By the way, I am writing this with the Edding 1800 pen I recently won in one of your competitions.
THE PASTEL COMPLEX
I would like to draw readers' attention to the term pastel painting , which is, in my opinion, a classic misnomer.
Note the following.
Paint : a pigment ground into a vehicle for application by brush etc.
Painting : the process of applying pigment, held in a vehicle and applied to the surface in colour.
A pastel is a dry stick or crayon, it is not paint.
It is not ground in a painting vehicle, but remains dry, or non-fluid.
One draws and colours with pastel sticks in the same manner as with crayons and pencils.
The reason, in my opinion, why many artists call pastel application ‘painting’ is because they have some sort of complex when comparing their art to that of the oil painter, which is wrong.
They must assume that unless they use the term ‘painting’, their work will not be viewed in the same light as the oil painters' art.
It is almost like saying that watercolour painting is inferior to oil painting, when most of us realise how difficult watercolour is, and how many problems the oil painter doe not have to contend with.
I say, let pastels stand on their own merits, let them be drawing or colouring sticks, or crayons.
They are an exciting medium which requires special handling and a different approach to painting, making them unique and in no way inferior to painting.
NEWS…
REVIEWS…
COMPETITIONS…
EXHIBITIONS…
MATERIALS
Mixed Media
EXHIBITION OF THE MONTH
Enhanced by Picasso's growing fame, Juan Gris (1887–1927) left his native Spain for Paris in 1906, and in the following years was to become one of the leading artists of the Cubist movement.
His work remains largely in the hands of private collectors, and has so far escaped the reassessment and appreciation give to fellow Cubists Picasso, Braque and Leger in recent years.
The Whitechapel Art Gallery London is intent on rectifying this, and the current exhibition Juan Gris , selected by Professor Christopher Green of the Courtauld Institute, collects for the first time many of the artist's best works.
Juan Gris has often been cited as the most orthodox or ‘pure’ Cubist; taking over from where the eager Picasso left off, and refining and enriching the latter's artistic legacy.
Gris' use of sumptuous colour, delicate geometry and bold composition converge in romantic collages of musical instruments or table top still lives, and a closer look at his work belies his popular reputation as a cool logician.
The exhibition aims to reveal the multiple character of Gris' Cubist style at different periods in his career, from his earliest collages to works of the late 1920s. when he achieved a perfect balance between spiritual content and the dictates of structure.
Juan Gris, The Book of Magic, oil on canvas.
Courtesy Whitechapel Art Gallery.
(ABOVE)
NEW PRODUCT UPDATE
New from Frisk comes a complete airbrush system.
It includes Friskfilm: a low tack, self-adhesive masking film; Friskair propellant which is CSC-free for eco-conscious artists; airbrush paper in a variety of sizes; and concentrated dyes in 20 compatible colours.
The Karisma Art Holder from Berol is a slick, functional pencil with a cleverly concealed sharpener, for artists and designers.
Ideal for sketching, shading and fine line work, it can hold a range of leads and comes in a smart, recycled presentation pack.
Daler-Rowney has launched a new, heavyweight cartridge paper, which is acid-free and available in a selection of sizes.
Watch out also for their Tinted Bockingford paper: the pochette containing one sheet each of four shades should allow you to dabble economically.
That is, if you manage to beat the rush at your local suppliers'.
The Tate Gallery has announced the shortlist selected for the coveted £20,000 Turner Prize, and the winner will be announced in November 24, 1992.
The shortlisted artists are: Grenville Davey, sculptor; Damien Hirst, installation artist; David Tremlett, painter and Alison Wilding, sculptor.
Examples of the work of the four artists will be showing in an exhibition at the Tate Gallery from Nov 4–29.
Channel 4, sponsors of the prize, will broadcast four 15 minute documentaries profiling each of the artists on Nov 3 and on Nov 24 they will be broadcasting the award-giving ceremony live from the Tate.
COMPETITION UPDATE
Pick up some tubes of Daler-Rowney's Designer Gouache and you could find yourself whisked away on a colourful trip to Venice and Rome.
All you have to do to compete is pick up an entry form, match Italian cities to specified colours on the map, and use your nous to come up with a pithy advertising slogan for Rowney's Designer Gouache.
Entries must be received by Nov 30.
For further details and entry forms, head down to your local retailers.
Young oil painters will have to be quick off the mark to get their entries in to the Winsor & Newton/Royal Institute of Oil Painters Young Artists competition.
The first prize is the prestige of having your work hung at a top London gallery, plus a weekend break for two in Florence, £700 cash and £300 of W&N products.
You may submit up to six paintings, which must be executed using W&N Oil, Griffin Alkyd or Acrylic colour.
Entries must be submitted to the Mall Galleries, London, by Oct 31.
For an entry form and details, write to: Communications Management, Winsor & Newton Awards Dept.
The Birmingham Pastel Exhibition, organised in conjunction with Daler-Rowney, brings together the work of some of Britain's most acclaimed contemporary pastellists.
Held at the Gallery of the Royal Birmingham Society of Artists Nov 16–28, with a one-day workshop on Nov 22 for those of you inspired by the soft touch.
THE SWAGGER PORTRAIT
Social snobbery and showy excellence come into play at the Tate Gallery London , where the exhibition of The Swagger Portrait focuses on the aesthetic excesses of English Grand Manner portraiture.
Van Dyck had a hand in exporting his style to England in the 17th century; the allure of the full-length formal portrait endured for the following 300 years.
Glamour and grandeur are key characteristics of these paintings, executed by such doyens of portraiture as Augustus John, Ramsay and Reynolds, but the show examines the works in the light of their unique British context: Protestant seriousness and an indigenous distrust of ostentation.
The 79 works on display offer an insight into the national psychology; its effects on artists and the techniques they employed to represent it are placed under the spotlight.
Also examined is the essential challenge of portraiture: how to combine lively images with propaganda and effective picture-making.
Sir Peter Lely, Barbara Villiers, Duchess of Cleveland, oil on canvas.
Courtesy Tate Gallery.
(ABOVE)
TENDER IS THE NORTH
Art of the chilly climes comes south to the Barbican Centre London , where Border Crossings draws together works by 14 Scandinavian artists, exploring the relationship between them, and emphasising the importance of European and international influences in their work.
A central theme of the exhibition is nature as a theatre in which life's dramas unfold.
The artists Munch, Strindberg and Hill explored themes of despair and isolation, and this, coupled with a element of chance in their work, marks them out as precursors of the Expressionist movement.
All is not bleak, however, as colourful abstracts, romantic landscape paintings and lyrical images of Icelandic folklore make their lively presence felt.
Asger Jorn, The Song of the Swans, 1963.
Courtesy Barbican Art Gallery.
(RIGHT)
For those in the know, the Fanny Adams Big Ball takes place on Oct 28 at The Seen, Apple Tree Yard London .
A glittering line-up includes Bobby Baker, Rose English and Suandi Films, and all proceeds go to Fanny Adams and Positively Women.
Tickets priced £8.50/6.50 are available on the door.
This is your chance to kick up your heels and support this group of anonymous women artists.
Watch out for more on Fanny Adams in next month's Mixed Media.
ART CLUB AND SOCIETY PROFILE
Until the opening of the Swan Theatre in 1965, the Worcester Society of Artists went under the name of The Society for the Advancement of Music and the Visual Arts, founded in 1947.
Links with the theatre are very close: meetings and demonstrations are held there, and all members must also belong to the Worcester Arts Theatre Club.
Regular exhibitions of members' work are organised by the society, the annual exhibition being held at the City Art Gallery.
There are monthly exhibitions at the Swan Theatre, be they one-man or group shows.
Weekly meetings are held on Monday evenings, and host demonstrations by members or visiting lecturers.
Programmes of videos or slides are also shown, and courses on subjects such as portrait painting run for consecutive weeks.
All the above serve to promote lots of healthy discussion and criticism!
There are no qualifying tests for new members, since the basic principle of the society is to encourage the appreciation of art.
Members range from beginners to experienced artists, and as such, the latter are always willing to help with advice if the former get ‘stuck’.
There is plenty of opportunity for practice, and summer sketching parties beckon those who prefer not to be studio-bound in the warmer months.
Finally, a newsletter,Studio News is issued on subscription to members, so that the wheels of communication are kept well-oiled, and not members miss out on the opportunity to seem their favourite demonstrator in action!
For details contact the Secretary.
The National Art Collections Fund has begun it autumn lecture series,The Discerning Eye: Collectors and Connoisseurs , taking place on Tuesday evenings at the Royal Geographic Society, Kensington Gore,London .
The November itinerary includes stretching subjects such as Catherine the Great's gluttony for collecting, and the buying power and tastes of superstars and millionaires.
Brilliant equestrian paintings by Jay Kirkman are on show at the Park Walk Gallery London .
The works are executed in a variety of media, including some spectacular pastels, and range in subject matter from British sporting art genre scenes to sensitive equestrian portraits.
MOUNTPAX
Maybe you've recently had artwork printed and are now faced with marketing.
The best presented prints are the ones that sell.
Mountpax offer a complete presentation package for prints, art cards, postcards or photographs and offer professionally cut bevel-edge mounts, re-usable sleeves and backing boards at reasonable cost.
A sample presentation pack for art cards or postcards is available for only £4.99, which includes a money-saving voucher.
For a brochure, write to: Mountpax.
MANUSCRIPT PEN CO LTD
The Chronicle series of dip pens includes five specialist sets: Roundhand I and II, Italic, Craft and Poster.
Made in England by the Manuscript Pen Company Ltd , sets contain an elegant, black wooden pen holder, six gold plated nibs, accessories and an introductory leaflet.
Evocative packaging makes the pens even more appealing!
Contact Manuscript Pen Co Ltd.
COLIN BRADLEY MAIL ORDER
Anyone interested in using the popular Carb-Othello Pastel Pencils need look no further than Colin Bradley 's mail order service for their supplies.
All the aids and materials he and his students use to produce beautiful pastel pictures are available to everyone.
From now until the end of November, you can take advantage of two unique offers.
Buy his new Tiger Portrait video for just £14.99 post free, or the video plus his Square Drawing Pack (RRP £5.95) for only £17.95 post free.
Send for the above offers or mail order details to: The Bradley Gallery.
DW VIEWBOXES
A simple but clever idea for a low-cost lightbox has recently been introduced by DW Viewboxes Ltd and is meeting with an enthusiastic response following its first showing at The Art Materials Exhibition.
This low-cost product represents an alternative to the conventional lightbox, for any task assisted by back-illumination.
It is operated by the light from an ordinary desk lamp to provide an excellent level of illumination at its screen.
A free DW Blue Light Daylight Simulation bulb comes with every viewcase.
Other  accessories are also available.
The Viewcase is available in A4 and A3 sizes, at £18.80 and £25.85 respectively.
Full details from: DW Viewboxes.
THE BLITZER
Undoubtedly this must be the neatest and cheapest airbrush in the world.
At just £5.99 the Blitzer costs less than a can of airbrush propellant!
It's so simple too — a small handpump blasts the colour off felt tip pens to create a light, controllable spray ideal for artwork and design.
Blitzer works with any felt tip pen, so it can be used for T-shirt design, craftwork with enamel pens, and even sugarcraft using food dye pens.
With Christmas coming, it's an ideal present for artists of all ages.
Purchase direct from: Airtoys.
MIXED MEDIA PROFILE
Oils, impasted thickly onto large canvases, layer over layer, spread like butter, then gouged to show the textures and folds of paint already lying beneath, have dominated Dariusz Romanowski 's painting style over the last couple of years.
Two subject areas have been energised by this very physical application of paint; garden scenes and old women.
In the garden scenes, the technique gives a tangible impression of organic growth, of nature recycling itself, now buds and shoots evolving out of the rotting vegetation of last year's earthly fruits.
The paint, so thick in places that it seems to exist independent of the canvas, becomes an integral part of this annual cycle.
In contrast, in the unusual paintings of the old women, the oozing, languid application of oil mirrors their own physical deterioration, their ageing, slowing bodies, spreading out and losing their deftness of youth.
The oil paint lazily moves over the surface of the paintings; in places its application is to thick that it seems to be rotting and falling away.
Many viewers have found the handling of this subject matter distressing, but these are sensitive paintings, and there is real character in the artist's impressions.
The images do not intend to degrade their subjects.
The portraits depict weary, yet often bright-eyed individuals, and their intimacy with one another gives them a curious force, perhaps he has captured the wisdom gained through their experiences of life?
For these works, the use of bright colour, which flickers across the garden scenes, is less apparent, and the impressions rely more on goldens and browns, matured colours which denote fading grandeur and bring to mind the self-portraits of Rembrandt.
Garden Scene, 1989, oil on canvas on board.
(ABOVE)
Dariusz ascertains that he has painted all of the figures from his imagination, directly onto the canvas.
The vision of the completed composition will come into his mind and remain there, often unchanged, until it has been transferred directly onto the canvas by the artist's brush.
Such  vision is an unusual attribute, but one which the artist maintains has been with him since a very young age.
Copious sketchbooks reveal his childhood drawings; technically accomplished copies of Michelangelo and Raphael cartoons, Impressionist landscapes and German Expressionist figures, amongst his own personal studies.
Without an art school training, Romanowski, now in his late 20s, has taught himself the methods of the masters through reproductions in books and paintings hanging on gallery walls.
Names trip off his tongue with an ease bred through familiarity; Bacon, Moore, Picasso, Degas…they all have been his teachers, through their images and writings on art.
His reverence for their contribution to the development of art history is not an uncritical one, however, and the artist is as aware of why he thinks paintings don't succeed as why they do.
With his own progress, Romanowski is possibly at his most critical.
He is beginning to move on from the subjects which have dominated the last couple of years, feeling that he has gleaned all the experience he can from them.
With this new departure comes a desire to discover fresh approaches and further subjects for his exploration, an endless process of examination of which he is certain he will never tire.
Interior with Women, oil on canvas, 1990.
(ABOVE)
Head, pen and ink, 1990.
(ABOVE)
Four Women on a Bench, oil on canvas, 1991.
(BELOW)
IN CONVERSATION WITH JOHN BLOCKLEY & MOIRA HUNTLY
JOHN BLOCKLEY and MOIRA HUNTLY JOINT PRACTICES
‘We have an empathy in our way of painting, in the whole attitude to painting.’
Artists John Blockley and Moira Huntly talk to FAITH GLASGOW about sharing their Cotswold studio but retaining independence on the canvas.
JUDGING BY THE evidence, a fireplace used for cooking with a salt recess beside it, there used to be a family living in the cellar of the rambling 16th century oak-beamed warren in Stow on the Wold, the heart of the Cotswolds.
Now, the bulging walls are lined with paintings and the rooms are the studio of John Blockley and Moira Huntly.
Both are prolific painters, involved in many artistic pursuits, and are members of the Royal Institute of Painters in Watercolour and of the Pastel Society, of which John is the President.
He belongs to the New English Art Club.
Moira is a member of the Royal Society of Marine Artists.
JB : It seemed natural that two painters working in the same vicinity with the same painting outlooks should share a studio which we've been doing now for, how long?
Twelve years?
We sort of gravitated together.
And we do have similarities — not so much in the way we work but in the way we seen things.
MH : Quite apart from anything else, there aren't all that many professional artists around here, unlike London, so you tend to feel a bit isolated.
It's always very helpful to have an opinion on your work, or to have a good argument every now and then!
JB : Well, yes, we've got that wall dividing us, you see, so we're not looking over each other 's shoulder all day.
But it's nice to be able to get an unexpected comment.
We value each other 's judgement.
I think Moira's a very shrewd operator when she's looking at paintings, and I find it very useful indeed.
We're attracted to the same sort of subject matter; I think that's it isn't it?
MH : Well not entirely subject matter.
If we go to an exhibition together we find that we like the same paintings; so I think it's that we have an empathy in our way of painting, in the whole attitude to painting.
JB : My background, living in the north country with rugged landscapes, had a great influence on my way of thinking and working.
I actually enjoyed dark skies and rain which I always thought enhanced the colours.
I suppose we're both tonal painters.
Strong colours, strong pattern.
And there's quite a bit of energy about both of our works.
FG : Would you say you've been influenced by similar painters?
MH : I'm not too sure!
I particularly like Hans Holbein from the drawing point of view; I'm a great admirer of the clarity of his drawings and paintings.
But I'm also very keen on Braque and Degas, Cézanne, and Modigliani, so it's quite a mixture.
But I'm not sure which really inspired you.
JB : Vuillard, Sickert, and, of course I enjoy many contemporary painters.
MH : Yes, it's quite a cross-section.
Holbein sounds a long way away from Braque but I think it's a question of visual patterns, the division of the area.
And you can learn an awful lot from good draughtsmanship.
JB : Well, draughtsmanship's one of your strong points, isn't it?
Her drawings are tremendous, compared with my little scribbles.
FG : How did you end up in this building?
Do you actually own it?
JB : I do.
I lived for many years in the north of England.
When I came to the Cotswolds and looked for a studio, before I even looked for house, I found a great barn, a wonderful old building, except that it was cathedral-like and freezing cold in the winter.
So I cast around for somewhere else and we found this, in a very poor state of repair.
That was it really.
It isn't as well lit as a studio perhaps should be, but I rather like that.
I also like the idea of being able to look through the window and see people walking by, a bit of activity.
FG : How do you organise your day here?
MH : I get over as soon as I can in the morning and work here all day.
Sometimes I continue yesterday's painting or I start a new work, often it is an idea I have thought about from the studio, or I might spend some time looking through sketch books.
JB : I just work here.
All the time.
I only live two minutes away.
I'm here at least 10 hours a day for seven days a week.
I don't have to do anything else; I'm lucky.
We always seem to have exhibitions to work for, work for galleries, and so on and days are planned around these.
One painting stimulates ideas for another so we never consciously have to plan the day — it happens.
FG : Does it help being an artistic partnership?
Do you get more recognition or coverage than you would have working by yourselves?
JB : Oh, I think we are very much individuals; I wouldn't want to give the idea that we're dependent on each other.
We get the occasional commission to work together — we had one in North Wales recently — but we work quite separately 99 per cent of the time.
MH : It's a lonely business, painting.
We don't discuss ideas before they're on the canvas.
I like to be alone when I'm beginning a painting — I don't want anyone to speak to me then — but as the work progresses you want a bit of contact with somebody else.
FG : How long does it take each of you to complete a picture?
JB : There's a bit of painting there on the wall that I rather like — well in fact I do like it, it took 20 minutes.
Other times it can be weeks.
MH : I remember somebody told me that a member of the public asked that question and was told it could be either five minutes or 40 years!
If you do something at speed, it's really the accumulation of everything that's gone before that has got you to that point.
But it is also very much a question of medium and size.
JB : I tend to paint anything although only very occasionally a portrait.
I don't very often paint out of the studio now.
I always used to, there was a time when I wouldn't dream of painting indoors.
I was always doing landscapes outside; so I know what it is to be working out in the field in December at six o'clock in the morning.
But now I draw outside, I think that goes for both of us — we draw outside and then paint indoors.
The act of drawing sort of fixes it in your mind.
When I come to paint, I like to look at the drawing; then I put it away and don't look at it again, because I don't want even the drawing to influence too much the progress of the painting.
MH : I like to travel and never go anywhere without a sketchbook, boats and harbours are a particularly good venue for me, I paint a lot of marine subjects, buildings, figures and industrial subjects as well as still life.
I have never really regarded myself as a landscape painter.
I do a lot of drawing on the spot; mostly the painting is done in the studio, working from drawings.
I think you can have more freedom that way and be more imaginative — interpret material in different ways.
I sometimes use sketches I did years ago, they still can inspire and start a train of thought.
In fact, my recent painting of Paddington Station was inspired by a sketch I made in 1953 when I was still a student.
Moira Huntly, Paddington circa 1953, oil on canvas.
(ABOVE)
JB : I don't know much about painting really, and I think I paint by intuition, so that I have many, many misses for each one that hits the mark.
I put the misses on one side and perhaps come back to them weeks, or a year later, and battle it out.
MH : Occasionally I see something that you've missed and think that it's a lot better than you do.
The thing is that you can't always judge your own work, this is the value of working together.
Sometimes I will have abandoned a painting, got really tired of it and feel it's not getting anywhere, and you will come and make some remark that makes me look at it again and think: oh yes, I could just pull that one together.
JB : Perhaps, we see the hits, rather than the misses of each other 's work.
MH : And I very often have several paintings on the go, particularly oils.
I take them to a certain stage, but I tend to find finishing a painting much more difficult than starting it, so I'll leave it to one side, maybe for a week or more, where I can see it, and as I pass it suddenly something will click.
It's funny how the more painting you do, the more you realise you don't know…
JB : But I wonder if you progress with more certainty than I do?
MH : It may seem like that to you, but is doesn't seem so to me!
JB : Well, you know what I think about our respective backgrounds.
You had a much more thorough training.
MH : I don't think that makes all that much difference.
A lot of students go through the system and don't do anything at all with their training.
It's the individual who finds out how to paint.
The opportunity you have as a student to do a lot of work is good though.
JB : I painted mostly in my own time, and it's been like that all along.
So I think a little more discipline and direction would have been helpful.
MH : Well it is initially, but in the long run your progress is just as valid.
I went to art school when I was 15, I was the youngest.
It was at a time when there was a big age difference: the elder students were ex-soldiers.
The lucky part for me was that I was able to go from school and do what I wanted to do.
You just had to wait longer for it to happen.
JB : It's a learning process now too.
We've just had a week painting with a group of other painters.
We were all doing our own thing.
That was fantastic.
MH : Yes, we came out on a real high.
It was terribly interesting to see other painters in action — painters whose work we're familiar with.
JB : Just working alongside these people, and seeing them being involved in whatever it was they were doing was stimulating in a strange sort of way, and kept us on our toes.
A great experience.
Moira Huntly, Rhythm and Blues, pastel.
(ABOVE)
John Blockley, Green Vase on Table Cloth, pastel.
(ABOVE)
Moira Huntly, Melons and Red Apples, oil on canvas.
(ABOVE)
John Blockley, Connemara, pastel.
(LEFT)
INTRODUCING WATERCOLOUR
WATERCOLOUR MASTER CLASS
PART SIX A WINDY DAY
In the final part of his watercolour series, TOM ROBB exploits the full potential of his watercolours in a wintry subject.
IN THE FINAL part of my series, I am going to look at the subject of wind.
This picture os composed of one wash, with wiping out and a great deal of dry brushing.
Although wind is something you can't see, we are all too aware of its effects on cold, blustery, winter days.
The technique of dry brushing has several advantages for this particular subject.
It is action based, and the fast sweep of the hand reflects the swirling movement of wind through the trees.
The dryness of the colour leaving the brush gives the feeling of imprecision and confusion, reflected in the experience of walking in these conditions.
You are not so much painting objects as indicating how the wind affects them, through brush action.
So attempt to gain an impression of paper, and a feel for the movement, rather than painting details.
You are not so much painting objects as indicating how the wind affects them, through brush action.
1/Lay a variegated wash, using cadmium red as the main colour, and adding cadmium orange and alizarin crimson to the lower part while it is still wet.
(LEFT)
2/Using a piece of white paper handkerchief, rolled into a small ball, wipe out some lines radiating from the horizon.
This can be done when the wash is still wet.
If the wash has dried, then you will need to use some well-dampened tissues.
(RIGHT)
3/Take a sponge or large wash brush, and a strengthened wash of black and water, make some marks, using the full width of the brush to suggest tree trunks.
This will establish some fixed points in space from which to develop the tree shapes.
(ABOVE)
4/Dry brushing needs practice, so that just the right amount of colour is on the brush and a controlled amount is leaving it on contact with the paper.
Practice using the edge of a large brush until you can be confident about making marks you intend to put down.
(ABOVE)
Although wind is something you can't see, we are all aware of its effects on cold, blustery winter days.
5/The picture is completed by using dry brushing and some fine lines for sharper detail.
All the strokes should suggest wind bending the trees, and the rushing of air through the branches.
The foreground is also strengthened with the same sweeping strokes.
The only details which can be seen in these blustery conditions are the two figures battling against the elements.
(LEFT)
USING GOUACHE
CREATIVE HORIZONS
The idyllic landscape of New Zealand inspired MICHAEL VINCENT to take his paints into the bush.
He explains how he captures the grandeur of his subject with gouache.
WHEN I FIRST came to New Zealand in May 1991, I was unaware of the profound effect the country would have upon me.
I returned to England after a month, with a very different view of the world and a deep urge to come back here with my family and paint the landscape.
We returned in December 1991 and, having established my studio on Auckland's north shore, I have begun to paint the landscape and coastline of this part of the island.
New Zealand is unbelievably beautiful.
Its mountain ranges, winding rivers, lush farmland and native bush sparkle beneath cloud-filled skies.
Aotearoa, ‘the land of the long white cloud’, is a place full of natural wonder, of nature on a grand scale.
New Zealand's numerous indigenous shrubs and trees provide unending greenery.
There are days when, after a shower or winter frost, the sun shines through clear air to highlight the leaves on trees for miles around.
The visual impact is deeply inspiring.
Across the east coast bays of Auckland, the subject of my first New Zealand paintings, wide expanses of shimmering sea change colour beneath the sky, reflecting in turn crimson, purple, turquoise, emerald green and many shades of blue.
This is indeed the landscape of one's dreams, a paradise still largely untouched and unspoiled by the activities of man.
The beauty here is beyond words but not beyond painting, and is my greatest artistic challenge to date.
FROM SUFFOLK TO AUCKLAND
I brought with me to New Zealand many paintings of my native Suffolk, much of the equipment used in over 30 years of painting in England, and all the learning achieved in the Suffolk fields.
This is the foundation upon which to build my approach to painting a very different landscape, and already there are notable changes to my technique and palette.
First, the scale of the New Zealand landscape has demanded important changes.
In Suffolk, I worked on a more intimate scale, on smaller paintings of specified areas of landscape.
A view of the east coast bays will encompass many miles and always a huge sky.
Landscape here is on a grand scale, and in consequence paintings will become larger.
Secondly, my palette is changing and I am introducing more colours.
I am using a range of paints produced in Australia by Art Spectrum which includes colours with names like Tasman blue, Flinders blue violet, Australian leaf green and Pilbora red, designed for use in the southern hemisphere.
Thirdly, I am using greater quantities of paint, not simply because of the larger scale of the paintings.
The subject matter itself, a view of the native bush for example, with its vast array of plant forms, demands the applications of thick layers of paint, often with a palette knife.
I work mostly on site in front of the landscape, a practice which presents problems I did not meet in Suffolk.
It is not always easy to get into the New Zealand landscape.
The often wet and windy sub-tropical climate of this part of New Zealand will impose its own limitations.
There are no extremes of temperature, but it rains a great deal and the sun is powerful throughout the year.
The bush itself is often impenetrable and is approached by mud tracks which are difficult to negotiate when carrying bulky art equipment.
However, the studio is no substitute to working in front of a living and vibrant landscape.
It is not difficult to find a quiet place to work.
Even in the suburbs of Auckland, New Zealand's largest city, there are areas of native bush where it is possible to work undisturbed from dawn until dusk, finding a peace of mind and in turn concentration which I always yearned for in Suffolk.
OIL VERSUS GOUACHE
I work in two media, oil and gouache.
However, there are times when oil painting is impractical.
Perhaps a landscape is too remote or unsettled weather makes a long painting session impossible.
Gouache is ideal in these circumstances.
There is less equipment to carry, and since gouache dries quickly, there is not the problem of transporting a wet painting.
Gouache is ideal for recording the fleeting effects of light shimmering on the sea and the wistful skies above.
Its wide colour and textural range, much wider than that offered by watercolour, can be readily explored in front of the landscape.
A gouache painting can be worked at for any length of time, varying from the essential speed required in capturing sky effects through to the meticulous detail of foreground rock formations grasses and wild flowers.
Gouache paintings completed on site become records of intense sessions of work, capable of being taken back to the studio to exist in their own right or to become resources of ideas for larger-scale studio canvases.
The versatility of gouache makes it an ideal medium for working in the rugged New Zealand landscape.
The site chosen for the painting is a view across the bays of the dormant volcano Rangitoto which dominates Auckland's skyline.
It is a site reached by means of a rigorous cliff walk through the pohutukawa trees which figure strongly in the painting.
It has become a practice of mine to return to the same sight and work throughout the seasons.
The deep knowledge thus gained of the site is built into the paintings which become records of the landscape as it changes.
1
I use a 300gsm Arches rough cotton watercolour paper, and brushes ranging from a no3 for detailed work through to a one inch for broad colour washes.
Colours used are the Art Spectrum and Winsor & Newton gouache.
I immerse the paper in water for about 20 minutes and then allow the excess water to dry on a flat surface between clean towels.
The paper is fixed to a piece of board with masking tape all round and a staple in each corner.
(LEFT)
2
A one inch brush is used to place a wash of sky colour across the paper.
This is done quickly on the damp paper and allowed to dry.
Upon this wash is superimposed the structure of Rangitoto.
At this stage the main compositional elements are established.
Work is done quickly and allowed to dry.
(LEFT)
3
The area of sea and the foreground are brushed in next.
It is always a relief to cover the white paper!
More work is done on Rangitoto including the texture of the distant bush which covers the island.
(RIGHT)
4
.
At this stage I apply foreground detail.
This is established with a fine brush.
Once I have achieved the correct balance I have completed the compositional structure.
(LEFT)
5
Work continues on the sky and cloud structures and foreground detail.
There is no set pattern for this.
If a cloud formation moves into the picture whilst work is in progress, I will include this if appropriate, whilst continuing to build foreground detail and the textural qualities of the sea.
In effect, work continues on the whole picture area.
(RIGHT)
6
I continue with the foreground forms of the pohutukawa tress.
These beautiful evergreen trees catch the sun and produce wonderful sculptural forms.
Gouache is an ideal medium for building these forms as the light changes and catches each leaf.
The colour is mixed, allowed to become sticky in the palette and dragged across the paper with a damp brush.
The paint is picked up by the texture of the paper and the previous layers of paint.
This is exciting, fast work, particularly if done under a strong sun when the paint dries very quickly.
(LEFT)
7
The painting is nearing completion.
Much effort has been placed into building the sky and the sculptural forms of the pohutukawa trees.
(RIGHT)
8
The grasses in the foreground are ‘drawn’ in with thin colour and a small brush.
These give additional depth to the painting and provide a framework for the distant forms.
(ABOVE)
9
The completed painting could now exist in its own right or become the basis for a larger studio painting.
(ABOVE)
Gouache is ideal for recording the fleeting effects of light shimmering on the sea and the wistful skies above.
FOCUS ON ALLAN RAMSAY all DELICACY and GRACEFULNESS
THE ART OF PAINTING WOMEN
Allan Ramsay, the  17th century portraitist to the great and  glamorous , is currently receiving belated acclaim.
ANDREW LAMBIRTH profiles the talents of the man who was formed to paint women.
UNLIKE MANY OF his 18th century contemporaries, Allan Ramsay (1713–84) was not a great womanizer.
He did, however, have a particular aptitude for portraying women, a talent which matured to genius during the course of his painting career.
He was married twice: the first time in 1739 to Anne Bayne, who died tragically in childbirth four years later, and the second time to Margaret Lindsay with whom he eloped in 1752 in highly romantic circumstances.
The exquisitely charming portrait of Margaret Lindsay remains Ramsay's best-known, one is tempted to say only-known, work, for his reputation suffered an enormous decline after his death.
Famous in his lifetime, court painter to King George III, Ramsay's genius has subsequently remained a well-kept secret, especially in England.
The major exhibition of his work currently at the National Portrait Gallery should help to change that.
Margaret Lindsay, 1758–60, oil on canvas.
(RIGHT)
A PRECOCIOUS TALENT
Born in Edinburgh, Allan Ramsay was precociously talented and received his first commissions while still a teenager.
In the early 1730s, he left Scotland for London to become the pupil of Hans Hysing, a Swedish portrait painter.
Between 1736 and 1738 Ramsay journeyed to Italy for an extended period of study, training under Francesco Imperiale in Rome and Francesco Solimena in Naples.
During this time it is likely that he also met Pompeo Batoni who was to be a considerable influence on his early manner.
Ramsay absorbed the late baroque style of smooth theatricality, full of implied movement, but he was also attracted to the French Academy in Rome with its emphasis on the more informal.
On his return to Britain, he set up as a portrait painter in both London and Edinburgh, purveying the Grand Manner to all buyers, but even then it was a restrained baroque, tempered by Ramsay's own unmelodramatic personality.
His success  in London was immediate, and it is to the history and development of English painting that he subsequently belongs.
Flora Macdonald, 1749, oil on canvas.
(ABOVE)
Ramsay became noted for a technique of vermilion underpainting unfamiliar in England, which he learnt in Italy.
Thus the composition was blocked in on a warm basis, over which he would lay a series of glazes.
The intention was, as the contemporary engraver and antiquary George Vertue remarked, ‘to make the flesh colour clear and transparent.’
Although very little of the red underpainting is discernible to the naked eye in the finished portrait, its effect is perceptible in the freshness of the skin tones and the convincing wholesomeness of the flesh.
The second technical achievement which goes some way to explaining Ramsay's success, is his superb draughtsmanship.
Ramsay learnt early on the crucial importance of drawing as the basis for his art.
He was particularly proud of his drawings and made many in order to discover the absolutely right pose or disposition of the hands.
His regular drawing practice gave him a solid understanding of the structure of the human head and hands, and he is unique amongst 18th century British painters for his custom of making detailed preparatory drawings for his portraits.
There are two distinct phases to Ramsay's career, and two accompanying styles.
The first is exemplified by his portrait of Anne Bayne, his first wife, painted around 1737.
Here, there is absolutely no attempt to flatter, yet the painting is imbued with intimacy and vivacity.
The latter quality is expressed by the precision of the design with its almost hard, linear effects, which are quite a contrast to Ramsay's later use of sfumato .
This early period is essentially the period of Ramsay's achievements in ‘masculine’ portraiture, in the sense of both the style and the subject matter.
His masterpiece of this time  is undoubtedly Dr Richard Mead , 1747, the portrait with which Ramsay really introduced his version of the Grand Manner to English painting.
Other splendid examples of this first style may be seen in the wedding picture of Rosamund Sargent, and the portrait of Flora Macdonald, both of 1749.
The Sargent painting has a lovely crispness to it and is celebratory in his straightforward frankness.
In the portrait of Flora Macdonald, the unwavering gaze and firm set of the mouth give the impression of a tough Scots lady.
Ramsay pulls no punches in his characterisation; refreshingly unsycophantic, he paints clearly what he sees.
Ramsay was apt to make his backgrounds neutral and to sharpen up the clarity of his designs to focus the viewer's attention on the sitter's face and hands.
But it was always as a unity that Ramsay approached a composition.
Thus the drapery was also important.
Ramsay early on made use of a drapery painter to fill in the clothes, as in the portrait of Dr Richard Mead.
He later abandoned this practice, except for the tedium of commissioned replicas when he was court painter, even though it was almost universal at the time.
In fact, one of Ramsay's greatest achievements was in the atmosphere he was able to conjure up through the depiction of materials.
Vertue wrote of his variety of drapery movement, yet despite these considerable gifts, a composition of any complexity involving relationships of figures was apt to defeat him.
CONTINENTAL INFLUENCES
In 1754 Ramsay was again in Italy, where he remained for three years, developing the wonderfully delicate style of his maturity, and constantly drawing from life with all the avidity to learn of a student.
If Italy provided Ramsay with the polish of sophistication and a kind of classical elegance, it was from the French that he learnt a quality he was to make quite his own: gracefulness.
Various influences are to seen at work here: the glowing example of the great pastellist Quentin de la Tour; Ramsay's copies of the old masters, in particular Domenichino; and though more slight, the rococo superceding the baroque.
But French painters remain the yardstick.
Late Ramsay begs comparison with Nattier and Perronneau, and often excels them.
Ramsay was essentially unhappy with the baroque idiom, of which one of the basic tenets is inherent movement, which he found difficult to express.
He had no real gift for the dramatic and could not to contend with his young competitor Joshua Reynolds in the Grand Manner.
Ramsay was shrewd enough to capitalise on his native gifts and develop a new style.
Against Reynold's skill with the theatrical Ramsay proposed a muted richness, a low-key, understated interpretation of the individual.
Reynolds was a great exponent of the idealized portrait typical of the day.
Ramsay was more up-to-date, a true child of the Enlightenment, emphasising individualism.
SUBTLE INTIMACY
The late style, all silvery tones, pastel colours, subtlety and naturalness, sees a deliberate move away from the portrayal of a public image to a more private, interior state.
It is a reticent yet intimate manner.
The justly celebrated portrait of Margaret Lindsay (c1754), almost certainly painted in Rome, is the great exemplar of Ramsay's second, or ‘feminine’ style.
Note the importance Ramsay gives to the hand.
Simple verticals provide compositional stability, as does the diagonal of Margaret Lindsay's right arm and shoulder as continued by shading onto the panelling.
There are constant subtle resonances, as in the pattern of the fichu echoed by the design on the vase.
The closely-knit composition is conceived and executed in one plane across the picture surface, a device which simplifies and unites the picture.
Deliberately, the colour has little force, but this is compensated for by its allusive subtlety.
As the leading Ramsay scholar Alistair Smart has written, after 1754, ‘It may be said that where Ramsay previously coloured, now he tints.’
The influence of the French pastellists had taken effect, and harsher colours and  contrasts were eliminated.
The result is very fine painting, the product of a finely-tuned sensitivity.
Vertue wrote of Ramsay's second style as being ‘rather lick't than pencilled’, and it is true that there is less variety of texture to be observed in a Ramsay  than in, say, a Hogarth portrait.
Also the latter sfumato technique that Ramsay favoured, in which smokily smooth and imperceptible transitions are effected between areas of colour, did not lay emphasis on the linear as the early style had.
Nevertheless, Ramsay's consummate sense of pictorial design remains as powerful as ever.
Consider the wonderfully natural portrait of Lady Holland (1766), caught in the moment of looking up from her book.
The shallow space is articulated by the angled chair on which her Ladyship is seated, and by the elegant rococo table.
Face, hands, costume, furniture and accoutrements — in this case a work-basket and two books, are beautifully orchestrated to form the most pleasing, and indeed satisfying, whole.
Countess of Elgin, 1763–64, oil on canvas.
(ABOVE)
THE LATER YEARS
Ramsay's late style, remarkable for its discretion, perfection of taste and avoidance of sentimentality, shed all vestiges of the baroque Grand Manner in favour of a charmingly informal approach.
The vigorous characterisation of his early style, as witnessed in Flora Macdonald, gave way to what we might now call a more subtle psychological penetration.
But how far did discretion carry?
Ramsay wrote that ‘a posture, in painting, must be a just resemblance of what is graceful in nature’.
One is left wondering precisely how much Ramsay was tempted, in his later style and purely for the sake of pictorial gracefulness (not, of course, to please  his sitters), to improve upon what he saw before him.
Whatever the case, the best of the resulting portraits are a very great delight to us today.
Anne Bayne, 1739–43, oil on canvas.
(ABOVE)
Self Portrait, 1755–56, pastel and watercolour.
(ABOVE)
There is a myth that Ramsay painted nothing of consequence after the 1760s, that his output was limited to replicas.
This in fact was not the case, as has been effectively demonstrated by Alistair Smart in more than 40 years of research, culminating in a new Ramsay biography and catalogue raisonne .
It has now been shown that Ramsay continued to develop and refine his style until an injury to his painting arm in March 1773 prevented him from further work.
The portraits of Lady Charlotte Burgoyne (c1771–2) and an anonymous woman in a pink dress (c1772) are ample proof of this.
Ramsay was a deeply cultured man who travelled a great deal on the continent.
Scholarly and erudite, a linguist as well as a student of archaeology, he earned a considerable reputation as a man of letters in the decade or so before his death.
His friend Dr Johnson stated: ‘You will not find a man in whose conversation there is more instruction, more information, and more elegance, than in Ramsay's.’
Inevitably, this reputation as a man of letters militated against his artistic reputation; in England, you are expected to excel at one thing only, if that.
Ramsay pioneered the informal portrait in the fashionable world of London.
Hogarth was doing much the same thing, though for the less fashion-conscious end of the market.
Although Hogarth called Ramsay ‘Phizmongers’ and ‘another face painter from abroad’, there seems to have been a genuine mutual regard between them, and their combined efforts literally changed the face of British portraiture.
Reynolds and Gainsborough were much indebted to Ramsay's example, but being louder talents altogether, have tended in the eye of posterity to eclipse Ramsay's quiet genius.
Yet a balanced assessment of Ramsay's oeuvre leads one invariably to a agree with Horace Walpole's judgment that Ramsay ‘is all delicacy.
Mr Reynolds seldom succeeds in women: Mr Ramsay is formed to paint them’.
PROMOTIONAL FEATURE
the EXPERT'S CHOICE
A selection of materials are tested by some of Britain's top artists for readers of The Artist's and Illustrator's Magazine.
REXEL DERWENT
‘From the unique range of Rexel Derwent pencils, I find the Watersoluble Pencils —both colour and graphite, indispensable.
Their versatility and dependability enable me to draw and paint with confidence and control, in quick field sketches or detailed studio works.
Adding water to a drawing gives subtle washes and blends, whilst intense colour is achieved by drawing into wet paper or lifting off the pencil tip with a wet brush; flicking the wet brush across the pencil tip gives a spattered, textural effect.
Draw on my experience — and try them!’
.
David Cook is a wildlife artist and works in Cumbria.
REXEL DERWENT
‘With a hard, waxy consistency and creamy texture, the Derwent Drawing Pencils have a particularly satisfying touch.
In four earth colours plus black and white, they have a complete and rich tonal range.
The round pencil can be used for all subjects; whilst the flat pencil can be used for broad strokes and the finest lines, when worn to a chisel edge.
I use the pencils for techniques such as cross-hatching, contour and scribble drawing, shading and frottage.
Tones can be easily built up and blended, rubbed hard with a plastic rubber or gently stroked onto a grained paper to produce sfumato effects.
The pencils are also suited to line drawing, making strong marks and even sgraffito to create solidity, contrast and precision.’
.
Steven Empson specialises in drawing urban and natural landscapes.
He lives and works in Oxford.
DAYLIGHT STUDIOS
‘The Art Pack is a folding stool combination, designed for the artist who needs a comfortable travelling seat, with a carrier for materials.
The smaller model is grey, the larger is black with a back rest.
Both have a light metal frame.
Though intended for artists, these will find a wider market as outdoor equipment.
They are available from Daylight Studios and most art shops.’
.
Tom Robb is a professional artist and regular contributor to The Artist's and Illustrator's Magazine.
WINSOR & NEWTON
‘Oilbar combines the artistic potential and characteristic feel of both drawing and painting.
It offers the exciting possibilities of drawing directly with paint, but also much more, as Oilbar can be modified and manipulated in all sorts of interesting ways.
Broad handling and textural effects are a natural response to Oilbar's unique qualities, and it really does encourage you to be direct and spontaneous.’
.
Jonathan Stephenson is an artist and art materials expert.
CARAN D'ACHE
‘The appeal of Caran d'Ache Neocolor II lies for me in combining the exciting possibilities of using the crayons dry as a direct drawing method, or as a painting medium, when they can be dipped into water, finely sprayed for a diffused image, or washed over with a brush — releasing a full flow of colour and texture.’
.
Wendy Jelbert is a professional artist.
CANSON
‘Good watercolour paper is perfectly sized, acid free and naturally white.
It accepts washes, sponging, engraving, masking and scratching without distortion.
In use, Montval paper meets all the above criteria, created at the turn of the century by Canson, if offers creative freedom with reliability, all at an economical price.’
.
Ian King is a professional artist and demonstrator for Canson.
CHARTPAK
‘I enjoy using the Schut paper because the variety of weights and textures gives me the perfect surface for my work, from very detailed illustrations to the more spontaneous watercolours.’
.
Linda Benton is a professional artist.
FOCUS ON JACQUELINE BLACK
A FEMALE PERSPECTIVE
Working as a single woman artist in France, JACQUELINE BLACK has had to overcome many hurdles.
Daughter TIFFANY BLACK examines how her mother's life has led her to her present occupation as professional artist and art school owner.
Jacqueline Black at home in France.
(LEFT)
THE PUBLIC AS as well as the practising artist, whether amateur or professional, seems always intrigued by the ways that another artist has arrived at being professionally and financially independent.
If not evident by the number of red spots on the exhibition sale list, or the latest book of illustrations, questions are often asked as to how the artist is surviving.
There seems to be a shroud of mystery wrapped around the existence of so many artists that must, in part, stem from the romanticised time when artistic practice was mainly reserved for self-supporting male painters and sculptors, or those few working under patronage.
After Zurbakán, pastel on card.
(ABOVE)
Today, with such a vast number of creators, even the definition of artist is often too generalised to be helpful, as it embraces commercial and non-commercial practitioners of fine art, graphics and so on alike.
The artist Jacqueline Black has led a career that shows, perhaps more radically than many, the necessity and capacity to adapt in order to raise a family and work as a professional artist.
Having studied painting at St Martin's School of Art, London, 1951–55 she went on to work variously as a consultant designer, art teacher, illustrator, Joint Board Examiner and raiser of her four children.
Like so many women, her own painting work would happen when and where possible between juggling these different roles.
It was in 1975, when she moved to the depths of the countryside in the south of France, that life and painting began to take a different shape.
This radical change in lifestyle was liberating artistically., especially as the children grew older and returned to England.
In 1981, with my help, Jacqueline started Le Delmazou Summer Painting School.
Since those early days it has continued to attract people from as away as North Africa, Australia and Canada.
I continue to work as Jacqueline's partner in the Summer School and assistant for her fine art work.
Besides being naturally sympathetic to her media, me own arts consultancy work feeds through to Jacqueline's activities and, in many respects, we have both benefitted from our collaboration.
The Summer School and studio have acted as a focus for Jacqueline's work.
It has been possible for her to work there within the family environment, which stimulates not only her own creativity but that of others.
Initially she worked on fairly traditional landscapes in oils, but as familiarity with French life and confidence in her own work has grown, so too has the scale and colour of her work.
It is interesting that, as the opportunity to paint for a specific exhibition has  offered itself, a freer and less tentative approach can be seen both in subject matter and technique.
This is true of the paintings and also, in the last few year, of Jacqueline's desire to create sculptural pieces.
Les Ombres, gouache, 1991.
(ABOVE)
Any artist's choice of media is often a practical one; when working outside, it is difficult to manage large-scale work, and gouache or oil lend themselves well to the immediacy and vibrancy of an outdoor setting.
If working in the studio, mainly in the winter or when it's too hot outside, then a more concentrated approach, and perhaps intimate subject matter, can be worked in soft pastel or mixed media.
Although Jacqueline's work has appeared on fine art posters and greetings cards, she maintains an integrity to her own working style.
The work is produced in direct response to a particular scene or constructed still life, and only when finished is consideration given as to whether to present it to a gallery or publisher.
Although aware of the images that do sell well, particularly as a woman artist, often painting flowers and other ‘feminine’ subject matter, Jacqueline is keen to seek a balance between her own personal politics and her work.
She chooses to paint objects and settings that reflect the natural pleasure and sympathy she has with her daily life.
As Linda Nochlin said, ‘Not all women artists are feminists; not all feminist artists wish to incorporate their feminist identity into their art works, and certainly, even if some of them do, none of them will do it in the same way’.
But it seems that being independent and feminist in thinking, and yet choosing not to portray these attitudes in the medium of painting, can still cause some confusion.
We are a long way from liberating the woman from the artificial status of woman artist, which only serves to segregate her further and prevents her working as an individual professional artist, regardless of her political stance — do we call a man a male artist?
Throughout the summer, with many visiting painters, many of whom are women trying to adjust the balance between home ties and their own creativity, Jacqueline is often asked to explain how the various threads of her life are woven together.
Questions concerning the juggling of home, business activity and painting work are often asked, perhaps in a way that few male artists would be quizzed.
These are issues which are very much the reality for an enormous number of female artists, professional or amateur.
This has stimulated an awareness of the very different ways that women support each other, work around issues of parenthood and career and seek to redress an art market that continues to marginalise them.
In any one year Jacqueline's work may involve the preparation of a show, several commissions, the writing of a few articles, and organisation of the Summer School.
This indeed covers a broad spectrum of activity, all of which is a direct consequence of her painting work.
For Jacqueline, as for all artists, it is the work itself that remains the point of departure and intrigue.
It is her that energies are restored, sparked off and fed into different aspects of her survival as a woman and as an artist.
The home and studio of Jacqueline Black.
(ABOVE)
FOCUS ON STAINED GLASS ARTISTS
the AGE of ENLIGHTENMENT
Once confined to chapels and minsters, stained glass now makes its shimmering presence felt in the secular world.
PHILIP VANN examines how innovative contemporary artists have transformed this medieval craft.
A VISIT TO one of the great medieval cathedrals remains, for believers and non-believers alike, a memorable experience, inspiring perceptions of wonder and beauty.
This is in no small part due to the potential of stained glass to transform ‘that which is material to that which is immaterial’, according to the 12th century Abbot Suger, who is credited with building, near Paris, the first gothic structure.
The finest medieval stained glass windows, such as the Rose window at Chartres, Saint Chapelle in Paris, or the Five Sisters window at York, were created by anonymous masters, at once consummate artists and craftsmen.
Today, when we are spoilt by endless light shows of technological wizardry, the art of stained glass retains indelible powers of transformation.
At factories such as that of Hartley Wood of Sunderland, founded in 1892, ‘antique’ sheet glass is still mouth-blown in essentially the medieval manner.
It was only in 1849 that the chemical formulae for medieval glass were rediscovered, and later published, by Charles Winston.
The subtle qualities of Hartley Wood glasses, their colours, such as liney gold pink which contains real gold, and their irregular, seedy, striated effects, own much to these discoveries.
Such glass is used most effectively in medieval restoration work, as well as in modern creations.
The popular German mouth-blown glasses are more uniform in appearance.
‘The great windows of modern times are all the work of artists working with collaborative craftsmen.’
This far-too-sweeping statement by the painter John Piper nevertheless contains some truth.
Matisse, Leger, Braque, Cocteau and Chagall all designed windows of exceptional merit, which were largely interpreted and realised by others.
This post-War French movement helped rescue stained glass from some of its most negative associations, from the mire of hobbyism and reactionary ecclesiastical commissions.
Patrick Reyntiens, Torentanz, 1981.
(LEFT)
AN ENDURING CRAFT
In any history of modern stained glass, the British artist Patrick Reyntiens is a paramount figure.
John Piper's design for the soaring Baptistry window in the new Coventry Cathedral (1954–62) were realised by Reyntiens.
This abstract work, with its brilliant sunburst centre, is somewhat marred and dated by the architectural imposition of huge masonry blocks between the glass panels.
Reyntiens' less celebrated, less ambitious collaborative windows are more successful.
These include The Tree of Life (1978) and The River of Life (1981) in the chapel at London's Charing Cross Hospital.
Reyntiens sympathetically merged himself with Piper's paradisiacal vision here, rendering it in the most lyrical and painterly terms.
The fruits of the tree of life are portrayed through acid-etching of the flasked, or surface-coloured, glass.
Parts of the surface were masked off, and the remaining colour worn away with hydrochloric acid.
By sandwiching together two acid-etched pieces of glass, one pink, one green, Reyntiens was able to evoke the fine gradations, the dappled surface, of apples.
Other fruits and leaves were painted directly onto the  glass.
The paint was then manipulated with brushes, even with fingertips, before the final firing.
Patrick Reyntiens, Homage to the Olympiads, 1980–81.
(ABOVE)
PERSONAL VISIONS
For many years, Reyntiens' own, non-collaborative stained glass was primarily abstract.
Like the great post-War German abstract stained glass artist, Reyntiens was searching for serene rationality through simplified structure and line.
In some ways the German experiment has proved a dead end, a numbing rather than illuminating experience.
Reyntiens does not deny the value of his own abstract work, but acknowledges that he has undergone a joyful renaissance over the last 12 years or so.
He says, ‘I've settled down to my own lyrical thing’: small, free-standing, autonomous stained glass panels, whose figuration recalls medieval glass and Renaissance painting, and whose brushwork has a timeless, flourishing spontaneity.
Yet these are undeniably contemporary works.
Reyntiens' subjects range from classical to modern myth: the labours of Hercules, Orpheus charming the trees, Commedia dell'Arte, evocations of the Music of Berlioz and Faure, Kenneth Branagh as Quince in A Midsummer Night's Dream, and Dame Edna Everage!
He portrays the human countenance in its full psychic range; the human body in all its muscular acrobatics, agony, gaiety and stillness.
Leadline is never applied arbitrarily, but is always expressive of the individual gesture, the unique form, yet indissolubly part of a work's overall rhythm.
He says, ‘The division of the lead is terribly important.
You just run a lead up the groin and you can get away with it, because the shadow content is there, and it doesn't  impinge .
If you run it straight across the human body, you've had it.’
His colours, at once resonant and muted, run from passage to passage, yet like the use of his lead, they are also specifically local and descriptive.
Reyntiens' considerable technical expertise is at one with his imagination.
Adelle Corrin, Untitled, 1986.
(ABOVE)
FOLLOWING TRADITION
Rosalind Grimshaw works in a Bristol stained glass studio, founded in 1933, which has a strong Arts and Crafts tradition.
Her own glass has many of the merits of the historic Arts and Crafts stained glass artists, such as Harry Clarke and Wilhelma Geddes, whom she greatly admires.
She avows a joy in the handling of materials and the studio's non high-tech tools.
She is a passionate maker, absorbed in every stage of creation, finding alien the widespread modern method of manufacturing stained glass in a factory, which thereby relegates the artist to mere designer.
She makes ingenious, economical use of all the expressive qualities of glass: the fluctuating seediness of Hartley Wood glass, for example, and the more matted uniformity of French glass.
Plexiglass, used by many modern German artists, she considers ‘about as dead as glass can be, the antithesis of good glass’.
Many fine Georgian houses in Bristol have specially commissioned windows by Grimshaw, including an imaginary underwater scene in a basement bathroom window.
This window is almost opulently luminous even on a dull day.
The leadline describes the swaying sea grasses, the tropical and imagined fish, the Art Nouveau wave.
Textures and patternings are applied meticulously through acid-etching and hand-painting.
Her subjects include flower studies reminiscent of the  turn-of-the-century glass of the American John La Farge; a panel, in English pastoral palette, inspired by a poem by Edward Thomas; and an ambitious, innovative panel, of explosive imagery and energy, entitled A Dream of Kristallnacht — or they thought they were Germans .
This evokes the Nazi pogrom against the Jews in November 1938, and depicts the burning synagogues, photos of the artist's own German/Jewish relations, and the Horsemen of the Apocalypse.
Glass bevels, placed throughout the composition, poignantly suggest the shattered debris from a synagogue and shop windows.
FULL SPECTRUM OF COLOUR
Not all medieval glass was figurative.
Much of it was of abstract design, of marvellous rhythms and symmetries, like the 13th century Five Sisters window at York Minster.
Reyntiens has called this ‘the most magical glass conceivable, yet it is almost completely without colour’.
This kind of glass, predominantly grey and white, is called grisaille .
American-born Adelle Corrin, who lives and works in London, creates some of the finest contemporary, grisaille glass, and also makes vibrant windows from what she calls ‘the primaries, the strong reds and blues which juxtapose excitingly.
The basic structure and feel for the balances of nature’, as she describes it, inform her abstract work, itself often initially inspired by her landscape watercolours.
‘Glass-painting is so tremendously kind and flexible’, she says, ‘because until you fire it, you can wipe it straight off.’
Her sparing use of leadline is complemented by the rough edges of her exploratory mark-making.
Through paintwork, light is reduced or blocked out.
Through acid-etching, colours are modulated, light increased.
She warns against ‘getting side-tracked by the sheer beauty of the material’.
Instead, she cooperates with the unique potential of each piece of glass, fully utilising qualities of opaqueness or opalescence, irregular textures, streaks and drifts of colour, within the dominant composition.
Heightened with calligraphic marking and very spare areas of colour, Corrin's landscape-inspired grisaille glass magically reveals the real landscape which lies beyond.
Patrick Reyntiens, Hommage a Berlioz, detail, 1985.
(ABOVE)
Rosalind Grimshaw, Peacock and Magnolia, 1988.
(ABOVE)
Alex Beleschenko, Entrance Window, Fujitsu Building, Stockley Park, Hillingdon.
(ABOVE)
ARCHITECTURAL APPLICATIONS
The Wales-based artist Alex Beleschenko has been working in recent years on large-scale architectural commissions for stained glass.
The scale of his windows and free-standing or hanging glass assemblages has not overwhelmed his lyrical impulse and painter's training and approach.
Stained glass is inextricably associated with the leadline, but most of Beleschenko's glass innovatively ‘liberates the glass from having a black line around it.
You then see the light-catching quality that you get with an edge of glass.’
In his large window (1986) at the Fujitsu Building at Stockley Park near Heathrow, myriad mosaic squares of antique glass are suspended, without glue or resin, between sheets of reinforced clear glass.
Precision-cut, liberated from the leadline, the mosaic edges refract the light in scintillating, unpredictable ways.
Qualities of nature and landscape are abstracted in a mostly low-key palette of blue at the top turning to green and watery blue below.
The occasional yellow square adds the odd high note.
His cool nature poetry is very much in evidence in his 1987 stained glass roof light for Sutherland's Restaurant in Soho, London.
Sheets of flashed glass have been acid-etched and painted.
The result suggests elemental masses, drifts flows.
Acid-etching is a painterly process for Beleschenko, producing unpremeditated tonalities that can be fixed with an acid resist.
‘The fascination with glass’, he has written, ‘lies in it ability to change constantly with the variance of light, transmitted and reflected through the day and the seasons.’
USING TINTED WATER COLOUR PAPER
seasonal SHADES
Tinted paper can bring subtle variation to your watercolour work, as TERRY HARRISON demonstrates in his cross-seasonal landscape paintings.
Incorporating the four different tints, I moved across the picture from one season to the next.
1/I firstly draw up the picture, using a 2B pencil onto stretched paper.
The main components of the picture are masked off using liquid masking fluid diluted with water.
I use a finer brush for the highlight on the ripples in the water and for the foreground plants, and a ruling pen for the tall grasses.
(RIGHT)
TINTED WATERCOLOUR PAPER is a good idea.
It certainly isn't a new invention: Turner used it to produce some of his finest watercolour paintings in the 1880s.
St Cuthberts Paper Mill, who produce Bockingford watercolour paper, have now introduced a range of high-quality tinted watercolour papers which are distributed by Daler-Rowney.
These are readily available at easily affordable prices.
Simply by choosing the appropriate tint, you can enhance the mood of a painting considerably.
The watercolour paper is acid-free, available in a 140 lb weight, and comes in four different shades: oatmeal, eggshell, cream and grey.
So if you intend to paint a cold, bleak, winter scene, the grey would be an ideal choice.
Alternatively, if you are looking for something warmer, be it a sunset or a warm interior view, the cream could be a better choice.
My personal favourite colours are the eggshell and the cream.
When I am painting summer scenes I use the eggshell, and for winter scenes I use the warm cream.
PAINTING THE POCHETTE
With regard to the Daler-Rowney pochette which I illustrated, many people have asked me how this effect was achieved.
The answer is very simple and does not involve any hightech process.
I pasted strips of each of the four tinted papers onto mount board and painted the subject matter as one painting.
Incorporating the four different tints, I moved across the picture from one season to the next.
I feel that this demonstrates quite dramatically the effect that can be achieved, and the mood created by each of the different tinted papers.
For this feature, I decided to use the same view, but chose two different seasons and two tinted watercolours papers in parallel.
This is to demonstrate the effect that can be produced just by using the different tinted papers.
2/Next I put in the sky, which is the same for both examples, with artist's quality watercolours.
For the remainder of the painting I use acrylics.
I use ultramarine, yellow ochre and crimson.
The crimson is used to warm the yellow ochre at the base of the cloud, and makes the ultramarine almost violet to form the shadow underneath the cloud.
This must dry completely before I can proceed with the painting.
Using a sponge to mix the colours on a stay-wet palette, I then paint in the trees at the back of the stream.
The acrylics are treated as watercolours.
In the winter scene, I use cobalt blue and crimson, adding raw sienna to get the warm glow in the distance.
For the summer scene the colours are cobalt blue, pale olive green and a hint of cadmium yellow.
(ABOVE)
A NOVEL APPROACH
My method of painting is slightly unusual, in that I use watercolour and flow formula acrylic as a mixed medium.
To keep the acrylic workable, I use a stay-wet palette.
This type of palette is designed to keep acrylics workable for long periods of time, which eliminates the worry of them drying too quickly.
The other main component I use is an ordinary household sponge, or synthetic sponge.
These are a lot cheaper than natural sponges and give, in my opinion, an equally good effect.
To rinse out the sponge, I simply use a bucket of water.
The acrylic is then mixed in the stay-wet palette with a damp sponge, and the moisture in the sponge dilutes the acrylic paint so that it  reacts as a watercolour.
The idea is to use the acrylic in a transparent form so that the colour of the paper shines through the layer of paint you are applying.
The acrylic is not effective to use in the traditional opaque sense, it must be treated as a watercolour.
The main advantage of using acrylic like a watercolour is that once it is applied, it dries to be water-resistant.
Therefore, when you lay another wash of colour on top, it doesn't disturb the paint underneath.
So, if you have applied the paint using a sponge and there is a lot of detail, successive layers of colour over the top will not dissolve the existing paint.
Thus you avoid giving the painting a muddied look, a common pitfall for the traditional watercolourist working in this way.
3/ (FAR LEFT) I put the colour on thinly so the colour of the paper shines through.
I paint the main tree using a slightly stronger mix using a sponge and then paint in the finer detail with a brush.
I apply stronger colours with a sponge over the top of the background to provide the smaller branches of the main tree.
For the foreground, I mix up burnt umber and deep violet for the winter scene and varying shades of green for summer.
4/ (LEFT) I remove the making fluid simply by rubbing it with my fingers — it peels off quite easily.
It is essential that the background colours are completely dry before removing it.
5/ (FAR LEFT) Now I can start putting colour washes over the exposed paper.
I use pale olive green and ochre to wash over the main tree, with the shadow softened using a dark olive green.
A wash of colour is then applied over the signpost and the stile, using yellow ochre, pale olive green and burnt umber.
This first coat should dry before the shadows on the side of the stile and signpost are applied.
6/ (LEFT) For the detail in the foreground, I apply pale washes of yellow ochre and raw sienna in the winter scene, and yellow ochre and pale.
7 & 8/ (ABOVE AND ON FOLLOWING PAGE) The final stage is to add the detail on some of the smaller branches, and finish off the background with finer detail.
Any finer detail required in the painting is achieved simply by mixing white with the appropriate colour and applying it over the top of the darker colours for an opaque effect.
Diluted acrylic washes allow the colour of the paper to shine through, thus enhancing the mood of the painting.
MEET THE ARTIST
TERRY HARRISON started his painting his painting career at Farnham Art School in 1968, and subsequently worked as a graphic designer, illustrator and aviation artist.
His first love is landscape painting, especially the rural scenes around his home in Farnborough, Hampshire, where he lives with his wife and two daughters.
After deciding to paint full-time in 1985, Terry has exhibited in galleries throughout the south east.
He also demonstrates for art clubs and societies.
Examples of his work, which include golf and cricket scenes, are available in print.
INSIDE ILLUSTRATION
GOING UNDERGROUND art in the tube
Wend your way down into the depths of the Underground these days, and you will find the walls alive with commissioned art, offering the traveller a glimpse of life above the station.
FAITH GLASGOW reports.
Not surprisingly, a slot on the Underground can be a big boost to the careers of unknown painters.
Melvyn Rodda, British Museum.
(LEFT)
YOU MAY FIND it hard to believe, wedged amongst the hordes on the Northern Line at 8.30am, but London Underground's 100 year history has been closely linked with contemporary British art and design.
‘It was really in the 1920s and 1930s’, recalls Environment's Manager Christopher Nell, ‘that London Underground became highly regarded in the fields of design and architecture.’
Many of the stations built in that era, for example, have been preserved as listed buildings.
And a radical new tube map, doing away with scale and accurate location in favour of clarity and now one of the most familiar designs in modern Britain, was introduced in 1933.
Platform posters, too, have been specially commissioned by the Underground for many decades to promote locations and events accessible by tube; they were introduced in 1908 but their heyday was during the 1930s, when prominent artists such as Graham Sutherland and E McKnight Kauffer produced high quality and popular work.
Such initiatives petered out in the decades after the war; indeed, it has only been since the mid 1980s that new attempts have been made, in Nell's words, ‘to regain the higher ground’, re-establishing the Underground as an influential patron of public art as well as improving the passenger environment.
Several avenues have been followed.
Probably the most obvious, and certainly the most enduring, has been the use of tiled motifs, and in some cases larger, more intricate designs, to decorate the platform walls of the main Underground stations of central London and tie them in with their locality above ground.
Trundle through the system and you'll come across Sherlock Holmes' familiar profile at Baker Street, and that of Queen Victoria at Victoria station; old architectural sketches at Paddington, echoing the West Country connection with the engineering Isambard Brunel; the escalator design at Oxford Circus, in the heart of department store territory; and crossed pistols at the odd duelling spot of Finsbury Park, to name but a handful.
As a repository of works by some of the country's leading names, the walls of the Underground certainly leave an impression.
Edward Bawden designed several of the Victoria line motifs, including Highbury and Islington: a castle, or highbury, destroyed during the peasants' revolt of 1381.
Eduardo Paolozzi's colourful complexities of grid and cog, which run riotously beyond the platforms and through the whole station at Tottenham Court Road, mirror the buzzing electronics and music shops at road level.
David Gentleman produced the Charing Cross murals depicting the building of the Eleanor Cross; but not all the artists commissioned have been so high-profile.
The idea has always been to link the station with its area.
However, lessons have been learnt since the earlier transformations.
One example is the complex design showing the treasures of the nearby National Gallery on the Bakerloo Line at Charing Cross.
As Christopher Nell explains, it is partly a question  of practicalities.
‘With more strident decoration, the signage is dwarfed.
The complexity of the tube system is such that the signage has to be much clearer.
We're aiming now for simpler patterns and more muted backgrounds in platform decoration; we want to promote a sense of calmness and a quiet backdrop.
So rather than covering entire platforms, we may use a design at a focal point within a station, but not where it clashes with the operational side of things.’
The emphasis has also shifted towards a more unified feel.
Mr Nell comments that ‘it may be better to have an entire line decorated by one artist’, which would also help to give each line a more recognisable identity for passengers.
GETTING COMMISSIONED
Involvement with London Underground in this sort of commission is a major piece of work for any artist.
‘People do write in and offer their services’, says Christopher Nell, ‘but I'm not aware that we've actually used any of they so far.
Most of the work they send in is a bit too obvious.’
As a public body, however, the Underground is keen to make its selection across a wide spectrum.
In Tottenham Hale, which will be the new change point from the Stansted airport line to the Victoria line and central London, the latest piece of work in progress, a number of artists were considered before Bruce McLean was commissioned through the Public Art Development Trust.
Clearly, redecorating a tube station is a relatively rare affair involving a large outlay and major investment in the correct choice of designer.
But the artistic world is London Underground's oyster when it comes to the fine art posters which, since the scheme started in 1986, have been scattered amongst less erudite advertisements on station walls.
Based loosely around the theme of London landmarks accessible by tube, they have proved effective in reminding tubegoers of the unexplored delights of the metropolis: from Highgate Cemetery and Sir John Soames' Museum to the Colombia Road flower market and Kew Gardens.
The John Soames Museum made the unlikely complaint that it had found itself too busy as a consequence of the poster's impact.
Henry  Fitzhugh is responsible for the commissions.
‘At its most mundane’, he remarks, ‘there are advert spaces on the tube, and if they're empty we have to put something else there instead.
We did use black paper, but it looked terrible and attracted graffiti, so then we thought of fine art.
It has the longest lasting poster life in the Underground and the original will last forever.’
The poster scheme also provides an excellent opportunity to expose large numbers of the population, who rarely or never set foot within a gallery, to contemporary art.
‘We can produce something for everyone’, says Dr Fitzhugh.
Indeed, one of the criteria on which he makes his choice of artist and subject is ‘the fact that public taste is very definitely not the same as refined gallery taste.
I aim to represent the whole spectrum.
From the slightly twee to the almost risqué.’
Robin Mason, Embankment Gardens.
(ABOVE)
USEFUL PUBLICITY
The scheme has another advantage, in that it is a very cost-effective way of brightening the place up, especially as each design has a ‘tube life’ of at least a year.
Dr Fitzhugh admits that the prices he pays for commissioned prices are well below market value; but few artists turn down the opportunity for such excellent exposure.
‘Young unknowns leap at the chance’, he says, ‘and even the better known are always keen to get exposure outside the gallery world.
They also tend to be pretty public-spirited anyway.’
John Bellany, whose Chinatown is among the most familiar of the scheme, received so much publicity from it that he came back to London Underground to ask if he could do another.
Henry Fitzhugh aims for a deliberate mix of obscure or up-and-coming artists with the glitterati of the art world.
The Red Cricketer , the work of a 15 year old South London schoolboy, Adrian Clarke, is in cheerful evidence at the moment.
It rubs hoarding space with Howard Hodgkin, whose paintings sell for a million pounds and more.
Where does he make his new discoveries?
‘All over the place.
A lot of my time is spent going to galleries and exhibitions.
People are always suggesting artists they like to me.
And in the last year or so, several of the top galleries have approached me to see if I'd consider a deal with one of their artists; for example, Fischer Fine Art offered Gillian Ayers, and Nigel Greenway offered Jeffery Camp.
But other artists have come to light through less likely channels, such as the pages of colour supplements.
Not surprisingly, a slot in the Underground can be a big boost to the careers of unknown painters.
According to Henry Fitzhugh, further commissions and media interest usually result.
So it's equally unsurprising that he receives  a steady stream of unsolicited portfolios from eager aspirants searching for their break.
It is not a rosy outlook for most of them, though: he estimates that only about three unsought artist have ever been selected for commissions.
In most cases the subject comes first, followed by a search for the right artist.
But once the basic theme of the picture has been agreed upon, Dr Fitzhugh makes no further input to the work.
‘I usually say something about going for boldness and colour, but that is really a question of choosing artists by their style.’
Only twice has a piece of work been unusable, in which case, he says, ‘it's my mistake in choosing an artist who wasn't up to the commission, so I pay for it anyway and just don't use it’.
Does he have any advice for aspiring contributors?
‘We can't use paintings full of busy detail, or delicate etchings and watercolours; we also try to avoid lots of open blank space, because it invites graffiti; and we can't have nudity or bad taste.
I used to wrestle with my conscience as to whether I should ask Francis Bacon, but I never did in the end.
I just didn't know what he'd come up with.
But there's only one piece of advice that matters really: think of the general public, in other words don't produce something that leaves 99 per cent of the public behind.’
Benoit Jacques, Flying Tubes, Heathrow.
(ABOVE)
Adrian Clarke, The Red Cricketer, Lord's Cricket Ground.
(ABOVE)
Dan Fern, Sir John Soanes Museum.
(ABOVE)
VICTORIA LINE STATION DESIGNS
The Victoria Line, completed in 1971, has a full complement of motifs enhancing its platforms.
Here is a selection.
Seven Sisters , artist Hans Unger: seven trees, which game their name to the locality
Kings Cross , Tom Eckersley: literal design based on a cross and crowns.
The king is not identified.
Euston , Tom Eckersley: a reminder of the Doric Arch which stood at the entrance to the BR station.
Warren Street , Crosby, Fletcher and Forbes: a maze design, punning on the street name.
Green Park , Hans Unger: a bird's eye view of the trees in the park, changed to a leaf profile in 1979 to match the Jubilee Line.
Walthamstow , Julia Black: adaptation of a William Morris design; he lived and worked in Walthamstow.
Pimlico : an abstract design to signify the Tate Gallery's modern art collection.
Vauxhall , George Smith: an ornamental design echoing the wrought-iron work of the once famous Vauxhall Gardens.
Brixton : a pattern of bricks, another visual pun on the name.
REPRODUCTIONS OF THE POSTERS, CARDS AND OTHER MERCHANDISE ARE ON SALE AT THE LONDON TRANSPORT MUSEUM IN COVENT GARDEN.
SHOPPING FOR MATERIALS
ACRYLIC BRUSHES
In the first part of a new series, MARTIN CHILD reveals the qualities which make certain brushes perfect for use with acrylic media.
BRUSH DESIGN HASN'T changed for centuries.
Ancient Egyptians used a reed with the end chewed or hit with a stone, as a brush.
Classical painters developed the use of animal hair, and the paint brush, as we know it, was born.
Soft haired brushes are mostly used for watercolour or tempera painting, with bristle mainly for oils.
Over recent years, acrylic paints and synthetic brushes have been developed.
Many techniques are available with acrylic paints, so there is not one type of brush suitable for all acrylic techniques.
Free impasto work will require a different type of brush than one for the application of thin washes.
What kind of brush is required by the artist working with acrylic paints?
Using traditional brushes has some limitations, there can be problems with wear and tear and acrylic mediums can be difficult to clean out.
Synthetic brushes have been available for some time and seemed to be the ideal solution, but in the past brushes could be too soft to control well, or too hard to be fully responsive, limiting paint delivery and with little spring, performing as a poor cousin to natural hair and bristle.
Much research and attention to artists' requirements has led to a new breed of synthetic brushes which are highly appropriate for use with acrylics, among other uses, which hold their shape well over a long period of time, are delightfully responsive to use, are superbly controllable, allowing precision work, and are durable enough to resist occasional misuse.
Good synthetic brushes deliver high performance, but cost less, so if there is a build up of acrylic paint at the ferrule (the base of the bristles) and performance is impaired, they can be replaced more cheaply.
CHOOSING FROM THE RANGE OF BRUSHES
The range of brushes is wide.
Round pointed are suitable for precise detail with control from fine to wide lines, laying down colour evenly.
Flats are suitable for larger strokes, holding a good charge of pigment and are good for hard edges.
Oval wash is suitable for watercolour techniques, carrying a large amount of colour and giving a soft edge.
Riggers are for letting, lining out and landscape applications.
Filbert brushes are less inclined to have a build up of colour at the edges and can be versatile.
Brush heads are shaped to taper inward, thus enabling great control of the edge of the brush, allowing precision, with the best brushes holding their shape extremely well.
To preserve brushes, whatever the medium, it is vital to clean them thoroughly.
As acrylics are fast drying it is imperative that the paint is never allowed to dry on the brush.
Always initially wash the brush in cold water and then clean it properly with soap and water, then return it to its correct shape with your fingers.
Synthetic no6 brush from Gerand, Series FNSD.
(ABOVE)
WHICH TO BUY?
The choice for the acrylic artist is wide, with personal preference for natural or synthetic brushes, appropriateness for type of application and cost all being considerations.
However the best brushes to use are probably hog for thick applications and synthetic for watercolour techniques.
The following list is not exhaustive, but does indicate some of the vast range which is available.
All the brushes mentioned have been recommended by the manufacturers as appropriate for use with acrylic paints.
Sizes and shapes available are listed in the chart.
Raphael have a very high quality synthetic range called Sepia , which are designed to combine the features of interlocked hog and soft nylon.
Acrylics can be cleaned out even after three hours?
From the Gerand range are Golden Synthetic Hair brushes, a superb imitation sable, similar to the natural product.
AP Fitzpatrick import the fine Lascaux Artist's Brushes , made of synthetic fibre.
Daler-Rowney offer Bristlewhite pure hog brushes, the well-known Dalon range which are an excellent synthetic version of sable.
There is also a set of nylon brushes available, series 260 and 270 round, series 280 flat.
Newly launched,Pro Arte 's Acrylix are synthetic brushes which retain their shape exceptionally well and are extremely responsive to use.
From the hugh range of the French manufacturer Leonard,Toray Artists' brushes are recommended for acrylic use.
They are available from The Etruscan Agency 
An extensive range of blushes suitable for acrylics is offered by Liquitex It includes Kolinsky Plus which is a red sable and synthetic mix,Sablon , a white synthetic, and Hogbrushes with pure white bristles.
From its wide collection of brushes,Osborne & Butler have a fine set of synthetic sable brushes called Golden Nylon .
Series 444 round and 555 flat Cotman Brushes from Winsor & Newton are ranges of pure synthetic brushes which have fibres of differing thicknesses to help them perform like sable.
Sceptre 404 and 505 are a mix of sable and synthetic providing a long-life brush of high quality.
Winsor Gold is a range of hog brushes also suitable for acrylic use.
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: No 10 fine bristle brush from Osborne & Butler, Series 980; Gerand Series F1 pure hog brush; White Taklon no 12 brush from Robert A Wade, Series 970; no3 Brush from Series SDRG by Gerand; Liquitex no3 Kolinsky Plus fan brush, Series 596; Winsor & Newton Cotman synthetic brush; no8 filbert brush, Series SDF2 from Gerand; Winsor & Newton Gold no4 short flat fine hog brush; Liquitex 3/4in Kolinsky Plus flat brush, Series 598; Pro Arte Acrylix Series 201 short flat brush; no 10 sable/nylon mix brush from Osborne & Butler, Series 962; Daler B24 Bristlewhite no3 brush.
(ABOVE)
Sable and nylon mix one inch flat brush by Osborne & Butler, Series 961.
(ABOVE)
SHOPPING FOR MATERIALS
Using traditional brushes has some limitations, there can be problems with wear and tear and acrylic mediums can be difficult to clean out.
NEW PRODUCT TEST
ACRYLIX BRUSHES
AIM's art materials section expands to include in-depth product testing by professional artists.
This month, RICHARD SMITH tries his hand at the new Acrylix brushes from Pro Arte.
SOME YEARS AGO I wrote an article for The Artist's and Illustrator's Magazine, entitled Painting Naturally .
Discussing brushes for acrylic painting, I stated that, because I use an old chip pan complete with wire mesh basket as a water container, many of the brushes washed seemed to wear quite quickly.
I still have and use some of these old favourites with all the hairs and bristles bent, broken, twisted or near non-existent.
They all have a place in my studio.
However, I use all sorts of things in the early stages of a painting.
These days they range from palette knives, sponges, six inch household paint brushes or fingers.
But, there comes a time in every painting when a clean, new brush has to be used to add detail or to control a passage of the work that started off as a spontaneous accident, or alternatively to lay on a clean glaze.
Long Flat Acrylix brush by Pro Arte, Series 201.
(LEFT)
NEW LOOK BRUSHES
So, as my array of new brushes was getting rather low, it was with interest and eagerness that I accepted to test some new brushes developed and manufactured by Pro Arte.
The new range is called Acrylix .
Now, in the past, I've field tested such diverse things as fishing tackle, shotgun cartridges, and waterproof clothing.
So, what is the difference between two near-identical products?
It is relatively easy to tell with clothing or fishing reels, even shotgun cartridges have different loadings, but surely an artist's paintbrush is an artist's paintbrush?
Well, on opening the box, they certainly looked like artist's paintbrushes, finished in silver grey.
I picked one out.
It felt different, the whole brush felt smooth and silky.
The ferrule was well-formed, with no sharp edges.
But it was at the business end where the main difference lay.
I had before me a selection of rounds, short flats and long flats in various sizes.
They all had rather startling white translucent bristles.
As I ran my thumb over them, they immediately sprang back into place perfectly.
PUTTING ACRYLIC TO THE TEST
But the proof lies in the painting.
I had a few pictures unfinished and decided to finish one or two.
With fresh water in the chip pan and a clean brush palette, I got started.
The brushes responded to the way I work very well.
Firstly, I used a no4 round to pick out detail on the highlights of a sea trout, and on the plumage of a woodcock.
The point was quite sharp, although not as sharp as sable, but as I work quite quickly, I could load the brush fully.
It allowed me to work for up to a minute or so rather than seconds, as with a sable, before reloading.
The flow of paint was well-controlled.
Acrylic paint can sometimes clog a brush because it dries quickly.
Although this fact does not worry me in the early stages of a work, it is not desirable when painting details.
On the Rocks: Sea Trout, 1992, acrylic.
(ABOVE)
PEARLY WHITE BRISTLES
I am told that the tapered polyester bristles have a different shape cross-section to conventional bristles, octagonal in fact.
Without being too scientific, it worked for me.
I could also see the colour of paint I was using due to the pearly-white bristles.
This I found a great help.
I discovered that the flats used on their edge were ideal for quickly flicking grass-like stems.
If the paint was mixed to the correct consistency, a razor edge could be formed by the bristles.
But I think my favourite quality was again the pearly translucence of the fibres, while mixing and laying on glazes.
By making sure the pigment or glaze was transparent, I could gauge the build-up of colour while mixing it in the palette.
I was then sure that the brush was holding the exact colour the painting required.
One or two pigments did stain the fibres somewhat, but they still held their translucence, and I suppose that a wash in warm soapy water would bring back the whiteness.
As the brushes are relatively inexpensive, separate ones could be used for different glazes.
I don't know how they will respond to my abuse in the chip pan after a few months' use, but I think they will fare better than other brushes I've used in the past.
Although they have been developed for acrylic painters, I'm sure they are ideal for oil painters too, as they can be cleaned in turpentine overnight, then used for acrylic painting the very next day.
Anyway, I like them, and will certainly be using them in future paintings.
The Art Media File
LIQUID ACRYLICS
Liquid acrylic paints come in many viscosities, and, as a result, can be used for a variety of applications.
In the first of a new series, which considers the properties of various media, MARTIN CHILD examines the brands available and puts them to the test.
SINCE THE 1960s acrylics have made their presence felt, with many, including David Hockney, using the new material in place of the more traditional oil paint it augments.
This new generation of artists was quick to see the advantages of the, exciting paints.
Fast drying enables a rapid overpainting, they are flexible and versatile, adhering to a variety of surfaces and they can be painted in large, flat blocks of colour, useful in hard edge, pop or optical art painting for example.
The development of liquid acrylics expands the possibilities further.
In truth there are liquid acrylics of varying viscosity and therefore suitable for different uses, but the one thing which they all have in common is that they open up acrylic work to the whole field of design and illustration and offer other useful techniques for the fine artist.
Until commissioned to write this feature, I had never used liquid acrylics and, having now worked with them for a few weeks, I must report that I am completely sold on this exciting medium.
Incredibly versatile, it is possible to switch from delicate line drawing to washes, to gouache style work, to loose free work on a large variety of surfaces, with ease.
The paint is open to innovation, the only limitation is with the artist.
DIFFERENT TYPES OF LIQUID ACRYLICS
Three distinct types of liquid acrylic have been looked at.
There are paints which are so liquid that they resemble inks, paints of a more creamy consistency and also free-flowing acrylics in tubes.
One advantage of the very liquid acrylic is that is doesn't require thinning, even for washes or for airbrush use.
Therefore colours retain freshness and luminosity.
The improvement over gouache in an airbrush is that, once dry, the paint is water resistant, making the image far more durable and permanent for the illustrator and overspraying is not a problem.
If you require opaque colour, a small amount of white will achieve the desired effect.
I found that Winsor & Newton Liquid Acrylic Colour and ACP by Rotring performed exceptionally well, neither requiring dilution within an Aztec airbrush, and there was no hint of clogging.
Golden Fluid Acrylic needed thinning, but the colours retained their vibrancy, as did Liquitex .
The concentrated colour readily thins with water or a medium.
Other semi-thin paints have similar properties when used with the airbrush.
Another new possibility with the very liquid acrylics is their use as an ink.
They can be successfully applied with dip pens, with technical pens and Rotring Artpens, which can be loaded with any colour, performing with just as much fluidity as traditional inks.
This is extremely useful for illustrators, but fine artists should not disregard the creative possibilities of the technical pen, especially now that it can be used with an infinite range of colours.
The pen and ink drawings of Mike Wilks may never be the same again.
Calligraphers should also find many applications for these paints.
CRAFT OPTIONS
There is a huge range of possibilities for the craftsperson.
Superbly subtle painting can be achieved on cloth or silk.
Wood can usually be covered in one coat, and marbling is easy to achieve.
Add a medium to these colours and painting on virtually any surface is possible — from metal to glass, with superb translucency.
Those of you who were inspired by paintings on the surface of bottles at the recent Magritte exhibition will now be able to create your own masterpieces, once you have emptied the bottles!
Liquitex as produced a whole range of Technique Sheets with extremely useful guidelines for most applications.
Watercolour techniques are possible, with the advantage that once dry, colour can be overpainted with no lifting of the original colour, which avoids problems of muddying.
The disadvantage, however, is that you must work fast.
One product which combines the best of both worlds in this area is Lascaux Aquacryl .
In essence this is an acrylic paint which remains watersoluble when dry.
This allows watercolour techniques — such as lifting colour whilst retaining durability.
Gouache techniques produce very satisfying results, with the less liquid acrylics scoring better in this department.
The thinner paints need white or black added to increase opacity.
A pleasing aspect of this technique is that overpainting is possible where adjustments are required.
For thick, impasto techniques it is preferable to use traditional acrylic paints.
AVAILABLE LIQUID ACRYLICS
So what is available?
I have been looking at the following: two very ‘liquid’ liquid acrylics are Winsor & Newton Designer's Liquid Acrylic Colours and the new ACP ArtistColour Professional by Rotring .
Both are exceptionally versatile, both have 36 colours in the range.
The Rotring set has a grey scale of five colours and two flesh tones as opposed to one with the Winsor & Newton product.
Each has the four process colours.
Other less liquid liquid acrylics include the accomplished Liquitex from Binney & Smith, the high quality Golden Fluid Acrylic supplied by Russell & Chapple and TN Lawrence,Lascaux Studio , a range of very intense hues from AP Fitzpatrick and Lucas Cryl , a fine pigment acrylic available from Atlantis Art Materials.
Cryla Flow from Daler-Rowney and Brera Extrafine Acrylic from Osborne & Butler , although in tubes, fall into this category because, coupled with their ability to create quite tactile effects straight from the tube, they are fluid and thin well for airbrush use.
This whole group of paints are in no inferior to the very liquid paints, they are similarly versatile, but cannot be used as inks, which the thinner acrylics do so well.
The quality of all products mentioned is high and they perform most reliably, the paints are durable, with colours being very stable once dry.
Liquid acrylics can open up a whole new world of possibilities.
If you are prepared to live dangerously, you can take many of the techniques above and combine them in one image, or, you may even discover completely new applications for this superb medium.
Selection of liquid acrylic paints of various viscosities.
LEFT TO RIGHT, TOP ROW: Lukas Cryl Metallic Liquid Acrylic; Daler-Rowney Pearlescent Liquid Acrylic; ACP Liquid Acrylic from Rotring.
CENTRE ROW: Liquitex Acrylic Artists Colour; Dr PH Martin's Radiant Concentrated Radiant Watercolour; Daler-Rowney Pearlescent Liquid Acrylic; Brera Extrafine Acrylic Colour from Maimeri.
BOTTOM ROW: Cryla Artists Acrylic Colour from Daler-Rowney; Liquitex Concentrated Artists Colour; ACP Liquid Acrylic from Rotring; Lukas Cryl Liquid Acrylic.
Selection of free-flowing acrylic paints in bottles vials and tubes.
(ABOVE)
GENERAL QUERIES…
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS…
QUESTIONS ANSWERED
Question Time
QUESTION TIME belongs to the readers of AIM and it is up to you to make full use of it.
If you have a problem with colour mixing for instance, why not direct a question to Michael Wilcox?
Tom Robb, a teacher for over 30 years, can lend advice on many technical problems.
If you have a query about information mentioned in a particular feature ask the person who wrote it!
Send your questions to Question Time, The Artist's and Illustrator's Magazine.
BURNISHED GOLD APPLICATIONS
I would like to incorporate burnished gold leaf into my paintings, for example, halos and ornaments in religious subjects.
I have no difficulty using gesso or in laying and burnishing the leaf, but I am unable to find a suitable way of laying paint onto burnished leaf.
I have tried watercolour, acrylics and indian inks, but they all subsequently flake off.
I would prefer not to work in oils.
Because of the detailed nature of the work I wish to do, it would not be practicable to apply the lead subsequent to the painting.
Have you any suggestions as to what I might try to overcome the problem?
Some artists of the 16th and 17th centuries painted on gold ground and, more recently, Otto Dix, among others used gold and silver leaf without regard to the religious meaning of gold.
Tempera is the normal alternative to oil for overpainting gold, but you may be able to use a thin layer of tempera or even saliva rubbed into the surface as a preparation for acrylics.
You may also find egg yolk with your paint is successful — this was used in Italy.
Alternatively, try rubbing over gold with a very small amount of modern PVA emulsion and glue and allowing it to dry as preparation for water-based paint.
As a general rule, nothing should ever be put on gold leaf.
Old paintings that have gold or silver in them and are on gesso ground are often found with the gold leaf or gilding scraped off down to the ground and the exposed gesso painted.
Done with a fine scalpel, this could give fine detail.
LIQUIN, AND OTHER QUESTIONS ABOUT OILS
I am interested in trying oils, and have purchased Alwyn Crawshaw's Oil Painting Course , however, I cannot find the alkyd medium or gel anywhere.
I am also confused at the many descriptions like ‘varnishing’ and ‘glazing’.
What is Liquin for and what is the difference between poppy oil and other oil materials?
I would like to be able to buy materials with confidence.
Is there an artist's directory which could help me?
Liquin is Winsor & Newton 's standard alkyd medium.
It is used to improve the flow of oil and alkyd paint, for subtle blending, smooth brushwork and fine detail.
It increases translucency and is quick drying, and is therefore ideal for glazing.
Glazing is the laying of transparent colour over a dry under layer to create special and/or colour effects.
Varnishing is the final application of a varnish which is applied to a finished painting in order to protect it from pollution.
Winsor & Newton make three alkyd mediums in total; Liquin, Wingel and Oleopasto.
Wingel is a thixotropic gel medium suitable as a glaze medium as well as being capable of moderate impasto.
Impasto is the laying of thick paint with a brush or palette knife.
Thixotropic means the viscosity of the gel is reduced when it is worked with a palette knife.
Olepasto is a stiff gel, made specifically for impasto and texture work, it retains knife and brush strokes and will not level out.
These and all other oils, mediums and varnishes are explained in the Winsor & Newton leaflet, ‘Oils, Mediums, Varnishes and Solvents’, available from your nearest retailer.
Poppy oil in fact is paler, slower drying than linseed.
A Winsor & Newton catalogue which can be purchased from you nearest retailer describes every product and its uses, which you should find indispensable when choosing materials.
Two possible art dictionaries which are currently in print are ‘The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists’ edited by Ian Chilvers, and ‘The Penguin Dictionary of Art and Artists’, edited by Peter and Linda Murray.
Another publication which may be of help with artists' methods and materials, is ‘Artists’ Materials, Which, Why and How’, published by A&C Black.
HELP!
I am teaching myself watercolour painting from books.
I am at present trying Tom Robb's Masterclass series.
I found that my Winsor & Newton Art Masking Fluid took off the original wash when rubbed away, leaving white paper.
It also took some of the surface of the paper.
I have had this problem before while working through exercises in some books.
The paper I have been using is 140 lb Bockingford, is there a better paper to use?
My local art shop had no idea and none of the books I have read so far give any advice.
You are not alone in finding resist medium unpredictable.
Success comes from practice and experiment.
The fluid should be removed as quickly as possible.
As soon as it is touch dry, it should be painted over and when the wash is almost dry, the fluid is removed.
It may help to keep a ball of used fluid, like a rubber, and use it to roll over the fluid to be lifted.
Always start at the edge and not in the middle.
This rolling action can reduce the tendency to tear the paper.
You should have no particular problems in using the Bockingford, but try other papers with a harder finish.
I would advise that you try several papers with timed experiments, leaving the fluid on until you find what suits your way of working.
One major vehicle is the weather.
What take one minute to dry on a hot summer's day may take 10 outdoors in winter.
YOU HAVE HELPED
Just to follow the correspondence in the September Question Time regarding Pelikan Mastercolour Oils, your readers might like to know that Artists' Choice is continuing to stock this excellent product.
Our current intention is to keep them available as long as there is a source of supply.
We offer a mail order service and I will be happy to send details to anyone who is interested.
Members of Artists' Choice will fine the product listed on page 19 of our current catalogue.
In response to Henry Malt's letter concerning health hazards relating to art,(AIM/July 92), there is a book called ‘The Artist's Complete Health and Safety Guide’ by Monona Rossol that he may find useful.
It is available from Allworth Press.
With reference to your question from Mr ER Brindley (AIM/Aug 92), ‘Treasure Island’ illustrated by Roland Hilder was published by Oxford University Press in 1929.
Examples of the illustrator's work can be found in ‘The 20th Century Book’, 2nd Edition by John Lewis, published by The Herbert Press in 1985 