

WOMEN'S AGLOW FELLOWSHIP
Glasgow Chapter
December meeting
Venue
Lesser Hall, Langside Halls, Shawlands
Date
Monday 7 December
Time
7.15pm tea and coffee 7.45pm start of meeting
Speaker
Dr Jim Brooks (advisor to Glasgow Aglow)
Men are welcome to join with us at our December meeting
January meeting
Date
Monday 4 January
Speaker
Mrs Anne Houston, Bailieston
Further details from Lynne Grant, Corresponding Secretary, tel 
BAPTIST UNION ASSEMBLY
Edinburgh 1992
The theme of the Assembly was ‘People to People’.
The Presidential Rally on Tuesday evening saw Dr Hugh Kennedy take over as President, a fitting tribute in this Bicentenary of the BMS to someone who has given so much of his life to serving God and others through the BMS.
He spoke on ‘Christian Mission — People to People’.
‘Scripture’ he said ‘puts the great Commission from Jesus right at the heart of the Christian faith, or it is for every disciple’.
The Rev David Neil, the Union's Mission Field worker stressed the need for churches to have a mission strategy or commitment to training or a willingness to reach out and become involved in their communities.
Dr Theo Angelov, President of the Baptist Union of Bulgaria, addressed the Wednesday evening rally on ‘People to People in Europe’, when he told us of faithful Christian witness over a period of 40 years by many in his country living through extreme conditions and hardships under Communist rule.
It was a very moving and challenging address, culminating in the acknowledgement that one person who underwent many years in Communist prisons, suffering hardships in mind and body was his own father.
Thursday evening's rally was ‘People to People — round the World’ which was a special celebration of the Bicentenary of the BMS.
The address being given by the Rev Angus MacNeil, Overseas Secretary of the BMS.
Representations from a wide range of Denominations and Missionaries in BMS were introduced.
The main thrust of the Assembly was MISSION.
Not all called to Zaire, Brazil, etc, but we are called to SUPPORT and PRAY in specific and informed ways for those who are, and we at home must get out and reach those in our own community.
Morning and afternoon sessions were mainly taken up with the business of the Union and these were highlighted by the clarity of reporting and the general agreement of delegates to the proposals put forward.
WORLD CHURCH
Over the last couple of months many folk have requested to know more about the BMS World Mission Link (WML) and our link partners the Collict and Meikle families.
The following article briefly outlines WML and gives details of our link partners.
If anyone would be interested in being part of a prayer support group for either of our link families could they please contact either Freda Kennedy or Bill Howieson.
World Mission Link
The Baptist Missionary Society has changed the way in which it organizes home support for its missionaries.
Gone are the days of deputation.
In its place the BMS has created WML.
WML is a real link not just a ‘we'll be thinking of you from time to time’.
History shows that where a church is committed to world mission then its life, worship, work and witness are transformed.
WML has been designed to strengthen such a commitment.
QP is part of WML and as such has made a covenant or promise to both the Collict and Meikle families to support them as they seek to serve the Lord out in Brazil.
We as a church have promised to commit ourselves in three ways:—
1
Committed to Learn The link missionaries regularly write newsletters which allow us to learn about the work they are doing — the hopes and fears, the joys and sadness.
Through that work we will know more about the national church, its leaders, its members, its worship and its life.
This month's magazine contains the latest letter from the Meikles.
2
Committed to Pray Having learned more about the missionaries and their work we as a fellowship should better informed in order to pray for real people and real situations.
Being committed to pray for someone is perhaps the greatest commitment we could make and as such we as a church need to be faithful in this, that is why it would be good to get prayer support groups together.
3
Committed to Act We as a church support BMS financially.
QP is not required to give more at this stage.
It may be that as individuals learn and pray that they would be led to greater personal giving.
But there are many other ways in which we could act.
For example, regular writing to missionaries or taking a stand against issues which are highlighted, such as human rights or ecological problems.
We need to be open to what God would say to us through our link missionaries.
As mentioned earlier, QP is linked to two missionary families, the Collicts and the Meikles.
The Collict family
This consists of Chris, Marion, Aaron, Joel and Rebekah.
Some will already know Chris from his Glasgow Bible College days.
The family have been out in Brazil since February when they commenced their second period of missionary activity.
They now live in the location of Sao Bento do Sul in the state of Santa Catarina, a little bit further south than Dois Vizinhos where they were during their previous assignment.
The Meikle Family
David and Catherine shared with us during the evening service on December 29th, and explained how God had led David from being a car mechanic into the mission field in Brazil.
Many of us will remember their enthusiasm for the work of the Lord and the joy that they had in the fact that God should use them in such a way.
Since they have been in Brazil things have not been easy but they have settled in well and are slowly coming to terms with the language.
David and Catherine have three children, Robert, Shona and Johann and have been members of Kirkintilloch Baptist church for four years.
David trained for Christian service at the Scottish Baptist College and at the Glasgow Bible College.
God has given both David and Cath the gift of personal evangelism.
It is good to know that God has chosen QP to share in the work of the Collict and Meikle families through World Mission Link.
Together, in partnership, we can reach out to the people of Brazil and share the Good News that Jesus is Lord and that only in Christ can men and women be reconciled to God.
Halleluia, what a Saviour.
If anyone would like to send a Christmas card or letter to our missionary link partners their addresses are as follows: mdash;
MISSIONS PRAYER DIARY
Mondays
Jack and Dorothy MacConnochie recently travelled to Hyderabad in India to do their Youth With a Mission outreach.
Ask the Lord to bless and encourage them at this time and that they would not suffer from ill health.
Pray that many would hear in their hearts the Good News of life through faith in Christ.
Tuesdays
Alan Middleton has recently moved to Aberdeen with Christian Literature Crusade, pray that he would settle into his new role in that place and that Alan would be open to what God would do through him in the coming months.
Wednesdays
Ask the Lord to raise up intercessors for the Collict and Meikle families.
Pray that the Lord would help us to be faithful in supporting our BMS link missionaries.
Thursdays
Give thanks to God for Martin and Lynn Watson and the family as they reach out into the Moslem community in Glasgow.
Pray that they would know the gentle touch of our Lord in their lives in the coming days.
Fridays
Pray for all those training for the mission field at the Glasgow Bible College or the Scottish Baptist College, that they would be anointed for their task and that they would not lose their first love of Jesus Himself as they study scriptures.
Saturdays
’ I am not ashamed of the Gospel, because it is the power of God for the salvation of everyone who believes…’
Romans 1:16 Take time and ponder over this verse.
Ask God to show us ways in which we, as a church, may be more effective witnesses of the Gospel in Glasgow and beyond.
CAMPHILL DEVELOPMENT — A TEAM EFFORT
The editor thought it was time to bring you an up-date on progress regarding the Camphill Development.
A good deal has happened since that important Church meeting last June when we agreed to go ahead and purchase the building from the Church of Scotland for £1.
Firstly, we formed our Development Group that has now met five times, and has quickly welded into a good team.
I am always thankful for their enthusiasm and commitment as we have drawn up the development brief for the Architect, Ray Davis, whom we have now appointed.
Together we have made the detailed application for a Repair Grant to Historic Scotland, the Government Agency which deals with Grants for Listed Buildings.
The Agency's Architect has now made his detailed inspection of the buildings and his report is expected early in the new year.
Once we have agreed the contents with him we will be in a position to drawn up a Phase 1 contract in which we intend to concentrate on making the sanctuary wind and watertight that will allow us to begin work on the interior alterations.
The group has also explored other areas and agencies that could provide financial support including Glasgow District Council, Glasgow Development Agency and various Charitable Trusts and we are hopeful of encouraging levels of support.
However, most importantly, the group was assured the Lord's protection as we have regularly met together.
The project is not just a building restoration but a spiritual challenge and journey of faith that is exciting.
We are acutely aware that it will not succeed without much prayer and a mutual pulling together.
Please continue to pray for us that we are protected and guided aright.
Secondly, our Gift Day in September was an inspiration to us all.
I'll never forget the sense of joy that came over our evening congregation when Edwin announced we had just exceeded our target of £200,000.
Perhaps, humanly speaking, some of us had doubted during a period of economic recession that we would achieve such a level of giving but God had been honoured.
It had been a gigantic TEAM EFFORT, no matter the size of each individual gift, all had been essential to achieve our mutual goal and that was the significance of the achievement.
2 Chronicles 24: 10–11 All the officials and all the people brought their contributions gladly, dropping them into the chest until it was full.
Whenever the chest was brought in by the Levites to the King's officials and they saw that there was a large amount of money, the royal secretary and the officer of the chief priest came and emptied the chest and carried it back to its place.
We need to continue to pray that our financial needs will be met as the project progresses over the next few years.
Thirdly, we have the practical involvement of a growing group of gifted people.
It has been a thrill as a member of the Development Group to witness the work already being carried out by Ronnie Martin and his team.
Ronnie has now earned the title of ‘Master of Works’.
His team has manfully cleared blocked gutters, downpipes and underground drains that have been the result of years of neglect and prior to the commencement of Phase 1 repair work, they have been ‘fire fighting’ the leaks in the sanctuary roof to limit deterioration of the fabric.
They have also worked wonders in the hall areas and we have now been able to bring these areas into use for the Learning Together groups on Sundays and the Beacon Centre on Thursday evenings, allowing us to make early use of the premises and demonstrate to the Community around us the church is in business again.
Indeed it is our intention that the necessary repair and improvement work on the halls and associated offices will largely be carried out by our own team with a view to reducing costs and encouraging the use of practical gifts of time and skills.
If you have practical skills that you would like to offer in this context please speak to Ronnie Martin or myself and let us all continue to pray that we will have released among us a glorious team spirit in this area of involvement.
2 Chronicles 24: 12–13 They hired masons and carpenters to restore the Lord's temple, and also workers in iron and bronze to repair the temple.
The men in charge of the work were diligent, and the repairs progressed under them.
They rebuilt the temple of God according to its original design and reinforced it.
Finally as a Church Fellowship we have just embarked on an exciting journey which I believe the Lord is going to honour.
However, at times we are going to be stretched to our limits, be it financially, or in practical commitment of time and energy or in overall inspiration and management.
My vision is of a team pulling together with a common aim and purpose to give glory to God and see His Kingdom extended in our part of the South Side of Glasgow.
John 15: 5, 8.
I am the vine, you are the branches.
If a man remains in me and I in him, he will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing…
This is to my Father's glory, that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples.
I know that the members and friends that visited the church premises on our recent open day were extremely grateful to have been shown around by Ronnie and his team.
CHRISTMAS CRACKER
Cracker Cabaret
11th December, 7.00pm at QUEENS PARK BAPTIST CHURCH a healthy diet of food and entertainment at the right price for the right cause……tickets £3.50 (£2.00) live entertainment
Barry Manilow, Cilla Black already booked — NOT!
Cracker Challenge
16th December, Takeoff 19:55 hours at GREENVIEW EVANGELICAL CHURCH
Around the world in 80 minutes.
fasten seatbelts for high speed pole to pole trip Tickets £2.99
Crackerama
19th December, 9.00pm at LANGSIDE HALLS video, drama, music, lights, action: this is the biggy! a radical challenge to the alternative Christmas.
Tickets £3.00 (£2.00)
Tickets and information for all the Cracker events are available from Q.P.B. Church Office.
BE WARNED!
There is limited ticket availability for these events so book early to avoid disappointment.
CAMPHILL GIVING
We have to give thanks for the magnificent giving to the Camphill Project.
The total amount of gifts as at 22 November was: GIFTS £161,864.49 COVENANT TAX RECOVERED £47,406.27 TOTAL £209,270.76
Gifts can continue to be made, by placing in offering bag, in an envelope, clearly marked ‘CAMPHILL’.
If you wish to take out a Standing order with your Bank, Forms are available from The Treasurer.
From the Pastor
 Dear Friends 
By the time you read this we will have recorded the two services for STV.
I hope you enjoyed the experience!
The first of the services is due to be broadcast at the end of January.
Please pray that many viewers may be able to share in that worship and find it helpful and that some who would otherwise ‘switch off’ will be drawn in to the programme and more importantly to the Lord Himself.
We are very fortunate to have the privilege of worshipping Sunday by Sunday in a full church.
It does mean we have to make extra effort to make visitors and newcomers feel welcome.
This is something that each one of us can do.
Please make sure you speak to others around you at church and not just your own special friends.
At the same time, we need to make sure we respect people's desire to have a few moments quietness immediately before and after worship.
Many of you have said that you are finding the two morning services a help in meeting others.
The slightly more manageable numbers in each service make it easier to spot visitors and relate to one another.
The coffee time helps too!
We are due to review the morning service pattern at the church meeting on December 9th, although it is difficult to imagine how we could ever revert to a single service since already we have about 500 adults and children attending the two services!
The evening services are also packed to capacity with a thrilling atmosphere of worship and sense of God's presence.
We have another Baptismal Service planned for 13 December when six people will be testifying to their faith in Christ.
Please plan to attend and bring friends.
As we come towards Christmas, please be in prayer for the outreach potential of our services and activities.
In co-operation with other Christians in the area, we are planning a Christmas Cracker project centred around these main events — a Cracker Cabaret in Queens Park on ll December; Cracker Challenge in Greenview Hall on l6 December and Crackerama in Langside Halls on 19 December.
Make sure you have got the details of these events and support them.
Once again we will have an attractive invitation leaflet giving information on the Christmas Services.
(Details elsewhere in the magazine).
We will be looking for a lot of people to help distribute these in the community.
We intend again this year to have a large Family Christmas Card to enable you to send greetings to other members of the fellowship.
But you are not allowed to sign the card without making a donation to the Bulgarian Baptist Orphanage!
Also remember that although signing one card for everyone might be cheaper for you, there are still some folk within the fellowship who may not have a big circle of family or friends and who would really appreciate a card from you.
If you were able to have an extra space at your table on Christmas Day for someone who might otherwise be on their own that really would be celebrating Christmas!
If you would like to do that but don't know who to ask, have a word with me (I'll come!).
Finally, on your behalf, I want to express our thanks to Ian Smith and Ashley Collishaw and all the team who worked so hard to present the drama ‘Hedda's’.
It was a tremendous effort showing some remarkable talent amongst us and contained a powerful presentation of the gospel.
Well done, everyone.
Let me wish you, from Iain and Ann, Stephen and Eunice, Morag and myself God's richest blessing for Christmas and His peace in your hearts and homes throughout 1993.
Yours in fellowship
CHURCH LIFE DEVELOPMENTS IN ALBANIA
Gail Smith writes ‘The burden God has given me for Albania took root in 1982 the first time I ever heard mention of the country and people.
All I knew then was that they were not allowed to hear about Jesus.
The Lord wonderfully provided for me to visit the country in March 1990 and later that year He revealed that I should prepare for service among Albanians.
Since January 1991 I have committed myself to full time study of the language, history and culture etc and have made a further four visits.
I await God's time for me to live among Albanians.
I follow any ‘Albania’ news with interest and so, through Hugh and Freda Kennedy and Susan Chalmers, I've met Chris and Mairi Burnett.
All were BMS missionaries in Zaire until they had to leave that country.
God subsequently led the Burnetts to accept the challenge of establishing a new work in Albania (in conjunction with the European Baptist Federation) and since summer of this year they have been resident in Tiran together with their two young sons.
The following account shows the enormous developments in church life in Albania, once a declared atheistic state and the most isolated country in Europe.’
Political and legislative change was accompanied by a momentous evangelistic crusade on 1 July 1991 held in a sports stadium in Tiran.
Various missionary societies co-operated in this venture under the umbrella of ‘Albanian Encouragement Project’.
From that time, missionary workers of various nationalities, societies, and denominations have entered (and continue to enter) the land.
Some 140 full-time workers are now resident and around 3,000 short-term workers were in Albania this summer.
Missionary societies and church denominations are involved not only in church planting but also in giving advice and assistance in such fields as Education and Health Care, etc.
Secular agencies are also giving aid in both practical and consultative capacities.
Naturally, not only the evangelical church has taken opportunity of the open door — cults are also active, notably Bahai and Jehovah's Witnesses.
Islamic literature is being translated and circulated.
In 1967, when the then Communist government declared Albania an atheist state, all religious buildings were put to other use or closed.
Now (since end-1990) those still fit for the original purpose of use have been restored, and so mosques too are open and functioning.
(In terms of religious background Albania is 70% Moslem.)
As religion had been banned there were no existing laws regulating it.
Therefore, new legislation, modelled on Turkish religious law, was recently drawn up and a bill is now before the Albanian Parliament.
The evangelical community has expressed concerns regarding several of the clauses.
If the bill were to be passed as it now stands it would result in the restriction, and even removal, of presently existing freedoms for evangelistic work.
The bill has not yet been passed.
PLEASE PRAY.
Your prayers could make the difference, affecting the final outcome.
Gail produces a quarterly personal prayer letter.
Anyone wanting to receive it should inform Gail or Mrs Jean Pert.
BMS BIRTHDAY SCHEME REGISTER
At the end of the year, like most folk, even QP members, we take stock of the events in the past months and plan for the future.
Looking back over the Birthday Scheme Register, there are gaps in some people's giving for some months.
Probably folk can't find the ‘little brown envelope’ or it is stuck behind a pile of mail in their ‘pending tray’.
SO:
Envelopes for donation can be had from Helen Chalmers or Theresa Scott or donations can be put in a plain envelope marked for BMS BIRTHDAY SCHEME.
Here is a guide for those who need to know.
If your birthday is here, you need to take action now!(but no names, and no ages): 3 January 1 February 1 April 2 May 1 June 3 July 4 August 4 October
For those who do not know what I am on about, why not pick up a Birthday Scheme Leaflet and make it your resolution to support the Medical Work of the BMS in the New Year.
We are trying to be economical and don't want to waste postage for those who no longer want to support the scheme, so please get in touch with either Helen (632 8214) or Theresa (638 5882).
CHRISTIAN BROADCASTING
I would like to share with you a burden for prayer as I feel it is only right that all Christians should know about anything that would deny us total freedom.
Would you like to see sound edifying, Bible based TV programmes, including directly evangelistic ones in the place of the morally and socially destructive ones we all deplore?
You can do something to bring this about.
You may know that after a long legislative battle the new Broadcasting Act became law on 1 January 1991 and restored freedom for such programmes, including direct evangelism, which had previously been lost.
This was the Lord's doing.
The Act provided for the old Independent Broadcasting Authority to be replaced by the new Radio Authority and the new Independent TV Commission, each with authority codes for the interpretation of the new law.
The Radio Authority codes are quite satisfactory but the Independent TV Commission codes are another matter.
They are so restrictive to true Christian programming as to be contrary to the spirit and the letter of the new Act, therefore a direct violation of the will of Parliament.
There is an obvious intention of preventing the Gospel from being freely proclaimed on television.
This is urgent.
The Independent Television Commission codes are due to become legally enforced on 1 January 1993.
The ITC has already made plain how it intends to apply them, namely to reduce still further the output of genuinely Christian Broadcasting and increase the multi-faith type.
Our Father says in His Word ‘Do not ill treat the stranger but to be kind to them’ Exodus 22 v 21, which is right.
But he also says ‘They provoked the Lord to anger because they forsook Him and saved Baal.’
Judges 2 v 13–14.
‘But if the watchman sees the sword coming and does not blow the trumpet to warn the people…
I will hold the watchman accountable’ Ezekiel 33 v 6.
The pen is mightier than the sword!
DIARY OF JONAH: December 1992
Monday
The shops have started to put up Christmas decorations.
It's ridiculous.
There is a long time until anyone has to think about Christmas shopping.
I mean, what about the spiritual dimension?
Tuesday
My silly wee sister has finished her Christmas shopping.
I don't believe it!
On second thoughts, I do!
She will have bought Dad another tie, Mum will get something smelly for her bath, Gran will get a scarf and I will get another bookmark.
She really puts a lot of thought into buying her gifts.
Wednesday
Gran is very upset.
Our local Co-op is closing.
She says it's the end of an era.
I am in everyone's bad books because I said that it was only a shop.
I mean, it's much more serious when something like a church closes.
Gran says I'll understand one of these days.
People always say that when they lose an argument.
I think she's just upset because she meets all her chums there.
Thursday
I'm absolutely starving!
Mum has gone into town for late night shopping.
Gran says it's all this late night shopping that's shut down her Co-op.
I'm sure she's right.
I mean, I don't expect my Dad had to wait as long for his tea.
Our first Christmas card arrived today.
It's not even December.
I mean, I don't think Mary and Joseph would have set out for Bethlehem yet.
Friday
Mum came back with lots of interesting parcels last night.
I wonder if she has remembered what I would like for Christmas.
I will maybe just remind her in case she has a problem finding one if she leaves it too late.
Saturday
Went to the church Christmas play tonight.
I am sure it was later last year.
It was excellent, even though they didn't use any of the suggestions I made.
They are probably going to write another play based on my suggestions.
I hope I get a part in the next one.
Sunday
Wonderful sermon although even our pastor mentioned how many shopping days till Christmas.
I suppose he has to start early.
I mean, Christmas is when he does most of his work.
I think he's even busier than at Easter.
Oh well, I suppose I had better make a start with the Christmas shopping.
I wonder if Gran's Co-op is going to have a closing down sale!
McCONNOCHIE NEWS UPDATE
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ.
Eph. 1:3
In our last letter you will remember we were concerned about what size of house we would have, how the children would settle in at school, how Jack would feel leaving paid employment.
We just want to share with you how God has been so faithful to us in many ways.
We have a lovely three bedroomed flat in a wing of the main house with its own front entrance.
Our furniture fits beautifully in our lounge which is quite big with a log fire.
We also have a small dining area and kitchen — Dorothy is very pleased with it.
Matthew has settled well into school and has a Christian friend who is in the same group in class.
Thanks all of you who prayed; we believe this is a real answer to prayer.
Mark has settled well after a hiccough at the start.
He has had to go into year 5 because of the different age for secondary school here but he has coped well with it and is allowed to carry on with his own level of work.
Jack and I have known God's strength and grace for the many tasks we have been involved in as Crossroads staff, and for Jack the difference is that we work a six and sometimes seven day week and we're open for business outside office hours!
We attend the lectures along with the students from 10 — 12:30 each day; we are both small group leaders which means we have six or seven students each; we pray and share our lives together, help work through with people what changes God is making in their lives.
We also enjoy having fun together.
The group meets four times a week; in addition we have individual counselling sessions and we also meet with couples.
It's a privilege to meet with the students as they seek God's direction for the future.
It's so exciting to see God change lives, bringing healing and restoration, equipping people to be more effective in sharing His love in the world.
On the 24th November we leave the Kings Lodge to lead a team of 17 students (adults) and 6 children to Hyderabad in Central India to share some of the things we have learned over these last three months of lectures.
We will live and work from the YWAM base in Secunderdad, which is just outside Hyderabad.
We will be working alongside the base staff, encouraging them and assisting them in their work with local churches, ministering to the homeless in Hyderabad and working among a gypsy group in the country.
As we have waited on God as a group we feel part of our ministry will be intercession and praise.
We look forward to sharing more of this with you when we return.
We are excited as a group in knowing God has called us to India but we realise how much we need Him in order for us to be effective.
We return to Kings Lodge on Monday 18th January.
It will be hard for us to be away from Andrew and Peter over Christmas and New Year but the boys have been really encouraging, telling us to go for all God has for us.
Peter decided to go to Jordanhill College in September to study for his degree in primary teaching.
He is staying with Christian friends during term-time, where he is being really loved and cared for by them.
This was a real answer to prayer.
Peter will spend Christmas with Jack's Mum in Irvine.
Andrew had a good summer with Kings Kids in Czechoslovakia.
He is leading a Kings Kids Christmas tour in Ayrshire but before that he is off to Albania to look at opportunities of taking a team there in Summer ‘93.
He is planning to spend Christmas with a friend in England.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank the many people who have written to us.
Please keep the letters coming; we so enjoy hearing from you.
Apologies to those who are waiting for a reply; we're trying…
Thanks to all of you who have prayed.
We do appreciate all your prayers and have seen answers to them, for which we give God thanks; please continue to pray for us.
A special thanks to our prayer support group who meet regularly at John and Rosemary Turner's.
We do thank you for your support for us as a family, and to those who have given financial support.
We pray God will bless you as you share with us in what God has called us to do.
We thank all our friends at Q.P.B.C. for their encouragement to us and for the love they have shown us.
We would like to wish you all a Christmas full of God's love.
DAVID AND CATH MEIKLE WRITE…
 Dear Friends and Partners in the Gospel 
We have been here almost a year now and the Revd Brunton Scott is still having a great affect on our lives.
How?
We were sent a tape of one of his sermons (brought a tear to the eye) and again he was on the subject of the Church as a Missionary Church, again confirming for us our call to WORK here in Brazil.
He quoted from the life of Carey and Prayer call of Fuller in 1784 where he says, ‘Let the whole interest of the Redeemer be affectionately remembered’, and he went on to say we are called to WORK not a holiday.
I was enjoying myself; now I will have to work.
But really we are enjoying our work here and have seen and felt the power of God, His Word and His love of His people, through the letters, tapes and cards that you have sent to us.
Please continue as we really need them.
The Church here has been great.
They have accepted us and used us for the furthering of the Kingdom here in Taquaral.
Now that we are ready to move to Sao Paulo please continue to pray for the Taquaral church and for the new church Jardim Miriam which we were privileged to see the starting and the continued growth of.
To all our Link Churches throughout Britain, thank you for your support for BMS and through them for us.
Your prayers are being answered and the language is better, but the best news is that God continues to use us even in our limited capacity.
I have been preaching a few times and invitations are coming in, so it is good experience for me.
The people are very tolerant and it has been overheard that I speak better Portuguese than I do English.
This was even said in England.
But as a result of learning another language I understand why English is so difficult for foreigners especially us Scots.
The church we are moving to, in San Bernardo do Campo, is very poor and has a membership of around 50 and needs to expand the buildings.
The church building is an old converted house (pictures to follow).
The location is in a valley.
On one side of the hill are typical favela wooden construction type houses, the other side of the hill where the church is situated are stone built constructions interspersed with all other types of construction material they can get their hands on.
There is also a large car factory nearby where some of the people work, so I will be asked to take services there also.
The family news is that we are all well, the girls are settled at school which we hope will continue when we move.
Their English language is needing some work even though Cath does a lot of work with them on their English, so please pray for this.
Robert says he is more settled at school but is having to work very hard this year.
Another plus for him is that he is no longer surrounded by girls and the English, as he now has Kyle MacDougall at the hostel, so along with Andrew they are beginning to affirm themselves.
He also has some good friends at school and the company of the Christine family and of course Uncle Kevin and Auntie Linda, the new hostel parents, so please continue to pray for them all, as they continue to face up to continued separation from their parents.
For David there is not really a lot more to tell except perhaps that I got some new teeth and as a result a few more pounds have been gained.
Cath does not have this excuse; she has to look for another.
This apart we are well, and again thank you for your prayers, support and love.
As this is a short letter we will of course send out another before the end of the year with our new address and further news on the life and times of the Meikle Mob…
THE MARK2 PROJECT
The Mark 2 Project is a scheme fronted by six local churches, to establish an alcohol-free bar in the Shawlands area for young people.
Now the Mark 2 T-Shirt, seen here  modelled by the lovely Lady Hannah, is on sale.
With its exclusive design this limited edition casual top is a must for the fashion conscious!
It comes in sizes S, M, L and XL and at a cost of just £6.75 is an affordable way to thrust yourself into the very forefront of the 1990's fashion!
But don't just take my word for it.
Here's what others have had to say about this amazing shirt:
GEOFF BANKS:’ Quite the most striking and uniquely designed piece of fun-wear I've seen in years.’
COCOA CHANEL:’ Wish my name was on the label, darling’!
HANNAH ELDER:’ Can I have my biscuit now, Daddy’?
You can place YOUR order by contacting the House of Elder on 
(Geoff Banks is a car mechanic from Grimsby, Cocoa Chanel a waitress on the Folkstone — Boulogne Ferry).
STANDING IN THE GAP
Jean Pert was sent this poem by a partner in her Prayer Chain and asked to share it with us.
She writes’…
I feel it sums up many of the issues we have been thinking about recently…’
Ezek. 22.30 —‘I looked for a man among them who would build up the wall and stand before Me in the gap on behalf of the land so that I would not have to destroy it, but I found none.’
I am looking for a people who will come on bended knee,
To bring to me your nation — with contrite heart and plea.
My Word was once respected, its truths help make the law,
Of home and hearth and parliament, of jury, health and more.
But now My heart is breaking as I see the crumbling mess,
In family life and government, the Church I cannot bless,
As marriages are breaking, few bonds are made with Me.
And others live together in superficial glee.
The families are divided, the children are confused.
No discipline is given — no happiness diffused.
So witchraft now is legal and ‘Gay’ no longer crime.
Indecent films and photos the ratings slowly climb.
The censorship of script has gone.
No longer does it race
To cut out obscene talk and scenes and so convey more grace.
My heart is very heavy as I look upon My Church.
I long for all my people their lives to humbly search.
To walk upright, My truths to share, not liberalise My Word.
Please do My will and go My way and may My voice be heard.
Oh…
I am looking for a people who will come on bended knee.
To bring to Me your nation, with contrite heart and plea…
2 Chron 7.14 —‘If my people, who are called by My Name, will humble themselves and pray and seek My face and turn from their wicked ways then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and will heal their land.’
We know God the Father,
We know God the Son,
We know the Holy Spirit,
We worship three-in-one.
We know our own Creator,
We know our saving Lord,
We know deep within us,
We worship One who loves us.
We know a joy o'erflowing,
We know a peace untold,
We know the greatest story,
We worship Jesus gladly.
PRAYER DIARY
December 92
Mon 7
Christine Murison Gordon Nicholl
Tues 8
Karen Ramsay, husband Ken, Colin & Kirstie
Wed 9
Betty Rankin, husband Ian, Ian, Stuart & Carol-lyn
Thurs 10
Margaret Reid Helen Richardson
Fri 11
Margaret Riley & Stephen
Sat 12
John Robertson, wife Judy, Fiona & Laura
Mon 14
Theresa Scott, husband Tom & Stuart
Tues 15
Stacey Scott Lynn Sharp
Wed 16
Frank & Wilma Shapiro, Ian & Barry
Thurs 17
Ella Skarpass, Eddie & Fred
Fri 18
Hans & Margaret Skowron
Sat 19
Marie Sommerville, husband Brian, Anna & David
Mon 21
Alice Stark Joseph Watt
Tues 22
Harry & Ina Tiggerdine
Wed 23
David West Lesley Whitefield
Thurs 24
John Williams & Matthew
Fri 25
Pray for the many people who will spend today alone
Sat 26
Gordon & Isobel Wills & Christopher
Mon 28
Greta Wilson Stephen Wright
Tues 29
Iain Wyper Stuart Benham
Wed 30
John & Anne Young
Thurs 31
Helen Young, husband Tommy
January 93
Fri 1
Tam & Ivy Young
Sat 2
Marion Beveridge Susan Bloom
Mon 4
Gerard Booth Mrs Brydone
Tues 5
Carol Butler Helen Chalmers
Wed 6
David & Hazel Coats
Thurs 7
Mabel Crawford
Fri 8
Susan Cruikshank, husband Neil, Stephen & Sarah
Sat 9
William Cunningham, wife Nancy
Mon 11
Martin & Jean Currie, Barry and Jason
Tues 12
Jean Farrell & Nicole
Wed 13
Edward & Marion Fergus, Eddie, Tracy & Emma-Louise
Thurs 14
Ken & Pat Ferguson & Sacha, Richard
Frid 15
Sheena Fraser husband George, Justine & Gavin
Sat 16
Helen Gibson Craig Govan
QP CRECHE
 Dear QP Mag 
Please pass on our thanks to all the Mums, Dads and kids who gave us such a great present for our involvement with the creche over the past couple of years.
The salad bowls are great to look at, and great to use — they are such a good size compared with the silly little one we've been crushing lettuce and tomato into for far too long.
And the candlestick is beautiful — dare I say we've been lusting after just such a one for ages, and now we can enjoy your gift.
Craig was able to say his thanks in church while I was languishing in bed with tonsillitis.
So let me add mine — thank you very very much.
Being in the creche was a lot of fun for all our family.
We had difficulty persuading our kids out of the creche and into their different groups, they liked the wee ones so much!
However we are loving being back in the service now.
Finally, many thanks to the parents and all the other folk who helped us by being part of the duty rota.
Particular thanks to Pauline Carruthers and Isobel and Colin Barber.
Much love to all you Mums, Dads and kids.
CHOCOLATE LOGS
¼ cup finely chopped candied peel
⅓ cup raisins, coarsely chopped
½ cup chopped almonds
2 tablespoons minced preserved ginger
2 tablespoons chopped walnuts
1 tablespoon sugar
⅔; cup shredded coconut
13 oz semi-sweet or bitter sweet chocolate
½ cup dark or light rum
icing sugar
In a large bowl combine candied peel, raisins, almonds, ginger, walnuts, sugar and coconut, set aside.
Melt 5 oz chocolate on top of double boiler, taking care not to let the water boil, so it doesn't get too warm.
Mix chocolate with dry ingredients, add the rum.
Let cool slightly.
On a surface lightly coated with icing sugar, shape chocolate mixture into finger-sized logs.
Refrigerate till firm.
Melt remaining chocolate, let cool slightly.
Dip cold logs in warm chocolate, covering each one thoroughly.
Place on wax paper.
With a fork draw lines over the warm chocolate to resemble bark.
Let set at room temperature.
Wrap in cellophane or plastic wrap.
Box several logs together.
Store in a cool place or the refrigerator.
NET TRUST
Net Trust has launched into action over the last few months in different areas.
The name originates in Luke 5: 1 — 11, where Jesus, and only He, could teach the Fishermen where to lay their nets.
Net is also a general term, not specific to working girls (prostitutes) so that it can facilitate other ministries in the future.
We are setting up outreach around Glasgow Green, South Side and the Gorbals.
The ministry of Net Trust has many faces — discipleship, counselling, crisis counselling, drug rehabilitation centre referrals, court case referrals, welfare rights awareness, housing, child cases and domestic violence, to mention but a few.
Our Statement of Purpose is a guideline to prioritise our time, spiritual and emotional resources:—
Net Trust is a movement of Christians committed to the following purposes:
1)
To serve, equip, educate, train and mobilise Christians in outreach and social action — the whole Gospel to the whole person.
2)
To respond sensitively to the spiritual, mental, social, physical and emotional needs of the people in Glasgow Green, South Side and Gorbals.
3)
Insofar as is possible in accordance with our statement of belief, to work with existing statutory bodies and charitable organisations in the achievement of the above objectives.
4)
To advance similar Christian initiatives elsewhere in the world.
After much prayer with ‘application interview procedure’ a team has come into formation.
We are going through an extensive, 3 month training programme which has professional recognition in Social Work.
Within the training our goal is that we know worship to be a lifestyle.
Net Trust's publication of leaflets will be professionally compiled as soon as the Trust is registered.
As you can imagine the support network is extensive:mdash; pastoral care for each team member, administration, typing, fund raising, auditing, transport and Care Trust homes programmes.
And the list goes on.
It's wonderful to see the body of Christ mobilised to the lost in a local Church outreach setting and being able to facilitate the challenge.
Prayer is the most challenging call in this ministry; if you would like to join the prayer chain do contact the team.
Bless you and thank you for all your love and concern.