

NOBODY WANTS TO KNOW
Following the shooting of William Black, the most urgent task was to endeavour to organise support for an inquiry.
Rev. Dr. Ian Paisley of the Democratic Unionist Party was one of the few persons keen to help.
The shooting took place on a Saturday.
On Monday, a meeting was demanded with Francis Pym, a newcomer who had replaced William Whitelaw as secretary of state for Northern Ireland some weeks earlier at the beginning of December.
It was granted for the following day and a deputation was formed consisting of Dr. Paisley, leader of the DUP; Rev. William Beattie, deputy leader of the same party; Cecil Harvey, Vanguard Unionist Assembly member from the Saintfield area; and the present writer.
The deputation told the story of the harassment of the Blacks over the months and emphasised the various indications that the government's undercover organisations were responsible.
In conclusion, a major inquiry was demanded and police protection for Black.
Pym listened impassively.
I found myself wondering if he were really as indifferent as his expression and few comments suggested.
In Parliament two days later, Paisely asked James Prior, leader of the House of Commons, to permit him to make a statement to the House on the matter.
Prior declined the request and pointed out that A. D. P. Duffy, MP for Attercliffe, Sheffield, already had a question on Northern Ireland on the order paper.
On Tuesday, 5th February, Duffy's question came up and was answered by Ian Gilmore, secretary of state for Defence.
It was a general question on the operations of the army in Northern Ireland.
Gilmore said, ‘The army has worked with the civil authority to bring about a reduction in violence and will continue to do so as long as it is necessary.’
Paisley had to be in Ulster that day, but Kevin McNamara, MP for Kingston-upon-Hull, realised that the Black issue was being avoided and intervened to say that MPs were concerned about the serious allegations which had been made.
He continued, ‘It is incumbent upon the government to refute them in the most absolute detail.’
Gilmore replied, ‘I cannot do much more than say that what was said was absolute nonsense.’
In his answer, Gilmore also took up and dismissed as totally unfounded a claim which Paisley had made several weeks earlier in the Commons that his own life was in danger from government agents.
It had not been taken seriously by MPs or press and the Black case was discredited by being placed alongside the earlier claim.
Paisley had based his assertion about the danger to himself on a warning from inside the security forces and this fact meant that he could not establish the credibility of it by revealing the source of his information.
In the meantime, on Saturday, 2nd February, an abridged copy of the police forensic report on William Black's injuries was secured.
Paisley and I issued a joint statement spelling out that the authorities had made inaccurate claims about the shooting and referred to the information in the forensic report.
The local press and Daily Express gave reasonable coverage, but the state-owned BBC was a different story.
I had given about half of the statement to a copy stenographer by telephone (a normal procedure) when a man with a southern or midland English accent intervened.
He said that he could not have a girl's time wasted by taking down statements of that kind.
I pointed out that it was a joint statement on behalf of Dr. Paisley and myself and that he was the best-known Ulster MP at Westminster and leader of a major Ulster party.
He replied that he did not care and anyway he knew about the Black shooting and there was no truth in what we were saying.
I asked to speak to the person in charge of the station.
He replied that he was.
The local newspapers in Ulster printed our press statements, but did not follow up the Black story on their own despite the clear indications of sinister and dramatic happenings.
Belfast has three dailies and a Sunday newspaPer.
As with most provincial newspapers, stories tend to be written in the reporters' office with a  minimum of telephone calls to check facts and with one eye on the deadline for going to press.
Much local news consists of accounts of terrorist and army activities and reporters rely heavily on the army press official for immediate and up-to-date information.
It was known that it could be unco-operative.
There had been various cases of ‘blacked’ journalists although usually as a result of pro-IRA stories.
On 7th February, I wrote to Derrik Mercer, assistant news editor,The Sunday Times , suggesting that the paper's Insight team should investigate the Black shooting and earlier harassments.
A Westminster general election was in progress and newspaper staff fully engaged.
Once it was out of the way, he sent across the correspondent, David Blundy.
He arrived on Monday, 18th, and spent several days investigating the shooting.
He received every courtesy from the army and a certain amount of information.
It stressed that it accepted that Black had nothing to do with the stolen goods or weapons found at the cottage.
This stance may have been the result of the influence of senior officers of the regular army, assisted by a warning from Black's solicitor that he would take legal proceedings should any new statement or comment on behalf of the army be libellous.
Blundy's report appeared in The Sunday Times on 24th February.
Unfortunately, he did not have certain items of information such as the history of the Star pistol found at the cottage.
He pointed out that the army version of the shooting prompted the questions: Why, if the army believed that it had caught three terrorists, did it let all of them escape?
Why, if either Black or his friends were suspicious characters, would they first contact the police?
Why was Black shot when the army's procedure explicitly states that soldiers should always try to handle situations ‘other than by opening fire’?
During the few days before Blundy came across to Belfast, Paisley contacted a legal friend who in turn suggested to Vincent Browne of the Sunday Independent , a Dublin newspaper, that he examine the Black case.
Browne did so and from his own contacts within the RUC learned several pieces of information such as the fact that the Star pistol was assumed to have been in the custody of the army since the previous owner was shot a year earlier.
Browne's story appeared on Sunday, 24th February, the same day as Blundy's.
It was given a banner headline on page one and was continued on two inner pages.
The Sunday Independent , however, does not circulate on the British mainland and so there was still no head of steam generated for an inquiry.
In Northern Ireland, its impact was limited as the newspaper circulates among the minority community and has a reputation for anti-British bias.
In the Irish Republic, it caused a minor sensation, but that was of slight value towards securing an inquiry in the United Kingdom.
Next day, RTE, the state broadcasting organisation in the Irish Republic, interviewed Black, which was additional publicity for the case.
Paisley was optimistic that he would be able to have the Black issue raised in an adjournment debate in the House of Commons.
He agreed that the aim should be a judicial inquiry.
I sent details of the case to a large number of politicians in preparation for his move in the Commons.
They ranged across the political spectrum from rightwing conservatives to left-wing socialists.
Most of the Ulster MPs were included.
After some weeks, Paisley reported that he had been unable to persuade the speaker of the House of Commons to allow the Black case to be raised in an adjournment debate and that he was pessimistic of having it raised in Parliament in any other form.
This was a most grievous blow to the hope of an inquiry of any kind.
It meant, too, that other MPs were discouraged from themselves attempting to raise the matter.
They assumed that, if a person with Ian Paisley's formidable powers of protest could not have it raised, they would have even less chance.
In a last effort to rally organised political support behind a demand for an inquiry, I had the Black issue placed on the agenda of a wellattended meeting of the Assembly members of the United Ulster Unionist Council.
The UUUC had been formed in early December to bring together Westite Unionists, Vanguard Unionists and Democratic Unionists for electioneering and propaganda purposes.
I had already discussed it with a fair proportion of them as individuals in the previous weeks.
Paisley, one of the few who could grasp the larger issues brought into focus by the assassination attempt at Tully-West, unfortunately was absent at Westminster.
Ernest Baird was absent also.
It was soon clear that few of those present could comprehend that  it was not simply another shooting incident in the army's war against the Provisional IRA.
The old reluctance to be critical of the army in public was evident.
There were inter-party rivalries within the UUUC and inter-factional rivalries within the parties and, although Paisley and I belonged to different parties, the fact that we were both identified with the Black case was not necessarily always helpful.
But, the greatest obstacle was the limited experience, confidence and education of the average Assembly representative regardless of party.
Northern Ireland has a population of only 1½ millions and the mediocrity of its representatives is similar to that of town councillors for a city of that size.
The last straw was when a totally serious Westite Unionist remarked that, as it was a shooting matter, he recommended that it should be left to the army to investigate as it had a lot of experience of shootings of one kind and another.
I sent details of the Black story to key churchmen, ranging from the Archbishop of Canterbury to prominent Quakers.
Both the Anglican and the Roman Catholic archbishops of Armagh were included.
On each occasion, I pointed out that there were fundamental moral and constitutional issues at stake.
The response was disappointing.
Few acknowledged my letter.
A lay assistant wrote that the Archbishop of Canterbury would attend to it on his return to London from Canterbury, but no further communication ever arrived.
The Quakers, who have championed so many humanitarian issues in the life of the nation in earlier years, were particularly disappointing in their apathy.
An exception was Miss Evelyn Shire of the Westminster Quaker Meeting who clearly realised the underlying implications of the Black case and endeavoured to interest others.
The sole churchman to try to raise the Black issue in an effective way was Rev. Roy Magee, minister of Saintfield Presbyterian Church.
Shortly after the shooting at the cottage at Tully-West, a man telephoned and asked to meet him.
He declined to explain why or to give his name on the telephone.
When they met, Magee discovered that he was a member of the security forces.
He had not been on duty on the afternoon of the shooting or responsible for any of the aftermath investigations.
But, he was well informed on the matter and admitted that he and others were worried about their own safety because of what they knew.
He said that it was suspected that  the SIB unit at the cottage was an army intelligence assassination squad.
He gave the impression that he was most disturbed about the occurrence and wanted someone with whom he could discuss it in safety.
Magee also received the impression that the man felt it to be his moral duty to warn a responsible person who might be able to do something about it.
Roy Magee learned of the efforts and frustrations of Ian Paisley and myself to secure political action.
He decided to tell the story of William Black to the Down Presbytery which met monthly and consisted of the Presbyterian ministers of a substantial section of County Down together with one lay elder from each congregation.
He hoped that it would express disquiet at the circumstances of the Tully-West shooting and would call publicly for an independent inquiry.
He felt that such a call, coming from a church body, would be difficult for press and public to ignore.
At the meeting of the Down Presbytery, the first difficulty was innate sympathy towards the army and reluctance to admit that the shooting of Black was more than another of those unfortunate accidents which occur in war.
One person pointed out that, if it was not an accident, there were serious political overtones and the convention had been long established that political matters were never raised at presbytery meetings.
Another queried whether it was a proper subject for the meeting as William Black was not a resident of the area, but a week-end cottage tenant.
In addition, he was a Plymouth Brother.
Nevertheless, the resolution might still have won a majority had it not been for the stolen goods in the outhouse.
That fact carried much weight with the laymen even when it was emphasised that Black was not responsible.
One layman summed up the feeling with the remark, ‘If there were stolen goods anywhere on the premises, the Church must keep out of the matter.
It makes no difference who was responsible for them.’
I endeavoured to interest the National Council for Civil Liberties in the Black case.
At first there was some response and I was able to meet two officials, Jack Dromey and Miss Catherine Scorer, in Belfast on 28th April 1974 during a visit to Northern Ireland which they were making together with Martin Loney, the general secretary.
They listened to the Black story and admitted that it had important implications.
However, I received the impression that the society was more interested in a scheme for a new RUC complaints procedure  and that it was not anticipated that it would be taking up the Black affair in a major way.
Subsequent events bore out my impression.
It is a small society and at that time had an annual budget of only £50,000.
Nevertheless, it was able to take up various causes from Chilean refugees to the RUC complaints procedure.
I could not escape concluding during subsequent weeks that there were certain strong prejudices and preferences within the organisation.
It was also rent by internal feuds which culminated in early June in the resignation of Martin Loney, the general secretary.
Amnesty International, too, was unable to help.
It pointed out that it is bound by a constitution which limits its work to prisoners of conscience and the abolition of torture and the death penalty.
On the evening of 14th May, 1974 the Ulster Workers' Council began the general strike which spread through Northern Ireland and lasted sixteen days.
The special constitutional arrangement which the Westminster government had imposed on the region in the preceding months collapsed like a house of cards.
The Times commented:As a constitutional experiment it is finished.
It cannot be made to stand up again.
The final defection of the protestant community was swift, missive, disciplined and decisive.
They will not have it and that is that .
The triumph of the Ulster Workers' Council left it with huge prestige during the remainder of the summer.
In early July, I asked its Executive Committee to examine the Black case.
One or two members already had some knowledge of it from press reports and Black's fellow employees in Short Brothers.
The Executive Committee invited William Black to meet them and I, too, was asked to attend and speak.
The members had a warmth of approach and a human interest in Black and his family which had been less evident among the politicians.
Their problem was that they had only one sanction with the British government and that was a general strike.
They doubted if the public would respond to a call for a second general strike over what many would see as only the shooting of one man in a period of frequent shootings and violence.
If the attempt was made and failed, the organisation would be discredited and no longer able to intervene decisively in Ulster affairs.
Also, as with so many of the politicians, some members of the UWC  did not appreciate the constitutional and other implications raised by the case.
Such persons tended to see it simply as a question of money compensation for the injuries which had been inflicted in the shooting.
OUTSIDE ST.
ANNE'S CATHEDRAL, BELFAST PRIOR TO A MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR VISCOUNT BROOKBOROUGH, FORMER PRIME MINISTER OF NORTHERN IRELAND.
VARIOUS LOCAL PEOPLE ABSENTED THEMSELVES BECAUSE OF HIS PRESENCE AND TRAVELLED TO ENNISKILLEN TO ATTEND AN ALTERNATIVE SERVICE.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
EDWARD HEATH, THE FIRST PRIME MINISTER AND (IN CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY) HEAD OF THE SECRET SERVICES DURING THE EVENTS OF THIS BOOK, ARRIVING AT ALDERGROVE AIRPORT, BELFAST.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
VISIT TO AN INFANTRY PATROL NEAR THE IRISH FRONTIER.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
HAROLD WILSON, THE SECOND PRIME MINISTER AND (IN CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY) HEAD OF THE SECRET SERVICES DURING THE EVENTS OF THIS BOOK.
GENERAL SIR FRANK KING, GOC NORTHERN IRELAND, IS GIVING A GUIDED TOUR OF ARMY HEADQUARTERS NORTHERN IRELAND IN APRIL 1974.
THE ARMY WAS AGAIN TO PERFORM THE SAME SERVICE FOR HIM IN THE FOLLOWING MONTH EXCEPT THAT NEXT TIME IT WAS A GUIDED TOUR OF THE COURSES OF ACTION WHICH WERE NOT OPEN TO HIS GOVERNMENT AS THE GENERAL STRIKE ORGANISED BY THE ULSTER WORKERS' COUNCIL MOVED TO A CLIMAX.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
JAMES CALLAGHAN, THE THIRD PRIME MINISTER AND (IN CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY) HEAD OF THE SECRET SERVICES DURING THE EVENTS OF THIS BOOK.
PHOTOGRAPHED DURING HIS FIRST VISIT TO ULSTER AS PRIME MINISTER.
Century Newpapers Ltd.
MARGARET THATCHER, THE FOURTH PRIME MINISTER AND (IN CONSTITUTIONAL THEORY) HEAD OF THE SECRET SERVICES DURING THE EVENTS OF THIS BOOK.
PHOTOGRAPHED DURING A JOINT PRESS CONFERENCE WITH AIREY NEAVE NEAR ALDERGROVE AIRPORT, BELFAST IN JUNE 1978.
SHE WAS LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION AND HE WAS SPOKESMAN ON NORTHERN IRELAND AT THE TIME.
NEAVE WAS IN MI9 DURING THREE YEARS OF WORLD WAR II AND MAINTAINED CONTACT WITH THE SECRET SERVICES UNTIL ASSASSINATED BY TERRORISTS ON THE EVE OF THE GENERAL ELECTION OF MAY 1979.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
CENTURY HOUSE, 100 WESTMINSTER BRIDGE ROAD, LONDON, SE1.
HEADQUARTERS OF D16.
CURZON STREET HOUSE, CURZON STREET, LONDON, W1.
HEADQUARTERS OF D15.
A CRUISE MISSILE.
ONE OF THE NEW WEAPONS WHICH HAVE MADE THE UNITED KINGDOM EXCEPTIONALLY VULNERABLE TO SOVIET NUCLEAR ATTACK FROM THE ATLANTIC.
POPPERFOTO.
CARTOON BY JAK OF THE DAILY EXPRESS (30TH JULY 1977) FOLLOWING PRESS REPORTS THAT AN INTELLIGENCE ORGANISATION HAD BUGGED THE OFFICES OF HAROLD WILSON, THE PRIME MINISTER.
EDWARD HEATH LEAVES 10 DOWNING STREET ON 4TH MARCH 1974 TO PRESENT HIS RESIGNATION TO THE QUEEN AT BUCKINGHAM PALACE.
IN ULSTER, EVERY FAULKNERITE CANDIDATE HAD BEEN DEFEATED DESPITE THE BACKLASH CAUSED BY THE CROMWELL ROAD INCIDENT.
THE SUCCESSFUL UUUC MPS HAD THE NUMBERS TO HAVE ENABLED HIM TO REMAIN IN OFFICE, BUT WERE BOUND BY AN ELECTION PLEDGE NOT TO SUPPORT HIM.
PRESS ASSOCIATION PHOTOS.
The Executive Committee discussed the case at several further meetings and decided to re-examine it when Black's solicitor should have had more time to ascertain the prospects of money compensation from the government for the injuries.
They did not realise that three years would elapse before Black's injuries would be sufficiently stabilised to enable them to be measured by his doctors or that there are factors in the functioning of the United Kingdom judicial system which would thwart him from securing justice in the courts.
It is understood that the police thoroughly investigated the shooting at Tully-West within the limitations imposed on them.
They confirmed that Black was an innocent person who walked into his own cottage on lawful business that Saturday afternoon.
They were unable to pursue any line of inquiry which transgressed across the frontiers of authority of the intelligence organisations.
The police report went to the Northern Ireland Director of Public Prosecutions.
He declined to make a decision on whether persons responsible for the shooting should be prosecuted and forwarded it to the Attorney General for the United Kingdom.
Such a step is unusual and is taken by a director of public prosecutions only when a case has exceptional political or other implications.
I wrote to the Northern Ireland representative of the Attorney General on 28th June 1974, but a reply was not sent to me until August 1st.
It read:The position is that an investigation file relating to the occurrence referred to in your letter has been submitted by the Chief Constable to the Director of public prosecutions.
Upon the evidence before him the Director has decided that the initiation of criminal proceedings is not warranted .
No mention was made of the special involvement of the Attorney General.
Also, Parliament had risen for the summer recess on the previous day.
Thus no immediate question could be raised in the House of Commons.
The Attorney General is answerable only to Parliament for his decisions.
He is a member of the cabinet and of the ruling political party in Parliament.
If he has the support of the prime minister and main political colleagues, he can decide any matter which comes before him as he may think expedient.
It is open for him to ‘take into account the wider interests of the public’.
This aspect of the powers of the Attorney General was highlighted in January 1977.
The postal workers' trade union publicly announced that it had decided to forbid its members to handle a particular class of mail and that it was aware that the action would be a breach of the law.
Samuel Silkin, the Attorney General, refused to intervene to prevent the law from being broken.
He subsequently consented to explain his action to the Appeal Court, where three judges presided.
He told them that he was answerable to Parliament alone when he made decisions and that it was his duty to take into account the wider interests of the public.
One of the judges, Lord Chief Justice Lawton, then inquired whether this meant that the Attorney General was entitled to consider the political trouble which would be caused by a decision to enforce a particular law.
Silkin replied that it was a factor which he was entitled to take into account.
Silkin explained in a press interview that he had refused to enforce the law against the postal workers' trade union because he feared that the action would precipitate a postal strike.
In the case of William Black, the political considerations would have been no less difficult to ignore.
The ruling that there should be no prosecutions destroyed the hope that such court proceedings might uncover enough information to stir a public demand for a wider and more thorough inquiry into the background to the conspiracy to murder an innocent man and to frame him with stolen goods.
The RUC men who had conducted the police investigations were fiercely indignant and a senior officer threatened to resign.
The file on the case is now lodged at RUC Headquarters, Knock Road, Belfast.
A special classification has been placed on it and access forbidden to  anyone except the Chief Constable and a small number of his most senior officers.
In May 1977, the Ministry of Defence, although continuing to claim that the shooting had been an unfortunate case of mistaken identity in a legitimate and tense situation, agreed to pay William Black £16,700 in compensation for the injuries he had received.
His legal advisers urged him to accept it.
The sum was small in relation to what he had suffered, but it was an admission by the state that he was an innocent person and that was what mattered most to the Black family.
The alternative was to wait a further two or three years until a civil case could reach a hearing in the overcrowded Northern Ireland courts and then to endeavour to fight it with the state using against him the formidable privileges and stratagems available to it.
Each one of the following would in itself be almost an insuperable barrier to having the real issues of the case examined.
No. 1
: The decision by the Attorney General not to prosecute would be construed as a vindication of the legality of the ‘arrest ambush’ at William Black's cottage.
No. 2
: The state under ‘crown privilege’ would have the right to withhold crown documents such as the RUC report to the Director of Public Prosecutions and through him to the Attorney General.
No. 3
: United Kingdom courts have a convention that judges exclude evidence and refuse to allow the cross-examination of witnesses when the authorities (often on the decision of the intelligence services) claim that reference to it would be ‘prejudicial to the national interest’.
An example occurred in the ‘Angry Brigade Trial’ of 1972.
The judge, Justice James, explained that ‘it is the duty of the court to watch the situation and see that certain questions are not asked and, if they are asked, to see that they are not answered’.
No. 4
: The state can forbid persons to give evidence on subjects specified by it if at any time in their lives they have taken the Official Secrets Oath.
This includes a good proportion of the population as, in addition to persons currently employed by the state, many others have been employed by it at some earlier stage in their lives.
ACQUITTED WITHOUT HAVING TO PRODUCE A DEFENCE
Major-General Frank Kitson, writing in 1977, laid down a code of basic principles for the guidance of a government fighting terrorism.
Immediately following on the principle that it must establish an effective intelligence system, he placed the further principle that it must provide itself with a legal system adequate for the needs of the moment.
By that date the British government had already taken various steps in Ulster to do so.
When ‘direct rule’ was imposed in March 1972, the Special Powers (Northern Ireland) Act and legislation to Permit suspects to be interned without trial already gave additional anti-terrorist powers not available in mainland legislation.
The problems that juries were liable to arrive at verdicts that were less than helpful and that witnesses and jurors were vulnerable to intimidation were met by the abolition of juries in the criminal courts and the introduction of unorthodox expedients to enable witnesses to remain anonymous.
These latter included screens behind which they could be hidden; heavy socks and mocassins to prevent feet from being recognised if seen below the screen; and a ‘Donald Duck squawk box’ instrument which distorted an individual's voice so that it could not be recognised.
At the same time, the Detention of Terrorists (Northern Ireland) Order introduced commissioners with legal training to preside over a Detention Appeal Tribunal to which detainees could apply after a period for a review of the justification for their imprisonment.
These new arrangements of the non jury courts and the Detention Appeal Tribunal were based on the recommendations of an inquiry chaired by Lord Diplock and are known by his name.
Harsh legislation and a streamlined judicial process are normal  responses when a government is confronted by terrorists.
Few will quarrel with the general principle that such steps should have been taken in Ulster.
In a totally different category, however, have been the attempts to use the administration of the law for expedients such as unjustified murder charges in order to promote the political interests of the government.
During the second half of 1972, law and order deteriorated badly in Northern Ireland.
Assassination and counter-assassination became worse and worse.
Between 1st July and 30th November, 112 persons were murdered in ‘civilian incidents’.
William Whitelaw, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, and the Northern Ireland Office administration came under intense pressure from the public.
A joint task force of military and civilian police was formed to patrol assassination black areas around the Irish republican-Roman Catholic enclaves in east Belfast.
The step was announced by the secretary of state in person and given maximum publicity.
Unfortunately for the credibility of the Northern Ireland administration, murders during December 1972 numbered twenty which was more than double the November figure.
Two-thirds of them were Roman Catholics.
Politicians of the powerful Irish republican and solidly Roman Catholic SDLP political party were fiercely critical and their co-operation was basic to the government's policies at that time.
The Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Church, the Moderator of the Presbyterian Church, the Archbishop of the Church of Ireland and the President of the Methodist Church asked to meet the secretary of state as a deputation.
They did so on 3rd January 1973 and emphasised the public consternation at the government's apparent inability to take effective action against the assassins.
A few hours later that same day, it was announced that three young Protestants, John Orchin, Samuel Richmond and Victor McCready, had been charged with the murders of three Roman Catholics.
Three days later (6th January) came a further announcement that four additional young Protestants, David Barr, William Bingham, Charles Martin and Joseph Miller, had been charged with murdering two Roman Catholics and a Protestant married to a Roman Catholic — again in three separate incidents.
The total of seven Protestants charged with murder was credited to the new joint task force and heavily publicised on the governmentowned BBC and other news media.
The public was impressed and the  political and other pressure on the Northern Ireland administration eased.
The public would have been less impressed had it known the facts.
The first three lads had been arrested almost three weeks earlier because an unlicensed pistol had been found in a car in which they were travelling.
A couple of weeks after the arrests, a lawyer in the Belfast office of the Treasury Solicitor was drawing up charges on the basis of the presence of the pistol when a senior police official ordered him to prepare fresh indictments charging them with murdering three specified Roman Catholics.
The lawyer protested that there was no evidence for such charges.
When the order was repeated, he refused to obey and later resigned.
Charges for two of the murders were subsequently dropped without publicity by the Crown on 26th March 1973.
This left charges for one murder and for travelling in the presence of an unlicensed pistol.
The four persons against whom the murder charges had been announced on 6th January 1973 had likewise been travelling in a motor car in which an unlicensed pistol had been found.
In addition, in their case the car had been stolen.
On 30th March, the Crown admitted that it would not offer evidence on the charges for two of the murders and they were quietly abandoned.
On 26th April, it declined to offer evidence on the charges for the remaining third murder and they, too, were dropped without publicity.
The lesser charges centred on the unlicensed pistol and stolen car came up for trial on 11th May.
One man was imprisoned for three years for possessing the gun and one for one year (suspended for two years) for stealing a car and having no insurance.
The remaining two men received sentences of nine months (suspended for two years) for allowing themselves to be carried in a stolen vehicle.
In September 1973, the Insight team of The Sunday Times set out the story of the seven arrests and the dropped charges for five murders.
It summed up its findings thus: ‘It is extremely difficult, often impossible to determine what considerations lie behind the framing of any particular set of charges.
But after extensive inquiries in legal circles in Belfast, it is impossible to escape the conclusion that some knowledgeable and experienced lawyers have come to believe, reluctantly, that the impetus behind some of the sectarian murder charges laid in the past nine months has been more political than legal .’
Charges in connection with one remaining murder and travelling in the presence of an unlicensed pistol were still pending against Orchin, Richmond and McCready when The Sunday Times published its findings.
They had been arrested in December 1972 and, as a result, did not come under the ‘Diplock’ innovations and the more stringent Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act, both of which were to come into force in the following year.
This should have given them several useful advantages, including the right to trial by jury.
The authorities, however, had other ideas.
All three had been assigned to Long Kesh Prison near Lisburn to await trial.
One day they were told that a police officer wished to see them in connection with the charges already preferred.
Each replied that he did not wish to see him without consulting his solicitor as the depositions had been taken and it was understood that nothing further was required other than a date to be set for the trial.
The other prisoners in the compound supported their stand as just and reasonable whereupon some fifty warders were assembled and carried Orchin, Richmond and McCready bodily to where a police officer was waiting.
He withdrew all charges against them and immediately re-charged them with the same ones.
They did not even leave the building.
The date on which they were re-charged was in 1973 and was used as a pretext to deprive them of the right to be tried by a jury.
It also threatened to prejudice their trials in other ways.
For instance, they became subject to Section 2 and Section 7 of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act in connection with the unlicensed pistol.
Under the law prior to that date, the onus was on the prosecution to prove that a person in such circumstances knew, first, of the presence of the pistol and, second, that it was unlicensed.
Section 7 reversed the situation and placed the onus of proof on the accused to prove his innocence — a requirement which in most instances would be much more difficult and in some would be impossible.
The date for the trial of Orchin, Richmond and McCready was set eventually for mid-February 1974, sixteen months after their arrests.
Sir Robert Lowry, Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland, was the judge.
The prosecution case against the three (and against four other persons) rested solely on the inconsistency studded testimony of a man convicted some months earlier of four murders and eleven robberies.
Sir Robert ruled that it did not have credibility and  dismissed the charges without any of the accused having to present a defence.
After the trial Orchin, Richmond and McCready were held in prison for about a month on the charge relating to the unlicensed pistol.
They were then released on bail and kept on it until May 1978, a period of over four years (i.e. a total of five-and-a-half years from the date of the original arrests).
A long prison sentence is the penalty for an unlicensed firearm and to keep the three men on bail, year after year, with this terrifying threat hanging over them was a most effective way to deter them from exposing the monstrous injustice of their treatment either in the media or with the European Commission of Human Rights.
The above bare statement of the facts tells nothing of the mental agonies suffered by persons wrongly accused of murder and by the members of their families.
Sometimes a physical symptom points to what is happening in the mind.
For instance, Orchin developed a severe stomach ulcer after he was charged which became increasingly worse during the years on bail until it had to be treated by major surgery.
In Long Kesh Prison, fellow prisoners used to save for him part of their daily allowance of milk.
IN GREAT BRITAIN ITSELF
Mrs. Joan Waters was aged twenty-eight, had golden-red hair and was the daughter of a civil servant.
She was a qualified teacher, but chose to work as an accounting secretary with a firm of solicitors instead of in a class-room.
John Waters, her husband, was an engineer.
A friend in Joan's office was active in the Womens' Loyalist Action Association and invited her to one of its meetings.
It was a group which came together in 1972 in an attempt to focus attention on the severity and inconsistencies of sentences being given in the courts to loyalists charged with politically motivated offences in contrast to those being given to republicans.
Sentences were shaped to intimidate loyalists by their severity in the knowledge that the Ulster majority would not raise a finger on behalf of persons convicted for violence.
On the other hand, the guiding principle in sentencing republicans was moderation in order not to create new martyrs within the republican minority.
Joan Waters was impressed by the facts presented during the WLAA meeting.
She agreed to do what she could to help.
She began to visit the families of sentenced persons in order to compile detailed dossiers on the more extreme sentence anomalies.
Soon she was recognised by the group as their specialist on facts and figures and formal press officer.
Some of the cases were outstandingly tragic.
One lad, belonging to a respected family, had been given a long sentence although he and local residents emphatically maintained that he was not at the scene of the incident for which he was convicted.
The most pathetic case was that of a middle-aged man with the mental age of a child of nine.
He was sentenced to seven years for throwing a petrol bomb.
He had picked up one that was lying in a gutter with a burnt-out fuse.
He tossed it into a front garden, laughing like a child and neither doing  nor intending damage.
In gaol he refused to try to understand how he came to be there and during the years of his imprisonment spent much time sobbing in his cell as a desperately hurt child sobs.
The mental age of his wife was not much older than his.
She too refused to accept the justice of the imprisonment.
She had a nervous breakdown and her hair fell out.
After a time she had a stroke which semiparalysed her.
The WLAA eventually induced William Whitelaw, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, to receive a deputation.
Joan Waters was included in it and acted as chief spokesman.
They pressed on him the anomalies between loyalist and republican sentences.
He promised to have certain ones re-examined, but the outcome was that they remained unchanged.
She also took part in one or two television debates which were shown in the English Midland and London areas.
Joan Waters was the oldest of four children.
A brother, Derek, two years younger, was closest to her in age.
Trailing some years behind were a younger brother and sister.
Derek, as a teenager, was athletic, a non-smoker and a teetotaller.
He was uninterested in politics and, like the other members of his family, had little time for sectarian prejudice.
On several occasions, he was invited to play for the Roman Catholic Holy Cross football team in charity matches to raise funds for it.
He was an outstanding footballer.
He played for Northern Ireland once or twice.
Sheffield Wednesday recognised his talent and he signed a contract to play for it.
In Sheffield he was homesick and missed his girl friend.
The team released him and he returned home where he soon married.
A few months later, he accepted a contract to play for a Canadian football team.
Derek was a great success as a footballer in Canada until an injury destroyed his kneecap.
He was on crutches for three or four months and was just beginning to recover when a stomach malignancy had to be treated by very extensive surgery.
He was in hospital for a long time with the doctors far from optimistic that he would recover.
He was left in feeble health, unemployed and with a wife, three-year-old daughter and a newly-born one.
He and his wife decided to return to Belfast where they secured a house.
For a few weeks, he drove a taxi while searching for a permanent appointment.
His parents were indignant when they discovered about it and he gave it up through  respect for their views.
They felt that a low status job of that kind was unfair to the family as a whole and would be unhelpful in his search for a permanent one.
His parents lived in the Balmoral suburb of south Belfast.
Both of the younger children were at school.
The one who was fifteen attended the Belfast Royal Academy in the north of the city.
On Friday evenings, he often attended a disco with school friends in a church hall near to it.
Afterwards, his father would collect him by car and bring him home.
The lad was at the disco one Friday evening, three or four weeks after Derek and his wife returned from Canada.
His father arrived a little early and sat waiting in the car.
His son came out of the building with several of his friends.
They were fifteen and sixteen-year-olds.
They entered a nearby shop and bought some refreshments.
When they came out, he noticed his father waiting.
He and a friend separated from the others and began to move towards the car.
His father called a greeting.
At that moment, a car drove up and a gunman in it sprayed the boys with a machine-gun.
It turned immediately and again passed with the gunman firing at them.
The father jumped out of his car and began to run to where his son had thrown himself to the ground.
One boy, seeing an adult, rushed towards him with intestines hanging out and screaming ‘Help me!
Help me!’
He saw a tall boy slide down the door of the shop and lie still on the pavement.
He was seized with a certainty that it was his own son.
He moved him a little and saw from his face that it was someone else.
He then realised that he had already seen his son some distance from the door and that his conviction that it was him had been totally irrational.
One boy was dead and four were injured of whom one died a year later.
It was Derek's introduction to the ‘troubles’.
When he left for Canada six years earlier, Northern Ireland had the lowest crime rate in the United Kingdom and no political violence had occurred for a number of years.
He and his wife were badly shaken and decided to move out of Ulster so that their children could grow up under normal conditions.
A few weeks later, he obtained employment with an engineering firm in Fifeshire about thirty miles from Edinburgh.
This was towards the end of June 1973.
Derek's parents were even more overwhelmed by the horror of what had happened.
His father had been present and his mother was  a sensitive, nervous person.
They, too, decided that they could no longer remain in fairness to their young children.
His father secured a civil service transfer to a post in Scotland and at the beginning of September moved to a house about three miles from where Derek and his wife had settled.
One evening in the late autumn, Derek entered a bar in a hotel in the town.
A man came up and offered to buy him a drink.
He said that he had noticed his Northern Irish voice and that he liked the country very much.
It was a typical self-introduction.
As the evening wore on, he asked Derek if he knew anything about the Ulster Defence Association or anybody in it.
He replied that he did not.
He asked him if he belonged to the loyalist section of the population and he replied that he did.
At that point the subject was dropped.
Two nights later, Derek was having a drink in the same hotel when the same person approached him accompanied by a second man who gave his name as Alexander Atkins.
After a period of normal conversation, they turned to the subject of his loyalist background.
Local people later told Derek that the man who had first approached him was a policeman.
He was attached to Dysart Police Station and well-known in the district as the ‘drug squad’ detective.
He wore the ‘hippie’ type clothes then fashionable among teenagers.
After the evening when he introduced Atkins, he remained in the background and his place as the latter's companion was taken by a swarthy newcomer.
Alexander Atkins and his swarthy colleague began to accost Derek on various occasions.
The former would do most of the talking; the latter said little.
They were hefty men in their forties.
He had been reduced to seven stone by his ill-health and was some twenty years their junior.
They came to his home uninvited once or twice and they would waylay him as he emerged from work at the factory.
One evening Atkins and his colleague were sitting at the factory exit.
They insisted that Derek enter their car and drove him to a quiet layby a short distance away.
They produced a file which they said was his and took out of it an indistinct, green photograph of someone carrying a parcel.
They said that it was of himself and that the parcel contained a gun which had been taken to pieces so that he could  carry it inconspicuously.
They said that the incident had taken place in Belfast and that the photograph had been taken by a night camera.
Derek replied that it was untrue and impossible.
They added that they were working for the government undercover and that they had enough evidence to ‘make the charge stick’.
They next claimed that he had been responsible for a murder in Belfast which had received considerable publicity.
He protested that it was totally impossible and they replied that they had evidence to make certain that he would be convicted.
They told him that his only remedy was to work as a government agent.
The two men produced two further files.
One was exceptionally thick and the other empty.
The bulky one, they explained, recorded the activities of his sister, Mrs. Joan Waters, and the other belonged to her husband.
They refused to allow him to examine his sister's file except to show him that it contained a photograph of her.
They threatened that, if he did not co-operate, the Northern Ireland emergency powers of detention would be used to intern her as a dangerous subversive.
Derek was confident that she had never been involved in anything subversive in her life or, for that matter, anything which was not completely dignified and fully reputable.
At the same time, he knew that, while he had been living in Canada, she had been an activist for a period with the WLAA and had been outspoken on occasions such as the meeting of the deputation with Whitelaw and the television debates.
He suspected that she had been an embarrassment to the authorities and that, in the conditions which then prevailed, what mattered was whether they wished to have such a person interned and not whether she had been subversive.
The sheer bulk of his sister's file and the fact that her husband's one was empty registered strongly on him.
He knew that his brother-in-law had never been associated with a controversial or political activity at any time and that, if the files were genuine, his one would contain exactly nothing.
Alexander Atkins and his companion eventually told Derek that he had to go to Dundalk to shoot Martin Meehan, an alleged highranking member of the Provisional IRA.
Instructions were laid out in some detail.
He was to go to a hotel where arrangements would be made for him to meet Meehan.
In his room at the hotel, he would find a gun and it was emphasised that, after the shooting, he was to  replace it in the room as arrangements had been made to dispose of it.
Derek refused and they again threatened him that it was the only way to save his sister from being interned and himself from being charged with murder and gunrunning.
Derek felt helpless and told no one.
His wife was a tense, sensitive person.
So, too, was his mother who, in addition, was in poor health.
His father was still badly shaken by the shooting of the schoolboys.
Atkins and his colleague had savagely threatened him against telling anyone, but he was influenced more by reluctance to distress the rest of his family as he assumed that they would be as helpless as himself.
It seemed futile to go to the police as they appeared to be in the plot.
During these weeks, his wife noticed that he ate little, drank too much and suffered abominably with his stomach.
He would lie awake for complete nights.
An old sword hung on a wall of his house as an ornament.
He took it down and kept it beside his bed.
He remained at home from work on various days through terror of being waylaid on emerging from the factory.
He considered returning to Belfast, but his tormentors anticipated that his mind would turn in that direction.
They told him that they were prepared should he attempt to slip back to Ulster.
They had an agent, they said, who lived close to where he had lived during the short period after his return from Canada.
He would be instructed to pass the word around in militant loyalist circles that he was an informer so that he would be assassinated.
They described the person they claimed was the agent in sufficient detail to direct Derek's attention towards a particular individual.
He realised that they were unlikely to pinpoint a genuine agent in that way, but their familiarity with the Belfast scene was unnerving.
Derek had an aunt who lived not far from his new Scottish home.
Her birthday was on 21st December and he arranged a family dinner party to celebrate it.
His aunt, uncle, father and mother were present and it was held in a hotel.
At the close of the evening, he left slightly before the others to return home.
They saw him leave the room where they were sitting and begin to walk across a bar which lay between it and the entrance to the building.
A man intercepted him and began to say something.
As they watched, they saw Derek more than once attempt to continue towards the entrance, but each time the man closed up on him again.
His aunt recognised him immediately as the well-known local ‘drug squad’ detective.
His father rose, walked into the bar and asked his son if he would like a drink.
At that the drug detective left.
Derek returned home a desperately worried person.
The detective had told him that Alexander Atkins and his companion insisted that he meet them on Boxing Night as they would have definite instructions for him.
On the day before Christmas, a note was sent into Derek at his place of work.
It read, ‘Meet us at 8 o'clock on Boxing Night’ and specified a place.
The senders of it must have had misgivings as to whether he would obey as they appear to have decided to back it up with physical intimidation.
In the evening, Derek went into a bar to have a drink.
After a time he went to the toilet.
There he was set upon by three hefty roughs.
They placed a lavatory chain around his neck and hoisted him off his feet.
One placed a knife against the huge scar left by his stomach operation in Canada.
They accused him of giving information to the police about a robbery a few weeks earlier at a local company.
Derek mistook the name of the company for that of a person and blurted out, ‘But, who is he?
Who is he?’
Suddenly, they let him down and one said, ‘This guy doesn't know what we are talking about or he would not ask, ‘Who is he?’'
They than asked what he had done to the police that they had it in for him.
At first, he did not understand what they meant.
Then he realised that they were referring to their own attack on him.
He replied, ‘I have no trouble with the police.
I think that they maybe want trouble with me.’
His assailants next told him that they had been given three pounds each ‘to do you up tonight’ by the ‘drug squad’detective with whom he was already unpleasantly familiar.
The experience shattered Derek and for the first time he told his wife and parents the story of his harassments from the first meeting with the drug detective.
They were greatly upset, but discussion was cut short as his father had to drive to Glasgow to meet Joan, his sister, and John, her husband, to bring them to Fife to spend the festive season.
In Glasgow, Joan asked her father, ‘How is Derek?’
He replied, ‘He's all right.’
Instantly, she recognised from his voice that there was something seriously wrong with her brother.
She did not press him further during the journey.
They arrived at her parents' house a little before midnight.
Derek was in the living room with his wife and two children.
He looked very ill.
She immediately assumed that the malignancy of the stomach had not been cured and that he was dying.
Her mother was incredibly tense.
She could not sit down to  talk, but kept moving around the room polishing doors and furniture although they already sparkled.
Half-an-hour later, her father drove Derek and his family to their home.
Immediately they left, she turned to her mother and asked, ‘What is wrong?’
‘Awful, awful trouble,’ she replied and began to re-tell the story which Derek had told earlier in the evening.
Soon her father returned and he continued it in greater detail.
Joan and her husband listened with astonishment.
The shock was like a physical thing — like thunder hitting one.
The night was spent in deep discussion.
Next morning Christmas morning — Derek and his family returned and all day the only subject was how to rid him of his tormentors.
His father suggested going to the Home Office, but then agreed that it would be futile as it was probably implicated.
The case of Kenneth Littlejohn had been prominent in the news during the year and they had the impression that he had been working for the Home Office.
(Littlejohn claimed that he was working for DI6.
The Home Office, however, had been associated with his name because of controversy over certain visits to him in an English prison and unsuccessful legal proceedings to stop his extradition to the Irish Republic.)
Joan also hesitated to go to the Home Office as her father was a senior civil servant in line for further promotion and not too far from retirement.
She feared that to approach it would simply alert the authorities to a new means of blackmail by threatening her father through his civil service position.
As they talked, they came back more than once to the mystery of the three files which Derek had been shown.
Why the thick file on Joan and the heavy emphasis on it?
Was there an intention to try to blackmail her in some way as well as Derek?
John and Joan decided that they should meet Alexander Atkins and his colleague in the flesh.
They told themselves that they might be frightened off if they knew that Derek was backed up by other members of his family.
The note which had been sent into him at the factory had said that he was to meet them at eight o'clock on Boxing Night.
They told him to ignore it and to remain at home where they would join him for the evening.
At ten o'clock there was a sharp knock at the door.
Joan opened it, endeavouring to appear calm.
Two burly men were on the doorstep.
One said, Can we speak to Derek?’
She replied, ‘No, you cannot speak to him.
He is in the living room, but he is not going out with  you.’
They replied, ‘Oh, but we were to go for drinks with Derek tonight.’
Joan retorted, ‘Well, as far as I am aware the licensing hours in Scotland are until 10.30 at night.
That does not leave you much time for drinking.
Besides, if Derek continues to drink, at best he probably has a year left to live and at worst a matter of months.’
This was not altogether an exaggeration as he had lost much of his stomach in his operation and was supposed to be on a rigid diet.
They laughed and between them said with insistence in their voices, ‘So you are the boss.
But can we speak to him.’
The dialogue continued:
‘No, as I said, you cannot speak to him.
You've been a bad influence.
I take it you are his drinking partners.
This is fine for you.
You are two healthy, strapping men.
My brother is an extremely ill person.
No, he is not joining you to drink and please don't come back again because he will not ever be joining you to drink again.’
‘Well, just let us talk to him for a few moments,’ said one of them.
‘No, you will not.
By the way, what is your name.’
‘Oh, Derek knows my name.’
‘Since you are Derek's friends — or rather since you don't care very much for his health and welfare I will not call you his friends but surely I ought to know your name!’
‘My name is Alexander.’
‘Well, Mr. Alexander, I can assure you that Derek will not be drinking with you again.
In fact, he will not be seeing you again.’
‘Tell him Alexander is here.’
‘No, Mr. Alexander, I will not.’
‘It is not Alexander.’
‘Oh, you are not Mr. Alexander!’
‘It is Alexander Atkins.’
‘Well, I will not forget that name.’
‘I will not forget yours.’
‘That would be strange if you did not forget mine.
You do not know mine.’
‘Oh, I know more about you than you think.’
At that point, John joined Joan at the door.
He, too, took up the theme that it was unfair to encourage a person, who could be dying with each drink he took, to take more.
Finally, both men left appearing very exasperated.
John and Joan Waters had hoped that, once they realised that  Derek had the support of other members of his family, they would leave him alone.
The confrontation convinced them that, on the contrary, they were so dogmatic and sure of themselves that it was obvious that they had no intention of being deterred.
They returned to Joan's parents' house and about four o'clock in the morning decided on two steps.
First, she would find a local solicitor and recount the events to him and, second, both would return to Belfast to obtain advice and help.
They decided that the undercover plotters would be most afraid of publicity and political pressure and that their best hope would be to find an influential member of parliament who would believe their story.
They were acutely conscious of how unbelievable it was and felt that an Ulster MP would be more likely to credit it than one in Scotland.
In the meantime, a further development had taken place at Derek's home.
His sister and brother-in-law had left about 2.00 a.m.
A few minutes after they drove away there was a knock at the front door.
He and his wife had just gone to bed.
He assumed that they had forgotten something and had returned.
He came downstairs and found Alexander Atkins and the second man back again on the doorstep.
They told him to meet them two nights later and threatened frightful consequences if he should fail to appear.
Their chief was coming specifically from London to see him, they said, and had ordered them to make certain he was present.
Joan went into Kirkcaldy to find a solicitor next morning.
She passed two closed solicitors' offices on the main street.
A third was open and one of the partners, an elderly man, saw her at once.
She recounted the harassments and blackmail threats by Atkins and his undercover colleague.
She explained that she wanted someone outside her family to know about them in case anything should happen to her before she would be able to raise the issue with someone with influence in Northern Ireland.
The solicitor made notes and promised to do all that he could to help if contacted.
At five o'clock next morning, John and Joan Waters returned to Northern Ireland via the Stranraer to Larne ship route.
From her home, Joan telephoned William Craig, a party leader in the Northern Ireland Assembly and former minister of Home Affairs in the disbanded parliament of Northern Ireland.
His name was the first to come to her mind and his telephone number was in the directory.
She  told him that it was a life and death matter and could she speak to him?
He said that unfortunately she could not.
He was going out and would be engaged for the following few days.
She next tried to telephone Dr. Ian Paisley, the MP for North Antrim at Westminster and a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly, but was unable to locate him.
She was uncertain of who to try to contact next.
She felt it would have to be an MP or someone of similar standing in order that her story would at least be believed.
She later explained, ‘I did not think that anyone was going to believe us as a family.
The story was so mad that your brother was being told to shoot Martin Meehan and that I was going to be interned for doing nothing.’
The Waters drove into Belfast.
On the Shankhill Road they saw by accident a person whom Joan had talked with during the WLAA campaign for legal justice.
She asked if he could suggest how she could contact an MP.
He replied that a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly was due in the district and suggested that she wait.
A few minutes later, Miss Jean Coulter arrived.
She listened attentively to the story and recommended the Waters to see Ernest Baird, a fellow-member of the Northern Ireland Assembly.
They drove at once to Baird's home which was in the Dundonald suburb of Belfast.
He and his wife were at home.
He seemed at first to be hyper-critical — if not disbelieving.
She began to feel that she was wasting her time and that he probably thought that she was mad.
Eventually, he mentioned the present writer and suggested that I should be brought in on the matter as I had already knowledge of one or two other cases.
The Waters agreed and he telephoned me.
Forty minutes later, I arrived.
John had just left and I heard the story from Joan.
On the following day, Sunday, 29th December, Ernest Baird, Joan Waters and myself re-met at the Baird home.
It was realised that our first aim should be to secure more tangible evidence and, if possible, further witnesses.
It was decided that Joan should telephone Alexander Atkins at a number which he had given to Derek and which had been discovered to be that of the police station at Dysart.
A tape recorder was attached to the telephone.
The rest was left entirely to Joan's initiative.
Atkins answered the call.
Joan was conscious of the long-distance noises on the telephone.
She had gone to school in Scotland and  in order to lull suspicion said that she was in Glasgow visiting an old school friend.
She said that Derek had told her the whole story.
She appealed that he be left alone.
She hinted that she could be of more help to them than her brother, provided that they left him alone in his present state of health.
Atkins arranged with her that she and her brother would meet him and his superior from London in the Commodore Hotel near Edinburgh at seven o'clock on the following evening.
The next problem was who should go to the hotel to act as a witness.
It had to be someone who would not be recognised easily by undercover men familiar with Ulster.
By good fortune, Jean Coulter was already booked to travel to Glasgow the following day and very courageously agreed to go to the hotel with a male friend.
Next morning, the Waters left for Scotland via Larne and Stranraer.
They missed the train connection in Glasgow which meant that they could not be at the hotel by seven o'clock.
Joan telephoned the hotel.
She told Alexander Atkins that she had missed the train after leaving her Glasgow school friend.
She said that she would travel by the next one and should be at the hotel about eight clock.
He was angry.
He said that he had his boss with him and that they would not wait longer than eight.
Jean Coulter and her friend had arrived early and were sitting quietly at a table with a good view of the room when, about half-pasteight, Joan and Derek entered the hotel, having left John outside in the taxi.
Atkins and the other man who had been with him during the doorstep confrontation on Boxing Night were waiting.
They invited them to sit at a table and were joined by an unusually tall, thin man who was extraordinarily blonde for his age which was thirty to thirtyfive.
He had the stance of a soldier.
They said that the ‘chief’ was upstairs in a bedroom.
They referred to him as ‘David’ and emphasised that he had to catch a plane back to London at midnight.
They said that he wanted to talk to Joan.
Atkins was sent to the bar for drinks which would suggest that he had the lowest standing or rank.
After a brief interval Alexander Atkins left and returned with ‘David’.
He was in his forties and his manner and speech clearly indicated that he belonged to a much higher social class than Atkins and his colleagues.
He wore casual country tweeds and checked shirt which was unusual on Old Year's Night.
At the same time, he looked comfortable and not out of place in them.
His speech, manner and  inbred courtesy reminded Joan of the 13th Earl of Antrim.
The latter was the president of the National Trust in Northern Ireland and she had met him when helping with its work.
Jean Coulter and her friend watched the group in conversation and were impressed by what appeared from across the room to be the relaxed self-control of Joan and Derek.
One of the men she recognised as someone she had seen on the Prosecution side in a Belfast court during trials for terrorist offences.
At one point, Joan rose from the table and went to the ladies' room.
Jean Coulter joined her there and they had a brief conversation.
A little later ‘David’ went to the telephone to call the airport.
The telePhone was within earshot of Jean Coulter's table.
She heard him say that he was still flying as planned, but would be departing somewhat later than originally intended.
He was thus of sufficiently high rank to have an aircraft at his disposal.
‘David’ asked Joan if she would infiltrate the loyalist paramilitary organisations to find out where they hid their arms or ammunition.
She said she would provided they left her brother alone as he was so very ill.
At that point John abruptly joined the group and sat listening quietly.
Joan asked whether her brother would be charged with murder if she did not work for them.
She was assured that he would be.
She asked whether it could be made to stick as he had been told.
Atkins interrupted and said that they certainly could make it stick.
A few minutes later ‘David’ said that they would go to the bedroom where they could talk in privacy.
The group instinctively rose to their feet, but John said in a firm voice, ‘You are not taking my wife up the stairs.
Don't try to and don't move from here.
You are big, burly men and I am small, but I will cause a lot of noise and draw attention to us all before I go down.’
‘David’ and his companions were obviously frightened by the threat and appeared glad to sit down again quietly.
He suggested that Joan should meet him in Belfast.
He mentioned four possible hotels.
They were in the suburbs and she replied that she would prefer the Royal Avenue Hotel in the centre of the city.
He said that he would telePhone her on the following Thursday.
Joan, John and Derek rose to leave.
The others were tense.
For a moment or two Joan and Atkins were engaged in a separate conversation from the rest of the group.
She felt that he was beginning to  smell a rat.
She said, ‘I have taken a great risk in coming to see you tonight.’
He retorted that it was nothing to the risk he had taken.
Joan, John and Derek travelled into Edinburgh by their taxi and out of Fife by train.
It was a minute to midnight when Joan and John reached her parents' house as the bells were beginning to ring out the old year.
Derek would have reached his house some minutes later.
Within an hour, Derek's wife telephoned Joan.
She was hysterical.
She said Derek had been arrested.
Joan asked if the police had had a warrant and she replied, ‘Yes.’
Joan immediately telephoned Dysart police Station, the police headquarters for Fife and asked where was her brother.
The police assured her they were certain that no warrant had been issued for his arrest and that they did not even know his name.
She next rang the solicitor with whom she had called in Kilkcaldy and who was having a New Year party at the time.
He, too, checked with the police and rang back to confirm that Derek had not been arrested and that he felt she must have made a mistake.
A little later, Derek knocked at the front door.
He was in shirt sleeves, shaking all over and greatly upset.
After he had reached home, two men in police uniforms had appeared at the door, waved a piece of paper which they said was a warrant for his arrest.
They bundled him into a car and drove him to a car park at the rear of Dysart Police Headquarters and afterwards to an isolated road.
At one stage, one seized him by the neck and nearly chocked him.
Finally, they said slowly to him, ‘You do not know Alexander Atkins.
You do not know David.
You were never in the hotel tonight.
You spoke to no one and tell your sister the same.’
They then bundled him out of the car and left him on the road.
The place was fairly close to his parents' home and possibly had been chosen for that reason.
He soon recognised the locality and walked to it.
Joan Waters immediately telephoned Dysart Police Station.
Unlike the earlier occasions, it was claimed that no one knew of an Alexander Atkins.
She asked for the duty sergeant.
He appeared genuinely not to know of Atkins and to be trying to be helpful.
She said that it did not matter whether or not he knew Alexander Atkins and instructed him to take down a message for him.
The message read that she had been in the hotel that night; that she had met David; that a tape had been taken of the conversation; that if he thought he could arrest her brother and charge him with murder, he should now try; that, if he thought he could intern her whilst completely innocent, he should now try; that several persons had listened to the conversation in the hotel that night and that one was an Ulster MP.
Next morning, she telephoned Ernest Baird and gave him a short account of developments.
He contacted the Scottish police and insisted that the Waters should be given police protection until their return to Northern Ireland.
His approach was successful.
On the train to Stranraer and on the steamer to Larne two men and a woman shadowed their every movement.
On the train to Belfast, they were no longer present.
In addition, Joan's uncle and aunt travelled with them in the hope of giving some protection by their presence.
The attack on Derek by the roughs who had been paid £3 each was worrying lest it should be repeated.
John thought it might be useful to try to locate them and to warn them off.
A club notorious in the area as a hang-out for the criminally inclined was suggested as a place where someone might know of them or their whereabouts.
Before the return to Northern Ireland, John and Derek went to it.
On opening the door, Derek saw two of them drinking at a table.
John walked across to them.
He was shaking in his shoes, but said as calmly as he could, ‘You roughed up a man from Belfast a few nights ago.’
They answered, ‘Yes, but it was a mistake.’
John then continued, ‘If any of the police again approach you or any of your colleagues-in-crime just tell them that this thing is bigger than any of you.’
The blunt statement and Ulster accent made an immediate impact.
For a moment neither spoke.
One of them asked John if he would like a drink.
He replied, ‘No, I don't drink.’
At that both rose, ignoring their unfinished drinks, and left the club.
John's aim had been to frighten them so that they would not again attack Derek.
He was himself much surprised at his apparent impact.
Derek did not again see Alexander Atkins or his swarthy companion.
Nor, was he again attacked by roughs.
Joan Waters, too, was left in peace apart from the following two minor incidents which may have been attempts to impress upon her that she had not moved beyond the reach of the long arm of the undercover services.
A few days after she returned to work, ‘David’ telephoned her office.
The switchboard operator asked his name and he replied, ‘Just tell her that David rang.’
She said, ‘Hold a minute and I will put you through to her.’
He replied, ‘No, I don't want to speak to her.
Just tell her that David rang.’
Early in the new year, Joan Waters went into hospital and spent  five months in it.
Afterwards, she stopped with her mother-in-law.
One afternoon, two men came to the door of the house and demanded to see her.
She was in the bedroom at the time and in an advanced state of pregnancy.
She came two-thirds of the way down the stairs and confronted the men as they stood in the hallway.
She asked them for identification.
They said that they were police and flashed white cards.
She knew that the police do not have white cards, but did not press them further on the issue.
She said that she did not need the police; that she was just out of hospital and had no knowledge of anything requiring police attention.
She could see that they were startled and embarrassed by her condition.
In fact, she felt that they were deterred by it as they left quickly with no attempt at explanation.
She immediately reported the incident to the RUC by telephone.
The police made inquiries and telephoned back.
They reported that they knew of no matter involving her in any way and asked for a description of the white identification cards.
The RUC officer confirmed that they were not police ones.
He added that the army used white cards and that the RUC would keep watch on her house as it was all very mysterious.
The police did so for several days, but there was no further development.
GUY FAWKES STYLE ELECTIONEERING?
When public opinion is central to the fortunes of a government, unscrupulous expedients to manipulate it are to be expected.
It has always been like that.
One of the most successful was the operation to which the hit man, Guy Fawkes, gave his name in 1605.
The target was public opinion.
Neither the buildings of Parliament nor the members were in serious danger from the amount of gunpowder to be used.
Of course, the three, original, amateur conspirators had other ideas.
They initiated the plot in order to rid England of James I and his régime.
The Earl of Salisbury, director of government intelligence (and chief minister of the realm), infiltrated and masterminded it as a timely and much-needed device to make permanent the rule of the same monarch and régime.
He knew that a conspiracy (exposed with the maximum publicity) to murder the king and Parliament in one horrific holocaust would cause public opinion to recoil into solid support for the less than popular James I and himself.
When the plotters decided to abandon their scheme after failing in an attempt to dig a tunnel under the House of Lords, no-one was more concerned than Salisbury.
He arranged as quickly as possible for the vault under the House of Lords to be vacated by its tenant and the news that it was available for renting to be passed to the associates of Guy Fawkes.
They fell for the stratagem and the plot was resumed.
In the twentieth century, public opinion has an added importance because, when expressed through elections, it can decide the lifespans  of democratic governments.
If it can be manipulated, the dividends can be high.
In certain elections, they will appear to be particularly high and the expedients to sway public opinion are likely to be correspondingly determined and extreme.
One such election was the United Kingdom general election of February 1974.
A period when a killer volcano threatens to erupt and in the end does not is a non-event to subsequent generations.
To the men and women who wait in its shadow with the ground rumbling under them and the volcanic ash hiding the sun, it is a terrifying reality which may drive them to the most desperate expedients.
The British establishment passed through a non-event of that kind in the weeks leading up to February 1974.
The economy had been in serious trouble during 1972 and 1973.
Edward Heath's Conservative government adopted stringent regulations to restrict increases in wages.
This, in turn, led to direct confrontation between it and the coalminers in the latter part of 1973.
On 12th November, the National Union of Mineworkers announced a ban on overtime work and the nation s reserves of coal began to deplete rapidly.
On 13th December, the government restricted industry throughout the country to three working days per week to conserve fuel.
Capitulation to the wage demand of the miners, it was believed, would be followed by an avalanche of wage claims from workers in other industries with the result that the pound, already precarious, would collapse on the international money market.
The arrangements for running the country in an extreme national emergency, such as a nuclear attack, were alerted.
These assume that centralised, parliamentary government will cease and that regional administrations under military and civil service commissioners will endeavour to operate essential services.
The persons assigned to act as regional commissioners were placed on standby and the secret bunkers from which they would control their regions were prepared for occupation.
Emergency generators were distributed with water supplies and the pumping of sewerage the first priorities.
Eventually, in January, Heath decided to go to the country in a general election on the theme, ‘Who rules Britain?’
The public was apprehensive at the shortage of heat and light and the inconveniences of the three day working week.
However, for those in the higher echelons of government it was a period of seemingly near apocalypse.
Many believed that the country was teetering on the precipice of political anarchy and economic collapse.
A recollection of John Davies, the minister for Europe in Heath's cabinet, indicated the mood, ‘We were at home in Cheshire, and I said to my wife and children that we should have a nice time, because I deeply believed then that it was the last Christmas of its kind that we would enjoy.’,
A number of persons who were involved in the crisis, or were wellinformed observers, later joined the militantly anti-trade union National Association for Freedom.
Among them were Vice-Admiral Sir Louis Le Bailey, director-general of military intelligence, and the counter-insurgency experts, Sir Robert Thompson and Field Marshal Sir Gerald Templer.
Colonel David Stirling was so alarmed at what he believed was the dubious ability of the government to cope with a major strike affecting essential services that he turned to the possibility of forming a private force of military and other experts to assist the civil authorities.
Sir W alter Walker, the retired NATO commander-in-chief, was equally perturbed and formed the less specialised Civil Assistance which, he reported, attracted 100,000 volunteers.
It has been claimed that criminals, sportsmen and senior government officials are the most conservative groups in every country.
Of the senior government officials, none can be more conservative than the members of the Foreign Office, the officers of the armed forces and the officials of the intelligence services.
In addition, in February 1974, these interlocking groups had special reasons for wanting a Conservative government returned apart from the fear of a miners' victory leading to anarchy and national bankruptcy.
The officials of the Foreign Office had a fanaticism about United Kingdom membership of the EEC such as has seldom been seen since the early crusades.
Joe Haines, from his vantage point as Harold Wilson's press secretary, reckoned that so strong and so determined  was their resolve to make the country a member that no government, regardless of party, could have resisted it indefinitely.
The present writer, too, can testify to the fanaticism from discussions at that time with diplomats in London and overseas.
When Edward Heath and the Conservatives took the country into membership, the Foreign Office officials regarded it as their very own special triumph.
In February 1974, they feared acutely that a Labour victory would reverse their achievement.
A powerful section of the Labour Party was demanding that Britain withdraw.
Only a year earlier, Wilson himself had denounced the legislation which made it a member.
‘In ninety-three legislative words,’ he said, ‘the safeguards gained after centuries of constitutional struggle, even bloody civil wars, were swept aside by a provision that said simply that hereafter anything enacted by the EEC automatically became British law, annulling any laws which were inconsistent without debate.
We have sold, with hardly a murmur from the media, our constitutional birthright for a mess of highly problematical economic pottage.’
On the eve of the election, Wilson pledged that, if the Labour Party won, his new government would have ‘a fundamental re-negotiation’ of the terms of membership.
The Foreign Office officials knew that fundamentally improved terms were not possible because the other member countries could not concede a privileged position to one member only.
This meant that Wilson would have to accept from the re-negotiation the same conditions as Heath had accepted, with perhaps a few minor, cosmetic modifications, or else withdraw the United Kingdom out of the EEC.
In the event, Wilson opted for the cosmetic exercise, but no one could foretell this in February 1974.
The Foreign Office and even more the armed services and intelligence organisations were alarmed at a commitment in the Labour Party election manifesto to reduce spending on defence.
A strong lobby within the Labour Party was urging more open government and greater access to official information on the lines of the Freedom of Information Act which has since been implemented in the United States.
The Foreign Office, Ministry of Defence and intelligence services were resolute in their opposition to relaxation of the  security rules.
The Labour manifesto did not refer to the issue, but that did not mean that a Labour government would not legislate on it.
Later in the year, the manifesto for an October election did contain an undertaking that a new act would place the onus on government departments to show cause why information should not be disclosed.
The Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defence were acutely aware that the Republic of South Africa is the sole stable country in Africa; that its government is opposed to the increasing presence of the USSR and China in Africa and that it controls the sea route to the Indian Ocean where the USSR has mounted a powerful naval challenge.
Also, the British intelligence services co-operate closely with South Africa's BOSS.
Each year, the Labour Party at its annual conference had pledged itself to boycott South Africa as a protest against apartheid.
Harold Wilson himself had emphasised publicly that he would ban the export to it of all arms except the minimum necessary for self-defence against foreign aggression.
Some months after Wilson resigned from being prime minister, he admitted to two journalists that he believed there was a faction in DI5 sympathetic to the South African and Rhodesian authorities.
He also said that he was convinced that South African agents and others concerned with intelligence gathering were responsible for more than a dozen burglaries at the houses and offices of himself and his professional advisers.
His claim about South African involvement was subsequently ridiculed in the press and elsewhere in a way reminiscent of the scorn poured for so many years on the suggestion that British intelligence might have had a link with the Zinoviev letter.
That Wilson should have turned to South Africa as a prime suspect was not unreasonable.
It spends heavily on its undercover services and Britain is the country whose policies most vitally affect it.
American concern as to who rules Iran or Guatemala, for example, is modest compared with South African interest in who rules the United Kingdom.
Nor is Wilson likely to have forgotten an earlier incident in which a young lady in the cabinet office had to be charged and was convicted of supplying documents to a South African intelligence agent.
In the same interview with the two journalists, Wilson made the further point that he believed that a faction in DI5 had pursued a vendetta against himself and his close colleagues.
A whispering campaign by it that there was a communist cell linked with his cabinet and involving himself and his personal secretary, Lady Falkender, had led him to call in Sir Michael Hanley, director-general of DI5, in the summer of 1975.
The latter had confirmed that a disaffected faction with extreme right-wing views existed in the service.
The remarks to the journalists were published in The Observer on 17th July 1977.
Later in the same month, the Daily Express carried reports by its defence correspondent, Chapman Pincher, that Wilson's offices had been bugged by security men in both 10 Downing Street and the House of Commons.
James Callaghan, who had replaced Wilson as prime minister, issued an official denial and Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, the leader of the opposition, put out a brief supporting statement that she shared his confidence in DI5.
Pincher replied that a denial by the intelligence services about bugging or other secret operation carries no weight because denial is part of their stock-in-trade.
He also pointed out that he had been careful to avoid stating that DI5 was the agency responsible.
On 28th August,The Observer printed a short statement by Sir Harold Wilson in which he expanded a little on his earlier remarks.
He said:My impression is that what has been going on over a period of years has come from, or been led by, a small mafia group of MI5 who have contacts outside in one or two sections of the press, and a few self-appointed private enterprise security agents .
It is my strong impression that it is probably a very small MI5 mafia who have been out of the service for some time, who still continue the vendetta for no doubt extremely right-wing purposes of their own.
I'm equally confident that the higher direction of MI5 and those operating today do not have anything to do with this, nor have they done so at any time.
An article in the same issue explained that The Observer accepted assurances obtained at three different levels from the ‘security authorities’ that they had no evidence that Sir Harold or his private secretary, Lady Falkender, had been a target for KGB blackmail or had been ‘a plant’.
It then raised the possibility that ‘there is indeed a faction within MI5 which is gunning for the former prime minister  (and by implication the whole Labour leadership).’
It then continued:Mr. Callaghan's statement is not the end of the story.
Material now with The Observer —which we are still checking — suggests that there may well have been a group hostile to Sir Harold Wilson (and hostile to leaders of the Liberal party) extending far beyond a ‘faction of MI5' .
‘Whether Sir Harold himself appreciated the full ramifications of the matter is doubtful.
four days before The Observer published this statement by Wilson, Chapman Pincher wrote in the Daily Express that he had a copy of a DI6 report, detailing the heavy surveillance of Harold Wilson prior to the general election of February 1974.
It was several pages long and marked ‘Top Secret for Addressee Only’.
Next day, he gave more information.
The document was a progress report during an inquiry into possible communist affiliations of colleagues and friends of Wilson.
The details, Pincher wrote, ‘reveal political overtones suggesting that certain intelligence men were strongly opposed to the re-election of Sir Harold Wilson as prime minister’.
The document expressed great concern that Wilson had been strongly pro-Israel when prime minister from 1964–70 and that his return to office would sour relations with the Arabs at a time when the international oil crisis was acute.
It referred to his close friendships with prominent Jewish businessmen, some of whom had commercial links with iron curtain countries.
It expressed fears that Wilson as prime minister would increase trade with the USSR which would allow the Soviets to infiltrate more KGB agents into the United Kingdom under diplomatic cover.
The last apprehension may have been as much influenced by professional considerations as patriotic ones.
The more KGB agents in the country, the more men the intelligence services have to deploy to watch and counter their activities.
The Conservative government of Edward Heath had expelled one hundred and five KGB agents in 1971 who were operating under diplomatic cover and there was reluctance to have the old situation restored.
Also, the feared return of large numbers of KGB agents may not have been the only operational reason to influence the intelligence men to fear the election of a Labour government under the premiership of Harold Wilson.
A British undercover agent in one of David Cornwell's [John le Carré's]novels is so exasperated by platitudes by  a superior that he exploded within himself that it was like working for a bloody clergyman.
There could have been a similar reaction to the prospect of a Wilson administration and especially with the kind of rough-neck covert operations that were in progress in Ulster.
Political parties can no more escape from their pasts than can individuals.
The British Labour Party was formed by Keir Hardie, a self-educated Scottish miner of high ideals and stout integrity.
Many of its earlier leaders were lay preachers who entered politics in order to apply their religious ideals in practical ways.
It was the party's ideals of social justice which eventually brought it a measure of middle-class support.
Bernard Shaw, the Webbs and their small circle led the way and it should not be forgotten that the Fabian Society, which they founded, is today stronger than ever, no less idealistic and no less a major influence in the councils of the party.
Sir Harold Wilson himself was in the mainstream of the party traditions.
He grew up in a Free Church home in Huddersfield with grace before meals and friends in for hymn singing on Sunday evenings after the service in the Baptist church; he was a Fabian of long standing; a cofounder of War on Want; and his wife was a daughter of a Congregational minister.
James Callaghan, who succeeded him as prime minister, was brought up a Baptist.
On Sunday, he attended Sunday school twice and church service twice and during the remainder of the day was allowed to read only the Bible and Children's Encyclopedia.
Dick Crossman was deputy-director of British psychological warfare in the Second World War and knew the murky, ruthless world of intelligence organisations from inside.
At an early stage of the Rhodesian crisis, he was a member of Harold Wilson's cabinet.
In his diary, he wrote that he had frequently tried to cross-examine Wilson on his plans for overthrowing the government of Ian Smith.
He added, ‘I get the impression that he considers the choice for Britain to lie between conventional military action or conventional diplomatic action, and that he denies the possibility of a third course in between.
This is, of course, ludicrous.
There are only 250,000 whites in Rhodesia and we have I presume an SIS [DI6], and SOE and other organisations of paramilitary war.
And yet I am pretty sure that Harold and his military advisers have never considered the use of  black propaganda or subversive organisations to put pressure on Smith.’
There was an earlier occasion when the same elements in high places were fearful about the outcome of an election.
It was in 1924 and the Labour prime minister, Ramsay MacDonald, was the bogeyman.
As fifty years later, the Foreign Office and armed services were among the most strongly affected.
Again, as later, the intelligence set-up had its own special reasons for alarm.
It was anticipated that a new Labour government under MacDonald would close down MI 1c (as DI6 was then called) in the interest of economy and aspirations of international brotherhood.
The response was a forgery purporting to be a letter from Gregori Zinoviev, president of the Third International in Moscow, to the British Communist Party, urging it to promote revolution and to foment mutiny in the armed forces.
The document appeared in the press shortly before polling day and swung many votes against MacDonald.
The February 1974 general election contained one incident  reminiscent of the Zinoviev letter episode.
A few days before the poll, an attempt was made to interest The Guardian in a story that Harold Wilson was involved in land speculation.
Such a story would have been heavily damaging to the electoral prospects of the Labour Party as it was pledged to end such speculation.
Wilson telephoned the editor who accepted his denial.
The attempt then appears to have been transferred to the Daily Mail .
Wilson's solicitor and adviser, Lord Goodman, was called in.
He was also chairman of the Newspaper Publishers Association and pointed out to the proprietor of the Daily Mail the danger of damaging democracy through a last minute election stunt story.
The result was that the story was set aside for the time being.
There is no evidence to indicate who was responsible for the attempt to have the alleged land deal story published.
Assumptions based on the analogy of the Zinoviev letter could be totally wrong.
On the other hand, an incident which occurred in Ulster during the same february 1974 general election left so much circumstantial evidence, suggesting undercover involvement, that a judicial commission absolutely must be used to establish whether or not this was so.
It was an explosion which destroyed 6 Cromwell Road, Belfast, the headquarters of the Alliance Party of Northern Ireland.
Forecasts predicted that the overall election result would be close.
Opinion polls suggested a Conservative win, but they had been wrong too often in the past to inspire confidence.
The issue, ‘Who rules Britain?’, began to lose momentum part-way through the campaign and the prospects of Labour correspondingly picked up.
When the count was over, the Conservatives had 296 seats and Labour 300.
Heath immediately proposed a coalition to the 14 Liberals who had been returned.
they rejected it, but he refused to admit defeat.
He was only four seats fewer than Wilson and the Ulster loyalists could perhaps be brought into the equation.
In the previous parliament there had been 8 Official Ulster Unionists who had accepted the Conservative whip and considered themselves part of his party.
Heath was sufficiently encouraged to delay surrendering the seals of office and to have two further cabinet meetings.
He was disappointed.
Of his 8 previous Ulster supporters, 4 had gone down in defeat, I did not re-stand and 3 were marching under new orders which forbade them to give support as in the past.
The February 1974 election in Ulster thus decided that the Labour  Party and not the Conservative Party would form the government at Westminster and that Harold Wilson and not Edward Heath would be the new prime minister.
This outcome, in turn, gave the Labour Party the double advantages of being able to choose the date of the next election and of going into it with the prestige of being the government.
It used both to good effect and at a further general election, held in October of the same year, won 42 more seats than its Conservative opponent.
It was enabled to continue in office until May 1979 and in the recriminations of defeat the Conservative Party polarised into the Thatcher and Heath factions, the implications of which are still only partly worked out on the political scene.
Northern Ireland returns a total of 12 MPs to Westminster.
On three occasions all 12 have been Unionist, but over the years the usual figure has been 10 Unionist.
In the outgoing parliament in February 1974, it was 9 and consisted of 8 Official Unionists and 1 Democratic Unionist.
For some time before that election, it had been recognised that, in the event of a close overall United Kingdom result, the Ulster MPs could hold the balance in the House of Commons.
Much therefore depended on which brand of them would be returned and whether, as in the past, they would align themselves with the Conservative Party and accept its whip.
A little earlier, the Westite Official Unionists, Vanguard Unionists and Democratic Unionists had formed the United Ulster Unionist Council to oppose the pro-government Faulknerite Official Unionists.
Most of the Official Unionist members at Westminster had remained close to the Faulknerites.
One had even held an appointment under Heath as minister of state for Employment.
The Ulster public was critical and unhappy at the way they had been passive and ineffective as Heath's government had set up a ‘power sharing’ administration complete with Irish republican ministers and had arranged a semicondominium with the Irish Republic in the Sunningdale Agreement and Council of Ireland scheme.
On the other hand, the outgoing men had been returned in the previous election by large majorities and established MPs are difficult to oust.
The UUUC coalition informed each of the 8 Official Unionist members from the dissolved parliament that he had either to align himself with it or fight for his seat.
4 chose to fight; I did not re-stand and 3 linked up with it in constituencies where UUUC support was strong.
Even among the 3 men who aligned with the UUUC, there  was reluctance to identify too closely with it for fear of losing a stratum of middle-class voters more conscious of social status than constitutional complexities.
The reluctance was even stronger in their party organisations and the UUUC had to impose firm pressure to ensure that ‘UUUC’ appeared on their election literature and posters.
In South Antrim, the constituency of the present writer, no satisfaction was received on the matter until an exasperated meeting of my own constituency party presented the Westite Official Unionists with an ultimatum that either ‘UUUC’ appear on the literature and posters of their candidate or it would present its own rival one.
The UUUC candidates consented to work together as a group at Westminster.
I pressed that such an undertaking would be meaningless if they were free to take the Conservative whip in common with faulknerite unionists.
(At that time even the most optimistic in the UUUC camp assumed that some of the latter would be returned.)
At first there was reluctance to jeopardise the concessions already gained by pushing for yet another.
The Official Unionists within the UUUC argued stubbornly that the most effective place from which to influence events at Westminster was inside the Conservative Party.
In the end, the point of view which I urged prevailed.
All UUUC candidates undertook to respond solely to their own parliamentary whip if elected.
There was particular resistance within the camp of the Official Unionist candidate in South Antrim and, not until the final pre-nomination meeting of coalition party leaders in the Seagoe Hotel, Portadown, was it confirmed that the point had been conceded even in that constituency.
The position was thus clear and unambiguous from nomination day onwards.
Successful Faulknerite unionists would continue to act in the new parliament as members of the Conservative Party.
Successful UUUC candidates, in contrast, would form their own party and act independently and possibly often in opposition to it.
As events were to demonstrate, eleven parliamentary seats or a difference of twenty-two votes in a parliamentary division were at stake.
The UUUC campaign went well.
It had undertaken, a few weeks earlier, a massive drive across the region for the signing of a petition to Parliament appealing for the removal of the ‘power-sharing’ constitution.
The exercise had made the public familiar with the  coalition and had given the local branches of the three parties experience in working together for a common purpose.
The Faulkner administration, complete with its Irish republican members, had assumed office at the end of the previous month and the sense of humiliation and indignation among the public meant easy UUUC canvassing.
As the days sped past, we knew that the tide was running strong for the coalition and growing stronger.
Then on Tuesday morning, 26th February — two days before polling came the Cromwell Road incident.
It did not stop the UUUC candidates from winning every seat in Northern Ireland, with one exception.
It did, however, have a violent, adverse impact on their votes.
A further Westminster general election took place in October of that year.
By then the Faulkner administration had been out of existence for some months and hostility to it no longer rallied the public.
The total UUUC vote should have fallen in the less tense conditions.
Instead, it rose by a further 6,6%.
At least part of the explanation is the setback in February caused by the explosion which destroyed the headquarters of the Alliance Party in Cromwell Road, Belfast.
The Alliance Party was small.
It had only three candidates and their prospects varied from slight to nil.
It aroused no strong antagonism in any section of the population.
At worst, it was regarded as consisting of sanctimonious, middle-class persons who mouthed government cliches about ‘power-sharing’ and said that they would be equally satisfied to live under London or Dublin.
There was no fierce detestation of it such as loyalist unionists had for Faulknerite unionists or Sinn Féin republicans for SDLP republicans.
The Provisional IRA consistently ignored it even in its verbal propaganda.
Cromwell Road is a quiet street of three-storey, Victorian brick houses.
It is off Botanic Avenue, a busier thoroughfare with shops.
Number 6 was the Alliance Party headquarters.
Beside it was an alleyway which provided rear entrances to a row of Botanic Avenue shops.
The nearest rear entrance belonged to a home bakery.
At seven o'clock on the morning of 26th February two men and two women were busy with the morning's baking.
The electric light was burning and mixers and other equipment were making a steady hum.
The door into the alleyway was open, giving a clear view into the bakery.
A vehicle was heard in the alleyway, followed by the footsteps of either two or three men walking past the open door.
The persons in the bakery assumed that they were the milkmen making  the morning delivery and paid no attention.
One of them left a couple of minutes later to buy a newspaper.
A motor car was parked in the alleyway about three metres from the bakery door and alongside the Alliance building end wall.
He walked past it and turned the corner into Cromwell Road.
Seconds later 200 lb of high explosive detonated in the car.
The people working in the bakery escaped alive only because its wall collapsed outward into the alleyway.
Windows were shattered over a wide area and a number of persons had to be treated for injuries from flying glass and shock.
The Alliance Party headquarters was totally wrecked, The building, however, was empty as it was so early in the morning.
The Ulster public, in the main, accepted that the bomb was the work of loyalist extremists.
The Alliance Party had a slightly Roman Catholic image with the man in the street.
The leader of the party belonged to a Roman Catholic family and in the council and Northern Ireland Assembly elections of the previous year, Roman Catholics had frequently voted for it when a republican candidate was not standing.
The public had also come to accept a rule of thumb that the Provisional IRA gave a warning when they placed a bomb and loyalists rarely gave one.
The persons responsible for the Cromwell Road bomb gave neither a telephoned nor shouted warning.
The Provisional IRA usually endeavoured to give a warning of some kind.
Experience had taught them that nothing alienated support within their districts more swiftly than bombs which killed or injured Roman Catholics and that nothing reduced the inflow of money from Irish American sympathisers more drastically.
It had further taught them that bomb casualties in Protestant districts frequently included a substantial proportion of Roman Catholics.
An example was ‘Bloody Friday’, 21st July 1972, when the Provisional IRA exploded twenty-two bombs in Belfast with slight or no warnings and killed 16 people and injured 120 others.
Many Roman Catholics were among the victims and the inflow of Irish American money is said to have slumped by two-thirds almost immediately.
As it happened, the occupants of two upstairs flats in 4 Cromwell Road were Roman Catholics.
They escaped solely because of the strength of the end wall of the building.
Loyalist extremist groups which planted bombs, on the other hand, often gave no warning.
They were invariably amateurs, usually  ill-organised and indifferent to public opinion.
Their targets were frequently public houses used as gathering places by the Provisional IRA and the chance of killing co-religionists was small.
The motor car which contained the bomb had been stolen in York Street which is frequented by both political communities.
The place of theft of the car is often a pointer to the political allegiance of the bombers.
On this occasion, it was no help.
Although the public as a whole accepted that loyalist extremists had destroyed the Alliance Party headquarters, a number of local people, including some caught in the blast of the explosion, doubted it from the beginning.
They insisted that neither loyalists nor republicans would have left 200 lb of explosive within a few feet of men and women working contentedly in the bakery kitchen and suggested that it was more like the work of outside agents, acting under strict and impersonal orders.
The bombers must have seen the persons in the well-lighted room through the open door and realised that they were almost certain to die in the explosion.
Nor could panic be the explanation.
The footsteps which were heard passing in the alleyway were of men walking not running in panic.
The bomb weighed 200 lb.
Only the two main loyalist urban paramilitary organisations were able occasionally to produce a bomb of that size.
Either would have regarded it as a special achievement and in either the semi-democratic command structure would have ensured that a number of men would have participated in the decision where to detonate it.
It is not believable that a Protestant residential street would have been selected nor is there any instance of such an occurrence on any other occasion.
Also, the bomb consisted of best quality commercial explosive a substance which loyalist bomb makers seldom had in quantity.
Most of their larger bombs were made of agricultural fertiliser ‘mix’ and similar substitutes.
The size of the bomb was exactly right to wreck the Alliance Party headquarters without bringing down additional buildings such as No. 4 in which several families lived in flats.
It was placed a little further forward along the wall of the building than would have been selected by a novice and apparently with a knowledge of the positions of the interior walls.
There was a professionalism and explosive expertise about the operation totally alien to the loyalist slap-dash, amateur bombers.
The Alliance Party headquarters explosion was forty-eight hours before polling was to commence.
Radio, television and the evening newspaper carried reports of it that day and the morning newspapers carried them next day.
The anti-UUUC backlash among voters, although difficult to measure, was formidable.
No proof is available that the incident was designed to produce such a backlash nor that it was masterminded by an element within the government's undercover set-up.
On the other hand, if there were as many unanswered question marks ranged against an individual, he would be under arrest and behind bars with bail refused.
When the hoped-for judicial inquiry into the activities of the United Kingdom intelligence organisations is conceded, high on the agenda must be an investigation of this incident.
It might even result in information which, in turn, could help to elucidate why army undercover men were stealing the three vehicles that night a few months earlier near William Black's house at the junction of Black's Road and Tildarg.
COURT OF THE SECRET INFORMER
Saturday, 25th May 1974, was the eleventh day of the general strike called by the Ulster Workers’ Council.
Andrew Beattie arrived around 9.00 a.m. at Central Strike Headquarters.
It was in the Vanguard Unionist Party Central Office, 9 Hawthornden Road, Belfast.
Some strike leaders were already there and others kept arriving at intervals.
They chatted informally until the Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee began its daily session at 10.00 a.m.
It consisted of the Central Council of the Ulster Workers' Council together with representatives of the loyalist parties and paramilitary organisations.
Harry Murry (UWC) was chairman and Jim Smyth (UWC) secretary.
William Craig, a former minister of Home Affairs, represented the Vanguard Unionist Party; Harry West, MP, the Official Unionist Party; and Dr. Ian Paisley, MP, the Democratic Unionist Party (each was leader of his respective party).
Among the representatives of the paramilitary organisations, the best known was Lieut.-Colonel E. H. Brush, CB, DSO, OBE, the commander of the Down Orange Welfare Volunteers.
He was Deputy Lieutenant for Co.
Down and was subsequently a representative for South Down in the Northern Ireland Constitutional Convention of the following year.
Andrew Beattie was present as the South-East Antrim political and welfare representative of the Ulster Defence Association.
The big issue that morning was whether to release feeding stuff from the mills for distribution to the farms.
There was a strong case against favouring one section of the community (i.e. the farmers), but it was known that animals and poultry were hungry.
In the end the humanitarian arguments won and instructions were issued for the release of a limited amount.
Apart from an interval for lunch, the meeting continued until 3.30 p.m. and then adjourned until 7.00 p.m. to allow representatives to report to their parties and organisations.
Reports had come in before the Central Co-ordinating Committee adjourned that the British government was about to take control of the refinery at Sydenham and the distribution of petrol and oil throughout Northern Ireland.
A report, too, came through from London that the cabinet had decided to arrest the strike leaders and to place the region under martial law.
Harold Wilson, the prime minister, had stated earlier in the day that he would give a television broadcast to the nation at 10.15 p.m. in the evening.
The assumption grew that his purpose was to announce martial law for Northern Ireland.
The present writer was co-ordinator of the UUUC ‘Advice and Relief Centres’ of which several hundred had been set up across the country.
They were the framework through which the region was being administered.
They issued travel passes and petrol permits for essential services, circulated strike regulations as they were formulated, encouraged mass rallies and cavalcades and resolved an infinite variety of local problems as they arose.
Around mid-afternoon, I had a report from Ballymena that the large police station in the town had been ordered to clear its cells of ordinary prisoners in preparation for a large number of arrests.
Shortly afterwards, more generalised reports came in from Co.
Down that mass arrests of strike organisers were imminent.
In the later afternoon, Andrew Gregg, deputy co-ordinator of ‘UUUC Advice and Relief Centres’, and I returned to Central Strike Headquarters and collected a portable typewriter and some other items of equipment useful for continuing the strike should we have to go into hiding.
I next made preparations for sleeping away from home that evening.
Andrew Beattie returned to Newtownabbey in south-east Antrim and reported on the decisions of the Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee to a joint meeting of the local paramilitary organisations.
Afterwards, he went home to have dinner and a wash and shave before returning to Central Strike Headquarters at 7.00 p.m.
At the latter, he found the building deserted except for two strikers on guard-duty.
They explained that the meeting was cancelled and everyone dispersed as it had been confirmed that the government was about to arrest all strike leaders.
A few minutes later, Andy Tyrie, Supreme Commander, UDA, arrived for the cancelled meeting.
He decided to accompany Beattie back to Newtownabbey.
The driver of the car was unfamiliar with that part of Belfast.
He turned right at  the foot of Hawthornden Road instead of left.
He realised his mistake when he was stopped by the gates of Parliament Buildings at Stormont and turned back.
A police landrover followed the car to the gates and for about a mile after it turned.
Beattie and Tyrie were not much concerned.
It was not trying too hard to follow and they knew that there was much sympathy for the strike inside the police force.
They went to a hall where they would meet a cross-section of men from the various paramilitary organisations.
A television set had been set up in it and, at 10. 15 p.m., they watched Harold Wilson make his speech.
(t was cautious and  non-committal and sounded unlike a man resolved on martial law and a mass arrest of strike leaders.
The present writer, who in another district also watched him speak, promptly set aside the plan to sleep away from home that night.
Beattie went to Ardeene Social Club in Rathcoole after Wilson's speech and chatted with local residents.
Eventually, someone advised him to go home and have some sleep.
He took the advice and turned in about 2.00 a.m.
The army came at 3.45 a.m.
There was knocking on the front door.
Andrew Beattie came down and opened it.
Twelve soldiers at least were in his small front garden and on the footpath.
Others were at the back of his house.
In the background along the street were numerous other soldiers and many vehicles.
A young soldier said that he had a warrant to search the house.
He was wearing camouflage dress and no rank insignia was visible.
Beattie invited him into the living room.
He entered accompanied by four others.
He asked permission to bring his family downstairs.
It was granted and his wife and four children came down in pyjamas and dressing-gowns.
Two soldiers were detailed to search the lower part of the house and two the upper.
Beattie asked to accompany the two who were to search upstairs.
He had heard stories of security forces planting illegal objects during searches of houses and hoped that his presence might help to safeguard against it.
The soldiers searched the house superficially.
They appeared to be checking only if there were any additional persons in it.
Upstairs, they looked in the roofspace, but otherwise did not search.
In the living room they did not even look under the cushions.
A woman soldier was present, presumably to reassure any women who might be in the household.
Andrew Beattie was secretary-treasurer of the Eastway Social Club.
The club account books were in the house and over £2,000 in cash.
He drew the attention of the soldier-in-charge and explained about his position in the club.
He accepted the explanation without question.
He did not check through the money.
He looked into the box and then immediately closed and left it.
The soldiers withdrew from the living room and went to the front of the house.
After a couple of minutes, one of them returned and placed a hand on Beattie's shoulder and said that he was arresting him under Section 10 and Schedule 1 of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act.
He was taken immediately to an armoured personnel carrier or pig as these vehicles are nicknamed.
Five minutes later, he was joined by a UDA officer who had just been arrested.
The vehicle was then driven to the flat of another UDA officer.
It was searched, but he was not at home.
Beattie and the other arrestee were driven to the army base on Church Road, Newtownabbey.
They were placed in a large room with about thirty men.
All sat on the concrete floor.
Twelve of the men were paramilitary officers in the area centred on Rathcoole, Newtownabbey.
The remainder were men who had been arrested at Ardeene Hall in Rathcoole.
Local UDA vigilantees used Ardeene Hall nightly as their base for patrol and watch duties in the district.
The army authorities appear to have been afraid that they would intervene to prevent the arrest of the paramilitary officers and mounted a special operation by 43 Royal Marine Commando to arrest them also.
The marines chatted with the vigilantees for a time and exchanged cigarettes with them.
Suddenly, an officer blew a whistle and the vigilantees were overpowered, arrested and brought to the army base on Church Road.
In the morning, they were released.
None of them were paramilitary officers.
After about two hours sitting on the concrete floor, the prisoners were taken, one by one, into a room to be interviewed by an Englishman in plain clothes.
He was thirty-five to forty and it was assumed that he was an army intelligence officer.
Beattie sat facing him across the table during his interview.
The room was rather dark.
He asked him his name and address and rank in the UDA.
He replied that he was a captain in the Social Welfare  wing.
He asked about several crimes of violence that had happened in south-east Antrim and Beattie told him that he knew nothing about any of them.
He then turned to the general strike and asked him about his role in it.
He answered that he was a UDA political and welfare representative on the Central Co-ordinating Committee.
He asked about proceedings at Central Strike Headquarters and lingered for some time on the subject although he received no information.
He gave the impression that he was well informed about it.
At the end of the conversation, he again asked a question or two about crimes in south-east Antrim, but Beattie once more told him that he could throw no light on them.
The interrogation over, Beattie was given a rapid medical examination by an army doctor, and his photograph taken.
A little later, he was placed with three others in a landrover which drove to Castlereagh Police Holding Centre, Ladas Drive, Belfast.
The police at Castlereagh allocated a cell to each man and gave them a good meal.
It was the first food that any had had since arrested.
Beattie slept for the rest of the day.
He had had little sleep from the commencement of the strike and was dog-tired.
At night, the police served tea and toast.
They also gave out their own cigarettes and were exceptionally considerate.
They told the men in custody that they would be released soon and appeared to believe it.
Next day was Monday.
Two RUC officers in plain clothes interviewed the men, one by one, in the morning.
They asked for information in a general way about various obvious crimes that had taken place in south-east Antrim.
They did not stress any particular one.
They were easy interviews and lasted about ten minutes.
In fact, the interviews were so casual that everyone was reassured that they would be released as soon as the general strike eased.
Andrew Beattie was allowed a visit by his wife for a few minutes around half-past one and for the first time he learned that no strike organisers had been arrested other than in the Rathcoole district.
This astonished him.
He was not surprised that the government had declined to arrest members of parliament such as Dr. Ian Paisley and Harry West or other elected representatives such as members of the Northern Ireland Assembly.
He could also understand that a Labour government led by Harold Wilson might be reluctant to arrest Jim Smyth or Harry Murray because of their support among the workers and their trade union links.
But, the paramilitary leaders were in a  less-privileged position and, if arrests were to be made, they were obvious targets.
However, to limit them to twelve officers in the Rathcoole district made no sense.
He himself was the only one among them to be on the Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee and although that part of south-east Antrim was militantly behind the strike, it had no particular strategic importance.
His wife was again allowed to visit him about the same time on the following (or third) day of custody.
She brought sandwiches and a bottle of milk.
A policeman assured her that she had no need to worry as her husband would soon be home as would the others.
Reports were circulating that Brian Faulkner, the head of the Westminster government supported Northern Ireland Executive, was about to resign and that his departure would signal the end of the strike.
(The resignation was announced about 2.30 p.m., but Beattie did not hear about it until later.)
A policeman came to Beattie's cell after teatime and said that he had a visitor.
He took him to a room in which was H. W. Hall, a solicitor.
Beattie exclaimed, ‘When are we going home?’
Hall replied that there were a lot of wagons outside and that it looked as though some men were to go to Long Kesh Detention Camp.
He explained that he had fought tooth and nail to be allowed to see the men in custody since the time of the arrests.
The authorities had eventually allowed him in, but only to see a spokesman.
He had selected Andrew Beattie as the spokesman as he already knew him.
He did not know who was to be detained or whether any were to be released.
Beattie was taken back to the cell and shortly afterwards brought down to the main police office where the other men who had been arrested were being assembled.
His personal belongings were produced and checked out.
He was handcuffed to another prisoner and placed in an army, armoured personnel carrier.
It was the first time that he had been handcuffed.
The men were unloaded in the reception area at Long Kesh Detention Camp and placed in cubicles.
Everywhere was in darkness as the strike was still in progress and the electric power was off.
There had been no preparation to receive them.
Names were noted down and there was a long wait before blankets could be located.
About 1.30 a.m, they were taken to Compound 14.
It was the only one for loyalist detainees and was already full.
All the men in it were being held ‘on suspicion’ under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Powers) Act.
None had been charged before a court.
Next day the Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee discontinued the general strike.
(The term used was ‘suspended’ in order to remind the British Government that it could be resumed if it were to give cause.)
The men from the Rathcoole district waited for the order to come for their release, but nothing happened.
They were exasperated and mystified.
They assumed that their arrests had been a political move and began to suspect that their continued detention had equally a political motive.
The men were correct that their arrests had been a political decision.
This chapter begins with an account of events on Saturday, 25th May.
During the early part of that day, orders were given to the army to arrest strike organisers over much of Ulster.
As the hours went past, senior army commanders and others persuaded Whitehall that the step would make the region ungovernable and create a situation in which the government would be soundly worsted.
The orders were countermanded and the speech for which Harold Wilson had alerted the nation was an innocuous anti-climax.
The soldiers who had been detailed to make the arrests in the Rathcoole district together with a handful of other arrests in a section of Belfast were accidentally omitted when the new instructions were sent out.
They were 1st Battalion, Light Infantry Regiment and 43 Royal Marine Commando.
They carried through with the original orders.
The news media learned of the arrests next morning and over a number of days outraged protests went up from loyalist spokesmen, including leaders of loyalist political parties and Andrew Beattie's colleagues on the Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee.
The authorities reacted swiftly with a smear counterattack.
An army spokesman pointed out to journalists that the men were being held under anti-terrorist legislation and added that they had already been interrogated and had been ‘singing like birds’, a phrase from the criminal underworld implying that they had confessed to crimes.
The police had been excluded from prior knowledge of the arrests, but quickly built up an accurate picture.
One useful source of information was 43 Royal Marine Commando which had made the arrests at Ardeene Social Club.
Its officers shared quarters with the police in North Queen's Street Police Station, Belfast.
The police were angry.
They had not been consulted and they knew that they would be caught in the middle if, as for a time seemed probable, there should be violent local protests.
They also knew that the arrested men were respectable and law-abiding and they were highly indignant when they heard that an official spokesman had smeared them with the suggestion of criminal activities.
Journalists who telephoned the divisional police were told bluntly that the men had not even been interviewed at the time the army spokesman had made his statement.
Several plain-clothes detectives went further and telephoned a commentator on commercially-owned Ulster Television and asked to be quoted as anonymous detectives in the police division responsible for Rathcoole I who knew that no evidence whatsoever existed against the men arrested.
The cancellation of the plan for the mass arrest of strike leaders across Ulster doomed the Northern Ireland Executive to a speedy demise.
The Irish republican SDLP and other groups which had had members in it turned on the Wilson government with the utmost ferocity for being weak, cowardly and treacherous.
Outside Northern Ireland political forces in the Irish Republic and the Irish lobby in Wilson's own Labour Party were little less restrained.
Suddenly, the loyalist outcry over the arrests in the Rathcoole district was the government's best friend.
It was not weak, cowardly or treacherous, it told its assailants and for proof pointed to the arrests and the fact that it was not releasing any of the men.
The loyalist leaders who pressed for the release of the arrested officers were handicapped by a coolness just then among the public at the name Rathcoole.
Early in the general strike, the Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee had instructed that pubs, clubs and all places for the sale of alcohol were to remain closed.
Thirty-three bored and idle men from Rathcoole and nearby Carrickfergus took two minibuses and a taxi and drove to north Antrim for a  pub crawl in districts where the writ of the Central Cc.ordinating Committee was not observed.
In the evening, a man from the group shot dead two brothers at their own public house in the townland of Tannaghmore.
The police arrested all of the group before they reached home and they, the army authorities and NIO knew that the paramilitary organisations were not involved in any way.
The public, which did not have the inside information of the police, could be less sure.
It knew that the incident had been the only serious act of indiscipline during the strike and that Wilson had used it in his speech to taunt and smear the Ulster people.
The Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act laid down that a person arrested on suspicion could be held without further formality for up to twenty-one days.
Beyond that period, he had to be issued with a holding order and eventually served with allegations of his suspected terrorist activities which he could contest before a commissioner in a special ‘Diplock’ Detained Persons' Tribunal.
Five of the men arrested in the Rathcoole district were released within twenty-one days and two more after a much longer period, but without ‘allegations’ having been made to justify their detention.
The remainder spent the summer waiting to be released or to receive ‘allegations’ which would give them something definite to contest.
Time passed slowly and the men worried about their families and jobs.
Long Kesh was like a prisoner-of-war camp.
The men lived together in a compound or — to use their term — a cage.
Food was delivered to the gate and they distributed it among themselves.
The tentative explanation came to be accepted by the men that they were victims of what they called ‘the Northern Ireland Office's numbers game’.
This was the theory that it kept a Long Kesh compound filled with loyalists as a propaganda exercise to impress observers outside Ulster that it was acting impartially towards both the British loyalist and the Irish republican community.
Andrew Beattie was given parole from 7th to 10th August.
His wife was feeling the strain and the family doctor had recommended it.
Also, his youngest daughter's birthday was on the 8th.
On 5th September 1974 came the first indication that something new and more sinister than the ‘numbers game’ was afoot.
The secretary of state for Northern Ireland appeared on television to read a special apologia for detention without trial.
The public was weary of the pros and cons of the topic, but, when the statement made specific  allegations, interest was intense.
It claimed that those detained ‘have been involved in terrorism the use of violence, including murder, intimidation, arson and the use of explosives’ and asserted that among them were persons who, but for the intimidation of witnesses, would have been charged with:
(1)
The ‘Bloody Friday’ atrocity of 21st July 1972 in which Provisional IRA bombs had killed sixteen people and injured one hundred and twenty others.
(2)
A shooting in Rathcoole on 31st January 1974 in which two Roman Catholic workmen were killed and three others injured.
(3)
A shooting at Abbey Meat Packers, Ltd., near Rathcoole, on 11th February 1974 in which a sixteen-year-old boy and an eighteenyear-old girl were killed and four others injured.
The last atrocity had been claimed at the time by the Ulster Freedom Fighters with the explanation that it was in retaliation for a bomb which the Provisional IRA had exploded in an army bus in England seven days earlier, killing twelve men, women and children.
Andrew Beattie's wife saw the secretary of state read the statement on television.
She and the wife of another detained paramilitary officer took a taxi shortly afterwards.
It was crowded and the other passengers had also watched the broadcast.
They accepted the claims without question and assumed, equally without question, that the detained paramilitary men from the Rathcoole district had been responsible for both of the specified shooting atrocities.
‘They don't detain them for nothing!’ was the refrain.
The two women dismounted from the taxi as soon as possible.
They were shocked and greatly distressed.
Of the twelve men arrested in the original swoop in the Rathcoole district, five continued to be detained in Long Kesh.
They, too, saw the secretary of state read the statement.
They bitterly resented the unfounded claims, but after a time pushed it from their minds as no more than another instance of government ruthlessness in propaganda.
They were thus still thinking in terms of the ‘numbers game’ when, about a month later, they at last received ‘allegations’as required under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act.
They astounded and horrified them.
Each man was accused of one or more serious crimes.
Andrew Beattie's ‘allegations’ were, first, that he had been a member of a gang which had murdered the teenage boy ind girl at Abbey Meat Packers, Ltd. in the previous  February and, second, that he had hijacked vehicles for road blocks during the UWC general strike.
There could hardly be a more serious accusation than these particular killings and they had been given renewed publicity by the secretary of state's broadcast of only four weeks earlier.
The five paramilitary officers from the Rathcoole district had each an unblemished record as a law-abiding citizen.
One or two had quite responsible positions in their employment.
Beattie was a senior foreman and had been twenty years with his company.
All were freed eventually by the ‘Diplock’ Detained Persons' Tribunals through failure of the prosecution to produce convincing evidence that they were other than innocent.
It is difficult not to conclude that the motive for the ‘allegations’ was the political self-interest of the government.
It had announced an elected convention to recommend new constitutional arrangements to replace the ones overthrown by the UWC general strike.
The elections for it were promised for the following year and already by the time of the secretary of state's television broadcast in early September both the NIO and the Ulster political parties were evolving respective plans.
In the loyalist camp an intense controversy on strategy was in progress and was to continue through the following months.
(It led to the partial withdrawal of the present writer from my political party and was a factor in my decision in the following year to join with others in setting up a new political party, the British Ulster Dominion Party.)
One section of loyalists correctly forecast that the proposed constitutional convention was an exercise to buy time and that the Westminster government would ignore its recommendations as cynically as it had ignored earlier constitutionally expressed wishes of the loyalist majority.
The electoral campaigning in the constituencies, they said, had to be accompanied by a strengthened UWC and mended fences with the paramilitary organisations.
They urged that if the loyalist political parties were to go into the convention without having in reserve the weapon of the general strike, they would be as naked and helpless as Aneurin Bevan, the post-war foreign secretary, had said  Britain would be in international councils if she were unilaterally to discard her nuclear weapons.
None knew the force of such reasoning better than the NIO which had been humbled by the general strike or the previous May.
But, it also knew that no politician in the run-up to an election would allow  himself to be associated in any way with organisations or groups tainted with crime or violence.
Here, ready to hand, was the means by which political parties could be isolated from the physical force (including the UWC with its trade union links) wings of the loyalist army and brought naked into the constitutional convention.
It was the urban UDA with its mass membership, which, during the general strike, had dominated the greater part of Belfast, the political and industrial capital.
Sections of the Belfast battalions were contaminated by both crime and violence.
Nevertheless, the organisation as a whole continued to have a large measure of credibility.
This was partly because of respect for Andy Tyrie, the intelligent supreme commander, but even more to the existence of battalions outside Belfast that were well disciplined with dedicated officers and that were free of crime.
Such battalions had the additional valve that they made liaison practicable between the UDA and the law and order sensitive rural paramilitary organisations and kept open a bridge of respectability into UDA circles over which even pre-election politicians could come and go.
The decision to accuse with serious crimes the Rathcoole UDA officers held in Long Kesh can be seen as part of the NIO's strategy for forestalling a general strike confrontation with the combined physical force and political wings of loyalism in the context of the coming constitutional convention.
A wedge was to be driven between the political parties and the UDA and between the rural paramilitaries and the UDA.
At the same time, the additional possibility is not excluded that some of the crimes may have been chosen for the ‘allegations’ because individuals in high places had vested interests in having them pinned on persons other than the real culprits.
There is no reason to assume, for instance, that the attempted assassination of William Black in January of that year was totally unique.
Andrew Beattie received his ‘allegations’ in the first few days of October.
About two weeks later, on Thursday, 24th October, he was informed that he would appear before the ‘Diplock’ tribunal on Wednesday, 30th.
He was further informed that the main charge against him was amended to what in reality was a new charge.
It was no longer that he had been a member of the murder gang, but that he had presided over a meeting of UDA officers in order to plan it.
The lesser charge of hijacking remained unaltered.
Patrick Donnelly was Andrew Beattie's solicitor and Anthony Cinnamond his barrister.
They had only three working days in which to prepare the defence against the new charge.
Much of the work of the previous fortnight securing evidence to counter the original charge was suddenly irrelevant.
The hearing was held in a portacabin building in the grounds of Long Kesh Detention Camp.
The room was square, but curtains and a carpet helped to conceal the prefabricated-austerity.
The commissioner was Judge Ireland who was on a temporary transfer from Scotland.
To his right was a heavy curtain behind which prosecution witnesses could be concealed.
Defence witnesses were kept in a separate room from the court.
They were permitted into it only when giving evidence and not more than one at a time.
No press or member of the public was allowed to be present.
Andrew Beattie and his wife grew up in Oldpark, Belfast, and as a young married couple settled in Rathcoole.
Intimidation by the IRA sent most Protestants and a number of moderate Roman Catholics fleeing from the district at an early stage of the Ulster political crisis.
For a time many of these refugee families were housed in five halls belonging to three Presbyterian, a Methodist and an Anglican church in the Rathcoole area.
Andrew Beattie knew some of them personally and was drawn into the work of finding new homes and dealing with the problems of the young, sick and old.
(On one occasion he helped in conjunction with a Dutch charitable organisation to arrange a holiday in the Netherlands for some of the children.)
A little later when local people formed themselves into vigilantees and eventually into a battalion of the UDA, he was asked to take charge of the extensive social work sponsored by it in the district.
Beattie's outstanding record as a dedicated social worker stood him in good stead at the ‘Diplock’ tribunal and partly explained the presence of a total of twenty-four persons who came to testify on his behalf.
It was the highest number at any hearing up to that time.
They were:
Glenn Barr (VUP), Jim Craig (DUP), Vincent McCloskey (SDLP) and Peter McLachlan (UPNI), four members of the Northern
Ireland Assembly who belonged to four different political parties.
Chief Inspector Kyle and Inspector Jardine.
The former was in charge of the investigations into the shooting at Abbey Meat  Packers, Ltd. and the latter was one of the police officers assisting him.
Rev. Robert Allen, minister of Rathcoole Presbyterian Church.
Thomas Seymour, mayor of Larne.
Harry Murray, chairman of the Ulster Workers' Council and Constitutional Stoppage Central Co-ordinating Committee.
Councillor Alex McGowan, whose son chanced to be driving past Abbey Meat Packers at the time of the shooting and was severely injured.
Councillor C. W. Stringer, who lived in Rathcoole.
Thomas Braniff, supervisor at the department in Gallaher, Ltd., in which Beattie was a senior foreman.
Mrs. N. Nelson of the Newtownabbey Society for Handicapped Children.
She had come to know and respect Beattie through his social work.
Mrs. Fenton, chairwoman, Eastway Old Age Pensioners Club, Rathcoole.
Mrs. Betty Brown, now a social worker with the United Kingdom Prison Service.
Andy Tyrie, Supreme Commander, UDA.
E. W. H. Christie of Lincoln's Inn, London, who knew from high level contacts the story of the countermanded order for the arrest of the leaders of the general strike.
Seven other individuals, not related to his family, who had come to have a high regard for Beattie over the years among them were three or four Roman Catholics, including a man whom he had helped to find a new house after he and his wife had been intimidated out of their home by the Provisional IRA.
After two days, Beattie's trial was adjourned for eighteen days and then resumed for a further three days.
This was a total of five days of hearing and was the longest period spent on one case by a ‘Diplock’ tribunal.
The adjournment was because Judge Ireland had commitments in Scotland.
The lesser charge of hijacking vehicles to form roadblocks during the general strike collapsed when the soldier called as a witness could give only vague and imprecise descriptions.
The prosecution's only witness on the main charge that Beattie had convened and presided over a meeting of UDA officers to plan the murders was an anonymous Special Branch detective who claimed to  be reporting evidence of a paid, anonymous informer.
He said that the latter was a member of Beattie's UDA company and that the meeting had been attended by four other UDA officers when he named.
The four named officers had been arrested at the same time as Beattie and had already appeared before ‘Diplock’ tribunals and been released.
During their hearings, the prosecution had made no reference of any kind to suggest that the authorities had information to connect them with the murders or the alleged meeting to plan it.
The Special Branch man remained hidden behind the screen for prosecution witnesses, but did not wear the heavy socks and mocassins or use the voice distorter.
He thus appeared to assume that Beattie and those among his witnesses who were from south-east Antrim would not recognise him.
Presumably, he was from outside that area.
Beattie's defence barrister, Anthony Cinnamond, called Chief Inspector Kyle who was in charge of investigations into the murders at Abbey Meat Packers, Ltd. and Inspector Jardine who was assisting him.
They testified that they had supervised one hundred and seven interviews in connection with them and examined several hundred telephone calls from the public and that not once had Beattie been mentioned.
It was pointed out to the Special Branch man behind the screen that the police team investigating the murders had no knowledge of his information and he was asked why he had not passed it to them.
He replied that he had given it verbally to a police sergeant, but that he must have forgotten about it.
When pressed why he, a trained detective, had not committed such important information to writing, he ha
Beattie was a captain in the social welfare wing of the UDA.
The Special Branch detective was asked whether he thought it probable that a more junior officer in the social welfare wing would call such a meeting and at it preside over ones of much more senior rank from the military wing.
Again, he did not reply.
There were three other mysteries to which the prosecution had no answer.
the army intelligence officer who had asked Beattie on the morning of his arrest for information on crimes in south-east Antrim had not even mentioned the one of which he was now accused.
Why was this?
Nor had he been interviewed by any policeman or other  official whatsoever during the five months of his stay in Long Kesh Detention Camp.
Was this a normal or reasonable way of conducting murder investigations?
And then, too, he had been allowed three days of parole some weeks earlier.
Was this a likely concession to someone whom the authorities believed had committed such horrific killings?
F. W. H. Christie, an English barrister, testified that an order to arrest the strike leaders throughout Northern Ireland had been countermanded, but that the new instructions did not reach the troops who were to make the arrests in the Rathcoole district and a small section of Belfast.
Further, he offered to provide Judge Ireland with irrefutable proof from his personal contacts at the highest level in London.
Anthony Cinnamond reserved one particularly effective item of information to the end of the cross-examination.
He turned to the Special Branch detective behind the screen and asked whether the prosecution knew that a man was awaiting trial in Crumlin Road Prison, Belfast, because the murder weapon used at Abbey Meat Packers, Ltd. had been found in his house.
The reply was ‘No.’
He then gave the man's name and address, the date of his arrest and details of the weapon (a Schmeisser), including its serial number.
I
The prosecution was allowed to sum up its evidence in secret hearing as part of it had been given in camera.
Cinnamond was greatly disquieted by the move as it deprived him of guidelines on which to base his reply.
However, on the resumption of full hearing, Judge Ireland instructed that Beattie be released immediately.
Four days later, Patrick Donnelly, his solicitor, wrote to him from a hospital bed: ‘What a tremendous thrill to hear of your release!…
Yours is one case I will always remember not for the large number of witnesses, but for the meeting of a man who right from the first impressed his lawyers with his innocence a conviction that grew and grew the more that one went into the case and met the many people who knew Andy Beattie so well.’
SOMETHING WHICH WE CAN HARDLY MISMANAGE
Counter-insurgency and its attendant covert and intelligence aspects have had an inordinate degree of latitude and influence on policy in Ulster partly because the Westminster cabinet and parliament are incredibly ignorant of the region and have been well content if the English politicians and Whitehall civil servants who administer it from the Northern Ireland Office at Stormont Castle succeeded in preventing its problems from impinging on the affairs of the mainland.
A Labour government under Harold Wilson was in office until June 197) which was the vital, formative phase of the Ulster crisis.
Richard Crossman's Diaries of a Cabinet Minister (vol.
III) give an insight into its attitudes.
A cabinet committee, including the prime minister, existed on Northern Ireland.
Crossman joined it on 29th April 1969.
In his diary, he records Denis Healy's description of it prior to his arrival.
‘You have no idea,’ said Healey, ‘what it was like before you came into the committee, The prime minister was always demanding active intervention early on, with this crazy desire to go there and take things over, that we should side with the Roman Catholics and the Civil Rights movement against the government and the Royal Ulster Constabulary, though we know nothing at all about it.’
Crossman urged that the government begin to build up political intelligence about Northern Ireland.
James Callaghan, the home secretary, said that the idea was absurd and that the Northern Ireland government would dislike it.
Healey backed Crossman and pointed out that they would be ‘blind men leading the blind if they had to go in there knowing nothing about the place’.
In a later diary entry on 17th August, Crossman noted that the Ulster situation was awful and depressing, but, ‘Nevertheless, from the point of view of the government it has its advantages.
It has deflected attention from our  own deficiencies and the mess of the pound.
We have now got into something which we can hardly mismanage.,,
Crossman's own special contribution to the debate on Ulster completes the impression of a new version of the Mad Hatter's tea party.
He suggested that Ulster Roman Catholics should be encouraged to emigrate to England, Australia or elsewhere.
It would be much cheaper, he added, than promoting policies to create new industries in the region.
The same blind complacency has equally prevailed in the ruling circles of the Conservative Party.
If the abolition of the B Specials and the other limited interventions had brought such plaudits on the mainland and from Irish republicans, how much more would result from the abolition of the government and parliament of Northern Ireland!
Also, if they were swept away, the stage would be clear for the introduction of new arrangements ‘to solve’ the Ulster problem.
Why not be the statesman to take the step?
In March 1972, Edward Heath, prime minister of a Conservative government, succumbed to the temptation.
He demanded that the Northern Ireland government surrender its authority over all aspects of law and order, including powers of legislation, police and courts.
It refused as it knew that it could not do so and survive at home.
Heath and his colleagues next abolished the parliament and constitution of Northern Ireland in defiance of all Commonwealth constitutional precedent and despite the fact that the action was a unilateral tearing up of an international treaty registered at the League of Nations.
In addition to the ignorance and naiveté at Westminster has been the assumption that the region is expendable in the wider context of Westminster politics.
Whether the party in office has been Conservative or Labour, the first consideration has been that Ulster policies must never injure electoral prospects.
Better that soldiers or policemen or civilians be murdered and maimed in that corner of the United Kingdom and millions of pounds of property be destroyed than that votes be lost in mainland constituencies.
Better to buy time with covert operations and the steady working of violence, crime and racketeering than to risk vote-endangering controversy.
Neither party would stomach the firm legislation and other measures needed to stamp out IRA terrorism while working within the law.
Both were too sensitive about the middle-of-the-road, liberal, humanitarian public.
From that social stratum come the brains of the  Labour Party and its middle-class infrastructure.
They are equally a force in the Conservative Party and provide a high proportion of the leaders of public opinion in the media and elsewhere.
For a time, soldiers in Ulster were denied the protection of armoured personnel carriers because pictures of them on television and in the press would remind people of the Russian tanks which overran Czechoslovakia.
The army command long pressed for a local ‘home guard’ such as had been the rule in Malaya, Kenya and other terrorist situations.
It would have freed numerous troops from guard and patrol work.
The refusal was stubborn and continuous.
Outside Ulster, the proposed force might be regarded as a return of the B Specials.
The pressure from London was continually for low profile military and police activity in the interest of a good propaganda picture in the mainland constituencies.
Unfortunately, the obverse of that coin is intensified covert activity.
Everyday is election day in politics and few governments have been more aware of it than the Westminster ones since the beginning of the ‘Ulster troubles’.
In 1969 the Wilson government was worried about the general election which it was to call in June 1970 and lose.
Heath formed the new one with an overall majority of only thirty.
During his period of office by-elections came near to eroding it.
The next general election was in February 1974 and placed Wilson back in office, but with a minority in the House of Commons.
A further general election in October of the same year gave him a majority of three.
By the time Wilson resigned the premiership in April 1976 and was replaced by James Callaghan, by-election defeats had reduced Labour to an overall minority party.
Thus, during these years, the overriding concern of the government in office was parliamentary survival and electoral prospects.
Ulster was never more than a facet of it.
The ill-informed and uninvolved are easy victims to simplistic solutions.
The Northern Ireland government had had a bad press for years as have had all weak and well-meaning governments in a classical revolutionary situation whether they were Stuart, Bourbon, Romanov or more modern.
The cabinet ministers, parliamentarians and civil servants in London knew it only from its press image and inability to assert itself against mounting agitation.
They were persons who had been brain-washed by years of experience of disengaging from colonies and saw Northern Ireland as another external  colony from which Great Britain was destined to disengage in order to hand it back to the natives whom they assumed were the republican Irish of the island as a whole.
When Edward Heath destroyed the government and parliament of Northern Ireland, he sent William Whitelaw to the region with such a mission.
Four months earlier, Harold Wilson, leader of the opposition Labour Party, had proposed a scheme for the unification of Ireland within fifteen years.
A little later, he met the leaders of the Provisional IRA in Dublin and assured them that he would be delighted if he could cut it down to ten or eight years.
Heath did not indicate a time scale for unification, but appears to have seen it materialising even sooner than Wilson.
The general consensus between the leaders of the Conservative and Labour parties made easy the initial reckless imposition of ‘direct rule’ from Westminster and at every subsequent stage has provided the basis for a bipartisan policy under which the party in opposition has supported the measures taken in Ulster by the one in office.
The policy has stifled realistic thinking and become a conspiracy whereby happenings such as the attempt to assassinate William Black was carried out under 2 Conservative government and the decision by the Attorney General to have no one prosecuted was taken under a Labour one.
The special conditions at Westminster are one part of the explanation of the relatively free rein given to counter-insurgency and covert activity.
The other part is to be found in Ulster.
In the land of the blind the one-eyed man is king.
The English politicians and Whitehall civil servants sent to govern Northern Ireland were quick to grasp that Provisional IRA violence had to be contained by physical force or their administration would collapse in chaos with probably some of their own number murdered in the process.
They had no short-term solution to the bomber and assassin and they knew it.
In contrast, the counter-insurgency specialists had never been better prepared with schemes and theories.
Experience based on antiterrorist operations in half-a-dozen countries from post-war Malaya to more recent Vietnam gave them confidence and authority.
The region's new political masters turned to them in a desperate hope that their expertise would make good their own helplessness.
They gave them much latitude in day-to-day operations and allowed them to mould law and order policies according to counter-insurgency  theories.
The next step was to realise and accept that the expertise and advice of the counter-insurgency specialists could be used for a more ambitious purpose than the discomfiture of terrorists — that it could be employed to destabilise the region and in the process to destroy the organisations and popular support of inconvenient, legitimate political opponents of the government.
Mao Tse Tung compared guerrillas to fish that swim in the water of a sympathetic population.
Modern counter-insurgency practice concentrates on ways by which the water can be poisoned so that the fish shrivel and die.
Terrorism is a two-edged sword.
A terrorist organisation, such as the Provisional IRA, can cause a government much inconvenience and heavy expenditure, but, if the struggle is prolonged, the violence will cause a backlash in the host population.
This was largely why the terrorist organisations of the 1960s and 1970s collapsed, including the Tupamaros in Latin America and FLQ in Quebec.
Counter-insurgency theory accepts this fact as basic and concentrates on ways to expedite the process by making terrorists appear even more violent, callous and irresponsible than they are.
In Ulster the application of the theory has been taken a stage further and much effort has been spent, in addition, on ways to discredit and alienate non-terrorist opponents of the government from their host populations.
The indictment of this book is not only that the authorities have permitted certain specific excesses of which examples are described, but that they have deliberately promoted and condoned violence, crime and racketeering in order to alienate both their terrorist and political opponents from their natural sympathisers.
It has been a clinically planned destabilising and brutalising of the population, year after year, for both military and political ends.
Edward Heath disbanded the government and parliament of Northern Ireland in March 1972 and created a new post of secretary of state for Northern Ireland.
He gave it to William Whitelaw, his  leader of the House of Commons, and despatched him to Stormont Castle to administer the region.
The local press referred to him as the Supremo.
the comparison with General Douglas MacArthur at the height of his Far Eastern career was apt.
There was a similar concentration of power in the hands of one person and a similar relaxation of constitutional restraints and accountability in the exercise of it.
The Ulster majority was humiliated and alarmed, but its immediate emotions were channelled into a two-day general strike and Peaceful protest rallies, one of which attracted 100,000 people.
Four minor English politicians were placed in control of the seven ministries of the  overthrown Northern Ireland government.
English civil servants and other English appointees were brought in to fill policy-making and sensitive positions.
Most of them were concentrated in Whitelaw's headquarters and  secretariat , the Northern Ireland office at Stormont Castle.
For a period, many of them were housed in the Culloden Hotel amid rural surroundings in Co.
Down.
Later, some fifty superior houses were purchased for them and expensively furnished.
Most were in the Cultra to Helen's Bay area of the north Co.
Down coast, a district referred to locally as Belfast's Beverley Hills.
With them came a small retinue of mainland filing clerks, bodyguards, etc. for whom well-furnished houses and flats were also purchased.
William Whitelaw was perhaps the most experienced manipulator in British politics in this century.
He had been Conservative Party whip and leader of the House of Commons.
More important, he was the man who manipulated the United Kingdom into the European Common Market against the strong inclinations of a very large section of the population.
He was the manager of the entire domestic campaign for entry.
Geoffrey Rippon, who was in charge of negotiations, reported to Whitelaw more often than to Heath, the prime minister.
The most  formidable public relations exercise of modern times was launched and Whitelaw was the controlling spider at the centre of the network.
Public relations firms were engaged across the United Kingdom.
Press and television men were invited to breakfast or lunch with Whitelaw in a steady stream.
Front organisations were used such as European Movement, United Europe Association, Campaign for Europe, Trade Union Committee for Europe, and European Educational Research Trust.
Large sums of money were diverted to them.
Academics at the universities, such as Uwe Kitzinger of Oxford, were involved.
On Whitelaw's arrival in Northern Ireland, he began a similar farflung operation to manipulate the Ulster public.
Transfers and new appointments were made from the mainland to BBC Northern Ireland so that it became almost as firmly a government instrument as, for instance, the army's information office in Lisburn.
The  correspondents and editors of Fleet Street were courted as assiduously and tactfully as earlier during EEC entry with the result that the Whitelaw regimé had almost invariably a sympathetic and cooperative press on the mainland.
He had the additional fortune that the Belfast Telegraph , the daily newspaper with the largest circulation in Ulster, was strongly pro-government and anti-Ulster majority.
It was one of the London-based Thompson chain and was the only evening newspaper.
On one occasion in early 1973, the Vanguard Unionist Movement issued an important statement.
The Times [London]gave it fourteen column inches;Guardian [London], eight inches;The Irish Times [Dublin], twenty-four inches;Sunday News [Belfast], forty-four inches; and Belfast Telegraph , nil.
The mice in the fable had the problem of how to bell the cat.
The existence of Ulster's British majority posed a similar difficulty although it was not fully recognised at Westminster until the general strike organised by the Ulster Workers' Council in May 1974.
Wilson treated the majority with caution prior to his defeat at the polls in June 1970.
Heath was apprehensive about it as he forced the Stormont government to resign and ended the parliament of Northern Ireland.
But, as the great loyalist protest rallies faded out and a section of the Official Unionist Party showed signs of succumbing to the bait of office in a new Northern Ireland Assembly, he became confident that the main danger was past and that there would be no ‘loyalist backlash’.
On a visit to Northern Ireland, he was brash enough to taunt the region that it was a burden on the Westminster exchequer and could be cut off without a penny.
However, even persons as brash as Heath had to recognise continually that the majority was uneasy and dangerous and much effort was expended in monitoring it and in camouflaging the government's Irish unification objective from the man-in-the-street who, initially, was almost incapable of believing that a British government was endeavouring to cede its own subjects to a foreign power.
The Whitelaw and subsequent ‘direct rule’ administrations depended heavily on the friendly co-operation of the British majority in Ulster.
The houses of the Whitehall civil servants were on the safe (and comfortable) north shore of Co.
Down.
Persons in close contact with them at work or at their houses were drawn from the majority population for ‘security reasons’.
One or two English senior officials engaged a housekeeper.
They were impressed by her intelligent  appreciation of political matters and took to consulting her on political problems that confronted them at work.
Months later, they were to discover that she was the aunt of an Ulster Unionist MP at Westminster.
During the UWC general strike of May 1974, a key employee in the secretary of state's personal kitchen at Stormont Castle had to be fetched to work by helicopter from her home in south-east Antrim.
On one occasion, loyalist strike pickets asked the pilot on touchdown for his UWC essential service pass.
He answered that he had not realised that, as a pilot of an aircraft, he needed one.
At that point, the passenger-to-be produced her UWC pass and, on her assurance delivered in Ulster speech that the flight was indeed an essential service, it was accepted as valid for both herself and the pilot.
English civilian and army personnel found it natural to consort with the Ulster majority when off duty.
An attempt was made to introduce a non-fraternisation policy, but with limited success.
A young, newly-arrived Guards officer asked for permission to spend his first weekend at the home of a retired service officer in Co.
Down whose son had been bestman at his wedding.
Within two weeks he was transferred to Hong Kong without an explanation.
The army was made dominant in matters of law and order.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary acted under army instructions in antiterrorist and related matters.
They also had to share ordinary police duties with Royal Military Police in order to give the latter civilian experience and to condition the public to being policed by them.
Metropolitan and other English detectives were seconded to Northern Ireland and a number of English recruits were enrolled into the RUC.
Promotions and appointments within the RUC were made on political attitudes and submissiveness to the regimé.
Resignations through frustration became commonplace.
The proportion of Roman Catholics in the most senior posts rose to 25%, but in the force as a whole the proportion dropped from 11% to 4%.
Among those who turned to other occupations were Roman Catholic career policemen whose families had been associated with the RUC and its predecessor, the RIC, for two and three generations.
Preparations were made to re-equip the force with green uniforms.
A report spread that it was the first step towards establishing a joint all-Ireland police force with the Irish Republic.
Protests came from the men and the Northern Ireland Office assured them that the change of colour was  solely because the black dye previously used was no longer manufactured.
A small batch of uniforms in the new colour was issued.
The men refused to wear them.
The attempt was abandoned and no more was heard of the alleged dye problem.
A police reserve was recruited as a partial replacement for the disbanded B Specials.
They were assigned to police stations with slight training to undertake chores for the regular police and caused an all-round dilution of competence.
Unlike the B Specials they had no officers or NCOs of their own.
Some of the Metropolitan and other English detectives on transfer from the mainland shocked the straight-laced policemen of the RUC by their slick shortcuts.
One was the planting of bullets on IRA suspects.
The latter were incensed at what they regarded as hitting below the belt and retaliated with vicious shootings at policemen regardless of whether they were the men responsible.
Such Planting activities would surprise less today.
Sir Robert Mark's campaign to root out corruption in the Metropolitan Police is well known.
Less publicised, but equally significant has been evidence of corrupt practices in police forces outside of London.
An example on English provincial home ground of the type of short-cut activity imported into Ulster was the planting of drugs by policemen in Liverpool which was exposed by Radio Merseyside in 1971 only a few months before the imposition of ‘direct rule’.
A policewoman in Liverpool stated that in certain police stations, particularly in the city centre, brutality and drug planting took place regularly.
She added, ‘After hearing the word ‘agriculture’ used on a number of occasions, I asked what it meant.
The reply was ‘planting’, but you can leave that to us.’
The RUC was excluded from policy making on security and even most administrative decisions of consequence.
Too often, it was  remembered only when some chore required to be done as on the night when William Black arrested the men on the covert operation and someone was wanted to allay with a concocted story any suspicions which might be forming in the mind of Seán McNamee.
This situation continued until a phased transfer of the administration of security from the army back to the police began in 1976.
During those years, the main influence of the police force on policy and security decisions was that, by its existence, it set bounds to what was practicable.
Covert operations, for instance, had to be concealed as far as possible from the police as well as the public.
On at least one occasion, this negative or limiting influence was decisive on a top policy matter.
The ‘Feakle’ Agreement of early 1975 between the Wilson government and the Provisional IRA promised the latter free movement for its members without arrest for previous crimes and the right to carry concealed hand-guns for selfdefence.
The chief constable of Northern Ireland seconded from the Metropolitan Police by the Westminster government prior to‘direct rule’ had returned to London and until the following year the RUC was administered by Ulstermen.
They informed the NIO that the force would not recognise any such understanding by the government with criminal terrorists and would continue to arrest and charge without exception for previous crimes and the carrying of weapons unauthorised by the police themselves.
ALIENATE THE HOST POPULATIONS
Shortly after Edward Heath became prime minister in 1970, the United Kingdom government began to build up an intelligence system in Ulster independent of the RUC.
An index was begun which today includes information on some 65% of the adult population.
After a time, the data was stored in a computer at army headquarters, Lisburn.
Army intelligence supervised most of the information gathering and army technicians handled much of the technical work.
About a year later and some six months before Heath closed down the government and parliament of Northern Ireland, army technicians began systematic telephone tapping or landline intercept as it was euphemistically termed.
Later, when the Northern Ireland Office was established, it relied heavily on it for the information on which it based security and political activities.
No one was sacrosanct.
Even as recent as 1978, senior police officials in the office of the Chief Constable suspected that their private lines were tapped.
A complete floor in a central telephone complex in Belfast was taken over by army technicians.
It was converted into a monitoring centre with numerous listening consoles and bays of multi-track tape  recorders.
Permanent taps were soldered into the telephone lines of selected individuals and organisations at intermediate distribution frames — a place where civilian technicians were unlikely to discover them.
Telephones in the republican Andersonstown district of Belfast are centred in the exchange at Balmoral.
At one time, would-be subscribers had to be refused telephones because outgoing cables were overloaded with intelligence telephone taps.
In addition to the permanent taps, the monitors have been able to tap a conversation on any telephone within a few seconds by means of the TKO device.
The latter is normally intended for an operator in a central exchange to tell a subscriber engaged in a conversation on an automatic exchange that he has an incoming trunk call.
Anne McHardy, a correspondent of The Guardian , has confirmed that the Belfast telephone of her newspaper has been tapped.
The proof came in December 1977 when an indiscreet civil servant in the Northern Ireland secretary of state's team divulged the details of private conversations that he had listened to ‘on the tapes’.
She commented, ‘His disclosure showed clearly that whoever was doing the physical tapping, the government had access to the end result.’
The intelligence men also have used infinity bugs and other devices by which telephones can be converted into microphones to relay conversation in the rooms in which they are placed.
Concealed miniature radios and microphones which use wires other than telephone have been other bugging expedients.
More recently, they have been supplemented by the galium arsenide laser instrument with opto-electrical linkage for picking up conversation at a distance from the vibrations in window panes.
It is reported to have been used for surveillance of the United Unionist Action Council strike headquarters in May 1977 together with an infinity bug in a newlyinstalled telephone in a committee room.
The opening of mail was as extensive and systematically organised as telephone tapping.
Letters addressed to the present writer have been opened from time to time from at least 1973 to the present.
For a long period, they were opened by the same intelligence case officer as opened correspondence between William Black and the European Commission of Human Rights at Strasbourg.
His distinguishing mark was an inept smear of glue left on enclosures.
When the Heath administration first began to expand its intelligence activities in Ulster, it operated a number of agents, complete with English accents, before it built up an indigenous network.
One ran a shoe shop on the Shankhill Road in Belfast where he sold cut-price footwear until the local peoPle chased him.
Another joined the Finaghy Branch of the Vanguard Unionist Movement in Belfast — an innocuous group by any standard.
He was accompanied by a woman whom he introduced as his wife.
She was elected secretary.
A member of the branch had served with army intelligence in World War II.
He became suspicious and denounced them at a branch meeting.
Within hours, they had vacated the flat which they were occupying and were not seen again.
The members of the branch were indignant that the government should have planted two spies among them.
Later, when they discovered that the couple were not married, they were more than indignant — they were scandalised.
An agent who can provide information is useful.
One that, in addition, can influence or control the target organisation, group or individual is even better.
A further refinement is for government intelligence to use agents to form a special organisation in which they occupy the controlling positions.
For example, American intelligence is believed to have been responsible for setting up Alpha 66, the most violent and unpredictable of the Cuban, anti-C astro exile organisations.
A strong belief exists in Ulster that British intelligence was responsible for the emergence of the secret Ulster Freedom Fighters in the late summer of 1973.
It is said that initially it consisted of a small number of ex-convicts brought together and controlled by British intelligence.
These, in turn recruited and controlled others who believed that they were members of a genuine loyalist secret organisation.
The truth of this belief cannot be tested at present.
However, three factors threw suspicion on the UFF.
From the beginning, it claimed credit for outrages in widely separated places in Ulster.
Secret organisations in competition with other secret organisations require time to grow and do not emerge with countrywide capabilities.
Second, its members appeared immune from detection regardless of the outrage.
Third, it gave as justification for some of its outrages that they were in retaliation for attacks on the army.
Not that such claims were  decisive.
Such attacks provoked strong local indignation and on several occasions the UVF and UDA had issued similar justifications after attacks on republicans.
British intelligence has been able to secure numerous local informers and agents through blackmail, bribery and straight payments.
Blackmail has always loomed large in intelligence work, but never more so than today.
It is the easiest way to secure and retain informers and agents and its other uses are legion.
Nowhere is it easier to blackmail than in the criminal underworld and the grey areas of conduct that surround it.
For that reason alone, the official connivance at and encouragement of conditions for mafias and racketeering has paid the Northern Ireland Office handsome dividents in both republican and loyalist districts.
A minor episode gives a glimpse of the ethics involved.
DI5 in conjunction with army intelligence and the Special Branch set up two brothels and a ‘massage parlour’ in the Malone Road and Antrim Road districts of Belfast to obtain material with which to blackmail clients into becoming informers or agents.
A London vice king was brought in to make the arrangements.
The girls were required to take the Official Secrets oath.
They were young and presentable and paid £500 per week.
Conversations with clients were tape-recorded and remote controlled 35 millimetre Olympus cameras took photographs in the bedrooms.
In August 1972, the Provisional IRA discovered what was happening and fired shots into one of the buildings.
The establishments were closed immediately and some time later the main details appeared in the Dublin press.
It was a type of operation relatively common in international intelligence work.
For instance, the CIA at one stage ran a brothel in Paris in conjunction with the French intelligence organisation, SDECE, with the purpose of obtaining blackmail material for use against eastern block diplomats and similar people.
Various bomb explosions and violent incidents, including assassinations have been attributed to British undercover.
The most widely attributed bomb explosions occurred in Dublin in the Irish Republic.
It was on 1st December 1970.
The Irish government had introduced a bill to provide stiffer penalties for terrorists.
There was doubt whether it would pass.
The debate on a second reading was in progress when news circulated along the lobbies that bombs in  central Dublin had killed two people and injured eighty-three.
A few hours later, it passed by seventy votes to twenty-three.
The dramatic effectiveness of the timing of the bombs lead to wide suspicion that they had been planted by British agents.
Almost twelve months afterwards, on 11th November 1973, the British government issued an official denial.
Some days later, Patrick Cooney, the Irish minister of Justice, in response to a Dublin newspaper report denied that the Irish Special Branch had a dossier, implicating British agents from the Special Air Service in the bombings.
The denial was less than helpful to London as it excluded only one specific army unit.
‘Dirty tricks’ gave good results when used against the IRAs.
They gave even better against the paramilitary organisations and political groupings of the majority British population which is as instinctively law-abiding as that of any other part of the United Kingdom and probably even quicker to disassociate itself from senseless or politically motivated violence.
Unchecked IRA shootings and bombings and fears that steps were afoot to transfer Northern Ireland to the Irish Republic caused the majority population to erupt into a one day strike on 7th February 1973.
In Belfast, where five civilians died from violence, there was considerable evidence of agents provocateur .
Their handiwork also appeared in other areas.
In the evening, the present writer drove to Saintfield in Co.
Down by way of Lisburn, the town with the large army base and Northern Ireland army headquarters.
At the roundabout outside the town, I saw the entrance to the M2 motorway to Belfast blocked by three overturned motor cars, including one which was burning fiercely.
The IRA did not operate in the area and I subsequently learned that the local paramilitary commanders were confident that their members were not responsible.
In the months that preceded the general election to the short-lived Northern Ireland Assembly set up by Whitelaw, a number of explosions occurred in church and other emotive buildings in quiet parts of the country with no terrorist problem.
As the police privately noted at the time, most of them showed substantial expertise and one in particular was carried out with the skill to be found only among persons such as highly trained army saboteurs.
British undercover agents are suspect in a number of assassinations.
One is the murder of Tommy Herron, the vice-chairman of the Ulster Defence Association, who was kidnapped and shot.
It is  known that the RUC has accumulated considerable evidence which would be of great interest to an impartial inquiry.
The murder, it is suspected, was intended to foment open conflict in Belfast between the Ulster Defence Association and the rival Ulster Volunteer Force as relations between them were strained at the time.
The standing of each organisation with its host population in Belfast was far from good and such an outcome would have greatly worsened it.
In practice, the sole result was an outbreak of fisticuffs between the UDA and UVF prisoners in Long Kesh prison.
One development was the Military Reconnaissance Force, or MRF.
It consisted of small units which patrolled in mufti in civilian cars.
Its purpose was fourfold.
(1) To restrain the Provisional IRA by a mobile army presence and to prevent them from completely taking over republican districts through the absence of uniformed soldiers and police.
(2) To have at least one mobile force thoroughly familiar with these districts and available for immediate reaction to terrorist moves.
(3) To collect information and to keep the districts under constant surveillance.
(4) To undertake special covert operations.
It has been suggested that the ambush on William Black at his cottage was the work of an MRF unit which had been placed under the charge of the SAS specialist from Hereford.
For a time, the Northern Ireland army press office denied that such a force existed.
Such information as is known about it transpired during court proceedings following the shooting and wounding of three taxi drivers by an MRF squad on 22nd June 1972.
The incident occurred at the Bunbeg bus terminus on the Glen Road, Andersonstown.
The three taxi men were cut down by machine-gun fire from a passing civilian car.
Shortly afterwards, the Northern Ireland army press office issued the statement:About eighteen shots have been fired in an incident in which security forces were not involved.
When a patrol of the Second Field Regiment, the Royal Artillery, arrived at the scene they found nothing.
Our men were not involved in this shooting at all .
Unknown to the army press office, the RUC had stopped the car, from which the shots had come, at a roadside vehicle search a short distance from the scene.
They found two soldiers in civilian clothes in it and a Thompson sub-machine gun.
They said that they were members of the MRF and that the Thompson had been issued to them by the RUC's own Special Branch at Castlereagh, Belfast.
The  latter denied that it had issued any such weapon and the policemen, backed by courageous superiors, charged the man who fired the shots with attempted murder and both men with illegal possession of the weapon.
The army press office reacted with the further press statement:Shortly after midday a mobile patrol wearing plain clothes and on surveillance duty was travelling eastwards on the Glen Road.
A group of men standing at a bus turn-about opened fire on the patrol and a number of bullets passed through the rear window, narrowly missing a soldier.
The patrol immediately fired back, and the men were seen to fall .
The soldiers charged by the police were Captain James A. McGregor, who was on secondment to the MRF from the Parachute Regiment, and Sergeant Clive G. Williams, who was on secondment from the Royal Military Police.
The charge for being in unlawful possession of the Thompson was the first to come to court.
It was dropped as both men were soldiers under orders and carrying the weapon as part of their duties.
This left Williams alone to face the attempted murder charge, which eventually was tried in Belfast on 27th and 28th June 1973.
Williams described the Military Reconnaissance Force at the trial.
It had a strength of forty men at the time of the shooting and carried out surveillance work in areas where uniformed trooPs could not move freely.
It was sub-divided into units of fifteen men and they worked in squads consisting of one vehicle and from two to four men.
The vehicles were civilian cars owned by the army.
Each unit had its own armoury.
He, himself, commanded a unit and its armoury included two Thompson sub-machine guns.
The most startling and controversial aspect of the shooting had been the use of a Thompson sub-machine gun.
It is an American gun and has been the main weapon of the Official IRA.
They have had a substantial number dating back to the abortive anti-British campaign of the 1950s.
The Provisional IRA have also used it on a few occasions.
The British army has never been issued with it.
The noise of a Thompson when fired is unmistakable and its large .45 calibre bullet is easy to identify after a shooting.
If agent provocateurs had been endeavouring to make trouble between Official and Provisional IRA, it would have been the ideal weapon to use.
Also, a truce between the Provisionals and British authorities was due  to begin in a few hours.
It would, again, have been the ideal weapon if the shooting had been an attempt to make trouble between hawks and doves within the Provisionals.
Williams explained in the court that the MRF had just had a new intake of NCOs.
On the morning of the shooting at Bunbeg bus terminal, he had accompanied them to a firing range at Kinnegar to familiarise them with weapons used by the terrorists.
He had taken the Thompson with him for a practical demonstration and afterwards had not had an opportunity to exchange it for the army's normal issue Sterling gun.
Williams gave the following description of the shooting.
He had two of the new NCOs with him in the car.
He made two crossings through Andersonstown to familiarise them with the work which they would have to do.
Another squad belonging to his unit was also patrolling in a car in the area.
They radioed that, at the Bunbeg bus turn-about and taxi stand on the Glen Road, they had seen a man with a revolver accompanied by two other men, one of whom was looking at the nearby mountain through binoculars.
He ordered the second squad to make another pass along the Glen Road.
They did so and radioed to confirm their original report.
He decided to see for himself; took the Thompson out of a holdall under the back seat; loaded it; and began the approach to the bus turn-about.
There he saw a dark green car near the entrance with a light blue one behind it.
The driver's door was open and kneeling behind it was the man looking through binoculars.
In front of the door was another man holding a pistol.
A third man was standing on the far side of the car.
Williams said that he glanced away and suddenly heard several single shots.
He looked around and saw that the third man was now lying over the roof of the light blue car and firing at them with what he took to be an M1 carbine.
As he seized the Thompson and dived for a rear door window, he heard shattering as a bullet came through the back window.
He saw two other bullets strike the road behind the car.
He discharged eight or ten bullets in three bursts of fire.
He saw the man with the binoculars fall back holding his chest; the man in front slump over the bonnet and the man with the rifle disappear.
His back window was starred where the bullet had entered so he knocked out part of the pane to give clear vision as he feared the car might be followed by other gunmen.
Williams was asked why he had not taken his squad back to recover the weapons.
He replied that his unit had orders never to become involved in any follow-up action, but to leave that to regular, uniformed troops.
A taxi driver, who was with his parked vehicle at the bus turnabout, told the court that he saw the three other taxi men talking together.
One was looking through binoculars at the mountain.
He heard a burst of gunfire and saw a car disappearing down the Glen Road.
He said that he saw no one at the bus turn-about with a weapon and heard no shooting other than from the passing car.
The jury withdrew for two hours and returned with a majority verdict of ‘not guilty’.
In the previous chapter it was emphasised that the authorities deliberately promoted and condoned violence, crime and racketeering in order to alienate both terrorist and legitimate political opponents of the government from their natural sympathisers.
This is more ambitious and outrageous than its use for day-to-day covert operational functions such as securing and controlling well-placed informers and agents.
The pattern was most conspicuous in the loyalist working-class urban districts from not long after the imposition of ‘direct rule’ until the second general strike of May 1977.
In them, the police were not shot at by gunmen as in the home districts of the Provisional IRA, On the contrary, they were not only welcome, but received deputations from residents from time to time imploring them ‘to take the gangsters off our backs’.
They were however, the districts where the loyalist paramilitary organisations were strong and where the more uncompromising political parties had much support.
Gangsters and racketeers gained a hold on sections of the urban paramilitary organisations quite early.
At all times, the BBC and official propaganda has been industrious at smearing them with crime and violence.
The smear campaign was also extended to political and other organisations associated with the majority cause.
When deputations, for instance.
from loyalist organisations and political groups met Whitelaw, the Northern Ireland Office would afterwards issue a press statement that such and such topics had been discussed and that he had emphasised the evils of violence and gangsterism.
The  only occasion that the present writer met him was as a member of a deputation to appeal for troop protection for Protestant homes that were being stoned and shot into by the Provisional IRA.
At the close of the interview, I said forcibly that, if a press statement were to be released, on no account must it contain the usual smear phrases.
Whitelaw turned red, said nothing, but for once they were absent.
The Ulster Defence Association, the main loyalist urban paramilitary organisation, was initially a coming-together of law-abiding vigilantes in Belfast and certain provincial towns.
In the first months of Whitelaw rule, strong-arm cliques began to assert themselves in Belfast.
A violent, ruthless man (released from Prison early) gained control of a section and placed it at loggerheads with another section.
The more moderate, responsible men and women began to leave in ones and twos and then in a landslide.
With them went most of the exservicemen who had contributed much to the discipline and paradeground smartness.
The people who were left behind were unable to prevent the drift into ‘tit for tat’ terrorist vendettas with the IRAs which in turn led to ever larger numbers of their members being imprisoned.
On the other hand, in the provincial towns outside of Belfast and in areas such as Newtownabbey the UDA has had a comparatively clear record from crime and racketeering.
In at least one such area where it did eventually intrude, the original ‘rotten apple’ is believed to have been a government agent.
The history of the rural paramilitary organisations is a contrast to that of the Belfast UDA and the other urban ones.
The Down Orange Welfare and Ulster Service Corps (both rural and small town) have not had a single member imprisoned for a terrorist offence nor has the rural section of the Orange Volunteers.
Also, it has been admitted by at least one officer in military intelligence that government undercover has had practically no success in penetrating them with agents.
Their discipline is friendly, but strict and crime and rackets are unknown in their ranks.
Their strength has been that recruits came to them already vetted and character-tested through membership of a church or Orange lodge.
It was the ordinary police who prevented a complete collapse of law and order in the loyalist urban districts of Belfast.
Despite limitations on their deployment, they kept making arrests.
But, it was the low-grade criminal, often teenagers, who were caught.
The  ‘godfathers’ and syndicates in the background remained untouched, Further, they still remained untouched even after the second Ulster general strike of May 1977 forced the NIO to crack down on gunmen, bombers and violent criminals.
An exception was the closure in loyalist and republican districts of the main illegal drinking shebeens in the summer of 1977 and there is doubt about the motive behind it.
They are important to the Provisional IRA as a source of revenue.
It was threatening to resume bombing on the mainland and it is suspected that the closures were linked with indirect negotiations to induce them to change their intention.
The absence of police from the republican districts, until a cautious and limited return in 1977, left a vacuum which was filled by the Provisional IRA.
They monopolised the more profitable rackets.
Originally, the main ones were ‘protection’ of Public houses, shops and businesses; Provisional controlled legal and illegal drinking clubs, pirate taxi fleets, hold-ups and blackmail.
The Belfast bus comPany was induced to allow the taxi fleets a monopoly of certain routes by the device of burning its buses when they appeared on them.
A London based international construction company closed down all its operations in Northern Ireland rather than pay the protection money required.
Contract bombing of buildings has been an excellent source of income for the Provisional IRA.
Some of the contracts have been straight business deals whereby the Provisionals and the property owners split the profit from the government compensation.
On other occasions, the Provisionals have been hired by property speculators who wished to buy the bombed site cheaply or to reduce the value of adjacent property preparatory to buying it cheaply.
More often, the Provisionals intimidated the owners of bombed buildings into sharing with them part of the compensation.
In 1971, the Criminal Injuries to Property Compensation Act (Northern Ireland) enabled the government to refuse to pay compensation for bomb damage if the owners had not taken satisfactory security precautions.
The Provisionals replied by appointing a ‘security officer’ to each brigade to inspect buildings to be bombed for compensation and to arrange with the owners that the security arrangements be brought up to the standards specified in the government regulations.
Some six million pounds of taxpayers' money, it is thought, was syphoned to  the Provisional IRA through compensation claims for bombed buildings prior to 1976.
In the latter year more stringent regulations reduced the flow, but has not ended it.
The business undertakings of the Provisional IRA and other racketeers require substantial book-keeping and written records.
Al Capone need not be the only gangster to be caught out on his tax returns.
Also, standards of integrity have fallen dramatically in other fields.
For instance, certain building permissions granted by the Department of Planning have been associated with inexplicable circumstances.
In one case, police admitted that they cried out for investigation, but explained that they could not undertake it as they had no men with the expertise needed.
When Roy Mason arrived in 1976 to take up his duties as secretary of state for Northern Ireland, the present writer met him as part of a deputation from my political party.
We urged on him that the RUC must be given a ‘fraud squad’ as quickly as possible.
His adviser on police matters dismissed the idea with vigour.
It was normal, he insisted, that police forces in an area of the United Kingdom such as Northern Ireland, call upon outside ‘fraud squads’ such as those of the Metropolitan Police.
It was one more indication that the government had its own vested interest in allowing Ulster to stew indefinitely in its crime and racketeer misery.
Not until recent months has a small ‘fraud squad’ of limited expertise been formed within the RUC and it has still to be asked to investigate something with potential political repercussions.
One of the government's liaisons with racketeering is partially documented.
A Provisional IRA bombing campaign was in progress on the mainland during the latter part of 1974.
Two explosions in Birmingham killed twenty-two people and injured one hundred and eighty-one.
At Westminster alarm grew that a strong backlash against IRA violence would ‘destabilise’ English politics.
Christmas brought an eleven day truce partially negotiated at Feakle.
It was extended, but the Provisionals continued to make noises about renewing the violence.
One of their demands was for a phased release of internees.
The government agreed a it, but the Provisionals were not satisfied.
In desperation, it searched around for additional incentives.
On 13th January 1975, Stan Orme, MP, deputy to the Northern Ireland secretary of state, met representatives of the  internees and undertook ‘to make work available’ for released ones in the Andersonstown district.
It took the form of contracts for three firms to renovate residences belonging to the Northern Ireland Housing Executive, the state corporation responsible for public-owned housing.
Officials within the Housing Executive protested, but to no avail.
One of its senior men recorded in a memo that an official of the Northern Ireland office emphasised to him that the Housing Executive had to do everything possible to prevent unemployment because of the political situation.
He had protested that it did not have the money and had been told that ‘the Minister would not wear a statement that funds were exhausted’.
The Housing Executive stood its ground and refused to transfer money earmarked for other projects.
Officials within the Northern Ireland Office then arranged for money to be secured for the scheme from the Department of Environment.
The Northern Ireland Housing Executive's standing orders that contracts must be advertised and be subject to tender were ignored.
The Provisional IRA named the Andersonstown Co-Operative and two private building construction firms and it was agreed that the work would be in the Provisional-controlled Maynard Estate.
The police had been long withdrawn from the district and army patrols ventured into it only occasionally.
Employees of the private firms selected would be helpless to resist Provisional dictates.
The contracts were open-ended.
Payment was either on time plus 112½% and materials plus 25% or on day work plus 35%.
Workers on the sites prolonged their tasks indefinitely; building materials vanished; workmen claimed for overtime which had neither been worked nor authorised; and non-existent workers were kept on the payroll by the workers.
Costs rose quickly until renovations were averaging £15,996 per flat.
The ceasefire ended on 25th August.
The firms engaged in the renovation scheme were called to a meeting with officials at Stormont and their contracts terminated on 11th and 12th September as part of  retaliatory moves against the Provisionals.
In September 1975, Mrs. Jill Knight, MP for Edgbaston, Birmingham, learned about the Maynard contracts and raised the matter with the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, setting out the main facts.
She urged an inquiry, but as she explained some months later, ‘This was brusquely and rudely refused by Mr. Merlyn Rees, the then Secretary of State, on the grounds that my allegations were untrue.’
In November 1975, Dr. Ian Paisley, MP, published classified figures from within the Northern Ireland Housing Executive for part of the work at Maynard.
27TH MAY 1972.
LOYALIST URBAN VIGILANTEES BEGIN TO FORM THEMSELVES INTO THE ULSTER DEFENCE ASSOCIATION.
NOTE THE MIX OF MUFTI AND MILITARY GARB.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
28TH JUNE 1972.
THE UDA IS FOUR WEEKS OLDER.
NOTE THE STANDARDISATION IN UNIFORM AND PARADE-GROUND EFFICIENCY.
A SHORT TIME LATER, GOVERNMENT AGENTS, VIOLENCE AND RACKETEERS HAD CAUSED AN EXODUS OF THE MORE RESPONSIBLE MEN AND WOMEN, INCLUDING MOST OF THE MIDDLE-CLASS AND EX-SERVICEMEN.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
FIFESHIRE CONSTABULARY HEADQUARTERS, DYSART.
IT WAS USED AS A BASE BY THE UNDERCOVER AGENT, ALEXANDER ATKINS.
D. IRELAND, KIRKCALDY.
THE PEOPLE OF BELFAST IN A SPONTANEOUS VICTORY CELEBRATION AT THE END OF THE GENERAL STRIKE ORGANISED BY THE ULSTER WORKERS' COUNCIL.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
THE VIOLENCE, CRIME AND RACKETEERING ARE ALLOWED TO CONTINUE.
FIREMEN SEARCH THE RUBBLE GOLDEN PHEASANT FOR THE BODIES OF TWO BROTHERS.
MANY ULSTER PUBS, INNS AND CLUBS HAVE BEEN DESTROYED IN ORDER TO DIVERT THEIR BUSINESS TO ILLEGAL DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS.
Century Newspapers Ltd.
BURNED OUT VEHICLES DUMPED ON WASTE GROUND AT YORK STREET, BELFAST IN EARLY 1976.
EACH HAD BEEN IN A BOMBING, ROBBERY OR OTHER CRIMINAL ACTIVITY AND SET ON FIRE TO REMOVE FINGERPRINTS.
Century Newspapers Ltd.
BETTY WILLIAMS AND MAIREAD CORRIGAN OF THE PEACE PEOPLE READ THE MOVEMENT'S PLEDGE TO A 30,000 STRONG RALLY IN THE LOYALIST SHANKILL AREA OF BELFAST ON 30TH AUGUST 1976.
Century Newspapers Ltd.
A PEACE PEOPLE MARCH IN THE IRISH REPUBLICAN FALLS ROAD AREA OF BELFAST ON 25TH OCTOBER 1976.
Century Newspapers Ltd.
FARMERS BLOCK THE NEWTOWNARDS ROAD ROUTE INTO BELFAST DURING THE UUAC GENERAL STRIKE OF MAY 1977.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
HERCULES TRANSPORT AIRCRAFT OF THE ROYAL AIR FORCE.
DURING THE UUAC GENERAL STRIKE THESE AIRCRAFT WERE TOUCHING DOWN EVERY FEW MINUTES AT ALDERGROVE AIRPORT IN THE LARGEST AIR AND SEA MOVEMENT OF TROOPS UNDERTAKEN BY THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT SINCE THE SUEZ OPERATION TWENTY-ONE YEARS EARLIER.
AIR PORTRAITS.
AN INTERROGATION ROOM AT CASTLEREAGH POLICE HOLDING CENTRE.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
A CORRIDOR AND CELLS IN CASTLEREAGH POLICE HOLDING CENTRE.
Pacemaker Press Ltd.
The Northern Ireland Office would normally have ignored the moves by Jill Knight and Ian Paisely knowing that matters affecting a public corporation, such as the Housing Executive, could not be raised in Parliament and that, in lethargic Ulster, the matter would soon be forgotten.
The fly in the ointment was that money had been switched from the Department of the Environment which is accountable to Parliament.
Arrangements were made for explanations of the transfer to be demanded by the influential Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons.
Chief Inspector West and District Detective Sergeant Treadcole of the ‘fraud squad’ of the West Midland Police were seconded to the RUC to make a report on the Maynard scheme.
The explanation given for the importation of two comparatively low-rank police officers was that the RUC lacked the expertise in accountancy needed for an investigation of that kind.
The report of the West Midland led team ran to ninety-eight pages.
It confirmed that £2.9 million had been spent in the Maynard renovations and that one million of the sum had gone astray.
It was assumed that most of it went to the Provisionals and a smaller amount to the Official IRA.
On 12th June 1977, twenty-one months after the Maynard contracts were terminated, Ian Paisley announced publicly that he had information about additional irregularities in Northern Ireland Housing Executive contracts which he would reveal in due course.
About midnight four days later, the  headquarters building of the Housing Executive burst into flames and was badly damaged.
The police reported that a number of fires — believed to be malicious had ignited simultaneously on the fourth floor.
The office housing the records relating to contracts was on the fourth floor and  was totally destroyed.
The building was one of the most closely protected in Ulster and the staff employed in it had been doubly vetted for security.
Racketeering and syndicate crime have been invaluable to the government in that the persons and organisations involved develop the characteristics of legitimate business men.
They have employees, profits, overheads and customers to be supplied on a regular basis.
Their political interests, if any, evaporate and, like business men elsewhere, they are concerned most of all to have the status quo maintained and to grant, where useful, co-operation to the authorities.
For instance, during the hurried preparations for the second Ulster general strike of May 1977, the loudest protests within the Belfast urban paramilitary organisations came from such persons.
The government has another not dissimilar pressure point in the fact that the IRAs and the loyalist urban paramilitary organisations with members in detention or prison contribute to the upkeep of their families.
The financial burden has been heavy and much energy and organisation has had to be diverted from politically motivated activities to illegal or legal fund raising.
BACKLASH
A government which condones and orchestrates crime, racketeering and violence as a means of alienating and isolating terrorist or political opponents from their host populations will, in the long run, pay the price of alienating itself from the general public.
The latter may not realise in a coherent way what is afoot, but it knows that the duty of a government is to provide law and order and senses that it is not deploying its resources to do so.
The first grassroot backlash in the Ulster public came within the Irish republican districts.
Mrs. Anne Maguire was walking in Andersonstown, Belfast, with her four children, including a baby of four months, in August 1976.
A Provisional IRA ‘get-away’ car was fired on by a soldier and the driver injured.
It swerved off the road; killed three of the children; and badly injured Anne Maguire.
She had a sister, Miss Mairead Corrigan, who, overwhelmed by the tragedy, began to knock on doors in Andersonstown, asking people to join with her in making a stand against the violence and destruction of life and human values.
Thus began the Peace Movement which continued through the remainder of the year with marches and hymnsinging rallies and which led to the award in 1977 of the Nobel Peace Prize to Mairead Corrigan and her co-founder, Mrs. Betty Williams.
It was basically a Roman Catholic movement with substantial Protestant support and sympathy.
The backlash within the majority population took a different path.
In early summer, three unionist parties and several other organisations, including one or two paramilitary, came together in the United Unionist Action Council.
Some or the political personalities saw it as a new political pressure point on the Westminster government.
All recognised, however, that it would be the groundswell against terrorism and crime which would give the new body its momentum.
No less significant, a new, highly disciplined vigilante  organisation, the Ulster Service Corps, sprang up in rural areas where Provisional IRA units were active.
The killings, maimings, destruction of property, crime and racketeering continued through the autumn and winter.
Often the activists were fifteen and sixteen years old and parents lived with the fear that their own children could become involved.
Some of the atrocities were unbelievably revolting.
A Provisional IRA gang, for instance, laid an ambush for a part-time member of the Ulster Defence Regiment on a country road in County Antrim.
He was driving a lorry and accelerated away, escaping with minor injuries.
The gang then went to his home and shot his aged mother.
Farmers in Provisional IRA harassed districts were selling their land and transferring to Scotland so frequently that Scottish estate agents began to advertise farms in the Ulster press.
A large proportion of Ulster people are of Scottish descent and, as in Scotland, Presbyterianism is the main Protestant faith.
The ministers and other officials of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, in common with those of its sister churches, the Church of Scotland and the Free Churches in England and Wales, are ultra-cautious in making political pronouncements.
At their elbows stand the ghosts of the fallen in the first world war, reminding them of that earlier occasion when so many ministers preached uncritical political guidance from their pulpits.
Interventions by them during the Ulster crisis had been limited, in the main, to generalities about building bridges across Christian divisions and holding out hands of friendship.
It was thus a new phenomenon when, during the winter and early spring of 1976, outspoken resolutions on law and order began to arrive at the Presbyterian central office in Belfast from congregations and presbyteries across the country.
Dr. Jack Weir, moderator of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, met Roy Mason, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, on 31st March and presented him with a memorandum drafted in judicious, forceful terms.
It explained that the basic complaint expressed in the formal church resolutions was that ‘the government was failing in its fundamental duty of providing security of life and property to those going about their lawful business.’
And again, ‘people are more conscious of the widening circle of violence, involving more and more the decent, public-spirited people of the  province and not just riotous bullies who may be creating the violence themselves.’
The army had been partly withdrawn following the agreement and truce made between the Wilson government and the Provisional IRA in negotiations associated with Feakle in the Irish Republic in the winter of 1974–75.
Further withdrawals took place after Callaghan succeeded Wilson as prime minister.
Prior to Feakle, army battalions were able to spend only five months outside Northern Ireland between tours of duty.
By the time Callaghan took over, the average interval had been increased to a little over two years.
On 17th December 1976, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland told the House of Commons that there were 14,500 troops in Ulster.
He was not believed.
As pointed out in an earlier chapter, security was placed in the hands of the army as part of the innovations of the Whitelaw administration.
A phased return of responsibility from the army to the civilian police was begun in 1976 and had been completed for most of the region by early 1977.
RUC officers decided when troops were to be called in and how they were to be used.
Only in the more militant republican districts did the army continue to be the overlord force in law and order matters.
The new arrangement enabled the police to gain an excellent idea of the total troop strength.
They placed it at 7,000 in early 1977 and were far from happy at the knowledge.
They saw themselves, untrained in guerrilla warfare and with inadequate equipment, being pitted against the armour-piercing bullets and landmines of the Provisional IRA while the remaining troops stayed in the background, protected, it was assumed, by a secret understanding between the NIO and the Provisionals.
In March, Alan Wright, chairman of the Northern Ireland Police Federation, protested in a public speech, ‘The government says there are 14,500 troops here, but I do not believe it.’
He added, ‘You can drive the length and breadth of the province without seeing a single soldier.
In some police divisions I know there are no soldiers.’
A further official assurance was given on the total number of troops, but the public preferred to believe its own eyes.
There was also another factor making for scepticism.
Statements by officials, including some made by ministers in Parliament, have been used too often to mislead in connection with Ulster affairs.
Not that Ulster has been alone in being so treated.
The same device has been used in  various areas of government activity where the British public is ignorant or indifferent.
The Rhodesian sanctions-breaking saga is not as unique as many suppose.
The United Unionist Action Council, which had been set up in the early summer of 1976, had a slow and troubled start.
The Official Unionist Party withdrew in order to have inter-party talks with the Irish republican Social Democratic and Labour Party — talks to which the other loyalist parties objected strenuously.
The Ulster Workers' Council remained outside the UUAC, but like an honest sheepdog endeavoured to herd parties and organisations into it.
It made clear that, once a unified, credible coming-together had been achieved, it, too, would join.
Early 1978 brought a change in momentum and purpose.
A public  consensus began to form, especially in rural areas, that something had to be done to force the Westminster government to act against the killing and crime.
The UUAC was looked to as the natural vehicle for action.
As it responded to the grassroot demand, its political objectives were largely forgotten.
The Ulster Workers' Council joined as did the remaining paramilitary organisations.
The excePtions were the UVF, Red Hand Commando and UFF (if such a paramilitary organisation exists).
Each of these had been proscribed in law.
The UUAC decided that its only effective recourse was a general strike.
It was by now April and intense discussion went into selecting a date.
It was agreed that the choice was between May-June or the autumn.
The political parties were unhappy about May as the local council elections were due on 18th May.
Certain branches of the Ulster Workers' Council wished for more time to prepare their particular factory or section of industry.
One argument overrode all others  in the end.
The country demanded that the killing be stopped at once.
It would not understand delay until the autumn.
The strike was called for 2nd May.
The strike began well.
The petrol tanker road crews responded to a man and the dockers in Belfast and Larne equally well.
Many of the smaller shops, factories and workshops closed at once.
Queues began to form outside the strike headquarters for travel passes.
The Callaghan government replied with the largest airlift and sea movement of troops since the Suez operation twenty-one years earlier.
Giant Hercules transport aircraft were touching down at Aldergrove Airport every few minutes.
Some of the vehicles accompanying the troops were direct from the factory with wood and fibreglass sections still unpainted.
The world press thronged into Belfast.
It was exactly the over-reaction for which the strike organisers had hoped.
The electrical power workers, however, did not respond in the forthright way they had done in the general strike of May 1974.
The largest generating station was at Ballylumford near Larne, County Antrim.
A second station at Coolkeeragh, County Londonderry, had to be discounted as the work force had altered from 60% loyalist to 60% Irish republican since the 1974 general strike.
The two remaining stations were small and in Belfast.
They undertook to close down immediately Ballylumford took action.
Ballylumford had had a long, bitter industrial dispute a few months earlier and the scars were raw and unhealed.
During it, the workers had seen the managers run the station without their help and knew that they could again run it.
No less important, the choice of 2nd May had left no time to consult them beforehand and they resented what appeared to be an arbitrary order.
If the electric power could be cut, industry everywhere would be brought to a standstill.
A complication was that it had to be reduced in a complicated, controlled manner or the electricity grid throughout Ulster would be burned out and would require a long time to replace after the strike would be over.
No less important, once the electric power could be turned down, the State became responsible for supporting all workers and their dependents for the duration of the strike.
Under the United Kingdom national insurance scheme strikers are disqualified for unemployment payments, but workers sent home because there is no electricity receive them.
Also, employers who close their premises because there is no electricity cannot be accused of a lockout and are no longer responsible for wages.
The Ballylumford workers eventually invited Jim Smyth of the Ulster Workers' Council, Dr. Ian Paisley of the Democratic Unionist Party and Ernest Baird of the United Ulster Unionist Party to meet them.
Their spokesman said that the men were prepared to close down the generating plant immediately, but it would mean that the grid would go and that factories and hospitals would be without power for an indefinite time.
They emphasised that they were unable to operate a reduced load such as the UUAC urged.
Could they please have instructions?
The strike was in its second week.
It had almost certainly achieved its objective of jolting the Westminster government into strong action against the Provisional IRA.
The spokesmen were asked to thank the men, but to tell them that a shutdown which destroyed the grid would be too disastrous for the country.
The Northern Ireland BBC fought back with a ferocity that was frightening to anyone with theories about impartiality by state-owned broadcasting bodies.
It concentrated on talking the public back to work by exaggerated claims of the numbers of people at work.
On one occasion, it asserted that 50% of the 8,000 workforce of the Harland and Wolff shipyard had clocked in when there were only twenty-five motor cars in the workers' car park.
The press had been hostile at the beginning of the 1974 general strike, but swung over to a more balanced view once the electric power went off and the country came to a halt.
It was equally hostile at the beginning of the 1977 one, but when no dramatic evidence of success materialised, such as the lights going out across Belfast, it continued hostile.
The most frustrating aspect of the press reporting was the almost universal failure to accept that the objective was to force the government to act against the terrorists and criminals.
The strike was launched with a press conference.
At it each speaker emphasised this fundamental point.
Jim Smyth of the Ulster Workers' Council emphasised and re-emphasised it with particular skill and persistence.
The Northern Ireland Office pushed the line that the strike was an attempted coup by Paisley and most of the media accepted it uncritically despite the fact that the Democratic Unionist Party, of which he was leader, was only one of three political parties  in the UUAC and that the Ulster Workers' Council, which carried most of the industrial muscle, was beholden to no political party or personality.
Three exceptions to the stereotyped reporting were Anne McHardy and Derek Brown of The Guardian and Mary Holland of the Observer .
The latter exposed the BBC's numbers fraud.
After a few days, the strike began to slip in Belfast and to gain momentum in rural areas where farmers (including a small number of Roman Catholic farmers) laid on huge tractor cavalcades.
The Statistics Branch of the Northern Ireland Department of Commerce has since confirmed that the slump in industrial production was similar to that of the earlier strike in 1974.
By the beginning of the second week, the organisers knew that the strike had achieved a substantial measure of success, but were much concerned that the media reports suggested the contrary.
The intention had been a fairly short, impressive strike which ended on a note of strength and with the obvious ability to resume at a later date should the government drag its feet on terrorism and law and order.
No one had reckoned on a strike which was not a clear success or a clear failure.
One or other would have been easy to end.
As it was, the temptation was to continue in order to demonstrate success through staying power.
On Tuesday, 10th May, came disaster beyond remedying.
A parttime member of the UDR who was the son of a representative on the UUAC was killed when a bomb exploded at a petrol filling station where he and his wife were making a purchase and, in a further incident, a bus driver was shot dead at the wheel of his vehicle.
The firm and repeated instruction of the strike organisers was that passive resistance alone was to be used.
In one instance after some teenagers had burned a milk float, it was spelled out with the additional phrase ‘the same as was used by Mahatma Gandhi in India’.
Government agents were suspected, but it was also realised that a freelance group could have been responsible for the killings.
Most of the men and women who formed the UUAC had strong religious and ethical convictions.
Each morning the strike council opened business by someone offering a prayer.
Usually it was a member of a political  party; occasionally of a paramilitary organisation.
On a few occasions, there was also a short reading of scripture.
Such persons were shattered by the killings.
The blackleg buses disappeared off the streets and other vehicles which had been beginning to return to the roads.
But, in the UUAC there was unanimity that it did not wish to preside over that kind of success.
The strike was continued for another four days, partly to show that it had not been panicked by the killings into throwing up its responsibilities and partly to ensure that persons on unemployment insurance and social benefits received payment for a full week.
CRUSHING THE PROVISIONAL IRA ON THE CHEAP
The general strike of May 1977 had lasted practically a fortnight.
The British government had been forced to undertake a massive air and sea movement of troops.
The Northern Ireland Office was shaken to its foundations and accepted that it had to curtail drastically the activities of the Provisional IRA and be seen to move against the more violent gangsters in loyalist urban districts.
On 9th June, Roy Mason, secretary of state for Northern Ireland, announced increased penalties for terrorists.
‘I must frankly admit the fact,’ he remarked, ‘that to the people of Northern Ireland it does not seem that the battle against terrorism is being won fast enough.’
The maximum penalty for conspiracy to murder was increased from ten years to life; for causing explosions from twenty years to life; and membership of proscribed organisations from five years to ten.
Only a week after the strike, a clean-up of the more open violence had begun in the worst harassed loyalist districts.
Over a number of days, eleven men belonging to a gang were arrested who subsequently were convicted of nineteen horrific murders.
Provisional terrorism was a more formidable problem.
The stiffer penalties announced by Mason were of limited value by themselves.
The large troop reinforcements brought in during the strike were withdrawn.
Russia and Cuba were expanding their activities in Africa at the time and the generals were demanding every man as a counterweight in Europe against the Warsaw Pact armies.
It is understood, too, that the Provisional IRA had warned that it would resume  bombing in England if the army were not reduced to its pre-strike strength in Ulster.
The Northern Ireland Office resolved the dilemma by a decision to crush the Provisionals on the cheap by re-introducing the interrogation ‘in depth’ techniques (the hooding and noise were excluded) used on IRA suspects in 1971 and subsequently condemned by both the European Commission and Court of Human Rights.
The fact that the United Kingdom had given assurances at home and at Strasbourg never again to use them appears to have caused no qualms.
It was accepted that Amnesty International would investigate and draw up an adverse report.
It is a private body with no power other than to embarrass.
The British press, it could be hoped, would play down its finding in a ‘responsible’ way as it has done with those of the European Commission of Human Rights in 19761 and the European Court of Human Rights in 1977.
Some of the new cases, no doubt, would be taken to Strasbourg, but, as with the earlier ones, the United  Kingdom could delay proceedings for at least six years by which time the Ulster crisis might be half-remembered history.
The condemned techniques had already been used in experimental interrogations in the month or two prior to the UUAC general strike and had demonstrated how effective they were in inducing confessions.
A special team of over forty plain-clothes, interrogation detectives was formed.
Most were assigned to Castlereagh Police Holding Centre in Belfast (38 cells and 21 interrogation rooms) and the remainder to Gough Police Holding Centre in Armagh (24 cells and 9 interview rooms).
It was the first time that anything of that kind had happened in the long history of the RUC and its predecessor, the RIC.
The arrest and interrogation of the IRA suspects in 1971 had been a military operation with only one or two RUC men of low rank involved in a supporting role and under army direction.
The ‘in depth’ interrogation techniques began to produce rapid results.
The special ‘emergency’ legislation allowed the police to detain a person for interrogation for three days or, on an order from  the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, for seven days.
Three days were usually enough to secure a signed confession.
Some confessed to crimes going back three or four years.
It is morally certain that a number of persons signed confessions to crimes of which they were innocent.
94% of all persons charged with offences in the anti-terrorist, nonjury courts in Belfast during the remainder of the year were convicted.
This compares with 70% for persons charged with normal crimes in the United Kingdom as a whole.
80% of the convictions were made on signed confessions either with no corroborative evidence or with almost none.
People who glibly hold that the United Kingdom judiciary is a guardian of the rights of the citizen should ponder over these figures.
J.
A. G. Griffith, Professor of Public Law, University of London, may have been near the mark when he wrote, ‘In both capitalist and communist societies, the judiciary has naturally served the prevailing political and economic forces.
Politically, judges are parasitic.’
Soon two-thirds of the activists of the Provisional IRA in Ulster were reported to be in prison either awaiting trial or convicted.
Only its senior, policy-making members (i.e. thirteen members of the Executive, seven of the Army Council and certain others) appeared to be immune from arrest.
One of the more charitable of various explanations which circulated was that the officials of the Northern Ireland Office preferred not to arrest those particular persons lest new men with more original and enterprising minds should take their places.
A team from Amnesty International visited Ulster at the end of November 1977 to investigate the Castlereagh activities.
It was unable to interview persons in prison awaiting trial or convicted.
Nevertheless, its report, published in June 1978, confirmed that there was serious maltreatment and that it was by persons other than the uniformed members of the RUC.
It demanded a public and impartial inquiry.
The government refused to concede one and counterattacked with assertions that the Police Complaints Board and civil  courts are open to anyone with a genuine experience of improper treatment.
Ignored was the consideration that interrogators of prisoners do not come forward as witnesses against themselves before police boards or civil courts.
The Northern Ireland Office knew that a point had been reached where the overwhelming majority of the Population, including Roman Catholics in the districts which the Provisional IRA claimed to protect, was so hostile to it that few cared as to what methods were used to wipe it out.
An indication of the changed mood was a acceptance of the SAS as a valuable weapon against the Provisionals.
As noted in an earlier chapter, the Irish republican population had been hyper-sensitive about that body of men with its ruthless reputation.
Mason in his previous post as minister of Defence, had given assurances that no SAS were in Ulster.
In contrast, when he was forced to admit, in early June 1977, that the trooPs concentrated in response to the UUAC general strike were to be withdrawn as soon as possible, he endeavoured to reassure the public with the remark, ‘More is being done in the field of SAS-type activities than is realised and this will now be intensified.’
The Amnesty International report embarrassed the government more on the mainland and abroad than in Ulster and could not be completely ignored.
A three man committee of inquiry was set up, consisting of a judge, a former chief constable and a medical specialist.
All three were English and the judge, Harry Bennett, gave his name to the committee as he was chairman.
It was instructed to recommend improvements in procedures used by the police when holding suspects in custody in Northern Ireland.
It was forbidden to interfere in individual cases which were ‘to continue to be addressed to the Chief Constable and the Police Complaints Board’.
No power was given to conduct investigations on its own and it had to advertise in the local press for information to be brought to it.
With limitations so precisely and clearly defined, the exercise Promised to be innocuous.
It did not work out that way.
The committee gave a guarantee of strict confidence to certain RUC officers of substantial rank and they in return gave forceful accounts of the interrogation usages and the helplessness of the regular police to intervene.
Police surgeons, too, gave valuable evidence.
It was not accidental that the report of the committee later included the remark, ‘It is difficult to  see what private or public purpose is served by the exaction of untrue confessions, and it is a danger to be constantly guarded against.’
The internal police evidence and surgeons' confirmations enabled the committee to draw up a report more positive than anyone had originally anticipated.
It stated that ‘medical evidence revealed cases in which injuries, whatever the precise cause, were not self-inflicted and were sustained in police custody’.
It acknowledged the difficulties of the police in a terrorist campaign: complimented the RUC on its restraint and professional integrity and pointed out that the number of detectives who had resorted to physical violence appeared to be small in relation to the total force.
On 11th March 1979, Dr. Robert Irwin, a police surgeon, stated in an Independent Television programme shown throughout the United Kingdom that he had examined some one hundred and fifty persons who had received physical injuries during interrogation, including bruises, damaged joints and several ruptured ear drums.
There was widespread disquiet in the media and elsewhere.
Civilian and police press officers attached to RUC Headquarters, Belfast retailed various smear stories against Irwin, including a claim that he was bitter and vindictive against the police because they had failed to arrest a soldier who, it was alleged, three years earlier had raped his wife.
Gerry Fitt of the SDLP and Dr. Ian Paisley of the DUP supported Irwin in the House of Commons and the controversy over Castlereagh interrogation methods appeared set to escalate into an embarrassing crisis for the Westminster government.
The outcome, instead, was an illustration of how a report of a committee of inquiry can be used to disarm and neutralise public and parliamentary agitation, regardless of the nature of its findings.
The publication date of the Bennett Report was brought forward.
As is normal in such documents, the wording was restrained and tactful  and the authorities were able to quote from it selectively in the knowledge that few would ever read it.
In the Commons, on a Friday when only a handful of MPs are ever present, the secretary of state for Northern Ireland spoke deferentially about it and on behalf of Jim Callaghan's Labour government singled out two of its recommendations which, he promised, would be implemented as soon as possible.
These were that interrogation rooms in police holding centres should be monitored by silent, closed-circuit television and that a prisoner should be given the right to be visited by a solicitor every forty-eight hours until either released or charged.
Nothing had been done when, six weeks later, a general election placed in office a Conservative government with Margaret Thatcher as prime minister.
Eventually, in July 1979, a new secretary of state for Northern Ireland pronounced on the Bennett Report on behalf of her government.
The proposal for monitoring by silent, closed-circuit television cameras, he said, would be implemented as recommended, but the one to allow a prisoner the right to consult a solicitor every forty-eight hours would be curtailed to the extent that ‘where it is thought necessary’ a senior police officer would be present.
The concessions impressed the public, but were worthless without a new policy decision at the same political level as the original one to re-introduce interrogation-in-depth techniques.
Screams from a nearby interrogation block have been heard loud and clear at the desk of the duty sergeant at Castlereagh without causing anyone to intervene to stop the maltreatment.
If screams do not cause a single person to react, what hope is there that a small, silent television screen in a bank of twenty-one such screens will be more effective?
The right to be visited by a solicitor after each forty-eight hours is also less satisfactory than might seem even if there were no question of the probable presence of a policeman.
Most confessions at the police holding centres have been signed during the first two days of custody.
In addition, there is no protection against the old device of refusing admission to a solicitor (or doctor) and asserting afterwards that the prisoner did not ask for him or even that he had refused to see him.