

THE GREAT BATTLE
THE DIVINE DRAMA LOST
‘Christianity is a fighting religion’, claimed C. S. Lewis (1942: 39).
Did Lewis mean us to take this literally, or is it an example of an author's dramatic licence?
At one level this statement is clearly metaphorical and rhetorical.
Britain was at war with Germany, and Lewis's famous religious broadcasts were replete with images of sabotage, secret wirelesses and enemy-occupied territory.
But at a deeper level Lewis wanted to make it plain that talking in this way was not mere metaphor.
That is to say that although he was clearly not endorsing a militaristic brand of Rambo-style Christianity — say, fighting modern crusades against Muslims, or shooting atheists — he was insisting that to be a Christian meant to be a person engaged in the Great Battle.
This battle, which is still raging, is no less than the fight between good and evil: the war between God and the Devil.
Today in the 1980s many Christians don't like this fighting talk.
Sometimes their reservations are due to sensitive reasons concerning the proper use of language.
More often, however, they are a consequence of the trend in much modern Christianity to deny the reality of spiritual warfare.
To be specific about it, many of the Christian circles that I enter from time to time do not believe in the Devil.
Even in those denominations which claim a Christian orthodoxy, I have often found that the Devil is a formal proposition only.
Rather like the concept of Holy Trinity, the Devil hangs around as part of the religious baggage that belongs to tradition or ‘our church doctrine’ but seems to have no life or substance.
But if the Devil has no reality or active role in the divine drama of salvation then the vision of the Great Battle is lost.
Now, of course, it may well be that such a vision exists in your  church, and that to insist on the importance of spiritual warfare, some of you might say, is only to preach to the converted.
But I believe it to be true that in many corners of Christendom spiritual warfare is no longer a central concern.
Furthermore it is not only ‘liberal’ or modernist churches where this is true.
The reasons for this are complex, and are partly related to modern scholarship and partly connected to an over-rationalistic view of redemption in both Catholic and Protestant denominations (both of which I will elucidate towards the end of this chapter).
Despite the complexities behind the loss of the vision of the church at war, the net result has been simple: either the Devil has ceased to exist, or he plays no essential role in the history of salvation.
This being so, I would like us to examine some of the implications of a Christianity without the Evil One as opponent.
Not only does the Devil's absence from the picture alter how we see the purpose and destiny of the church, it fundamentally changes how we understand God's redemption through Jesus Christ.
The New Testament ought to be understood not as a resource for abstract theological thinking, but as a divine drama: the story of the Great Battle.
Furthermore, the early church (and in particular during the great patristic era of the first five centuries AD), despite its many internal disagreements on matters of doctrine, saw redemption in thoroughly dramatic terms.
But if — for whatever reason — you take the Devil out of the redemption story, the divine drama is lost.
ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE DEVIL AND ‘DEVILS’
Some people say that they believe in the Devil but not in demons.
I once taught a student who claimed to believe in Satan but thought that demons were used by the biblical writers as a means of explaining the sources of diseases and mental illnesses that were not understood in modern medical terms.
Certainly it is true that we cannot expect that writers in Palestine thousands of years ago would have talked about sicknesses in the jargon of medical aetiology.
Neither do I  think it altogether heretical to wonder whether some diseases attributed to evil spirits may not have been forms of mental illness.
I am thinking in particular of the spirit that came upon Saul and drove him mad (1 Sam 16:14–23).
The German theologian Rudolf Bultmann (1884–1976) believed that we need to demythologise the New Testament because demonism was part of the cultural world-view of first-century Palestine that we must reject in order to discover authentic faith (Bultmann 1953:5).
I know also that many modern scholars believe demons are part of a primitive Weltanschauung (world-view) that smacks of pagan animism where gods and spirits dwelt in rocks, streams, and trees.
There are two points here.
Firstly, it is not the case that the evil spirits of the New Testament are remotely similar to animist spirits.
The story which most reminds me of animism (if anything does) is that of the angel who stirred up the pool of Bethesda (John 5:1–15).
Secondly, and crucially, it is not sophisticated exegesis that leads scholars to disbelieve in devils.
It is because evil spirits do not fit — have no logical place or space — into the modern scientific world-view.
This view affects more than just clever scholars; I believe that for the same reason many Christians who hold to some belief in the Devil do not believe in evil spirits either.
(A favourite way of disposing of demons is the same trick as is used to deal with miracles: assign them to the New Testament era, where they can do no harm or cause any embarrassment.)
It is possible to do away with demons and still cling to a belief in the Devil, but once the Devil is denied then ipso facto so are the demon hordes.
Once belief in Satan is overthrown then the church has to see its role not in conquering the ‘Devil and all his works’ but in overcoming ignorance, disease, superstition and injustice.
The ‘good fight’ is then no longer the Great Battle but the fight for human rights, human equalities and human justice.
When we squeeze the Devil out through the front door, we unwittingly let in all sorts of secular ideologies that masquerade as Christian ones (which is just another way of saying that he comes in again through the back door).
Fighting for justice should indeed be part of the Great Battle — God forbid that our fight has no social and  political cutting edge — but it must never become a secular substitute for it.
A few years back I was invited by the Church of England to be an ecumenical guest at a consultation, held at Ely, on the charismatic renewal movement.
Just before this a number of leading members of that church had written to The Times declaring their disbelief in the Devil.
At the consultation a leading psychiatrist, who was from the Society of Friends, insisted that the Devil had no objective reality but was a projection of our fears and insecurities.
The Devil was an invention, he claimed, that prevented us from taking responsibility for our own destiny.
(Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) said similar things about God the Father!)
I met a number of people at the consultation who concurred with that view.
Now I believe it is the case that some Christians do project their own failings on to the Devil.
But these people's delusions do not convince me that Satan is a fiction, and psychological arguments against him by psychiatrists have no philosophical bite that carries conviction.
Modern psychology has been too taken with human drives and the abolition of guilt to take seriously enough the problem of evil in the world.
DUALISM
The main philosophical argument I come across that has a bearing on the Devil is the old one of dualism.
This is the ancient belief that there are two separate and equal forces in the universe.
Or, as it appears in Manichaeism (which influenced St Augustine in a number of negative ways), metaphysical dualism posits good and evil in eternal opposition.
Although I have heard many a Christian sermon that was implicitly dualist, the orthodox Christian position on this is quite clear.
God alone is the sole author of the universe, but, as it were, one of the characters created by God refused to accept the dependency of a created being and insisted on equal powers and rights with the author.
There was war in heaven and a rebellion began.
This, of course, brings us right back to the beginning of the  divine drama.
And there is no doubt that although Christianity rejects metaphysical dualism it has a proper dualism of its own.
C. S. Lewis (1942: 45–46) sees that this is the essence of the divine drama:
…real Christianity (as distinct from Christianity-and-water) goes much nearer to Dualism than people think.
One of the things that surprised me when I first read the New Testament seriously was that it was always talking about a Dark Power in the universe — a mighty evil spirit who was held to be the Power behind death and disease, and sin.
The difference is that Christianity thinks this Dark Power was created by God, and was good when he was created, and went wrong.
Christianity agrees with Dualism that this universe is at war.
But it doesn't think this is a war between independent powers.
It thinks it's a civil war, a rebellion, and that we are living in a part of the universe occupied by the rebel.
For some people this perspective creates its own problems.
They are pleased that belief in God does not mean one has to believe that there is another (evil) god, but they do wonder whether on this view God is in control of the universe.
Does not the divine drama seem to suggest that the Devil is calling the tune?
To look at Christian dualism in this way is actually to advance an argument against God, not the Devil, and some people feel that in discrediting God such a view calls into question not only the Devil but the whole of Christianity.
The early church faced this problem too.
In the Old Testament the Devil is usually portrayed as an adversary, not as the supreme evil being.
In the story of Job we see the adversary bargaining with God over the righteous man.
He seems to be on talking terms with the creator and is able to gain permission to tempt Job in a number of horrible ways.
In the New Testament Satan is much more the Evil One that we associate with Christian theology.
Wishing to be faithful to the whole biblical tradition (unlike many moderns), the church fathers insisted that Satan was a rebel but that he was also somehow connected to God's purposes and plans for the world in terms of both judgment and deliverance.
In other words, they insisted that Satan's rebellion was itself part of God's overall plan of redemption.
The Anglican Charles Williams (1886–1945) once daringly called the Devil ‘God's shadow’.
There is — let us admit it — a mystery about the Devil and his role in God's providence.
But the fathers also insisted, and believing Christians have proclaimed it ever since, that although we do not fully understand the relationship between God and the Devil, the inescapable fact about Satan is that he has declared war on God and his creation.
The Devil, like all of mankind, was created free.
It was not that God let him get out of hand because he was too weak to control him.
Like all of us, the Devil is free to serve and love God or reject him.
God is love, as St John tells us (1 John 4:8), and as love, by his very nature, cannot command even creatures to love him in return.
God's communion and kingdom know of no masters and slaves — only lovers.
The Devil was created both free and good.
God as creator has never willed evil.
But goodness can choose to change its nature if it has true freedom of will.
And the Devil — the angel Lucifer, and the apple of God's eye — wanted to be equal with God.
In other words he wished to be God himself, and not a creature.
The wish was the mother of the deed and Lucifer rebelled, choosing — in the words of John Milton (1608–1674)— that it was ‘better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven’.
To reject the dualism of Christianity may be a refusal, or an inability, to accept any form of philosophical dualism.
Christian dualism, however, is not a philosophical dualism, because the concept of a rebel is not an alternative god: it is a creature trying to be God.
It is this sin that Satan taught the human race (Lewis 1942: 48–49).
Another reason why Satan and demons are more usually rejected by modern scholarship is because they are seen as mythological explanations of realities now explainable by science.
Or, more simply, there is a belief that the status of the Devil is very uncertain in the New Testament.
To this we now turn.
NEW TESTAMENT SCHOLARSHIP AND THE DEVIL
There is no doubt that the Devil is a complex and changing figure in the sacred scriptures.
The Hebrew word for destroyer or devil (Abaddon ) is not used in the Old Testament to describe Satan, who is seen as the adversary or the accuser.
We find in the New Testament that the satanic accuser (diabolos in the Greek Septuagint) becomes the full-blown Devil of Christian dualism.
In fact the different Greek roots for the Devil in the Septuagint —diabolos/apollyon — are of very little importance, for what emerges is the concept of the Devil as the supreme Evil One, the Dark Power.
He is not only the tempter and accuser: he is ‘god’ and ‘prince’.
The Devil seems to play multiple roles: he is the angel of the pit (Rev 9:11), the god of this world or this age (2 Cor 4:4), the prince of darkness (Eph 6:12), the prince of this world (John 12:31), and the dragon (Rev 12:7).
Not only does he appear in many guises — far more than the few I have mentioned here — but the Devil seems to be chief of the evil spirits.
Not only are the gospels and the Acts of the Apostles full of demonising stories, but demons are understood as the opposition forces to the church.
They are not simply nuisances or vicious spirits, but are ‘principalities’, ‘powers’, ‘thrones’, ‘dominions’(Col 1:16).
Modern scholarship has tended to try and distinguish the different meanings and uses of the words ‘Devil’ and ‘demons’.
This has been not so much a question of exegesis but of hermeneutics, searching for the underlying meaning and background to the understanding and belief in the demonic world (see Carr 1981).
In this search many scholars since the nineteenth century have stressed the influence of Jewish intertestamental literature on the New Testament.
As he is depicted in many Jewish apocryphal documents the Devil is certainly closer to the New Testament Devil than the Hebrew Satan of the Jewish Bible.
There seems to be considerable evidence that the New Testament Evil One is influenced by apocryphal literature, which in turn was influenced by Persian Zoroastrianism.
I have no problems with this evidence, but it never ceases to amaze me what some modern theologians do with it.
Because they have shown that the Devil of the New Testament is influenced by sources other than the Old Testament they seem to think that this somehow undercuts the authenticity of the Christian Evil One.
But the lure of this historical explanation is to be resisted.
To provide an aetiology is not to pronounce on matters of authenticity.
In the Great Britain of the early days of the Celtic church, for example, the old Druid ways made their mark on Christian ritual and symbols.
The Celtic cross, a cross in a circle, which probably related to the sun and solstice rites, was one symbol with such a pedigree.
But once the church sanctioned the Celtic cross it was sanctified; it was exorcised, if you will, of all the previously pagan associations.
The etymology of the word Devil and the influence of pagan religion on Christianity, though perhaps interesting in themselves, are of no great theological significance.
The central theological question is whether the picture of the Devil that emerges from the New Testament is true and necessary for a proper understanding of the Christian story.
Another view of modern scholars is that the New Testament Devil and his demons became augmented by the fathers of the patristic era and were made even more devilish, as it were, than they are in the Bible.
Henry Kelly takes this line in Towards The Death of Satan (1968: ch. 2), and I think there is some justice in such an approach.
There is no doubt that for the fathers the Devil is the Enemy, and on the whole most of them stress this even more than did St Paul himself.
However, as Gustaf Aulén (1879–1978) points out (1965: ch. 4), the New Testament provided the basic groundwork for a full-blooded belief in the Evil One and the dark powers.
It is true that the fathers tried systematically to translate biblical beliefs into essential Christian doctrines.
But if we are going to accuse them of this then we had better also accuse them of inventing the doctrine of the Trinity, for although the New Testament provides evidence for such a cardinal Christian belief it does not set it out in a clear or distinct fashion.
What really grates about Bultmann's demythologising and Kelly's historical spadework is not the scholarship but the  network of assumptions.
Kelly, for example, can hardly control his incredulity when looking at the mythological world of demons.
For him they are not myths that express spiritual reality; instead they are mistaken myths.
Similarly with Bultmann.
He cannot bring himself to believe in dark powers and evil forces as expressed in biblical language.
This is why I think Walter Wink's recent study on the ‘powers’ of the New Testament (Wink 1984) is so interesting; he demonstrates that power concepts not only saturate the New Testament but are an essential aspect of its message.
Therefore, if modern scholars are ‘modernist’, they reject the Devil and the fallen angels not because of the lack of evidence or authentic bases for their existence in the New Testament canon.
They reject the Devil because they do not believe in him.
As heirs of the philosophical Enlightenment and the modern scientific world-view, they cannot grasp the possibility that Evil could be personified or exist as a spirit opposed to God and his creation.
DEMYTHOLOGISING SATAN AND EVIL SPIRITS: A PROPER CHRISTIAN APPROACH
There is a further argument against the existence of the Devil that is, I believe, a very important one.
It is not so much an argument against his existence per se , but an argument against the way he is so often portrayed.
This takes two major forms: either as a monster or as a pathetically funny being.
People find it difficult to believe in a personification of evil that looks like something out of a horror movie or a cut-out from a medieval painting.
Cloven hooves, pitchforks and horns invoke in most of us laughter or ridicule.
On the other hand the modern world, which finds it so difficult to deal with evil, nearly always treats the Devil as a figure of fun if it rejects the monster personification.
In 1986 I wrote an article for the London Arts Festival on C. S. Lewis and The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe .
This was to accompany the first showing in Europe of the musical Narnia, which played in All Hallows by the Tower.
It was a  very professional and creative production.
But one fundamental flaw completely undermined the whole production: the White Witch (Lucifer) was played strictly for laughs.
We sat and watched not the coldness and menace of evil but a pantomime dame who was obviously too stupid and incompetent ever to pose a threat to goodness.
Instead of being treated to the confrontation between the great lion Aslan and the forces of hell, we sat and watched a game of cat and mouse.
No wonder people cannot believe in a Devil like that; it supports the old adage that the Devil likes nothing better than to be denied.
The image of the Devil as a monster, however, does occasionally gain some unusual supporters.
A number of people told me that the film The Exorcist was positive because (they thought) it put the fear of the Devil into people.
I find this view curious.
No doubt I am perverse, but I found the film sensationalist, spurious and totally unbelievable.
I think that people enjoyed it (if that is the word) because it was shocking and frightening, but this is not the ‘fear of God’ that leads to conversion or belief.
I am afraid that charismatic circles are sometimes influenced more by the horror genre and the barmier corners of the Bible-belt than the Bible when it comes to the Devil and evil spirits.
I remember once reading that the evangelist A. A. Allen had taught that there was a nicotine demon!
I have seen exorcisms that have been totally unbelievable because they were either trivial or ridiculous.
Demons of unbelief, demons responsible for masturbation, demons responsible for unhappiness and depression, demons that control our cities —all these and many more seem to have popped up with alarming regularity in recent years.
An excess of demons, like the proverbial ‘reds under the bed’, can too easily lead to the belief that there are no such things.
There are many people in classical Pentecostal churches and the renewal movement who are worried about an over-emphasis on exorcisms.
As David Tomlinson put it, ‘We want to be charismatics not charismaniacs.’
A wrong emphasis on something that is true trivialises the work of the Evil One.
One would think, in some Christian churches, that the Devil is entirely concerned with  tripping-up the faithful on a day to day basis and has nothing to do with racism, class hatred, war, ecological disaster, and political oppression (see chapter nine).
If one pursues an untheological and obsessive interest in demons, committed Christians cease to believe in them, and the Devil applauds.
That is why I find the recent cult book Pigs in the Parlor (Hammond and Hammond 1983) totally unacceptable as a Christian document on demons — it is totally unbelievable.
Demons are real, I believe, but the moment we try to literalise them — describe their shape and detail their habits — we tend to slip into fantasy.
Interestingly I have come across this same problem in a totally different context.
I remember teaching a class of social workers who had once received some lectures on Freud.
They started to talk about the ego, id and superego as if they were physical realities located in the body.
Some of them even seemed to think that the ego was a sort of ectoplasm that walked — or perhaps swam — about in the head!
C. S. Lewis (1979: 9) surely put his finger on the proper Christian approach to evil spirits in the preface to The Screwtape Letters : ‘There are two equal and opposite errors into which our race can fall about the devils.
One is to disbelieve in their existence.
The other is to believe, and to feel an excessive and unhealthy interest in them.’
I once helped a lady to believe in the Devil by playing devil's advocate.
She told me that she believed that evil was real, and not merely the absence of good, which, I felt, was a good start.
(For example, the power of Stephen King's novel The Stand is that evil is a living reality, not the negation of goodness.)
Her problem lay in the question of a personal Devil.
She could not bring herself to believe in Evil with a capital E, as personified in a spirit-being called Satan or the Devil.
So I told her that the most ancient creeds did not mention the Devil.
Nowhere do the creeds say ‘I believe in the Devil’.
Nevertheless it is indisputable that all the early church fathers believed in the Devil as the Evil One, although it was never found necessary to define him in the way we must do so about God.
God reveals himself to us as personal in a very unique way.
Personhood is in fact what God reveals to us about himself: God as a being is in communion (as Father, Son and Holy Ghost).
The Holy Trinity is in a sense a communitarian concept, for God dwells in perfect communal relationship.
The Greek word for this is koinonia and the fact that God reveals his being as persons-in-relation, the Trinity, tells us something about the relational nature of personhood.
Now the Devil, I argued, is not revealed to us by God at all.
We know nothing of his being or his nature, except that he is a created spirit that has lost his relationship to the Godhead.
Milton tells us in Paradise Lost that Satan, even after his fall, still dimly reflects his former glory.
But cut off from God his source and out of relationship with the Trinity and the angels, that glory is almost extinct.
In a sense, therefore, I told her, the Devil is no longer a person-in-relation that can truly be called personal at all.
He is not impersonal like stones or bureaucracies: he is a non-person.
The Devil has become all that God is not; he is not beyond personality — he is without it.
His purpose in creation is not to destroy God; he knows that he cannot do that.
He wants to draw us into the vortex of non-personhood that he has become, and the nothingness or non-being that he is becoming.
Satan, in short, aims to take as many of us with him as he can.
In order to believe in the Devil we must rid ourselves of unhelpful images of him (though we do not need to wax philosophical about him as I did for the doubting lady!).
We do not have to define him, or even believe that he is a ‘person’, in order to believe that he is real.
John Robinson was telling us all in his 1963 book Honest to God that we should get rid of pictures of God as an old man with a beard living in the sky.
I have no idea what Satan's personal appearance is like — if a spirit with virtually no personhood left can be said to have an appearance — but the divine drama knows him for what he is.
He is, in the words of Lewis, the ‘Dark Power in the universe’(Lewis 1942: 45).
We are entitled on the basis of the biblical witness to see the Evil One as the rebel against God, the usurper who became the prince of this world, and the Enemy of the church.
What we are not entitled to do is to assume that our own mythological conceptions of him are scriptural.
We have all been too  influenced by medieval demonology and Milton.
(Although I have twice referred to Milton myself, I did so because I was grasping for images to convey something of the reality of the Devil.
Milton, for example, sees Satan, Death, and Sin as the trinity of hell.
It is an interesting literary image, and one that is well worth developing, but it is not the gospel.)
It may be true that Satan and the demons plot against the church in hellish councils, but we do not really know.
It is legitimate to speculate about the Devil as long as we do not assume that our speculations have the solidity of holy writ.
Thus, for example, I am not convinced that Satan is a centre of pure malicious but rational evil.
On the contrary, I think it more likely that, cut off from the source of rationality, the Godhead itself, the Devil is evil but irrational.
One might say ‘fey’.
I once heard a sermon in which the preacher defended atomic weapons on the ground that Satan would never use them because it would hasten his own destruction!
This assumes, of course, that the Evil One is rational and sane.
Evil may have intelligence, but the Devil's strategies against the church are not, it seems to me, to be understood as rational military strategies, rather they are more like desperate and increasingly vicious attacks (does he know his time is short?).
Perhaps God in his wisdom has told us only a little about the nature and personhood of Satan so that we are not tempted to dwell on him with morbid fascination.
We are called to resist him (1 Pet 5:9), not to know or understand him.
THE DIVINE DRAMA, MYTH, AND BIBLICAL SCHOLARSHIP
So far in this chapter my argument has been that by entirely removing the Devil from the Christian world-view, or simply silencing him by demythologising him away a la Bultmann, we undercut the gospel as divine drama.
I have looked at some of the reasons why people today cannot (or will not) believe in him.
Before looking at how, albeit unwittingly, orthodox Christianity has too often failed to appreciate the dramatic  nature of the Great Battle, I want to add a footnote on myth, the gospel, and modern scholarship.
It could be said that scripture's view of the Devil and the evil spirits is mythological.
If by this we mean that we explain real spiritual forces in mythic language because there is no other adequate language to explain them, that, it seems to me, is reasonable enough.
It is understandable and no bad thing that people should react against crude literalism.
When we read, for example, that there was ‘war in heaven’(Rev 12:7) we should not assume that there was some sort of cosmic version of Star Wars , or that the archangel Michael and Lucifer fought it out with spiritual light-sabres.
The tragic thing is that in reacting against such unhelpful literalism too many of us assume that the war is not real.
Some of the stories and images of the gospel are literally true (the incarnation and the resurrection, for example) while other stories are real but not necessarily–literally true.
The great poetic truths of the Psalms and the spiritual truths of the parables would be good examples.
Even so-called ‘fundamentalists’ usually insist that although it is an axiom of faith that God really created the world, he did not necessarily do so in a literal six days of twenty-four hours each.
C. S. Lewis's approach to the nature of myth is very helpful to us at this point.
He believed that the truths of the Christian religion needed to be defended by philosophy and logic.
(Christian apologists, for example, appeal to reason in support of revelation, and theology is concerned with truth.)
But he also believed that Christian apologetics needed to be explicated in order that their meaning could be made clearer to us.
He felt that this could best be done by resorting to myths.
Unlike many modernist theologians, however, by myths Lewis did not mean stories that contained spiritual truths without any historical basis whatever.
And he certainly did not mean legends and fairy stories (some of which would be mythical in his sense, some of which would not).
A myth, for Lewis, was a ‘real though unfocused gleam of truth falling on human imagination’.
The Narnia chronicles, for example, were written as a mythological expression of the gospel story.
Lewis, who was never a crude literalist, understood the  scriptures as a divine drama containing great truths — some of which were historical and physical — explicated and interpreted by mythology.
The Bible, however, is more than a great storehouse of myths, of unfocussed divine truths, for it also reveals God in full-focus.
Jesus Christ is sacred myth historically located in time and incarnated in the material universe.
He is the Word made flesh.
Myths are no more than refracted images, the logi of the Logos, but with the appearance of Jesus Christ truth (God incarnate) is fully revealed.’
I do not mean to suggest that Lewis thought that the Bible was only half true.
He stood foursquare on the ancient creeds precisely because he believed in their truth.
The Bible for him, however, contained many truths, and he understood far better than many theologians that you must never tamper with the mythology of scripture.
If you do — if you insist, for example, in assigning the Devil, the war in heaven, and evil spirits into the realm of legends or outdated world-views — you are playing with the gospel itself.
If we want to tell the gospel story as drama, as opposed to elucidating the truths of revelation in dogmatic theological form, then we have to take the story as it comes, neat.
Some of us might go so far as to say that the Genesis account of creation is not literal history but myth in Lewis's sense.
But to suggest that we should toss out the Garden of Eden story because it is not necessarily literal historical fact would be a dangerous precedent.
The fall is real enough (remembering my earlier distinction between real and literal , p. 36), and to take out the story of Adam and Eve is to make a terrible hole in the gospel.
It also creates serious difficulties for the theological understanding of Christ as the second Adam.
We can all be too clever by half, and it is wiser to take the gospel story as it is revealed to us and presented throughout the whole of the sacred text of scripture.
To reject the mythological character of much of the Bible is to run the serious risk of looking for the truth of scripture as if it were like the kernel in the nut, and ending up with nothing but the shell.
Is this not what happens to Bultmann's programme for freeing the authentic message of the gospel for modern man?
(See chapter eight.)
The mythological character of the gospel is also essential for the telling of the drama.
The Great Battle cannot be told entirely as a series of truth statements: the Gospel is not philosophy.
It is no coincidence that the drama of salvation is kept alive by preaching and story: this is how epic poetry works — and the early church believers in particular were tellers of the story, not New Testament critics.
Epic poetry is essentially spoken poetry.
It was intended to be heard, not read (Ong 1982); the gospel, likewise, speaks to the heart when the redemption story is presented rhetorically and dramatically.
Of course the Bible is not epic from cover to cover, but there is an epic dimension to the Great Battle.
One wonders why it is that Lewis could see the reality of this divine drama dancing throughout the pages of the scriptures even though many notable theologians could not.
Lewis could state boldly, as we have seen, that Christianity believes that there is a civil war on, a rebellion, ‘and that we are living in a part of the universe occupied by the rebel’(Lewis 1942: 46).
He could see the Bible as drama not only because he believed in the Devil but also because he read the Bible as literature.
For Lewis the Psalms were poetry, Job sacred fiction and St Mark's gospel narrative, and yet he could detect the flow of the divine drama through and in the different mediums of the biblical writers.
He could, in short, recognise the epic quality of the Great Battle.
For Lewis it was not enough to have the Bible: you had to learn how to read it.
During Lent, in the Orthodox churches, the gospels are read at a single sitting.
Despite the different styles and theological stances of the writers, the epic quality of the gospel reveals itself.
Such a practice is enough to give some modern scholars apoplexy.
But too many of them have been weaned on the habit of chopping up the New Testament into bits (sorting out the sources, contemporary themes and ideologies of Aramaic Palestine or the Hellenistic world) so that they can no longer see the scriptures as a sacred text aflame with the divine drama.
The Bible as holy literature, the oracles of the Logos, has become for them an inanimate object of scientific investigation.
The divine drama illuminated for us by the Holy Spirit  disintegrates into puzzles, conundrums and endless interpretations.
Instead of the great epic being told over and over by the bards and preachers of the word, we are offered by the critics snatches of data to be dissected, truncated, and — most scandalously of all —‘authenticated’.
The ‘old, old story’ becomes under the critics' needle the ever-unravelling story, and the drama is lost.
THEOLOGY AND THE LOSS OF THE DIVINE DRAMA
What, I believe, makes Lewis's view of the Bible so important today is that it is very similar to the view of the fathers of the primitive church.
For them, the gospel was essentially a story in dramatic form, to be told not as isolated theological truths or a series of philosophical axioms supported by mythological stories and poetic exhortations.
The drama to be told was an epic of cosmic dimensions and significance, played out on the world stage.
This epic I have called, throughout Enemy Territory , the Great Battle.
That the fathers took this view of the Divine Drama is not obvious, the reason being that if we look at the development of theology from the first Great Council of Nicaea (AD 325) to the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451) it is dominated by the disputes concerning the nature of the Holy Trinity and Christological issues.
And what we today call ‘soteriology’(the doctrine of salvation) did not exist in any systematic way at all(Kelly 1977: 375).
There are two essential points to be made from this.
The first is that the absence of a systematic theology of redemption was simply due to the fact that in the early church no great disputes had yet arisen about it.
The problems the fathers faced were more related to the nature and person of Christ and his relationship to the triune Godhead than the meaning of the cross.
The second point is crucial to my argument.
The absence of an elaborate and systematic theory of the atonement does not mean that the redemption story was not told.
On the contrary, I believe the evidence is overwhelming that  although there were many different emphases on salvation there was a general agreement as to the nature of atonement and its role in the purposes of God (see chapter two).
And if we look at the patristic understanding of atonement, what hits us with startling freshness is that the Divine Drama is alive and pulsating with the tension and conflict of the Great Battle.
Ironically, what we also find, as we shall see in a little while, is that when soteriology was really put on the map in the eleventh century much of the drama was lost.
Perhaps the most famous attack on the Western development of the doctrine of the atonement comes from Gustaf Aulén (1965).
He argues — irrefutably, I believe, despite his oversimplification of Latin theology — that the early fathers' understanding of God's war with the Devil was obscured by rejigging the drama of what I have called the Great Battle into a legalistic rational framework.
The view of the early church, which Aulén insists must be seen as the classic theory, he calls the ‘dramatic’.
‘Its central theme is the idea of the Atonement as a Divine conflict and victory; Christ — Christus Victor — fights against and triumphs over the evil powers of the world, the ‘tyrants’ under which mankind is in bondage and suffering, and in Him God reconciles the world to himself' (Aulén 1965: 4).
THE DEVIL AND THE ATONEMENT
It may not be immediately obvious what theories of the atonement have to do with the Great Battle in the modern world.
The connection is this.
In order to understand how we are to fight the Devil today, we need to realise that our fight is directly related to Christ's own victory over the Evil One.
If we push into the background God's warfare with the rebel Lucifer, we are liable to underestimate its importance in our own spiritual lives.
Some theories of atonement do precisely this.
The early fathers were Christian dualists and saw, like Lewis, that the Great Battle is the essence of the gospel story.
Many of the later Latin fathers (and some of the fathers of the  Reformation) tended to see it only as a backdrop to the true meaning of the atonement.
The roots of this belong not in the New Testament but in Latin legalism.
It was Tertullian (c. 160–220) who first introduced into the theology of the third century the concepts of ‘merit’ and ‘satisfaction’from Roman law.
In the fifth century Augustine retained many of the bold and dramatic metaphors of his contemporaries, but moved towards a view of atonement in which Christ the mediator between God and man was pre-eminent.
In his schema great emphasis was laid on Christ's expiatory death: Jesus the perfect man is accepted as a substitute for sinful mankind.
Of course the Latin fathers not only had St Paul's reference to Christ as the propitiation (with its notions of appeasement) for sins, 5 they also had the whole history and logic of the Old Testament to draw on.
But from the tenth century onwards this whole strain of soteriology predominated in the West, and under Anselm of Canterbury became far more systematic and juridical.
The love of God, the war with the Devil, and many of the earlier incarnational theories of atonement (which we will see in a moment) fell away to be replaced by a story of God's wrath and its appeasement by Christ's death.
The epic of human redemption was now recast as a domestic tragedy between the Father and the Son, in which the Devil, and incidentally the Holy Spirit, do not seem to be directly involved.
The sacrifice on the cross and the ‘merit’ of Christ's death is the dominant motif.
The virtue of Christ's human life, and the control of the world by the Devil, fade into the distance.
Now there are some serious theological problems here which we cannot go into in this book (see Aulén 1965, and Walker forthcoming), but we can grasp the essential issues.
In the early church most of the theologians taught the efficacy of Christ's sacrifice, but tended to see it within the context of his whole life, and also against the cosmic background of God's war with the Devil.
The later, more sophisticated theories tended to view the question of salvation not so much as God winning back the world from the Evil One and reconciling humanity in himself, but in terms of a legal arrangement entered into by God and man because of the  perfect death of the sacrificial Lamb: God the lawgiver lets off sinners, as it were, because of Christ's substitution.
The dramatic and mythological language disappeared and was replaced by a doctrine more fitted to legalism or the language of the ledger: salvation came to be seen as a question of balancing the books, or paying debts to the debtor.
(In the nineteenth century the great preacher Edward Irving (1792–1834) once scornfully called such a language a ‘stockbroker theology’.)
It is, I think, not untrue to say that too much has been made of an explanation of salvation couched primarily in terms of the law courts — crime and punishment — in which God the lawgiver demands and receives satisfaction.
Professor James Torrance, I know, sees this as a weakness in Calvinism, and it cannot be denied that, despite the Reformation, a great deal of this legalism passed over into Protestantism.
The philosophical Enlightenment of the eighteenth century onwards saw a change in mood on the part of many Protestant theologians.
They tended to cast doubt on the objective nature of the atonement — at least the Catholic scholastics and Reformers had held on to that — stressing instead the subjective changes wrought in mankind by Christ's sacrifice (such as a growth in God-consciousness or moral transformation).
But more interestingly for our purposes, they poured scorn upon the primitive church, seeing the dramatic and mythological story of redemption as crude, unsatisfactory, and even immoral!
Fortunately the Christian church is not dominated by theologians, but by the praying faithful, and the Divine Drama, although suffering numerous attacks and emendations, has lived on in popular spirituality and liturgy.
Wherever the New Testament is preached, the divine drama breaks through the restrictions of theological theory and rational presentations of the gospel and continues to win men and women to God's cause.
When the Devil was driven from the centre of the Divine Drama, as he was by the medieval scholastics, he resurfaced elsewhere among the superstitious beliefs of medieval Europe, where he remained despite the Reformation.
Indeed  the great Puritan era of the seventeenth century saw the heyday of witchcraft.
Aulén makes the telling point that no amount of legalism or rationalism could entirely destroy the Divine Drama, because the mythology of the Great Battle is too dominant in the New Testament to be suppressed.
But let us now look at what the early church fathers made of this mythology.
RETELLING THE DIVINE DRAMA
There are many ways of telling the Divine Drama.
The essential elements are: God, the Devil, the material world, the fall, the incarnation, the cross, the resurrection, and the continuation of the struggle until the eschaton — Christ's return.
It would be arrogant to suggest that the West no longer tells the story, but I think that it is not untrue to say that the Devil is not as central to that story as he was.
I intend to retell the story (rather than talk about it) from the perspective of the primitive church.
The fathers were as close to the New Testament as we are to the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century.
Their theology was saturated in the gospel, though they often contended for it in the language of Greek philosophy.
In retelling the drama I shall make use of some of my own images and those of some Catholic and Protestant divines, but I shall remain faithful to the spirit of the Greek fathers and their understanding of the Great Battle.
Four notes of explanation will be helpful.
1
It is often said that the Eastern fathers neglected the cross in favour of the incarnation.
Too much has been made of this by Western critics.
St Irenaeus of Lyons (b. c.
AD 140) explicitly stated, for example, that it was the blood of Christ that paid for our sins.
And both St John Chrysostom (c. 347–407) and St Gregory of Nazianzus (c. 329–389) in the fourth century talk of Christ nailing our sins with his body to the tree.
It remains true, however, that the Greeks see the cross within the context of the incarnation perhaps more so than most Western thinkers.
(Karl Barth would be an exception.)
2
The Eastern fathers, and many of the earliest Western  theologians, tended to see the atonement in terms of what is known as the ‘physical’ theory: God enters into sinful humanity in order to restore it from within.
This incarnational theology was partially recaptured by Luther, who accepted the classic position of St Gregory of Nazianzus that Christ in becoming a man became a real human being, the same in nature as ourselves — excepting that the Lord never sinned.
(Gregory's slogan was: ‘That which he could not assume he could not heal.’)
Such a view is found in partial form in Calvin, and it surfaces again in the nineteenth century in the thought of both Edward Irving (who was wrongly convicted for heresy for believing it) and the great Anglican churchman, F. D. Maurice (1805–1872).
3
The Eastern fathers, and nearly all the Latin fathers too, held a view of the Devil which eventually fell into disrepute.
This view was the belief that the ransom for sin which Paul tells us is Christ's sacrifice (1 Tim 2:6) was paid not to God but to the Devil.
All the fathers of the early church saw the Devil as holding rights over this world, but some of them believed that God had to pay him his dues in order to win back the world.
That even the Evil One must be treated with justice was the idea.
(Do not we see this in Lewis's The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe ?
The White Witch reminds Aslan of the ‘deep magic’— the ancient law.)
This view eventually fell away because, as Tom Smail puts it, the theologians ‘could not cash it out’ as a fully-blown doctrine of atonement.
In the West the juridical view soon dominated, the ransom for sin being seen as paid to God (to appease his wrath).
The Devil consequently disappeared from the story.
In the East the ransom view also fell into disuse, but the Devil remained as a major opponent to be defeated by Christ on the cross.
The Evil One is seen after St Gregory of Nazianzus as having no rights at all— on the contrary he is seen as a robber and a liar who stole the world from God and who holds humanity as captives in bondage to their own sin and his influence and power.
4
Another strand of thought survived in the East from the primitive church, namely the belief that God outwitted Satan  on the cross.
(This view outraged the sophisticated German theologians of the liberal school in the late nineteenth century.)
It saw Jesus as the victim on the cross who in submitting to Satan became his victor.
In the words of St Augustine, ‘the cross was the devil's mousetrap’.
St Gregory of Nyssa (c. 335–394) uses an even more shocking metaphor: Jesus is the ‘bait on the fish-hook’.
I will not make use of the ransom theory in my retelling of the drama, but I shall cling on to the primitive belief, which I believe to be the correct biblical one, that God's atonement in incarnation and cross was the crucial victory in the Great Battle not only over sin but also over the Devil and the powers of darkness.
However, let us now turn to the Great Battle itself.
THE DIVINE DRAMA:
God's epic of salvation retold in three parts
Prologue
God is love, and in a moment of ecstasy, of uncalculated desire, created outside his personal communion the spiritual universe.
This universe contained no matter but intelligent and free spirits: free to choose and free to love.
In a time before history existed, and while the all-holy Trinity was hymned by cherubim and seraphim, and angelic hosts communed with the divine love, a rebellion began.
Lucifer, the morning star of creation, dreamt the impossible dream: to be a creature of God that is equal to God.
This fantasy was not fuelled by disinterested speculation but by envy.
Others were told the insidious lie, ‘We too can be as gods.’
A conspiracy was conceived that gave birth to a revolution.
And the courts of heaven rang with the sound of warfare.
The rebellion failed and the pretenders to God's throne were cast out of heaven.
Cut off from God's communion and divine love, the rebels still clung to their leader Lucifer, their fallen star, who still glowed with forgotten glory and the heat of defeated bitterness.
Part One: The Fall
God continued the inexorable course of his divine love, and again from that immeasurable passion spoke the word of creation and out of nothing called into existence the material universe.
It too, like the angels, was created good and without corruption.
In this our world God breathed his spirit into the dust of the earth, and matter became articulate and personalised in the forms of man and woman.
Though they were made just a little lower than the angels, they were stamped with God's character, bearing his image and divine likeness.
To them was given dominion over the world, and all the created beauty of earth was theirs to hold as regents and stewards of God's kingship.
To remind them that their rule was derived from God himself, and that they were neither creators nor rulers by right, God forbade them only one thing: they were not to partake of the knowledge of good and evil; such a mysterious gnosis belonged to God alone.
If they disobeyed this one command, God told them, they would die.
The fallen angel Lucifer, having failed to defeat God in the great battle of heaven, saw his chance to enlist new recruits and continue his rebellion in the material universe.
Once so full of envy and pride, the great angel became a devil of meanness and spite, and he resolved to spoil the joy of God's new creation.
‘Do not be afraid of God,’ he told the man and woman.
‘Discover good and evil for yourselves: reach out and taste reality.’
And repeating the well-tried lie he told them that they too could be gods and would never die.
The man and woman chose to disobey God, and their act of disobedience severed their relationship with their creator: they lost the divine likeness and his image in them was clouded over — though not lost — through this separation.
The loss of innocence marred their communion with the divine love, and terror entered their hearts as they were cast off from the sustaining life of God.
The corruption of the material world through human folly led to a process of decay and death, so that the whole cosmos  mourned the loss of sustaining communion and groaned and yearned to be set free.
And the fall of man resulted in the curse of separation falling upon the whole of the human race and its future history.
God's wrath cast a shadow upon the earth, and the fallen angels settled on the darkened world like vultures on a dying prey.
When man and woman were innocent the Evil One's power was not great enough to take the world by force: he could only operate outside the human race as a whisperer of lies and delusions.
But with the act of disobedience the will and the hearts of the human race were unlocked from the inside and the Dark One scuttled in and, like a ‘thief and a robber’, took the world by stealth.
The Dark Power continued to influence the world by encouraging evil, but he could not control it completely.
Despite the fall, the human race still contained the dim image of God within it.
Men and women were still free to choose good from evil, though the corruption rooted in their very nature tugged them towards their captor and now ruler of the earth.
Three wills contended for the world.
The Evil One sought totalitarian control by wresting the allegiance of all human beings away from God and fostering the human stubbornness that refuses to submit to any authority.
His methods were twofold, either dominance by the fear and brutality of superior force or seduction by the enticement of power, sensual pleasure without constraint, or flattery.
The Dark Power had lost for ever his eternal brightness, but his strength and intelligence were derived from God and he could still disguise himself as Lucifer the angel of light.
Against the Evil One and the principalities and powers of darkness God also contended for the world.
Human sin and devilish enticement could not obliterate the divine image.
God whispered in the secret chambers of the human heart.
His Spirit breathed a longing for communion and a nostalgia for the God who was lost.
When persons responded to the wooing of the divine love, a breach was made in Satan's empire and hope and joy would enter the world.
Men dreamt dreams of salvation and the human imagination  created divine myths and received the signs of God's grace.
And to show the world the meaning of faithfulness the Holy One established a prophetic people who would prefigure the restoration of human obedience and divine communion.
He spoke through prophets and in acts of history, through poetry and prayers of contrition.
Through this people God called for resistance to the great rebel and usurper of the world.
The third will that contended for the world was the human will itself.
As human history and experience progressed humankind oscillated between God's light and the depravity of darkness.
Every culture, however imperfectly and blindly, either turned towards the light or fell back into the darkness.
Each human soul was in tension between the divine dignity of sonship and the degradation of Satanic enslavement.
To choose neither God nor the Devil was an illusion of freedom, for in reality every step of human endeavour, however unwitting, was either a step homewards to God's kingdom or a step closer to hell.
The human will could not stand back from the Great Battle raging in its own soul as well as in the world at large: it had to choose to contend either for God or the Devil.
Although individual men and women, and sometimes whole nations, took God's side against the Evil One, the world remained enemy territory.
The weakness of the human will betrayed by generations deprived of God's inner communion was no match for the Dark Power.
God's authority would sometimes flash across the universe in miracles and signs which illuminated the true nature of Satan's shadowed kingdom.
But after the flashes would come an even greater blackness as men and women continued to show that they preferred darkness to light.
Despite their unfaithfulness to him the people chosen by God continued to dream of deliverance, and their songs spoke of an anointed one who would champion his people in the lists and free them from oppression and enemy occupation.
And if their poetry was ostensibly about a political and cultural freedom, it also spoke of the bondage of the human race, the yoke of the Evil One, and the hope of salvation.
Part Two: The Restoration
While people were dreaming dreams and singing songs, and the Evil One and his angels strutted their mastery over the world like cocks in a barnyard, the omnipotent God made the decisive move that was to win the Great Battle for the world.
He took everybody by surprise.
While the prophetic people waited for a great military leader, and the Dark Power scoured the skies for signs of a cosmic invasion, God slipped into the world almost unheralded.
Only a young Jewish girl, her betrothed husband, a handful of shepherds, and a few wise men had any inkling who had arrived.
At the fall Satan was not able to take the world by force.
It was only because the human beings sinned and let him in that he was able, like some robber baron, to plunder God's territory.
The divine love on the other hand was strong enough to invade and recapture the world, but God chose a different avenue of attack.
The community of the Trinity is a companionship of love, and the God who is love refused to force free creatures to love him by command.
He knew also that the human race freely chose to reject him; it was only right that they should take some responsibility: mankind as well as God must be responsible for reversing the effects of the fall and for moving on to the mature relationship with the creator that had been ordained for them from all eternity.
God knew, however, that without divine intervention and the presence of his glory in the depths of human life such a reversal was impossible.
And so in the sanctuary of the triune Godhead, whose secrets we can never know, and whose mystery we must never probe, God the Father prepared him a body, and the Word from the beginning, the Son, humbly said, ‘I come’ and the Holy Spirit overshadowed a young woman of Israel so that the uncreated one was joined to creature-flesh and became man.
And just as it was that the woman was instrumental in the fall of the human race, so it was that another woman was instrumental in its restoration.
All heaven was hushed as the maiden heard the annunciation from God's messenger that  she would bear God's child.
She assented freely and only with her full co-operation did the Spirit quicken her body, and the God-Man enter the world.
Who can grasp the wonder or the truth of it!
‘Whom have we Lord, like You.
The Great One who became small, the Wakeful who slept.'
The myths and songs of the dreaming world had found their people's champion in the form of a little child.
The Omnipotence who smashed the rebellion in heaven freely entered Satan's stronghold, naked and helpless.
The restoration of humanity had begun, and God's standard-bearer of the true kingdom had arrived.
The alarm rang out in the temples of hell that something was up in Judea and that there was a baby born in Bethlehem who posed a threat to the rebellious empire.
The human king of the region was persuaded to act, and all the first-born sons in the district were slaughtered.
But the young God-child escaped with his mother and her husband.
And the child grew in wisdom and strength, but his flesh was no mere phantom or merely the appearance of flesh: he belonged to the human race.
As he grew he fought the temptation of sin in his body, and felt the pain of separation in his heart, but he never faltered in his faithfulness to his heavenly Father.
Quietly, away from the crowds and demon curiosity, he came to manhood.
He began to teach men and women the kingdom of God and declared that it was already in their midst.
Sometimes he spoke straight from the shoulder and sometimes in puzzles and parables.
In solidarity with his fallen race, though he himself was without any sin, this man called Joshua in the Hebrew and Jesus in the Greek entered the river Jordan to be baptised for the remission of sins.
The mystery of the communal Trinity was revealed and the Holy Spirit descended upon Jesus, who received him gladly from the Father who spoke of his love for his Son, though the crowds at the baptism did not understand the significance of the event.
The Spirit urged Jesus into the desert, where he resisted the  temptations of the Devil, who did not seem to know that he was tempting God himself.
And Jesus, endowed with the Spirit, breathed love and fellowship and yet stood sternly for the truth.
He commanded the weather and rebuked the demons.
The man who had mastered self-control and resisted sin from within now openly declared war on the outward corruption of the fall and the bondage of the Evil One.
He healed the sick, raised the dead, exercised authority over the evil spirits and forgave sins.
Both the councils of men and devils were perplexed and awed: there had been prophets, healers and magicians before, but none like this man.
Who was he?
No doubt some of the angels who had faced God's holiness before had a premonition about this man.
Intuitively they knew this was no ordinary son of Adam.
But the angels of hell are not party to the councils of heaven.
God's invasion plans and strategies of salvation were not known to them.
Was this man leading a resistance movement against the Dark Power?
How could a man, however unique, win such a struggle?
The devils knew that all men sinned, and all men must die.
As the prophetic people flocked around Jesus, and as they saw the transformation in the lives of his disciples and heard the words of life and hope, they longed for a rebellion against the Roman occupation of Judea or a reformation of the Pharisaical law.
But Jesus had come to defeat not an occupying human army but the forces of hell.
He knew that he had to die to free the captives from the corruption within and the Captor without.
All his life he had fought, resisted, and overcome sin.
He had obeyed the Father in all things and would not only have to die but had also to become sin for the sake of the captives.
The agony of his death confronted Jesus as he prayed in the garden of Gethsemane.
It was not just the natural fear of a cruel crucifixion: suffused with the divine life, the person of Jesus could not die in any ordinary sense.
He had to will the rending of his divine nature from his human nature, and die a man alone — the human Jesus cut off from the Father; the Son denied the sustaining power of the Spirit.
The naked baby helpless but safe in his mother's arms would now have to become the helpless victim of unrestrained evil.
And as Jesus awaited the betrayal by one of his own disciples to the Sanhedrin authorities, Satan nearly broke him.
The time for subtle temptations was over; all of hell, in its unimaginable horror, unleashed its powers on this one person alone in the garden.
Perhaps the devils still did not know who this holy man really was, but they could see that he was without sin.
If he was to die in perfect innocence, could the effects of the fall be reversed and the time of their dominion be over?
They would be routed for the second time in their existence, and their slaves — the people — would be set free and return to fight with God against them!
Lucifer also could not be sure who was before him in the garden.
Once, long ago, at the dawn of time, he had persuaded man to disobey in a garden.
Perhaps he could do it again.
If he could not persuade the man to desist from dying, then he would claim his pound of flesh and his right to Jesus's soul on the cross; the rebellion of this holy creature would then be over.
As Jesus agonised over his death — a death unique to the Son of God — he sweated drops of blood and he felt his heart failing him.
‘Don't let me have to do it,’ three times he begged the Father.
(Hell cheered him on.)
But the Father asked only obedience, even to the end, and Jesus resolved to die.
The forces of hell reflocked around the cross.
They had missed him in the garden, but now if he was truly a son of Adam he would die.
When Jesus was scourged by the Roman soldiers he bled like a man.
His crown of thorns wounded him like any other victim of torture.
Hell was confident, and the Evil One moved in to claim his prize.
Jesus the Son of Man and Son of God, who had conquered sin within the depths of humanity was taken ‘without a city wall’ to die on a Roman gibbet.
The champion of the people was nailed to the wooden beams and lifted up between two murderers.
God in the middle contending for the world, a man on his left choosing to side with the Evil One till the last, and on the right a thief who with his last gasp offered his broken solidarity back to God for healing and restoration.
Above the head of Christ were the words — ordered by a conscience-stricken Roman governor  who refused solidarity with him —‘Jesus, King of the Jews ’.
The crowds jeered and mocked, not knowing that he was the king of the universe and the deliverer of the captives.
The human world and hell joined forces to scoff at the dying man.
‘I thirst,’ he cried.
One man alone remembered his forgotten humanity, and the Spirit of God flared within him with the brightness of Eden, and against the crowd, with the dignity of a true son of God, he offered some unrefined wine on a sponge to the dying king.
By now the intoxicating swell of success had unseated the demons, who, fey with the scent of victory, yelled at their victim to leap off his cross and show them his tricks.
The mob, more demonised than human, took up the cry: ‘If you are the Son of God, get off the cross.’
Amid the banter and foul jibes of the crowd — drunk as all crowds are at a blood-letting — the God-bearer Mary and a few disciples stood numb with horror and dread as they saw their Lord and their champion humiliated, despised and broken.
Jesus called out to the Father in his spirit and with his voice: ‘Father forgive them for they know not what they do.’
The final words of forgiveness had a threefold action.
Firstly, the cry was the cry of solidarity with the corrupted hopelessness and dereliction of all men and women broken by sin and separation.
It was the cry to let them be; from one who knew no sin came the plea from the heart of humanity, ‘Have mercy on us.’
There was no question of an appeal to justice: it was the penitent's cry for forgiveness.
Secondly, the cry of forgiveness was for the covert bondage of unwitting sins, the habits of sinfulness that bound a lost humanity.
The cry for forgiveness was also the cry for inward healing and deliverance from the mental and physical effects of sin.
Thirdly the cry to the Father was to set the captives free from the Devil, who ensnares and traps what goodness is left in human beings.
The human and material world needed to be cleansed from within, but it also needed to be liberated from the powers without.
‘Father forgive them for they know not what they do’ was the threefold shout of victory: of forgiveness, of healing, of liberation.
But the words masked the meaning and reality from the crowds of fallen men and angels who were awaiting the final denouement.
And when it came, the sun itself could not look upon the death of God.
The sky turned black and, as it were, God the Father mourned and turned his back on his only Son.
It was nearing the ninth hour, and Jesus, who had resisted sin throughout his life, now, because of his obedience, became sin itself — not by wilful act but by being made the crucible of the whole sum of human evil.
And the Father could not look at him and the Spirit fled away.
‘My God why hast thou forsaken me,’ echoed the voice of Jesus in the terror of unrelated naked existence.
Cut adrift from sustaining love, and dwelling in the deepest bowels of evil, the divine Logos, the person of Jesus, chose this moment of absolute sin and forgottenness to die.
‘It is finished,’ breathed Jesus, and he expelled his life with his final word.
For the disciples round the cross the words were the pronouncement of doom: the end of hope and meaning, the extinction of faith, defeat.
That was the experience of Christ's death in the natural order.
But in the supernatural universe the Great Battle was won in the twinkling of an eye.
As the Devil (feeling the final breath of his adversary leaving him) lurched forward to seize his prize, and as the demons howled their triumph like a frenzied pack of wolves falling upon their slaughtered prey, Jesus appeared to them in terrifying power.
The disciples heard ‘It is finished’ as the scream of defeat, but the devils heard the words as the shout of victory.
In a moment the reality of God's judgment crashed through the barrier of their self-delusion.
Jesus the Christ was, after all, not only a perfect man but the Ancient of Days.
Instead of hauling another lifeless victim into Hades, the Evil One's power was destroyed, and Jesus entered the gates of hell in triumph.
He harrowed hell with the same spiritual vigour with which he had overturned the tables of the money-changers in the temple, and the faithful dead were set free.
The Devil knew that if hell could not hold Jesus, neither could death.
He had lost the second war in the Great Battle of  the universe and had forfeited his power over humankind for ever.
And on the third day after his death the human body of Jesus, still reposing in the sanctity of the divine presence, was quickened by the Spirit and the person of Jesus of Nazareth was restored to life.
But now the human nature of Jesus was not only perfect — as it had been from conception — it was a risen humanity beyond death.
Jesus was and is the new Adam: not the unfallen Adam of innocent humanity restored, but the first of a redeemed and resurrected humanity — a greater and more gloriously human humanity than ever the first Adam knew.
By his death and resurrection Jesus had smashed the powers of the Devil and in his own person reconstituted the full restoration of communion between God and man.
Part Three: The Completion
Christ's earthly obedience ended in triumph, and the crucial battle against the Evil One was won.
But the war was not over.
Jesus had shown the way back to God and had demonstrated in his own person that he was the Way, but men and women in order to return to God would need to freely join themselves to the new humanity of Christ.
Having achieved our reconciliation to God Jesus now asks people everywhere to be reborn of the Spirit in order to enter into his new humanity.
By nature we cannot be divine, uncreated life, but we can be adopted into the redeemed humanity of Jesus.
In this the threefold action of God is again revealed to us.
Jesus the Son was sent into the world by the Father through the Spirit.
Jesus departed the world, ascended into heaven, and sent the Holy Spirit from the Father.
The Spirit on the day of Pentecost constituted the church that Christ instituted.
Henceforth to be a Christian is to be united to the risen Christ through the adoption of the Spirit.
The church is to reflect the mystery of the divine communion: members of the church are to be personally related to each other and, through the Holy Spirit, to Christ the head.
The vision of the church as a body is not an accidental analogy.
The body is the new humanity: the one person of Christ and his adopted brothers and sisters.
However, because we are adopted by the Spirit and yet naturally sons and daughters of Adam, the old nature still wars with the new.
The church is not, in this world, the perfect body of Christ, but is composed of sinful members under grace.
And it is because the new humanity is made up of free men and women that God wishes that all should be saved: his delay in invading the world and bringing an end to history is to allow time for the new humanity to supplant the old.
The stay of final judgment upon the universe is an exercise of the divine mercy: God wants a fully redeemed humanity, not a remnant.
Christ entered into humanity to defeat the Dark Power that oppressed us and to set us free from the corruption within.
The Jesus who has shown his solidarity with us now calls us to show our solidarity with him.
He does not ask us to emulate him: we are not divine, and none of us could die for the world.
The Lord's death was a unique and a once-for-all event.
However, the final victory over sin was anticipated but not completed on the cross.
It was actually achieved but not yet fully realised.
And so just as Jesus showed his at-one-ment with us, he now asks us to show our at-one-ment with him, and join him to continue the Great Battle until the final defeat of Evil and the ‘restoration of all things’.
Twice the Devil has been decisively defeated by God, but his strategies remain the same.
He can never destroy the creator, but he can still spoil and corrupt his creation.
Just as he spoilt the old humanity, he now tries to spoil the new one.
There is, however, a difference.
God never promised the old humanity that it could resist and defeat the Evil One.
But the church of Christ has been told that the ‘gates of hell shall not prevail’ against her.
The world was never told by God that it could overcome the evil inherent in it, but Christ tells his disciples to be of good cheer because he has overcome the world.
Jesus departed the world so that he could equip the church with the weapons and armour of the Spirit.
When Christians  choose to face Satan in the Spirit — in the new nature — they are not only living and adopted members of Christ's new humanity, they are also by definition his soldiers.
As companions of the Spirit, a holy company, we are victors as Christ is victor.
Postscript: The Divine Drama Now
Throughout church history, and as we move towards the eschaton , we must recognise that the world is not yet kingdom territory.
Until Christ's return it remains enemy territory.
Sadly, Christians have too often forgotten that the world belongs to Satan and is not our natural home (as sons and daughters of the new humanity).
Sometimes Christians have tried to build the new Jerusalem on earth, and church history is littered with the debris of broken dreams, from the wreckage of Byzantium to the forgotten Puritan theocracy of New England.
Christian civilisations have risen and fallen.
Today we are supposedly living in the first great secular age of history (though do we not still worship our own pagan idols — of money and success?).
Ironically we find that this mixture of heathenism and paganism is rather like living in the primitive church.
Perhaps it is less hopeful in some senses, because unlike the early church we are living in a post-Christian age.
What is certain is that we need to recapture the vision of the primitive church, for if only we could drag ourselves away from our television sets and unhook our headphones from our portable stereos we would hear the clear call to arms.
The Great Battle is no longer at Golgotha or frozen in church history, it is here now.
We must abandon our leave and return to active service.
The Enemy is upon us and we have no time to organise ourselves into battalions and ordered companies.
Scattered and divided, we must act like all true liberation armies.
Let us pass the word along and come together to fight in the only way left open to us — the way the church has always been meant to fight — behind enemy lines.
THE CHRISTIAN STRUGGLE FOR THE MODERN WORLD
‘Christianity is the story of how the rightful king has landed…in disguise, and is calling us all to take part in a great campaign of sabotage.’
(Lewis 1942: 46)
ENEMY-OCCUPIED TERRITORY
APPROACHING MODERNITY
In Book One my main concern was to show that the Christian life is one that has to be seen in the context of the Great Battle.
This battle, I have argued, is no less than the fight between God and the Devil.
I do not believe that the gospel story — of redemption and reconciliation — can be adequately told without the clamour of spiritual warfare or without the primary role of the Evil One.
However, I have also been at pains to show that we need to distinguish the reality of evil from crude and literalistic representations of it.
The primitive church employed mythology to augment and explicate the great truths of the gospel.
In my retelling of the Divine Drama I have made use of primitive mythological ways of speaking because I do not believe that we have a better language that is available to us when it comes to understanding God's revelation as story — as the great epic of salvation.
I do not think either that we can make sense of the Devil in the language of contemporary philosophy or science; on the other hand neither do I believe that we should try and invent a modern mythology that makes the Devil more credible and accessible.
To revamp our old Enemy for contemporary consumption is to run the risk of creating a science fiction that will be seen as fantasy rather than science.
We must be prepared to understand the Evil One as the Dark Power — that which is evil — rather than elaborating (new) mythologies that concentrate on personalised demons and personified devils.
I say this because I am anxious that having decided to reject the modernist notion that there is no Devil — and therefore no Christian dualism — we should not be tempted to fall into the opposite error of conceiving our adversary as no more than a fiend.
Evil is not literally  the ‘dreaded Apollyon’ of Bunyan's allegory Pilgrim's Progress .
If we concentrate only on the mythological representations and personifications of evil, we too easily relegate the Devil to our private worlds of personal torments and individual temptations.
I do not wish to exclude him from such private and individual arenas, for to do so would be to fly in the face of Christian tradition from the fathers to C. S. Lewis and Cardinal Suenens (1982) in our own time.
But I do want us to realise that evil today has to be faced in a far more fundamental and crucial theatre of war: it is in the processes and ideologies of the modern world itself that we find the destructive, impersonal and heartless force of the Dark Power.
We need not wait for evil to swoop out of the cosmos or ascend from the depths of hell: it is here now, not incarnate in human form but embodied in the structures and philosophies of our modern culture.l It is this contemporary culture with which we must grapple and fight.
This for us is the spiritual warfare to which we are called; it is our small though crucial engagement in the Great Battle between good and evil.
I insisted in my foreword that spiritual warfare was down to earth and it is no less than modernity where the battle is now raging.
Understanding this modernity is the prerequisite, the necessary intelligence work if you will, of our struggle for the modern world.
DEFINING MODERNITY
‘If you want to know what a word means,’ said my philosophy tutor, ‘never look it up in a dictionary.’
I have found this useful advice, particularly if one wants to know what a word means in different cultures and groups.
Modernity is a word that evokes a different response in North America, Continental Europe and Great Britain.
While the large Oxford English Dictionary defines modernity as ‘the quality or condition of being modern’, this is not how the word is really used on either side of the Atlantic.
The word itself first came into usage in the seventeenth century and was  not intended as academic jargon or as a sociologism.
It was used simply to stand against all that was feudal or pre-modern.
As a proper noun standing for the state of being modern it has never really caught on as a popular word in everyday speech.
Today in –Great Britain most people do not use the word.
When students come across it they assume it is some sort of technical language.
Increasingly in universities and colleges modernity is becoming a major concept whose usage is increasingly following American philosophical and sociological meanings.
These meanings have given modernity a far more specific content.
So, for example, whereas in France or Italy modernity — which enjoys greater popular usage than in Great Britain — tends to mean ‘these modern times in which we live’, and in Germany modernity means both modern and fashionable, Americans identify modernity as a description of life in advanced industrial societies.
Furthermore, this identification of modernity with life in industrial societies contrasts them with all preindustrial societies (both in a historical sense and in those countries of the Third World that have barely been touched by industrialism).
But in North America modernity, while retaining this basic meaning, has become a term that is not only descriptive of the central features of modern life in advanced societies but increasingly contains a moral dimension; that is to say, modernity is viewed with concern as a source of conflict, contradiction and danger.
The idea that modernity is problematic has caused sufficient anxiety about the modern world for its use no longer to be restricted to the universities and classrooms but to spill out into the everyday culture.
In America today modernity as a term synonymous with the problems of life in the advanced societies has become almost a cliche.
Modernity understood as the modern world in crisis has now hit us with such force that writers of many different political persuasions are addressing the issue (cf.
Kumar 1980 and Greer 1984).
In this book I shall be following an understanding of modernity established by the philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre (1981) and the sociologist Peter Berger (1969).
Both men are Christians, and in the last few years a  number of other Christian writers have followed in their footsteps (Hunter 1983; Guinness 1983; Williamson, Parotta et al 1983; Kolakowski 1986).
Modernity for these writers has been used as an all-embracing concept that includes both the ideologies of the modern world — its ‘modernisms’— and also the economic, social and cultural realities of modern life.
To understand modernity, then, involves an investigation of modern ideologies and methodologies — in science, theology, philosophy, literature, etc.; it also involves an effort to make sense of these ideologies in the context of advanced industrial societies.
It is important, as Christians, to link modernisms with our lifestyles and economic systems, because the crisis of modernity is not just an isolated problem of wrong philosophies or false doctrines, it is also a crisis of wrongdoing and crass social values.
Living in modernity does not mean living in an age that is intrinsically evil because it is modern, but it does mean that we have to understand that we are living in a fallen culture: a culture whose people and institutions and social habits need to be redeemed.
It is not our central concern as Christians to get bogged down in the minutiae of academic arguments concerning the merits and demerits of modernity.
We would be foolish to believe that nothing good could come out of modernity.
But we would be even more foolish if we imagined that modernity is neutral territory: it is enemy territory — as the world, for Christians, has always been.
We shall begin to see in this and the next five chapters that the evils and problems of modernity are of an intensity and subtlety unimaginable a mere two hundred years ago.
The Enemy is at work, and our first task as Christians as we confront our adversary in the Great Battle for the modern world is to identify his strategies.
MODERNITY IN THE RIGHT PERSPECTIVE
In order to do this successfully we have to avoid two snares that our Enemy has set modern Christians.
The first trap is a  sentimental romanticism that turns our attention away from the present battle and leaves us wallowing in nostalgia for the past.
Hankering after the ‘good old days’ is a way of always viewing history with rose-tinted glasses.
Looking backwards with either envy or merely admiration tends to distort history.
It has already happened with Victorian England, for example.
No longer is it to be seen as an age of poverty, disease and false hopes.
Rather it assumes the image of a golden age of progress and stability.
Seen thus, there are no ‘satanic mills’ and violent social upheavals.
These are blotted out by the dominant images of Christian England and the establishment and power of the greatest empire the world has ever seen.
If only we could return to the values of the past, many of us dream, how much better life would be!
Perhaps if we are American we long for the early seventeenth-century Puritan theocracy of New England.
Or perhaps for a return to the first Great Awakening of the eighteenth century, when Jonathan Edwards thundered against the evils of the age.
(Such a longing, incidentally, tends to forget certain unpleasant features of the time in question: for black Americans a reassertion of eighteenth-century values would mean a return to slavery.)
No denominations are immune from such romantic longings.
No doubt some Catholics yearn for a return to the middle ages before the Renaissance and Reformation shattered the stability of feudal Europe.
If only life could return to the ‘right believing’ of the church fathers, many Orthodox sigh.
And is not the ultimate ‘nostalgia-trip’ beloved of so many Protestants to return to the full power of the New Testament church (the golden age par excellence for Christians)?
But even this requires a kind of nostalgic astigmatism and amnesia, for the New Testament church is viewed without flaw or corruption, sin or perfidiousness, and we likewise forget the trouble St Paul was having with Corinth, the bitter wrangles over circumcision, and what the Spirit had to say to the churches…
And so the Devil is quite happy as long as we dream our lives away, or become antiquarian, seeking to dredge up  history in order that we can live out our lives in a museum of our own making.
Personally I am strongly committed to a primitive Christianity, but I know that I cannot return to the total world-view of the primitive church.
In the first place I do not know exactly what it was like in all its details.
Furthermore, there are some features of primitivism, attitudes to women for example, or the anti-Semitism of the church fathers, that I find distasteful and not truly Christian.
Crucially, however, the point is this: I cannot pretend that the philosophical Enlightenment has never happened, and that we are not living on the ‘post’ side of a scientific revolution.
Neither can I pretend not to be a modern.
In order to be a Christian and to continue the Great Battle against the Evil One, I cannot return to the life and times of the New Testament church as if there had been no history in between.
What I need is a New Testament Christianity that speaks to the modern man that I am now; a faith, in short, that is real and challenging to modernity.
But if romanticism suits the Devil because it has a habit of slipping us into unreality-away from the real battle — it has an even more pernicious aspect.
At its worst romanticism can be a cloak to disguise naked evil.
Nazism appealed to the romanticism of the German people and attempted to re-create the rituals and folklore of its pagan past.
From 1933 to 1938 the Third Reich tried systematically to restore the old gods and pagan festivals, homeopathic medicines, and the archaic medieval German language.
During the great party rallies at Nuremberg Himmler and the SS hierarchy rode through the streets on horseback, dressed in the full regalia of Teutonic knights.
During this period many travellers to Hitler's Germany found the new enthusiasm for German folklore and the old peasant ways both quaint and charming (but harmless).
But all this re-creation of the old ways was also the creation of the Völkisch : the racially and culturally pure Aryans who were to be the master race destined to rule the world.
Romanticism feeds on the mythology of the past which it tries imaginatively to re-create in the present.
Nazism fed on the dark myths of racial purity and xenophobia dressed up in the glories of a  supposedly great history and an invented Nordic heritage (Walker 1969).
There have been men such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834) and C. S. Lewis who were so rooted in the Christian gospel that their ‘romanticism’ was clearly a prophetic warning against modernity.
But without such a sure embeddedment romanticism becomes sway to the influence of the Dark Power.
Even that great opponent of the industrial system of the nineteenth century Thomas Carlyle (1795–1881) failed to relate his criticisms to the Christian doctrine that he had abandoned as a young man.
He became increasingly attached to an almost Greek sense of the hero, but recast in a mould similar to Nietzsche's superman.
This form of romanticism becomes not only reactionary, therefore, but conducive to the sort of fascism that took root in Europe in the twentieth century.
William Blake (1757–1827), that great romanticist, attacked the new industrial capitalism in the early nineteenth century with great power but not with the radicality of the gospel; he sought to oppose the emergence of modernity with the gnosticism of his mystical Swedenborgianism.
When I was an undergraduate student studying sociology we were all warned of the dangers of romanticism.
Early sociologists such as Ferdinand Tonnies (1855–1936) and Émile Durkheim (1858–1917) tended to bemoan the loss of community in the face of modern urbanism; there is a wistful longing for the past in aspects of their analysis of the modern world.
In recent years, however, I have realised that although romanticism can distort the past, there is an even greater trap into which we can fall.
This trap is the Devil's second snare and is the one he sets if he fails to catch us with the first one.
Furthermore, it is my conviction that this artifice is more dangerous than the first and is widespread in the secular culture and the churches.
It is a belief that everything in the present is superior to the past.
C. S. Lewis called it ‘chronological snobbery’(Lewis 1955: 159).
This belief distorts the past because it can see nothing good in it.
The old days are always the ‘bad old days’.
Life before modernity was ‘nasty, brutish and short’.
In fact such a  view tacitly rests on one of the ideologies of modernity: a belief in continual progress (see chapter seven).
It is difficult to resist this view because of the great successes of medicine, public health, education, welfare and technology.
When I was at school and university in the 1960s, when the myth of progress was still very much alive, my social and political lessons tended to recite the advances of the century as a long list of linear progress: the gradual emergence from primitivism to modern civilisation.
Feudalism was basically bad; modern democracies are good.
The economics of late feudalism were inefficient; capitalism is efficient as an economic system (and hence superior).
Preindustrialism was incapable of generating wealth (and therefore bad); industrialism generates great wealth (and is therefore good).
And so on.
Many people living today, in the advanced industrial societies at least, cannot imagine that anything in the past was better than it is in the present.
Lewis sees this as a sort of snobbism because it rests on the uncritical acceptance of the notion that our contemporary culture and intellectual ideas are superior to the past simply because they are new.
Phrases such as‘out of date ’ and ‘old fashioned ’suggest that we are always moving on to better things.
Living in modernity facilitates this belief because we live in a world of rapidly changing fashions and technologies.
There are always new and better cars, new and better clothes, new and better consumer goods of all kinds, and, it is thought, new and better ideas.
To be thoroughly modern, like Millie, is to be ‘with it’ and ‘where it's at’.
And where it's at is always the latest though ephemeral social and intellectual fashions of the day.
Looking around us we can see affluence and a long-living and healthy population.
But the health and wealth of contemporary society blinds us to the decadence and moral sickness under our noses.
If romanticism's distorted view of the past clouds its view of the present, chronological snobbism's myopic image of the contemporary world leads it to look at history ‘through a glass darkly’.
If we wish to measure the past in terms of life-expectancy, poverty, ignorance, disease, education, comfort and leisure, then there is no doubt that the modern world in the West has  come a long way.
There are millions of people in the Third World today who would gladly exchange their lifestyles for a dose of materialistic and scientific modernity.
But there are other scales of measurement besides technology, medicine, and even the basic human need for food.
These are the scales of spiritual, moral and personal values.
Such values cannot be measured by numbers (though Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), the founder of utilitarianism, thought that they could), but are no less real for all that.
Modernity is a historical process that began in the eighteenth century with the philosophical Enlightenment.
It accelerated in the nineteenth century as industrialisation took place, and increased even more rapidly in the twentieth century under the impact of advanced technology and science.
Modernity is a radical break, both socially and philosophically, with feudalism.
So what did we gain with modernity and what did we lose?
Remembering the dangers of our two traps, may I propose that we take an imaginative journey back in time to the year 1700?
North America was still such a young country in 1700 that it will be more useful to look at Europe during this time.
As the Enlightenment and early capitalism had such a major effect in Great Britain, let us home in on England.
After spending some time there (as if we were actually present) we will gradually come back to the present day, and as we do so we will become more reflective and try and push the present away from us — making it strange — by maintaining a certain distance from our immediate history.
Ironically, as we come nearer home we will slip into the past tense.
KNOWING THE ENEMY — The coming of modernity
Going back in time takes some imaginative effort, so please switch off your computers, video games and television sets.
(Was there life before television?)
Good.
There are now less visual stimuli, but it is still far too loud.
Could you now unplug your hi-fis, remove your laser playing compact discs, turn off all your tape decks and old-fashioned record players.
If there is anyone cheating, I mean those still wired for sound, please remove your headphones and listen.
It's much quieter now.
But let us go further and imagine a world without ‘steam radio’ and ‘talking pictures’.
There is still too much electrical environment.
In Eastern Europe cities are dim and drab compared to most Western towns; there are no neon lights and glaring bulbs to dominate the skyline and illuminate the streets.
Imagine first of all that our cities become as dim as these Eastern towns.
Having got used to this, be really bold and pull the switch on electricity altogether.
Off go the modern appliances (no more dish-washers, hoovers, microwave ovens and refrigerators).
Out go the lights in Times Square and Piccadilly Circus and all the cinemas close down, and the IBM typewriters stop chattering, and the computer screens go blank.
Hospitals close, trains stop, radar goes on the blink, satellites spin wordlessly in space, and for everyone dialling long distance or local calls, the pips announce that time is finally up.
Come on you iconoclasts, don't stop now!
Let's go the whole hog.
Clap your hands and insist that natural gas goes up in a puff of noxious air.
As for you ‘Greenies’ this is your moment: wave your arms and abolish petrol — with all its lead poisoning — and the internal combustion engine along with it.
Well done!
Of course you realise that having dispensed with petrol with a quick flourish you have also abolished plastics, polymers and detergents, not to mention over a hundred major products necessary to modern industry.
Still, never mind — we will just have to make do with animal furs and leather where we are going.
(Sorry about that.)
Let's pause for a while in order to breathe in some pure air.
I don't think that we would enjoy the Victorian smog of 1880 London, so let's settle for 1850 England.
Well here we are.
Funny kind of place isn't it?
There are no rockets, aeroplanes, cars, motorcycles, trams, or even bicycles.
Aren't the cities small?
But at least there are nice reassuring mechanical sounds and clankings during the day.
It's quite nostalgic really — all these steam engines in the factories and those funny little locomotives; nothing but boilers, pistons and rivets.
But the countryside!
Absolute deafening silence.
Not a tractor in sight.
No buzzing saw mills, no electric milking machines humming away.
Just horses and ploughs and, for want of a better word, peasants.
Let us take a last look at the towns before we move on.
It's difficult to look, I admit, as it is now night-time.
Some streets are dimly lit by smoking torches, but the houses have only the shadowy light of candles and oil-lamps.
Most people seem to be in bed!
Well I suppose there is not much to do.
(Is this the real reason why the birth-rate is so high?)
Can you imagine that these people have never listened to canned music or swigged a ‘Coke’, never twiddled with radio frequencies, never seen Dallas on TV, never answered the phone, and never played Space Invaders?
Those that are still up do at least seem to be talking to each other!
Gosh it's cold here.
Have you noticed the chill and damp that pervade everywhere?
I mention this not in order to remind you of the central heating that you have left behind, but to warn you not to get ill.
Here in Victorian England they have no antibiotics, and medicine is barely out of the Stone Age.
Where we are going (1700 England) they have only just got over periodic waves of bubonic plague.
No need to be alarmist, but it's time to be off.
Perhaps we  ought to be a little more circumspect.
This is not supposed to be a travelogue, and I can see from your faces that you want a little more than a cheery jaunt…
…
Well here we are.
(I hope that I have not left anybody behind!)
As you can see, not only is there no electricity but there are no steam engines and very little industry.
Over in West Sussex you can see the ‘Hammer Ponds’ where the iron ore is still smelted with charcoal.
Believe it or not, it is the centre of the European iron industry.
But I can see that you are bewildered, and I know why.
You want to know where all the people have gone.
It looks like the Ireland of the 1850s after the great potato famines: there is no one about.
The first thing to remember is that the England and Wales of 1700 has a total population of only five and a half million people.
Over eighty-five per cent of these are scattered throughout the country in small villages and hamlets.
Outside London, cities are so small that only Birmingham, Bristol, Exeter, Newcastle, York and Norwich have more than ten thousand residents.
A real shock for British moderns of the late 1980s is to discover that Norwich, with over thirty thousand citizens, is the largest city outside of London!
London itself is a great metropolis of half a million residents.
Even now it is the magnet that draws the rural peasants and small businessmen looking for work and casual labour.
All roads lead to London, but thank goodness we can travel by imagination, because there are no hard-surfaced or tarmacked roads.
Travel for most people is by foot or horseback.
The rich landed gentry and the new but small professional classes may run the risk of travelling in an unsprung carriage on the winding dirt roads (not to mention the risk of highwaymen).
Perhaps an even greater shock for us than the small population, tiny towns and scattered rural communities is the shape of the countryside; the physical geography seems to be different.
The river Thames, for example, is much shallower and slow flowing.
(So that's why the river is always freezing over in winter!)
But the real eyecatcher is the acres and acres of fields unmarked or constricted by hedgerows.
Hedges as  boundaries have not been invented, and England has yet to be enclosed by the landlords in neat and formal fields.
Just as North America once had no barbed wire dividing the range, neither does eighteenth-century England have any boundaries, excepting mountains and rivers (and some fortified towns, agricultural ditches and low stone walls).
Perhaps this was the ‘green and pleasant land’ that Blake was invoking.
There is nothing like this countryside in the England of the twentieth century (though rural Ireland is somewhat similar).
But let us keep our attention fixed on 1700.
There is a small landed gentry and a growing professional class that make up perhaps eight per cent of the population.
They are extremely well educated.
Indeed the gentry prefer to leave business to the professionals ('those damn usurers') and concentrate on the arts and natural sciences, religious speculation and, of course, a little hunting.
It is the aristocrats in England, as is the case in Continental Europe, who will lead Europe by the nose out of the philosophical world-view of a dying feudal order.
As we are time-travellers we can peer into the future and notice that it is the professional class that will have the last laugh; for the ‘bourgeoisie’(as Marx called them) took over from the gentry.
It was the businessmen, not the lords, who called the tune when the industrial system began.
However, as we know them in the modern world, there are virtually no middle classes in 1700.
The vast majority of the population are labouring peasants or artisans in the cottage industries of the villages or the small cities.
Peasants and small town workers are chronically under-employed and the majority of the population is illiterate.
The gentry and professional group own more wealth than all the lower classes put together.
(Did the romanticists among you imagine that you would have been a member of the gentry if you were alive in this England of 1700?)
Disease and poor diet are endemic.
The rich eat too much meat and suffer from chronic constipation, diseases of the bowel, gout, and bladder stones.
Looking at the poor, we can see that they eat plenty of roughage, but their diet lacks essential vitamins and protein.
Everywhere there is a total lack of understanding about  hygiene, antisepsis, and the importance of sanitation.
Perhaps it is just as well that we are travelling by imagination and not with our physical senses, because many of the towns and cities still carry open sewers in the streets.
Medicine is prescientific.
Bloodletting is popular among the doctors and apothecaries, but herbal medicine, witchcraft and spells are rampant in the general population.
Bubonic plague, as I promised you, is now virtually absent from England, but people in the towns die in their thousands from periodic waves of influenza, dysentery, typhus and smallpox.
Death is literally to be found in the midst of life.
Infant mortality is phenomenally high, and many children die before they reach six years of age.
Even the aristocracy is not exempt.
Life expectancy is so low that the average life span of men just before we got here (in the last quarter of the seventeenth century) was 29.6 years.
I Admittedly if we stay in the rural districts of England in 1700 we will discover that forty to fifty years is not unrealistic, but old age is rare.
For those men and women who live into middle age, pain, disease and poverty are the norm rather than the exception.
My guess is that many of you have had enough of life before modernity.
To go back to 1700 is to look at a life that is very little different, for most men and women, from that of 1500 or even 1200.
Most peasant cultures remain unchanged in their essential structures for hundreds of years.
So by taking a trip back nearly three hundred years we could say that we have covered the pre-modern world thoroughly enough.
But, in the words of the film, we cannot yet go ‘back to the future’.
If we go back now, we will go back with only half-truths.
This is one of the Enemy's favourite tricks: nothing is more convincing than a half-truth joined on to a lie.
It has been necessary to look with open eyes so we would not see 1700 as a pastoral idyll or an untroubled world.
Let's face it: how many of us would want to live here?
Modernity will, however, overcome many of the basic problems of poverty, superstition and disease, extremes of wealth and ignorance.
But let us take one more look before we return to modernity.
Family life is very different from today.
The emphasis  in marriage is not on sexual and romantic compatibility but on the rearing of children and economic stability.
Women are bound by their biological functions as child-bearers, and their lack of education no doubt acts to their detriment as full participants in social and political life.
But most men are also uneducated and lacking in chances for advancement.
What we do find, however, is that women's work is not so divorced from the work of men as it becomes in later times.
The family, not the factory, is the major unit of economic production in 1700.
The housewife of modern times has not yet been invented.
Women are involved in the cottage industries and farms.
Furthermore, women are not as isolated from each other as they are in the world of the 1980s.
Sisterhood, in the feminist sense, is a reality here.
Mothers, mothers-in-law, aunties, grandmothers, first and second (and third) cousins are all bound together in a community of common suffering and joy.
(No less a modern authority than Germaine Greer (1984) has insisted that sisterhood is a greater reality in preindustrial society than liberated modernity.)
Living in community in 1700 may not be living in the kingdom, but there is a world of common commitments, understandings and religious belief.
Relationships are personal (sometimes unpleasantly so) because there is no other way to relate; there is no state machinery and there are no bureaucratic organisations or industrial complexes.
Men and women may or may not be moral in practice in 1700, but there is no doubt that they have a common sense of morality which is itself bound up with a religious world-view.
Peter Berger calls this a ‘sacred canopy’(Berger 1969) that informs, makes sense of and interprets the world as the focus of God's concern.
Despite cruelty and sinfulness there is a common sense of the moral and spiritual universe which is binding on all persons.
In short, people here sin, but at least they know what sin is.
No doubt some of you will find this less than convincing in the face of the superstition and magic that exists everywhere.
This is the negative side of rural life, where the gods of old mix with the Christian God in an uneasy alliance.
But even this points to a living belief in the supernatural realm.
What is  more, this is only a whisper away from primitive Christianity, which is kept alive by faithful worship, rituals and community practices.
Christianity bites deep into the culture of pre-industrial societies, and in 1700 life may be full of pain and suffering and hardship (which are not good in themselves) but these life-experiences point to the mystery of life in Christ and the reality of his suffering for the world.
If we walk round the towns and villages we will not find the acquisitiveness and competitiveness of modernity.
(How many modern Christians value these modern attributes as somehow good!
It is precisely because our modern economic system champions these things that we find so little community spirit alive in the advanced industrial societies.)
Crime exists, but rape is rare, and murder and theft exist on a minute scale compared to the urban crimes of the twentieth century.
A feature of village life that we cannot help noticing is how people come together to share their common joys and griefs.
The sacred canopy of a still Christian England is not just a question of shared beliefs and a common moral perspective: it is an involvement in communal, religious and social rituals which bind people together.
People have roots, both spiritually and socially, and these are clearly important to their identity and security.
This strange world of 1700 England has a naturalness and simplicity of behaviour not yet tainted by the enticement of big towns and the whims of fashionable society.
Perhaps I had better not go on in this way or things will get too mushy and pastoral after all.
But we must beware of cynicism.
For too long we Christians have heard the modern world blowing its own trumpet.
Yes, it is true that much has been gained, but we need to understand from the perspective of pre-modern rural England some of the things that have been lost.
However, we must return to the present day.
We must come back with haste, but as we travel let us also reflect on some of the things we see: looking with the eyes of discernment for the hand of the Enemy on the controls of the engine of progress.
THE ENLIGHTENMENT
Already by 1740 European feudalism is experiencing its death throes.
Crucially for Christianity, that great Puritan era of the Reformation is also drawing to a close.
The landed gentry of Europe have become a leisured class cut off from the peasantry and increasingly divorced from the authority of scripture.
The humanist Renaissance of the late Middle Ages had already witnessed the gradual emergence of reasoning independent of the church.
The Reformation accelerated this process, even though the Bible had become the primary if not the sole authority of the churches.
But tragically the Reformation produced a number of unintended consequences that were certainly not in the minds of Calvin and Luther.
One consequence was this: once it was accepted that scripture stood alone outside tradition, and could be interpreted correctly by anyone with a pure heart and God-given rationality, it was not too big a step to suggest that the same could also be said of nature.
Although many of the great scientists and philosophers of the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century were Christians, they became increasingly attached to the supremacy of reason.
The dawn of the philosophical Enlightenment had almost no effect upon the average European who still tilled his feudal strip and grazed his animals on the common land.
But if we move out of the fields and villages and into the great houses of Europe and the salons of fashionable society, we can see a revolution beginning.
Among these men where learning and speculation have become a leisured pursuit — where the amateur-cum-Renaissance man is king and the dilettante is the hero — a new world-view is being forged.
Just as the new physics of Einstein will have such a devastating effect upon the philosophy of the twentieth century, so it is the physics of Isaac Newton (1642–1727) that so fires the imagination of the aristocratic intelligentsia.
This natural philosophy (science), and the methodology of Francis Bacon (1561–1626) and Rene Descartes (1596–1650), seems to  suggest that the universe is run not by divine decree but by natural laws; laws that can be discovered by the application of the human mind through the senses (by observation) to the physical world.
The world — and especially the empirical (the sensate) world — is becoming the prime focus of attention.
God and ‘eternal verities’ are almost out of vision.
It is true that God is not yet totally banished from his creation, but having made it and all that is in it, rather like a watchmaker constructs a timepiece, he is felt to be no longer necessary to explain the inner workings of the mechanism.
Perhaps too much emphasis was given in hyper-Calvinism to God the lawgiver?
It was not such a great step in reducing him to the laws-giver.
Faith in reason and its ability to crack the code of the universe by discovering the scientific laws that sustain it will become the new legalism of the dawning secular age.
And the personal and loving Father, the almighty and awesome Yahweh, bows out to the god of Aristotle: the impersonal first cause in a chain of scientific causation — the ‘unmoveable mover’.
No wonder that theism is abandoned with such alacrity by so many of these new philosophers.
Unitarianism is often the stepping-stone to a rampant deism.
When the trinitarian God of biblical faith and credal affirmation becomes the one sovereign God locked into himself, the eternal love of the three persons of the Trinity which is naturally dynamic and outflowing becomes static and inward looking.
Deism frees this bound-in monadic god by releasing him as an immanent but impersonal spirit.
Nature becomes her own god and pantheism dances its way through the coffee houses and salons of Europe.
What an irony: the great rational philosophical Enlightenment opens the door to paganism!
But some of the new philosophers and freethinkers — Voltaire (1694–1778), for example— go the whole hog and, particularly in Catholic France, where anticlericalism spurs it on, atheism takes root.
Atheism is virtually unknown in pagan and rural societies, but this new rationalism will usher it into the modern world.
The Enlightenment, then, is far more than a revolution in theories of knowledge (epistemology) or even new methods in science and critical philosophy.
We must not move on until  we have understood that this philosophical impetus to the modern age is the rise of a new humanism with man at the centre.
This is the great ‘paradigm shift’— to borrow a phrase from Thomas Kuhn (1970)— of the Enlightenment.
God has been replaced by man.
And it is men and women in relation to each other, and in relation to nature, that really captures the imagination of these drawing-room philosophers.
As Alexander Pope (1688–1744), that great versifier of the Enlightenment, puts it:
Know then thyself, presume not God to scan,
The proper study of mankind is man.
And out of this fascination with man two modern versions of him are born.
There is the ‘individual man’, who will become the basis for both modern morality and the principles of democracy.
He is not really a man related to other men in natural affinity or community: he is atomised man, human society pared down to a single individual.
He is man alone.
In the morality of Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) and John Locke (1632–1704) and the later utilitarians he can only act in his self-interest.
He enters into a social contract with other men only in order to preserve his own interest and (in some versions) pleasure.
Individual man is not condemned under the fall.
He is driven by self-preservation rather than sin.
The social contract theories are a metaphysical fiction to explain the origins of society, but they also create the mythology that human beings are essentially innocent.
In their different ways both Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) saw young children as being free from the taint of original sin.
In the greatest of the Enlightenment philosophers (notably Immanuel Kant, 1724–1804) the individual is seen as possessing ultimate worth and dignity.
This is perhaps one of the noblest legacies of the Enlightenment.
But out of a concern for restructuring the traditional communities of feudal Europe into mobile free persons with inalienable rights, modern individualism is born.
Locke, for example, makes the rights of individuals and their right to private property the basis for his democratic principles of a free society.
Adam Smith (1723–1790) and the Scottish philosophers and economists construct their principles of capitalist economics upon a belief in the rights of individuals to pursue their own wealth and happiness.
Laissez-faire is an economic system based on individualism and self-interest.
Indeed the whole point of Smith's contention in his 1776 treatise The Wealth of Nations is that if individuals pursue their own self-interests then, as it were, an invisible hand will guide all their separate strivings and competition and lead them into the greater good for society as a whole.
But another modern man also comes to life in the eighteenth century: the ‘collective man’.
Modern democracy in the West is based on the principle of ‘one man one vote’.
This is the positive side of individualism; no one is to count more than another.
This clearly echoes the gospel, despite the distortions of rational philosophy.
But the collective man, the man of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831), and later Karl Marx (1818–1883), but supremely of Rousseau, eschews individualism altogether.
Rousseau, who was an incurable romantic, wanted to preserve the community of innocent and primitive social life, but wanted the community to take precedence over the rights of its individual members.
Strictly speaking, collective man is no man at all, but an aggregate or abstraction of real flesh-and-blood men and women.
These men and women always belong to and are made sense of only as a part of the collective — the race, the nation, the state, the republic, the class, etc.
Modern psychoanalysis has taught us a great deal about the ‘splitting’ and division that takes place within our own personality.
On a philosophical level, the Enlightenment created a whole series of dualisms that have permeated deep into the heart of modernity: the collective is divided from the individual (leaving community a virtual impossibility) and the spiritual world is divided from the material world, leading either to gross materialism or to an other-worldly and gnostic spirituality.
(Also, as we shall see in chapter eight, Kant divided the world of metaphysics from the world of the senses and created havoc for theology and philosophy generally.)
In a moment we are about to leave the leisured and leisurely world of the eighteenth-century gentlemen and hurtle through the mechanical and material world of nineteenth-century England, where the revolutionary ideas of the aristocratic philosophers will become embodied in the social, political and economic structures of industrial Europe.
But before we go we must understand the full import of what we have seen.
The Enlightenment was the morning star of modernity.
Without it, modern democracy and republicanism could not have come into existence and scientific and technological progress would not have been possible (and possibly slavery might not have been abolished).
It was a period of remarkable intellectual illumination; a time when a new idealism and optimism transformed man's understanding of himself, his society and the universe.
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (1781) was just one of the major works that heralded a new way of doing philosophy: the beginning of that critical rationality that Sir Karl Popper so admired and saw as a turning-point in the history of ideas.
Henceforth, tradition, superstition and, later, biblical authority itself would be under continual scrutiny and correction from the empyrean dictates of critical reasoning.
There was nothing that would be exempted from rigorous examination.
We find after Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz's (1646–1716) raising of the question of theodicy in 1710 that even God himself was put in the dock.
Nothing was to be sacrosanct or sacred, excepting reason itself.
Men would become gods and taste of the fruit of the (critical) tree of knowledge of good and evil.
Eden was not only a historical reality, therefore, but a perpetual temptation for humankind.
And lest we be dazzled by the glare of the morning star of modernity, let us not forget that the morning star in biblical imagery is another name for Lucifer: we must not fail, if we are to defeat the Enemy, to detect the dark side of the Enlightenment.
In the early seventeenth century, science was still married to religion.
Indeed the great majority of the members of the English Royal Society were Puritans (and mainly nonconformist at that).
The divorce of science and religion was a  tragic mistake (Koestler 1959).
And for Christians the Enlightenment has meant that the world of phenomena and, later, the materialistic world have combined to force out the reality of the spiritual realm.
There is nothing intrinsically evil about a scientific world outlook as long as it is rooted in the life and authority of God.
Cut off from that life it is fair game for the Enemy (see chapter seven).
But if rationalism and empiricism have a tendency to blot out God, we must recognise that the Enlightenment's supreme beguilement which has so bewitched modern men and women is a false understanding of human beings.
Not only do we not get from the Enlightenment an understanding of human nature that is under the curse of the fall, neither do we get a true understanding of men and women made in the image of God.
Most importantly, however, we must recognise that neither the individualistic man nor the collectivist man of the philosophers is truly Christian.
Collectivism would eventually lead to totalitarianism — fascism and communism are collectivist ideologies — but it would also surface in the bureaucratic thinking of Western governments and multinational corporations.
Neither should individualism be seen as the Christian corrective to collectivism.
At its worst individualism is rooted in a hedonism (utilitarianism, modern ‘fun moralities’) and a selfishness that the Bible unambiguously calls evil.
The consumerism of the twentieth century needs to be understood as a modern economic mode of hedonistic individualism.
Rampant individualism finds so little interest in the collective that injustice can become the hallmark of some free enterprise systems.
It should be Christians, and not only Marxists, who assert that capitalism too easily turns a blind eye to its exploitation of the Third World.
It could be argued that the false views of humanity perpetrated by the Enlightenment were partly offset by Methodism and the growth of pietism in the eighteenth century.
Certainly it was the case that the new religious enthusiasm that was replacing the dying Puritanism assured the individual of his intrinsic worth, and assured him also that he was loved and cherished by God.
But did pietism, I  wonder, sail too close to the spirit of the Enlightenment?
Is there not a certain over-attachment to one's own salvation and individual worth, with the consequence that missionary endeavour becomes centred on individuals?
Pietism, I would suggest, loses something of the communal commitment of the old Puritan covenant and the earlier Catholic spirit.
But there is no further time for speculation and reflection on the Enlightenment, because one of the false views of humanity (the collectivist kind), after ticking away like a time bomb, explodes in a political event of such fury and consequence that the gentle yet élitist world of the Enlightenment philosophers is destroyed for ever.
NINETEENTH-CENTURY INDUSTRIALISM
Philosophy has a habit of creeping out of boudoirs, salons and the libraries of great houses and inspiring (or beguiling) the minds and aspirations of ordinary men and women.
When it does, when the populace is stirred with a great idea — for good or evil — then such philosophy is never the same again.
The soft glow of the Enlightenment was merely the surface heat of a great fire that exploded in the volcanic fury of the French Revolution.
Like a fiery Pandora's box, the lid was thrown wide open, spewing all the good and evil upon the world (and, like the Greek myth, once good and evil are loosed on the world they cannot be called back).
I do not think there has ever been a period in history when there has been such a violent and irreversible change in the political and social order (unless it be the long-term consequences of the Russian Revolution).
Up until the French Revolution, as we have seen, life for the ordinary rural peasant had remained virtually unchanged for centuries, in a slowly decaying and dying feudalism.
The great changes in intellectual thinking had little effect upon European culture as a whole.
The Revolution changed all that.
It was this cataclysmic political event that shattered the stability of the old order.
A group of men fired with the heady doctrines of republicanism, anticlericalism and atheism shook French society to  its foundations.
This was no peasant revolution, but an insurrection led by the intelligentsia of the new middle classes (those professional groups whom the Enlightenment aristocrats despised as base and usurers).
The murder of the royal family, the ruthless repression of the enemies of the state and the establishment of Madame Guillotine ushered in not a glorious collectivist state as prescribed by Rousseau, but a ‘reign of terror’.
Soon the mask of mob rule and anarchy was replaced by the naked face of despotism, and eventually it gave way to Napoleon's personal image of collectivism: an imperial militarism.
The shock waves of this political explosion engulfed the whole of Europe, so that by 1848 only England of the major nations had not experienced a revolution.
By the 1790s these shock waves had triggered off another seismic event, sending North America (where the struggle for national independence had already begun in 1774) not only away from the English Crown but on the road to a republican state.
By 1818, when the War of Independence was over and the Republican Revolution can be said to have been won, America had rejected both the Crown and religious establishment, and had accepted a creed that granted religious toleration and the ‘natural rights of man’.
Indeed New England was a battleground in the eighteenth century between Puritanism and Enlightenment philosophy.
The American Constitution reflects this battleground but emerges (formally at least) as more of an Enlightenment document than a Christian one.
If one wants to look for the origins of conflict in modern America, one could do worse than line up the eighteenth-century Puritans against the Enlightenment men: say, Jonathan Edwards (1703–1758), Samuel Davies (1723–1761) and Timothy Dwight (1752–1817) versus Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790), Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826), Thomas Paine (1737–1809) and James Madison (1751–1836).
The revolutions of Europe and the New World blew apart the old order for ever; henceforth there could be no going back — no healing of the breach.
The modern world had struggled free of the past.
Soon after the French Revolution in  England, and starting in the 1830s in New England, waves of religious adventism began to sweep across the nations.
The break-up of the old world was seen as a sign of the last times.
When the Christian Brethren movement and the Catholic Apostolic Church emerged in Britain in the 1830s and the Millerites in New England waited for the return of Christ in the 1840s, adventism had already taken firm root in evangelicalism (where it has remained ever since).
And if the religious world sought to understand the passing away of the old order and the emergence of the new one, the secular world too, faced with the greatest social change in history, reacted by the invention of sociology and the construction of grand social theories that would explain it all.
So while such religious men as William Cuningham (1805–1861), Edward Irving and J. N. Darby (1800–1882) pondered the scriptures to understand and prophesy the future, the secularists, Saint-Simon (1760–1825), Auguste Comte (1798–1857) and Karl Marx, sought to predict forthcoming events through the method of Enlightenment science.
But in a sense the cataclysm of the French Revolution was only the outward political symbol of a much greater  cataclysm : the rise of the new system of economics that Thomas Carlyle called ‘industrialism’.
It is this system, with its marriage of technology and the rationality of market economics, that really embodies — makes incarnate — the philosophies of the Enlightenment.
Modernity began in earnest with this industrialism — like the starting up of a great steam-driven machine, straining and clanking at the mechanical bit and snorting with impatience to be off.
Let's follow its progress.
The machine needs feeding, so it gravitates to areas of coal, water and iron.
These areas need developing, so entrepreneurs pump in investment: capital accumulated from the slave trade, sugar and cotton.
But the machine also needs tending, and its food supplies must not dwindle, so labour is needed.
And from the fields and villages of England, where work has slowed to a trickle and where the landlords have enclosed the common lands (after 1802) SO that even subsistence living is difficult, from these fields comes a mighty army of labour.
Tears are shed as the traditional homes and communities are left — where the peasants and their families had lived for hundreds of years— and they go to feed the machine.
The migration is so great that the countryside looks almost emptied.
But the new workers of the modern age must live, and so homes are built around the machine's food supplies; crowded and sprawling, urbanism begins forming part of the machine's superstructure.
Yet the workers who tend the machine and keep open its food supplies must also eat.
So entrepreneurs, owners of mills and factories, offer them wages.
They must keep them low because wages are labour costs that have to be deducted from profit (besides, if the workers do not like the pay there are plenty more around who will take it!).
High wages, they feel, will affect the final cost of their product, and if their product is too expensive there is always another entrepreneur who will sell the same product at a cheaper price.
This new capitalism is a cut-throat enterprise: to stay in business you must not only compete with but beat your competitors.
And so, founded on its sure infrastructure of heavy industries, free-flowing capital and cheap labour, the machine is off.
And what a machine it is.
All over Europe the hum and resonance of its powerful engines can be heard.
(Ah!
This sounds more like the modernity we know.)
As the machine gains momentum, so it grows — almost magically — in size.
Its interconnecting parts — the mechanised looms, the steam-operated factories, the driven conveyor belts — fit together in an ever-increasing and complicated system of cogs and wheels.
The industrial towns grow and the cities swell to take the still coming rural migrants.
And if a few romantics mutter against the ‘satanic mills’, despoliation of the countryside and pollution of the skies from the factory chimneys, the machine shunts them aside as surely as it repulses those Luddites who would shut down its engines if they only knew how.
For though the machine has its critics and it seems clear that not everybody can adjust to its speed and voraciousness, one incontrovertible fact emerges: the machine can generate wealth of such volume as the world has never dreamt.
And with wealth (admittedly unequally distributed between the  social classes) comes new investment and improved products, money for scientific research and technological innovations.
And as the wealth increases in absolute terms even the poorer classes, those who feed but do not run the machine, begin to improve their social conditions and economic power.
Governments begin to slough off some of the wealth in taxes to ameliorate the conditions of the poor and provide public amenities for their citizens.
Scientific research begins to pay off with spectacular dividends in the fields of medicine, physics and chemistry.
By the 1870s the machine has become so sophisticated that it needs more educated people to run it, to learn new techniques of maintenance and improvement, and to keep up its momentum.
Governments initiate education for the masses, and the masses in return are inspired with higher aspirations and demand more leisure time to enjoy their increased earnings.
The machine responds by creating new products to enjoy the new leisure, such as the bicycle and the ‘magic lantern’.
And everywhere in the newly industrialised world people are on the move.
The steam trains revolutionise travel and open up new towns and industrial markets.
New social classes appear who run or are run by the machine.
People's social and religious habits change and a new materialistic culture emerges where life is influenced by the consumption of earnings on goods and products made by the machine.
And the culture glories in the success of the machine and wonders at its might and inventiveness.
The machine seems to need neither worship nor fear to make it run; it is built on rational philosophical principles and sustained by money, labour, steam and steel.
Despite the fact that religious influence declines throughout the nineteenth century (in the fields of work, welfare, education and government), and social disharmony increases as the gap between the poor and rich widens, the century remains essentially one of optimism.
The machine is a winner.
It is as if industrialism and the growing success and power of science confirm all that the Enlightenment stood for: progress, it seems, really is the stuff of the universe.
This appeared to be scientifically supported by Charles Darwin's (1809–1882)On the Origin of Species (1859).
In the eighteenth century Kant and Hegel preached progress based on philosophical and moral conviction.
But the nineteenth century demonstrates it as a scientific fact.
If Darwin showed biologically that evolution was nature's way of natural selection and continual improvement, he was backed up on the social level by all the great social theorists who taught one version or another of perpetual progress.
Whether it be the positivism of Comte, the social evolutionism of Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) and James Frazer (1854–1941), or the socialism of Marx and the Fabians, the slogan they all chanted was ‘Progress, progress, progress’.
The sociologist Émile Durkheim was not quite so sanguine.
He recognised that many of the first and second generation of industrial urbanites were morally and socially disorientated — in a state of anomie or normlessness (a sort of perpetual culture shock).
Clearly also the rise of urbanism brought a concomitant rise of crime and prostitution.
Unless the working classes were caught up in the new sectarian movements of Protestantism (which were themselves a reaction and response to modernity), they were liable to slip into unbelief.
It is historically untrue to say that religious decline in Europe began in the twentieth century: the majority of working people in the first one hundred years of industrialism were not regular churchgoers (though the new middle classes were).
The process of religious decline that sociologists call ‘secularisation’ began with modernity and has continued ever since.
As the machine enters the twentieth century we notice that it is more streamlined.
The people surrounding it and supporting it — and by now many are living off it — are fitter and are living longer than ever before.
They are better educated and more informed — though illiteracy is still widespread among the poor.
Daily newspapers are now becoming popular, providing the first phase of what will later become known as the mass media.
Family size is shrinking as mothers no longer need large numbers of children to work either down the mines or in the factories (the machine would take anybody to work for it at first) or to ensure that a few would survive; high infant mortality rates are now becoming a thing of the past.
There had been some hints in the latter part of the nineteenth century that the machine was not in perfect working order.
As early as the 1860s there had begun a phenomenon that has since become endemic in advanced industrial societies: in a word, recession.
Sometimes the machine would boom along, growing and expanding with heroic speed; then strangely it would halt and slump.
It would still hiss and make noise, but the energy and power were gone; sometimes it would even shrink and contract within itself.
As economic theory had not really moved beyond the ‘invisible hand’ idea of Adam Smith, not surprisingly no one really knew what was wrong with the machine.
But then, as the new, more streamlined, machine slips into the twentieth century, moving smoothly and with a new confidence — and by now virtually everybody is along for the ride — it crashes catastrophically.
THE GREAT WAR (1914–1918)
Ironically, the Great War would not have been the war that it was if it were not for the machine.
With the new science and technology had come new weapons of destruction: armoured tanks, steel submarines and warships, aerial warfare, bombs, machine guns and the huge infantry field-cannons.
There were ‘Whizz-bangs’ and shell-shock, telegraphy and telephones, railways to hasten troops to and from the battlefront, and the new horrors of chemical warfare.
(170,700 men were killed by chemical gas — among those severely injured by Allied mustard gas was an insignificant and then unknown German corporal, Adolf Hitler.)
Still feeding off nineteenth-century optimism and belief in the Empire, millions of young British soldiers perished under the combined efforts of the machine and the Continental mud.
(Did they wonder who was running the machine?
Was anybody at the controls?)
It was by now clear that the economic and technological side of modernity was a power of terrible destruction as well as positive social improvement.
By the end of the war, according to the United States War Department, 8,634,000 military personnel lay dead.
A further  five million civilians were killed (a great number of them in Russia) because of direct military intervention or through the indirect and insidious side effects of famine and disease.
The horror of the war led some Christians to look in desperation for a new understanding of God as the suffering God.
Studdert Kennedy ('Woodbine Willy') wrote, ‘The real truth about the Church is that it is the broken, battered, bleeding but deathless body of the suffering God revealed in Christ.’
But for many more intellectuals it was the death knell of their belief in God.
No great and loving God, they reasoned, could have stood aside and watched the world tearing itself apart.
Meanwhile a young infantry soldier who had fought in the trenches and had been taken prisoner of war was putting the finishing touches to a philosophical treatise that was to bring traditional philosophy crashing down about its ears.
(The young man was an Austrian of half-Jewish descent called Ludwig Wittgenstein, see chapter seven.)
But the machine, as if unaware of all the spiritual anguish and philosophical commotion, and despite the terrible damage wrought by its own locomotion, began to move forward again.
THE INTERWAR YEARS
But this time there was a difference.
There was a new phenomenon: the machine was divided in two.
The old machine continued, but battered and clearly full of technical faults.
However, out of its ruin, yet composed from its constituent parts, a new machine began to thrive and grow with a power of its own.
The outward symbol of this new phase of the (trans) mutant machine was the Russian Revolution.
It is essential for all of us Christians to understand what was happening here.
Modernity is not merely or even supremely capitalism.
The industrial machine that we have followed so far has been the philosophies of the Enlightenment embodied and incarnated in the economic mode of capitalism.
It is capitalism that generates the power of modernity, but the philosophies of the Enlightenment provide its guiding lights  (or, if you prefer, the ‘ghost in the machine’— the software in the computer's brain).
But capitalism is only the individualistic man of Enlightenment creation in economic form.
We must also consider the collectivist man who first burst upon the world with the French Revolution.
These two men are a Janus: the two faces of the same materialistic coin.
Modernity, then, is incurably materialistic but it can look towards either collectivism or individualism.
The Russian Revolution, under Lenin (1870–1924) and Trotsky (1879–1940) in direct  descendance from Rousseau, Hegel, Marx and Engels, decided to alter the course of modernity towards collectivism.
But because such men were materialists and therefore underestimated the power of spiritual and moral values (despite the Soviet invention of the doctrine of ‘dialectical materialism’), they failed to see that they were only perpetuating the problem of modernity in another form.
Indeed there is no doubt that in overthrowing capitalism, and seeing it as the source of all modern evils, the Soviets saw themselves as the true heirs of the Enlightenment.
They also embraced science, materialist philosophy and doctrines of (socialist) progress.
But they went one stage further: Soviet socialism adopted a stance of militant atheism.
With this militant atheism came a ruthless drive against Christianity and an attempt to overthrow traditional ethics as the vestiges of an outmoded and regressive bourgeois morality.
The dominance of the collective (the state) over the individual led to the repression of individuals and a denial of the very basic human rights which the Western Enlightenment had bestowed upon democracy.
Despite the grand titles of ‘freedom’, ‘democracy’ and ‘socialism’, Soviet-style communism inaugurated a ‘reign of terror’far more widespread and horrific than the French Revolution.
To this day no one has accurately computed how many millions of people were killed under the rule of Lenin and Stalin.
In many ways Dostoevsky (1821–1881) had predicted the spiritual bankruptcy of the new collectivism in his novel The Devils (1872)(a novel, incidentally, still banned in the Soviet Union).
Meanwhile in the West, it was not obvious whether the  machine of individualist man would survive.
Would the great engine of progress run out of steam?
Despite all the wonderful new scientific inventions and the beginning of the electric age (and hence new fuels for the machine), the great power of the nineteenth century simply was not there.
People throughout Europe and America began to complain against their new god who seemed to have let them down.
The world economic market seemed to be saturated with demands for goods which the machine could not supply.
Investment was drying up, businesses were collapsing, men were laid off work and wages were cut.
Unrest and revolution were in the air, and strikes, sit-ins and lock-outs were leading to political instability and an increasing possibility that the old machine would be destroyed.
On the other hand, although the machine was in need of a re-fit, the Enlightenment principles that guided and supported it were being increasingly reinforced by changes in philosophy and science.
Perhaps the problem with the machine, thought many of the intellectuals, was that it needed a new design and improved principles to guide it.
In the field of philosophy logical support was claimed for the absolute superiority of scientific and mathematical thinking over religion and even traditional philosophy.
The rise of this logical positivism reinforced the Enlightenment belief in science and rationality (at the very moment that the world was in desperate need of a moral code and a spiritual light to help it through the great crisis — the Depression — of the old machine's apparent demise).
This led to the collapse in many universities of not only traditional moral theories but also many of the great idealistic philosophies (such as Kant's, for example) that had come out of the Enlightenment itself.
Only science and mathematics, declared the positivists, could be depended upon for reliable knowledge and to provide the true basis for progress (see chapter seven).
Science itself had undergone a radical shift since the Great War.
The great Newtonian synthesis of cosmology and physics, which had been the basis of the scientific revolution, was found to be faulty.
The great mechanical cosmos understood in terms of cause and effect, and symbolised technologically  in the mechanistic world of the age of steam, was reinterpreted in a far more sophisticated and brilliant new scientific synthesis, the theory of relativity (first propounded by Albert Einstein in 1905).
This great change in scientific thinking meant little to the masses, but they were able to see the great benefits of modern scientific practice despite the faltering of the economic system.
The discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming in 1928 was only one of the obvious wonders of science, but everywhere people could feel the impact of scientific research: travel on land, air and sea; new electrical and domestic appliances; moving and talking pictures; radio and the telephone.
Modernity was increasingly becoming an industrial system dominated by a scientific world-view.
But science will work for any man.
Having no values of its own, it can work equally well for collectivist man or individualist man.
Science, in short, does not care which machine it works for.
And so the Western machine, although it was responsible for the growth of science, could claim no exclusive ownership of it: it belongs to and supports the materialistic world of modernity, not a particular political or economic system.
Throughout these crucial years of twentieth-century growth, the many colonial countries that had provided so many natural and human resources for the Western machine began to demand an independence of their own, fired by the very principles of democracy that had sprung out of the Enlightenment and inspired the French and American revolutions.
And while Africa and Asia were in ferment, modernity faced its own Waterloo on the fields of the advanced industrial nations.
During the late 1920s and early 1930s when John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946) was working out a new economic system where government intervention would stabilise the negative effects of free enterprise — low investment, acute unemployment — individualist man and collectivist man were fighting it out for supremacy.
The great fear of the Western democracies was Bolshevism.
And with good cause.
There had been aborted revolutions in Germany after the Great War, and an  international socialism (though factional) was spreading throughout Europe.
But collectivism can come in many forms.
When Benito Mussolini (1883–1945) invented fascism in the 1920s (literally national socialism), it was not quite clear whether this was going to be a force to use against Sovietism or a collectivist evil in its own right.
In the event, fascism in either its nationalistic form (Italy and Spain) or its chauvinistic and racist form (Germany) was to prove a totalitarian system of terrifying evil.
Hitler's Germany in particular was an embodiment of the dark side of the Enlightenment: a regime of science, efficiency and power without morality.
But national socialism (Nazism) also fed off the dark side of the counter-reformation to the Enlightenment: a romanticism that was anti-intellectual and irrational.
Not without justification did Rene Guenon understand the hideous strength of Nazism as an unholy marriage of magic and tanks.
THE SECOND WORLD WAR
I believe that the Second World War was a war that had to be won not in order to save Western modernity, or to ensure that individualist man would conquer collectivist man, but simply because Hitler posed the greatest threat to the moral order of the world that history had ever seen.
Fascism was the sly trump card of the Evil One.
While Westerners were impressed that the trains ran on time in Italy, and that unemployment had been solved in Germany, Hitler was preparing for war.
In 1945, when the war against the Third Reich was finally won, and the Allies had also defeated the Japanese Empire, the total loss of life, including the civilian victims of bombing and famine, was fifty-five million people (a figure equivalent to the whole population of Great Britain in the late 1960s).
Furthermore, the Second World War had resulted in the most terrifying weapon of destruction being not only developed but also deployed against the enemy.
When the atomic bomb developed at Los Alamos, New Mexico, was dropped on two Japanese cities in August 1945, the  Apocalypse of St John moved out of the realm of mythology and prophecy into scientific reality.
This is not the age of Aquarius, as the 1960s song so misleadingly supposed: it is the age of imminent judgment.
The Bomb gives the lie to the false Enlightenment doctrine of perpetual progress.
It is a reminder that the social utopias of the philosophers are a delusion.
The atomic age has forcefully reopened that old forgotten Christian question: ‘What if the world should end tonight?’
(Lewis 1975: 82).
COMING HOME: THE POSTWAR YEARS
And yet the end of the Second World War was such a celebration of the defeat of the fascist enemy that there was a failure to grasp the fact that the universal Enemy had merely been rehearsing for Armageddon.
The war, far from finishing off the machine of modernity, had given it new life.
In the capitalist West new markets opened up, and the industries that had become so busy and productive in the war effort were ready to go again in a postwar boom.
The ingenuity of the scientists and technologists, prompted by the necessity of wartime, had created postwar spin-offs: there was the development of the jet engine and radar, rockets and computers, plastics and new synthetic materials.
The Russian Bear, the uneasy ally of the Western powers against fascism, made its own bid for power.
It soon developed the atomic bomb.
Shortly afterwards both America and Russia developed a fusion bomb.
This hydrogen device was more powerful and ‘dirtier’(it had greater radioactive fallout).
Politically the 1950s saw a Cold War between the superpowers — each battling for supremacy in the world economic markets; each striving to gain the upper hand in military might and ideological influence over the developing countries.
At least the battle for supremacy was somewhat channelled symbolically into the race for the moon.
It was surely preferable for the superpowers to fight it out in the space race than blow the world to bits (Wolfe 1979).
When, however, the Americans won the competition with the ‘giant step for  mankind’ in 1969, the peaceful application of space exploration took second place to the development of spy satellites and military innovations.
(The very fact that the proposed ‘Star Wars’ defensive strategy of the United States involves computerised laser technology should alert us to the fact that such a defence has ominous offensive possibilities.)
And all the while the shadow of the Bomb grew longer as the most powerful nations on earth stockpiled enough megatonnes to blow up the world fifty times over.
If this was not enough, India, Pakistan, South Africa and Israel joined Great Britain and France in the growing queue of independent nuclear nations who have entered the atomic lists for the final tilt.
But in the West what really characterises the mid-1950s to the present day, and marks off the contemporary world from the earlier stages of modernity, is the bewildering speed with which the social, technological and ideological changes have taken place.
Modernity went into overdrive.
I once saw a science fiction movie about time-travellers in the future; towards the end of the film the whole story is speeded up and re-run in about two minutes.
Modernity has been a bit like that in the last thirty years, except that as the story progresses, faster and faster — with many Enlightenment doctrines reappearing in new form — new lines keep being added to the narrative so that no one knows how the story will end.
The speeding up of modernity began with the start of modern consumerism.
Of course capitalism is essentially about selling goods, so there is nothing new about consumerism per se .
But in the 1950s, with the switch from heavy industries to light engineering and service industries, a new age of personal affluence got under way.
This affluence was made possible not only by higher wages (in real terms) but because new mass markets in non-essential goods were also opened up for the population at large.
It was one thing in the 1830s and the 1930s to provide luxuries for a minority, but it was quite a different thing to provide non-essential products at a competitive price for the whole population.
Of course consumerism works by convincing people that  they actually ‘need’ non-essential products as an aid to the quality of life.
As J. K. Galbraith (1979) has pointed out the adman actually creates markets and implants ‘needs’ in people; he is not merely responding to consumer demand.
But in the 1950s the first wave of modern consumerism transformed people's lifestyles so that they came to expect it to be right and natural that they should have consumer durables (and increasingly non-durable goods).
Advertising came into its own with the mass media, and soon ‘steam radio’ turned into portable transistors and the old 78s phonographs became radiograms and record players.
Television augmented and soon overtook the cinema as the masses' most popular form of entertainment.
And with television the world of advertising carne right into the home.
What could be better than a captive (and captured) audience!
It may very well be, and I mean this seriously, that the adman invented the teenager.
In all pre-industrial societies children pass from childhood to adulthood by a ‘rite of passage’; there is virtually no in-between stage.
Even in nineteenth-century Europe the passing from young person to ‘grown-up’ was accomplished with the minimum amount of fuss and transition.
But in the 1950s, with the first wave of postwar affluence, young people in transition began to have money and the adman found them a place in the consumer society.
This was the period which saw a revolution in popular music and the beginning of rock'n'roll.
With it came not only new though ephemeral music, but new clothes, magazines, books and films.
At the same time were born new heroes and demigods; the Hollywood dream factory, which had already indelibly stamped the character of both North America and Great Britain by the 1940s, began to spin its web of enticement over the whole of popular culture.
Everyone wanted to be a ‘star’, either in films, music or television (and perhaps even in religion).
But the new teenagers also created new social phenomena and philosophies: ‘the generation gap’ appeared, ‘angry young men’ranted and raved and ‘beatniks’smoked reefers and read about Zen.
The ‘Teddy Boys’ probably heralded  that other new aspect of teenage consumerism — the beginning of modern youth subcultures.
Over the years ‘Mods and Rockers’, ‘Hell's Angels’, ‘Skinheads’, ‘Rude Boys’, ‘Romantics’, ‘Neo-Romantics’ and ‘Punks’were only a few of the pieces in an ever-changing cultural jig-saw.
Lest it be thought that I have singled out young persons as a special problem, let me hasten to add that I think that the behaviour of youth cultures has to be seen as a mirror image of the adult society.
Since the 1950s parents have been accumulating more (and always better) consumer goods, domestic appliances, automobiles and luxuries.
Adults follow fashion in clothes and social habits as assiduously as their children.
Indeed, I think that the onslaught of modern consumerism is not so much a slavish addiction to fashion as a capitulation to hedonism.
Hedonism, for Christians, has its roots not in the Enlightenment but in the fall.
Nevertheless, hedonistic doctrines are a natural for individualistic man.
And of course after the Second World War and the comparative austerity of the 1940s, having fun seemed natural enough, and justifying having fun is what hedonistic philosophy is for.
Hedonism, however, is not simply a doctrine that says pleasure is good for you.
John Stuart Mill had claimed (Rogers 1964: 238) that pleasure could be of a carnal nature or of a ‘higher’ kind.
During the 1960s, and what became known as the ‘permissive society’, it was perhaps sexuality that became the dominant form of hedonism.
‘If it feels good do it’ was the carnal end; ‘sexual enjoyment as personal fulfilment’was the higher end.
Sexual intercourse aided by the technological breakthrough of synthetic hormones (the pill) became normative among unmarried couples.
Casual sex (promiscuity) increased rapidly.
Probably even more than action there was a great deal of talk about the techniques of sex, its joys, its malfunctions and inhibitions and how to overcome them.
This same period saw the end of traditional censorship in films, plays and books.
The ‘right’ of orgasm for women (as well as for men) seemed to have been added to the list of the ‘natural rights of man’which the fathers of the Enlightenment seemed to have overlooked!
Sex is like the cat that is let out of the bag: once out it is  difficult to put back.
The phenomenal rise in venereal diseases and the performance of abortions ‘for social reasons’ were two of the unintended consequences of sexual hedonism which nevertheless seemed to have little effect on sexual behaviour.
Instead we still see an increasing clamour for ‘abortion on demand’ and improved facilities for sexually transmitted diseases.
But the most subtle — and most high — kind of hedonism that dominated cultural life in the 1960s was known as ‘self-awareness’.
People were ‘into’ themselves ('psychological solipsism' as one wag called it).
There was psychoanalysis for the status-conscious and assertiveness training for those with low self-esteem.
You could join consciousness-raising groups if you were deprived or oppressed.
If repression was your problem you could engage in Co-Counselling, sensitivity training and T-grouping.
For those who wanted peace of mind or enhanced consciousness there were several off-the-peg forms of Eastern mysticism.
Looked at positively, we might say that all these things were actually a realisation that the stresses and strains of modernity could not be coped with by further doses of materialism.
The great spread of drug-taking among the young during this time can also be seen either as ‘doing it for kicks’ or looking for a road out of materialistic culture.
(For some it was simply a road to oblivion.)
I mention this because while the ‘swinging sixties’ was at its height the emergence of the so-called ‘counterculture’was more than just youthful rebellion: it was a genuine ‘revolt of the soul’.
Os Guinness has captured this middle-class revulsion against materialism and affluent decadence in his best-selling book The Dust of Death (1973).
He saw the counterculture as a desperate cry for help from the captured sons and daughters of the Evil One; a cry, he feels, which went virtually unheeded by many Christians who saw only the law-breaking or iconoclasm and failed to see the spiritual hunger.
The 1960s was a decade of great excitement, creativity and energy.
It was, until 1968 at least, a time of great optimism.
Taboos were being broken, cheap holidays abroad were all the rage, for, as everybody was taught at school, ‘travelling  broadens the mind’.
New religious ideas and moral codes were made accessible by widescale immigration, cultural exchanges and mass communication.
The mid-1960s were the watershed of postwar society, and the creativity and anarchism of the period left nothing untouched.
The full effects of the theological liberalism which had been at work since the nineteenth century came into their own in the English-speaking world after the publication of Honest to God (Robinson 1963).
The fly-by-night theologies of the ‘death of God’ and ‘magic mushrooms’were only the anarchic end of a serious attack by modern scholarship upon the presuppositions of biblical faith and credal affirmation (see chapter eight).
Of course all this change, verve and audacity was enough to give traditional Christians apoplexy, but too many people were having a good time to worry about the consequences of all these changes.
And then, like a blast from Gabriel's horn, 1968 declared that the party was well and truly over.
That year saw the invasion of Czechoslovakia and the worldwide student protests.
In North America hippies and flower children were turning into anti-Vietnam war demonstrators.
The Vietnam war had undermined the moral confidence of America, and a mood of recrimination and uncertainty was settling in.
For many people living through that time, 1968 was the unforgivable pin that pricked the bubble: and with the deflation of the great illusion that the 1960s was a perpetual party came the realisation of the cost.
In economic terms the truth of the matter was that Western capitalism had underinvested, overspent (as one does at a party) and failed to keep the machine in running order.
The 1970s became a decade of high inflation and spiralling unemployment.
The world entered a long-term period of recession and chronic unemployment, both of which at the time of writing seem to have become endemic to our advanced societies.
Furthermore, the 1960s was a decade of ecological mismanagement.
Too much attention had been given to the short-term goals of profitability and not enough to the long-term effects on the environment of industrial waste, chemical spillage and oil and petrol pollution.
In the heart of the great  metropolitan areas of America the inner cities became as desolate and hopeless as shanty towns.
Urban violence and civil unrest were mushrooming like small bombs threatening to blow up the machine from within.
Violent crime, and in particular rape and the molestation of children, climbed vertically (to the present day), and the violence of domestic crime was matched by the scourge of international terrorism and the regional and local wars of Africa, the Middle East, Asia and South America.
Although the ‘swingingness’ of the 1960s had been absent in the 1970s and 1980s, drug-taking had increased among young and old alike ('coke' if you were middle-class, glue-sniffing if you were poor), and so too had alcoholism.
Many of these features of the modern world were only the surface manifestations of the much greater structural changes begun in early industrialism and accelerated since the Second World War.
For example, there have always been high rates of divorce after wars, but in the 1960s divorce was made easier and simpler by legal changes.
These changes themselves reflected the changing role of women and the consumer approach to marriage: ‘If your partner does not satisfy get another’; ‘Shop around until you find what you want’; ‘Children are of course important, but not so important as sexual compatibility and personal fulfilment’.
And by the mid-1980s in California one in two marriages ended in divorce, and one in three in other high-density populations in North America and parts of Europe.
I will have more to say about family life in the next chapter, here I note merely that in the last twenty years we have seen the large-scale establishment of the single-parent family, the so-called serial-monogamy syndrome (divorced people keep getting remarried) and an endless chain of step-children and step/half brothers and sisters.
And who would have thought that as we face the 1990s the social and moral habits of the 1960s should be visited upon us in the guise of AIDS, which threatens to sweep across the world with all the terror and destruction of the black plague in the Middle Ages?
Admittedly, for optimistic technocrats at least, the 1970s  saw the beginning of a new technological revolution which, it was hoped, would refuel the flagging machine, create new jobs and improve the quality of life.
At least this revolution was genuine because the comparatively cheap micro-chip computers made possible and affordable a computerised society.
But it remains to be seen whether this will exacerbate chronic unemployment or solve it.
And despite all its promise it is not yet clear whether it will pull capitalism out of its recession or whether it will only serve the interests of affluent minorities.
The fact that such technology has already had a major impact upon the leisure industry should not fill us with wild joy.
Videos and computer games, hi-fidelity television and quadrophonic sound are the sort of toys developed for people with nothing better to do.
Or if you are of a nightmare disposition, the whole thing resembles the clinical and pageless world of Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 , a world in which there is sexual fetishism, but no books, and people are wired for sound and watch TVs implanted into the walls of their homes.
As Paul Simon says in his song ‘The Boy in the Bubble’:
These are the days of miracles and wonder
And
Don't cry baby, don't cry, don't cry.
But as the individualist man's machine ticked over at idling speed, in desperate need of a new surge of power and aware that the world's supply of oil had nearly run out, the collectivist machine was doing no better.
Russia, for example, failed to keep up with the scientific and technological innovations of the West.
Its economy was in a state of inertia.
Neither superpower could rationally risk a war to get them out of their malaise — there could be no winners this time round.
It is difficult to apply the medieval doctrine of the just war or the Puritan conviction of ‘God on our side’ to atomic apocalypse.
Curiously, in the United States there was an optimism and a new sense of confidence after Ronald Reagan became president (a confidence later deflated by the Iranian arms fiasco).
It is difficult for a European to find the rational basis for this optimism.
Conservatism (both secular and Christian) was on  the rise and there was a feeling of greatness and destiny: a sense that Americans could again hold up their heads and ‘walk tall’.
No such confidence existed in Europe, where the new post-liberal conservatism in politics had little positive effect.
BACK TO THE PRESENT
In this chapter we have, through our time travelling, been outside of our own world for some time now, so perhaps we are now looking at modernity with the eyes of a stranger coming home.
Bishop Lesslie Newbigin (1983) describes the effect of coming back to England after years in the mission field as one of shock: a realisation that there was little hope.
Even India, with all its poverty, he found more hopeful.
Our politicians still speak of help coming just around the corner, but in the inner cities of England and America, among the chronically unemployed, among the young faced with the long-term prospects of AIDS or the imminent threat of annihilation, there is little talk of hope.
Belief in utopian progress is increasingly seen as a delusion.
As Christians we must surely wonder if the time for Enlightenment man is not up.
I have said elsewhere that
Enlightenment man has undoubtedly been a man of power, but he has also been a barbarian.
Now he is stumbling.
The Church should not be helping him up, but helping him over: false optimism does not need a helping hand; it needs firstly the truth, and secondly love to salve the lost illusions and move on to a fuller humanity (Walker 1986: 214).
The problem with modernity, Enlightenment man's home is that it masks the reality of his hopelessness from him.
By concentrating on some of the crises and conflicts of modernity through my interpretive and impressionistic historical journey, I hope that I have begun to bring to your attention some of the fundamental problems of the modern world.
In the next chapter I want to show some of the more insidious ways in which modernity stops us from seeing contemporaneity as the territory of the Enemy.
CAPTIVE LIVES — The insidiousness of modernity (Part one)
Having arrived back in our contemporary world after our historical journey, I hope that we will be better able to view modernity with a certain detachment.
The problem with contemporaneity is that it is right under our noses.
Because we are immersed in the culture of the modern world as actor-participants, it takes an effort of will to stand back and look clearly with Christian discernment.
In our impressionistic historical view of the coming of modernity we saw it in terms of crises and radical social and economic change.
But to live in modernity is to experience it as home.
This is where we live, and for those of us not dwelling in the inner city or immobilised with fear by the threat of atomic war, modernity is really quite comfortable.
We do not experience our existence as under constant threat from the Devil.
Our life is characterised on the one hand by a certain cosiness of Christian fellowship and on the other hand by a pleasant familiarity with the secular world: we work in it, spend our hard earned income on it, and take some of our pleasures from it.
Certainly the modern world has its problems, but so it will always be until the parousia, we could say.
Why make such a fuss about modernity?
The Devil no more threatens Christians today, we might think, than he did a thousand years ago.
If that is how we still feel, then we must recognise that we can only think this way because the Enemy is not threatening us.
And one of the main reasons why this is so is because we are not threatening him.
Most of us remain unaware that our Christian faith — however real to us — has already been divorced from the mainstream of modern life.
As the great machine of modernity spins remorselessly round, it has spun  us away from the centre of social existence — community life, government, commerce, industry, education, welfare, leisure — to the peripheral margins of societal life.
Life on the margins characterises the Christian church in advanced industrial societies, and more often than not we do not even notice it.
The Evil One may not have come between us and God on a personal level, but as an army he has scattered us all over the place, dumped us unceremoniously in our little religious ghettoes and subcultures, and left us to our own devices.
And so in this chapter I want to look analytically at some of the ways Christianity has unwittingly capitulated to the forces of modernity.
We talk about the evils of secularism, but do not seem to recognise that we are ourselves secularised.
We all want to do a mighty work for God, but do not realise that we are living on privatised religious estates on the outskirts of the city of the world.
If we want to rescue the captives from the clutches of the Enemy, we must first wake up and realise that we are ourselves leading captive lives.
We are not in darkest prison like our brothers and sisters in the flesh, but we are under house arrest.
Our adversary lets us out from time to time, to visit other houses, but we rarely enter with power and authority into the heart of the city.
When I was a boy I belonged to a small Christian sect that was my whole world.
I thought it was a big world, for we were always going to conventions and special meetings where, so it seemed then, there were thousands of others like myself.
When I went to Bible college at the age of eighteen, hardly anybody had ever heard of my religious home.
When I later became an agnostic and went to university, nobody had ever heard of my Bible college.
And so it is in Christian life generally.
We imagine that we are in the thick of it — especially if there are miracles, new liturgical enthusiasm and popular songs — but in reality we are in the thin of it.
Hardly anybody in the big wide world has heard of us, let alone been influenced by our lives.
Those Christians who belong to the sort of council of churches where passionate debates take place about atomic war, South Africa, police brutality, racism and urban decay  may think that they at least are closer to the real action.
But this is a delusion if we think that passing resolutions about the evils of society actually influences world governments and changes the direction of modernity.
I am not saying that churches should not state their views about social evils, but it is quite another thing to imagine that clear statements are denting the Evil One's power.
' (But as we know, a great many Christians caught up in talking about social activism of various kinds do not believe in the Devil.)
Of course it is one thing to state baldly that modern Christians are often ineffectual in their witness and live in a privatised world, cut off from the mainstream of social life, but it is quite another thing to make out a case that it is so.
The central question I want to use as a peg on which to hang various theories is, ‘Why are so few Christians aware of the direct threat of modernity to the Christian church?’
I will attempt to show that answers to this question have to do with the almost hidden insidious nature of modern life.
The social philosopher Alfred Schutz (1889–1959) was concerned to demonstrate how we never notice the way in which everyday life works (Schutz 1943).
Because we are engaged in practical actions of great complexity, which we nevertheless ‘pull off’ day after day, we have little time to stand back and analyse how we do all the things that we do.
According to Schutz, we take for granted that the world works in a reasonably rational and orderly way, unless and until something goes wrong.
In reality the social world is constantly shifting and changing, yet we experience life as orderly and sane, not as random or chaotic.
Despite all the things that happen to us, such as religious conversion, dreams, accidents, bereavement, psychological shock — all those things that pull us out of everyday reality — we tend to slip back to a belief that there is a bedrock of common sense and sensibility at the heart of things.
I remember my father used to say that even those experiences that take us out of ourselves — the ‘mountain-top’ experiences — can never keep us from having to come down to the valley of ordinary existence.
But on the plain, the everyday, where we must live most of the time, we do forget — or  never notice — that reality around us is constantly changing.
That is why social processes are so much more difficult to understand and combat than ideologies.
Now I believe that the secular ideologies of the modern world do pose a real and direct threat to the Christian church.
They are a frontal assault of the Devil not only upon believers but on human beings everywhere.
But what worries me more is the process of secularisation.
I believe this to be more pernicious than secularism per se .
Many Christians can recognise secularism and have boldly stood up against it.
But secularisation creeps up on us announced.
While we fight the Devil on the theological front, he sneaks up on us from behind.
We must remember that he is waging a dirty war.
This is not an equal fight between two evenly matched sides battling it out according to some carefully laid down ground rules of fair play.
Consequently, if we want to engage in enemy combat in order to further the coming of God's kingdom we need to beware of two damaging manoeuvres.
We should avoid an exclusive obsession with ‘secular humanism’ that sees the problem of modernity only in terms of false ideology.
The New Religious Right in North America eschew humanism when it threatens the fundamental truths of God's revelation of himself in the sacred scriptures (at least as they understand them).
But they embrace the worldliness and materialism of advanced industrialism and even declare it good!
The ‘electronic church’ pulsates with the secular energy of modernity.
This worldliness, as Os Guinness has recognised, is precisely, for Christians, what the process of secularisation is all about (Guinness 1983: chs 3, 7).
Conversely, many ‘liberals’ in the churches in both America and Europe denounce (but rarely renounce) capitalism, or at least materialism, but praise the superiority of critical rationalism over Christian dogmas and tradition.
The Devil does not mind which of these attacks upon him we make, because taken on their own either one will leave us helpless and impotent in the Enemy's territory.
SECULARISATION
I must come clean and admit that the concept of secularisation has become extremely confusing in sociological usage.
The clearest and most sophisticated expositions of secularisation that I know can be found in Martin (1978) and Dobbelaere (1981).
Basically secularisation is a composite concept that involves a number of different ideas.
Many people erroneously think that secularisation means that religion or religiosity itself has disappeared from advanced industrial societies.
This is not so.
On the contrary, all the evidence suggests that not even modernity can stifle spiritual hunger.
In a country like Great Britain, for example, even though less than fifteen per cent of the population regularly go to church over seventy per cent still claim to believe in a God of some kind.
Increasingly sociologists are insisting that although traditional religion (and certainly Christian orthodoxy) is in decline, latent or ‘implicit’ religion abounds everywhere (Bailey 1976).
Of course this is of small comfort for Christianity.
The fact that superstition, occultism, and vague forms of religious paganism persist into modernity is nothing to shout about.
On the individual level secularisation has meant, on the whole, a decline in Christian commitment.
Throughout Europe there has been a steady drop in religious attendance since the nineteenth century.
As I pointed out in the last chapter, working-class attachment to institutional religion never picked up from the moment that peasants moved off the land and became urbanised.
Continental working classes are more violently atheistic and anticlerical than their British counterparts.
The United States is unique in the advanced countries of the West in maintaining a level of church attendance of closer to fifty per cent than the European norm of some fifteen per cent or less.
This itself gives the lie to the notion that America is a secular republic.
Under the influence of its Enlightenment men the American constitution may formally be secularist, but the history of America demonstrates that it is the most religious continent in the Western world.
Indeed as Neuhaus  has recognised (1986) it is precisely because religion has been forced out of the central corridors of power in America that the New Religious Right has managed to stride in with such urgency and rage.
But this leads us into the area of secularisation that has been the most damaging to the Christian church.
The technical term for this is ‘laicisation’.
There is no English equivalent to the French basis of this concept, but broadly it denotes the fact that institutional church religion has been pushed by modernity out of the centre of social and cultural life and into its own peripheral and private sphere.
(This is the point I was making — without the jargon — on pages 106–107.)
The traditional sacred cosmos or canopy of preindustrial society that dominated rural life before modernity (remember England of 1700) was dissolved by the amoral technical and specialised institutions that developed with industrialism.
The commercial, scientific and industrial world of capitalism (or socialism) does not need religion in order to go about its business.
This was precisely why Edward Irving prophetically saw that the great evil of industrialism (to use his friend Carlyle's term) was that it was godless.
Furthermore, the new technical and rational society not only dissolved the sacred order; it disintegrated the communal order.
Henceforth the local, stable community where relationships were both personal and persistent became no more than a rarity in the modern world.
An excellent example of such a community today would be the Amish groups of Pennsylvania.
A student of mine who saw the Hollywood film Witness , which featured the Amish community, wondered whether we should think of their way of life not as a residue of the past but the way of the future!
Although ‘laicisation’ is a process that has become universal in the Western world, it is in North America where it is at its most advanced.
In Europe Christians everywhere know that they are in trouble because their churches are empty and attendance continues to decline.
Despite the recent successes of house churches and charismatic movements, the overall picture is unchanged.
In the United States, however, it is precisely because churches are so full, and wealthy, that it is  not easy to see that in fact secularisation in the form of ‘laicisation’ has gripped the church by the throat.
The philosophical Enlightenment, as we have seen, promoted rationality on a philosophical level.
The immediate effects of that philosophical rationalism were felt only by the intelligentsia.
But with the coming of modernity proper, that is with industrialisation, what made the philosophies so potent was that they became embodied as a functional rationality.
It was the economic rationality of the market and the scientific rationality of research and technology that facilitated the process of laicisation.
And it is at this point that we can see the way in which secularisation feeds and nurtures the philosophies of secularism.
Functional as opposed to philosophical rationality is experienced by men and women in work, by government and through bureaucracy.
There is nothing philosophical about this in itself, but it begins to create the habit of mind that begins to take for granted the natural superiority of science and rational thinking.
In short, modernity itself creates the scientific/rational Weltanschauung (world-view) of modern men and women.
This world-view is one in which the material and the phenomenal dominate consciousness at the expense of the spiritual (the numinous) and the supernatural.
Within the crucible of the modern mind, the modern world-view, secularist philosophies are naturally at home and breed with alarming fecundity.
I do not mean to suggest for a moment any kind of determinist philosophy here: functional rationality does not cause philosophical rationality, but it does help it along.
A simpler way of looking at laicisation might be to say that institutional Christianity has lost some of its functions: most education passes from church to state; so too do medicine, welfare and human counselling.
Neither psychology, psychiatry, social work, health education, social security, nor nursing relies significantly on religious insight or Christian doctrine.
They too have passed over into the world of law, business, government and technology, where rational but secular goals and methods dominate.
A more important Christian observation is to note that  laicisation has meant that as institutional Christianity has been forced out of the control box of the modernity machine it has lost its authority.
Christianity in the contemporary world in which we live has become a matter of private belief and personal preference in a society that tolerates any old religious beliefs (and new ones) so long as they do not interfere with the running of the machine.
A friend of mine told me that although he is a committed Christian, when he leaves home and goes to work he has to play by the rules of commerce.
The aggressiveness and competitiveness of capitalism has little time for his Christian sensibilities.
When pushed, he explained that in his line of work ‘cutting corners’, ‘fudging’, ‘giving out disinformation’ and ‘cheating just a little’are part of the rules (unstated, but there) of the job.
The fact that so many Christians feel the tension between their private family and church life and their public performance at work exemplifies how far removed Christianity has become from modern institutional life.
Anthropologists and sociologists agree that religion as a sacred world-view is virtually impossible in advanced industrial societies.
Like it or not, it is a fact that religion is more dominant and persistent in rural societies than industrial ones.
It is in the West that religion has declined not only in terms of churchgoing but authority.
The great growth in Christianity at the present time is in the Third World and those parts of Eastern Europe that are still under atheistic leadership.
It is one thing to attack the Soviet system or Third World countries not yet under the sway of Western democracies (and business), but it is in these countries that the gospel is spreading like wildfire.
To recapitulate, the essential feature of the most important aspect of secularisation, laicisation, is that Christian authority and institutional control have been virtually removed from modern life.
The modern world has become dominated by the rational and technical society where specialisation in work is no longer related to traditional skills or crafts (based in the home) but to the economic and functional necessity of the marketplace.
This has led to a ‘knock-on effect’ where the  technical world has invaded the church.
We have seen the growth of extra church bureaucracies such as the World Council of Churches, and the bureaucratisation of churches themselves.
Recently I was shown around the offices of a community church that prides itself on its radical Christian commitment.
My abiding memory of the tour was the computers, word processors, IBM typewriter, and management ‘know how’.
(This is not meant to be a criticism, for I doubt whether we can work effectively without such things; it is merely to point out that modernity enters the church far more easily than the church enters modernity.)
DEATH AND DYING: A SECULARISATION CASE STUDY
There is one monopoly left to the church in modernity, and that not by choice but default: she still controls funerals.
Or to be exact, Christianity does not but religions of all kinds do.
Death is the unforgivable sin of modernity, and the modern world will have nothing to do with her.
She interrupts the pleasures of cultural hedonism, gives the lie that progress is for all and for ever, and introduces suffering into personal relationships.
The secular and technical world manages the mechanics of death very well — disposes of corpses efficiently — but will have nothing to do with rites and prayers and personal goodbyes.
How could it?
And so throwing up its hands in horror and resignation it turns to the priests and pastors of religion — of a more primitive world order — and tells them to get on with it.
But the priests and pastors are caught in a trap.
Everywhere in the modern world death is taboo.
Victorians loved to wallow in the sentimentality of death because it was so prevalent and self-evident in their society that they had to come to terms with it as best they could.
Today we can talk about sex without modesty or fear, but bring up the subject of death and you will be treated with the same social horror as if you had brought up the subject of masturbation at a Victorian ladies' tea party.
Not only do we not talk about death, but we  do everything we can to hide it from view and pretend that mortality is just a myth.
On a wild and windy day, with gusts of rain driving into the side of the crematorium, an Anglican priest waited for the next funeral to commence.
He was one of many ministers on the ‘death rota’, as he called it.
Looking the picture of misery and helplessness, he snatched a few words with me as I waited to go in.
‘What are we expected to do,’ he said.
‘Nine times out of ten we do not know the deceased or the grieving family.
Most of the ‘congregation’[he said it in such a way that it merited being put in inverted commas]do not know how to behave, when to stand or kneel, how to express their grief.
I have to pronounce words of Christian hope when I do not know if there is any hope.’
Even more tragically for the vicar is the fact that for many unchurched families he is simply a cog–in the death machine; an impersonal professional who has to mumble a few words before the curtains swish and the coffin descends to the fires below.
The first concrete experience of the church that many people have in their whole lives is at a funeral.
For nominal Christians it is perhaps only the third time they have been at a religious service; the other two being their baptism and marriage.
We see here how widespread and deadly is the net of secularisation that has been cast.
Let us see how this has taken place.
Firstly, we need to recall that a feature of modernity is that infant mortality rates have dropped, people live longer, and medicine and improved diet have ensured that we have healthy populations.
Consequently death is no longer in the midst of life as it was for our ancestors and still is in many Third World countries.
Secondly, when people do have the temerity to die they increasingly do so away from home.
In both the United States and Great Britain more people die in hospitals and homes for the elderly than in their own houses.
Even if people do die at home, before you can say ‘Jack Robinson’ the men from the funeral directors are round to take the deceased to the chapel of rest.
Dying these days involves a variety of bureaucratic and local government procedures.
The undertakers have moved in as the middle-men, the ‘third party’, who handle all the unpleasantness and worrying details of death.
This has resulted in not only strangers and professionals moving into the arena of dying and death, but it has also led to commercialisation and big business.
Jessica Mitford's book on The American Way of Death (1963) is now nearly thirty years old but little has changed except that death is now even bigger business.
Not so long ago a wife would have ‘laid out’ her own husband at home.
The wife would have been ‘laid out’ by family or friends.
The body, as the material expression of the divine life, would have been treated with respect and care.
The deceased loved one would have been left for all to come and see, and grieve over, and most importantly to say goodbye to.
There would have been no question whether the children would come; they came as a matter of course and ‘right behaviour’.
It is, may I suggest, much easier to say goodbye to a face than to a wooden box.
And when a death occurred in a family or a community, mourning would be a ritualistic affair.
Curtains would be closed, arm bands worn, and hats removed as the hearse passed by.
(What a wonder it is today in atheist Moscow to watch the people as a funeral passes by.
Streets are blocked and atheism has to give way as people kneel in the streets and cross themselves with the sign of the Holy Trinity.)
Rituals have always been more colourful in ‘Catholic’ countries than Protestant ones, but many Protestant rites survived until the end of the First World War.
Rites of passage, as anthropologists call them, are not only universal features of all rural life, they also survive in truncated forms into modernity.
These rites mark the cycle of life — birth, puberty, marriage, death.
Not only are they dramatic representations of personal and social events, they are also outward expressions of inner emotional feelings.
But modernity abhors them, and they are repressed.
Puberty rites have virtually disappeared; even the ritualistic marking of birth and marriage is less than it was.
Death rites remain, but rites that are no longer recognisable as rites or common practices.
We could say quite simply that this is an example of the  decline of religious belief.
It would be more accurate to say that it shows the decline of community and public practices.
As laicisation has forced religion from community to private practice, we should not be surprised that so few people know how to mourn together and share common griefs.
We shall see in the next section that partly as a result of secularisation religion has become privatised and inward looking.
Personal grief very often no longer has a communal expression.
The terrible thing about the modern attitude to death is that we pass it on to our children.
We do not want them to be upset, so we keep them away from funerals, or from saying goodbye, face to face, to their relatives and friends.
We do not even like adults to grieve.
Sometimes we repress the natural grieving processes by giving the mourners tranquillisers.
We cannot bear emotion in public, and we look at grief as pathological or a sign of emotional instability.
If a woman has lived with a man for over fifty years, why should she be expected to get over his death in a week?
Insensitivity while dealing with the bereaved is an endemic problem in our modern world.
Where once husbands and wives would ‘go into mourning’ for prescribed periods ranging from months to years, we like to see people pick themselves up and get on with it.
A girl on a health education course I once taught told me of someone she knew whose husband had died after six months of marriage.
Nothing had happened to sour their relationship or to lead her to have negative feelings about him.
On the day after his funeral, her best friends called at her door with the news, ‘Surprise!
We have got you a blind date…’
I remember only too well a student whose little girl died at six months of age.
His best friend did not go to the funeral because he had already decided to go on a day trip to France!
After the funeral was over and the bereaved student returned to college, instead of going up to him and holding him — or even just politely commiserating with him — most students ignored him.
I realised then how our own personal embarrassment and refusal to face up to our own mortality prevents us from behaving to others in a natural and human way.
And now we must come to the ‘hard saying’.
When it comes  to death, counselling the dying, or helping the bereaved, we Christians have become secularised.
It may be true that we still believe in the resurrection, but we seem to forget that we must first experience death.
People do not ‘pass away’, ‘pass on’, ‘fall asleep’ or even get ‘promoted to glory’: they die.
I recall another student who was an Anglican clergyman.
He developed cancer, and despite radium treatment — after which all his hair fell out — he was declared terminally ill.
But no one would tell him.
His doctors would not do so, his wife could not bring herself to do so, and the vicar in charge of the parish did not know how to do so.
It was eventually agreed that I could be allowed to bring up the subject.
When I did so, tears of pain and relief broke out.
‘I know that I am dying,’ he said, ‘and I am so angry with God for letting it happen, and with my family for refusing to let me work through it.’
I saw him as often as I could and at first we concentrated on his anger.
It seemed to me that it was not only natural but positive: it demonstrated that he still had a relationship with God.
But while this was happening another student, who was a friend of both the dying man and myself, became convinced that God was going to heal the clergyman of his cancer.
It is very difficult psychologically to prepare somebody for death when you are also trying to heal them.
I asked him to desist not from his prayers but from his actions because I felt sure that God wanted to prepare the Anglican priest for his death.
More so, however, I knew somehow that my friend was bolstering up his own natural fear of loss and dread of death.
He did not turn up to the funeral when his friend died, and for me this was sadder than the loss of the vicar who had found peace and hope before he died.
I believe in healing, but ‘there is a time to die’.
When we are privileged to know this in advance (and I think that it is wrong in nearly all cases not to tell a dying patient) it is a time for preparation and repentance, and ultimately of acceptance.
The establishment of hospices is a genuine example of moving out of the margins and into the city of the world (Du Boulay 1984).
By that I mean it is a way of bringing dignity, caring and love right into the heart of the impersonal  secular world of modernity.
We must understand that hospitals are not designed for death, and yet they have become institutions of death.
Many doctors and nurses are not trained in counselling the bereaved.
Death is always a failure in hospital, and the business and routine of life in the medical and surgical wards do not lend themselves to a personal death (Sudnow 1967).
Christians usually think that they have nothing to learn from other religions, but that is because we confuse beliefs and practices.
We could learn much from Jewish behaviour (Gorer 1965) and indeed the religions of most pre-industrial countries.
Bureaucratic and institutional practices in public life, and idiosyncratic and private beliefs in private life have combined to push out the communitarian and personal dimensions of dying, death itself, and bereavement.
I think that in the Protestant West.
in general there is perhaps a little bit too much of an emphasis on beliefs and saying the right thing — giving the right word.
But when you are involved with the dying, as I have had to learn to be, so often it is more a question of practising the presence of God.
You are holding the hand of an old man who is ninety.
He is senile, and there is no indication from reading his case notes whether he has any religious conviction at all.
His breathing is laboured in that heavy way which so often heralds the end, and as you grip his hand to let him know that he is not alone, you try to love him as the Lord himself would do.
This, I am convinced, is one of the strange yet powerful ways we Christians overcome the Evil One.
I do not think that we can turn back the tide of secularisation altogether in the area of dying, but we can call a halt to it by giving some serious thought to practices within our society and churches.
Hospices are clearly an improvement on hospital wards.
Our doctors and nurses need far more counselling in this area, as do our social workers and priests.
Furthermore, perhaps we should at least ask whether cremation is not really for the convenience of public health, efficiency, and land conservation rather than for people.
Purely on a psychological level, it may be that a culture such as ours that has grown up out of a  Judaic-Christian background finds cremation difficult to accept.
Theologically, if we are going to accept cremation at all(given our belief in bodily resurrection) should we not at least commit the ashes to a grave and not scatter them to the winds?
(We are not, with deep respect to them, Hindus.)
I know that in talking frankly about death I have touched many a raw nerve here, and possibly even stirred up guilt and feelings of unease.
Many of the people on my courses on dying, for example, had never really come to terms with the inevitability of death in their own lives, and many a time we had to stop to allow distressed and upset people to leave the room.
I do not want to embarrass anyone or to moralise, but I feel that this is an area in which modern Christians have been caught in the net of secularisation without realising it.
Too often, even if we are committed Christians, we are afraid of death and like secular society prefer to imagine that it will not happen to us or our loved ones.
And when it does, as it always does, we are caught unawares and unprepared.
This is enemy work, and it acts upon us subliminally and insidiously.
Perhaps we could start by forgetting our Christian duties and remembering our humanity: the naturalness of grief and the pain of loss.
It is precisely because our Lord suffered these things that we recognise him as not only God but human, like us.
Let me end this section with a personal story of encouragement.
Recently my father-in-law died, and I was anxious for our children to go and see him and say goodbye.
This is the sort of thing, so an undertaker told me, that only the Irish do in Britain these days!
Usually when you suggest this action to your family, whether they be Christian or heathen, you will be regaled with horror stories of long-term psychological damage.
If that fails to dissuade you, you will be told that it is not very nice: it is frightening and ghoulish.
(Well, death is not supposed to be nice.)
However, though I cannot speak for others, my three boys found it perfectly normal and natural.
(Please be sensible and ensure that the body is laid out decently.)
When we came away from the chapel I asked the boys if  they were pleased that they had all gone to say goodbye to their grandpa.
They all said that they were very glad.
‘But dad,’ said Joshua, who is seven, ‘I noticed that Grandpa did not have on his ordinary clothes.
He was dressed in the robes of a king.’
PRIVATISATION
Already in this chapter I have referred to the idea that Christian commitment has become a matter of private belief.
Like secularisation, this ‘privatisation’, as it is called by sociologists, affects Christians because it affects everybody living in modernity.
We live in a fallen culture and cannot be completely exempted from it.
If we want to know what is happening to the church we need to understand what is happening in the secular world at large.
I have already hinted that perhaps we are not aware how much religion has become detached from public and modern secular life.
I think we need to say more about this, because while it is related to secularisation and is partly a direct result of laicisation, there is more to it than that.
The fact that Christians find themselves caught up with a religion that is no longer related to work or community life, but instead to leisure, tells us something about the whole process of privatisation.
Os Guinness has talked about the modern world in terms of a divide.
On the one hand there is the macro-world of big business, government complexes and military machines which we experience as impersonal and anonymous in character.
On the other hand there is the micro-world which we find more personal and meaningful, the world ‘of the family and private associations, the world of personal tastes, sports, hobbies and leisure pursuits.
Very significantly, it is on this side of the divide that the Church has made her home’(Guinness 1983: 76).
It was not a conscious choice to retreat from public life into a private world.
This happened more as a result of the need for specialised care and education for citizens to be managed by the state.
Churches alone could not handle the enormous  demands created by an industrial society in the spheres of welfare and social security.
The old system of parish relief for paupers in England, for example, was quite inadequate for a geographically mobile population.
Such demographic changes wrought by industrialism meant the decline of rural parishes and the creation of a new urbanised and industrial poor.
More straightforwardly, however, capitalism and technology have no need of religion.
In pre-industrial Europe there was still a division between church, work and home, but these divisions were not absolute.
Industry was primarily ‘cottage industry’ where the family was the unit of production.
Village life was community life where the church, home, and work, were the living and connected cells of a functioning organism.
I have experienced this kind of world in the mountain villages of Crete.
There it is difficult to separate the secular world from the sacred.
The primarily agricultural work blends in with the liturgical calendar of the church.
The regularity of the seasons matches the regularity of the great Christian festivals of Christmas, Easter and Pentecost.
I remember in particular going with the local bishop to an early morning Eucharist.
The whole village was there.
After the liturgy everyone came to receive the agape (delicious warm and scented bread) from the hand of the bishop.
And then we continued the ‘love feast’ by moving into the homes of the villagers, eating sumptuous food, drinking wine and singing songs.
There w–s no sense that we had passed from the holy world of church to secular life: there was a wholeness and a holiness about the whole experience which is difficult to describe.
As modernity has progressed in the last one hundred and fifty years, it is not only the world of work that has become secularised, but also government.
Increasingly governments in the Western world have become reliant on their advisers, scientific specialists, experts in systems analysis, and supremely on economists.
The great rational market economy (which ironically keeps breaking down) now dominates governments' policies.
Perhaps the most significant aspect of the technical and rational mastery of the modern world has been bureaucracy.
Government in North America is not really run  by the President or the Senate but by the Washington bureaucracy.
In England the daily business of politics is not controlled by the Prime Minister or Westminster: it is Whitehall that calls the tune.
Bureaucracy, which was so brilliantly analysed so long ago by Max Weber (1922), is based on legal-style directives and rational — though slow — procedures.
Nowhere in modernity has bureaucracy more stifled the cause of human freedom and destroyed a sense of personal identity than in the great central bureaucracies of Eastern Europe.
Bureaucracy is the natural tool for collectivist man in modernity.
But we in the West cannot be too sanguine, because bureaucracy is a major cause of impersonalism in our societies and the most negative aspect of the collective in our essentially individualistic culture.
Relationships at work, in the technical and scientific sphere, and supremely through bureaucracies, are functional relationships.
Our dealings with our fellow citizens in this public domain are based on what Martin Buber has called the ‘technical relation’.
The ‘I-Thou’ of personal and communal relationships does not really apply.
Of course we all like to get on with people at work, but our relationships are based on our skills, our expertise or our functional roles, not on friendship.
It is precisely because so many of us experience the world of work, government, the military, multinational corporations, etc. as impersonal that we seek personal fulfilment in the private sphere of leisure and the family.
This is particularly so for workers whose lives are related to work not as a vocation or as a career, but as a job for earning money to spend in private.
Working on a conveyor belt or as a human cog in a vast industrial machine does little for a sense of personal fulfilment.
Indeed it creates a sense of alienation from work and the public world (Blauner 1964).
THE FAMILY AND PRIVATISATION
Privatisation, however, is not simply a case of alienation from the impersonal technical world of modernity.
It has partly  been caused by changes in the family itself.
In the typical pre-industrial village the community, even if it was not tribal, was based on mutual rights, duties and obligations.
This was reinforced by family and kinship.
The pre-industrial family was not mum, dad and the kids.
Grandmother, grandfather, uncles, aunties, grandchildren, first, second and third cousins were not simply related by conjugal and marital ties: they existed in a network of meaningful relationships.
In short, family and community were inextricably linked.
But it has been a universal feature of modernity that the larger family unit, the so-called ‘extended’ family, has given way to a much smaller unit, the ‘nuclear’family.
This has nothing to do with Enlightenment philosophies; again it is a question of process.
Industrialism demands mobility of labour.
People have to go where there is work.
Traditional communities decline.
At first new communities grew up around the heavy industries of coal, steel and shipping.
But in recent years the decline of these industries has meant an end to many traditional working-class communities where the extended family still survived.
The nuclear family is not only smaller, as it is based essentially on the marriage bond and children, but it encourages privatisation.
‘An Englishman's home is his castle,’ goes the old adage.
This is meant to convey a sense of security and privacy: the drawbridge is pulled up and the portcullis is dropped.
The meaning persists in the contemporary world, but the castle, these days, is usually a semi in suburbia with mum, dad and two children.
As the family has shrunk it has also lost some of its traditional functions to the public world.
Families are no longer units of economic production; they have become solely units of consumption.
The education of children has passed to specialised institutions, usually run by the state.
But the shrinkage and change in family structure and the alteration of some of its functions has coincided with a rise in the importance of the family as a focus of personal fulfilment.
Indeed as the public domain has become more impersonal and technical so the family has increased in importance.
There are many positive aspects of this move, not least the fact that modern families are child-centred.
It could be argued  also that the nuclear family has facilitated the improvement of women's status within the home.
The modern wife is considered more of an equal partner and helpmate than a chattel or a housekeeper.
As women increasingly spend some of their married lives in careers, it follows also that they have more economic power.
In many ways, however, the focus on the family as the source of personal fulfilment is crazy.
The modern nuclear family is a vulnerable and fragile institution.
Witness the rates of marital breakdown in the Western world!
In the first place men have expected too much of the ‘new’ woman.
They have expected her to be super-wife, good in bed, a wonderful mother, an efficient housekeeper, a co-counsellor, and an earner of income.
The changing role of women has often in practice meant that women go out to work and still do a full-time job in the home.
Not surprisingly, many women have begun to reject the expectations of men and have looked for their own ‘role models’ among themselves.
Feminism has meant in practice that as women change they demand that men change too.
Men confused by some of the changes in women's own expectations of marriage have found it hard to adjust to a wife who now expects her husband to be a thoughtful and technically competent lover, a housefather and a co-counsellor.
The ‘battle of the sexes’ has penetrated into the heart of modern family life, leading not only to change but to role confusion.
It has certainly not led to a greater family stability.
The great strain for married couples in modernity is the absurdly high expectation of the marriage bond.
Of course it is admirable that expectations are high and that women should be given greater autonomy (and hope for more in the sexual area than their Victorian forebears).
But both men and women in modernity have been too influenced by the romanticism of popular literature and supremely by the dreams of Hollywood.
Marriage is about respect, commitment and graft, not just the ‘buzz’ of romantic and sexual excitement.
Sexual fulfilment is at such a premium in modernity that if marriage cannot provide it, it can always be found elsewhere.
But if marriage turns out to be less than satisfactory in the  arena of personal fulfilment, this is not only for the marriage partners.
The battle of the sexes is augmented in the home by the generation war.
It is in the family that the seeds of teenage rebellion first germinate.
‘Honour thy father and thy mother’ is not a slogan of the youth culture.
But can we altogether blame the children when from the moment they are born they are the focus of adoration?
In the ‘baby boom’ of the 1960S a whole generation of children were reared on Dr Spock and a belief in the right of self-expression.
This approach to children not only makes them precocious (more so in America than Europe) but ‘precious’.
A belief in the importance of ‘self’ and ‘my ego-fulfilment’becomes a childish occupation that continues into adulthood, militates against the collective (the community generally) and feeds aggressive consumerism, individualism and hedonistic culture.
Again we can see how processes and changes in social life facilitate secularist philosophies.
I was amused at Dr Spock's comment about his book and his attitude to child-rearing towards the end of his life.
When asked if people should still buy his book, he replied that they should, but only in hardback ‘so they can hit the little ******* over the head’!
It is significant that the great teenage rebellions of the 1960s and much of the counterculture came from those very middle-class families that had practised and encouraged self-fulfilment and personal autonomy.
A desperately sad aspect of the modern family is the way in which so much lavish attention is spent on the (small number of) children who after a life of smothering contact with their parents grow up and become almost strangers.
All of us, I am sure, have tales to tell of the anguish and alienation that exists between parents and children.
When they grow up, our children leave our private world to move into a private world of their own.
There are so many to choose from, so many philosophies and cultures to move into.
All this contrasts vividly with those many families that have not taken on board self-fulfilment for their children, but have left them to their own devices: the ‘latch-key’ children, those out in the streets, members of territorial gangs.
Sometimes children brought up in safe middle-class homes discover that  safety is illusory as their parents split up, and the single-parent family becomes a dominant feature of modernity.
They too get caught up in the underworld of youth subcultures, where the peer groups become more important (and possibly more caring) than the family.
WHERE HAVE ALL OUR OLD PEOPLE GONE?
But if the private world of family life is a world fraught with tension and danger for parents and children, it is far more frightening for the elderly: they may very well find themselves excluded from it.
We have a number of ways of dealing with the elderly in Western societies.
If they have money, they can go into private homes or villages where only the elderly can live.
These ‘happy homes’ are meant to give old people a sense of dignity and worth, but in reality they live in a privatised world cut off from both family and the wider community.
If the elderly do not have money, then the answer is to put them in government homes.
The move of the elderly from the family to institutions is partly a result of the change from extended family to nuclear family.
The smaller family units cannot cope with grandparents either in terms of money or space.
Tragically, as our old people disappear from our midst so that increasingly we do not notice them, the old adage ‘out of sight out of mind’ comes into its own.
It is a feature of modernity that our elder citizens are considered to be a nuisance to be dealt with as quietly and unobtrusively as possible.
Social worth in our society is related to the workplace: you are valued by what you do for a job, not what or who you are as a person.
Wisdom and experience are of secondary importance in our world; it is expertise that is valued.
What makes this alarming is that we are all living longer and retiring earlier.
At the moment, when we should be integrating our elderly into community life and reintegrating them into our families, we are sending them off into social exile.
For those old people who want to continue living outside institutional life, it means in many cases living alone or  away from their children and grandchildren, or perhaps giving up their own homes to live in ‘sheltered accommodation’ overseen by a warden and social workers.
But the worst aspect of this whole affair is that so many people do not care about the quality of life for old people.
I can talk about this from direct experience.
For two years I worked as a residential officer in old people's homes in addition to my academic work.
As senior officer on duty I came to know only too well the loneliness of old age.
My wife, who works as a field social worker, also knows the problems of the elderly.
She faces the same syndrome day after day.
It is this: the phone rings and someone tells her that they are worried about an old person in their family —‘What are you going to do about it?’ they demand.
Sometimes they are only too eager to be ‘shot of them’.
Sometimes there is an appearance of caring, but really they just want the ‘problem’ off their hands.
Even when children care desperately for their elderly parents and have to put them in a home because of lack of personal resources, they are not always able to keep up regular contact because of moving to find employment.
Many of the residents in homes for the elderly have no family, and many that do never see them from one year to the next.
There is nothing more heartbreaking than trying to cheer up an old man or woman on Christmas day, surrounded by decorations and a cheerful staff, when their daughter or son does not visit or even call on the telephone.
And every residential social worker knows that I am not exaggerating when I say that after a death has occurred — often alone or with one of us holding the dying resident's hand — the family will descend like vultures, demanding a complete inventory of all their belongings, ransacking their personal clothes for valuables, and insisting on receiving all that is left of the petty cash.
I wish that I could say that it is my experience that Christians are above this sort of thing, but it is not.
And try as hard as they do, residential staff can never turn a residential establishment into a home.
Great strides have been made in recent years to offer greater choice and to  personalise private rooms, but resources are never enough to provide the optimum living conditions for a comfortable and happy old age.
Many homes, in Great Britain at least(and perhaps this is more true of the private sector), still offer no privacy for the elderly who do not have their own rooms, who have no locks on the lavatories and who have to suffer the indignity of being bathed and examined by a non-qualified member of staff of the opposite sex.
The first task I was given was to bathe an elderly spinster.
I infuriated the officer in charge by asking the lady if she minded.
The old lady looked at me in wonder and said, ‘Nobody has ever asked me that before, but if you really would not be too cross I would rather you did not.’
In the worst homes the confused-elderly are wheeled in front of the television and left there all day.
Institutionalism sets in after a few months, and active people slow down and soon learn not to complain.
People who cause trouble are constantly under medication (more for the staff's sake than the residents', so it seemed to me.
I have met wonderful doctors who really cared for their old patients, but sometimes the doctors were dismissive and rude, believing that there was little point in wasting valuable resources on the elderly as they were going to die soon anyway.
I remember one day I was serving lunch and the doctor strode in during the meal, walked up to his patient who was eating his lunch, pulled his head up and demanded, ‘What is it this time?’
He then frog-marched him out of the dining hall to the medical room.
When I confronted him outside the refectory and insisted that the resident be allowed to finish his meal, he exploded in a torrent of foul language and vowed he would never return.
I could tell you many tales of great joy and hope, but I could also give you far worse than the few examples I have mentioned here.
Have they shocked you?
I hope so, because residential homes are places where people become cut off from family life and the outside world.
Most people do not wish to see what goes on behind the locked doors.
Eskimos put their old people out to die on the ice.
Some African tribes leave their elderly to die by the rivers and waterholes so that the wild animals will eat them.
We lock our old people away.
Occasionally we hear of staff abuse and there is outrage, but more often than not we simply do not think of what it means to be old or shut away.
Do not ask the elderly about personal fulfilment in the modern privatised family: they feel betrayed.
Perhaps you would like to help; please do not feel maudlin or offer a vicarious prayer.
Why not act and go round to your local old people's home — it will be within walking distance — and take your children with you.
Ring the bell and say that you would like to adopt an old person.
Do not only go and see them, but take them out or bring them home.
This is kingdom work.
Nothing less.
THE CHURCH AND PRIVATISATION
Privatisation, then, is not only a question of secularisation.
It is something that has deeply influenced all social life.
We have seen how the impersonalism of public life and changes in the structure and functions of the family have led to an emphasis on self-fulfilment as something that belongs in the private sphere.
I have been anxious to show that the nuclear family may lead not to satisfaction but to frustration and disappointment.
But while the family may still be the supreme focus of privatisation, it is not the only one.
The private domain is that world where families, individuals and associations of private affiliation live alongside each other.
I say alongside because in no sense does the private world consist of a common culture and identity.
Families live separately and autonomously.
A feature of suburbia is that many people do not even know their own neighbours; certainly not those across the way.
Furthermore, the private world consists of hundreds of different subcultures and associations.
It is doubtful if we can talk about modern nations having a culture in the sense that we can say that there is a monolithic entity called American culture or British culture.
We can definitely say, however, that both America and Britain have a vague overall culture that is expressed in its national institutions  and ‘way of life’.
But underneath the umbrella of the popular (and vague) culture there are hundreds of ‘little cultures’.
Perhaps not so much a way of life, but what Wittgenstein called a ‘form of life’: small and privatised world-views binding on the group and consisting of accepted social practices, group norms and common languages (by the latter I do not mean natural languages like French or English, but a nomenclature or group argot).
If there is a common culture at all it is usually expressed as part of the public world of government and state.
Something like the ‘civil religion’ of American life, or the compromising good-sense of the British, is held up as embodying the culture at large.
But the private world, where people look for both their pleasure and their fulfilment, is a competing world of separate group allegiances, some of which happen to be religious.
The reason I am suggesting that the church of Christ lives in this subcultural world is because I want to insist that God's spiritual family, as well as the human family, has also been radically altered by modernity.
I do not mean spiritually altered, but socially transformed.
The fact that Christianity is just one option among many shows us that the private world is a competing realm of separate and pluralistic realities.
I shall say more of this a little later on, but for now I want to concentrate on aspects of privatisation.
Again we can see how this process of modernity aids philosophical secularism.
For what could be better for the life of individualistic man than privatisation?
The private sphere becomes the natural home of modern man.
In the public world perhaps the older Puritan work ethic still dominates, though more so in the United States than Great Britain.
But in the private world(s) hedonism takes root.
Capitalism and the sterner Puritan ethic are delighted with hedonism as a private way of life because hedonism encourages consumerism, and consumerism becomes the economic mode of hedonism for modern man.
Pleasure, in short, belongs to private leisure and individual patterns of economic consumption.
Even this affects church life, as I shall show, but we must recognise that it is not only rank hedonism that flourishes  under private banners.
As we have already seen (p. 101), self-fulfilment is the ‘higher’ form of hedonism.
If we do not turn up for work, we are likely to get the sack, but in our private worlds we can dream our lives away at home, church or play.
We can do this because the private universe that we inhabit for much of the time is characterised by a philosophy of personal freedom and private choice.
‘’ Do what you want’shall be the whole of the law' was a favourite catch phrase of the occultist Aleister Crowley, but in fact it is the ‘law’of the private kingdom — with the added rider, ‘as long as it does not interfere with other people's personal preferences’.
The ‘consenting adults’ mentality dominates private life, for there are no community taboos or collectivist laws to inhibit private expression (though, of course, there is the penal code).
To be free in private is to be able to watch pornography or to preach the gospel.
Private pietism fits in very nicely with privatisation, but then so too does Transcendental Meditation or the playing of Trivial Pursuits .
You have to look hard in Christendom to find a Christian culture which has not become privatised.
There are strong cultural residues in Catholic and Orthodox countries that are still primarily rural.
It is no small thing to be able to leave your belongings unguarded and your doors unlocked, as you still can in the country areas of Greece (Davies 1982: 85).
But it is Islam, not Christianity, that has realised the danger of privatisation and the negative and draining effect it can have on public life.
We Westerners find it hard to understand or admire the growth and success of Islamic fundamentalism, but the traditional Muslims have realised far better than the ‘progressives’ that if you want to resist consumerism and individualism then you have to capture the public ground and control the country from the centre.
We Christians have already lost that battle, and I personally believe that we should not attempt to fight it again.
This is my fundamental objection to the American new rightists.
It is not because they are rightists (they could just as well be leftists) but because they want to capture the centre not for the gospel but for a ‘Holy America’.
The church  throughout its history has been too preoccupied with building Christian civilisation at the expense of ‘realising’ the kingdom.
I do think, however, that we should hit the Enemy in the public world, and even set up outposts and command centres there, as long as we do not forget that the kingdom cannot be built as a nation state or a political empire.
There is more bad news to come, but let us pause for a moment to take heart.
While it may be true that we Christians are living in our separate and little private worlds, this is not to say that nothing significant is happening.
On the contrary, a great deal is happening.
This is because our adversary cannot have everything his own way.
Privatisation is in fact a dual-edged sword.
On the one hand we can see it as a master stroke of the Devil: Christians and humans everywhere have been forced into private enclaves cut off from the public world and each other.
Private worlds, whether they are families or voluntary societies, turn out to be delusory sources of personal freedom: disillusionment and hopelessness follow behind the many human philosophies and religious ideas that modern men and women discard as carelessly as consumer toys.
On the other hand privatisation can also rebound on the Enemy, for there is no doubt that personal fulfilment is possible in the private sphere.
There is real love and joy to be found in families and human life; no person is totally under the control of the Evil One until sin once and for all obliterates the imago dei .
And we in the church may not yet be an army ‘mighty and terrible with banners’, but we can muster resistance by coming together in little bands of hope ready to strike in deep raids behind enemy lines.
If the private world is where we find ourselves, then it is here that we must first come together.
I would like to suggest, with respect to the historic churches, that we should take a lesson from the sects.
Usually we think of sects in totally negative terms; they divide Christendom and introduce strange beliefs and practices, we often think.
But we have to understand that sects are a response to modernity that works.
For example, my own Confession, Eastern Orthodoxy, has not found it easy to translate its great liturgical and spiritual treasures from rural and primitive  existence to the urban and sophisticated life of modernity.
Those emigrés who have settled in Western society have found that their diaspora churches cannot be like the great populist and establishment churches of Russia and Greece; they have to survive as nonconformist ‘sects’.
I do not mean by this that they have had to invent new beliefs, but they do have to adopt the voluntary camaraderie of the sects.
That is what we need to learn from sects.
We look so closely and with such moralistic scrutiny at the religious content of sects, and the habit of mind that imagines that it alone has the full and unique expression of the faith, that we fail to notice what they have to offer.
Nowhere is this more true for Christianity than in the inner cities.
How is Lutheranism doing in Berlin, or Episcopalianism in Detroit, or Anglicanism in London?
They all face the same problem: their strength traditionally lay in parish life, traditional communities, and what the sociologists call ‘cultural embeddedness’.
The inner cities no longer respond, because the communities have dissolved or become permanently disfigured.
You cannot predicate a parish life upon shifting populations and broken communities.
Anglicanism, for example, may be surviving in the countryside of Hertfordshire, and indeed is truly embedded there, but she is adrift in the East End of London (Ahern and Davie 1987).
What sects do, and are doing with remarkable success in inner cities, is to create ‘community’ by private association or voluntary agreement.
This may very well have to be the hallmark of the future church in modernity, just as it was in the early days of Christian existence.
After all, lest we forget, the church, sociologically speaking, started as a sect of Judaism.
The question modern sectarian formations have to ask themselves is also the same question as the early church asked: ‘Are we to be exclusive or inclusive?’
Too often modern sects have been too exclusivist and purist.
But it need not always be so: sectarian formations without sectarian spirits are a genuine recipe for a future.
But on a more general level we need to realise that the church is not down and out because she is on the privatised and peripheral margins of society.
She is, however, hemmed  in by the Adversary.
So God is calling us and gathering us where we are.
I believe that he is also calling us to break out of the margins and take the battle to the Enemy.
We worry about sectarian exclusiveness without realising that we have become used to living under siege.
It is not only the sects that are guilty of fortress mentalities: we have come to believe that God is to be found only in our prayer groups, fellowships and denominational congregations.
In Egypt the Coptic church is forbidden by law to proselytise.
Her members can convert to Islam, but it is a one-way street.
A positive consequence of this is that the church has preserved her spiritual heritage and also maintained her community base.
The negative consequence, however, is that Christians there have developed a ghetto mentality that can no longer think in terms of mission, but only survival.
We are a long way from Egypt, but in many ways the secular world is as merciless as Islam.
It does not care how many revivals the church experiences in the private world as long as it stays where it is.
The Devil is not powerful enough to prevent genuine spiritual and personal fulfilment in the church.
She remains for him, even in modernity, enemy territory.
His desire is to keep us inside our barracks (or, more appositely, behind the battlements of our homes).
An army on the move is what he really fears.