

A Joyous Christmas and A Happy New Year
Number 134
STRONG PLEA TO THE DIOCESAN ASSEMBLY
Bishop calls us to action
WE WILL never solve problems in meetings.
Meetings are effective only when reflection leads to action.
This was Bishop Gray's message to the 1992 Diocesan Assembly.
He was speaking at the end of an interesting day when 160 people — the Bishop, 21 priests and parishioners from all parts of the diocese — met at St Benedict's School, Upton Wirral.
In the first of four topics, Father Harry Stratton, parish priest of St Alban's, Macclesfield, spoke of the development in the Church's teaching on baptism, seen as a movement away from the congregation being virtually spectators at the liturgy, to them becoming a parish community worshipping together.
This change meant that preparation was essential.
The importance Father Stratton placed on preparation was echoed in the group discussion, although what constituted preparation in the parishes varied from talks or a video to none at all.
Of particular importance today, it was agreed, was what the  Church's attitude should be to non Mass-going parents seeking baptism for their child.
The vision
In the second talk, Tom Helvin, director of the Diocesan Schools Department, told delegates: ‘The main reason for our Catholic schools is religious growth and development of the children, not merely to make them practising Catholics, but to involve them fully in parish and church.’
Mr Helvin said that the ethos or vision of our Catholic schools was that the children should learn that the attitudes and values of our religion should imbue every aspect of our lives.
This had implications in school for such things as curriculum and discipline as well as relationships.
This vision might not always be met but that was no excuse not to go on trying.
‘Catholic schools will only be understood when  they are seen as part of the mission of the Church,’ said Mr Helvin.
Good works
The third talk brought the comment: ‘It is not enough to say to the hungry, ‘Be fed’, or to the naked, ‘Be clothed’.’
With that, Charles Burchell, chairman of the Diocesan Justice and Peace Commission, in his talk Social Needs Awareness for Catholics, reminded delegates that faith without good works was dead.
Sometimes, he said, it seemed that the Church's social teaching was a well-kelp secret, even though there were many people quietly involved in helping others.
No-one should ever think that what they were doing was too small.
Mr Burchell suggested that if a social need was seen, then we should look around and see what support was available.
The solution might well be an ecumenical link, or a secular organisation where we could bring a spiritual dimension.
In the final talk, Father Peter Wright, Diocesan Youth Chaplain, reminded the assembly that the youth were the church of today and the hope of tomorrow.
Helped by some of the Diocesan Youth Service volunteers, Father Wright showed delegates that many young people had an ambivalent attitude to the Church.
They were full of vision and enthusiasm for change, but felt that the ‘adult’ church put a barrier against them.
They wanted to be considered as equals, to be in the Church, not an elite group.
Father Wright said: ‘It takes, perhaps, a special sort of leadership on the priest's part to draw young people into the larger parish community.
The Youth Service is seen as important at diocesan level, but this is not always the case at parish level.’
Drawing the assembly to a close, the Bishop said: ‘It is good to meet people where they are as Christ did with the woman at the well, gradually leading her to understanding.
So we must do.
A kind, sympathetic understanding of where people are is the best pastoral attitude we can have.’
The Bishop finished by praying that what had been discussed would become an apostolic thrust of the diocese.
Happy birthday!
THE children of St Albans, Macclesfield gave Bishop Gray a great greeting when he arrived on his pastoral visit.
As it was his birthday that week, Kirsty Ross (above) presented him with a card and a small gift of Macclesfield silk as a token of their love and affection.
Zoe, Hannah and Rebecca made sure they got into the picture too! and the Bishop tested out his zuchetta for size on some of the smaller children, including Ryan (left)
Run for Cafod
GET FRESH air into your lungs after Christmas and join the CAFOD Christmas Run at Up Holland on Monday, December 28.
It starts at 1pm prompt.
The event is now a well-established tradition, but for the benefit of newcomers, a word about its flavour.
It is very much a family event which in recent years has attracted more than 1,000 participants and at least as many spectators.
It's a welcome outdoor diversion after the usual indoor festivity.
Although the event attracts some serious runners, it is essentially a fun-run for mums, dads and grandparents, young children and youth.
Parish and school teams are much in evidence, as are priests and nuns.
Even Father Christmas has been known to take part.
The cross-country course is five miles in two laps, but the younger, or older, or less fit are strongly advised to do only one lap.
All participants receive a certificate.
Last year's run raised more than £20,000 in sponsorship for the relief and rehabilitation of famine victims in Africa.
A brass band will play carols from 12 noon until the starting pistol at 1pm.
Also from noon, hot drinks, light refreshments and CAFOD T-Shirts, sweatshirts and other resources will be on sale.
For you convenience and to avoid delay, you are asked to photocopy entry and sponsorship forms.
Please send entries as soon as possible.
These can be obtained from CAFOD North West, St Joseph College.
Peter's run nets £1,178
PETER BOOTH, of St Hilda's Parish, Wythenshawe, again ran to help when he learned that St Bonaventure Group of the Catholic Handicapped Fellowship were desperately in need of funds.
The group, who have an active Saturday club and a Monday Club for the blind and partly-sighted, has their mini-coach stolen when it was on loan to another charitable organisation, and they were left with a deficit of £5,500 when the insurance was settled.
Peter responded by taking part in the Great North Run.
He came 4,247th out of 30,000 competitors and his sponsorship raised £1,178 for St Bonaventure's.
Len O'Brien of Newall Green, came nearest to guessing in which position Peter would finish, to win a bottle of vintage champagne.
Previously Peter had raised £1,180 in 1988 for the group and £1,192 in 1990.
Names in the news
RECENT moves of priests include:
Canon vincent Turnbull to Ss Catherine and Martina's, Hoylake; Father Peter Sharrocks to St Werburgh's, Chester; Father Michael Lester to St Theresa's, Blacon; Father William Harrison to St Bernard's, Ellesmere Port; and Father James Kenny to St Mary's, Madeley.
FATHER Noel Keane, SDS, parish priest of St Augustine's, Runcorn, has been appointed by his provincial to Christ the King, Bristol, and will be succeeded by Father Georgio Malecki, SDS.
Father Andrew Ryder SCJ, of the  Sacred Heart Church, Wythenshawe, is the new Episcopal Vicar for Religious, in succession to the late Father Gerard Hanley.
MARCELLA JOHNSON is the new Diocesan President of the Union of Catholic Mothers.
She game her first inaugural address at the diocesan meeting held in Chester.
THREE MOTHERS, Mrs Mary McKeown, Mrs Nellie Andrews and Mrs Eileen Ashworth were presented with certificates by Bishop Gray for reaching 50 of service to the Union of Catholic Mothers, at the celebrations of the diamond jubilee of the Holy Cross Foundation, Birkenhead.
SPRED a lot of happiness
WITH ALL the turmoil surrounding education in this country, it is a joy to share reflections about SPRED, a programme of religious education which reaches out and welcomes children, adolescents and adults with developmental disabilities into the local parish community.
Growth in faith is a lifelong event, so there is no age limit to those who are welcomed into a SPRED programme.
SPRED groups are formed locally, and helpers are volunteers from the community.
No previous qualification is required, as training is provided.
Within SPRED groups, everyone has a special friend.
We recount here some of the reflections of those  involved in SPRED groups in the Wirral.
We cannot explain the presence of God among us, we cannot explain love.
What is shared in these reflections is something experienced and known through the atmosphere of peace, joy and unity, present in the small group communities.
Forgotten
THE cry of SPRED for the past 25 years is that ‘No-one believes alone’.
We all need to belong to a group of people who believe, if we are to grow in faith.
Do we welcome into our midst those people who have developmental disabilities, on order that we can grow together in faith?
Many people with these handicaps are marginalised within our society.
They have intimate experience of what it means to be rejected, forgotten, isolated.
The Church has not always recognised their rights to spiritual growth nor the contribution that they can make to building up the body of Christ.
The clear objective of every SPRED group is that these special people are visible within their parish as active  members , participating and contributing to the life of that faith community.
Church is the place where we hope to find an experience to love, to be known as a parson, sharing the stories of our lives and the stories of our faith.
These are some of the stories which we have received from SPRED groups in the Wirral…
David's Story
DAVID HAMMILL writes:
‘I have been living in a Social Services Home for about seven years.
I never wanted to go out until I joined SPRED.
That was the start of a new life for me.
It started me going out and meeting people.
‘My friend in SPRED is very patient with me, talking to me, holding my drink for me, making me laugh and listening carefully.
Sometimes he finds it hard to understand what I want to say, but he doesn't mind how long he waits while I repeat it, and he always understands in the end.
I look forward to the fortnightly meetings.
I don't know how I would get on without them now.
It makes me more patient with the difficulties of the way I have to live, and you meet people who are worse off than yourself.
‘When we have our celebration, it reminds me of Lourdes, and I've been going to Lourdes since 1961.
I've been disappointed when there's no transport to my SPRED, but now I organise it myself.
The last time that the transport didn't come, my friends came to see me instead.
I went to the parish race night and won a bottle of wine.
‘I won't tell you my friend's name because he wouldn't want people to make a fuss’.
Elizabeth's story
BRIGID and Tom McClennan write about their daughter Elizabeth's experience:
‘Elizabeth joined Holy Name SPRED group at Birkenhead in September 1988, when she was 11.
For Elizabeth, SPRED was a big social event.
She is totally blind, has poor mobility and is unable to  get out and about independently.
‘You could sense Elizabeth's excitement at the thought of going out and meeting her friends.
The minibus called at the house, Vin Roper was the driver, and John the helper.
Her one-to-one helper was Hugh Lappin, a fellow parishioner.
Hugh is married to Joan, and has two children, Sarah and Peter.
Hugh and Elizabeth became great friends and he treated her like gold.
‘The group did lots of creative activities and as well as fun and happiness at the meetings, there was always a quiet time for the word of God to be shared in the group.
The special love of Jesus was expressed to Elizabeth.
She was full of good news.
The spiritual love given to her from all the helpers was very apparent.
‘We have all been enlightened by Elizabeth.
The Lord does use His power through her and through the people he has put into her path to make her life richer.
We thank the Holy Name SPRED group.
Everyone has a special friend 
TOP LEFT: David and his friend.
TOP RIGHT: Everyone has a special friend.
LEFT TOP: ‘Our shared meal’.
LEFT CENTRE: Peace, joy and unity.
LEFT BOTTOM: Summer celebration.
BELOW: In a parish, God calls us to be Church for one another.
‘The public were shocked’
THE Sale and Altrincham branch of SPUC organised a market stall and public awareness day in Altrincham Precinct, to commemorate the passing of the Abortion Act on April 27, 1967, and the more than three and a half million lost to abortion since then.
Thousands of leaflets were given out and pro-life songs and talks were broadcast.
Bebe Hinds, branch chairman, was overwhelmed with the warm response of the public to the educational material given out.
Bebe said: ‘The passers-by could not believe the scale of abortion taking place in this country and worldwide.
The  public were shocked when shown the foetal model, that anybody could kill these babies.
‘Every time your heart beats a baby dies!
Abortion is a political act, and as a simple act of Parliament has brought about the slaughter, so only by a political action can the law be changed to stop it.’
MEANWHILE, 100 SPUC members and supporters formed a three-hour pro-life chain in Cross Street, Manchester.
And Manchester Regional chairman Wilf Austin said: ‘We have certainly got the message over.
I hope that people are beginning to realise the scale of abortion’.
The pro-life chain was backed by many supporters in Altrincham, Wythenshawe, Hale and other Shrewsbury parishes.
Vigil for Life.
BISHOP Gray celebrated Mass and gave a brief talk at the final vigil of the Deanery Novena of Sanctity of Life Vigils, writes EDWARD WALKER.
This ninth and last vigil took place at Our Lady of Pity, Greasby, on December 4.
The intentions of the vigils were to give thanks to God for the precious gift of human life, and to also pray for an end to the abuses of this gift, by abortion, destructive embryo experimentation, and euthanasia.
The novena was organised by the Our Lady of Pity Sanctity of Life Group, and was a response to the desperate need for prayer and for education of life issues.
Other guest speakers included Dr Peggy Norris and Father Chris Walsh.
The emphasis throughout the novena was on prayer, and the talks focused on the real and imminent threat of euthanasia being given legal approval in our country.
FIGHTING for Life in Altrincham precinct, and in Cross Street, Manchester.
Kill pain, not patients
KILLING Pain — Not Patients was the title of the talk given at the November meeting of the North Cheshire Newman Circle, by Dr Peter Tweedy, a physician from St Ann's Hospice.
Euthanasia, although technically illegal was practised in Holland, but under what were regarded as safeguards, including the explicit and continued request of the patient, the agreement of relatives and of two doctors one of whom must be a consultant.
Afterwards it was necessary to inform the public prosecutor.
Dr Tweedy stressed that from the Christian point of view, it was a necessity to look after our God-given body, and there was an obligation to receive treatment if it did not involve undue risk, was not distressing and was practically viable — in other words, ‘ordinary medical treatment’.
Distress
If, however, there was only a low chance of treatment being effective, or there was a high risk of death or deterioration any risk of unbearable distress to the patient, or there could be an unwarrantable drain on resources, there was no obligation to proceed.
Hospice medication was always given in doses adequate to give relief of pain and other symptoms, even at the risk of shortening life, and this could improve, of only temporarily, the quality of life of the patient as it drew to its close.
At the January 6 meeting of the circle, Veronica Lawler will speak about CAFOD in Indo China.
Meetings of the circle are held at 8.15pm, preceded by Mass at 7.30pm on the first Wednesday of the month, at Loreto Convent Grammar School, Dunham Road, Altrincham.
All are welcome.
NEWS IN BRIEF Pilgrimage places
THERE are still a few places left on the pilgrimage to the Holy Land which Marie Stormont is organising on behalf of the Tour Company.
It leaves in March, with Father Malachy Sheehan as the spiritual director.
For further details contact  Marie .
A day to renew
THERE will be a Day of Renewal at St Theresa's Church, Blacon, on January 23, 1993, from 10.30–4pm, when the speaker will be Nigel Bavidge.
Getting the message
THE importance of communication was the theme of an evening at the Wellspring Centre in Stockport.
Annie Hold, who works for BBC Radio Shropshire and is also the Broadcasting Officer for the Anglican diocese of Lichfield, gave the presentation.
The plans are to have a Deanery Communication Team, with representatives in every parish.
Athletes honoured
FOUR athletes from Plessington Catholic High School, Bebington, were selected for the Merseyside County teams to compete in the Isle of Man — Paul Mort, Christopher Hamilton, Anthony Dunne and Joanne Madden.
Rome gives its blessing
THE Teams of Our Lady have received official recognition as a private association of the faithful from Rome.
Cardinal Pironio, from the Pontifical Council for the Laity, wrote to them to convey the good wishes of the Holy Father.
The Teams of Our Lady is a lay movement of Christian married couples in 50 countries who base their family life on the gospel, and see their love sanctified by the sacrament of marriage.
A team consists of five or six couples and a priest/spiritual counsellor.
They meet monthly in each other 's home, and share their experiences over a simple meal, pray together and deepen their understanding of marriage, family life and their faith.
Throughout the month, they endeavour to pray and read the scripture regularly and make time for a ‘sit down’ an occasion to have meaningful conversation — which should be an important part of married life.
THREE WOMEN HAVE THEIR SAY
Stop the arms trade
BRITAIN is heavily involved in the arms trade.
Pat Gaffney, general secretary of Pax Christi, spoke in Manchester about the arms trade, which provides a major source of income for this country and provides employment directly or indirectly in a whole range of ways.
Since the arms trade brings income at a time of serious recession, people are employed to use all their marketing skills to persuade other countries to buy our military goods.
So the arms trade encourages and keeps going wars throughout the world.
From the time of World War Two, there have been 127 wars, mostly in the poorer countries.
In 1989, Britain earned £2 billion from arms exports, with more than 75 per cent of sales going to the poorer countries.
The powerful in these countries use scarce resources to buy weapons, while vast numbers of their fellow citizens go hungry and lack basic necessities.
Especially at a time of recession and high unemployment, it is hard to give up a source of income and jobs.
The ending of the Cold War has not made much difference to the well-being of this country or the extent of the manufacture of weapons.
Alternatives to this industry are needed, and do exist.
What is lacking is the will to move towards the alternatives, and this can be influenced by public opinion.
As an individual, I can look for ways of dealing with conflict in my own life through negotiation and avoiding imposing my will on others.
I can find ways of contributing to peace-making organisations or activities.
I can check that any money invested on my behalf (such as my pension fund) is soundly invested.
I can write or speak to anyone with a say in how society or the Church spend money — our money, God's money — and I can discuss these things with others.
Years ago, Shrewsbury Diocese offered to support any woman considering contemplating an abortion if she was prepared to continue with her pregnancy.
This included financial support.
A positive and practical way for the Christian community would be to offer necessary support for those willing to leave the arms industry.
Women to the fore
HAVE YOU seen the latest issue of the Catholic Woman?
It should have arrived at your parish by now, so perhaps you could ask your parish priest for a copy.
Catholic Woman is the newspaper of the National Board of Catholic Women.
It has eight pages of interesting reading.
There is a message from Cardinal Hume, and there are five definitions of the word  ‘feminisim’by five contributors of very widely different opinions.
The Board of Catholic Women has been asked by the Bishops to represent the range of views and concerns of all Catholic women.
You may remember that two or three years ago, we made an attempt to consult you by producing a discussion paper, Woman, Status and Role, Life and Mission, which resulted in the report, Do Not Be Afraid.
Many women in this diocese participated in this consultation.
The newspaper is a further and on-going attempt to communicate, inform, and consult all women, including those not in organisations, and to give them a means of expressing their views and concerns.
The Catholic Woman is issued twice yearly, in Advent and at Easter, and £5 will get 25 copies of both issues; £10 will get 50 copies, delivered to the parish, the group or the individual and will allow £5 or £10 profit of sold at 20p each.
Individual mailing is £2 for the two issues.
Why we are hurting
I RECENTLY attended the Assembly of Black Catholics in Birmingham, with two members of the Shrewsbury Diocesan Justice and Peace Commission.
I was pleased to renew friendships made over two years ago at the First Congress of Black Catholics, and it was a joy to be again in a crowd of African, Afro-Caribbean and Asian Catholics where for once I was not the only black face in a sea of white ones.
In the Shrewsbury Diocese, amid the white highlands of Cheshire, Shropshire and the Wirral, white Catholics at all levels must be convinced that there is an important educational task to be achieved.
How can we support black individuals who feel powerless and isolated?
How can we increase the awareness of self-worth of our black children.
Where are the black role models for them to follow?
We must begin the process of raising awareness among our white brothers and sisters so that they realise that they are hurting us.
We black Catholics must speak out in our schools for equality for our children, so that they can become the clergy and laity for the future without having to apologise for being black.
I would welcome contact with other black Catholics in our diocese.
Would you like to contact me to exchange experiences and help us feel less isolated?
We could form a CARJ group to combat the quiet resistance in our church to the concerns of Black Catholics.
Homeless in Chester?
CATH AIDS THE CITY
‘I DIDN'T think that Chester would have a homeless problem’, is a comment we hear quite often, says Father Tim Dowling, Father Guardian of St Francis's Church and Honorary Secretary of Chester Aid to the Homeless, CATH, as it is known for short, is a registered charity, which this year notches up 20 years of working with homeless people.
CATH is not a Catholic organisation, but Father Tim continues a long line of involvement by the Franciscans that started with Father Crispin back in 1972.
CATH's  largest hostel for 19 men, Roodee House, is the former friary of St Francis', and was bought from the church in 1985 by Muir Housing Association.
Approaching 1,000 homeless men have been temporarily housed there since it opened.
The Soup Kitchen, the existence of which also surprises many people, is run from the old Franciscan refectory in Cuppin Street, says Father Dowling.
Tony Murphy, a parishioner of St Werburgh's, Chester is the project manager of CATH's facilities, which include a short-stay hostel and a night shelter.
‘Although our main aim is to provide accommodation and care’, he says, ‘we also give advice and support to homeless people and try to assist them to resettle back in the community.
People become homeless for a wide range of reasons, and sadly homelessness is on the increase, particularly among younger people’.
Tony also co-ordinated Chester's effort for the lobby of Parliament on Tuesday, December 1 as part of the Churches National Housing Coalition.
Mike Maxwell, a parishioner of St Teresa's, Blacon, works as a volunteer at the night shelter.
He enjoys the work.
‘There are a number of people who regularly stay at the night shelter, which can hold up to 15 people, both men and women.
Equally there seem to be many people who stay for a short period, and then just move on.
‘It can be difficult handling the residents at times, but it is nice to know that without CATH, they would otherwise be sleeping in the car parks or shop doorways’.
Says Father Tim: ‘CATH receives limited funds for its work, and relies heavily on charitable donations.
At the moment we are looking for an alternative night shelter, which is going to prove expensive’.
As an effort to raise money, CATH took part in the national Sleep Out on Friday, December 4, looking for sponsorship for their work, and also trying to raise awareness about homelessness.
For further information about CATH, or if anyone wants to help, either personally or  with a donation, contact Father Tim or Tony Murphy.
Redundant?
IT'S BAD enough being told you haven't got a job anymore.
Being an executive one day and unemployed the next brings an added trauma.
Apart from the blow to one's pride, the drastic loss of earning brings with it a sense of utter helplessness.
Executive Job Clubs have been set up, but for many they are havens of retreat where preconceptions can be themselves an obstacle to the need for change.
One way forward that has proved helpful to a number of people is franchise management.
Top franchises, with reputable financial services companies, can restore the pride that was lost, as well as giving the status needed.
They do demand hard work, but can provide real business and personal development.
The returns are related to performance, but that is not surprising these days.
If this seems to be something you are interested in, and you are between 30 and 55, and have been earning £30K plus, then Philip Glennon will guarantee you an interview, to talk this through further.
Food for those in need THE Harvest celebration at St Peter's, Hazel Grove, was marked with an abundance of food and symbols of the harvest.
It also showed the typical daily diets of the victims of famine, the average British midday meal, and also of the homeless in Britain.
The readings and music were designed to help people reflect on the goodness of God's creation and our responsibility to be stewards of the harvest.
The food went to the Wellspring Soup Kitchen in Stockport, and to needy families in the area.
The collection of £320 went to famine relief work in Somalia
Fight for Sunday hots up
THE BATTLE for Sunday is resuming with a new intensity.
In the great pressure for profits, the large stores are using their muscle to get their share of the market.
The Keep Sunday Special Campaign has been fortunate in getting its proposals for reform of the legislation for Sunday trading drawn out in the ballot for Private Members' Bills.
Be it a coincidence or an answer to prayer, Ray Powell, a senior backbencher and a strong supporter of the Keep Sunday Special campaign was drawn third in the ballot.
It means that there is a chance for the law to be reformed positively.
What is needed is at least 100 MPs present to support the Bill.
This means there can be a vote.
The crucial date is January 22, when the Bill's second reading will take place.
If the Bill wins a clear majority, it is almost certain to become the basis of new legislation.
The anomalies and confusions of the 1950's Shops Act would be removed, while Sundays would be kept special for rest, family recreation and worship.
If the Bill is outvoted, we are faced with dire prospects.
The Government's commitment to a positive reform of the law will weaken in view of the apparent lack of consensus.
Nothing will be done.
More and more shops will be forced to open illegally, to protect their market share.
Your help is needed — and your continuing prayers, especially over the next three months.
People need to be encouraged to write to or visit their MPs and urge them to be present on the day and vote for the Bill.
Also, financial support is needed to help mobilise grassroots support and to lobby MPs effectively in the run-up to the vote.
Quiz night aids charity
THE KNIGHTS of St Columba would like to thank the priests of St Chad's Deanery for the support to our Charity Quiz night on November 6, at Our Lady's Social Centre, Stockport, writes ANTHONY MOORES.
The winners, and also retaining the shield for a second year, were the team from the Sacred Heart, Cheadle Heath, who donated their £100 winnings to the Little Sisters of the Poor.
The Stockport Labour Party team were second, and their prize was donated to the intensive care unit at Steeping Hill Hospital.
Our Lady's Operatic Society were third, and they donated their £20 to St Ann's Hospice.
On behalf of Council 80 of Stockport, I would like to thank everyone who made it such a successful evening.
Bags of help
PUPILS are arriving at All Hallows Catholic High School, Macclesfield, with bags laden with toothpaste, soap and disinfectant.
No, it's not part of a campaign of cleanliness in the school.
The pupils have heard about the Jospice — a clinic in Marazan, Honduras, where local nurse Rachel Birch, from St Edward's parish, works, helping to care for sick and injured people.
The conditions are very poor and overcrowded, as there is a total lack of the most basic amenities.
When Rachel Birch met sixth form students at the school earlier this year, they asked her how they could help.
They were told that if they could supply soap, toothpaste, toothbrushes, disposable razors, disinfectant, cotton sheets and  pillow-cases and adult shorts and T-shirts, such items could be shipped to Honduras free of charge on a returning banana boat.
The pupils at All Hallows have responded with their customary generosity.
If anyone else would like to help please contact Mr Campbell at All Hallows.
Pupils at the school have also presented the ecological musical, Yanomamo, which takes the theme of the richness of the rainforest and the tragedy of its destruction.
United in song
PUPILS, parents and friends of Ellesmere Port Catholic High School turned out on a stormy evening, to make a recording for BBC Radio Merseyside's regular Sunday morning programme, United in Song.
The school was very pleased to take part in a programme which has visited many local churches and schools in Radio Merseyside's 25 years of broadcasting.
The finished recording, by all accounts, is a credit to all who took part.
This programme will not be transmitted until 8.30am on Sunday, January 10, 1993, when the reflection on the Christmas and Epiphany messages, which the script highlights, will seem more appropriate than on a wet November evening.
School comes of age BISHOP GRAY joined parents, governors , staff and pupils for a mass to celebrate the 21st birthday of St Benedict's School in Handforth.
The school also held a big birthday party on St Benedict's Day.
To mark the occasion pupils were presented with a commemorative book mark, and the school hall was decorated with pictures celebrating the anniversary.
Pictured with pupils from the school are headteacher Paul Colquhoun, with Mgr Lightbound, Bishop Gray, Father O'Riordan and Father Long.
ANNE PLATT'S FESTIVE CHILDREN'S CORNER
The joys of Christmas past
CHRISTMAS is a very important festival in the Christian year.
As we look forward to the big event, let's take a look at how Christmas was celebrated long ago, before we were even born.
Early on in history, music became a part of the season.
The first carols were sung in the 13th century, and St Francis of Assisi made them popular.
Another tradition he encouraged was the crib.
At an Italian church in 1224, he made a living nativity scene from real people and animals!
We did not always eat turkey for Christmas dinner.
Instead a boar's head was on the menu.
In the middle ages, celebrations lasted from Christmas to Epiphany.
There were singing, games, dancing and pantomimes.
No television in those days!
The Christmas tree has been part of the festivities in Britain since the last century.
When Queen Victoria married Albert, he brought the custom over from Germany.
Most people send Christmas cards at Christmas time, but do you know who invented them?
The first Christmas card was designed by William Maw Egley Jr., on December 9th, 1842, when he was only 16.
Until 1900, cards were not signed, but hand delivered with a calling card.
Christmas day is a busy and  exciting time for everyone, but we should not forget the reason for our celebration.
It is Christ's birthday, and when we go to Mass on that day, it is the most important thing we do at Christmas.
Have a happy Christmas and a good New Year.
Young offenders need our help
PHIL McGLINCY pays a visit to prison
FATHER Peter Wright and I — along with a number of other youth workers from this and other diocese — took up an invitation from Father Patrick Cope, chaplain to Deerbolt Young Offenders Institute, in Co.
Durham to look around and meet some of the prisoners.
This was the first time I'd been into a prison and a number of things struck me during the day.
The first was that the lads weren't allowed to move freely within the prison; another was the size of the cells, in which the lads spend about 11 hours each day.
They were tiny.
The positive things were the training opportunities provided for them, and the lads we met.
First, a lot of these lads hadn't done very well at school, so the training provides them with a better chance of a fresh start once they have paid off their debt to society.
The lads we met were a group who choose to meet with Father Patrick weekly.
They are lads like one comes across all the time in schools, workplaces and pubs.
They are a group of really normal lads who have wandered off the tracks for different reasons.
One young man who impressed me immensely was from Scunthorpe.
He is on his fifth prison sentence, but this time he is determined to make a fresh start when he gets out.
Since he has been in Deerbolt, he has passed his GCSE's and is now trying to get a place catering college when he gets out next year.
Obviously this isn't always the case with ex-offenders — even those who are like this tend to get branded by society, and so don't get given a chance to start anew.
At the end of the day, the lads requested that we do something for them.
The suggested starting point was that, if a lad is coming out of Deerbolt, Father Patrick lets his area youth worker know and gives him a contact address for the worker and they go from there.
I think that this is something that we as Christians should be aware of and, if possible, we ought to be available to help keen ex-offenders reintegrate into society.
NEWS FROM OUR YOUTH
I'm glad I went — sad I missed you…
WAKING UP one Sunday morning, my first thought was of more sleep and consequently not bothering to go to the deanery day that had been organised in our area.
I knew that response had been bad in our parish and I honestly didn't expect many young people to be there anyway.
But when I arrived at The St Chad's Deanery Day for Stockport and discovered there was a group of 20 people aged from ten up to 19, I thought that things couldn't be so bad after all.
Led by Una Doyle and Ged Flynn, the group became acquainted and then proceeded to play a game called BaFa BaFa.
This provided us with fantastic entertainment, and more seriously, a talking point about respecting peoples views — particularly within our church communities.
The day finished with some drama and Mass and I was sadly surprised to find how quickly the day had gone.
I feel sad for all who didn't attend and for those who don't even have the chance to attend something similar.
I wish that the church in general was not regarded by many young as ‘boring’ or ‘a waste of time’and that some people, like myself at times don't wish to be associated with church for fear of social credibility.
Maybe the Church isn't the answer for some especially those in parishes with only a few young people, but that is why I praise the deanery day as it provides a discussion place for people of all ages, and encourages us — the Church of the future — to make the Church a more  appealing and welcoming place.
Sadly nothing can be cone without ideas, and ideas need people to produce them, so I extend an appeal to all the people who may read this and pray that God might give each of us the sight to see where we are needed..
ST CHAD'S Deanery day, at Stockport.
Above, the youth workshop.
Right, getting to know you…
A Sportsman's Dinner at St Bede's College raised £2,000 for the Rainbow Family Trust, of which Bishop Grey is a Patron.
Mr Trevor Fisher, who is from Shrewsbury, organised the event and is seen presenting a cheque to Fr Tom Mulheran, the Director of the Trust, watched by Headmaster Mr John Byrne, who is from St Vincent's Parish, Altrincham.