

Socialism in One Family
It was some time after the crowds stormed the Presidential Palace compound in northern Bucharest in the late morning of 22 December 1989 that they found a confused old lady in a bungalow in the grounds.
Elena Ceauşescu's mother was by then one hundred and two years old.
Abandoned by her family and deserted by her servants, Elena Petrescu was incapable of grasping that a revolution had happened.
Her long life had witnessed so many incredible events, but as the final twist of fortune engulfed her, she was already too decrepit, mentally and physically, to come to terms with it.
She died a few days later.
Her last nurses did not tell her about her daughter's terrible fate.
Unlike Napoleon's mother, Elena Petrescu left no memorable quotation or hint that peasant-wisdom had perhaps already prepared her for her world to be turned downside-up again.
Nobody since the first Napoleon made his Corsican brothers kings of half Europe had made the political code of the Latin world of the Mafia so obviously the basis of his policy as Nicolae Ceauşescu.
Like any political arriviste , he could not be sure whom he should trust among his colleagues, but the  faction-fights of the previous thirty years must have taught Ceauşescu that in the Romanian Communist Party ideological affinity or even past services counted for little.
Loyalty could only be guaranteed by fear or by family ties.
Ironically, the effect of communism in the Balkans was to reinforce much older social attitudes and mores.
In a perverse way, the new utopia dredged up ancient ways of doing things which capitalism a few decades earlier had threatened to abolish.
In Romania, politicians' reliance on relatives was a strong tradition long before the Communists came to power.
Much of liberal politics before they were snuffed out by the Dej regime had been dominated by the Bratianu family.
But the Bratianu family abided as often as not by the principles of its imported Western liberalism as its inherited clannishness.
This was because the Bratianu dynasty flourished at the top of an increasingly Westernized society, whose new value it symbolized.
The Ceauşescus, of course, were underdogs who rose despite the new capitalist system — or at least as its enemies.
The disruption of agrarian society encouraged by modern industry and commerce pushed people like Nicolae Ceauşescu into the new world against their will, but also supplied them with a new ideology to explain their anger and frustration, and to make use of them.
Marxism rationalized Ceauşescu's resentments against the new Romania of the inter-war period, but it did not abolish his pre-modern attitudes.
Under centuries of Ottoman rule, throughout the Balkans, the individual had counted for nothing unless he had connections, ‘family’.
At the very least, in face of the hardships of peasant life under an alien and demanding regime, the Romanian peasant needed to be able to rely absolutely on his clan, the network of extended family relations, bound by blood and mutual obligations.
In difficulties, members of a family could look to each other.
In prosperity, the fortunate assisted their less well-off relatives.
Instinct reinforced calculation in building bonds between members of a given clan, but also in preserving traditional enmities and feuds.
Ottoman rule had in effect atomized society.
Theoretically, every person was subject to the whim of the sultan, which in practice meant they were at the mercy of his capricious subordinates.
Only people who could rely on an extended family network could hope to have the friends and connections necessary to protect themselves from the avarice of the sultan's lesser officials.
At worst, one could fall back on the immediate family of brothers and cousins to protect the individual, if only by helping to pay up to meet the demands of the tax collector.
Throughout the Ottoman world, centuries of arbitrary and frequently oppressive rule reinforced age-old peasant tendencies towards looking to the clan as the mainstay of life and regarding everybody outside with suspicion and hostility.
Life in Takrit in Iraq fifty years ago was based on similar principles for the young Saddam Hussein as it had been in Scorniceşti a generation earlier for Nicolae Ceauşescu.
Both came to lead theoretically revolutionary parties, which they staffed at the higher levels with relatives or friends from their home region.
(The same could be said of Hafaz Assad in Syria, or Todor Zhivkov in Bulgaria, though perhaps to a lesser degree.)
Throughout the Balkans for two generations after the Second World War, the initials ‘PC’ had two interchangeable meanings: ‘Communist Party’and ‘Friends and Connections’(Prietini si Connexiunei ).
By the late 1970s, Romanians talked of their Party, ‘PCR’, as ‘Petrescu — Ceauşescu — and Relations’.
The most famous joke was ‘In the Soviet Union under Stalin, they achieved ‘Socialism in One Country’, but in Romania under Ceauşescu we have achieved ‘Socialism in One Family!’
No one knows who first made the quip but it soon had universal currency.
What Ceauşescu managed was to marry the traditions of conspiracy and tight discipline, developed by Lenin and Stalin to bring the Communist Party to power, with the local legacy of Ottoman rule: the methods and the morals of cosa nostra .
Some historians and anthropologists have argued that the Sicilian Mafia began as a form of resistance by poor peasants against their harsh alien landlords.
The Mafia was supposed to be originally a subversive secret  society.
If that was the case, then the example of the rule of the Ceauşescus suggests what the People's Mafia might have turned into had it ever succeeded in gaining power in Sicily.
Only in Albania was the scenario of dynastic communism and vendetta carried on with more brutality and verve than in Romania, but at least there were two rival clans struggling for control of the Albanian Communist Party.
In 1981, Enver Hoxha, whose wife Nexhmije controlled ideology, suddenly denounced his prime minister of a quarter of a century's standing, Mehmet Shehu, as an agent of Yugoslavia, the CIA, and the Gestapo.
The cause of Hoxha's suspicion against a communist who had fought in the International Brigades in Spain and with him as a partisan during the Second World War was Shehu's consent to his son's marriage into the family of an exiled critic of Hoxha.
Shehu committed ‘suicide’, though rumours suggested Hoxha shot him personally.
Shehu's fall took his nephew Feçor Shehu, the Minister of Interior, and his brother-in-law, Kadri Hazbiu, the Minister of Defence, with him into the grave.
Politics in the Balkans always involved small interrelated élites: what communism did was to reinforce this tendency, and not just in the Balkans.
Saddam Hussein rose to rule Iraq in succession to a cousin from the Takriti clans, and depended upon cousins and near relatives to consolidate his hold on power.
Iraq's heritage has been at least as much shaped by Ottoman rule as Romania's, but equally Saddam and the Iraqi Ba'ath Party modelled their organization and secret police methods on those of the Soviet Communist Party and its little brothers.
Perhaps, one day soon, we will discover that in the most secretive Communist state of all, Kim II Sung's Hermit Kingdom of North Korea, the Party was still more nepotic and clannish than in the Balkans or in Iraq.
But, until Pyongyang opens up (and the suppression of a plot against the ‘blood-line of the Party’ in February 1991, suggests not everyone welcomes the prospect of Kim Jong II taking over), it seems safe to say that Romania under Ceauşescu (like Iraq under Saddam) had one of the most inbred political élites in the modern world.
In Romania, in addition to the blood relatives of both Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu, they both relied on people from a similar background and frequently from the same part of the country.
What the district around Takrit was to Saddam, Oltenia has been to the Ceauşescus.
In Romania, ‘Socialism in One Family’ meant rule by the Ceauşescus and Petrescus plus lesser client-families who attached themselves to the dynasty.
Equally, it meant that rivals were judged not only personally but in their relatives too.
Whole families rose and fell together.
In the 1930s, both Nicolae Ceauşescu and Elena Petrescu seem to have been introduced to the Communist Party by relatives who had already made their way to Bucharest from the country.
This no doubt guaranteed their trustworthiness to their new comrades and may well have persuaded them that if communism was for their brothers then it would do for them too.
In his rise to absolute power, neither Nicolae Ceauşescu's brothers and sisters nor his in-laws played any significant role.
However, once at the pinnacle of his ambition, his only aim could be to preserve his complete control of the Romanian Party and State, and to pass it on to his own chosen successor.
Whereas in his rise to power, Nicolae Ceauşescu had needed to make deals and alliances with other, equally ambitious, apparatchiks, once at the summit, he needed to dispose of them to preserve his position and to protect it from intrigue.
He needed an able team of allies during his rise, but they became the greatest threat to his predominance after the mid-1970s.
His brothers deserved to share in his success — family obligation could not be neglected — but they could also serve a useful purpose by occupying positions which blocked access to real power by other people from outside the clan.
That at least was the rationale behind the nepotism, though in practice Nicolae Ceauşescu's brothers were as little use to him in the final analysis as Napoleon's brothers were to the beleaguered emperor.
Relying on brothers and cousins to help administer the family's good fortune — in this case, the Romanian state  — was not at all unusual, but to promote the career of a wife was a remarkable innovation.
In so far as women had played a prominent part in Romanian politics, the precedents were not happy.
Magda Lupescu was held to have been an avaricious and pernicious influence on Carol II.
Ana Pauker was commonly regarded as a brutal Stalinist.
(In fact, Stalin, who shared many Romanian peasants' anti-Semitic distaste for Pauker's origins, supported her purging at the end of his life.)
Most Communists, despite their theoretical commitment to sexual equality, looked askance at any woman who aspired to be more than a tractor driver or street-sweeper.
The elevation of their leaders' wives to positions of political power in their own right happened more and more often by the 1970s, but it was not well regarded even in countries where the wife was not like Elena Ceauşescu in combining arrogance, brutality, stupidity and self-confidence.
Elena's promotion over the heads of more senior comrades with much greater political or administrative experience not only humiliated them, it also antagonized their wives.
Many of the politburo members had married good bourgeois ladies or fashionable actresses.
They regarded the General-Secretary's wife as uncouth and comic in her attempts to ape the styles of the more chic among the Communist élite.
Elena Ceauşescu later became infamous for her lavish wardrobe.
Certainly, it surpassed in bulk and cost anything yet seen in Romania and was on a scale approaching Imelda Marcos's spendthrift acquisitions.
However, it should not be forgotten that Nicolae Ceauşescu's colleagues and their wives had quickly learnt to reward themselves for the hardships of their long struggle for power.
Under Dej, the once affluent bourgeois residents of Herastau, the attractive northern suburb of Bucharest, were evicted and their houses occupied by the new élite.
Even today, Ion Maurer and the surviving leaders of the old regime live in fine turn-of-the-century houses, surrounded by high walls, with guards at the gate.
Ceauşescu's family and favourites have gone, but their places have  generally been taken by the prominent figures of the new regime — some of whom have not had to move far.
It was not only in Communist Romania that the leaders of the Party quickly adapted their lifestyles to their capacity to exploit the state.
Every country in Eastern Europe has been rocked by scandalous revelations about the special privileges of their former rulers.
In this, as in much else, the fallen Communist leaders could plead that all they were doing was imitating Lenin.
After all, from the very first weeks after the first seizure of power by a Communist Party back in November 1917, special rations, housing and other privileges had been the order of the day.
The people who were devoting their lives to transforming society into an egalitarian paradise could not be expected to live like other people who had nothing better on their minds than scratching a living.
From Lenin's use of an ‘expropriated’ Rolls-Royce and ‘socialized’imperial palaces and capitalist villas onwards, the People's representatives had found it necessary to insulate themselves from the daily difficulties of ordinary life.
Apart from Elena's promotion, two of Nicolae's brothers were most important in this respect: the military-historian, Ilie, and the younger Nicolae Andruţa.
Both were given positions near the centre of power, unlike their other brothers and sisters, who were installed in basically honorific positions, with the partial exception of the eldest of the siblings, Marin.
Marin Ceauşescu's position at the Romanian Foreign Trade Mission in Vienna made him the provider of the family's needs when it came to everyday items from razor blades to video films.
Regular sums of hard currency were put at his disposal so that he or his aides could buy whatever the residents of the Palaţul Primaverii wished.
In fact, with the exception of the occasional exotic demand, such as orchids from Singapore for Elena, Marin's job was little different from the agents of the other communist élites placed in Western Europe to provide the videotape recorders and other  appurtenances of power for the nomenklatura from East Berlin to Moscow and beyond.
In 1989, both Nicolae Andruţa and Ilie Ceauşescu were deputy ministers in their respective departments: Nicolae Andruţa at the Interior and Ilie at Defence.
Both were supposed to supervise appointments inside their ministry to exclude anyone capable of disloyalty to their brother.
Events do not suggest that they were very efficient as watchdogs of Nicolae's interests.
In the moment of crisis, Nicolae Andruţa at least made a show of coming to his brother's aid and brought the cadets from the Securitate training school at Baneasa into the centre of Bucharest.
Ilie by contrast seems to have panicked and tried to run away.
It is said that he was found out by one of the groups of civilian vigilantes who sprang up spontaneously on 22 December: apparently he had disguised himself in ordinary working clothes and was driving a Dacia 1300 when stopped, but suspicion was aroused when a search of his car revealed citrus fruits, like oranges and pineapples, in the boot — no ordinary Romanian had access to them.
At the time of the revolution there was a great deal of speculation about the Ceauşescus' wealth which, it was often claimed, had been stashed away in Swiss banks.
No evidence of huge deposits has come to light despite the Swiss authorities recent willingness to assist foreign governments in pursuit of funds embezzled by fallen dictators.
The Marcoses may have stashed away well over a billion dollars plus other Philippino assets, in the USA, Switzerland and elsewhere, but neither Nicolae nor Elena Ceauşescu felt under any compulsion to insure themselves against a rainy day.
They were confident that they were on the winning side of history and did not need to take precautions against exile in the autumn of their lives.
A few million dollars were kept abroad to provide for the family's regular needs from videos and colour television sets through to Nicolae Ceauşescu's preferred Gillette razors.
By the time the threat to their system became suddenly  apparent in the summer of 1989, it was too late to shift the sort of fabulous amounts rumoured at Christmas 1989 into foreign accounts.
Romania simply did not have billions of dollars for the Ceauşescus to purloin.
In any case, the pair had no intention of renouncing power and going into graceful retirement.
Their chaotic flight on 22 December revealed their complete lack of serious contingency plans for the eventuality of a coup , let alone a popular revolution.
Until very late in the day, the possibility of their downfall does not seem to have occurred to Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu, any more than it had to Zhivkov or Honecker.
Their regimes seemed insulated against instability.
Dollars and Western valuables were not hoarded against a rainy day in the manner of Latin American dictators.
History appeared irrevocably on the side of the ageing generation of Communists who had come to maturity in the era of the great depression and Hitler.
The possession of Western consumer goods of all kinds, from plastic carrier-bags via bottles of Johnnie Walker to sophisticated high-tech household items like hi-fi systems was vital to the status of high Party officials throughout the Communist world.
Not only did Japanese stereos or Italian fridges add to the comfort of life, they were badges of rank, proof of one's standing in the hierarchy of power.
Lesser mortals would be overawed by them.
Subordinates with the right to travel to the West knew that when they returned, a suitable gift, whether a silk-tie or a pornographic video, would be expected by their immediate superior.
Naturally, the Ceauşescu clan had to possess more consumer goods than anyone else in order to assert their authority.
When the crowds stormed the Palaţul Primaverii on 22 December, they were astonished by what they found: The lavish — if ugly — real and imitation Louis-Quinze furniture; the use of marble and gold for everyday objects; and, most striking of all, was the presence of a large Philips colour television and videotape recorder in every room.
Throughout the Communist world, the videotape recorder was the  greatest status symbol because it implied ready access to a constant supply of Western videotapes.
Nobody, least of all a Party boss, could be expected to watch, still more record, domestic television output!
Ironically, in the West, the sale of videotape recorders has often seemed to grow in step with industrial unemployment.
Perhaps it is a reflection on the economic failure of communism that its greatest status symbol should have been the most precious household item of the unemployed in the West.
The fact that the Ceauşescus had countless colour televisions added to the perverse aspect of their superabundance since ordinary Romanians had to put up with only a couple of hours of black-and-white television each day — and that largely devoted to the doings of the residents of the Palaţul Primaverii.
But, apart from that, the Ceauşescus, collection of television sets, indeed their domestic arrangements as a whole, were not so far out of line with what any politburo member in the Bloc would have regarded as normal.
Take Boris Yeltsin's description of the official dacha he was treated to on joining the Soviet politburo in 1985:
I was met at the door by the commander of the bodyguard, who introduced me to the domestic staff — the cooks, the maids, the rest of the bodyguard and the gardener.
Then began the inspection of the house.
Even from the outside I had been overwhelmed by the size of the place.
I went into a hall…with an enormous fireplace, marble panelling, a parquet floor, large carpets, chandeliers and luxurious furniture.
We went on passing through first one room, then a second, a third, a fourth,in each one of which was a television set …
I lost count of the number of bathrooms and lavatories…
And everywhere there was crystal, antique and modern chandeliers, oak parquet floors ad infinitum …
This dacha had belonged to Mikhail Gorbachev before he moved on to bigger and better things.
Ceauşescu's Balkan neighbour, Todor Zhivkov, maintained a fairly dynastic system, also with a bizarre, pseudo-academic angle — at least until the death of his favourite daughter, Ludmilla.
Her interests in the paranormal were unorthodox for a Communist but not unusual among the post-religious élite in Brezhnev-s Europe.
(Ludmilla's intellectual ambitions were posthumously immortalized by her father's generous establishment of a research fellowship named after her at Oxford University.)
His son, a Bulgarian double of Nicu Ceauşescu, became deputy minister of culture, while his illegitimate son, Petko Danchev was deputy premier at the time of Zhivkov's fall.
But there were also a few marked differences.
Although the number of his palatial residences and hunting lodges — twenty-two — rivalled his Romanian neighbour's collection, unlike Ceauşescu, Zhivkov had fairly good taste.
On visits to Romania, the curators of Ceauşescu's residences, the state guest-houses and museums, noted that Zhivkov only stole or requested as presents the most exquisite items.
Ceauşescu casually approved these, either as a generous host or because he did not recognize the value of rococo or recherché items.
Ceauşescu's sensitivities in matters of art were hardly developed: as he was to show later in the planning of the enormous House of the People (see chapter VIII below), he knew what he liked but had difficulty envisaging it, and tended to change his mind.
If he lacked Zhivkov's taste, Ceauşescu showed greater consistency of purpose: Zhivkov survived his fall and lived long enough to explain that he had not really been a Communist after all; Ceauşescu never gave his judges the satisfaction of hearing him renounce his beliefs.
Nicolae Ceauşescu devolved a considerable amount of the routine authority and privileges of a general-secretary on to his wife.
Elena shared some of Zhivkov's perquisites of power.
The most important was the monopoly on the re-sale of valuable Western goods, especially cars, within the country.
Elena received a fee for permission to purchase what was by Romanian standards a luxurious limousine, even if in the  West the car might have been only a family saloon.
Elena's greed was resented by the privileged few who could both afford the fees and knew who to approach to get permission.
Not satisfied with her cut from the sale of foreign cars, Elena also asserted her prerogative with regard to the distribution of the standard Romanian car, the Dacia 1300, making party officials pay up for getting a car ahead of others in the queue (which, as usual in Romania, seemed to grow ceaselessly).
By the late 1970s, Elena had come to share most of her husband's prerogatives and was almost his co-ruler.
Ambitious as ever for more recognition than was either possible or reasonable, she was no longer satisfied with receiving honours worthy of a spouse, or even a ‘world-ranking scientist’ in her own right.
Travelling abroad, in defiance of all customary diplomatic niceties, the Romanian couple began to demand that the First Deputy Prime Minister receive the same awards as her husband.
Hours of wrangling over the protocol of such matters was squandered during both the preparation and the course of the pair's ceaseless round of state visits to ever more obscure countries.
In 1984, Ceauşescu almost went home in a huff from Greece when even Andreas Papandreou's government balked at awarding the highest honours twice over.
Romanian propaganda could not entirely disguise the fact that it was somewhat unusual for the wife of the president to hold high office herself.
In the official English-language biography of Nicolae Ceauşescu, published in 1983, the subject was broached and settled in the following inimitable way:’‘I would like to ask you,’ a journalist from abroad [in fact Le Figaro ]asked the Romanian Head of State,—‘what is the role of Madame Elena Ceauşescu, who is not only your wife, but also a person with a political function: she is First Deputy prime Minister?'’
The First Deputy Prime Minister's husband replied in his standard way, larding his lengthy answer with the typical verbiage of the langue de bois : ‘I will answer you starting with  a more general presentation of the mechanism of societal government,’ he began, before launching himself on about ten minutes' worth of the following: ‘A principle of collective leadership operates in the Romanian socialist society…
All work in a collective manner; make collective decisions on all problems.
The government operates on the principle of collective leadership…
In this framework — the Comrade concluded his exposition —‘Elena Ceauşescu contributes to solving the questions of our society's development.’
Although Ceauşescu kept open the question of who would succeed him as both Party leader and head of state, by the 1980s there were only two candidates whom he would tolerate in the necessary launching-pad positions around him.
Like his father, Nicu Ceauşescu had gone to the top of the Communist Youth League at an early age.
This post had often served as a launching-pad for a future general-secretary as the careers of both Erich Honecker and Egon Krenz in East Germany show.
Then Nicu had been sent to the country's second city, Sibiu, as leader of its Communist Party and de facto head of the local administration.
Away from Bucharest and the constant oversight of his parents, Nicu perhaps developed some critical ideas about the realities of life in Romania for people outside the Communist élite.
Elena Ceauşescu was not without her own ambitions and may well have agreed to the (temporary) sidelining of Nicu after he made some mild protests about the state of the food supply in Sibiu.
Ceauşescu's typical response was to improve the distribution of food to his son's county so that people would see the benefits of Nicu's administration and quieten down.
The fact that the supplies to Sibiu were simply deducted from another area's quota apparently did not cause anyone to lose sleep.
What mattered was that things should appear to function well in Sibiu, because Nicu's presence there had to cast credit on the family.
At least, the image of a good situation should be preserved for the rulers if not their subjects.
Nicu's political career owed everything to his father's  power.
Clearly Elena's advancement into the inner sanctum of the Romanian Communist party's decision-making bodies depended on her husband's prestige and influence.
But her other, ‘scientific’ career was also in reality an expression of Nicolae Ceauşescu's power.
Step by step, Elena advanced up the academic tree in pace with Nicolae's progress up the hierarchy of the Communist Party.
Why Elena latched onto chemistry as the science which she would master is not clear.
Her choice seems almost eccentric, certainly bizarre in a woman otherwise monotonously crude in her ambitions for power, comfort, and status on behalf of herself, her husband and her family.
Perhaps the very unintelligibility of her final subject matter, ‘the stereospecific polymerization of isoprene’ appealed to her.
Certainly, if her husband was increasingly the master of ‘scientific socialism’, she became the mistress of the natural sciences in Romania.
The application of the wife of a politburo member to study at a research institute would never have been easy to reject.
Leaving aside the fact that already under Dej the standing of a student's relatives in the Party hierarchy already counted for a great deal when it came to handing out exam results, connections with the very summit of political power could offer useful patronage and protection to scientists and their institute.
Already under Dej, Elena was granted higher degrees by the Bucharest Polytechnic, despite the doubts of some scientists both about the quality and authorship of her work.
But once she took over the directorship of the Institute for Chemical Research in Bucharest (ICECHIM), she began to purge those scientists who had been foolish enough to cast doubt on her credentials or to refuse to ‘co-operate’ with her research.
There is very little evidence for Elena's scientific activity in the ten years after 1955 when she took up her ‘studies’ before becoming director of the Institute.
What is clear is that she rapidly took in hand the Communist Party cells in the various academic bodies to which she was attached.
The secretary of each level of the party had quasi-absolute power  over the members below him, and Elena had a double advantage: not only was she the Party secretary able to veto or grant small privileges for her colleagues, her husband was much of the time the Second Secretary in the Party at large, controlling the day-to-day business of the Romanian Communists under Dej's supervision.
Co-operating with Elena had its rewards and falling out with her could be catastrophic.
Unfortunately, Elena knew no happy medium: her approach to her better-qualified colleagues was parasitical.
Professor Murgulescu, the original head of her field, was subordinated to her and witnessed her takeover of his institute which she amalgamated with her own operations to obliterate any trace of professional independence.
Stories abound of Elena's ignorance.
Her approach to academic seminars would seem to confirm some of the claims that she was totally out of her depth when it came to discussing the new discoveries which she had allegedly made.
Like her brother-in-law, Ilie, the historian, when faced with foreigners who could not be simply forbidden to ask questions, Elena graciously used to encourage her colleagues to show their mettle by contributing to the discussion.
(No doubt, a future feminist biographer will revise our verdict on Elena Ceauşescu's contributions to macro-molecular chemistry and maintain that far from plagiarizing Murgulescu and his colleagues, they tried to deny to a peasant woman the credit for her discoveries.)
Had she not treated her subordinates with vindictiveness and meanness, Elena's desire to cut a figure as ‘a world-ranking scientist’ would have a comical charm.
To be as fair to her as is possible, it can at least be said that the work which she had plagiarized on her behalf (since she had neither the time nor the inclination to copy it herself) was generally of good standard.
Unlike Stalin and Khruschev, Elena did not use her dilettante approach to science to promote a bogus figure like the Soviet agronomist Trofim Lysenko — though it must be admitted that Nicolae Ceauşescu's interventions in agricultural practice often recalled the half-baked interference of Lysenko's patron, Khruschev.
It was perhaps  evidence of some restraint that Elena did not oblige Romanians to praise her for her own inventions, but only those expropriated from others.
This was a small mercy for those who fell foul of her and faced ruined careers or worse.
Apart from her scientific achievements, Elena was anxious to be regarded as a woman of taste and refinement.
She had suffered at the sharp end of the tongues of some of Dej's more sophisticated barons' wives in the 1950s and Dej's favourite daughter did not respect her.
As Pacepa's notes of the foreign minister, Stefan Andrei's, collection of her faux pas and bêtises suggest, Elena never grew into the grande dame she dreamed of becoming.
Nonetheless, as the cassettes of a BBC teach-yourself English course found in her bedroom after the fall indicated, Elena never lost her taste for self-improvement.
Elena was also determined that her children should have successful educations.
Although Valentin seems to have passed his exams by his own efforts (though no doubt crammed by special tutors) and achieved a respectable degree at Imperial College, London, his sister and brother followed their mother's educational model more closely.
Both Zoia and Nicu showed early promise in mathematics and teachers or professors too blind to recognize it were shunted aside.
Some even fled the country.
Elena fostered Nicu's interest in nuclear physics.
He was destined to head Romania's nuclear power and research programme, which was as good a reason to emigrate as any other.
The steady growth of the grip of family members on so many walks of life had a stifling effect on initiative, which had hardly been encouraged before 1965.
In Romania from the late 1970s, the  ubiquitous portraits of Nicolae Ceauşescu increasingly came to be replaced or to share prominence with pictures of the couple together.
The front pages of every publication from the Communist Party's daily newspaper,Scînteia , through to obscure literary journals and even the calendar of religious festivals issued by the tame Orthodox Church, always displayed a portrait of Nicolae Ceauşescu or  a photograph of the ‘most beloved couple’.
So much so that the joke went around: ‘Why are there no pornographic magazines in Romania?’
‘Just imagine which couple would appear on the front cover!’
Jokes about the Ceauşescus abounded from soon after Nicolae became General-Secretary of the Communist Party.
They grew more pointed as his rule inflicted growing hardships on the population and the cult surrounding his alleged genius and its successes became more absurd.
One typical story recalled the fate of the apocryphal Lupescu, who was the alleged inventor of several scurrilous stories with the Comrade as their butt and who was supposed to supplement his income with hard currency or Western cigarettes given him by his appreciative audience.
After being arrested by the Securitate, Lupescu is dragged in chains before Ceauşescu, who demands to know how much he is paid for his jokes.
The trembling Lupescu replies: ‘Perhaps two or three dollars for an ordinary joke, but five for a really good one.’
‘What!, exclaims Ceauşescu.
‘For that pittance, you're willing to sell out the most beloved son of the Romanian people, their greatest leader in history?!’
At which Lupescu collapses in fits of hysterical laughter, and crawls over to Ceauşescu and embraces his knees and kisses his feet, saying, ‘Thank you, Comrade, for a joke like that, I could get ten dollars!’
Well before the revolution, Valentin Ceauşescu had a good reputation among Romanians — unlike his younger brother and sister.
They were regarded as at best degenerate and self-indulgent, and at worst as vicious.
Stories circulated in Romania reflecting Valentin's reputation as a quiet sceptic about his parents' policies.
A standard rumour was that someone the story-teller knew personally had been hitching a lift one dark night.
A Dacia 1300 picked up the friend-of-a-friend and the driver and his passenger fell to talking and telling jokes.
Eventually, the passenger felt confident enough of his new friend in the driving seat to tell him jokes about  the regime, culminating in obscene calumnies of Elena Ceauşescu.
When they reach their destination, the driver stops the car beneath a rare working streetlamp and his passenger feels a tremor of recognition, but is reassured by Valentin that he has heard all the jokes before and he won't be passing them on to his mother.
In practice, very few Romanians would have recognized Valentin Ceauşescu before his family was exposed to public denunciation after his parents' fall.
By 1989 even his brother Nicu was rarely given publicity.
Sometimes he appeared unidentified alongside his parents in photographs which were invariably captioned with Nicolae and Elena's superfluous titles.
Listing the offices held by the pair was not done for information purposes — every five-year-old knew who they were — but to assert their authority.
The very anonymity of everybody else in their entourage was part of making clear who was in charge.
It emphasized that there was no alternative to their rule.
Even if Nicu was intended to be their ultimate successor, he was not allowed to appear as dauphin, particularly not after making the critical remarks to his father about the economic problems and social conditions in Sibiu.
Valentin fell foul of his parents much earlier.
He showed no interest in politics, certainly not in his own advancement.
Although not a particularly gifted student, he preferred to pursue scientific interests and his involvement in the Party's youth wing was blatantly perfunctory.
However, it was his decision to marry the daughter of one of his father's political rivals, and a defeated one at that, which brought into the open his unreliability from the clan's point of view.
He married Iordana Borila, whose father Petre Borila had opposed the break with Moscow in 1962.
Like many of Nicolae Ceauşescu's critics within the Romanian Communist Party, Borila had been an émigré from Romania during the 1930s.
Like Valter Roman, he fought in the Spanish Civil War, and had good contacts with the Soviet advisers from Stalin's secret police, the NKVD.
Also like Roman, Borila was of Jewish  origin, something which neither of his daughter's prospective in-laws looked upon favourably.
Valentin has been discreet about his upbringing.
It was widely rumoured that he was adopted by the Ceauşescus in 1946.
At this time the Party especially urged its officials to set an example to the country by rescuing orphaned or abandoned children who were destitute as a result of war and, in Moldavia, famine.
Other tongues suggested that Valentin was Elena's illegitimate child by another man, but the chronology of his gestation and birth seems to rule that out as malicious gossip.
Whether these rumours reached his impressionable ears as a child must also be doubted.
If they did, they do not seem to have affected his psychological balance or his relations with his parents.
On the other hand, he must have been a disappointment to his dynastically inclined father and mother since he never showed any aspirations for political office despite their encouragement.
Unlike his younger brother, Nicu, Valentin would have preferred a life of anonymity.
Of course, he could not escape from his parents' ambitions.
At the last Congress of the Romanian Communist party in November 1989, they added Valentin to the Party's Central Committee where he joined his brother and uncles, but even in the heat of the revolution a month later, no one thought to use his promotion as a serious charge against Valentin Ceauşescu.
He had been added to confirm his father's hold on power: if the Congress would passively accept such a nomination then there could be no threat to Nicolae Ceauşescu's authority from within, or so it must have seemed.
Whatever expectations his parents had of him, Valentin grew up the best-balanced and the least ambitious of their children.
Certainly, the sort of rumours and gossip which were common about his sister and brother were not attached to him.
(Even so, Valentin's marriage did not survive and it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that its atmosphere must have been far from normal.
It cannot have been easy for his wife to have Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu as in-laws.)
Although it was common gossip that Zoia's private life was  deeply and messily unhappy, and that alcohol was a frequent source of consolation, and of course the stories about Nicu's debauchery and coarseness were unparalleled, Valentin's public reputation (which is to say, the cautious whispers between friends about him) was positive.
Unlike both his younger brother and sister, who clearly suffered from an inability to form stable ties with other people and seemed to depend on the bottle to bolster their self-assurance, Valentin's reputation was almost that of a good prince in a fairy-tale.
Nicu Ceauşescu swaggered around Bucharest from his early teens onwards.
Stories abounded of his drunkenness and adventures with women, including attempted rapes, even before he was legally an adult.
Both his parents indulged him, particularly his mother.
Whereas Nicolae preferred to turn a blind eye to his son's misdemeanours, which were so unlike his own abstemious and dedicated youth, Elena seemed almost to prefer Nicu's bad behaviour to Valentin's modest and retiring example.
Of course, younger sons often enjoy their mothers' particular favour, but most do not have a mother like Elena to indulge them.
Not all the stories about Nicu's uncontrollable and violent lusts were true.
Many Romanians took a prurient pleasure in whispering news of the latest outrage, but many of the alleged crimes of the ‘Crown Prince’ were invented by the fertile imagination of his parents' subjects.
People wanted to believe that rulers who were denying their people every small pleasure were engaged in orgies of Neronic excess.
Many of the grisliest stories about Nicu's alleged brutal debauchery were attached to the gymnast, Nadia Comanecj, whom rumour had it that he claimed was ‘state property’ and that he even ripped out her nails for refusing his attentions.
Comanecj's dramatic flight to America just weeks before the revolution robbed Romania of one of its few remaining internationally known citizens and further encouraged the stories about Nicu's behaviour.
Zoia retreated into a world of pets blurred by the bottle.
She showed little understanding.
Like Nicu she studied  nuclear physics, but unlike Valentin, she was never considered suitable for study abroad.
Her written work and exams in mathematics and physics were prepared by professors, who preferred a quiet life to academic suicide.
Unlike their children, Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu were not the subject of much trivial gossip.
Even their discontented subjects could not imagine routine vices.
Those acquainted with them, like Sergiu Celac, who acted as interpreter for so many meetings with English-speaking heads of government and heads of state, sometimes thought that they detected vestiges of their changing sexual relationship.
According to Celac, Elena came to dominate her husband as he grew older, though he attributes her authority as much to her marginally more elevated social origins as to her sex.
Given Nicolae's peculiar lack of empathy with other people, it may be that all his human emotions were concentrated on her, and on getting and keeping power of course.
Even his children found him strangely distant and impersonal.
The daily life of the couple at the height of their power was marked by a contrast between their frankly petit bourgeois devotion to each other and the grandiose back-drops to their carefully analysed and tasted diets or their regular watching of junk videos and films.
They had no aspirations to be patrons of the arts and to regale themselves like proletarian Ludwig IIs with grand opera or private performances of the classics.
An American detective film sufficed.
Like most Romanians, who were not in a position to exercise any discretion in the matter, the couple had an almost slavish regard for the most commercialized features of capitalist culture.
For ordinary people in undernourished Bucharest to regard the trinkets of capitalism as the symbols of liberty as well as the rewards of prosperity is understandable, but to have the wealth of twenty-three million Romanians to squander at one's will and to choose to watch Kojak or to sit on the sort of lumpish gilt furniture that Western department stores export to their Arab allies would not have suited Caligula.
The oil sheikhs at least have the excuse that it is their countries' natural wealth that they are frittering away, not the fruits of the toil of their peoples.
Their appetites are limited to the exorbitant enjoyment of expensive and clashing furnishings.
Tucholsky once remarked that there were people who thought that staying in an elegant hotel made them elegant themselves.
Casting one's eyes over the palaces and lodges In which they lived, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that Nicolae and Elena had stayed in one over-decorated and garish hotel too many.
Even their private quarters, presumably the scenes of touching fidelity, were equipped to make the lobbies of Gulf hotels seem intimate.
They could not distinguish public splendour to dazzle and impress their people and foreigners alike (if that is the effect their trappings achieved) from the conveniences of private life.
Romania was not only dotted with scarcely visited residences, each filled with furniture in gilded styles that the reigns of twenty more Louis XIV's could not have conjured up.
There was also a presidential yacht which cost more than three hundred million lei and whose very occasional guests included the French Communist Party leader, Georges Marchais, in 1984.
By December 1989, even French Communists were embarrassed by that sort of holiday.
If the presidential yacht was under-used, the special train built for the couple was never put into service.
It sat in sidings, waiting for the revolution, as it turned out, so that foreign tourists with more money than taste could buy a night-ride in the bed in which Nicolae and Elena had never slept.
After the revolution, Romanians sat in their flats lit by a maximum of two 40-watt bulbs by order, usually wearing winter coats as they had become accustomed to years of sudden power cuts, and watched television pictures of their late rulers perusing menus to decide what to eat.
The commentators told people used to queuing for a bare minimum that the General-Secretary and the First Deputy Prime Minister had a choice of six different menus.
Their food was grown  on special farms, when not imported exclusively for their consumption.
Anything they did not eat went to waste: nothing was recycled or left for the servants, though Nicolae's beloved dogs got scraps, if they tired of their imported frozen meat.
By all accounts, Elena was the architect of this meanness: it could hardly be called peasant hoarding, since she would not keep leftovers, but certainly discouraged even her husband from rare bouts of generosity to the staff.
Some of the stories about the Ceauşescus, wastefulness were exaggerated, but were hardly malicious given the truth.
Pacepa says that Ceauşescu was afraid of poisoning after the CIA's attempt to murder Fidel Castro by impregnating his clothes with potions to make his beard fall out, and so he ordered the Securitate department which provided all his personal needs free of charge to arrange for the manufacture of a new set of clothes for every day of his life.
In fact, he seems to have contented himself with only forty new suits per annum and an unlimited supply of underwear and shirts.
On the other hand, as much as assassination attempts, Ceauşescu feared infection with common contagious diseases.
His regular hand-washing using alcohol as a disinfectant was reported by foreign hosts as well as witnessed (off camera) at public events in Romania.
Hitler had a hand-washing fetish too.
Stalin seems to have been more relaxed about human contact.
Ceauşescu's distancing himself from his fellow countrymen, whether for reasons of security or hygiene, meant that his daily life involved him in regular contact with relatively few people.
He chose to spend his moments of relaxation with his political cronies, though none of them could be said to have enjoyed his full confidence.
Long-term associates on the politburo, like Ilie Verdeţ or Manea Manescu, made up regular members of the ‘family’.
So closely was Ceauşescu identified with the policy of nepotism that local people and foreign observers often presumed that men like Verdeţ or Manescu were intermarried with the clan.
Ceauşescu's ‘family’ included the coterie of long-time sycophants and aides who lived in the villas around the presidential palace in northern Bucharest and who were on call to attend upon the Comrade should he feel the need for advice, flattery or entertainment.
Access to the ear of the General-Secretary was a sign of power.
So long as an apparatchik continued to be invited to join the Ceauşescus at play, even the ceaseless rotation of offices could not disguise his continuing status as one of the leaders.
But when it became known that someone ostensibly in the top echelon of the regime was no longer seen at the Ceauşescus' palace at the nightly film shows or for chess, then whatever the victim's ostensible rank, his own hangers-on would begin to look for another patron.
By the late 1980s, Ceauşescu's suspicions and caprices had whittled down the numbers of his long-term favourites.
Long gone from the family circle was Ion Iliescu, who once was photographed playing hoopla with Nicolae and Elena in 1976, and who was one of the Comrade's partners for chess at one of his many elaborately decorated boards.
Ceauşescu liked to win at chess: the result of the game asserted his supremacy over his opponent in politics as much as the skills of the game itself — few risked beating the Comrade.
Similarly, while he was still fit enough, Ceauşescu inflicted games of volley-ball on his colleagues: his team was made up of bodyguards and young relatives, the opponents were politburo members or deskbound apparatchiks of one sort or another.
One of Ceauşescu's most gifted loyalists was Stefan Andrei who was also from Oltenia.
A cynical nihilist, Andrei expected a sticky end (if only at the hands of his master and mistress) and wanted to live well before it came.
In the last discussions of the Communist élite as Ceauşescu struggled to preserve his hold on power, it was Andrei, rather than the more completely self-abasing types, who urged tough action against the demonstrators, and who showed no qualms about shooting down the crowds.
Better to hold on to power for a few days or hours longer.
After the revolution, Andrei's  starlet wife loyally tried to defend her husband by portraying him as an opponent of the Comrade and the victim of persecution, but this unoriginal line of defence is not borne out by the facts, except insofar as all the members of the ruling group lived precariously.
So long as they were in favour, they were free to feather their nests, which Andrei did as industriously as anyone else.
The petty corruption of the élite is striking.
No doubt, Dej's cronies had enjoyed access to the small pleasures of life which were increasingly denied to their subjects by the impact of their own economic policies, but it is the tawdry nature of men like the Minister of the Interior, Tudor Postelnicu, which is so unattractive.
No means of gratifying their trivial desires was too demeaning.
Their prosecutors at the trial of the politburo took pleasure in revealing how many cartons of Western cigarettes each of the defendants had possessed at the time of the revolution.
To Romanians, every carton of Marlboro represented a week's work.
Ion Pacepa, Ceauşescu's chief intelligence officer who defected in 1978, takes particular pleasure in his memoirs in exposing Stefan Andrei as both corrupt but also as well aware of the absurdity of the Ceauşescus' pretensions, especially Elena's academic titles.
Although Andrei may have been more intelligent than his colleagues, his greed was no less than his more stupid comrades such as Postelnicu.
Pacepa tells a typical story about Postelnicu's cupidity.
When he became Minister of the Interior and thus boss of the Securitate, its various intelligence activities and methods were explained to him.
After the idea of a dead-letter drop had been made clear to Postelnicu with some difficulty, the new minister took the intelligence officer to his bathroom and asked if the lavatory's water-cistern could be used as a letter drop.
When told it could, Postelnicu made it clear that he expected a regular supply of Scotch to be discreetly deposited there.
Any agent worth his salt knew that promotion under Postelnicu depended upon satisfying the minister's whims as much as doing his proper job well.
At his trial at the end of January 1990, Postelnicu blubbed out his guilt in connection with the shootings in Timişoara and the incineration of the forty victims there, but he was anxious to defend himself from charges of cupidity.
He managed to blurt out at one stage in the proceedings: ‘I didn't have any dollars, no gold, I don't smoke and I earn 3,500 lei a month.’
The attorney-general cut off this unlikely tale: ‘You had eleven radio-sets, sixty-six cartons of cigarettes, four hundred bars of soap, ten kilos of gold, and two hundred kilos of meat in your deep-freeze.
Postelnicu's life at the top was a sorry story of petty venality.
To the Romanian audience for these trials (which were broadcast live on television), the lists of cartons of cigarettes or kilos of refrigerated meat were as fascinating as the tales of the riches of the Sultan in One Thousand and One Nights .
Manea Manescu, who counted as the intellectual of the group, tried to explain how ‘the road to hell is paved with good intentions’, but, despite all the difficulties of his position, he had remained ‘faithful to the principles of his youth’.
He even claimed to have been reading a book on cybernetics at the time of the revolution, but his scholarly interests did not prevent him from amassing enormous wealth by the standards of his fellow citizens.
Ordinary people regularly broke the rules and resorted to bribery if they could get away with it to obtain essentials or medical care, but then their corruption was a sign of independence asserted against the system, whereas Manescu's was typical of a deep inner decay of the system.
Nicolae's sister, Elena Barbulescu, who administered the family's birthplace like a feudal domain, was also a typical representative of this corrupt élite.
Her petty tyranny and ruthless exploitation of anyone who fell under her sway was typical of the behaviour of hundreds of local Party bosses in Romania.
Her status as sister magnified her authority and the disparity between her limited abilities and her responsibilities, as, among other tasks, inspector of schools.
Would she have been a normal and contented woman had she not  been Nicolae's sister, or did her willingness to abuse every chance to profiteer from her position and to humiliate those she disliked reflect a deeply unpleasant cast in the Ceauşescu genes?
Ceauşescu Between East and West
Take the case of Ceauşescu.
He served you, you in the West, as a footbridge into the communist world.
You praised his tolerance and his modern attitudes.
He was your friend until the last few months preceding the insurrection in Romania.
Saddam Hussein
1978 marked the apogee of Ceauşescu's acceptability in the West.
In April he had paid an official visit to Washington along with Elena.
Then he paid a call on President Giscard d'Estaing in France.
In mid-June the social climax of the couple's political ascent was reached when, together with an entourage of light-fingered bodyguards, chefs and food-tasters, Nicolae and Elena stayed with Her Majesty the Queen at Buckingham palace for three days.
(Giscard d'Estaing had already warned the Palace about the Romanians' insatiable pilfering during their recent stay in France, but Palace officials remain discreet about any misdemeanours during the Ceauşescus' visit.)
The British establishment has remained remarkably reticent about the whole episode, which culminated in Her Majesty the Queen bestowing an honorary knighthood on Nicolae Ceauşescu, while distinguished academics and scientists joined together to honour their ‘colleague’, Elena Ceauşescu.
The embarrassment of the British establishment in December 1989, caused a great deal of well-deserved Schadenfreude among those who had always been sceptical about the  Ceauşescus.
There was also a great deal of indignation among ordinary British citizens who discovered for the first time after the massacre in Timişoara that Romania was ruled by a brutal tyrant who enjoyed the privileges of a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath.
Of course, the Bath was not the only order of Christian chivalry into which Ceauşescu had been admitted.
The Danes had given him the appropriately named Order of the Elephant.
Belgium and the Netherlands had bestowed equal honours.
Western republics like Italy, Austria, and West Germany also gave out medals and awards.
Ceauşescu elected to exhibit his trophies in the National History Museum in Bucharest, in salons of ‘homage’ where his subjects could see the admiration Western democrats felt for their leader.
The display of honours was indiscriminate: alongside the insignia of a commandeur of the Légion d'honneur awarded by Giscard d'Estaing, a certificate of honorary citizenship of Disneyland aroused the admiration of the visitor to the museum.
The salons of ‘Omagiu ’ crammed with foreign honours and gifts contrasted with the rather paltry display of genuinely historical artifacts recording the history of Romania itself.
The lavish donation of Western honours helped to reinforce Ceauşescu's propaganda that his period in power represented a completely new epoch in Romanian history.
1965 became the ‘year zero’.
The willingness of the Western democracies, led by the USA, to endorse Ceauşescu's rule was based upon the view that his regime was pursuing independence from Moscow and that such a ‘nationalist’ line must involve domestic reform and liberalization.
Despite his claims to originality in his foreign policy, in practice Ceauşescu built on the foundations laid by his predecessor.
Romania's growing independence from Moscow had started under Gheorghiu-Dej.
Khruschev's half-hearted attempt to oust Dej in 1957 encouraged him to look for allies to counter Soviet influence.
De-Stalinization in the Soviet Union threatened Dej but was also disliked by Mao.
The Chinese were equally touchy about Soviet  predominance in the communist world, and were in a much stronger position than the Romanians to assert themselves.
In April 1964, the Romanian Communist party under Dej issued its famous Statement asserting its independence from Moscow.
There could no longer be a relationship based on Moscow leading, and the Romanians following orders from abroad.
The Romanian Statement asserted equality between Communist Parties.
It was the beginning of the independent foreign policy which was to become a hallmark of Ceauşescu's rule and reach its zenith in the summer of 1978.
Ironically, according to Silviu Brucan, who briefed the Romanian politburo on the implications of such a step, Ceauşescu was the most prominent member of the Romanian politburo who opposed Dej's desire to make clear the limits of Khruschev's influence over Romania.
Ceauşescu was already the heir-apparent and perhaps hoped to improve his chances of taking over sooner rather than later by siding with the pro-Soviet lobby.
Or perhaps he was merely expressing caution about Romania's chances of escaping from the Soviet orbit.
In any case, he recognized the success of Dej's gambit and made it his own after 1964.4 In fact, when Khruschev was toppled by Brezhnev in the autumn of 1964, three counts in the lengthy criticism of his methods that was levelled at Khruschev by the new Soviet leadership referred to his errors in his dealings with the Romanians.
By the spring of 1967, it seemed that Ceauşescu felt confident enough to reiterate Dej's insistence on Romania's independence from the Soviet Union.
For a start, he continued Dej's policy of distancing the Romanian military from the Red Army: he discouraged contacts between Romanian Army officers and their Soviet counterparts, insisting that Romanian soldiers be trained in Romania.
Sometimes the public distancing of Romania from its Warsaw Pact allies, especially Big Brother in Moscow, was done in a quite insulting fashion: Ceauşescu could even implicitly put the Kremlin in the same category as the White House: ‘The small  and medium-sized states refuse to play the role of pawn in the service of the interests of big imperialist powers any longer.’
Instead, Romania, like other middle-ranking states, intended to pursue an independent foreign policy.
But it went further than that: Ceauşescu was anxious to assert Romania's claim to be among the leaders of the underdeveloped countries.
He insisted that ‘by vigorously defending their legitimate interests’, the Third World countries ‘can play an outstanding part in international life’.
A country like Romania could ‘considerably influence the course of events’.
This rhetoric was intended to make Ceauşescu new friends outside the Soviet bloc, particularly in the West.
Despite his words suggesting solidarity with the Third World, Ceauşescu's initial actions as maker of Romania's foreign policy were designed to build bridges to the West.
He opened diplomatic relations with West Germany, to the fury of the Communist rulers in East Berlin.
Then in June 1967, Romania failed to break off diplomatic relations with Israel after the outbreak of the Six Day War.
There seems little reason to doubt Ion Pacepa's insistence on Ceauşescu's evaluation of the importance of the Jewish lobby in US politics.
Whatever the reality on Capitol Hill, Ceauşescu undoubtedly believed the pro-Israeli gestures would win Romania influence in Washington and would perhaps lead them to accept his differentiation of Romanian foreign policy from the Kremlin's at face-value.
Ceauşescu liberalized the regulations restricting emigration from Romania by Jews.
He probably guessed instinctively that the West would confuse the granting of special privileges to individuals with the extension of human rights.
Ceauşescu was right: a few years later, the US Congress made freeing trade with the Soviet Union dependent on it permitting emigration, particularly of Soviet Jews.
Little thought was given to the conditions in which people who had no desire to leave the country of their birth had to live.
Ceauşescu made the granting of exit visas into a profitable business, first with Israel and the USA (which paid the bills), then with West Germany too.
The West Germans were prepared to pay handsomely for the right to emigrate of hundreds of thousands of German-speaking Romanian citizens whose ancestors had lived in the country for centuries.
Ceauşescu's policy killed two birds with one stone: on the one hand, he began the process of ridding Romania of what he considered troublesome alien minorities and earned hard currency from their new countries for the privilege; and at the same time, he gained a reputation in the West as a ‘good’ communist, a man to do business with — in this case, by bartering for human beings.
No wonder he liked to joke that ‘oil, Jews, and Germans’ were ‘Romania's best exports’.
Liberalizing emigration was just part of Ceauşescu's strategy to gain acceptance in the West and thereby access to its storehouses of wealth, technology and industrial secrets.
As far back as Lenin, Communists had recognized what he called the ‘objective contradictions’ of capitalism.
The capitalists hated the idea of the abolition of private property, but they liked to do deals; the Communist state, by virtue of its total control of an individual economy, was in a position to do business unhindered by ethical or trade union considerations.
Rich pickings were available to those willing to swallow their ideological prejudices.
What Lenin did not abandon in return was his fundamental antipathy to capitalism.
Individual capitalists could serve his cause, even making a personal profit on the way, but they were also selling the rope with which they and their class were going to be hanged.
It never quite worked out as Lenin planned, but his strategy was inherited by Communists after him.
Ceauşescu knew that greed and gullibility often went hand in hand.
His genuine differences with Moscow about where authority in the communist movement should lie could be exploited to give the impression of a total break with the ideology itself.
In their efforts to impress the United States, the Romanians went so far as to compare their position vis-à-vis the Kremlin with Cuba's in relation to Washington.
It says  a lot about the quality of US diplomatic thinking that the Americans were flattered to be put on the same level as the Soviet rulers.
Equidistance was the key theme of Ceauşescu's foreign policy.
He wanted other states to see Romania as part of neither bloc.
Yet at the same time, he needed each superpower to see Bucharest as a natural place for influencing the views of the other one and other players in the international game.
Ceauşescu was anxious to be the broker.
It was a part which he played well.
But he was never an honest broker.
When Ceauşescu's chief intelligence adviser, Ion Pacepa, defected to the United States in 1978, he claimed that Ceauşescu had been engaged in a long-term strategic plan codenamed ‘Red Horizon’.
Its aim was to deceive the West and to obtain key political, military and technological secrets which he intended to share with the Soviet Union.
Pacepa argued that Ceauşescu was hand-in-glove with Brezhnev and that the split between Romania and the Soviet Union was a deception agreed by both parties to cheat the West.
Pacepa was not the first defector from the world of Soviet bloc secret services to make such a claim.
At the very least, it says a great deal about the conspiratorial mentality which the leaders of the Communist system have created that so many defectors tend to see deception at work everywhere.
The truth is probably that Ceauşescu cheated on everyone, and that Pacepa, involved on the pro-Russian side, was unaware of the extent to which Ceauşescu was also double-crossing Moscow.
Western academic Sovietologists have gravitated to the opposite pole: they have been unwilling to question the professions of good faith repeatedly made by Communist leaders.
Despite the evidence of more than seventy years of clandestine activities by communists, many Western ‘experts’ seem psychologically unable to enter into the minds of Communist leaders.
They have preferred to regard them as basically sharing the mentality of their Western counterparts.
At worst, Western politicians, and some academic and journalistic  commentators, have shared the mentality of the apparatchiks, but most have remained attached to their illusions that differences between East and West were based on misunderstandings rather than fundamental disagreements.
Even a cynical American politician like Richard Nixon did not approach the habitual level of -doublethink' which an ideologically motivated communist like Ceauşescu regarded as natural.
Since the revolution in 1989, it has been revealed that not only was Romania passing on some of the Western secrets obtained in the long honeymoon with the West to Moscow, but that Ceauşescu's brother, Ilie, the Deputy Defence Minister, was passing Soviet military secrets and technology to the Americans.
How valuable this Romanian channel of military information was to the Pentagon may be doubted, but it is revealing of the extent of Ceauşescu's duplicity.
In the summer of 1967, Richard Nixon was received with the honours usually reserved for heads of state when he arrived in Bucharest.
Nixon was less than eighteen months from becoming President of the United States, but when he was received by Ceauşescu he was very much a political has-been.
He was the Republicans' defeated presidential candidate in 1960, and the man who had stomped out of a press conference in 1962 when he failed to win the governorship of California, telling the reporters that they wouldn't ‘have Nixon to kick around any more’.
This proud, but humiliated, most complicated of politicians was not averse to flattery.
Ceauşescu's treatment of Nixon paid off handsomely.
Henry Kissinger recognized that Romanian co-operation could be useful to the United States in its efforts to get out of the Vietnam War and to open up relations with Mao's China.
He also saw that by inviting Nixon when he was out of office with few prospects of getting back into it, Ceauşescu struck a chord with the future US President, who would remain loyal to his friend in need.
According to Kissinger, ‘Nixon never forgot courtesies of this  kind…’
They met several times more up to 1985, but seem to have remained in touch until the last few months of Ceauşescu's rule.
Oddly enough, Ceauşescu was always a shrewder judge of the likely choice for the highest offices of democratic electorates than of who would come out on top of the Soviet politburo.
He anticipated and insured himself for the re-emergence of Richard Nixon from the political wilderness in 1968, and correctly judged that Ronald Reagan would defeat Jimmy Carter in 1980 (which was not such an inevitable result as the next eight years made it seem).
Ceauşescu was, however, confident that Andropov would not succeed Brezhnev — as he told Nixon earlier in 1982.
From their meeting after Brezhnev's funeral in November 1982, relations between Ceauşescu and Andropov were understandably poor.
As head of the KGB since 1967, Andropov was well aware of the pluses and minuses of Romania's independent role in the world.
He was less tolerant of Romania's cheating the USSR than Brezhnev had been.
Brezhnev expected everyone to take his cut at home and abroad (as he himself had done).
Andropov wanted to reintroduce discipline among the Soviet Union's allies as well as at home.
Andropov died early, but Chernenko's sickly reign in the Kremlin was brief and when Andropov's protégé, Gorbachev, came to power he was even less sympathetic towards Ceauşescu than his patron had been.
Apart from any policy clashes between them, Ceauşescu adopted a rather patronizing attitude towards his younger equivalent in the Soviet Union.
Ceauşescu's arrogance in presuming not only to treat the Soviet General-Secretary as a person on a par with himself, but also one without the necessary experience to speak with the full authority of a veteran revolutionary like himself undoubtedly aroused a mixture of irritation and amused contempt in Gorbachev.
It was the sort of pride which comes before a fall — and it was a fall which Gorbachev became increasingly willing to envisage.
After 1985, the Romanians played up their independence  from Moscow for all it was worth.
Gorbachev's talk of perestroika was met by Ceauşescu's insistence that he was ‘perfecting’ the functioning of socialism in Romania.
But Ceauşescu's continued use of the slogans of independence belied a growing reality: whereas in the 1970s, Romania had diversified its trade away from dependence on the Soviet bloc, by the mid-1980s only Comecon countries were willing to buy each other 's low grade products — and Romania's were amongst the lowest.
Just as he wanted to assert Romanian sovereignty, Ceauşescu found his economy increasingly inter-twined with Gorbachev's.
Even before 1985, Pacepa's defection and still more the growing criticism of Ceauşescu's human rights record in Congress made the United States government distance itself from him.
Once Gorbachev was entrenched in the Kremlin and wooing Ronald Reagan directly, Ceauşescu's value as an intermediary between East and West waned rapidly.
Even when Andropov and Chernenko ruled in Moscow, Reagan had sent his Vice-President, George Bush, and his Secretaries of State, Alexander Haig and George Shultz, to pay court in Bucharest.
After Reagan had forged direct personal links with Gorbachev in Geneva in the autumn of 1985, Ceauşescu's role quickly disappeared.
He soon discovered how fickle capitalist affections can be.
The Soviet government continued to honour Ceauşescu as one of its fraternal allies.
If anything as Ceauşescu's international position weakened the men in the Kremlin bestowed more medals on him, as if to mark each step in his growing dependence on them.
Receiving the Order of Lenin from Gorbachev's men must have been almost a humiliation for Ceauşescu on his seventieth birthday in 1988.
The fact that Gorbachev sent the old Stalinist Andrei Gromyko to perform the pinning on of the award must have been scant compensation for what Ceauşescu probably saw as a badge of his growing servitude to Moscow.
It was one thing to act as the go-between in the 1970s and to be a successful defrauder of  the Americans and other Western states.
It was quite another to see his ‘independence’ from Moscow discounted by the gullible Western leaders, especially when they fell for Gorbachev's ‘revisionist, charms.
Ceauşescu could trust himself to play the liberal, but he could not be certain of Gorbachev's real intentions.
After 1985 the Americans were increasingly happy to forget about their affair with Ceauşescu, but for almost twenty years it was a important plank of their foreign policy.
The Romanians had played it for all it was worth.
At times Ceauşescu almost seemed to suggest that Romania might become an informal ally of the United States.
In fact, cruel strategic reality, as well as Ceauşescu's commitment to communism, meant that Romania could never become to the United States what Cuba was to the USSR.
The main value of Romania was as a conduit for undercover contacts between the United States and other Communist countries, especially Red China.
Of course, both the Americans and the Chinese knew that there were clear limits to Romania's autonomy.
Even before Pacepa revealed the extent of Ceauşescu's double-crossing of them, the Americans recognized that Romania's geo-political position made it very vulnerable to Soviet pressure and limited its freedom of movement.
The Chinese even suggested to Kissinger during the years of backdoor diplomacy before Nixon's visit to Peking in 1971 that his channel to Peking via Bucharest was far from secure: Ceauşescu kept Brezhnev informed.
Of course, it was useful to both Romania and China to let Moscow know how deeply involved they were with the Americans, because such knowledge could deter Moscow from interfering in their internal affairs.
Whether Ceauşescu's leaks to Brezhnev about Nixon and Kissinger's assignations with Mao and Zhou Enlai helped US-Soviet relations is less obvious.
Ceauşescu served Brezhnev well by promoting the idea of what became the Helsinki Conference in 1975.
The Soviet  leadership had long hoped to persuade the West to accept the division of Europe as the price of détente .
At last, the capitalist leaders were prepared to treat Brezhnev et al .
as their political and moral equals by signing an agreement which committed them all to the same values.
This was utter nonsense from a communist point of view and neither Ceauşescu nor Brezhnev had any intention of abiding by the terms of the Helsinki agreement, but its value to them lay in its public announcement to the peoples of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union that the West had abandoned them to their fate.
The smug foolishness of the Western leaders was typified by the British participants.
Harold Wilson announced that a conference graced by statesmen like himself and Gerald Ford (who rarely knew which country he was in, let alone what its politics were) made the Congress of Vienna in 1815 look like an ‘overdressed tea-party’.
Even after Ceauşescu's death, Lord Callaghan, who had been Foreign Secretary in 1975, recalled generously that Ceauşescu was ‘always a rogue elephant in the Warsaw Pact’ and had ‘helped us’in drafting the Helsinki accords and as a go-between with Moscow.
Of course, it was during James Callaghan's premiership that Nicolae Ceauşescu received his knighthood.
At the state banquet in Buckingham Palace, the British Prime Minister was too busy negotiating a deal with a fellow guest, the Liberal leader David Steel, to prop up his minority government, to pay much attention to Romanian affairs.
(Steel was an old acquaintance of the Ceauşescus' and once gave Nicolae a dog.
Later he inquired of the ‘elderly autocrat’ how it was getting on.
Since it was fed with steaks served in gold-plated bowls, the creature presumably regarded a dog's life in Romania as greatly preferable to its existence in Britain.)
Ceauşescu's first contact with British statesmanship was through the interest that he had in obtaining British technology and the up-and-coming Antony Wedgwood-Benn had in selling it.
In June 1968, at their first meeting, Ceauşescu  shrewdly let a twenty minute courtesy call run on for a flattering two and a quarter hours.
Benn came to the conclusion that -Ceauşescu…is modest mannered, very penetrating in his ability…
I liked him.’
Benn had already met Ilie Verdeţ, then First Deputy Premier, in January 1968 in London.
He noted condescendingly in his diary that the wily Verdeţ was ‘a most agreeable person who had never been outside a Communist country in his life…
I took him to the Savoy Hotel.
We got on very well and he has an excellent sense of humour.’
It helped that Verdeţ had been a miner.
A genuine working class origin must have impressed the former Viscount Stansgate.
(It cut less ice with Romanian miners in 1977, for which see chapter VI below.)
In Bucharest, six months later, Benn ‘told a few jokes.
They had a great sense of humour…
We sat at a special table and just told jokes about the Russians, the Americans, and ourselves.’
Benn joked to Ceauşescu that he should stand for the general-secretaryship of the Labour Party too!
Ceauşescu must have amused his colleagues with his remarks ‘strongly in favour of the acceptance of free will’ and his thought that ‘the withering away of the State would be very welcome though he didn't quite see the withering away of the [Communist]Party!’
Ceauşescu played with Benn.
He assured Benn that the French were not going to let themselves be tied by COCOM: ‘Frankly, the French do promise integrated circuits and the dates and deliveries are laid down.’
De Gaulle had told Ceauşescu ‘embargoes were made to be broken’.
Benn's patriotism knew no bounds when confronted by the assertion that the French were more conciliatory than the British.
‘So I answered, ‘Well, anything they can offer we can offer too and I can offer it now subject to the same conditions.'’
Benn's willingness to encourage the Romanians to believe that a way could be found to sell high technology to a Warsaw Pact state was ardent indeed.
At a reception for Benn at the British Embassy, several of the Romanian ministers turned up including ‘Dragonescu, the Minister of Electricity, who  is also a great computer king, a tall, angular, intellectual man.
I took him around the garden and told him simply, in the hope that it would feed through to the Romanian government, that we were making the most enormous efforts to try to break this COCOM problem.
I think he understood.’
Presumably, Mr Dragonescu resisted the temptation to say that Romania and all the other allies of Moscow ‘were making the most enormous efforts to try to break this COCOM problem’ too.
In 1968, Benn's desire to sell Romania sophisticated jet-engines was frustrated ‘despite the fact that Ceauşescu made a courageous speech attacking the invasion of Czechoslovakia.’
At that point, Benn had to admit, ‘my aims to encourage further trade with Russia [as well as Romania]and to break through this whole strategic nonsense have come unstuck.’
Along with a few other consequences, the Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia ‘means my Russian visit is affected.’
Benn was so impressed with Ceauşescu's Romania that he found nothing odd in the following suggestion from Bruno Pittermann, the former chairman of Kreisky's Austrian Socialist Party: ‘Pittermann said he would like to see parliamentary links with Romania, Poland and Yugoslavia, and to study their election process and procedure.
He thought we had a lot to learn from that and it would encourage them…
I found this highly intelligent.’
Self-important democratic politicians who have been themselves well-treated by tyrants of all stripes come dangerously close to the stance of classic fellow-travellers like George Bernard Shaw — in Shaw's words, as seven million starved to death in Russia in 1932, ‘I have never eaten so well.’
The professional political apparatchiks of the West too often found themselves among kindred spirits in the East.
Their response reminds one of Ribbentrop's description of the Kremlin banquet with Stalin, held to celebrate the Nazi-Soviet Pact in 1939: ‘It was just like being with old party comrades.’
It was not only left-wing politicians who were taken in.
With the publication of his diaries in 1989, Benn has been disarmingly open about his dealings with Ceauşescu.
Figures such as Margaret Thatcher and Edward Heath, on the other hand, have remained remarkably quiet, although the idea of the state visit and some signal honour went back to 1970 — 4.
Even the most crusty of Tory right-wingers were not immune to Ceauşescu's charms.
Perhaps they lacked the ideological baggage, or even the intellectual equipment, to recognize the type of mentality which lay behind the smiles and jokes.
One Tory MP, an aristocrat of impeccable right-wing views, who helped renegotiate some of Romania's debts at the beginning of the hard years in the 1980s, also enjoyed joking with Ceauşescu.
He once told the Conducator the old (apocryphal) story about Churchill's meeting with Stalin in October 1944.
The two war-leaders had a good dinner alone together, and then a heavy drinking bout, typical of inter-Allied summit meetings of that period.
Afterwards Churchill is supposed to have sent a note to the Marshal, thanking him for his hospitality and reminding him of the details of their verbal agreements of the night before the morning after.
According to legend, Stalin replied that he too had greatly enjoyed himself, but had completely forgotten the contents of any agreement between the two and had, unfortunately, in the meantime, had the interpreter shot!
Ceauşescu was amused by this story, particularly by his own interpreter's stuttering as he came to translate the punchline.
At the end of the interview, Ceauşescu neatly added his own twist to the story.
As his English guest turned at the door of his study to bow to the Romanian head of state before leaving his presence, he saw that Ceauşescu was holding out his fingers in the shape of a gun pointing at the head of his own interpreter!
The catalogue of Ceauşescu's British admirers would not be complete without a mention of the former Bishop of Southwark, Mervyn Stockwood.
At first sight, his praise of the Romanian regime seemed to put him in the same class as the ‘Red Dean’, Hewlett Johnson.
Stockwood wrote an article, ‘The Big Improvements’, welcoming the state visit to Britain by the Ceauşescus in The Times .
‘Each year I have noticed a higher standard of living’, the bishop wrote in his eulogy of this ‘brave man’, whose ‘exceedingly generous’ treatment of the churches in Romania was something of which ‘we in Britain might well be envious’.
After the outbreak of the revolution in December 1989, the press thought that they had caught an even bigger fellow-travelling fish than the old Dean of Canterbury.
At first, Stockwood seemed to prevaricate when journalists asked pointed questions about his admiration for Ceauşescu: his praise, he said, referred to Ceauşescu before he went off the rails.
The Red Bishop seemed hooked.
But then, a few days later, Mervyn Stockwood revealed that he had all the time in fact been helping dissident priests in a variety of clandestine ways, still too secret to be fully detailed: not so much a Red Bishop as a clerical Scarlet Pimpernel.
British academic institutions which had been involved in satisfying Elena Ceauşescu's desire for recognition by her colleagues handled their embarrassment with little aplomb after Christmas 1989.
Even before the outbreak of the Romanian revolution, there had been a growing scandal about Elena's academic acceptability.
The evident plagiarism which underlay her ‘prodigious’ contributions to polymer science was too obvious to require special demonstration except to the inquiring scientific minds of the committee of the Royal Society of Chemistry which elected Elena Ceauşescu to its membership.
According to Sir Richard Norman, the President of the Society, Elena Ceauşescu was a ‘distinguished scientist, whose work on the ‘stereospecific polymerization of isoprene, on the stabilization of synthetic rubbers, and on copolymerization…[had]the dual merit of increasing our effectiveness in exploiting chemistry for the benefit of mankind.’
A picture of Nicolae Ceauşescu looked down over these proceedings, which were graced by the presence of the Nobel Prize winner Dorothy Hodgkin, Mrs Thatcher's former  chemistry tutor at Oxford (though she had no sympathy for ‘that woman’) who had contributed an introduction to an English translation of one of Elena's works.
In an exchange of letters with lay critics of the Royal Society of Chemistry-s award of a fellowship to the ‘world-ranking scientist and academician’, J. S. Gow, the Society's Secretary-General, had tried to distance it from the Romanian laureate.
He gave a perfect demonstration of how egg on the face leads a pompous body still further into the mire.
It was not true to say the Society had honoured Madame Ceauşescu, Mr Gow argued.
All it had done was grant her professional membership ‘on the same basis as everybody else — i.e., specifically on her qualifications and experience as a chemist’!
Presumably, the other professional members were not supposed to feel dishonoured by this explanation: after all, what had Elena Ceauşescu done other than engage in those everyday academic activities — plagiarism, paying others to write one's work and bullying those unwilling to comply?
After the revolution, B. A. Henman, the Registrar of the Royal Society of Chemistry, explained that Elena Ceauşescu's ‘application was supported by a long list of papers published in her name …
There was no talk in 1978, nor has there been (to our ears) until recently…about the extent of Elena Ceauşescu's qualifications.’
The unfortunate Mr Henman concluded cautiously, ‘If, in the final analysis, it turns out that the qualifications were deficient…’ then it would be a matter of ‘hindsight’.
In any case, lest anyone think the Royal Society of Chemistry had pandered to Elena Ceauşescu's vanity, he assured the public that ‘the fellowship was presented at a ceremony no grander than would have been arranged for any other spouse of a head of state.’
The Central London polytechnic gave an honorary professorship, but wisely refrained from public defence of its decision.
A portrait of Elena Ceauşescu graced the Polytechnic's building in Central London until it disappeared during the Christmas vacation at the end of 1989.
The honorary professorship was a pitiful affair.
More prestigious  universities, showing a surer touch than the Royal Society of Chemistry, had refused to get involved with Elena, but the Romanian Embassy pointed out that she would have taken the Central London Poly for a much grander institution than it really was.
As in Paris, so in Bucharest, the Polytechnic ranked amongst the most prestigious academic bodies.
Elena would regard anything called the Central London Polytechnic as an institution of the same rank, and therefore worthy of her.
Of course, the staff at the Poly could only be flattered to take part in a state visit.
So it was arranged.
The bizarre story of British academic institutions' flattery of the Ceauşescus could be repeated many times over in other impeccably democratic countries.
The relations between Romania's ruling couple and the leaders and universities of the Third World is a more straightforward story.
It is not surprising that the University of Manila felt obliged to honour the Romanian guests of the flagrantly corrupt and nepotic Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos.
Nor should Juan and Isabellita Peron's promotion of the couple seem out of place — though Elena found little to admire in Peron's second wife, an ageing and broadening nightclub hostess, compared with the legendary Evita.
Even the encouragement given to the Ceauşescus' globe-trotting by Robert Mugabe was pretty much a case of like endorsing like.
Both the Zimbabwean President and his wife Sally, the Mother of the Nation, seem to have taken to Nicolae and Elena.
Mugabe gave the Comrade the opportunity to fulfil one of his long-held ambitions as Romania's Great White Hunter — to shoot one of Zimbabwe's increasingly rare elephants and to take the tusks home as a trophy.
Even as late as June 1990, the Zimbabwean President publicly expressed his disbelief at what the ungrateful Romanians had done at Christmas 1989 to his former honoured guests — but then he was still bent on making his country into a one-party state according to the tried and trusted recipe.
The world and its leaders reacted very differently to the news of  Ceauşescu's fall: Westerners, even those who had flattered him, rejoiced, but the rulers of Third World or Communist states mourned him — not only for his own violent end, but also because they saw it as a premonition of their own impending fates.
Despite Romanian support for the Emperor Bokassa, the Central African Empire was one of the few African states which the Ceauşescus failed to visit.
Their devotion to African and Asian states was surprising in view of their dislike of humidity, and Nicolae's aversion to mosquitoes, as well as their well-developed sense of superiority to those they still thought of as negroes.
Large quantities of Western insecticides as well as elaborate pest-proof bedding had to be transported for their regular journeys into the Dark Continent.
The quest for international recognition, almost regardless as to the importance of the state bestowing it, took on an almost manic quality by the later 1980s.
The fewer Western states wished to receive the Conducator , the more he had to fill his diary with visits to other self-proclaimed National Heroes and Liberators of the People.
Another African host, the late President Samuel Doe of Liberia, had much in common with Elena: he aspired to study at Cambridge University.
It was because the rebels believed that he had stashed away rather more cash abroad than might be necessary to pay his tuition fees that Doe met an end still more grisly than that of his Romanian guests.
Whereas his state visits to Washington, London or Bonn had given Ceauşescu enormous status even within Romania, his tireless travelling around the Third World helped to undermine respect for him at home.
It was one thing to have turned his own country into an ‘underdeveloping’ society, but to seek out the company of the other basket-cases of the world economy was to add gratuitous insult to already grave injury in the minds of most Romanians.
Although the endless state visits to Harare or Mauretania always climaxed with the publication of pompous declarations  and assertions that trade was going to increase by generous percentages within a few years, the consequences of these visits were negligible apart from providing a few more exhibits for the trophy rooms in Bucharest.
However, the buttering-up of Western politicians was not wasted.
Its object was to get access to modern technology as cheaply as possible and as much effort was put into charming Western bankers and businessmen as their political leaders.
As good students of Lenin, the Romanian leaders needed no reminding of the short-sighted lust for profit of many capitalists and their lack of concern for the public interest, in their own countries or abroad.
Ceauşescu and his intelligence advisers recognized the corruptibility of many Western businessmen, but even more, they knew how to play upon on Western wishful thinking and self-deception.
If Romania was to get cheap credits and access to high-tech goods it needed to prove its credit-worthiness to the prestigious foreign institutions which specialized in economic analysis.
Some institutions like the World Bank employed many economics ‘experts’ who were thoroughly sympathetic to the claims made for the efficiency of planned economies, regardless of the empirical evidence.
In 1979, the World Bank published a glowing report,Romania: Industrialization under Socialist Planning , which claimed, on the basis of official Romanian government figures, that in the quarter century between 1950 and 1975, the Romanian economy had grown at an average compound annual rate of over 9%.
Few countries in the world — certainly not economic sloths like Japan or West Germany — came near such a rate of progress.
Clearly Romania was well on its way to becoming an economic super-success and anyone with funds to spare was well advised to lend them to Ceauşescu.
The sceptical economist peter Bauer did a simple calculation, reversing the World Bank's growth-rate.
Bauer asked himself: what was the economic level of Romania in 1950 and what was the average annual income of Romanians then?
De-compounding the dramatic 9% growth-rate revealed that  in 1950, the Romanian economy would have been too small to sustain human life on the income available.
In other words, the World Bank's figures were bogus, but what mattered was that they provided welcome fodder to those who were already convinced of the value of Ceauşescu's friendship and wished to promote further deals with his regime.
Ceauşescu's double-game of continuing to recognize Israel while courting the Arab states paid dividends in his relations with the Western democracies.
They saw him as the ‘honest broker’ who might help negotiate a resolution of the Middle East's problems.
Ceauşescu fondly imagined the day when the Nobel Peace Prize would be added to his trophy cabinet.
At the same time, he was anxious to foster Romania's influence in the region as a supplier of arms and the provider of a safe haven for the training of Palestinian terrorists, among others.
The officially published diaries of Ceauşescu's engagements reveal that Yasser Arafat was his most frequent guest: on average they met six times a year and saw each other for the last time only a month before the revolution.
During the Christmas revolution, it was claimed that Arab guerrillas in training camps formed the core of the last defenders of Ceauşescu's regime.
This was one of several useful myths propagated by the men who overthrew Ceauşescu, but was widely believed by Romanians, who knew from experience that Romania housed thousands of young, unattached Arab ‘students’.
Ceauşescu was an important intermediary between Egypt and Israel in the lead up to Anwar Sadat's dramatic visit to Jerusalem in 1977.
He met both Israeli leaders and Sadat beforehand.
It was Ceauşescu who reassured Sadat with positive answers to his key questions: Could he trust Menachem Begin and could Begin deliver on any promises he might make to Egypt?
Of course, Jimmy Carter's support for the negotiations was vital to their success: the USA could both reassure Israel and reward Egypt with economic and military aid.
But without Ceauşescu's discretion — Bucharest was not  as leaky a diplomatic centre as Washington — the American President would not have been able to achieve the one great success of his presidency, the Camp David Agreement between Israel and Egypt.
This debt helps to explain Carter's willingness to receive Ceauşescu in April 1978.
In retrospect, Ceauşescu's first important meeting with a Western head of state on equal terms took place in circumstances which made it a curious anticipation of his own downfall.
In May 1968, Charles de Gaulle paid a state visit to Romania, the first by a Western leader.
De Gaulle had made of France's relations with the United States and the rest of NATO, what Ceauşescu seemed to do for Romania over the next decade within the Warsaw pact.
The visit should have been a great success for both the tall and the short mavericks of the respective alliances.
Unfortunately, the students of Paris saw to it that the French President had to beat an undignified and premature retreat from Bucharest.
For a brief moment, it seemed that it was not only the presidents of newly independent Third World countries who had to take special precautions before departing on state visits.
On 18 December 1989, Nicolae Ceauşescu arrived in Teheran for the last of countless travels abroad.
He laid a wreath at the tomb of the Ayatollah Khomeini.
After all the drama of ‘68, de Gaulle, of course, simply went querulously into retirement in 1969 after the students had gone back to their studies and the French electorate felt it was safe to dispense with his services.
Within a week of going to Iran, Ceauşescu was dead.
Challenges to the Clan's Power
Let them hate so long as they fear.
Caligula
On 4 August 1977, the Romanian Communist Party's daily newspaper,Scînteia , carried a report of ‘Comrade Nicolae Ceauşescu's working visit to the Jiu Valley’.
The bland account, superficially no different from hundreds of others carried every day, continued: ‘in the course of his visit, Comrade Nicolae Ceauşescu met with representatives of the miners of Lupeni.’
During this meeting Ceauşescu noted ‘some shortcomings in the organization of the mines, some abuses in the application of laws, and some deficiencies in the leadership of the mines’.
Behind the bland terms of Scînteia's unimposing announcement lay the greatest challenge to Ceauşescu's power, in fact to communism's control of Romania, to date.
A few days earlier, the 40,000 miners of the Jiu Valley towns of Lupeni, Vulcan and Petrosani, in the foothills of the Carpathians two hundred and fifty miles to the north-west of Bucharest, had done the unimaginable in a communist state: they had gone on strike.
They occupied the pitheads, and even took the government's emissaries hostage, demanding that the Comrade himself come and hear their grievances about changes in their output quotas, wages, and pension rates, as well as about poor housing and worse food.
In 1972, the miners of the Jiu Valley had already shown that they were not the reliable toadies who could be expected to applaud the Comrade without comment on his ‘working visits’.
Even the Party daily,Scînteia had noted during one of Ceauşescu's endless round of ‘meet the workers’ visits, that some of the miners ‘did not hesitate’to put their ‘point of view’to the General-Secretary.
It was one of those uncomfortable collisions with discontent about housing and the quality of food which Ceauşescu's aides were supposed to keep out of his itinerary.
Despite evident irritation, the Conducator blamed the local officials and issued firm instructions to resolve matters, in the hearing of the miners.
Such dressings-down of the local bosses were naturally popular with the ordinary people and for a while at least they helped to foster the paternalist image of the General-Secretary.
In many absolutist states the myth that if only the Tsar or the Führer knew about the people's grievances he would act to resolve them was carefully fostered by state propaganda and even more so in Romania by the Securitate's rumour machine.
Like their peers elsewhere in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, the Communist rulers of Romania were shrewd enough to know that not even village idiots believed the official media.
What Radio Bucharest announced was what people had to believe in public, in other words the formulas that they needed to repeat to prove their loyalty and conformity to the regime.
What people actually believed about their country and the world around it was derived either from foreign radio stations, which enjoyed greater credibility the less their news coincided with the local stations, or from rumours.
Whereas people throughout the communist world were inclined to believe the opposite of what their masters told them (e.g. Pinochet was a good democrat — why else would ‘They’ abuse him?), very often their scepticism collapsed in the face of an unsubstantiated rumour.
The Securitate had a department devoted to analysing the rumours in circulation and putting out its own to promote the regime's purposes, which often could not be publicly stated.
The news in August 1977 of the strike of thousands of coal-miners in the Jiu Valley was the realization of the waking-nightmare of all Communist regimes.
That the working class in whose name the Party bosses ruled from East Berlin to Vladivostok should suddenly denounce its leaders and abuse them as a ‘red bourgeoisie’ was the greatest trauma of the nomenklatura .
Ceauşescu responded to the threat by sending the ever-reliable Ilie Verdeţ and the Minister of Mining, Constantin Babalu, to negotiate with the strikers.
They were instructed to fob them off with promises in order to get them back to work as quickly as possible.
To the embarrassment of Verdeţ, it became clear that the strikers at Lupeni would settle for nothing less than meeting the Comrade face to face and putting their demands to him.
Verdeţ was pushed into the porter's cabin at the entrance to the mine and obliged to telephone Communist Party headquarters in Bucharest with the miners' message.
To reinforce it, several miners crammed into the little wooden hut with Verdeţ, adding the odour of their own sweaty bodies to the air of tension.
Ceauşescu was unwilling to come to the phone and Verdeţ had difficulty controlling the mood inside the cabin.
He could only imagine the impatience of the thousands waiting in the late summer sun outside.
The officials of the Central Committee who first dealt with Verdeţ were not entirely certain of the situation in the Jiu Valley.
They left Verdeţ unsure about how Ceauşescu would react to the miners' insistence that he himself should come.
While they waited to hear what the leadership in Bucharest would decide, the miners held the high-ranking emissaries as hostages in cramped conditions at the pithead.
To pass the time, they told Verdeţ what his fate would be if the government resorted to violence to suppress the strike or to try and rescue them.
They also insisted that they would blow up the mines if Ceauşescu tried to force them back to work.
Quite correctly, they reckoned that ministers and central committee secretaries might be expendable to their Boss, but coal-mines were something he could not afford to lose.
Eventually, after three days, Ceauşescu came in person.
When he appeared before a great crowd of miners and their families in the primitive football stadium at Lupeni, he was greeted with catcalls about the ‘red bourgeoisie’.
However, he had taken several precautions to distance his own image from that of the nomenklatura as a whole.
He came in an open-necked shirt and walked to the makeshift podium without a very obvious security presence.
Some elderly miners, veteran communists, were supposed to have guaranteed his safety.
When he spoke, Ceauşescu emphasized his own working-class origins as well as his recognition of the hard and dangerous life of the miners.
He reminded them that shortly after he became General-Secretary in 1965, he had revised plan targets for coal output in order to put less strain on the miners and to reduce the risk of accidents at work.
Ceauşescu agreed to reverse the pay cuts that the men in effect faced because they could not cut enough coal to meet the Five Year Plan's targets.
The pension arrangements of miners had been changed earlier in the year: instead of receiving a set pension, retired miners were to be paid pensions based on their average earnings in any five of their last ten years at work.
Since older miners were usually no longer fit to work at the coal-face and did less well-remunerated jobs on or near the surface, this meant that in old age — if they reached it — their pensions were to be a calculated on the basis of their more poorly paid years at work!
These obnoxious changes to their pension arrangements were also reversed.
Their other demands were met, or at least Ceauşescu promised to satisfy them.
Any cheers that met his statement — which was not heard in silence — were not for the General-Secretary but for his concessions.
Ceauşescu knew that he could not both meet the miners' demands and achieve his economic targets.
He made it clear to Verdeţ that some way around his promises would have to be found, but one which would not simply revive the workers' militancy.
During his stay, he set to work himself on the principle divide et impera .
The only positive aspect of the strike  from the Party's point of view was that the miners had only formulated demands about their conditions of work and life.
They had not taken the step of demanding political change to make the decisions which affected their lives a matter of debate and consent before they were taken.
The miners' representatives had not even pressed for a free trade union, though they had demanded the removal of trade union officials whom they did not like or trust.
Ceauşescu was happy to meet this condition: for him, as for any true follower of Lenin, a trade union was ‘a transmission belt of authority’; if the union officials could not get the workers to meet their targets, failed to anticipate strikes, and then did not resolve them at once, what use were they to the regime?
The chief spokesman of the strikers was Costica Dobre.
He had been catapulted into the awesome role of negotiator with his country's ruler more by chance than anything else.
Life had not prepared him for the task, and it soon became clear that he lacked the natural shrewdness and strength of character that a Gdansk plumber was to show the Polish bosses three years later.
If Costica Dobre was no Lech Walesa, nor was Ceauşescu a fool like Eduard Gierek.
Taking Dobre aside, Ceauşescu made it clear to him that his talents were wasted down a mine.
A man of his abilities should go far in the Party.
The chance to escape from the daily drudgery in the pits must have been more than attractive.
Shortly after the end of the strike, Dobre left the valley to go and study at the Communist Party's university in Bucharest, the Academy Stefan Gheorghe.
There he met and came under the influence of one of the instructors, Professor Virgil Magureanu, who was to be one of the judges at the trial of Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu, thirteen years later.
No one would then have anticipated Magureanu's distinguished future.
In the early 1980s he was put in charge of Securitate activities in Western Europe.
He survived the revolution to become head of the Romanian Information Service — that is to say, the Securitate under its new name.
Magureanu was not able to help Dobre settle down in his new calling as an apparatchik in the service  of Ceauşescu, though he kept a ‘paternal’ eye on the erstwhile rebel over the next decade.
Over the next year or so after August 1977, the concessions granted to the miners were gradually revoked.
As the miners and millions of other Romanians came to rue with each passing year until December 1989, the greatest chance to change the leadership had been missed.
Ceauşescu did not mean to let it come again.
The mines were flooded with thousands of new workers.
A decade later 7,000 soldiers were working alongside civilian miners.
Many of these civilians were brought in from other mining areas in Romania.
Just as in his rotation of Party officials to areas with which they had no connection and where they would have difficulty building up a power-base, so now Ceauşescu was transferring people into new places of work, forcing them to move from their old homes.
He knew very well that fear of Securitate informers was as effective a way of hamstringing opposition as actually deploying agents in the field.
Of course, Ceauşescu was not a man to leave things to chance.
At the end of 1977, to confirm the Securitate's control over the pits, the Party secretary in charge of security matters, Vasile Patilineţ, was appointed the new Minister of Mines.
Ceauşescu knew Lenin's dictum, ‘trust is good but control is better’, and ordered the Securitate to send in new informers and to recruit more from among the existing workforce as well.
As ever, rank-and-file Party members and local trades union officials provided the core of the listening web which was supposed to embrace all citizens of Romania from cradle to grave.
Ion Pacepa has described how scientists working for the Securitate designed a telephone which could be used to bug both phone conversations and any talk in the room where the apparatus was located.
How many of these telephones were installed remains unknown, but after the revolution many Romanians who had telephones (a small minority of the population, of course) ripped open their own apparatus to find the hidden microphones.
Needless to say, given the universal  inefficiency of the Socialist Republic of Romania, relatively few listening-devices were round, at least by do-it-yourself de-buggers.
What enthusiastic amateurs often managed to do after the revolution was to disable their telephones by removing components which looked suspicious, but were innocent and vital to the functioning of the machine.
In some ways, the broadcasting by Radio Free Europe of extracts from Pacepa's Red Horizons served the regime well.
From the Securitate's point of view, belief in the omnipresence of its surveillance was often as important as the actual capacity to intercept everybody's telephone calls.
As George Orwell noted in 1984 , the fear that the thought-police might monitor everybody at all times was enough to keep Big Brother's subjects in a state of paralysed terror.
A perverse testimony to the feeling that most Romanians had of being constantly under the scrutiny of an all-embracing network of human and electronic observers were published by an official Romanian journal in the summer of 1988.
A twelve-year-old schoolgirl had written a science fiction story, ‘The White City’, which read like a thinly veiled satire on Romanian reality:
Liliana Cojacaru creates a huge urban settlement, which initiates mankind's good and peaceful actions, a kind of general headquarters of quiet and security.
Extra-sensitive radars are continually detecting not only tensions among countries and peoples anywhere on Earth,but also the smallest disputes among friends, or even among parents and children .
Despite the well-founded fear of the Securitate, for most of the period of Communist rule in Romania, the secret police was not in the front-line of control over the population.
Ten years after the Jiu Valley miners' strike, a protest demonstration erupted in Braşov on 15 November 1987, the day of local elections.
The crowd which stormed the local party headquarters and found stocks of fresh citrus fruits in store there, were soon suppressed by special troops.
In the aftermath  of the events in Braşov, Silviu Brucan became the first old Communist apparatchik to break ranks with Ceauşescu and publicly criticize his policies.
It is also striking how far he took issue with Western critics of Ceauşescu's Romania who saw it as a police-state pure and simple.
In his statement smuggled to the Independent in London, Brucan said: ‘I must take issue with a misconception prevailing in the West that this regime owes its survival to the repressive organs of the State.
Surely this could not explain more than two decades of political stability.
In fact,the main instrument of power has been the Communist Party , with the security forces playing only a marginal role and dealing with especially deviant cases.’
‘Kill one, frighten ten thousand’ was Mao's dictum about the use of force.
Of course, in practice, the Great Helmsman acted on the principle: ‘Kill ten thousand, frighten a billion’, and not just once.
But Ceauşescu preferred to terrify his opponents into silence and conformity rather than to kill them.
A few ringleaders of trouble like the miners who failed to follow Dobre's example in 1977 were ‘disappeared’.
Similarly in Braşov, the Securitate used photographs of the crowd taken from an armoured car which had swept through it on 15 November to identify ‘especially deviant cases’.
They were then ‘dealt with’ over the next eighteen months.
When faced by demonstrations or strikes, Ceauşescu's regime generally avoided head-on clashes.
They preferred to isolate the area of discontent, reduce any crowd to its hard-core and then to move, or even wait until after people had dispersed before taking action.
So long as it could prevent news of discontent travelling from one region to another and igniting a bush-fire of revolt, the Party was able to restore its control relatively quickly and with little loss of life.
On 1 March 1989, a group of British skiers were horrified to see a man set fire to himself on the ski-slopes outside Braşov.
He left a plea behind him: ‘Stop the killings in Braşov.’
But at the time his name was unknown.
It was testimony to the effectiveness of the terror inspired by the Securitate that unlike Jan Palach in Prague in 1969, the dead  man's suicidal gesture of protest remained anonymous.
It was only after the revolution that Liviu Babes was named as the martyr.
Ironically, at the same time as Babes was killing himself in protest against Ceauşescu's tyranny, the BBC ran a holiday programme detailing the pleasures of skiing around Braşov and suggesting that viewers go to Romania for a glimpse of glasnost .
Despite the repression which drove Babes to suicide.
Ceauşescu was not after all Pol Pot, though in his last hours on earth perhaps he wished that he had been.
Pol pot lives to fight another day despite butchering millions of his people.
In the end, Ceauşescu fell because he degraded most Romanians without destroying them.
He taught them hatred and fear, but when at last their fear waned, their hatred devoured him.
It was not long after the autumn of 1977, that things began to look very bleak for the Romanians.
The future promised only worse to come.
Towards the end of the Shah's reign, Ceauşescu made a deal that was supposed to earn Communist Romania a fortune in hard currency from the capitalist West.
Romania would import Iranian oil via its port of Constanza and then process it in refineries specially built for the purpose.
It would then sell on the finished product to the West for dollars, which would in turn fund other high-tech developments.
Using money borrowed from Western banks, Ceauşescu embarked on building an oil-refining capacity three times greater than Romania's domestic production of oil.
(He also borrowed heavily to fund other projects: a vast aluminium-smelting complex at Slatina, for instance, that threatened to consume as much electricity as the domestic consumers of Romania!)
Then the Shah fell.
His old friends were no longer welcome with the Ayatollah.
Not only did the deal fall through, but the Iranian Revolution, and then the Iran-Iraq War which followed it, drove up the price of oil in the West.
Ceauşescu could not profit from this because he had none to sell.
Worse still, interest rates shot up and Romania had to  pay more and more to the Western banks simply to service the debt.
Capitalism had always been baffling to Ceauşescu, now his involvement with it was a curse.
In Poland, Gierek's regime plunged into crisis in the face of its mountain of debt.
Ceauşescu's colleagues watched the rise of Solidarity with anxiety.
Some Romanians, however, saw the emergence of General Jaruzelski and his apparently successful suppression of Solidarity after 13 December 1981, as a good omen: perhaps, the local incompetent might be replaced by a reliable general and perhaps the Soviet Union would not mind either.
Meanwhile Ceauşescu became convinced, in common with other East European states in hock to Western bankers, that credit was being used as a political weapon and that Reagan intended to finance his rearmament through the interest due on their loans.
Only Ceauşescu came to the ‘obvious’ conclusion: the debt should not be rescheduled, it should be paid off as quickly as possible.
From 1982 onwards, Romania's Western creditors found themselves faced by a baffling response from Bucharest to their offers of further credit.
It was unwanted.
The Western banks regarded Romania as a good risk: cynically, they judged that Ceauşescu would keep the lid on the pot in Romania in a way that Gierek had manifestly failed to do in Poland.
Whatever his faults from the perspective of Amnesty International, those very same blots on his reputation were what made Romania much more credit-worthy than many less brutal regimes.
But independence is indivisible, so Ceauşescu thought, he should not have let Romania become dependent on Western credit any more than he had let it fall under Soviet political control.
By 1989, he was publicly proclaiming his intention of imitating Albania and anchoring a ban on foreign loans in the constitution, which was clearly going to be more binding on his successors than himself.
Paying off the debt meant cutting consumption at home of the few things which were imported and almost anything which might be exported.
Ceauşescu set the target: $10 billion had to be repaid by the end of the decade.
Rationing  was introduced on most food items — not to share the burden equally but to reduce consumption so that more foodstuffs could be exported.
Romanian meat went in every direction.
Even the US Army in West Germany was fed on beef and pork from Romania in the early 1980s.
Only unappetizing parts of animal carcasses remained for the domestic market.
Romanians called pigs' trotters ‘patriots’ because they were the only bits of the pig allowed to remain in the country.
In a typical joke a teacher tells her pupils to draw a pig.
They diligently draw its head, trotters and tail.
‘But where is the body?’ asks the teacher.
‘You didn't say to draw an export pig!’ chorus the children in reply.
Jokes about their own plight and sarcasms aimed at ‘Them’ at the top went the rounds as the standard of living fell steadily throughout Romania in the 1980s.
Outbreaks of popular discontent became more frequent, but were no more effective than the great strike of 1977.
In October 1981, Ceauşescu repeated his direct intervention when the miners of Motru rioted and attacked the local Party HQ.
However, he recognized that the days when he could play the benign ruler, satisfying the grievances of his subjects and punishing guilty lesser officials, were waning — even if he had nothing more positive to put in its place.
In 1982, he sacked on the spot several high-ranking officials for failing to maintain an adequate food supply to the main market in Bucharest — as if it was their fault that there was nothing to show the General-Secretary when he put in a surprise inspection visit.
Everybody knew that they lived in a ‘planned economy’ and they also knew who, in the final analysis, drew up the plan.
But such Machiavellian gestures on the part of a benevolent ruler increasingly cut less ice with the people.
After 1981, the Securitate and other security forces were used as the prime means of settling industrial disputes and demonstrations.
It was not surprising that even within the upper reaches of the Party discontent began to come into the open, or at least to be expressed clearly behind closed doors at meetings of the Central Committee or Council of Ministers.
By 1981, Virgil Trofin had been downgraded, like so many former protégés, and was now Minister of Mines and Petroleum.
Suddenly, at the Central Committee meeting in November, he failed to respond to the criticisms levelled at his ministry for failure to meet plan targets in the standard manner, neither would he take the blame for the strike at Motru.
Instead of criticizing himself, begging for forgiveness, and promising to follow the example of Comrade Ceauşescu more closely in the future, Trofin launched into a tirade against the absurdity of Ceauşescu's methods of planning.
He described the impossibility of extracting high-grade coking coal from the worn-out mines under his control, particularly if investment in modern machinery was cut.
The heresy was heard out, but then the heretic was expelled from all his posts and finally the Party itself.
As in the rest of Romanian society, even in the Party leadership, no one could rely on anyone else with confidence.
A year later, Virgil Trofin died.
At the time it was rumoured that he had been murdered or committed suicide.
In fact, it seems he had a stroke, but that the doctors were discouraged from treating him quickly by the Securitate.
Although Trofin had been an ally of Ceauşescu against the old guard in the mid-1960s, in an act of rare solidarity, perhaps even comradeship, Draghici, Bârladeanu, Brucan, Corneliu Manescu, and others turned out to mourn him at his funeral.
At the time, it seemed that nothing could break Ceauşescu's hold over a servile and cowardly Party élite.
A couple of years later, Ion Iliescu followed Trofin into the wilderness.
He apparently remarked in his capacity as Minister of Water Affairs that not even socialism ‘could make water run uphill’ during a discussion of Ceauşescu's favourite project to complete the long-abandoned canal linking Bucharest to the Black Sea.
Unlike Trofin, Iliescu did not raise his voice against Ceauşescu, but remained a simple member of the Communist Party and waited for times to change.
Disputes within the Communist Parties of Eastern Europe were veiled from public view and the West knew little about them.
In fact, most Western interest in the slim possibilities of reform in the East tended to focus on the academic and intellectual dissidents in Eastern Europe rather than either disgraced apparatchiks or those stubborn, principled ordinary people without contacts abroad who defied the system in anonymity just because they would not bend any further.
The fate of the common person who refused to conform and voted ‘No’ in the bogus elections beloved of Communist rulers rarely attracted attention in the West.
How could it?
But at a day-to-day level, the resistance of ordinary people was reflected by the ‘silent strike’, the carelessness and indifference people paid to their work.
Even quite senior figures in the system just went through the motions of working and fulfilling the crazy plan laid down from a great height without taking local conditions into account.
Georgi Markov, the Bulgarian dissident writer, recalled the first speech given by a new factory director which could have been given by any Romanian middle-ranking cynical conformist when put in charge of an operation by an arbitrary decision from the top.
The director told his new subordinates:
Frankly, I don't know why I am here.
I've no idea what you're doing, how you are doing it, and what it all adds up to.
However, as They've sent me here, I'm going to stay.
But I don't want us to tread on each other 's toes.
I shall be the director but you will work in the way you're used to and as you think fit.
Don't ask me questions because I can't tell you anything.
It was that sort of genial incompetent who plagued the management of Ceauşescu's industry, but what else were ill-trained bureaucrats to do when orders rained down on them which could not be obeyed even with the best will in the world.
Ceauşescu himself knew the cynical and cringing apologetics of those managers who were caught out for gross  failure to follow the plan.
In 1988, he complained, ‘I must say that I have the impression that there is a certain mentality with some activists.
‘I will be criticized again,’ I will once again admit my mistakes, I will make some more pledges; and that will be all.
''' That was exactly what the average person called on to make self-criticism thought: all that mattered was getting through the ritual humiliation, and then going for a drink.
Such people were the most irreducible problem for the Communist system everywhere and perhaps its ultimate downfall.
Of course, Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu did not deal personally with every village dissident or industrial worker who spoke his mind.
Perhaps pressure from his local boss or party secretary would revise the awkward customer's views in an acceptable direction.
If not the Securitate, with the help of its ‘special measures’, or even psychiatrists with their drugs, would change the victim's mind once and for all.
The better-known intellectual dissidents risked incurring the wrath of the Comrades at the top.
The name of the writer Paul Goma, for instance, was enough to make both of them spit with rage.
Like most other people in Romania the Ceauşescus were fascinated by Radio Free Europe's reporting on the country and were always anxious to hear its latest news.
The ruling couple preferred, however, to receive RFE's news at second hand from a minion, who all too often had the thankless task of retailing the unflattering commentary or the contents of a critical letter smuggled out to the Munich-based radio station by one of their subjects.
Elena particularly suffered from a painful fascination with the appalling contents of radio broadcasts.
According to Pacepa, it was her obsession with the scurrilous anonymous letters sent to RFE that led to the establishment of the national handwriting archive, as well as the decree requiring all typewriters to be registered with the authorities and a regular sample of the typeface to be provided.
In early February 1977, Romanian listeners heard the text of an Open Letter to their president from the novelist, Paul  Goma.
A month before, Goma had been the first Romanian to try to imitate the initiative of the dissidents of Czechoslovakia.
Led by Pavel Kohout, Vaclav Havel and other Czechs and Slovaks who would not buckle under to the regime imposed on Czechoslovakia by Brezhnev's tanks in 1968, the first permanent group of dissidents in Eastern Europe issued their statement of inalienable human rights at the start of the year —Charter 77 .
Goma signed up to support Charter 77 , but very few other Romanians, and certainly fewer still of his fellow intellectuals, took the risk of publicly associating themselves with the critics of the fraternal Communist regime in Czechoslovakia.
Undeterred by the understandable timidity of his acquaintances, Goma hit upon a masterstroke of irony.
The Open Letter broadcast by RFE in February 1977 was addressed to the President of the Socialist Republic of Romania ‘at the Royal Palace’.
Goma appealed to the man who denounced the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 to stand up and be counted, and so give an example to his fellow citizens to persuade them to overcome their reticence about signing the Charter :
I turn to you in despair.
You are my last hope…
Ever since Charter 77 was published…
I can find no rest, and, I am sure of it, neither can you…
I try to convince my acquaintances to join in the action of the Czechs and Slovaks, but I fail…
The Romanians fear the security forces…
It seems that only two persons in the country do not fear them: Your Excellency and myself…
An entirely different situation would be brought about should Your Excellency send a declaration of support to Charter 77 .
I am profoundly convinced that millions of Romanians would follow you.
Naturally, Ceauşescu had no intention of engaging in a debate with Goma.
Subtle word-play had never been the Conducator's forte.
Instead, he chose to reply to Goma's letter  in his own direct way.
The former champion boxer of Romania, Horst Stumpf, now a captain in the militia, was sent round to Goma's home to teach him his manners.
It was not the first time Stumpf's skills had been put to such use.
Like the other athletes of the Interior Ministry's Dinamo Sports Club, he was in the service of the state at all times.
Goma still showed signs of his beating when he was allowed to emigrate to France shortly afterwards.
Goma did not show the gratitude towards the Comrade expected from someone given the privilege of leaving Romania and he continued to agitate against the regime from Paris.
It was decided to teach him the final lesson, which would also warn off other émigrés who thought that they were secure in the West and could say what they liked about Ceauşescu.
The Romanian secret agent, Matei Pavel Haiducu, who was based in France to pursue industrial espionage, was instructed to silence both Paul Goma and another troublesome dissident, Virgil Tanase.
He was equipped with a special poison designed by Soviet specialists to kill the victim through cardiac arrest without leaving evidence of his murder.
Haiducu not only failed to assassinate Goma and Tanase, but handed himself over to the French authorities with his weapon.
Not all of the émigrés from Eastern Europe were so fortunate as Goma and Tanase, who lived with the constant threat of assassination at least until Christmas 1989.
At about the same time, as Haiducu abandoned his mission, the Bulgarian exile, Georgi Markov, whose revelations of the corruption of Zhivkov's cronies infuriated Ceauşescu's Bulgarian counterpart, was murdered by an unknown agent of the Bulgarian secret police in London.
Another Bulgarian ‘traitor’ survived a similar stab from an umbrella in Paris.
The Romanian section of Radio Free Europe in Munich was repeatedly the object of attempts by the Romanian secret service to penetrate it and to harm its staff members.
The Romanian section's staff had an alarming tendency to die from cancer.
After his defection to the United States, Pacepa claimed that Eastern  Bloc scientists had developed a method, known as RADU, of irradiating an enemy and inducing cancerous  tumours .
This was Ceauşescu's preferred weapon in dealing with his critics at home and abroad, when the case was not urgent and when the very length of the victim's sufferings might add to the satisfaction of his elimination.
The Securitate was also anxious to make sure that any suffering on the part of a non-conformist at home was made known to the dissident's contacts in the West.
In the summer of 1988, Doina Cornea, the former lecturer in French literature at Cluj University, smuggled a letter to the BBC and RFE attacking Ceauşescu's plan to demolish thousands of villages as part of ‘systematization’.
Her friends in the West were told that she would be beaten until they stopped publicizing her case.
To the thin-skinned Ceauşescus, the broadcasts of Radio Free Europe and the BBC were intolerable, but they recognized that the émigré broadcasters had little or no influence in the West.
When Haiducu defected he named, among others, the Romanian Ambassador to France as one of those involved in plots like the one to murder Goma and Tanase.
The Quai d'Orsay (the French foreign ministry) said that it did not consult with the French secret service before accepting the credentials of East European diplomats, and apparently had no intention of instituting such an undiplomatic practice.
It would take a great deal more than flagrant attempts to assassinate people in Western capitals and the hardly less obvious espionage of the Directorate of External Intelligence to make Nicolae Ceauşescu persona non grata in the West.
The Cult of Personality
Somoza Unveils the Statue of Somoza in Somoza Stadium
Not that I believe the people raised this statue to me,
I know as well as you that I commissioned it.
Nor that I thereby hope for immortality:
I know the people will one day destroy it.
Nor that I wished to give myself in life
The monument you will not raise when I am dead:
But that I raised it knowing you hate it.
Ernesto Cardenal
In April 1968, the reformer Ceauşescu told his Central Committee, ‘We don't need any idols…
Marxism-Leninism rejected and rejects any such concepts, which have nothing in common with the ideology of the working-class.’
Less than a dozen years later, television, radio, newspapers, posters and placards proclaimed the same slogans extolling life in the ‘age of Ceauşescu’.
‘Epocha Ceauşescu’, became the shorthand both in official propaganda to justify every acclaimed new success in building a multi-laterally developed socialist society and in ordinary people's bitter sarcasm when confronted by another breakdown in supplies of energy or food.
Even foreign tourists who had not yet caught on to the realities of life in Romania and perhaps were over-insistent in demanding from a minor bureaucrat of the tourist office why some essential and prepaid feature of their holiday had failed to materialize would be confronted by a shrug of the shoulders  and the muttered words, ‘Epocha Ceauşescu, as the only explanation.
Comparisons between twentieth-century dictators and the classical tyrants of Ancient Rome are alluring but misleading.
Of course, Roman emperors deified themselves, made their horses consuls and existed in a state of terrifying paranoia which eventually provoked genuine plots and assassinations, but in retrospect the gross crimes of a Caligula or Nero lacked the all-pervading hypocrisy of the modern tyrants.
Caligula was degenerate but, by all accounts, did not deign to hide the fact.
Ceauşescu's vices were mundane, but probably more damaging to his people as a whole than a debauched emperor's capricious treatment of Ancient Rome's élite.
From the time of Stalin, at least, modesty and megalomania have gone hand in hand.
Stalin's humility was put on record in the official history of the Soviet Communist Party — at his own suggestion.
Countless twentieth-century dictators have been defended from their detractors by pointing out the asceticism of their private lives.
If the propaganda portrait of Hitler reached the pinnacle of self-denial, showing him virtually celibate, certainly teetotal, non-smoking, vegetarian and animal-loving, the other would-be saviours/butchers of humanity such as Pol Pot have all conformed, at least publicly, to type.
Some of the worst tyrants have in fact been without private vices: as Bertrand de Jouvenel once noted, ‘power is the most perfect form of self-indulgence’.
(Henry Kissinger, practical as ever, called power ‘the ultimate aphrodisiac’.)
Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu's devotion to each other was unaffected by their complete power.
Unlike Nicolae's sister, Elena Barbulescu, Elena Ceauşescu was never tempted by her power to stray from fidelity to her husband.
Although Elena possessed the powers and ambitions of a Messalina, she had the domestic virtues of a good bourgeois, but then so did her husband.
Of course, their domestic tastes were more grandiose than most contented couples, and Elena played her part in promoting the over-decoration of their apartments in the  various palaces they used, and even in those they never visited.
But though, at the revolution, Romanians were shocked by stories about the pictures of the luxurious excesses of the Ceauşescus' lifestyle — which until then had remained private — they had to whisper about their children, especially Nicu, if they wanted gossip of a Neronian quality.
Until 22 December 1989, the General-Secretary and his wife were presented to the Romanian people (despite Elena's highly visible furs and cashmere clothing) as a hard-working, abstemious couple with only one thought — the well-being of ‘The People’.
Both Nicolae and Elena constantly emphasized in their speeches that they had sprung from the common people and therefore shared their hopes and sufferings.
Of course, rumours abounded about what went on behind the barriers which prevented the common people from entering the districts where the Communist élite lived, but no one knew for sure .
Naturally, the building of the huge Palace of the People could not be hidden from public view, but the actual details its plans or internal designs were never discussed or published in the media.
The ignorance of ordinary people sometimes led to exaggerations of the self-indulgence of the Ceauşescus after the revolution.
Quite often features of their palaces would be described as made of solid gold, which were in fact merely brass.
Perhaps the Ceauşescus were themselves sometimes cheated and knew no better.
The Palace of the People was, of course, a massive exercise in doublethink.
Although clearly designed to the specifications laid down by Ceauşescu so that it would be a suitable monument to his glory as well as a home and office for the remainder of his working life, the colossal building was always officially described as the Civic Centre.
This name suggested that the capital's citizens might make some use of it.
In fact, only the square in front of the eastern face of the building was intended for their use: up to 250,000 could assemble there to cheer the Conducator .
The Civic Centre complex with the Palace of the People (later renamed Palace of the Republic) at its heart was designed to function as the  main shrine and nerve-centre of the cult of Nicolae Ceauşescu.
From about 1967 the praise of the General-Secretary pouring out from all the media took on more and more extreme forms.
At the IX Party Congress that year, both Ion Maurer and Alexandru Bârladeanu emphasized in their speeches to the delegates how much they owed to Nicolae Ceauşescu's inspiration.
After 1968, genuine approval of his anti-Soviet stance gave a boost to the incipient cult and by 1974 it had already reached its high-point, from which it never subsided, but simply spread to a suffocating extent into all areas of public life.
The year 1974 saw both Ceauşescu's ‘election’ as President of the Socialist Republic of Romania at a ceremony in which he bestowed on himself not only a sash of office but a sceptre too.
It was the first overt addition to the rituals of Communist adulation.
The ‘self-coronation’ of Ceauşescu was a gesture in imitation of Napoleon's crowning of himself in 1804.
At the XII Party Congress in the same year, Ceauşescu was compared with great men and monarchs of the world's past.
Many of them were difficult to reconcile with orthodox Marxism, but on the other hand, the Soviet Communist Party, for instance, had long since annexed the great Russians of the past to grace the progress towards Stalin or Khruschev or Brezhnev (or whoever reigned in the Kremlin), Ceauşescu's hagiographers chose Alexander the Great, Napoleon, Julius Caesar and Abraham Lincoln (among others) to compare with Romania's new president — in fact, he combined in himself all of their virtues.
Like the latter two, he was to die a violent death, but that was not in the mind of his flatterers at that time.
Fifteen more years would be needed.
From Augustus to Peter the Great, the history books were ransacked to find suitable comparisons.
By 1967 Ceauşescu had already staged several historical pageants at which he met the heroes of the Romanian past and of his own childhood games.
Actors played the parts of the giants of Romania's chequered history, like Stephen the  Great, and gave a kind of historical blessing to the new General-Secretary.
It was a sign that Ceauşescu intended to go much further than Dej in rehabilitating the Romanian past and distancing the Communist regime from the original Soviet model, at least so far as public presentation went.
In his early years, Ceauşescu liked to cock a snook at Brezhnev by making visits to the districts bordering the territories Romania lost to the Soviet Union in 1940.
Once in the Southern Bukovina, a beautiful hilly land, he raised his glass to toast ‘the Bukovina’, implying Romania's right to the whole territory including the northern half now inside the Soviet Union.
Such gestures appealed to many Romanians, as they did to Western observers anxious to see Ceauşescu as a ‘patriot’ and reformer.
Of course, these gestures cost him little, but the gains in public opinion in Romania and the West were worthwhile.
The homage and cynical words of approval from foreign heads of state and politicians were ceaselessly recycled inside Romania to impress upon ordinary people how famous and how much admired their president had become.
Ceauşescu's fame was supposed to compensate the ordinary Romanian (who could not travel) for life's temporary difficulties.
They were expected to think to themselves as they rose before dawn to struggle off through bitter winter colds to join a pre-shift milk or bread queue: things may not be perfect but at least Ceauşescu has put Romania on the map!
Those who could not console themselves with the thought of world-wide respect for their domestically heartily despised ruler were at least supposed to despair when they heard Western statesmen pour flattery over Ceauşescu.
Many Romanians did despair.
Others were baffled, not able to believe that free people, famous and rich too, could say what they saw printed or heard on Romanian television or radio.
But then the BBC or Radio Free Europe would confirm the incomprehensible that this president or that queen had honoured Ceauşescu.
Worst of all for the morale of ordinary Romanians was the ceremony in June 1978, when the Queen knighted Him.
Queen Elizabeth II had words of praise put into her mouth by Dr Owen's Foreign Office, which the Ceauşescu propaganda machine recycled endlessly.
This culminated in their gaffe on the Comrade's birthday in 1989 when Scînteia carried a telegram of birthday greetings from the Queen which was promptly denied by the British Government.
Although Ceauşescu continued to receive a daily deluge of congratulatory telegrams from tinpot rulers the world over until the last days of his rule, the reprinting of old praise from the Queen shows how desperate he was to present his people with evidence that he was acceptable to the West.
Praise from Western quarters was used to reinforce Ceauşescu's standing at home.
No one in Romania was allowed to forget the honours and flatteries which Western governments poured onto their maverick ruler.
As time passed, Elena too became the subject of such gestures of endorsement from the West which were duly recorded for the benefit of Romanians, lest they forget by just how an extraordinary couple they were ruled.
Books and newspaper articles were published in the West, often with a large subsidy from the local Romanian embassy.
They were frequently on paper of a quality — and had typesetting of an eccentricity — that suggested they had actually been printed in Romania itself.
Such books, and even genuinely spontaneous expressions of foreign admiration, soon found their way into displays in Romanian libraries and bookshops.
After the revolution, those authors who were not simply names to fill space on the badly produced jacket were usually sufficiently embarrassed to try to explain away their participation in the cult of Ceauşescu and thereby in lengthening his rule.
Every European country seems to have had a student of the Ceauşescu legend.
Britain's leading exponent of this minor publishing phenomenon was Stan Newens, the Labour MEP for London North-Central.
At meetings of the European Parliament's Human Rights Committee (at which even the French Communists stayed silent), Newens compared Ceauşescu's plan to demolish half the villages in Romania and to  relocate millions of people into standardized concrete blocks with the effects of redevelopment around Kings Cross on his own constituents.
Some of the Romanian émigrés and ex-political-prisoners present as witnesses at the hearing were shocked that a Western politician could express such views.
Newens's views were perhaps influenced by his contacts with Ceauşescu and he had written or edited at least three books about Ceauşescu:Nicolae Ceauşescu — the Man, His Ideas and the Achievements on the Road to Socialism (which appeared in at least three editions between 1972 and 1978 to satisfy popular demand),Talking with Nicolae Ceauşescu , and Nicolae Ceauşescu — The Effort to Create a Modern Romania .
Newens caused some unintentional hilarity when he commented on the policies of the Ceauşescu regime towards its Hungarian and German minorities.
Far from being persecuted, their language and culture was promoted, according to Newens.
He could testify to seeing many books on display in Romania in foreign languages including German and Hungarian.
It was not clear whether he caught the aside from one witness that Nicolae and Elena's speeches and writings were translated into many more languages than that.
Perhaps even some of his own words about Ceauşescu had been translated into the languages spoken in Romania for the edification of Ceauşescu's subjects.
Such examples of foreign respect and admiration for the Comrade and his wife were displayed throughout Romania in every museum and library.
The National History Museum on the Calea Victoriei in Bucharest had a floor devoted to ‘homage’ to the Comrade and his wife.
The salons were filled with honours, medals, awards, degrees from all corners of the earth, set out in cabinets according to the continent of origin.
They were displayed with an almost subversive indifference to the impression made upon the spectator.
Towards the end of the era, in fact, the attendants in the salons of homage became alert to the fact that among their few Western visitors, the majority were not as in awe of the Conducator as they might be and photographing the exhibits or taking notes of the  sycophantic citations attached to the awards by their Western donors was discouraged.
As in so much else, the ‘Omagiu’ in the National History Museum and its lesser imitators in every other museum and exhibition hall in the country, were Stalinist in inspiration.
Tito, Ceauşescu's role-model as a ‘new type of patriotic communist’, had long ago immortalized his universal popularity in his own lifetime by establishing the Memorial Centre to Josip Broz Tito at Dedinje, outside Belgrade.
Stalin had had his birthplace at Gori in Georgia converted into a shrine and much the same was done for Ceauşescu's home village at Scorniceşti.
His parents' cottage was restored to make it a suitable birthplace for such a great man.
Other places associated with Ceauşescu's career, like the prisons at Doftana or Caransebes, were made into shrines to his onward march through life and became regular centres of his cult.
Ceauşescu may have learnt this technique from Kim II Sung who has pock-marked North Korea with memorials to his every stage of development.
In addition to memorials marking the places associated with his career, the great dates — his birthday; from the mid-1970s her birthday too; the anniversary of the overthrow of Antonescu on 23 August — were marked by ceremonies, parades and shows in honour of Ceauşescu.
Schoolchildren could spend days or weeks drilling for athletic and balletic  displays in his honour.
Some were even chosen to meet him and offer him flowers, but only after careful screening for infectious diseases, and vaccination.
Their god was mortal and had to be protected from germs.
Ceauşescu told Newsweek in the autumn of his life that the cult was not his doing.
He was lucky to be so popular.
In fact, he would like more people to enjoy his level of popularity: ‘If this is a cult of personality, then I should like all the poorly developed countries to enjoy such personalities capable of ensuring a rising standard of living for the people.’
Ceauşescu knew very well from his travels to so many poor countries (including some getting poorer even more rapidly than his own) that he was not alone in promoting a cult of himself.
But the Romanian model of glorification went beyond the norms seen in Sub-Saharan Africa — not even Emperor Bokassa was able to make the cult of himself pervade every aspect of life in his country, as Ceauşescu did.
Elena's cult was if anything more bizarre than her husband's; the claims made on her behalf were even less credible than the praise lavished on Nicolae.
The humiliation involved in asserting and lauding Elena's scientific accomplishments was bitter for the country's intellectuals, in fact for anyone with common sense.
By the mid-1980s, Elena's birthday, though not her age, was celebrated with all the effusions associated with her husband's.
In January 1986, the readers of Luceafarul were assured that the anniversary of Elena's birth was ‘a crucial date in Romanian history, by which the nation, glorifying its chosen ones, is glorifying itself…’
At the same time another journalist reminded his readers that Elena Ceauşescu was ‘the perfect personification of the traditional values of the Romanian people’ with her secure place ‘in the golden gallery of the great personalities of national history’.
Ilie Purcaru described Elena as, ‘The woman who today, side by side with the man at the country's helm, is taking upon her shoulders — fragile as any woman's shoulders but strong and unswerving through her strong and unwavering beliefs — overwhelming missions and responsibilities, serving the nation with a devotion that none of our women has attained before…’
This idea of Elena as the colleague in leadership of Nicolae Ceauşescu led the poet, Ion Gheorghe, to conjure up a mystical vision of Elena as part of a ‘trinity’, whose ‘three dimensions’ were Nicolae Ceauşescu, herself and the fatherland, of which she was mother.
Another poet, Virgil Teodorescu, combined his enthusiasm for both birthday celebrants, claiming they were ‘the historical couple whose existence merges with the country's destiny.’
If once Romania was Ceauşescu, now it became the couple.
As one eulogist put it, ‘two communist hearts [beat as one]under the Romanian flag.’
The origins of the double-cult lay in the trip to China in  1971.
That trip must have revived Nicolae's memories of his time in Stalin's Moscow, but the frenzied adulation of Mao surpassed anything that Ceauşescu could have witnessed in the Soviet Union.
In his last years, Stalin lived almost entirely secluded from the public gaze.
The constant outpourings of devotion from the Soviet people reached him through the media.
He preferred to remain aloof, an invisible presence worshipped from afar.
Mao, on the other hand, actually presided over gatherings of a million crying and cheering devotees, before bodily and mental decline made personal enjoyment of ecstatic Red Guards screeching their devotion impossible.
At Mao's side during that visit was his ever more prominent wife, Jiang Qing.
If Elena wished to be a great scientist, then Jiang Qing was already a great actress and by the early 1970s a great creative artist, too; as well as being the voice of Chairman Mao on most issues.
The role of Jiang Qing was bitterly resented by Mao's male political colleagues, not least by Deng Xiaoping.
Undoubtedly, she was hated by countless millions of ordinary Chinese.
Jiang Qing could always be counted on to use her influence and pronounce in favour of the most extreme and disruptive policies.
For the elderly Mao, she was perhaps a useful alibi: anything which the government did which proved too unpopular was likely to be attributed to her doing.
After Mao's death and Jiang Qing's fall, the ‘moderate’ regime of Deng accused Madame Mao and her associates in the Gang of Four of being the cause of all China's woes, thereby sparing the late Chairman from the most bitter criticisms.
The rapid rise of Jiang Qing — rather than her still more sudden and catastrophic fall — were clearly lessons to Elena.
The experience of other ambitious wives of presidents might offer some material for reflection, but, with the possible exception of Eva Peron, none was an obvious model.
Elena knew instinctively that by building up a separate cult of herself — in many ways more spurious and grotesque than anything created for her husband — she was laying the  foundations for her own take-over in the event of Nicolae's death.
Both came from peasant stock of considerable longevity, but the presence of Nicolae's mother-in-law in her late nineties was evidence that Elena Ceauşescu could expect to live well into the twenty-first century — and she certainly had plans to be in charge then too.
Assertion of her supremacy over the other members of the politburo was an essential step to confirming her position as heir-apparent.
When foreign journalists were occasionally bold enough to ask Ceauşescu whether he intended Nicu to be his successor he gave non-committal answers.
This was partly because both he and Elena saw that it would require a great deal more experience and self-discipline to make Nicu fit for the role, and also because he did not want to rule out Elena.
Nicu shared all the vices of Kim II Sung's designated successor, his son Kim Jong II, except a megalomaniacal drive for power.
He was something of a disappointment to his parents.
Perhaps Elena thought that if she was in sole charge she could make a proper tyrant out of him.
In the meantime, she worked on demeaning the members of the politburo.
On her birthday on 7 January 1986, the members of the Political Executive Committee, the highest political authority in the country, assured Elena,
The entire country highly appreciates the outstanding activity you carry out in the field of science and technology…
Your valuable work — crowned by the high distinctions and titles awarded you by some prestigious scientific, cultural, and educational institutions from various countries of the world represents, much to the pride of all our people, a greatly important contribution to ensure the flourishing of the national and universal science and culture, as a brilliant example of revolutionary abnegation and deep concern with the cause of Socialist Romania's flourishing and the cause of all the nation's progress and civilization.
On her last birthday, the same rituals of praise were ground through.
The members of the Political Executive Committee abased themselves once more.
The press carried idealized pictures of Elena as a goddess of fecundity and plenty.
Florentin Popescu's poem, ‘In Simple Words’, expressed the whole people's love for the ‘woman as scholar’ whose ‘name we say when we use simple words: water, sun and bread’.
Spontaneous demonstrations throughout the country marked its affectionate tribute to Elena as they would a few days later, around 26 January, pour out their loyalty and love to the Comrade on his birthday — for the last time.
The constant repetition of an untruth did not make anyone believe, but it could batter the brain into unthinking apathy.
If every day, absurd lies — not even clever ones — are pumped into the atmosphere by radio, television, and newspapers, the mind becomes numbed.
After a while you can no longer be revolted every time you hear the slogans or your eyes glaze over while skimming through Scînteia .
The object of this sort of propaganda was to produce a Pavlovian state of dumb obedience.
All the rhetoric about redoubling efforts to fulfil the plan or striding confidently towards the future in imitation of the Great Leader was intended in practice to pacify the people rather than to stimulate them.
Everybody from the politburo downwards should know what slogans to repeat in any given situation.
The other purpose of the unrelenting propaganda in praise of the Ceauşescus was to humiliate and degrade its own proponents.
How could a Prime Minister who gave voice to such sentiments be regarded as a political figure in his own right?
The members of the politburo who queued up to pronounce convoluted and mendacious encomiums upon the ‘hero among the nation's heroes’ or his ‘world-ranking scientist’wife were proving their status as political eunuchs.
They served the Ceauşescus just as their emasculated predecessors had served the sultans.
Everybody was humiliated by the regular acts of worship staged to glorify the ‘Couple’ on  birthdays and meaningless anniversaries.
Everybody was obliged to take part and to applaud longest and loudest the most self-demeaning speaker.
It is difficult to decide whether the audience or the speaker was more degraded by participation in these ‘homage-giving’ events.
Doublethink had entered so completely into Ceauşescu's soul by the 1980s that he could genuinely bask in what he took to be sincere affection at the same time as he knew how stage-managed the whole event was.
At his trial, Nicolae Ceauşescu simply switched into the public half of the doublethink which he had imbibed for five decades.
He insisted, and appeared to believe, that he was loved by the people and was simply the victim of a coup .
The force of his sincerity convinced many Western observers at the time that he was simply mad, deluded by his own propaganda.
What they missed was that his response was a perfectly normal product of constant exposure to Stalinist thinking.
Enver Hoxha's memoirs are filled with analogous examples.
The Albanian leader could express his shock at the gangsterish methods of Gheorghiu-Dej in the late 1940s without for one moment admitting to himself, let alone to his readers, that he was even remotely hypocritical given his own tendency to resort to rubbing out rivals personally (including shooting his prime minister and long-term comrade-in-arms, Mehmet Shehu, in 1981).
Self-righteousness becomes second nature to any properly indoctrinated communist.
Milovan Djilas, who observed both Stalin and Tito at close quarters, has made the point that self-abasement too is necessary to the system: everyone is loyal to the leader, owes everything to his inspiration, is worthless without him, until someone else is leader: that someone suddenly loses his modesty.
Orwell saw the fundamental insincerity which lurked beneath the loud assertions of pure motives which Stalin and his like repeated ad nauseam .
Many of their contemporaries, however, thought so much noise must betoken some serious intent; later, others dismissed the noise as meaningless, and looked for different motives.
The essence of doublethink was  to hold absolutely to the given motive but also simultaneously to its contradiction: that is after all what dialectical thinking is all about.
The hunt for other reasons to explain the behaviour of a Ceauşescu misses the point: he was not ‘really’ a patriot or ‘at heart’a reformer, though when he proclaimed that he was at any given moment one thing, he was that but at the same time was the opposite.
Although theoretically the benevolent side of the dialectic was as likely to manifest itself as the malevolent, it is the nature of this sort of thinking that Mr Hyde always predominates over Dr Jekyll and lurks behind his actions like a puppeteer.
A lie is not simply as good as the truth: it is better, because unlike the truth, lies are completely malleable and creatures of their maker.
At the same time as Stalin had appeared to fulfil the potential of Lenin's thinking by achieving the subordination of humanity to a single will, the uncertain capacity of the system to eternalize its Great Leader of the moment was also evident.
As people had long joked: the future under communism was always certain, but the past was constantly changing.
Just as Stalin had created a myth of himself which was universally repeated from East Berlin to the Bering Straits, so any successor could rewrite history to suit his convenience.
Stalin had seemed immortal, but within three years of his death Khruschev had begun to demolish his myth.
Seven years later he was removed from his place in Lenin's mausoleum.
Mao's reputation had fared a little better, but even the Great Helmsman had had to endure the indignity of being retrospectively marked by his former protégés: he was allowed 60% correctness, 40% error in his actions.
Other lesser communist leaders, with whom in the privacy of his own thought Ceauşescu perhaps more modestly compared himself, had done even worse.
The Czechoslovak Communist leader, Klement Gottwald, who had died in the same year as Stalin and was embalmed like him and Lenin, suffered the indignity of springing a leak, loosing fluid, and slowly decomposing.
Eventually, as much for hygienic reasons as out of a desire to conform with Moscow's example of de-Stalinization, the  Czechs were forced to give up the battle to keep Gottwald's corpse from going green and bury him instead.
Who remembers him now?
Books, posters, stamps, even statues might all be transitory no matter how many were produced.
Ceauşescu's imagination turned to a project which could not be reversed by his successors, perhaps even by time itself.
The Architect of Socialism
It is also in the interests of a tyrant to make his subjects poor, so that…the people are so occupied with their daily tasks that they have no time for plotting.
As [an]example of such measures, all having the same effect — of keeping subjects perpetually at work and in poverty — we may mention the pyramids of Egypt…
Aristotle
Only the Pentagon is bigger than the Casa Republicii, Ceauşescu's most visible legacy to his people.
The House of the Republic dominates the skyline of Bucharest not so much through its height but its mass.
In cubic terms it is seven times the size of Louis XIV's palace at Versailles.
Buckingham Palace could fit inside the areas set aside for underground car-parking at the rear, where the old national football stadium has been turned into the modern equivalent of the royal stables.
Around it, other concrete dinosaurs lurk.
To the south, across a wasteland which might have become a park, is the House of Science.
If the palace was ‘His’ pet project, then this was to be the home of ‘Her’hobby.
Both buildings, and the rest of the vast complex stood empty, teetering on the brink of completion, when the only purpose of their existence was snuffed out at Christmas 1989.
Pre-war Bucharest was an architectural jewel-box.
In fact, in some ways the title, ‘Paris of the Balkans’, was unjust to the diversity of its buildings.
Despite its boulevards in the  north, the city was never as monotonous as the centre of Paris after Baron Haussmann had really got down to work on it in the 1860s.
When Nicolae Ceauşescu first arrived in the city, Bucharest contained a dazzling array of buildings of all styles: examples of its older Balkan heritage could be found side by side with grandiose business palaces in the style of Central Europe's Griinderjahre of the 1870s, with Art Deco and Cubist designs around the corner.
After the First World War, more pompous buildings worthy of a victor were put up.
Carol II was sympathetic to pseudo-fascist architecture and several of the most brutal pillar-and-concrete buildings in the capital were put up in his reign, though they were smoothly filled by the personnel of the new regime after 1944.
More than anything else he did, it was Nicolae Ceauşescu's decision to demolish much of this splendid city which aroused the concern of public opinion in the West about his regime.
It was one thing to impoverish his people and terrorize them, even to assassinate his opponents abroad.
It was still perfectly possible to remain on the international cocktail circuit.
However, to knock down old buildings was to put himself beyond the pale — not before time perhaps, but hardly for the right reason.
Naturally not all the criticism of the massive demolitions in the 1980s was purely aesthetic.
To be concerned about the fate of historic buildings when thousands of people were being uprooted was not necessarily to pity the plumage and forget the dying bird.
Undoubtedly, the Prince of Wales' unprecedented public denunciation in April 1989 of Ceauşescu's demolitions in Bucharest and his plan to ‘systematize, rural Romania represented genuine revulsion at the human consequences of the Conducator's policies.
Prince Charles's remarks also hit home when they were repeated to Ceauşescu himself.
Ceauşescu's decision to immortalize his rule in stone, or rather concrete and imitation marble, made clear the anachronistic, even archaic nature of his rule.
However, he was not alone: at about the same time Saddam Hussein began his project of rebuilding Babylon on its original site.
This  surpassed Nebuchadnezzar's original in at least one regard — whereas the Babylonian King of Kings thought it necessary to imprint his seal only every third brick used in the giant project, Saddam's name was stamped on each brick laid in the restoration.
Forty years earlier, modern architects and town planners in the West would no doubt have made pilgrimages to the demolitions and building sites in Bucharest and around Romania as they had to Stalin's new Moscow.
Ceauşescu's plans to standardize the living accommodation of Romanians would have been hailed as the epitome of human progress.
He would have been compared favourably with reactionary governments in the West who had barely begun slum clearance.
The connection between modern architecture and tyranny awaits its historian, but it is worth reflecting on the mentality of Le Corbusier and his acolytes before being too harsh on the servile Romanian architects who competed for Ceauşescu's favour so that they could take charge of the vast projects he had in mind.
When the democratic French governments of the inter-war period ignored Le Corbusier's scheme for demolishing most of Paris in favour of his own grandiose plan of urban renewal, the architect turned his thoughts to how much better his fate would have been under an absolute monarch like Louis XIV: ‘Homage to a great town planner.
This despot conceived great projects and realized them…
He was capable of saying ‘We wish it’, or ‘Such is our pleasure’.'
The decision to create a monument to his own glory and that of the system which he had developed, regardless of the costs such an undertaking would involve, was typical of Ceauşescu's arbitrary approach to his subjects.
Rather than let them squander the meagre fruits of their labour as they saw fit, their output had to be confiscated by the state for more long-lasting purposes.
Ceauşescu was fond of repeating, ‘History has kept not what was consumed [by the people], but what was accumulated.’
Left to themselves, the Romanians would have done little to immortalize the ‘Epoch of Light’, but by devoting 30% of the national income to what was  imaginatively described as ‘investment’— mainly in unproductive prestige projects — Ceauşcscu was determined to transform the country into the image of his ideal and leave it irrevocably marked by his rule.
By the time Ceauşescu came to lay the foundation stone of the palace in June 1984, its title had been changed from Casa Poporlui to Casa Republicii (from the ‘House of the People’ to ‘House of the Republic’) just in case, the local jokers remarked, the people got it into their heads to move in as well .
At the stone-laying ceremony, Ceauşescu spoke in almost Hitlerian terms: ‘Today, I have inaugurated the task of building the House of the Republic and the Boulevard of the Victory of Socialism, the grandiose and luminous foundations of this epoch of profound transformations and innovations, of monumental buildings which will persist across the ages.
Hitler had talked about architecture as ‘the word made stone’, the concrete realization of ideology in its most imposing form.
Together with his court architect, Albert Speer, the Führer had devised ‘ruin-theory’ which demanded that the great Nazi buildings should be designed to impress the observer even as ruins after thousands of years.
Even in decay, Hitler's edifices were intended to recall his past might.
Although nobody dared suggest to Ceauşescu that he might be mortal or that the victory of socialism might not be permanent, the new Civic Centre in Bucharest had the air of being constructed as a vast set of archaeological remains, whose scale and purpose would baffle future generations like the lost pyramid-cities of the Guatemalan jungle.
In fact, in August 1988, when the foundations for several more buildings had already been dug (including an opera-house which would dwarf President Mitterrand's concrete folly at the Bastille in Paris), Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu went through a ceremony designed to immortalize their rule into the millennia to come.
The two Comrades put their signatures to a scroll which was then placed in a stainless steel tube and sealed into the concrete foundations of what  was intended to become a new conference complex.
Under a dome with the modest diameter of 120 metres the complex was to contain various meeting halls with seating for from two to twelve thousand people.
The scroll proclaimed for the benefit, and probable puzzlement, of an archaeologist aeons away:
This 19th day of August 1988, in the 2060th year since the making of the centralized and independent Dacian state, the 44th year since the victory of the Romanian people's revolution of social and national liberation, and the 23rd year since the Ninth Congress of the Romanian Communist Party, we have inaugurated the construction works on the Centre of National Councils of Revolutionary Worker Democracy, a new and monumental edifice rounding off the great foundations of this epoch of strong economic, social and cultural blossoming of our socialist homeland.
Modern archaeologists have at least been able to conjecture possible rational motives for the primitive societies to have devoted enormous efforts to building pyramids or stonehenges, such as their use as astronomical or more likely astrological observatories.
What possible reason would scholars of the distant future have been able to deduce from that verbiage to explain the consumption of vast resources on the Civic Centre in Bucharest — except the desire to perpetuate domination even from beyond the grave?
Ceauşescu's favoured style of architecture was 1930s fascist-brutalist with a strange, almost Cecil B. De Mille Biblical-Babylonian admixture.
His frequent visits to North Korea since 1971 had kept him up to date with the progress of the reconstruction of Pyongyang under the Kims, father and son.
Undoubtedly, he was deeply impressed by what they had created on top of the ruins left by the Korean War.
As early as 1971, he had spoken with admiration of the Great Meeting  Hall in Pyonyang with capacity to hold up to 40,000 fervent admirers of the Great Leader at any one audience.
In his last visit to North Korea, Ceauşescu had been able to see the thirty-storey concrete pyramid in the centre of Pyongyang which had been built under the inspiration of the Dear Leader, Kim Jong Il (albeit from an original idea by George Orwell).
Although he found much to admire in the oriental-megalomaniac architecture of Kim's Korea or Mao's China, in his quest for a style suitable for a monumental Bucharest he looked to precedents closer to home.
Undoubtedly, the most important influence on Ceauşescu's architectural and visual imagination was the Stalinist architecture of Moscow which he had had every chance to witness under construction during his stay at the Frunze Military Academy thirty years before.
In the utopian euphoria after the success of the Bolshevik revolution in 1917, many Soviet communists wanted to make a clean sweep of the discredited old order.
Everything which recalled the past of tsarist Russia should be destroyed and replaced by new Soviet forms.
Language was changed, the structure of society altered beyond recognition and of course the architecture of the old regime had to be replaced by one appropriate to the new collectivist order.
The Second World War set back Stalin's hopes of completely rebuilding Moscow and replacing it with a new Soviet city, centrally planned and co-ordinated like the economy.
Even so, by 1941 considerable progress had been made.
The Cathedral of the Assumption on Red Square had been demolished along with other redundant relics of reactionary religion.
The famous metro had been built by the trench method involving the demolition of houses which lay in the path of the tracks.
By the time Ceauşescu first visited the Soviet capital, the new wedding-cake skyscrapers of the University and the Foreign Ministry, along with less outlandish and more uncomfortable blocks of flats, towered over the ancient heart of Muscovy.
Although he did not master the Russian language during his stay at the Frunze Military Academy in the last years of Stalin, thirty  years later Ceauşescu revealed a fine grasp of the vocabulary of Stalinist architecture.
Just as the civic buildings in Moscow expressed the confident power of the Communist regime, so the new housing blocks were designed to conform to the new ideals of social life.
Stalin's protégé, Andrei Zhdanov, who controlled the arts and still more closely the artists and architects of the Soviet Union, had said that architecture alone ‘is able to reflect the grandeur of the period in an objective way.
In a society constructing socialism an architect is not only a building engineer and a street engineer, but also an engineer of human souls .’
The Stalinist town-planner, L. Sobsovich, emphasized that ‘communal life’ was to take priority over personal privacy in Soviet architecture: ‘The idea of the one-family, isolated house, whose charms may be obvious from the petit-bourgeois , individualist point of view, will no longer have the slightest justification in the agglomerations of the socialist type and will consequently no longer be considered…’
Sobsovich concluded with an idealized vision of Stalinist architecture: ‘Most likely the typical habitation…will be an immense apartment building equipped with all amenities, electrified and heated by a central thermo-electric plant, fitted out with elevators, mechanical equipment for maintenance and cleaning,[communal]baths and showers, perhaps even exercise facilities and so on.’
Under Stalin, communal life had other purposes hinted at by Zhdanov's euphemism about ‘engineering human souls,.
People living in the new blocks or sharing overcrowded flats in old buildings throughout the Soviet Union would not find it easy to defy the conformity demanded by the authorities.
Who could express dissenting views openly when neighbours he hardly knew let alone trusted could hear every word in the shared kitchen or through thin partitions passing as walls?
Fifty years later, an anonymous group of Romanian dissidents smuggled a critique of the new dwellings planned in Romania.
They could have been writing under Stalin: ‘Life  in blocks of apartments…means living under the close scrutiny of your neighbours.
It represents a new way of life in which the behaviour and requirements of the collective body are present at every moment.’
They concluded that by taking people out of their own homes, however modest, they were being removed from conditions which they knew and made them feel secure into ‘a new social environment in which priority is given to the collectivity over the individual.’
That collectivity was supervised by the secret police and its resident informers.
It was said that at any social gathering one person would be an informer.
This claim has never been proved and it may have been part of the Securitate's scare tactics.
The decision to transform the capital city of Romania and the housing of the vast majority of the population was taken with political priorities uppermost in mind.
The ideological demand that communists should seek to improve the accommodation of the people was subordinate to the aspiration to house them in such a way as to make it easier to supervise them and mould them as the Party saw fit.
Egalitarianism was an important principle.
In July 1988, Stefan Dactu, one of the Romanian architectural planners, insisted on the uniformity of internal designs for the pre-fabricated blocks in which people were being rehoused throughout the country: ‘The designing of [internal]spaces is in keeping with a unitary legislation.
The living room, the bedrooms, the bathroom, the rooms’ height and other dimensions are therefore the same in a small or a big town .’
When suitably indoctrinated, they would see the benefits of the new housing, and perhaps even come to pity those unfortunates who did not share their style of life — like the party leaders, for instance.
The cost of the mammoth rebuilding of Romania's urban centres, already underway by the end of the 1980s, and the still greater projects announced for the near future, was part of the process of social subordination.
The hardships that Ceauşescu imposed were not only necessary to provide the  funds and material for everything from the House of the People (to which they would be denied access) to canals without traffic and power-stations without fuel, but also formed part of the folk-wisdom of tyrants going back much further in history than Ceauşescu's own model, Stalin.
(Stalin drew from archaic models which emphasized the pyramidal tomb [Lenin's]as the centre of a tribal cult based on forced labour punctuated by religious ceremonies [May Day; 7 November].)
What Aristotle had seen as the vice of the pharaohs, Cardinal Richelieu raised to a maxim of policy for Louis XIII, whom he advised ‘all politicians agree that when the people are too comfortable, it is impossible to keep them within the bounds of their duty…
They must be compared with mules, which, being used to their burdens, are spoiled more by rest than labour.’
Ceauşescu knew that revolutions do not arise from despair but hope.
Keeping the ‘common people’ of Romania down by always increasing the demands put upon them and diminishing their rewards was good policy as well as economically necessary if his ever-more ambitious plans were to be accomplished.
An act of God is usually held to have been the spark which ignited Ceauşescu's ambitions as a town-planner and architect of communism and spurred him to act on them.
On 4 March 1977, Bucharest was shaken by a severe earthquake.
At least 1,500 people died as a result.
Ceauşescu was hunting in Nigeria at the time and insisted on playing down the impact of the earthquake even before he returned.
Even though the authorities were unwilling to acknowledge the extent of the disaster, some Western aid was accepted.
As is often the case, much of the ‘aid, was more or less off-loaded to clear warehouses in the donor country with little thought of its use to the victims of catastrophe.
The United States sent millions of cigarettes.
According to local legend, this is how Kent cigarettes rather than any other brand became the currency of the black market in Romania.
Soon afterwards every valuable item or service — by definition in short supply in Romania — was available at a price calculated in packets or  cartons of Kent.
The more valuable emergency aid was siphoned off by foreign ministry officials for their own use or re-sale (just as many of the outpourings of Western sympathy for the orphans and destitute of Ceauşescu's Romania were purloined by the same fat-cats in the ministries early in 1990 after the fall of their master).
The worst result of the earthquake was that its consequences gave an excuse to the town-planners, not least the great urban visionary himself, to undertake grandiose schemes of urban renewal.
At the end of the 1970s, Ceauşescu was still far from set on any particular scheme.
As in other matters, he showed that typical combination of simultaneous indecision and dogmatic self-assertion in his approach to what became the ‘Civic Centre’ of Bucharest.
Different architects and teams of planners produced drawings and even models in the hope of catching his eye and being rewarded with the most prestigious project of their careers.
It was even rumoured that Western architects were approached, but that must have been at a subordinate level since early on one clear idea took hold of Ceauşescu's mind: the whole project, from design through the workforce to the materials used, must come from Romania itself.
The final scheme would be a tribute to the vision of ‘the greatest son of the Romanian people’ rendered by their skill and hands and made from the fruits of their native soil.
Town-planning is in fact a misnomer when applied to Ceauşescu's schemes for Bucharest.
Despite their evident megalomania, no coherent vision informed them.
At first, the plan was quite modest and not even crudely geometric, as it was later to become.
The proposed government centre (not yet a palace) was not situated at the end of converging boulevards, but occupied an already partially derelict and vacant site.
The ultimate scheme, which emphasized the simplicity of converging lines on a central pivot, symbolizing state power, was of course much More attractive to the head of state.
He could sit in his palace like the sun at the nodal point of an array of beams of light.
The great boulevards led  to him from all directions, bringing the homage of a loyal and overawed population — who could assemble in the oval-shaped square thoughtfully provided for a quarter of a million of them.
But such architectural perfection of an ideological imperative was to come later.
Work on planning the Civic Centre began in a haphazard way.
Even before the earthquake of 1977 had provided the opportunity and excuse for clearance, various Romanian architects and planners but also potential patrons, from Carol II onwards, had looked on the so-called burnt-palace site as a suitable location for redevelopment.
A former royal palace, burnt down in the eighteenth century, it was a place with historic connections but was also impressive: it was the nearest Bucharest had to a hill.
At the rear of the area was the Romanian national football stadium, now only one of several large arenas for the sport in the capital.
Various proposals were debated for the Centre: a group of buildings to house different state and party functions, or just one big one.
But the hill-top site was to be the limit of the project.
Then someone pointed out the inadequate access to the site through the maze of streets.
The security aspect was obviously serious: how could the Comrade's convoy of cars approach the planned government buildings at its usual high speed, if it had to turn sharp corners?
The risks to his person were already great simply coming down the nearly straight avenues from the Palaţul Primaverii to the Central Committee building, but the imaginary dangers threatening him in the area to the west of the hill were too great to be contemplated.
Naturally, a new approach road to the Civic Centre was required.
The planners tried to devise one which would do the least damage to the existing street pattern.
At first, Ceauşescu seemed to accept the solution but still needed to be convinced of the details of the route.
Since he was not very good at visualizing maps or plans, it was decided that the Comrade should go to the top of the Unirii department store, the tallest building in the area, about a kilometre east of the proposed site of the Civic Centre.
From there he  could see the route of the proposed avenue.
The planners put red and white markers on the house-tops to indicate where it would go.
There was a very obvious kink where the avenue made a bend to avoid some particularly valuable eighteenth-century houses.
Ceauşescu was not satisfied.
His security could still be threatened at the one point left vulnerable.
Perhaps he also had an inkling of an altogether more thorough-going solution.
In any case, one was soon proposed.
The critics and defeated rivals of Anca Petrescu in the competition for the Comrade's patronage insist that it was her idea to resolve the question of the approach road to the Civic Centre by the most dramatic and destructive means.
Until 1981 she was a virtually unknown architect, hardly more than a student.
When Ceauşescu had organized a display of different plans and models for the proposed Civic Centre at Neptune, his Black Sea retreat, she had decided to participate.
Unlike the other more senior competitors for the approval of the leader, she did not treat him as a fellow professional or even a well-informed client.
Instinctively, she understood that Ceauşescu would not want a standard architect's model made from cheap materials with only general hints at the building's style and decoration.
Spending her own money lavishly, she employed jewellers and fine craftsmen to build a doll's house, magnificently decorated and well-displayed, and took it down to Neptune with her.
At first neither Ceauşescu's guards and officials nor the older professional participants in the display wanted to let the young woman take part, but she did nothing to banish any assumption that her surname indicated a relationship with the First Lady.
Wisely, if not gracefully, the opposition to Anca Petrescu's taking part in the display of models died away.
As in a fairy-story, when the great man entered the room where the models were displayed, his eyes fell immediately on the glittering and finely crafted work of the youngest and least known of the competitors.
How the more distinguished men must have gnashed their teeth at the trivial  basis upon which great decisions are made — but how delighted they must be today not to be branded with the title of court architect!
Anca Petrescu's model was of a palace which would stand at the heart of a new city.
Instead of the relatively modest array of administrative buildings originally conceived for the Civic Centre, she had the imagination to propose a grandiose solution fit to commemorate the rule of Nicolae Ceauşescu.
Naturally, a great palace required a suitable environment.
Everything around it, from the trees and lawns to other buildings and streets leading to it, had to contribute to its glory.
It was obvious that not just a few houses, but whole districts including churches, monasteries, and other monuments to past glories would have to be swept aside to allow for the fill appreciation of the splendour of the glorious new order.
A straight, imposing avenue was required to link the palace with the north-south axis of roads which had been Bucharest's traditional main line of communication.
This simple solution to the problem of access had the merit of combining a secure approach with a clear vista of the proposed ‘House of the People’.
Rather like Mussolini's ‘improvement, of the approach to Saint Peter's in the 1930s, the Conducator wanted the full glory of the building to be evident from a distance.
The political pilgrim should not stumble through backstreets and alleys with only glimpses of his goal, then suddenly at the last moment find all revealed; rather he should approach it in awe, aware of its enormous size from a great distance.
This ‘Boulevard of the Victory of Socialism’ was planned to be wider than the Champs-Elysées by precisely one metre, as Ceauşescu's propagandists constantly reiterated with childlike pride.
As time passed it was steadily lengthened towards the eastern horizon, requiring the demolition of house, shops, churches, even workshops in its path.
To the town-planners it was obvious that the new boulevard served no purpose.
It led nowhere, but cut across many normal routes of communication within the city.
When  construction, or rather demolition began, thousands of people had to wend their way through the mud and debris to get from their homes in the south of the city to their work in the north or to the shops and market.
Nobody went east to west along the axis of the new boulevard.
Of course, the more that old buildings were demolished along the east-west line, the fewer people were left to make use of it.
The project began to generate a momentum of demolition of its own.
If the existing layout of the city contradicted the logic of the new centre, then the rest of the city would have to be changed to bring it into conformity.
Suddenly, other districts of the city began to experience the arrival of the bulldozers.
It was not easy to relate them to any obvious scheme.
Soon it became apparent that they were part of a general but secret plan for the whole city — which was being destroyed piecemeal.
Early on the authorities responsible for displacing the people in the Uranus area realized that if the inhabitants of a particular street got warning of the intention to do away with their homes they might try to organize protests or even resistance.
Increasingly, surprise was the weapon of the destroyers.
By 1988, people were often given only six hours' notice — sometimes less — of the imminence of their removal to new homes and the destruction of their old ones.
Apart from any sentimental reasons, the short-notice drove many to despair.
Cases of suicide are well-documented, and there was at least one instance when several people barricaded themselves into a flat and refused to leave.
When efforts to persuade them to go proved fruitless, the building began to be demolished around their heads.
Naturally, transport for the evacuation was inadequate for the needs of the displaced people.
How could people pack and prepare a lifetime's possessions, even with six days' notice?
They went to ill-prepared, unfinished blocks, often without furniture or bedding.
More than forty thousand people were moved from the old city centre to make way for the new buildings, but even though stereotyped blocks of flats were put up around the  site of the palace and were in many cases completed by the spring of 1988, they remained empty until after the revolution.
It was rumoured that the Ceauşescu pair were personally scrutinizing the Securitate files on those considered possibly worthy to live within sight of their own residence.
In fact, this was quite normal procedure by now in Romania, since they also determined the holiday plans of their senior colleagues, down to the destination, length of stay as well as with whom they spent their vacation.
Naturally, no one could move into any of the new flats until the presidential apartments in the palace were fit for the top comrades, so the Boulevard of the Victory of Socialism took on a ghostly lifeless quality with its empty layer of flats and its vacant shops on the ground floor.
Delays in the determination of the final form and decoration of the palace constantly put back the date for the grand house-warming party.
Ceauşescu's interference with features of the design wore down the patience of the architects and their staff.
His obsessive need to interfere and assert his taste added enormously to the cost.
Even Elena's advice could be unwelcome when it interfered with his contemplation of the project.
One of the few occasions for sharp words between them, in public at any rate, occurred when Elena disagreed about internal decorations with him.
Perhaps he had a sense that he would not survive its completion.
Tentatively, 23 August 1990 was marked down as the official day of opening, when Ceauşescu would address a quarter of a million loyal subjects from the balcony on the second floor.
Unable to visualize plans or even to judge the success of a design from a scale model, Ceauşescu demanded larger and larger mock-ups.
In the mid-1980s, architects and interior designers became accustomed to building models or preparing illustrations on a scale of 1:1.
Warehouses were used to accommodate full-scale models of rooms.
Ceauşescu would climb inside to study the details.
Every visit required further changes.
The most extraordinary aspect of this unrelenting  interference was that Ceauşescu obviously had no clear picture of what he wanted in his mind.
The final shape of the building had not been determined before the project got under way.
Even the height of it had to be lowered by two storeys when Ceauşescu decided thirteen storeys would be quite enough (unlike Elena he was not superstitious), and no one pointed out that they were already on the fifteenth floor.
But the most grotesque moment came when the frame of the building was surmounted by a wooden dome.
Ceauşescu viewed this proposed conclusion from all angles, even went inside the palace, when some of the frustrated architects and workers hoped that their flimsy mock-up might collapse.
The dome was rejected.
Too religious, perhaps?
No explanation was given, least of all to the thousands of workers living in converted railway wagons around the site.
Instead finally, by the spring of 1989, the flat-topped, tiered approach was adopted.
The building was 84 metres high, though because it was situated on a hill, with five storeys below ground, it looks shorter than it is.
It seems squat because it covers more than 265,000 square metres.
The whole vast edifice was surmounted by the tallest, and fattest, flag-pole in the country, carrying the largest tricolour in the world.
The weight of the material of the flag, which was thirty metres long and sixteen wide, threatened to wreck the pole despite its reinforcements.
Several revisions of its design were required.
The exterior decorations on the synthetic white-stone face underwent repeated changes.
Columns were raised, shortened, and narrowed.
Sometimes one set of sculptors would be finishing an already countermanded set before the news of yet more changes reached them.
The desire to teach the experts a lesson took on manic proportions.
Designers quickly learnt that nothing could be satisfactory on first viewing.
No amount of excessive decoration was sufficient to satisfy Ceauşescu's taste.
One of the interior decorators was an admirer of Salvador Dali and found to his secret delight that he could indulge his flights of fancy and still fail to meet the  needs of Ceauşescu's imagination.
If he surpassed himself with a full-scale mock-up of the ceiling for the Salla Romana with a snake-pit of interwoven flowers and exuberant garlands, he could be sure that a cursory glance by Ceauşescu would be followed by the demand, ‘More flowers, more gold leaf.’
Good taste to the General-Secretary was a matter of going further than any artist dreamed, and then when the mere craftsman of his vision had caught up with it, going further still.
Only once was the Conducator's arbitrary revision of a design previously imposed by him challenged.
Running down the centre of the Boulevard of the Victory of Socialism, there were rows of ornate street lights.
Their design had been changed several times before they were finally erected.
On the day the lights were at last put up, Ceauşescu appeared and showed his displeasure with the design.
The trunk of the lights should have been marginally taller, the spread of their branches carrying the individual bulbs broader.
They were to be taken down and appropriate changes made.
Suddenly, the unthinkable happened: the engineer in charge of putting up the lights, spoke up.
In his view, the lights and their trunks were just right.
There was silence as the General-Secretary's entourage and the assembled workers awaited an explosion.
Instead, after a pause, and looking at the man quizzically, Ceauşescu remarked, ‘Have it your way then’, and walked off.
Not all the ceaseless changes to designs were due to Ceauşescu's indecision and interference on aesthetic grounds.
The air-conditioning of the Palace was designed and installed as a single system.
At the time, Ceauşescu was preoccupied with matters of taste rather than safety.
Too late, someone in the security department which oversaw all aspects of the planning and construction realized the possibly fatal consequences of the integrated design of the air-conditioning system.
The problem was that it was theoretically possible for someone to introduce poison gas into a remote and perhaps unguarded part of the system and for the noxious fumes to be carried  through to the General-Secretary's apartments or office.
Worse still, a determined, if diminutive, assassin might find his way through the system in order to attack the Conducator .
When one of the security men raised the subject tentatively, Ceauşescu grasped the point at once.
Whenever it came to matters of personal security, suggestions for improving it were welcome from any quarter.
The air-conditioning ducts serving his quarters and bureaux as well as the politburo's chamber and other appropriate parts of the building were ripped out in a most difficult, complicated exercise.
An entirely new and separate system, proof against poison and midget assassins, was laboriously constructed inside the massive building.
Since it was designed to be earthquake proof and to resist cannon fire, the installation of the revised air-conditioning system was a remarkable feat as well as a test of the building.
Deep-down below ground level was an elaborate series of lead-lined bunkers to house the clan in event of nuclear war, or even perhaps an accident at the Cernavoda nuclear plant eighty miles away.
There were also tunnels with an electric light-railway to whisk the leadership away in the event of danger even here deep below the ground.
The politburo meeting room was connected to the bunker by a direct lift hidden behind the panelling.
These sudden changes of plan caused great damage to parts of the building which were completed.
Some of the marble floors in the great halls cracked under the weight of machinery moved over them after they had been prematurely laid down.
Of course, if the building had been finished, many of these flaws would have been obscured by carpets.
Some of these were intended to cover such large areas (150 metres by 60) that they had to be woven in situ , since they would have been too long and far too heavy to transport to the building, and certainly could not have been manoeuvred through its maze of passages.
It was a matter of great personal pride to Ceauşescu that every item in the palace and every part of it should be made out of Romanian products only.
For years, marble was refused  to people wanting it for tombs to provide a supply for the Moloch in Bucharest.
The suppliers lost count of the ancient oaks, not to mention the chestnut and cherry trees, cut down to provide panelling for the two grand offices reserved for the couple, but also for hundreds of function rooms and apparatchiks' offices.
The enormous table around which the politburo was supposed to meet would have required the members to shout at each other across oak as old as their collective age.
It was often rumoured that Ceauşescu intended the palace to be not only his home and the centre of his power, but also his mausoleum.
After all, from Lenin to Mao and Ho Chi Minh, communist leaders have sought to preserve their bodies in the hope that scientific progress would be able to revivify their mortal remains.
(This was the purpose of the embalming of Lenin's corpse and the removal of his organs for research.)
In fact, Ceauşescu was not so macabre as to plan to live in his own tomb.
But his choice of location for his last resting place was not out of character.
On the other side of the Strada Stirbei Voda in the west of central Bucharest which has been converted from a charming street into a new boulevard, almost opposite the old and soon to be redundant opera-house, lies the huge shell of the new National Museum of Romanian History.
The existing museums had all been converted into celebrations of the life and achievements of Nicolae Ceauşescu so what could be more natural than that the Conducator's body should rest in the museum as the culminating exhibit of Romanian national history.
After all, Napoleon rests in state under the dome of Les Invalides.
Why should not the greatest Romanian in history imitate him?
Systematization
Point 9.
Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries;…abolition of the distinction between town and country.
Manifesto of the Communist Party
The cost of the Civic Centre project in Bucharest was enormous but it was not the fundamental cause of the poverty of Romania.
The Casa Republicii was the symbol of Ceauşescu's indifference to the well-being of the current generation of Romanians as much as Versailles was the embodiment of Louis XIV's quest for glory regardless of the sufferings of his own people.
The palace complex was just part of the Conducator's plans to transform Romania as a whole.
When Albert Speer reflected on the enormous scale of Hitler's architectural ambitions, it dawned upon him that Germany alone could never supply the raw materials for the monuments and new cities planned by the Führer.
Hitler's architectural schemes required war to provide the booty and raw materials to fund them, and slave-labour to construct them.
Ceauşescu could not wage war against foreign enemies — his neighbours after all were his fraternal allies — so he could only provide means for his ambitious plans by waging economic war against his own people.
Just as the court at Versailles came to embody all that was hateful to the French people in 1789, the construction of  the Casa Republicii excited popular resentment against the Ceauşescu clan inside Romania.
However, the cost of the palace was almost negligible compared with the funds ‘invested’ in arbitrary economic projects and the rebuilding of all the major cities in Romania, and with what Ceauşescu intended to spend on ‘rural systematization’(which involved halving of the number of villages in Romania and constructing 558 ‘agro-industrial’complexes).
No accounts have ever been published — probably none were kept — but figures of around twenty billion lei are bandied about in Bucharest.
Yet so much money and effort was poured down so many drains in the 1980s, that the billions of lei and millions of man-hours spent on the Civic Centre can seem almost modest by comparison with the overall waste.
If Stalin's architectural taste was the chief influence on the new buildings going up all over Bucharest, Ceauşescu's still more ambitious scheme to ‘systematize’ the rural life of Romania, announced in March 1988, owed more to Stalin's successor, Nikita Khruschev, and even to Karl Marx himself.
The Communist Manifesto published in 1848 had called for communists to make the ‘abolition of the distinction between town and country’ one of their chief aims.
Marx had welcomed the industrialization and urbanization which was transforming traditionally agricultural Europe in his lifetime.
Marx despised the peasantry and even found words of praise for the bourgeoisie's destruction of the ancient way of life in the West: ‘The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns.
It has created enormous cities…and has thus rescued a considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural life.’
Marx looked confidently forward to a world in which the Industrial Revolution had triumphed completely, bringing in its train a thorough mechanization of life and the concentration of the population in cities.
Marx's vision was of a world re-made to suit man; he demanded the ‘subjection of nature's forces to man, machinery,[the]application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalization of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground…’
In Romania by the 1980s, this nineteenth-century vision of the abolition of any restraints on man's exploitation of nature and plundering of the environment was put into practice.
The population found itself thrust back even further in time in its working and living conditions.
Of course, when communist leaders like Trotsky talked about how, after the revolution, the communist state would move the features of the landscape around like so much furniture in a room, they still stood only on the threshold of the environmental disasters which have ensued throughout the communist world as dams have been built, rivers redirected, forests cut down, and refuse dumped with abandon to meet the requirements of the latest Five Year Plan.
The most ambitious of these schemes was proclaimed in 1949 under the modest title ‘The Stalin Plan for the Transformation of Nature’.
Its chief legacy has been the drying out of the Aral Sea and the desertification of much of Soviet Central Asia.
In North Korea by 1946, Kim II Sung had taken ‘the first step in the materialization of the far-reaching plan of remaking the nature of the country’.
Bombing by the USA during the Korean War saved a lot of indigenous demolition work.
(As his dreams of conquest crashed, Hitler consoled himself with the thought that Allied bombing was only destroying what he had intended to demolish anyway, to make place for his own buildings.)
Like Marx, the first generation of communists after 1917 still believed that this process of relentless industrialization would speed the emergence of a society without want or privilege, based on the maxim, ‘From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.’
However, for more than seventy years in the Soviet Union, the process of industrialization and environmental degradation went on unchecked.
Marx had expected the communists to come to power in the most developed industrial societies of the West, where there would already be considerable accumulated  wealth, scientific knowledge, and industrial capital to provide well-being for all.
Instead Russia and then other largely agrarian countries fell under the sway of his ideas.
Lenin and then Stalin turned Marx on his head by trying to use their political power to force through the creation of a modern industrial society as quickly as possible.
Romania in 1944 was typical of the sort of partially industrialized society which became Communist and then suffered exaggerated, one-sided industrial development as a result.
Ceauşescu had been part of the leadership under Dej which took the decision to press ahead with devoting enormous resources to industrializing Romania against Khruschev's wishes.
By the early 1960s, Khruschev wanted a division of labour between the members of Comecon.
Each state in the Soviet equivalent of the EEC would specialize in producing certain things for the general good.
Romania was allocated the unspectacular and, from the traditional Marxist point of view, demeaning role of agricultural supplier to its more urban and industrial partners.
Dej and his colleagues did not want to remain the poor peasant cousins of the other Communist states which were going off along the high road to communism.
After all, Khruschev had claimed in 1962 that the present generation in the Soviet Union would live in full communism.
By the end of the 1980s, it was confidently expected that people in the Soviet Union would enjoy a super-abundance of goods and the leisure time to appreciate them.
The Romanian leaders wanted to share in that utopia as well to prove their independence.
By the late 1980s, the ‘golden dream’ had lost its appeal to almost everyone in the ‘Socialist Commonwealth’except the few elderly leaders from the generation which had entered the Communist Party at the height of Stalin's predominance.
The comrades Honecker, Zhivkov, and above all, Ceauşescu himself, still lived in a mental world shaped by both Stalin's dreams and his cynical realism.
Only Ceauşescu had the energy left to push on even in his seventies in the hope of fulfilling the dream.
In the spring of 1988, the apparently moribund plan for rural  systematization which had been heralded as far back as 1968 was suddenly taken up again.
Far from being dead, the scheme had been hibernating.
Now, Ceauşescu announced, the time was ‘ripe’ to complete the process of urbanization and industrialization already under way.
What was needed was ‘to radically wipe out the major differences between towns and villages’ in order ‘to more powerfully homogenize our socialist society, to create a single worker people’.
Addressing the Central Committee in April 1988, the Comrade explained how this ‘homogenization’ was to be achieved: ‘It is necessary to cut down to almost half the number of villages, establishing those that are to remain and their size; all new buildings shall have to be erected only in these localities and we shall have to put other village areas to other purposes.’
The few areas which had escaped collectivization because they seemed too poor were now to be brought into line.
What Ceauşescu proposed was the ‘expansion of the socialist farming system to encompass all agriculture…’
Thus, he would ‘achieve…the co-operation [as it was called]of the whole peasantry’ in the system of ‘agro-industrial councils’.
Even shepherds, who grazed animals on what was often already common land, were to be included in the new agro-industrial ‘co-operatives’—‘I stress it again.’
The rationale behind the scheme was that by ‘liberating’ land for agricultural purposes through the relocation of the population into sensibly ordered accommodation, instead of their existing traditional homes, more surface would be available to grow crops or to graze animals.
The idea that an economic imperative justified the large-scale demolition of people's homes was not unknown elsewhere in Eastern Europe (or the West).
Erich Honecker, for instance, continued demolishing villages in East Germany until the end, but only in the relatively rational quest to get at the dirty sulphuric brown coal underneath them to provide inefficient and polluting fuel for his tottering smoke-stack industries.
The East Germans were not set on abolishing the distinction between town and country, just perhaps on smothering it in a pall of  acidic smoke and rain.
In the case of Romania, people suspected that behind the arguments about economies of scale and equalized standards of living lay more sinister purposes.
Ceauşescu talked about ‘raising’ the rural population's quality of life to that of the towns, but this was a perverse promise.
Any Romanian had learnt instinctively to expect the opposite of what the Party assured them the future had to offer.
By the late 1980s, the attractions of city life were not what they had once been for the peasants.
Food shortages and the lack of heating or lighting in towns, and the time-consuming difficulties of finding ways round them for city-dwellers, meant that for the first time in a century, if not longer, life in the country was not to be despised.
Despite all the restrictions put on private food production and the penalties for hoarding or stealing state or co-operative products, the peasants were markedly better fed than most people in towns.
The State tried to expropriate the produce even of peasants, gardens, but native cunning — bargaining with, and even bribing, officials of dubious enthusiasm for the Party line — often meant that rural households could escape from the worst deprivations of the towns.
The peasants might have even less electricity than the town-dwellers, but they could collect wood for fuel and could find foodstuffs available only on the black market in the urban centres.
Promises of more schools and hospitals were regarded sceptically by peasants whom bitter experience had taught that talk of better times always meant worse.
Most of all, they guessed the implications of replacing their cottages with flats in housing-blocks.
The privacy and identity that they possessed by living in family homes separated from other families, even when members of co-operatives, would be broken down under the new arrangements.
They would be drawn into the system which mulcted them and bullied them more completely than ever.
In fact, they would finally be reduced to the level of docile beasts of burden.
Under the eyes and ears of strangers, they would have to work for others rather than themselves.
That ideological and political imperatives underlay the plan of systematization cannot be doubted.
By concentrating people in new agro-industrial centres or in particular parts of old villages, the distance peasants would have to travel to their work in the fields would be lengthened.
At precisely the time that the Party leadership was extolling the horse as a modern and fuel-saving means of transport, it was also planning to increase the journey-times of the rural population and make them more dependent on motor transport — or perhaps to shorten the time they had left to themselves, to sleep, think and so on.
‘Systematization’ opened up the prospect of complete subordination to the State, the Party or, to be precise, to Ceauşescu.
Although ‘systematization’ struck many of its critics in the West in 1988–89 as an insane novelty, in fact its roots went back a long way.
Not only did it have the broad ideological stamp of approval from Marx and Engels themselves, but the preparation for it within Romania had started already in the late 1960s.
Indeed, the process was implicit in the ambitious plans to industrialize the country already drawn up under Dej.
Even Ceauşescu's critics inside the Communist Party revealed how strong a hold over them the anti-agricultural ideology of Marxism possessed.
In November 1987, Silviu Brucan compared Ceauşescu's rule unfavourably with the 1960s when ‘the Party could successfully control the mass of the workers because…a turn for the better occurred in the standard of living in almost three million peasants who joined the urban industrial workforce.’
Brucan added that ‘There was plenty of food, and there was no comparison with the ‘idiocy of rural life’ which they had left behind.’
Brucan's reference to the benefits of abandoning the ‘idiocy of rural life’ was the typical presumption of a Marxist intellectual that he knew what was best for the benighted peasant.
The shoddy tower-blocks and monotonous housing estates into which the ex-peasants were already being herded twenty-five years ago were in fact the first stage of  systematically transforming life in the country.
In the initial phases, the distorting effects of the processes of collectivization, planned industrialization and urbanization were not yet completely catastrophic for the normal functioning of life, but there was already a steady degeneration in the quality and quantity of food supplies.
In August 1989, Ceauşescu told his interviewers in Newsweek in reply to a question about ‘systematization’: ‘We are almost close to completing the modernization of the cities and to solving the housing problem.
practically eighty per cent of the town population lives in new houses [i.e. blocks].
Anyone can see the construction in all Romanian towns.’
Most Romanians knew how much more demolition than construction was really going on.
Strange to say in all Communist countries, tower-blocks were always being put up but their development never seemed to diminish the housing shortage.
Romania was not unique in cramming its citizens into overcrowded tenements which would have attracted the indignation of Dickens, but the process of urban deprivation was pushed much further because by the 1980s, the shortages of food, fuel and almost every kind of consumer good were worse even than in provincial Russia or small-town Poland.
By the outbreak of the revolution in December 1989, only about seventy villages had been directly affected by rural systematization.
The congenital apathetic inefficiency bred by the regime as the best way of keeping people down had also delayed the demolition process.
Only around Bucharest itself, where veteran drivers of bulldozers operated occasionally under the eye of the Conducator himself, was much done.
The large village of Otopeni next to the international airport was half-demolished before the collapse of the regime, as were several hamlets nearby.
The procedure was quite simple: the inhabitants of any given building were informed of its imminent demise, sometimes by officials, sometimes by the arrival of earth-moving equipment which dug holes next to the cottages large enough to accommodate the rubble after the individual cottages had been bulldozed into them.
The topsoil  could then be pushed back across the site and to all appearances undisturbed agricultural land was left.
No evidence of a family home should remain.
In the country of Giurgiu, to the south of the capital, Ceauşescu himself supervised the first demolitions at the end of July 1988.
I remember watching the television report showing him standing over a map in the local Party headquarters, sweeping his hand across it presumably indicating which areas were to disappear from the face of the earth.
The local party loyalists were standing in a line on the other side of the map-table, glumly applauding in the prescribed manner.
Even the Romanian press admitted that progress was not universally welcomed when it meant uprooting oneself and family from the home which had sheltered generations, particularly not when it meant moving into a block-house.
By the early 1980s, Ceauşescu recognized the debilitating effects of under-investment in an over-collectivized agriculture combined with rural depopulation due to exaggerating industrialization.
He drew the logical conclusion: in order to bring in the harvest, school children, students, and even soldiers should be sent into the fields to collect the fruits of the earth regardless of their lack of agricultural training ‘as was customary before’!
In practice, many school children had already been long integrated into industrial production: the windscreen wipers or the ubiquitous Dacia 1300, for instance, were often assembled by fifteen-year-olds in Transylvanian Sibiu.
Despite his frequent boasts about the progress made under his rule, Ceauşescu was turning Romania into a steadily ‘under-developing nation’(to use Alec Douglas-Home's felicitous phrase) and taking it backwards.
Increasingly he resorted to the crudest measurements of progress and methods of achieving it.
A Czech cartoon managed to appear in the years of ‘Normalization’ with a caption which summed up this perverse process: ‘Thanks to the continuous development of socialism, we became a developing country.’
The steady degradation of the Romanian standard of living to meet the burden of rapid debt repayment in the 1980s and the decision to remodel rural life according to a model abandoned by then even in the Soviet Union and China may have been primarily Nicolae Ceauşescu's work.
Elena, however, added her own peculiar contribution.
Despite being the ostensible representative of women's interests in the Party leadership, it was under her auspices that ordinary Romanian women suffered the worst effects of the Communist regime's insatiable intrusiveness.
Not only women, but their children paid a heavy price for Elena's concern for them.
Elena's specific role in the nightmarish final decade of the couple's rule in Romania was to flatter the Comrade's love of statistics for their own sake in the most personal and private area of life: childbirth.
Just as the quantities of steel produced or wheat harvested had to grow constantly, so too the population of Romania had to be encouraged to reach a size appropriate to the greatness of its rulers.
Perhaps had the Ceauşescus ruled over a larger state their megalomania might have been more comfortably contained, but trapped inside little Romania it began to consume the whole nation and to penetrate into every area of life, even its most intimate secrets.
On the other hand, neither Stalin nor Mao were moderated by the size of their countries.
Ceauşescu was determined to boost the population from around twenty million to thirty by the end of the century.
He was ambitious to nationalize procreation like everything else.
Official propaganda proclaimed that ‘population growth is no longer a spontaneous phenomenon in Romania.’
Ceauşescu himself insisted that a pregnant woman was ‘everybody's concern’ because family life was a ‘socialized private problem’.
Naturally, therefore, Ceauşescu insisted that a large family was a sign of loyalty to the regime: ‘a house with many children is proof of a good citizen's concern for the nation's future.’
One of the first measures of all communist regimes had been to legalize abortion.
In fact, because of the inadequacy  of their quality control in production of condoms, and their inability to produce a contraceptive pill, abortion soon became the only normal form of birth-control.
From the coming into dominance or Ceauşescu in the later 1960s onwards, the abortion law in Romania became increasingly restrictive.
However, in practice not even the Securitate could prevent pregnant women from preferring to resort to illegal abortions rather than bring children into the ‘Epoch of Light’.
The official statistics revealed that even legal abortions were outstripping live births in the 1980s.
For cartons of Kent cigarettes and a few videos, it was always possible to circumvent the regulations limiting abortion to the victims of rape or incest, or life-threatening complications.
Even the securist in the maternity ward probably lived such a squalid and impoverished life that his price for turning a blind eye to abortion was not very high.
As chairperson of the National Women's Council and of the co-ordinating scientific bodies, Elena Ceauşescu was the dominant organizer of the regime's pro-natalist policies.
Despite having borne only three (possibly two) children, Elena was the promoter of the pressure to breed on women whether married or not.
In the late 1960s, Ceauşescu himself had called for a strengthening of the traditional family, but when that failed to have the desired effect of boosting the birth-rate, the regime reversed its direction from promoting old-fashioned morality as a stimulus to conception.
Just as in Nazi Germany, ideologues like Himmler had tried to encourage unmarried motherhood by castigating old-fashioned, religious prejudices against illegitimacy, so in Romania in the 1980s.
Elena's journalists promoted the idea that bastardy should no longer be a matter of shame.
Their aim of course was not to improve the standing of unmarried mothers or to make their children happier, just to increase their numbers.
Reinforcing the propaganda were the demographic control units which toured factories and other workplaces carrying out gynaecological examinations on all women from sixteen to forty-five.
As ever, those with bargaining  power could evade the prying into their private lives.
It was those at the bottom of the social pile, without contacts or Western goods to deal with, who had to submit to the ordeal.
Today everyone is familiar with the pictures of the orphans produced by this population drive.
Pathetic figures housed in orphanages administered by the Ministry of Public Works (like the drains).
The unsanitary condition of almost every orphanage or home for the disabled or mental asylum is striking testimony to the distorted priorities of the regime.
There is no evidence that the Ministry of Works spent more on the public sewers than on the helpless, but they can scarcely have expended less money or effort on them.
If the rumour is true that Ceauşescu recruited his future guards and secret policemen from among these abandoned souls, then their failure to save him in the crisis of his regime is hardly surprising.
The irrationality of forcing undernourished women to bear children ought to have been obvious without the additional disincentives which the regime's economic and social policies created.
Ceauşescu's obsession with numbers ought to have been satisfied by the overmanning which already existed in Romanian industry which could not really provide productive employment for the existing population.
At the beginning of Ceauşescu's last decade in power, the average Romanian industrial enterprise was already employing 1,480 people.
That was twice as many workers as even the average Soviet factory employed and ten times as many as its West German equivalent.
Many of the young people who came onto the streets of Bucharest on 21 December 1989, to protest against the Father of the Nation faced a bleak future of under-employment in a poorly planned industry.
The object of all communist regimes, in theory at any rate, was to facilitate the transformation of humankind from its distorted and unhappy capitalist condition into a new type of person, ‘the New Man’.
Ceauşescu insisted that ‘the moulding of the new man’ was the central purpose of the  Communist party's rule.
Although he talked about how ‘we, as communists, essentially intend to work in harmony with nature’, he made it clear that this meant ‘understanding and controlling the laws of nature…to place them at man's service’.
This would enable the regime to fulfil its greatest ambition: ‘Now we want to improve nature's best creation — man.’
This was, needless to add, easier said than done.
Ceauşescu was aware that the ‘moulding of the new man, the human prototype of communism, cannot be accomplished within one, or several, five year periods’.
It was in fact going to be a ‘complex’ process, since it would require ‘permanent, steady and patient activity to delete from people's minds the remains of the past, the obsolete conceptions, mentalities and customs, and to cultivate a new attitude towards work, life and society.’
One such obsolete mentality was religion, which scientists sponsored by Elena Ceauşescu had exposed as a delusion caused by neurological disorders, and which could be cured by simple surgical interventions into the brains of believers.
Ceauşescu admitted at the beginning of the 1980s that it was easier to change the economy and society than people themselves: ‘As you can see, we have had an easy time constructing factories.
But it is incumbent on us to transform man at the same rate so that he will be capable of mastering new techniques and new ways of thinking.’
The role of propaganda and indoctrination was essential to reinforce the concrete pressures on Romanians to change their way of life and thought.
In 1981, Ceauşescu insisted that ‘the Romanian Communist Party and the Romanian State act in such fashion that all the cultural and educational means society has at its disposal [i.e. at his disposal]will be used for the moulding of a genuinely new man inspired by the revolutionary conception of our Party.’
But propaganda even on the mind-numbing scale practised in Romania was not enough to re-educate the people rapidly enough, nor was large-scale brain-surgery practical.
So long as people continued to live  in their old houses, surrounded by their old friends and neighbours, and had not broken with a routine of life which perhaps dated back generations, then the re-moulding of mentalities was going to be a frustratingly slow process, particularly for an engineer of human souls who was no longer young.
In retrospect, it is clear that few of the Party's officials really shared Ceauşescu's enthusiasm for the demolition of almost everything that their country's history had produced.
There was a great deal of dragging of feet.
Ceauşescu complained about it repeatedly.
But no amount of passive resistance and bureaucratic delay could halt the process set in train by Ceauşescu in the spring of 1988.
Twenty years earlier, it had been his patriotic rhetoric which had briefly rallied the nation around him and done so much to consolidate his grip on absolute power.
Now his incantations of the old slogans of national independence and identity sounded more and more hollow.
The planned destruction of so much of Romania's rural heritage seemed to go against the tenor of Ceauşescu's out-spoken nationalism.
In 1974, visiting the northern region of the Maramureş, one of the districts richest in the everyday survival of peasant customs and dress, Ceauşescu told a group of folk-artists that adhering to traditions was one way of developing a communist country: ‘I appreciate…these true works of popular art as an expression of your commitment to maintain the dress and customs of [your]ancestors, as well as to weave them tightly with that which is new,…because only in this way will we build a strong socialist society.’
In fact, the Conducator went so far as to command the peasants to ‘maintain the customs and dress of our great-great fore-bears, so that they shall always be in our memory.
I beg you not to forget this.’
A few years on, Ceauşescu's nationalism was in full, almost fascistic flood.
He insisted on the purity of the Romanian people and their ancient and immemorial attachment to the soil of their native land.
He used almost völkisch language, claiming that the Romanians (unlike the Hungarian, German and other minorities) were ‘ autochthonous ’: ‘They did not come from elsewhere, they did not fall down from the sky; they were born and lived here, in this land, and they defended it with their blood.’
Even as he was preparing to uproot millions of peasants and to destroy their homes, Ceauşescu praised their patriotism in terms ringing with irony: ‘In the toughest times, their forefathers did not desert the land where they were born, but in brotherhood with it, with the mountains, fields, rivers and great woods, they unflinchingly remained in these parts, defending their being, their right to free existence.’
Fifteen years later, Ceauşescu's emphasis on systematization left little place in Romania for folk-customs and the traditional way of life outside museums.
He told a West German reporter that traditions had to be sacrificed when they blocked either economic or social progress.
‘Capitalism after all belonged to tradition too.’
In the north of Bucharest, there is a fascinating village-museum, started in the 1930s, which has collected examples of the extraordinary variety of styles of peasant architecture found in Romania.
Other towns, like Nicu's fief, Sibiu, have similar though smaller museums.
The plan of ‘systematization’ if it had been carried through would have left them the only repositories of folk-culture and architecture, since the threefold slogan ‘Systematization — Modernization — Civilization’would have left little of what remained unscarred.
For instance, the peasants of the Maramureş to whom Ceauşescu had appealed to preserve their ancient ways had only been able to do so until then because their poor hill-side farms had not yet been collectivized.
It was a typical irony of the effects of the communist system that those who had been least affected by it were best off.
Hill-farmers in the north of the country, or the famous millionaire shepherds near Sibiu, had been considered too poor to collectivize forty years earlier, and so had been left to themselves, at least as much as anyone was in the Socialist Republic of Romania.
By comparison with their fellow citizens who had been integrated into the collective  farm system or recruited from the land to work in the cities, they had prospered.
Under Ceauşescu, they were subject to ever heavier taxes and requisitioning of their produce, but even so found ways around the worst shortages suffered by those tied into the State system.
The very success of such people was an affront to Ceauşescu's ‘golden dream of communism’, which left no place for individual initiative.
Instead, each person had ‘full freedom of initiative in implementing the plan’ and it was unacceptable to give ‘everyone the right to spend money as he likes.’
Originally, the rebuilding of the cities, especially of Bucharest, and the plan to ‘systematize’ the villages, seemed to involve the destruction of many cultural and religious monuments.
Under Lenin and Stalin, many churches in Russia were demolished as part of the Soviet state's anti-religious campaigns.
Propaganda films from the first years of the Soviet system show enthusiastic crowds, and sometimes, in the background, weeping elderly women, watching the officially sanctioned looting of churches, which were then demolished or turned into granaries or museums of ‘scientific atheism’.
Ceauşescu was not able to whip up any evidence of genuine enthusiasm for his destruction of churches.
Despite his pleas to the peasants of the Maramureş to preserve their traditions, Ceauşescu, like for instance Khruschev, had the ex-peasant's contempt for those still stuck in the rural rut.
To that he brought a class-conscious antagonism towards the relics and treasures of the old élites.
He probably shared Khruschev's contempt for conservationists and the defenders of the national heritage, who stood in the way of progress and tried to suborn Communist officials from their duty to demolish the redundant vestiges of the old order.
In 1961, Khruschev told the Soviet Central Committee:
Near Moscow many unnecessary objects of olden times have been put under restoration orders.
You will recall, comrades, that people sometimes throw such matters at  you, those who want to warm their own hands skilfully coax you.
They say something like this: ‘Here you are, a cultured person, you know and understand the meaning of this ancient monument.
You understand and value the fact that this famous person walked here, here he sat and considered his plans, and here he spat…’
I do not exaggerate, comrades;such outrages happen .
It was the destruction of thirty churches and monasteries in Bucharest to make way for the Civic Centre which aroused Western criticism of Ceauşescu's rule on a grand scale.
A hint of what was soon to befall Romania's historic buildings came in 1976 when Ceauşescu withdrew his country from the UNESCO agreement on the preservation of the architectural heritage.
But it was only when tourists and journalists began to return from Bucharest in the mid-later 1980s with photographs of the demolitions and stories about their effects on the local people that any organized criticism of the regime got under way in Western Europe.
Eventually, even Western governments began to raise their voices.
By 1988, the regime was forced to issue public statements denying it intended to destroy any more religious sites.
Already it had made great play of how it had saved certain famous churches from its own bulldozers by moving them out of the path of destruction.
It was an extraordinary sight to see a seventeenth-century church perched on steel-runners and pulled a few score metres from its original place.
The operation resembled a nineteenth-century historical painting of the Israelite slaves of Pharaoh pulling great slabs of stone to his monuments or a similar scene from a Hollywood Biblical epic, except that the raw energy to pull the building was provided by puffing steam-or diesel-engines rather than human slaves.
In February 1988, the Church of the Stork's Nest, on the corner of Stirbei Voda and Strada Berzei, not far from the shell of the new National History Museum, could be seen moving to a new resting place in order to improve the angle of the street.
Quickly an apartment block rose six storeys  high around it, almost removing it from sight: passers-by could just make it out looking through the unglazed windows of the unfinished ground-floor flats.
After the revolution, it became clear that the Church was far from saved: the process of moving it had severely undermined the stability of its fabric.
Cracks began to appear — and were plastered over.
Much the same happened to the famous monastery Mihai Voda, which was moved, minus some outbuildings, behind the neo-Babylonian blocks along the Boulevard of the Victory of Socialism, so that the inhabitants of the Palace of the Republic would not have their view disturbed by it.
Elena Ceauşescu in particular was surprisingly superstitious for a scientist.
Some Romanians claim (not unreasonably though without evidence) that Nicolae and Elena Ceauşescu were diabolists who had arranged for certain black magical and other superstitious figures to be carved in the decorations of the Casa Republicii or hidden in the overall design and visible only to other satanic initiates of the occult.
A few rams heads are visible decorating the tops of some of the countless columns in the building, but they seem more pastoral than sinister.
However, Christian symbols certainly were not to the taste of Elena.
On 14 December 1989, she visited the Casa Republicii for the last time and expressed alarm on seeing that one of the decorative features of the stairways leading to the southern entrance of the palace had the image of a cross when seen from high above.
It was a bad omen, she said.
There was no more time to redesign that feature of the building.
The relocation of churches and monasteries was a typical Ceauşescu combination of the spectacularly uneconomic and the cosmetic.
Although moved only a few score yards, the fabric of the buildings was sorely tested by what was in effect a prolonged minor earthquake.
The churches were usually brick built, and even when their walls did not crack and warp under the impact of the process, there remains, according to Romanian architects, the threat that their very bricks could crumble within a few years.
Ceauşescu had naturally received  expert advice on the process of relocating buildings in this way, and therefore must have known the consequences.
It is difficult to avoid the impression that he wanted to still Western protests about the destruction of Romania's heritage with this dramatic act of transferring churches from one site to another, but was also aware that within the foreseeable future the physical structures of the church would crumble into dust.
In the gigantic concrete suburbs around Bucharest and the other major cities, no churches were built to replace the ones in the areas demolished and to provide for the spiritual needs of the relocated populations.
Sometimes even the Falcons and the Young Pioneers did not have adequate facilities for their indoctrination in such new districts.
Such was the haste to build that the lower ranks of the Party were often not provided for properly.
By the late 1980s, Ceauşescu was on course for creating a new type of humanity: people brought up in a squalid spiritual void, learning only outward conformity and inward cynicism.
Those who criticize post-revolutionary Romanians for their lack of civic virtue and their insensitivity to the problems of their fellow citizens, particularly the abandoned young, should remember what sort of society they were forced to live in and what sort of values were imposed on them.
Romanians are very well aware of how much they have inherited from the Ceauşescu regime and how difficult it is, with the best will in the world, to purge the moral degradation from their souls.