

CO-PUBLISHING AND DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made the 13th day of February one thousand nine hundred and ninety in Ghent
BETWEEN
, a company incorporated and having its registered office at  and is entered into the Trade Register of Ghent under nr. 153 381 (‘’)(which shall include all or any of its subsidiaries, agents, successors or assigns) and herein represented by Christian 
AND
The Chancellors, Masters and Scholars of the University of Oxford trading as  at  (‘’) and herein represented by 
RECITALS
1 By an Agreement dated 1st September 1989 and made between   (‘’)(1) and  (2), a true copy of which is attached as Appendix I to this Agreement, was granted (amongst others) the exclusive rights worldwide to produce, market, promote, distribute, license, sell and support copies of the Core Software known as ‘ADAM & EVE’ and associated materials a described in Part 1 of Schedule 1 to this Agreement (together ‘the Licensed Software’) and to sub-license these rights to third parties.
2  wishes to take an exclusive sub-licence of all of  's rights relating to the Licensed Software in the territories set out in Schedule 2 to this Agreement (‘the Agreed Territories’) for the purposes set out in this Agreement, which will include the publication of customised disks to meet specific market needs as described in Part 2 of Schedule 1 to this Agreement (‘the Student Disks’).
3  owns the whole of the copyright and all other intellectual property rights in a basic version of the documentation and manuals which then accompanied the Licensed Software (‘the Existing Documentation’).
4  wishes to take an non-exclusive licence to use the Existing Documentation as the basis of publishing documentation to accompany both the Licensed Software and the Student Disks as described in Part 3 of Schedule 1 to this Agreement (‘the Accompanying Documentation’).
5 The Parties to this Agreement represent to each other that they have approved the terms and conditions of this Agreement and that their respective signatories are duly authorized to bind the respective parties in such terms and conditions.
IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS
1  's Rights and Duties
1.1  grants to  the following rights:
1.1.1 a sole and exclusive sub-licence to promote, distribute, license, sell and support the Licensed Software in the Agreed Territories, subject to the terms and conditions set out in this Agreement;
1.1.2 a sole and exclusive sub-licence to use the Licensed Software for the purpose of creating the Student Disks and to publish, produce, market, promote, distribute, license, sell and support the Student Disks in the Agreed Territories, subject to the terms and conditions set out in this Agreement;
1.1.3 a non-exclusive licence during the legal term of copyright (including any renewals) to use the Existing Documentation for the purpose of creating the Accompanying Documentation in such languages as  deems appropriate, and publishing, marketing, distributing, licensing and selling the Accompanying Documentation in the Agreed Territories;
1.1.4 the right to use the Licensed Software for demonstration, testing, support and such other purposes as are directly connected with the exercise of the rights conferred on  by this Agreement;
1.1.5 the right to appoint sub-under-licensees of any and all of the rights conferred on  under clauses 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.1.4, above (‘the Appointed Licensees’).
1.2  agrees to pay for the Licensed Software in accordance with the Pricing Policy as defined in Schedule 3 and with the Terms of Payment as defined in Schedule 4.
1.3 Neither  nor any of its subsidiaries, officers, agents or employees shall directly or indirectly seek customers, establish branches, maintain distribution depots or promote or sell in any way the Licensed Software in the Agreed Territories during the continuance of this Agreement.
1.4  undertakes to use all its marketing and commercial efforts to stock, sell and promote the sale of the Licensed Software throughout the Agreed Territories both directly and indirectly through Appointed Licensees and in particular to target sales into the following market sectors
education
commercial language institutions
large corporations and organizations, such as are likely to have in-house language training services.
1.5  undertakes not to develop, produce, market, promote, distribute, import, license or sell software which infringes any of  's or  ' property rights in the Licensed Software which are protected by Law.
1.6  undertakes:
1.6.1 not to incur any liability on behalf of or in any way pledge or purport to pledge  's credit or purport to make any contract binding upon ;
1.6.2 to involve  in any important contract negotiations including but not restricted to international sales contracts reaching beyond the Agreed Territories and sales contracts amounting to over 5 million BF;
1.6.3 not to alter, obscure, remove, conceal or otherwise interfere with any eye-readable or machine-readable marking on the Licensed Software or its packaging which refers to  as author or developer of the Licensed Software or otherwise refers to  ' copyright in the Licensed Software or de Wilde's Marketing rights and copyright in the accompanying documentation and language modules;
1.6.4 to permit any duly authorized representative of  upon reasonable prior notice to enter into any of its premises where the Licensed Software or any materials relating thereto are stored for the purpose of ascertaining that the provisions of this Agreement are being complied with by ;
1.6.5 immediately to bring to the attention of  any improper or wrongful use of  's trade marks, designs, models or other similar industrial, intellectual or commercial property rights which come to the notice of  and in the performance of its duties under this Agreement, and to use every effort to safeguard the property rights and interests of  and  and at the request and cost of , take all steps required by  to defend such rights;
1.6.6 promptly to bring to the notice of  any information received by  which is likely to be of interest, use or benefit to  in relation to the marketing and/or support of the Licensed Software;
1.6.7 to keep full, proper and up-to-date books of account and records showing clearly all inquiries and proceedings relating to fault calls of the Licenced Software and allow a duly authorized representative of  to have access to said books and records;
1.6.8  shall make available to  a camera-ready copy of the English only version of the Documentation.
Any use of this version in any language shall explicitly acknowledge  's contribution to its creation.
the wording of this acknowledgement will be separately negotiated and agreed in writing.
3 Enhancements and Modifications
3.1  shall notify the  of any enhancement or modification to the Licensed Software which may affect its operation/performance and/or cost.
3.2  may ask  to build in enhancements and/or modifications resulting from its knowledge of selling the Licensed Software in its Territories.
If these enhancements and/or modifications are recognized to be universally applicable, will carry out the necessary work and will bear the cost of this.
If they relate only to markets within the Territories  will contribute to the cost of  carrying out the necessary work at a rate to be negotiated.
and  determine in their sole discretion whether, and if so which, enhancements and modifications will be implemented.
3.3  reserves the right to introduce any substitute software which performs the same function.
In this eventuality this Agreement will apply in its entirety to the substitute software.
4 Copyright, Intellectual Property Right and Title
4.1  acknowledges that all rights (including but not limited to the copyright and other intellectual property rights) in the Licensed Software which are owned by  and  shall remain the property of  and  and  shall not during or at any time after the expiry or termination of this Agreement in any way question or dispute the ownership or any other such rights of  and .
4.2  acknowledges that the copyright in any modifications, additions or translations commissioned or otherwise effected by and at the expense of  to meet market needs in the Territories shall remain the copyright of .
This provision can in no way affect  ' fundamental rights in the executable files of the Licensed Software as described in 4.1 above.
4.3 The Title under which the Licensed Software is published shall belong exclusively to .
5 Publishing Imprints, Logos and Trade Marks
5.1 All components of the Licensed Software and any derivatives, extensions or adaptations of the Licensed Software offered for sale in the Agreed Territories shall be published under the joint imprint of  and of .
The wording of this joint imprint will be agreed in writing by both parties.
5.2  acknowledges that all logos and trade marks listed in Schedule 5 as belonging to  belong exclusively to  and shall only be used by  in association with the Licenced Software, its derivatives, extensions or adaptations, and only during the continuance of this Agreement.
5.3  acknowledges that all logos and trade marks listed in Schedule 5 as belonging to  belong exclusively to  and shall only be used in association with the Licenced Software, its derivatives, extensions or adaptations, and only during the continuance of this Agreement.
5.4 On expiry or termination of this Agreement neither  nor  shall continue to use imprints, logos, trade marks or any other devices that belong to or allude the other party.
In the event of there being stocks to be disposed of or a period during which essential support for the Licensed Software is required, temporary use of these devices may be agreed by separate negotiation in writing.
5.5  shall not during or after the expiry or termination of this Agreement without the prior written consent of , use or adopt any name, trade name, trading style or commercial designation that includes or is similar to or may be mistaken for the whole or any part of any trade name, trade mark, trading style or commercial designation used by .
gives a reciprocal undertaking to  in respect of all logos, trade names and marks, trading styles or commercial designations which are the property and/or copyright of .
6 Duration and Termination
6.1 This Agreement shall take effect on the date of signature of this Agreement and shall continue for a period of three years and from year to year thereafter until or unless terminated by either party giving to the other not less than six months' prior written notice, subject always to prior termination as hereinafter specified.
6.2 Notwithstanding any provisions herein contained this Agreement may be terminated forthwith by either party by notice in writing from the party not at fault if any of the following events shall occur, ie:
a)
if the other party shall commit any act of bankruptcy, shall have a receiving order made against it, shall make or negotiate for any composition or arrangement with or assignment for the benefit of its creditors or, if the other party being a body corporate shall present a petition or have a petition presented by a creditor for its winding up or shall enter into any liquidation (other than for the purpose of reconstruction or amalgamation), shall call any meeting of its creditors, shall have a receiver of all or any to its undertakings or assets appointed, shall be deemed to be unable to pay its debts, or shall cease to carry on business
b)
if the other party shall at any time be in default under this Agreement and shall fail to remedy such default within 30 (thirty) days from receipt of notice in writing from the first party specifying such default
c)
if either party is by any cause (other than a cause directly attributable to the other party) prevented from performing its obligations hereunder for a period of 3 (three) months or for a total period of 6 (six) months in any period of 12 (twelve) consecutive months.
If any such event referred to in this Sub-Clause shall occur, termination shall become effective forthwith or on the date set forth in such notice.
6.3 The expiry or termination of this Agreement shall be without prejudice to the rights of the Parties accrued up to the date of such expiry or termination.
6.4 Upon expiry or termination, for whatever reason, of this Agreement, shall return or destroy as  shall instruct no later that 30 (thirty) days thereafter, all Licensed Software, documentation, technical information and any other data supplied to  during the continuance in effect of this Agreement and all and any copies made of the whole or any part of the same and  shall furnish  with a certificate, certifying that the same has been done, except such supporting software, information and data which  will require to continue to support the Licensed Software being the date of expiry or termination where  permits  to do so.
will reimburse  at cost for all materials returned.
7 Ordering the Licensed Software
7.1  agrees to order from  the minimum number of copies of the Licensed Software as specified in Schedule 9.
7.2 Orders for copies of the Licensed Software shall be communicated in writing, by telefax or by telex to  at the above address or at such other address as  may notify .
7.3 Orders shall not be binding on  unless and until accepted by  in writing, by telefax or by telex.
7.4  shall use all reasonable endeavours to fill accepted orders for the Licensed Software with all reasonable despatch but shall not be liable in any way for any loss of trade or profit or any other loss occurring to  in the event of delivery being frustrated or delayed.
7.5 In the event that  fails to order and pay for the minimum number of copies of the Licensed Software specified in Schedule 9  shall be entitled at its option, to terminate the Agreement without liability.
8 Delivery of the Licensed Software
8.1  shall despatch the Licensed Software to  by post or by such other carrier as  and  agree upon, which shall be notified to  at the above address or to such address as  shall in due course communicate to  as its delivery address within the Territory.
8.2 Carriage and other charges for the delivery of the Licensed Software shall be borne by , ie. shipment Ex Works.
8.3 The Licensed Software shall be at the risk of  in transit.
8.4 If at any time  is at default in performance or observance of any of its obligations under this Agreement, shall be entitled for so long as the default continues, but without prejudice to any other rights under this Agreement, to withhold delivery of the Licensed Software from  notwithstanding that orders for the Licensed Software have been accepted by .
8.5 If at any time  fails to deliver the Licensed Software to  in such a way that  is unable to fulfil any order, the value of such lost orders may be counted towards any minimum order requirement which may have been agreed.
All orders shipped ex works from  within ten working days after ordering are valid.
9 Payment for the Licensed Software
9.1  will make an up-front payment of a deposit of the irrecoverable advance in Part(1) of Schedule 4
9.2 On signature of this Agreement, undertakes to pay  in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in Part(1) of Schedule 4 and in accordance with the Pricing Policy set out in Schedule 3.
10 Training and Assistance
10.1  shall offer training in the use of the Licensed Software, its modifications and enhancements to key technical, promotional and sales representatives of  or of sub-licensees.
Two of each category of representative will be allowed to attend the initial and regular follow-up training sessions which will be organized free of charge by .
Additional numbers of representatives must be agreed in writing with .
10.2 In addition to the training provided for in clause 10.1 above, undertakes to offer  free of charge adequate commercial and technical assistance in connection with the marketing and distribution of the Licensed Software.
10.3  may request training and assistance in addition to that provided for in Clauses 10.1 and 10.2 above, in which case  shall be permitted to charge  for this service.
Guidelines for appropriate charges, which will be negotiated and agreed in writing prior to the event, are given in Schedule 6.
11 End-user Licenses and Support
11.1  shall, upon delivery of the Licensed Software to an end-user, use its best efforts to cause the end-user to enter into a Software Licence Agreement in respect of each copy of the Licensed Software, in the form prescribed in Schedule 7 to this Agreement.
Any changes to these terms and conditions must be agreed in writing with .
11.2  undertakes, during the continuance of this Agreement, to provide directly or indirectly an efficient and effective help line to deal with fault calls relating to the Licensed Software made by end-users who have entered into the Software Licence Agreement described above.
11.3  shall maintain proper identification records of licensed end-users.
Every copy of the Licensed Software licensed to end-users will be protected by a hardware protection device until such time as an alternative means of protection is agreed between , and .
11.4 Without prejudice to the generality of  's obligations set out in Clause 11.2 above, shall, on demand, provide directly or indirectly all licensed end-users with the following support services
a)
proper training for the end users' operators in the use of the Licensed Software
b)
prompt receipt, analysis and reporting of reported faults in the operation of the Licensed Software
c)
prompt replacement of the master copy of any corrupted or damaged Licensed Software, such replacement being obtained from 
d)
technical information and advice on the use of the Licensed Software.
11.5  shall provide back-up support for  in line with the provisions made in Clause 10 above.
12 Liability
12.1 Except to the extent that liability may by statute not lawfully be excluded in an Agreement of this nature and between the respective Parties hereto, any statement, condition or warranty, expressed or implied, statutory or otherwise, as to the quality, marketability, suitability or fitness for any particular purpose of the Licensed Software is hereby excluded and  shall not be liable to  or to any other persons for loss or damage, whether direct or consequential, arising directly or indirectly from the use of the Licensed Software or any modification or enhancement thereof and any documentation, manual or training relating thereto.
12.2  undertakes to make the product and the Licensed Software and the Accompanying Documentation comply with local legislation in effect in the Territories.
12.3  shall assist  in adapting the product and the product documentation to this effect.
13 Warranty
13.1  does not warrant that the Licensed Software will be error-free but if any copy of the Licensed Software is demonstrated to  within 90 (ninety) days from the date of delivery to the end user to contain or have contained an error or malfunction, shall use all reasonable endeavours to correct such error or malfunction, or, as its option, to replace such copy of the Licensed Software free of charge, provided that:
a)
the Licensed Software has been duly registered under Clause 11.1 with 
b)
the Licensed Software has been used at all times properly and in accordance with instructions for use as set out in the Accompanying Documentation
c)
no alteration, modification or addition has been made to the Licensed Software without  's prior written consent
d)
the alleged error or malfunction has been notified to  within the warranty period specified above.
13.2 Each claim of  under this warranty shall be sent in writing, by telefax or by telex to  specifying the type of Licensed Software involved and the nature of the fault or defect.
Upon receipt of such written, telefaxed or telexed claim, or its agent or representative shall have the right to test or to inspect the Licensed Software at its then location or to have the Licensed Software despatched to a point designated by  or returned to  carriage pre-paid.
Work replaced or corrected under warranty shall be sent by  to  carriage pre-paid.
13.3 Except as otherwise provided in this Clause, makes no other representations or warranties and expressly excludes the same whether implied, statutory or otherwise, especially as to quality or fitness of the Licensed Software for any particular purpose.
14 Force Majeure 14.1  shall not be under any liability to  or to any party in any way whatsoever for the destruction, damage, delay or any matters of this nature whatsoever arising our of war, rebellion, civic commotion, strikes, lock-outs and industrial disputes; fire, explosion, earthquake, act of God, flood, drought, or bad weather; the unavailability or deliveries, supplies, work, disks, or other media or the requisitioning or any other act or order by any government department, council or other constituted body.
15 Confidential Information
15.1  has imparted and may from time to time impart to  certain confidential information relating to the Licensed Software, or up-dates or enhancements of the Licensed Software or other software owned, marketed or supported by  (including specifications therefore).
15.2  hereby agrees that it will use such confidential information solely for the purposes of this Agreement and that it shall not disclose, whether directly or indirectly, to any third party such information other than as required to carry out the purposes of this Agreement.
In the event of such disclosure  will obtain from such third parties' duly binding agreements to maintain in confidence the information to be disclosed to the same extent at least as  is so bound hereunder.
15.3  further agrees that upon expiry or termination of this Agreement is shall not itself or through any subsidiary or agent or otherwise, sell, sub-license, market, distribute or otherwise deal with any of the Licensed Software (in whole or in part) or have any software developed upon any confidential information supplied to it by , or in any way pursuant to this Agreement.
16 Relationship of  to 
16.1 It is agreed and understood that  is not the agent or representative of  and has no authority or power to bind or contract the name of or to create any liability against  in any way or for any purpose.
16.2 It is understood that  is an independent contractor with exclusive rights under this Agreement to sub-license, market, distribute, resell to retail traders and support the Licensed Software on its own accord and responsibility in the Territory.
17 Assignment
17.1 This Agreement shall not be assigned by , whether voluntarily or involuntarily or by operation of law, in whole or in part, to any party without the prior written consent of .
No such assignment by , howsoever occurring, shall relieve the assignor of its obligations hereunder.
18 Notices
18.1 Any notice required or permitted under the terms of this Agreement or required by statute, law or regulation shall, unless otherwise provided for, be in writing, and shall be delivered in person, sent by registered mail or air mail as appropriate, properly posted and fully pre-paid in an envelope properly addressed, or sent by telefax or by telex to the respective Parties as specified above or to such other address, telefax or telex number as may from time to time be designated by notice hereunder.
18.2 Any such notice shall be in the English language and shall be considered to have been given at the time when actually delivered, sent by telefax or telex or in any other event within 14 (fourteen) days after it was mailed in the manner hereinbefore provided.
19 Agreement
19.1 This Agreement supersedes any arrangements, understandings, promises or agreements made or existing between the Parties hereto prior to or simultaneously with this Agreement and constitutes the entire understanding between the Parties hereto.
19.2 Except as otherwise provided herein, no addition, amendment to or modification of this Agreement shall be effective unless it is in writing and signed by and on behalf of both Parties.
20 Headings
20.1 The headings of the paragraphs of this Agreement are inserted for convenience of reference only and are not intended to be part of or to affect the meaning or interpretation of this Agreement.
21 Severability
21.1 In the event that any or any part of the terms, conditions or provisions contained in this Agreement shall be determined invalid, unlawful or unenforceable to any extent such term, condition or provision shall be severed from the remaining terms, conditions and provisions which shall continue to be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law.
22 Law
22.1 The Parties hereto agree that the Agreement has been made in accordance with and shall be governed by Belgian law, and that this Agreement and the provisions hereof shall be construed in accordance with Belgian law.
23 Settlement of Disputes — Arbitration
23.1 If any dispute or difference arises between the Parties hereto in connection with or arising out of the Agreement and provided that either of them shall have given notice in writing thereof, the Parties shall try to reach an  agreement by negotiating in goodwill and at the highest level.
23.2 Should no settlement of disputes or differences be achieved by negotiation, the Parties shall submit their dispute or difference to an arbitration tribunal before bringing this dispute before a court of law, provided that arbitration is not contrary to the imperative law of the country whose law is applicable.
23.3 Such arbitration shall be held in Belgium and the then current rules of arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce shall apply, the procedure being conducted in the English language.
24 Jurisdiction
24.1 In case a dispute is brought before a court of law, the courts of the City of Ghent, Belgium shall have sole jurisdiction over this litigation.
In witness whereof the Parties hereto have executed this Agreement on the date set forth above.
Each Party represents to have received 1 (one) copy of the Agreement.
Signed for and on behalf of Signed for and on behalf of by: by:
In the presence of: In the presence of:
SCHEDULE 1
Part 1 The Licensed Software
The Licensed Software consists of the following:
1)
Core Software
‘Adam & Eve’ stands for Automated Document Analysis and Manipulation & Extensible Variety of Exercises.
It is a fully automated generator of exercises for the learning of foreign languages and the software runs on industry-standard MS DOS Personal Computers.
It is designed to be used by curriculum planners, course and test writers, teachers and teacher trainers and by self-access learners of foreign languages.
The basic functionality of Adam & Eve consists of:
a)
Text Analysis The vocabulary of an inputted text is checked against the criteria of objective frequency, ‘familiarity’ and coverage.
b)
Automatic exercise generation Exercise types include ‘outsiders’, polysemy, collocation, verb, cohesion, cloze and sequence.
2)
Language Modules
a)
Basic Language Modules 2000 most common lemmata in each of English, French, German, Spanish, Dutch (list to be added to).
b)
Extended Language Modules 2001–4500 next most common lemmata in selected languages.
c)
Extended Modules for Languages for Specific Purposes 2001–4500 lemmata most characteristic of to-be-defined LSP.
3)
Voice Hardware Board
4)
Spoken Databases
In English and in other languages to be defined.
5)
Sentinel Hardware Protection
SCHEDULE 1 Part 2 The Student Disks
The core software will be used by  to create, publish and market Student Disks to meet market requirements in the Agreed Territories.
These Student Disks may contain general exercises based on common language learning needs or may be customized according to 's identified market sector needs and/or according to clients' particular syllabus or domain.
SCHEDULE 1 Part 3 The Accompanying Documentation
It is proposed that the Accompanying Documentation will consist of the following:
1)
A User Guide
This will describe the nature and operation of the Core Software of Adam & Eve described in Part 1(1) of this Schedule.
2)
Student Disk Guides
These will be developed to whatever form is appropriate to the Student Disks described in Part 2 of this Schedule.
SCHEDULE 2 The Territories
Phase 1: United Kingdom Spain
Phase 2: Italy Greece
Phase 3: USA
SCHEDULE 3 Pricing Policy
will pay  for each Basic package (core software + one language module)
a)
for sales made to schools and universities BEF 10,000, where the recommended end-user price is BEF 20,000,
b)
for sales made to commercial organizations BEF 36,000, where the recommended end-user price is BEF 60,000 to BEF 72,000.
SCHEDULE 4 Terms of Payment
1)
Up-Front Advance Payment
To cover Phases 1 and 2 as referred to in Schedule 2 of this Agreement, shall deposit with  an irrecoverable advance of BEF 1,000,000.
The sum shall be paid on signature of this Agreement.
2)
Conditions of Payment
shall pay  20% of invoice value on placing an order.
The up-front payment mentioned in Clause 1 of this Schedule will be used to set off this advance payment until such time as it is used up.
the balance of the invoice will be payable 45 days from the end of the month in which the invoice is raised.
SCHEDULE 5 Logos and Trade Marks
1)
Logos and Trade Marks belonging to  (Please supply.)
2)
Logos and Trade Marks belonging to 
Oxford University Press
Oxford English
Oxford English Software
Oxford
SCHEDULE 6 Guidelines for Training Costs
Charges for back-up support by  at the request of  will be BEF 20,000 a day excluding expenses.
This rate may be renegotiated at any time.
SCHEDULE 7 Software License Agreement
Every copy of the Software sold shall be accompanied by a Software License Agreement based on the following text.
CAREFULLY READ THIS PERSONAL LICENSE AGREEMENT BEFORE USING THE SOFTWARE.
BY OPENING OR USING THIS PACKAGE YOU ACCEPT THESE TERMS.
If you accept the terms of this Agreement, please complete and sign the enclosed REGISTRATION CARD and return it to your local distributor (particulars see below).
If, however, you do not accept the terms of this Agreement, please return the package to your local distributor for a full refund.
1 DEFINITIONS
DW means .
It implies anyone who has been involved in the creation, production, or delivery of this Program.
LD means your local distributor;
‘You’ and ‘Your’refer to any person or entity acquiring this package.
Package means software, user manual and all other items accompanying this Agreement.
Program means the computer Program contained in this package together with all codes, techniques, formats, designs, concepts, methods and ideas associated with the computer Program.
The term also includes all copies of any part of the software as well as the User's Guide contained in this package.
2 TERMS OF THIS LICENSE
DW grants you a non-exclusive license to use the Program in this package according to the following terms.
3 PERMITTED USES
You may:
Operate the Program on one computer (system) at a time.
Operate the Program on a multi-user network.
Make one back-up copy of the Program which automatically becomes the property of DW and is the subject of this Agreement.
Transfer this license together with the original and all the back-up copies of the Program, provided that the transferee completes and returns a REGISTRATION CARD to LD and agrees to be bound by the terms of this Agreement.
4 PROHIBITED USES
You may not:
Make the Program available to any person or entity other than your employees, who must use the software as specified above.
Reverse engineer, disassemble, decompile, translate, transfer, modify or make any attempt to discover the source code of the Program.
Transfer the Program, or any copy, modification, or merged portion, in whole or in part, except as expressly provided for in this license.
Distribute copies of the Program or documentation.
Sell or otherwise distribute for consideration copies of student practice and/or tutorial disks to students or any other third party.
Software License Agreement
5 RIGHTS
This Program contains valuable proprietary rights of DW and others.
DW retains the title to or ownership of the Program and other proprietary rights related to the software regardless of the form in which the original and other copies exist.
DW may at any time replace, modify, alter, improve, enhance or otherwise change the Program.
DW may at its sole discretion offer you up-dates of the licensed Program.
DW/LD retains the right to require payment of an additional fee for such up-dates.
You may of course decline such up-dates.
6 WARRANTY OR PERFORMANCE
DW warrants that the Program will perform basically and substantially as indicated in the manual(s) when and if all the procedures are followed as indicated.
The Program and its documentation are licensed ‘as is’ without warranty as to their performance, merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.
DW does not warrant that the Program is free from all bugs, errors and omissions.
Except as specifically provided in this Agreement, there are no other warranties expressed or implied, including, but not limited to, any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.
No representation or other affirmation of fact by anyone shall be or shall be deemed to be a warranty by DW.
7 LIMITED WARRANTY FOR DISKETTES
DW warrants that upon delivery by DW/LD the diskette on which the Program is distributed is free from defects in materials and workmanship under normal use for a period of ninety (90) days from the date the Program is delivered.
If a defect in the diskette occurs during this period, you may return the diskette plus the REGISTRATION CARD to LD, and LD will replace the diskette free of charge.
Your sole and exclusive remedy in the event of a defect is expressly limited to replacement of the diskette as provided above.
This limited warranty applies only to the original licensee.
If your Program disk should prove defective after the above warranty expires, LD will replace for a fee of £ after you return the defective disk with the payment.
This applies only to the original licensee.
8 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
Neither DW nor LD shall be not liable for any incidental or consequential damages, such as but not limited to, loss of anticipated profits or benefits resulting from the use of the Program or arising out of any breach of any warranty.
DW is not your insurer for use of the Program.
Your payment is solely based on the value of the Program.
If, notwithstanding the above provisions, there shall be liability on the part of DW/LD by virtue of this Agreement, or because of the relation hereby established, whether due to negligence or otherwise, such liability is and shall be limited to a sum equal to the payment for the Program which sum shall be paid and received as liquidated damages, and not as penalty and this liability shall be complete and exclusive.
9 TERM
The license and the right to use this Program is for an indefinite time until terminated.
However, both the license and the right to use the Program terminate automatically if you violate any part of this Agreement.
In the event or termination you must immediately destroy the Program together with all the copies, modifications, and merged portions and return the hardware key (dongle).
10 ENTIRE AGREEMENT
Your use of the Program acknowledges that you have read this Agreement, understand it and agree to be bound by its terms.
You further agree that it is the complete and exclusive agreement between you and DW/LD and supersedes any proposal or prior written or oral agreement, or any other communication between DW/LD and you relating to the subject matter of this Agreement.
11 LAW AND JURISDICTION
This Agreement shall be governed by the law of Belgium and the Courts of the City of Ghent, Belgium shall have jurisdiction.
SCHEDULE 8 Turnover Obligations
Year 1: No turnover obligations
Year 2: No less than 40% higher than Year 1 sales
Year 3: No less than Year 2 sales
DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT IS made the first day of February 1989 between  of  (‘The Publisher’) and  of  (‘The Distributor’)
IT IS HEREBY AGREED as follows:
1 DISTRIBUTION RIGHTS
1.1 The Publisher hereby grants to the Distributor the rights to purchase and sell its ELT Publications in the Territory in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and as outlined in the Schedule
1.2 The Distributor hereby agrees to pay for the Publications in accordance with the price and terms agreed and to comply in all respects with the terms of this Agreement and as outlined in the Schedule
2 DISTRIBUTOR'S DUTIES
2.1 The Distributor hereby undertakes:
i
to use all commercial efforts to stock sell and promote the sale of the Publications throughout the Territory
ii
not to sell the Publications outside the Territory
iv
not to hold itself out as being entitled in any way whatsoever to contract on behalf of the Publisher unless previously agreed in writing
v
not to reprint (save with prior written consent of the Publisher) or otherwise reproduce change or tamper with the Publications
vi
to notify the Publisher forthwith in the event of any change in its control or ownership arising directly or indirectly
3 TRADE MARKS
3.1 The Distributor agrees that it will not during the period of this Agreement and after termination (for whatever reason) seek to register in the Territory or anywhere in the world the Trade Mark ‘Oxford’ or any other trade mark or trade name being used and owned by the Publisher
3.2 The Distributor hereby acknowledges that the Publisher is the owner of the trade mark ‘Oxford’ and of other trade marks used by the Publisher and undertakes to inform the Publisher immediately of any possible or alleged infringement of the Publisher's trade mark or of any other matter which may affect the continued use of the Publisher's trade mark in the Territory or elsewhere
3.3 The Distributor hereby undertakes that in the event of any infringement of the Trade Mark it will offer all such assistance as the Publisher may reasonably require to enforce its rights in the Territory.
The Publisher shall be under no obligation to initiate legal proceedings
3.4 The Distributor agrees to enter into a Trade Mark Licence Agreement with the Publisher to use the Publisher's Trade Mark if and when requested by the Publisher
4 MARKETING
4.1 The Distributor shall use its best endeavours to market the Publications within the Territory by advertising the Publications including by direct mail by visits to bookshops schools and universities and other similar organisations 4.2 The Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with such assistance as the Distributor may reasonably require in promoting the Publications and in particular the Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with publicity material and such sample books as agreed annually
4.3 The Distributor agrees to provide the Publisher with an annual sales report and shall include lists of major customers and sales figures and such other information as the Publisher may require
4.4 The Distributor agrees to undertake an Annual Stock Count each year and shall supply details of stock figures to the Publishers and shall permit a representative of the Publisher to be present at the Stock Count should the Publisher so request
5 DURATION
5.1 This Agreement shall continue for the period as shown in the Schedule
5.2 Either party shall be entitled on written notice to the other to terminate this Agreement forthwith in the event of any breach of the terms of this Agreement by either party which terms shall include:
i
a failure by the Distributor to make payment to the Publisher in accordance with the agreed terms
ii
any change in the control or ownership of the Distributor arising directly or indirectly
iii
the Distributor being compulsorily or voluntarily put into liquidation other than for the purposes of reconstruction and/or a Receiver being appointed to manage the Distributor's business
iv
the Distributor ceasing to carry on business for any reason whatsoever
5.3 During any notice period to terminate the Publisher shall be entitled to negotiate and appoint an alternative distributor of its Publications within the Territory
6 GENERAL
6.1 The Agreement shall be binding upon the parties and may not be assigned without the prior written consent of the other party
6.2 The failure of either party to enforce any of the terms or conditions of this Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver of future performance of any such term or condition
6.3 The terms and conditions shown in Schedule I shall be a part of this Agreement
6.4 This agreement shall be interpreted according to English Law without regard to the place of its physical execution
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have placed their signatures the day and year first before written
SCHEDULE I — DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
Distributor:
The ELT Publications: ALL ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHING MATERIALS AND EDUCATIONAL SCHOOL-BOOKS.
THE CAMEROON PRIMARY COURSE IS COVERED IN SCHEDULE III
Territory: CAMEROON
Distribution Rights: EXCLUSIVE
Price of Publications: SHALL BE THE PUBLISHER'S CURRENT PRICE (LESS NEGOTIATED DISCOUNT 45%) AND SHALL NOT INCLUDE CARRIAGE OR INSURANCE AND MAY BE VARIED ANNUALLY ON THE 31 DAY OF MARCH IN EACH SUBSEQUENT YEAR
Terms of Payment: NORMAL TERMS ARE 4 MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF INVOICE.
EXCEPTIONS TO BE AGREED SEPARATELY BETWEEN HATIER INTERNATIONAL AND CREDIT CONTROL
Duration: AN INITIAL PERIOD OF 3 YEARS AND THEREAFTER SUBJECT TO 3 MONTHS’ NOTICE TO EXPIRE ON OR AFTER THE EXPIRATION OF THE INITIAL PERIOD
Date of Annual Stock Count: 31 MARCH
SCHEDULE II — PROMOTION AGREEMENT
will appoint an educational representative to promote materials throughout Cameroon.
Costs will be divided between the Publisher and the Distributor on the following basis:
The Publisher:
Publicity material
Specimen copies
Mailings
Salary
Travel expenses
The Distributor:
Office space
Secretarial and office back up
Any seminar/workshop/exhibition costs will be divided between the Publisher and Distributor on the following basis:
The Publisher:
Hotel bills: Authors/Editors/Teacher/Trainers
Air fares: Authors/Editors/Teacher/Trainers
The Distributor:
Seminar rooms
Refreshments
All other reasonable costs
SCHEDULE III — CAMEROON PRIMARY COURSE
Distributor:
Territory: CAMEROON
Distribution Rights: EXCLUSIVE
Price of Publications: SHALL BE THE PUBLISHER'S CURRENT PRICE (LESS NEGOTIATED DISCOUNT 45%) AND SHALL NOT INCLUDE CARRIAGE OR INSURANCE AND MAY BE VARIED ANNUALLY ON THE 31 DAY OF MARCH IN EACH SUBSEQUENT YEAR
Terms of Payment: STOCK WILL BE INVOICED FIRM PAYABLE SIX MONTHS FROM THE INVOICE DATE ONLY IN RESPECT OF STOCK SOLD BY THE DISTRIBUTOR.
THE DISTRIBUTOR SHALL PROVIDE THE PUBLISHER WITH A SCHEDULE OF UNSOLD STOCK AT THE DUE DATE OF PAYMENT.
THE AGREEMENT WILL BE REVIEWED AT THE END OF THE FIRST YEAR
Duration: AN INITIAL PERIOD OF 3 YEARS AND THEREAFTER SUBJECT TO 3 MONTHS NOTICE TO EXPIRE ON OR AFTER THE EXPIRATION OF THE INITIAL PERIOD
Date of Annual Stock Count: 31 MARCH
VIDEO PRODUCTION AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is made the 29th day of January 1988
BETWEEN  of  (‘the Publisher’), and
,(‘the Distributor’)
WHEREBY IT IS AGREED as follows:
1 DISTRIBUTOR'S RIGHTS
1.1 The Publisher hereby grants to the Distributor a Licence to manufacture copies of the Publisher's Educational Videos in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and as defined in the attached schedules.
1.2 The Distributor hereby agrees to pay for the Licence in accordance with the price and terms agreed and to comply in all respects with the terms of this Agreement and as defined in the attached schedules.
2 DISTRIBUTOR'S DUTIES
2.1 The Distributor hereby undertakes:
i
) to use all commercial efforts to stock, sell and promote the sale of the Videos throughout the Territory
ii
not to sell the Videos outside the Territory
iii
not to hold itself out as being entitled in any way whatsoever to contract on behalf of the Publisher
iv
to include at the beginning of each Video Cassette a statement as follows: ‘This copy is made under licence from Oxford University Press and no further copies may be made’.
The existing copyright notice shall remain and in no circumstances may the Distributor change, add, take away or otherwise tamper with the videos unless by prior negotiation and written agreement.
3 PUBLISHER'S OBLIGATIONS
3.1 The Publisher will supply the Distributor on loan with copy masters for each video.
The Distributor may specify the standard and format of these copy masters and will return the copy masters to the Publisher's appointed representative at all times when they are not being used for the reproduction of licenced copies.
3.2 The Publisher will supply the Distributor with labels and insert cards free of charge.
4 TRADE MARKS
4.1 The Distributor agrees to register on behalf of the Publisher in the Territory only the Trade Mark ‘Oxford’ or any other trade mark or trade name being used and owned by the Publisher and after termination (for whatever reason) of this contract the Distributor agrees to endorse the above-mentioned trade marks or trade names to the Publisher.
4.2 The Distributor hereby acknowledges that the Publisher is the owner of the trade mark ‘Oxford’ and of other trade marks used by the Publisher and undertakes to inform the Publisher immediately of any possible or alleged infringement of the Publisher's trade mark or of any other matter which may affect the continued use of the Publisher's trade mark in the Territory or elsewhere.
4.3 The Distributor hereby undertakes that in the event or any infringement of the Trade Mark it will offer all such assistance as the Publisher may reasonable require to enforce its rights in the Territory.
The Publisher shall be under no obligation to initiate legal proceedings.
4.4 The Distributor agrees to enter into a Trade Mark Licence Agreement with the Publisher to use the Publisher's Trade Marks if and when requested by the Publisher.
5 MARKETING
5.1 The Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with such assistance as the Distributor may reasonable require in promoting the Videos and in particular the Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with publicity material and such sample books as shown in the Schedule on terms to be agreed.
5.2 The Distributor agrees to provide the Publisher with an annual sales report to the Publisher with sales figures and other such information as the Publisher may require.
5.3 The Distributor agrees to undertake an annual stock count on 30 June of each year and shall supply details of stock figures to the Publisher and shall permit a representative of the Publisher to be present at the stock count should the Publisher so request.
6 DURATION
6.1 This Agreement shall continue for a period as shown in the Schedule.
6.2 Either party shall be entitled on written notice to the other to terminate the Agreement forthwith in the event of any substantial breach by either party which shall include:
i
the Distributor being compulsorily or voluntarily put into liquidation other than for the purposes of reconstruction
ii
a Receiver being appointed to manage the Distributor's business
iii
failure to comply with any of the terms of this agreement including items listed in Schedule I.
7 GENERAL
7.1 The Agreement shall be binding upon all the parties and may not be assigned without the prior written consent of the other party.
7.2 The failure of either party to enforce any of the terms or conditions of this Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver of future performance of any such term or condition.
7.3 The terms and conditions shown in Schedule I and Schedule 2 shall be a part of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have placed their signatures the day and year first before written
SIGNED BY (On behalf of the Publisher)
SIGNED BY (On behalf of the Distributor)
SCHEDULE 1 — DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
Distributor:
The Publications: ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHING MATERIALS
Territory: ARGENTINA
Distribution Rights: JOINT EXCLUSIVITY WITH 
Joint Exclusivity:
Price of Publication: SHALL BE US$65 FOR EACH 30-MINUTE CASSETTE AS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE 2.
Royalty Payable: SHALL BE 25% OF THE ARGENTINIAN PUBLISHED PRICE PAYABLE ON THE QUANTITY TO BE MANUFACTURED AT ANY GIVEN TIME AND SHALL BE PAID ON RECEIPT OF THE COPY MASTERS.
Guaranteed Sales: SHALL BE AS SHOWN ON SCHEDULE 2.
IF THESE SALES HAVE NOT BEEN ACHIEVED THEN THE BALANCE OF ROYALTIES UNPAID WILL BECOME PAYABLE THREE YEARS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE FIRST CASSETTES WERE MANUFACTURED.
SCHEDULE 2 — VIDEO REPRODUCTION AGREEMENT
The Video titles, the initial minimum quantity and guaranteed minimum quantity over 3 years for licenced manufacture are given below:
TITLE MINIMUM GUARANTEED INITIAL MINIMUM QUANTITY QUANTITY OVER THREE YEARS
A WEEKEND AWAY CASSETTE 1 100 500
A WEEKEND AWAY CASSETTE 2 100 500
A WEEK BY THE SEA CASSETTE 1 60 300
A WEEK BY THE SEA CASSETTE 2 60 300
MYSTERY TOUR CASSETTE 1 60 300
MYSTERY TOUR CASSETTE 2 60 300
ZOOM IN PREINTERMEDIATE 50 150
ZOOM IN INTERMEDIATE 50 150
MAGIC MUSIC MAN CASSETTE 1 100 500
MAGIC MUSIC MAN CASSETTE 2 100 500
SUCCESS AT FIRST CERTIFICATE THE INTERVIEW 50 150
VIDEO PRODUCTION AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is made the 29th day of January 1988
BETWEEN  of  (‘the Publisher’), and
of  (‘the Distributor’)
WHEREBY IT IS AGREED as follows:
1 DISTRIBUTOR'S RIGHTS
1.1 The Publisher hereby grants to the Distributor a Licence to manufacture copies of the Publisher's Educational Videos in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and as defined in the attached schedules.
1.2 The Distributor hereby agrees to pay for the Licence in accordance with the price and terms agreed and to comply in all respects with the terms of this Agreement and as defined in the attached schedules.
2 DISTRIBUTOR'S DUTIES
2.1 The Distributor hereby undertakes:
i
to use all commercial efforts to stock, sell and promote the sale of the Videos throughout the Territory
ii
not to sell the Videos outside the Territory
iii
not to hold itself out as being entitled in any way whatsoever to contract on behalf of the Publisher
iv
to include at the beginning of each Video Cassette a statement as follows: ‘This copy is made under licence from Oxford University Press and no further copies may be made’.
The existing copyright notice shall remain and in no circumstances may the Distributor change, add, take away or otherwise tamper with the videos unless by prior negotiation and written agreement.
3 PUBLISHER'S OBLIGATIONS
3.1 The Publisher will supply the Distributor on loan with copy masters for each video.
The Distributor may specify the standard and format of these copy masters and will return the copy masters to the Publisher's appointed representative at all times when they are not being used for the reproduction of licenced copies.
3.2 The Publisher will supply the Distributor with labels and insert cards free of charge.
4 TRADE MARKS
4.1 The Distributor agrees to register on behalf of the Publisher in the Territory only the Trade Mark ‘Oxford’ or any other trade mark or trade name being used and owned by the Publisher and after termination (for whatever reason) of this contract the Distributor agrees to endorse the above-mentioned trade marks or trade names to the Publisher.
4.2 The Distributor hereby acknowledges that the Publisher is the owner of the trade mark ‘Oxford’ and of other trade marks used by the Publisher and undertakes to inform the Publisher immediately of any possible or alleged infringement of the Publisher's trade mark or of any other matter which may affect the continued use of the Publisher's trade mark in the Territory or elsewhere.
4.3 The Distributor hereby undertakes that in the event or any infringement of the Trade Mark it will offer all such assistance as the Publisher may reasonable require to enforce its rights in the Territory.
The Publisher shall be under no obligation to initiate legal proceedings.
4.4 The Distributor agrees to enter into a Trade Mark Licence Agreement with the Publisher to use the Publisher's Trade Marks if and when requested by the Publisher.
5 MARKETING
5.1 The Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with such assistance as the Distributor may reasonable require in promoting the Videos and in particular the Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with publicity material and such sample books as shown in the Schedule on terms to be agreed.
5.2 The Distributor agrees to provide the Publisher with an annual sales report to the Publisher with sales figures and other such information as the Publisher may require.
5.3 The Distributor agrees to undertake an annual stock count on 30 June of each year and shall supply details of stock figures to the Publisher and shall permit a representative of the Publisher to be present at the stock count should the Publisher so request.
6 DURATION
6.1 This Agreement shall continue for a period as shown in the Schedule.
6.2 Either party shall be entitled on written notice to the other to terminate the Agreement forthwith in the event of any substantial breach by either party which shall include:
i
the Distributor being compulsorily or voluntarily put into liquidation other than for the purposes of reconstruction
ii
a Receiver being appointed to manage the Distributor's business
iii
failure to comply with any of the terms of this agreement including items listed in Schedule I.
7 GENERAL
7.1 The Agreement shall be binding upon all the parties and may not be assigned without the prior written consent of the other party.
7.2 The failure of either party to enforce any of the terms or conditions of this Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver of future performance of any such term or condition.
7.3 The terms and conditions shown in Schedule I and Schedule 2 shall be a part of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have placed their signatures the day and year first before written
SIGNED BY On behalf of the Publisher
SIGNED BY On behalf of the Distributor
SCHEDULE 1 — DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
Distributor:
The Publications: ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHING MATERIALS
Territory: ARGENTINA
Distribution Rights: JOINT EXCLUSIVITY WITH 
Joint Exclusivity:
Price of Publication: SHALL BE US$65 FOR EACH 30-MINUTE CASSETTE AS SPECIFIED IN SCHEDULE 2.
Royalty Payable: SHALL BE 25% OF THE ARGENTINIAN PUBLISHED PRICE PAYABLE ON THE QUANTITY TO BE MANUFACTURED AT ANY GIVEN TIME AND SHALL BE PAID ON RECEIPT OF THE COPY MASTERS.
Guaranteed Sales: SHALL BE AS SHOWN ON SCHEDULE 2.
IF THESE SALES HAVE NOT BEEN ACHIEVED THEN THE BALANCE OF ROYALTIES UNPAID WILL BECOME PAYABLE THREE YEARS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE FIRST CASSETTES WERE MANUFACTURED.
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made the twenty-third day of November, one thousand nine hundred and eighty-nine
BETWEEN  of  (hereinafter referred to as the Publisher) of the one part
AND  (hereinafter referred to as the Artist) of the other part
WHEREBY it is agreed as
1 The Artist accepts an engagement to play the part of Receptionist in At the Doctor's in the video entitled Grapevine II (hereinafter referred to as the Video) and during shooting to be available for stills photography.
2 The Artist will be on call to the Publisher on Wednesday 6 December 1989.
3 The Publisher will pay the Artist a fee of £200 for the engagement.
The total fee will be paid on receipt of an invoice at the end of the engagement.
4 In consideration of the above payments the Publisher will be entitled to distribute the Video worldwide and for an unlimited period of time for non-broadcast use only and to use any still photographs in any books published to accompany the Video or in any publicity or promotion material for the Video and accompanying books.
5 The Artist may be required to attend for up to ten hours per day.
During this period the Artist will be allowed at least one hour's break.
6 The Artist will be provided with expenses to cover travel from home to location for the engagement and will be provided with transport to all locations during the making of the Video.
7 The Artist hereby authorizes the Publisher to pay all fees due to her agents, who are:
As witness the hands of the parties the day and year first above written
Signed by on behalf of in the presence of
Signed by the Artist in the presence of
SCHEDULE NO. 2
to an Agreement dated 30 November 1989 between:(1) and  (2) for the publication of English Language Teaching Video Cassettes using extracts of Central Television's News Programme ‘Central News South’
Title VTR Reference Approximate
Post by Road A2482/89(T1102) 1’ 38’
Smoking Ban A3531/89(T1104) 1’ 53’
Japanese Connection Swindon(T11) 2’ 16’
Reckless Drivers Swindon(T11/5149) 2’ 06’
Shakespeare's Birthplace 2348/89(T1255) 2’ 09’
Motorway Extension A1501/89(T1093) 2’ 03’
Threat To Common Land Central unable to trace 1’ 54’
TriOx A1528/89(T1102) 1’ 40’
Braunston Marina A3532/89(T1101) 2’ 00’
Back on The Rails (Ed. 1st loco) A2507/89(T1097) 1’ 55’
COLLABORATIVE AGREEMENT
DRAFT 3: 17 August 1990
1 Parties TO THE AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is made the day of.
199
BETWEEN
(collectively called the Non-academic Organizations) AND   (collectively called the Academic Organizations) altogether collectively called the Participating Organizations or the Parties
1.1 WHEREAS the Government of the United Kingdom has promulgated a programme of pre-competitive research in the field of advanced information technology and has invited, through the agency of the Department of Trade and Industry's Information Engineering Advanced Technology Programme (‘IEATP’) acting on behalf of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, and the Science and Engineering Research Council (‘SERC’), applications for financial support from consortia of academic and non-academic organisations; and
1.2 WHEREAS the Parties hereto desire to collaborate with each other, in accordance with the conditions governing offers of financial support by IEATP, in a project involving the creation of the National Corpus of the English Language
1.3 THE Parties HEREBY AGREE to abide by the following statements and undertakings.
2 DEFINITIONS AND TERMS
‘The Framework’ shall mean the Framework for Collaboration in the IEATP Programme and attached to this Agreement as Addendum A.
‘The Proposal’ shall mean the proposal entitled The National Corpus Initiative submitted to IEATP on 11 May 1990 on behalf of the Parties to this agreement together with any amendments agreed between the Parties and accepted by IEATP and attached to this Agreement as Addendum B.
‘The Project’ shall mean the programme of work to be carried out by the Parties to the Agreement in accordance with the terms and conditions of the IEATP ‘Grant Offer Letter’which shall mean the letter from the Secretary of State dated 10 July 1990 and attached as Addendum C.
‘Completion’ shall mean the date upon which the Parties to the Agreement and the Secretary of State agree that the Project is completed.
‘Technical information’ shall mean and include designs drawings reports specifications procedure instructions software and other technical information and data of any kind.
‘Intellectual property rights’ means background and results.
‘Background’ shall mean any inventions designs computer software reports drawings and other works and information made available before or during the Project but not generated under the Project and either belonging to the contributing Party or to which the contributing Party has the necessary rights for the purposes of the Project.
‘Results’ shall mean any inventions designs computer software reports drawings or other works and information made or generated under in the course of work on the Project.
‘Related company’ shall in relation to each Industrial Party mean any Related company within the meaning of Section 11 of the Company Securities (insider Dealing) Act 1985 and any other company (herein called ‘a Parent’) which directly or indirectly owns or controls more than one half of the equity share capital of such a Party and any other company of which such a Party directly or indirectly owns or controls company limited by guarantee by the Parties to be a Related company for the purposes of this Agreement.
‘The Lead Organization’ shall mean Oxford University Press which, acting on behalf of all of the Parties, shall be responsible for all communications with IEATP, shall receive any grant offer from the Secretary of State and shall act as Project Manager for the carrying out of the Project.
‘The Monitoring Officer’ shall mean the officer designated to this role in the Grant Offer Letter.
3 OBJECTIVES OF THE PROJECT
3.1 Signature of this Agreement will bind the Parties on whose behalf the signatures have been appended to form a Consortium within the meaning contained in the Framework.
Their relationships in respect of this Agreement shall be governed by the Framework within which context this Agreement shall be interpreted.
3.2 The objectives of the Project are as set out in the Proposal Section A.1.
4 RESPONSIBILITIES OBLIGATIONS AND RIGHTS
4.1.1 The Lead Organization has represented and acted on behalf of the Parties in making an application to IEATP for a Government Grant and shall represent and act on behalf of the parties in the acceptance of such Grant on terms acceptable to all of the Parties hereto including the completion of the project to the satisfaction of IEATP.
4.1.2 It is understood and agreed that all IEATP grant payments relating to the Project will be made to the Lead Organization as principal.
In compliance with IEATP Claims procedures The Lead Organization shall co-ordinate claims from the Non-academic Parties to this agreement submit them to the funding authority and on receipt of payments promptly forward the requisite sums to the other Parties.
4.1.3 All payments arising under or in connection with this Project and due to the Academic Parties will be made by SERC and the Non-academic Parties shall have no liability in respect of any such payments.
4.1.4 The technical responsibilities of the Parties shall be as stated in Section F of the Proposal and amendments thereto as appropriate.
Management information regarding resource deployment and technical achievement against plan, cost generation against budget and programme change implications shall be provided by the Parties to the Project Manager in accordance with formats and timetables approved by the Project Committee and to meet any information requirements of IEATP in connection with the payment of Grant.
4.2 In addition and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing:
4.2.1 The Lead Organization hereby undertakes to each of the other Parties
4.2.1.1 to use all reasonable endeavours properly to co-ordinate the Project in accordance with the directions of the Project Committee, to convene meetings of the Project Committee and ensure the proper distribution of information between the Parties
4.2.1.2 to provide project management facilities for the Project on the terms and conditions set out herein and in the Grant Offer Letter dated 10 July 1990
4.2.1.3 promptly on receipt of the necessary information to submit all requisite reports to the Secretary of State
4.2.2 Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing:
4.2.2.1 each Party hereby undertakes to each of the others fully and promptly to communicate to each of the other Parties all such technical information relating to background and results as such other may reasonably require to carry out its respective part of the Project or to which such other Part is entitled pursuant to Clause hereof
4.2.2.2 each Party other than the Lead Organization hereby undertakes to the Lead Organization duly to comply with all reasonable procedures laid down by and other reasonable requests and requirements of the Lead Organization in connection with the technical or other management or guidance of the Project.
4.3.1 The Non-academic Parties (other than the Lead Organization) will provide to the Lead Organization at times to be agreed, but not more frequently than at 3 monthly intervals, a statement of net eligible costs as defined in the Grant Offer Letter.
The statements will be accompanied by an auditor's certificate in the form set out in Schedule 2 of the Grant Offer Letter.
No costs may be claimed which were incurred before the relevant date set out in the Grant Offer Letter.
The other Non-academic Parties will also notify the Lead Organization of the sale or transfer out of the Project of any capital equipment for which any claim for payment has been made under this Agreement.
4.3.2 Notwithstanding the provisions of Clause 4.3.1, the total claim made by each Non-academic Party in each financial year of the Project shall not exceed the amounts set out in the Grant Offer Letter, unless agreed otherwise by the Lead Organization and by IEATP.
4.3.3 The other Non-academic Parties agree to provide to the Lead Organization, or direct to the Secretary of State, as may be most convenient a copy of their respective latest audited accounts, unless previously provided, together with such other financial and technical information as the Secretary of State may from time to time properly require in relation to the procedures governing claims for payment.
4.3.4 The Lead Organization undertakes to submit the claims for the agreed payment periods of the Non-academic Parties in consolidated form to the Secretary of State within a reasonable period of their receipt.
If a claim is not provided by the agreed date, the Prime contractor may notify the Non-academic Parties responsible for that claim that it intends to submit a consolidated claim without including such missing claim and may thereafter proceed with such submission accordingly.
4.3.5 Within fourteen days of the receipt by the Lead Organization of a grant payment from the Secretary of State, the Lead Organization will pay to the other Non-academic Parties such proportionate amount as represents its approved claim in the grant payment.
The Lead Organization will not be liable to make any payment other than in respect of an approved claim.
The Secretary of State may withhold payment of the last 15% of the grant amount until he has accepted that the work of the Project has been completed.
4.3.6 The Lead Organization shall be notified by the other Non-academic Parties of the proceeds less refurbishment costs received by such Party from the disposal of any prototypes the costs of which were included in the grants paid to such Party.
The disposing Party will provide an auditor's certificate in relation to the disposal and will refund to the Lead Organization such amount as may be claimed by the Secretary of State in respect of such disposal.
4.3.7 The Secretary of State has the right to reclaim payments made under the IEATP Contract in whole or in part.
If the Secretary exercises such right the Lead Organization will notify the Party affected so that it may have the opportunity of making representations to the Secretary of State.
To the extent that the Secretary of State thereafter enforces such right in respect of payments made to a Party, other than the Lead Organization, then that Party will promptly refund such amounts to the Lead Organization on receipt of an auditor's certificate that these amounts have been paid by him to the Secretary of State.
5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
5.1 The Lead Organization shall appoint a Project Manager who shall be responsible to a Project Committee, comprising representatives of all the Parties to this Agreement, for the planning, progressing and reporting of the technical content of the project, deployment of resources and financial estimating and control within pre-determined timescales.
Systems will be set up and maintained whereby progress reports in terms of technical achievement against plan and cost expenditure against budget within the same timespan are collated and integrated for regular submission to the Project Committee and IEATP's Monitoring Officer.
5.2 The Project Manager shall also be responsible setting up and maintaining a mechanism by which operational changes in the Project thought necessary by any of the Parties are submitted to the Project Committee for approval.
Changes requiring Project Committee approval include any substantial changes in technical direction which have implications for the allocation of resources or for time and cost required for the completion of the Project.
5.3 The Project Manager will refine the suggested committee structure set out in the Proposal and agree with the Parties the composition of the Project and Technical Committees.
The Project Manager will be responsible for calling regular meetings of both committees and ensuring that their business is properly minuted and that the information and decisions contained in such minutes are disseminated in ways considered appropriate by the Project Committee.
5.4 The Parties agree that the Lead Organization shall establish an Advisory Council which will take an overview of the Project from a national research perspective and advise the Project Committee on matters relating to the interests of the speech and natural language community.
6 CONFIDENTIALITY
6.1 As respects all information as is directly or indirectly communicated to it by another Party (hereinafter called the supplying Party) under the terms of this Agreement or otherwise in connection with the Project (including technical information or otherwise relating in any manner to the business or affairs of such other Party) the recipient Party hereby undertakes to the supplying Party that it will until five years after Completion or abandonment of the Project treat the same as (and use all reasonable endeavours to procure that the same be kept) confidential and will not disclose the same to any other person without prior written consent of such other Party in each case except to the extent that it is reasonably necessary in or for the purposes of the exercise of the rights and licences granted to it pursuant to this Agreement.
The recipient Party further undertakes to the supplying Party that it will not during that period use the same except in or for the said purposes.
6.2 Provided always that such undertaking shall not in any case be deemed to extend to any information which is:
6.2.1 in the possession of the recipient Party at the date of receipt from the supplying Party, or
6.2.2 public knowledge (or otherwise than by reason of any breach by the recipient Party) becomes public knowledge, or
6.2.3 obtained by the recipient Party from another person in good faith without breach of a confidentiality obligation owed to the supplying Party, or
6.2.4 independently acquired by the recipient Party as a result of work carried our by an employee or contractor to whom no disclosure of the relevant confidential information has been made, or
6.2.5 necessarily divulged by marketing products resulting from exploitation.
6.3 Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent the communication of such information as requisite in each case to IEATP or the Secretary of State for the purposes of fulfilling obligations under the Grant Offer Letter.
6.4 Without prejudice to the generality of Clause [6.1 a]each Party undertakes to establish suitable procedures for ensuring that technical and other information of other Parties is restricted to those employees, or as the case may be members of staff or students, needing such information for the purposes of the duties assigned to them and that all such employees, members of staff and students are themselves subject to suitable obligations of confidence.
6.5 Each Party shall be entitled at the completion of the Project to require delivery up of all copies of any information originating from it except information which the recipient in each case has a right to retain or use for the purposes of clause [Exploitation of Results].
6.6 Insofar as this Agreement is less restrictive or onerous on the recipient Party in respect of the disclosure or use of any particular information than any undertaking given by the recipient Party prior to the execution of this Agreement in respect of the same information, such information shall to such extent be deemed to have been superseded by this Agreement.
7 COMPETITION
7.1 Each of the Parties agrees during the term of this Agreement not to participate in any project which competes with the Project or which is designed to fulfil the same or similar objects.
8 EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
8.1 In the event that the Secretary of State shall reject the Proposal either generally or as respects the proposed funding or participation of any proposed Party in the Project or if the Grant Offer Letter shall not have been issued and accepted by the Parties within six months of the date of execution hereof, then upon such rejection or the expiration of such six month period the Project shall, unless otherwise agreed, be deemed abandoned, the Proposal shall be withdrawn and any rights hereunder shall be deemed to have been terminated and each Party shall be entitled to require each other Party forthwith to deliver up and return to it all Technical Information and all other information supplied by it in connection with the Proposal together with all copies thereof in any form in the possession of such other Parties or any of its Related companies.
8.2 Each Party undertakes to each of the other Parties that it will use its best endeavours to communicate fully and promptly to the other all such background and results as may reasonably be required for carrying out the project or complying with the terms of the Grant Offer Letter or for exploitation of the results in accordance with Clause 11.
9 WARRANTIES AND INDEMNITIES
9.1 Each Party
9.1.1 undertakes to use all reasonable endeavours to ensure the accuracy of all technical information provided by it pursuant to this Agreement.
In the event of any error or other deficiency therein being notified to it, or coming to its notice, it will use all reasonable endeavours to supply the appropriate corrections within a reasonable time
9.1.2 warrants its rights to disclose such information
9.1.3 undertakes that it will promptly disclose to the other Parties and to the Secretary of State any facts or circumstances which come to its attention indicating or suggesting any infringement or material risk of infringement of any patent or other Intellectual Property Right of any other person not being a Party to this Agreement through the expected mode of use or exploitation of its own results or background provided always that this undertaking shall not be deemed to impose or imply any specific obligation to undertake any patent searches of intellectual property rights or make any enquiries.
9.2 Subject hereto and same insofar as any defect or error in any technical information shall give rise to any liability on the part of any Party to the Secretary of State for repayment of Grant or otherwise pursuant to an IEATP Offer of Grant each Party shall be under no further obligation or liability in respect of any technical information which it furnishes pursuant to this Agreement and no Warranty, Condition or Representation of any kind is made, given or to be implied as to its sufficiency, accuracy, or fitness for purpose, or freedom from infringement of patents or other Intellectual Property Rights and the receiving Party shall in each case be entirely responsible for the use to which it puts the same.
9.3 To that intent and save and subject as aforesaid, the receiving Party undertakes to indemnify and hold harmless the supplying Party against all or any loss, damage, liability, costs, claims and demands (whether direct, consequential or otherwise) arising out of or in connection with the use made by the Receiving Party of any such technical information whether the liability claim be in contract or in tort and whether the same arises directly or by way of any claim for an indemnity contribution or otherwise and irrespective of whether or not the same was in consequence of the negligence of any person.
10 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
10.1 The Academic Parties undertake that as respects copyright and other intellectual property rights in any items comprising technical information in respect of their results they will at the request and cost of the Non-academic Parties to this Agreement assign to and execute and do all such deeds acts matters and things as may be requisite for vesting such rights in an Non-academic Party either along or jointly with other Non-academic Parties to this Agreement.
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing the Academic Parties undertake that they will not make any application for registration of IPR in respect of any technical information relating to results without the prior written consent of the Non-academic Parties.
10.2 The Project Officer of each Academic Party will monitor the results produced by that Party to identify any material that may be protectable by IPR applications.
H/she will notify the Project Manager of such material in a timely manner.
10.3 The Academic Parties shall, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, have a licence to use for the purpose of further internal research and teaching work all the foreground technical information that they themselves have generated together with such of the background and results as is communicated to them hereunder by the other Parties and is necessary for such use of their own result, but such use shall be in conformity with the confidentiality conditions of this Agreement.
10.4 Each Non-academic Party undertakes to monitor its results for material which may be the subject of applications for IPR protection.
Subject to the provisions of Clause 10.1, it will take such steps as it may consider reasonable in each case to secure IPR protection.
It will inform the other Parties to this Agreement of all applications which it makes.
10.5 Each Party undertakes to each of the other Parties in respect of results generated by it that it will not at any time make any publication or disclosure that would prejudice the rights of any of the other Parties in making IPR applications except for publication or disclosure:
a)
following the making of a relevant application for an intellectual property right, or
b)
in conformity with any rules agreed unanimously in that respect by the Parties, or
c)
without the prior written consent of any Party whose rights may be so prejudiced, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld.
10.7.1 Subject to due performance of its obligations hereunder each Party shall be entitled, subject to reimbursement of the costs of collation reproduction and delivery, to receive copies of all results and of such background technical information of the other Parties as is in each case reasonably necessary for such Party independently to exploit results in the manner specified herein.
10.7.2 In addition to its unfettered rights (subject only to the terms and conditions of the Grant Offer Letter to use and licence the use of its own results) each Party shall be entitled, subject to the provisions herein, without limit of time and (subject to any consents as may be necessary from the Secretary of State) in all parts of the world
10.7.2.1 to use results generated by each other Party in such manner as is reasonably necessary in any case for such Party to use or exploit its own or other results
10.7.2.2 to use background technical information supplied by each other Party in such manner as is reasonably necessary in any case for such Party to use or exploit its own or other results
10.7.2.3 to use background and results in carrying out the Project, such use to be free unless otherwise agreed.
10.7.3 Any such use under Clauses 10.7.2.1 or 10.7.2.2 shall be subject to reasonable prior notice to the Party which has generated or supplied the information to enable any relevant application for intellectual property rights to be made.
This obligation to give notice shall terminate six months after completion of the Project.
10.7.4 Each Party (hereinafter in this Clause called the sub-licensor) shall have the right to sub-licence a Party other than a Party to this Agreement (hereinafter in this Clause called the sub-licensee) to use any technical information of any Party for the purposes of the sub-licensee in like manner as specified in Clause 10.7 b subject to written consent of the Party who has generated or supplied such technical information.
Such consent shall not be withheld provided that the sub-licensor agrees to supply such technical information to the sub-licensee on conditions corresponding to the confidentiality conditions of this Agreement save that consent may be withheld at the sole discretion of any Party from whom consent is sought in respect of the supply of computer programs in source code form.
Nothing in this Clause shall require or authorise any Party to enter into an agreement which is contrary to law.
10.7.5 For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby stated that use of technical information pursuant to Clause 10.7 b, c and d includes in particular, but without limitation, the development adaptation merger modification or enhancement of software and the use of such developed, adapted, merged, modified or enhanced software.
10.7.6 In respect of the due exercise of any right or licence (i) confirmed or granted or (ii) agreed to be granted under the provisions of Clauses 10.7.2, 10.7.3 and 10.7.4, each Party (i) grants or (ii) agrees to grant respectively a licence under any intellectual property rights in respect of results and (i) grants or (ii) agrees to grant respectively to the extent reasonably necessary for such due exercise a licence under any background intellectual property right, and undertakes to procure like grants or agreements to grant from its Related companies.
10.7.7 Each Party, in exercising its rights under Clauses 10.7.2 to 10.7.6 shall be entitled to employ an agent or contractor, provided that 10.7.7.1 it shall not supply computer programs in source code form to such an agent or contractor without the prior written consent of the Party or Parties who have generated or supplied such programs or parts thereof, and
10.7.7.2 such Party supplies technical information to the agent or contractor on suitable conditions of confidentiality.
10.7.8 Consent under Clause 10.7.7.1 shall not be unreasonably withheld.
10.7.9 The rights granted or agreed to be granted pursuant to Clauses 10.7.2 to 10.7.4 and to the associated licences granted or agreed to be granted pursuant to Clause 10.7.6 shall be subject to the payment and other conditions set out hereinafter.
10.7.10 The rights and licences hereby granted or agreed to be granted to a Non-academic Party pursuant to Clauses 10.7.2 b to 10.7.6 shall be exercisable on identical terms by any Related company of that Party for so long as it remains such, subject to the obtaining from such companies of suitable undertakings as to confidence and delivery up.
In the event of any Related company ceasing to be so related then (unless the requisite rights are duly assigned to it by such Party by agreement) each Party undertakes on request to grant to it continuing rights of a similar nature on fair and reasonable terms.
10.8.11 For the avoidance of doubt nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to affect the ownership of any background technical information or background intellectual property rights.
10.8.12 In respect of licences granted under intellectual property rights the licensor shall, at the request and coat of the licensee, execute and do all such deeds, acts matters and thins as are requisite for securing an official registration of such licenses.
10.8.13 Without prejudice to its obligations under the foregoing provisions each Party undertakes to each other Party that (insofar as it has not already done so) it will procure undertakings from relevant employees members of staff and students to enable it to perform those said obligations.
11 EXPLOITATION OF RESULTS
11.1 The Parties agree to exploit the Results in accordance the undertakings set out in paragraphs 24, 25 and 26 of the Grant Offer Letter.
11.2 In relation to commercial exploitation the Non-academic Parties and the Academic Parties agree that the terms and conditions for exploitation of and licenses granted under intellectual property rights in results deriving from the Academic Parties shall have regard to the extent to which such results are incorporated in or applied to the manufacture of commercially exploited products (particularly where there had been substantial product development outside the project) and to the SERC guidelines which are set out in a letter from SERC dated 13 August 1984, together with its attachments.
11.3 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement no Party shall be subject to any obligation to make any payment or to any restraint or restriction in respect of its use of technical information, whether results or background, insofar as such information is not subject to intellectual property rights of another Party hereto or its Related companies (as the case may be) or to any agreement with a third Party which may impose restrictions.
12 SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
12.1 In the event of any dispute or difference arising between any of the Parties concerning this Agreement or the construction or performance thereof, such dispute or difference shall in the first instance be referred to the Project Manager whose decision shall be final and binding on the Parties unless with 14 days after such decision any one of the Parties shall have notified the others of his dissatisfaction with such decision.
12.2 In the event of any Party giving notice of dissatisfaction with the Project Manager's decision the matter shall be referred to the Project Committee of all the Parties who shall endeavour to settle the dispute amicably.
12.3 In the event that any such dispute or difference cannot be settled amicably the matter in dispute or difference may be referred by any of the Parties to a single arbitrator to be appointed by the Parties hereto or failing agreement within 28 days after being requested to concur in such appointment, according to the provisions of the Arbitration Acts, 1950 and 1979 or any statuary re-enactment or amendment thereof for the time being in force shall apply thereto.
13 PUBLICITY AND PUBLICATION OF RESULTS
13.1 No Press or other publicity release relating to this Agreement or the project shall be made without the prior authority of the Project Manager as to the terms and date of such release.
The Project Manager shall not unreasonably withhold or delay the issue of such authority, and any delay exceeding six weeks from the date of request, or any refusal of authority, shall be subject to review by the Project Committee.
13.2 Publication of Results
13.2.1 In addition and without prejudice to its obligations under Clause [number of confidentiality clause], no Party hereto shall cause or permit the publication or lease of any work, paper or presentation based on the work or any Party thereof without the prior consent of the Chairman of the Project Committee.
13.2.2 However, it is recognised that the Academic Partners will be expected to publish the results of their work on the project and may wish to disclose such work in ways other than by publication.
Any Party wishing to make any such publication or disclosure shall in requesting such consent submit details of the intended publication or disclosure to the Chairman of the Project Committee and may specify a reasonable time within which consent is to be given.
the Chairman may withhold consent to publication or disclosure where it can be demonstrated that publication or disclosure is contrary to the commercial interest of any of the Parties provided that ins such cases
13.2.2.1 such consent shall wherever practicable be given on the basis of and subject to the exclusion of any commercially sensitive information
13.2.2.2 such consent shall not otherwise be unreasonably restrictive as to content, and
13.2.2.3 the giving of such consent shall not involve more than the minimum delay which is necessary to protect commercial interests.
13.2.3 Subject as aforesaid, any refusal or unreasonable delay (including but not by way of limitation, any delay beyond the date specified in the request) in granting such consent may be referred to the Project Committee.
13.2.4 Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, no work, paper or presentation may be published or made where the publication or making of such work, paper or presentation would prejudice the grant or validity of any application for intellectual property rights based on any part of the work.
14 ASSIGNMENT AND SUBCONTRACTING
14.1 This Agreement may not be assigned or otherwise transferred by any Party in whole or in Party without the express prior written consent of the other Parties.
14.2 No Party shall sub-contract any part of the work under the Project assigned to it without the prior written approval of all Parties.
No such approval shall relieve the Party requiring approval from any of its obligations under this Agreement.
Approval shall not be required under this Agreement in the case of a sub-contract in respect of which the Sub-contractor and the work to be sub-contracted has been specified in the Proposal.
14.3 If any Party sub-contracts any work under the Project it shall ensure that the Sub-contractor enters into an appropriate confidentiality and restricted use agreement and it shall further ensure that it acquired the right to disclose and sub-license results generated under the sub-contract to the same extent that it can disclose and licence its own results.
15 DURATION AND TERMINATION OF THE AGREEMENT
15.1 This Agreement shall commence on the date of signature hereof and shall continue until the completion of the Project or until otherwise determined by written agreement between the contributors.
The provisions of this Agreement concerning confidentiality or necessary for the implementation of any licences for the exploitation of results shall survive termination of this Agreement and shall remain in full force and effect.
15.2 If a Party defaults in its obligation so as to jeopardise the objectives of the Project, and if the defaulting Party fails to cure its default within 60 days of a written request from the other Parties (the Project Manager) so to do, then the defaulting Party's right to continue participating in the Project shall (subject to the prior obtaining of any necessary consents from the Secretary of State) be terminated.
15.3 In the event that the participation of the Party in default in the Project is terminated
15.3.1 rights granted hereunder to the other Parties in relation to the Party in default's Background, technical information and intellectual property rights
15.3.2 the Party in default shall provide the other Parties with a free licence to use any of its Results necessary for the implementation of the Project, and shall also provide the others with a free licence to use its results to the extent necessary for those others to exploit their own results
15.3.3 all rights acquired by the Party in default hereunder to Background and results of other Parties shall cease immediately but the Party in default's obligations under Clause 6 shall remain in full force and effect, and
15.3.4 any rights granted by the Party in default to the other Parties may be extended on the same terms and conditions to any third Party whose involvement in the Project is necessary for the Project's satisfactory completion whether such involvement be by way of sub-contract or as a Party to this Agreement.
16 AMENDMENT OF THE AGREEMENT
16.1 No amendment or variation of this Agreement the schedules to this Agreement or any of the rights and obligations of the Parties hereunder shall be effective unless expressed in writing signed by all the Parties hereto and shall be subject where appropriate to the prior consent in writing of the Secretary of State.
16.2 The Lead Organization shall be notified in writing by any other Party who believes that any objective set out in the Proposal cannot be met completely.
All the Parties will consider the reasons and, if valid, will agree a statement to be discussed by the Lead Organization with the Secretary of State with a view to agreeing a change to, or revision of, the agreed programme.
Any consequent changes in the programme and grant payable shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Proposal.
17 APPLICABLE LAW
This Agreement should be governed by and construed in all respects in accordance with the laws of England.
PUBLISHING AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made the day of one thousand nine hundred and
BETWEEN  of  (hereinafter called ‘the Publisher’)
AND   (hereinafter called ‘the Proprietor’)
WHEREAS the Proprietor has prepared scripts for publication provisionally entitled Concordia Multi-media Package comprising those items listed in Schedule I (hereinafter called ‘the Work’)
NOW IT IS AGREED as follows:
1 PROPRIETOR'S OBLIGATIONS
1.1 The Proprietor agrees to undertake the duties and responsibilities shown in Schedule II.
2 PAYMENTS
2.1 The Proprietor shall be paid for the Work the payments shown in Schedule III.
3 PUBLISHER'S OBLIGATIONS
3.1 The Publisher shall subject to its approval of the finished material publish the Work at its own risk and expense and in such form as it considers appropriate and shall have exclusive control over the design illustration production promotion price distribution and sale of the Work.
4 INSURANCE OF MANUSCRIPTS
4.1 The Publisher shall not be legally responsible for any loss or damage (howsoever arising) to the Work its illustrations and other related material while it is in the Publisher's custody or in the course of production.
The Proprietor will keep a copy of all material delivered to the Publisher.
5 COPYRIGHT AND TITLE
5.1 The Proprietor hereby grants to the Publisher during the legal term of copyright (including any renewals thereof) an irrevocable exclusive licence to publish the Work throughout the world in any form whatsoever that the Publisher may wish.
5.2 The Proprietor further grants to the Publisher the right to grant sub-licenses under the Licence hereby granted on such terms as the Publisher may determine.
5.3 The Proprietor agrees that the Publisher may amend and alter the Proprietor's Work supplied to the Publisher in such manner as the Publisher may reasonably consider necessary and the Publisher agrees to discuss any substantial changes with the Proprietor and to obtain the Proprietor's consent to such substantial changes, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld by the Proprietor.
5.4 The Title of the Work shall belong exclusively to the Publisher.
6 PERMISSIONS
6.1 The Publisher shall be responsible for obtaining permissions to reproduce illustrations photographs and other copyright material for use in the Work and the cost of such permissions shall be borne by the Proprietor.
6.2 The Publisher shall be responsible for commissioning any artwork and obtaining stills shots from the video components of the Work for use in the preparation of the books components of the Work and the cost shall be borne by the Publisher.
Any existing artwork already and previously commissioned by the Proprietor shall be made available to the Publisher at no further cost.
7 PROOFS AND ARTWORK
7.1 The Proprietor agrees to read the Work in proof and apart from keyboarding errors all charges for carrying out the Proprietor's corrections additions or deletions in the proof sheets exceeding 10% (ten per cent) of the charge for composition shall be borne by the Proprietor and shall be deductible from payments due to the Proprietor.
7.2 The Proprietor further agrees that all charges for carrying out the Proprietor's corrections additions or deletions in the preparation and reproduction of artwork apart from errors for which the Publisher or printer is responsible exceeding 10% (ten per cent) of the charge for preparation of such artwork shall be borne by the Proprietor and shall be deductible from payments due to the Proprietor.
8 ACCOUNTING AND ADVANCES
8.1 The Publisher shall compile statements of sales twice a year and render them together with cheques for the amount due to the Proprietor within six months after the accounting dates.
The accounting dates are to be 31 March and 30 September.
8.2 If the Publisher is able to identify important opportunities for sale of the Work but which involve high commercial risk then the Publisher will pursue these opportunities only after written agreement with the Proprietor.
Royalties on such sale shall not become accountable as a sale until one month after the Publisher has actually received payment.
9 PRESENTATION COPIES
9.1 The Publisher may present copies of the Work to the Libraries entitled to the Privilege and shall be entitled at its discretion to present copies of every edition of the Work to the Delegates of the Oxford University Press and their Secretary and the Chancellor of the University editors of periodicals teachers and other persons through whom in its judgement publicity for the Work will be gained and shall retain the copies needed as samples by their showrooms and travellers throughout the world and all such presentation copies shall not be taken into account as copies sold.
10 PROPRIETOR'S COPIES
10.1 The Proprietor shall receive on publication six copies of all components of the Work and one copy of any revised or corrected impression all free of charge and shall be entitled to purchase at two-thirds of the United Kingdom published price any further copies of the Work required for the Proprietor's personal use and not for resale.
The Proprietor has the right to make copies of audio and video components of the Work for use within its institution for its own teaching programmes but such copies will neither be sold nor lent to third parties.
11 CONFLICTING EDITIONS
11.1 During the continuance of this Agreement the Proprietor shall not without the consent in writing of the Publisher prepare or edit for any other publisher any work that is an expansion abridgement or revision of the Work or of any part of it or publish or cause to be published any work on the same subject which may reasonably be regarded as likely to conflict with the sale of the Work.
12 REVISED IMPRESSIONS
12.1 The Proprietor when called upon by the Publisher agrees to undertake routine updating revision and correction of the Work after publication and shall from time to time inform the Publisher of corrections and revisions which the Proprietor may consider desirable.
12.2 Should the Proprietor for any reason whatsoever not prepare and deliver such updating revision and correction within such time as may be reasonably required by the Publisher the Publisher shall be free to employ for that purpose such writer (or writers) as it may think fit and to deduct all or part of the remuneration payable to such writer(s) from any monies due to the Proprietor for such updates, revisions or corrections.
13 SUBSEQUENT EDITIONS
13.1 The Proprietor if called upon to do so by the Publisher agrees to prepare subsequent editions of the Work.
The Publisher and the Proprietor shall agree on the nature of each new edition and on the reasonable date of its completion.
13.2 Should the Proprietor for any reason whatsoever not prepare or fail to deliver each new edition then the Publisher shall be free to employ an alternative writer (or writers) to edit the work in such manner as the Publisher may consider appropriate and the Publisher will be entitled to deduct all or part of the remuneration payable to the alternative writer(s) from royalties payable to the Proprietor on that edition.
14 SEQUEL WORKS
14.1 The Proprietor will offer any sequel works as referred to in Schedule I to the Publisher on terms and conditions no less advantageous to the Publisher than those provided for in this Agreement.
14.2 Should the Proprietor be unable or unwilling to produce a sequel work within a reasonable period of time the Publisher shall be at liberty to commission a sequel from a third party.
15 AUTHORSHIP
15.1 The Publisher shall publish the Work in the name of the Susan Parks, Gerard Bates, Mary Lee Wholey and Anna Thibeault as authors with reference to Concordia University, Center for Continuing Education, Montreal, Canada as the sponsor and in the event of the Work being revised by other persons in the future the Publisher shall be free to publish the Work in joint names or as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances without, however, omitting the name of the Proprietor.
16 WARRANTY AND INDEMNITY
16.1 The Proprietor warrants that it has the unfettered right to authorise the publication of the Work; that the Proprietor's own contributions to the Work are original and contain no libellous defamatory obscene or otherwise unlawful or misleading matter and that all statements therein purporting to the facts are true.
16.2 The Proprietor agrees to indemnify the Publisher against loss injury or damage (including all legal costs and expenses and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by the Publisher to compromise or settle any claim) occasioned to the Publisher by any claim action or threatened proceedings arising out of a breach or violation of the above warranty provided that the Publisher shall have given prompt written notice to the Proprietor of any such claim, action or threatened proceedings upon its becoming aware of same and provided the Publisher shall have given the Proprietor the option, at the Proprietor's discretion, to defend such claim, action or threatened proceedings himself.
17 WASTING AND REMAINDERING
17.1 If in the Publisher's opinion the Work should cease to have a sufficiently remunerative sale the Publisher may either remainder or waste any copies remaining on hand.
Should the price received per copy be less than one-third of the published price then no royalties on such copies shall be paid.
18 TERMINATION
18.1 If the Publisher notifies the Proprietor that it no longer wishes to publish the Work then on written request by the Proprietor the Publisher will do everything necessary to vest the Work as then published by the Publisher in the Proprietor's ownership.
If the Proprietor republishes the Work the use of the names Oxford, Oxford University Press or any logo or get-up which may suggest the name or trade marks of the Publisher must be removed.
19 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
19.1 In the event of the Publisher being involved in or threatened with legal proceedings arising from the publication of the Work the Proprietor agrees to provide such assistance as may be requested by the Publisher.
20 ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF LAW
20.1 In the case of any dispute or difference arising between the parties hereto relating to this Agreement or any matter arising therefrom or incidental thereto the same may be submitted to the arbitration of a single arbitrator in accordance with the provisions of the United Kingdom Arbitration Act 1979 or any statutory modification thereof for the time being in force.
20.2 This Agreement and all matters arising out of it shall in all respects be governed by the Laws of England.
21 FORCE MAJEURE 21.1 No party shall be liable to any other for non-performance in the event of circumstances occurring outside their control which shall include for the avoidance of doubt strikes material or currency fluctuations.
AS WITNESS the hands of the parties the day and year first above written
SIGNED BY on behalf of in the presence of:
SIGNED BY on behalf of in the presence of:
SCHEDULE I CONTENTS OF THE CONCORDIA MULTI-MEDIA PACKAGE
The Concordia Multi-media Package comprises:
Video Masters
Consisting of six sketches in complete form, in segment-by-segment form and in line-by-line form, and of total duration approximately 180 minutes.
Audio Masters
Providing recordings of approximately 10 hours' duration on open reel tape.
Typescripts
a)
For student's Activity Book (classroom version) to make a book of approximately 64 pages
b)
For teacher's Video Guide (classroom version) to make a book of approximately 40 pages
c)
For a student's Video Workbook, bilingual: French-English,(self-study version) of approximately 48 pages to make other bilingual books
d)
For a student's Workbook, bilingual: French-English,(self-study version) of approximately 136 pages to make other bilingual books
e)
For a Student's Guide, bilingual: French-English,(self-study version) of approximately 40 pages to make other bilingual books.
In all, the Package provides material for a first level of study for the teaching and learning of English as a foreign or second language.
As such it is seen as the first part of a larger work, to be completed by sequel works of a similar kind but which will be separately specified and will be covered by separate agreements in accordance with the terms and conditions laid down in Clause 14.1.
INITIALLED PROPRIETOR.
PUBLISHER SCHEDULE II
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PROPRIETOR
The Proprietor shall be responsible for the supply of the components of the Work as listed in Schedule I.
a
Video Masters
The Proprietor at its expense shall supply 1’ video masters consisting of all or any combination of the forms of the video sketches as itemized in Schedule I, to the specification of the Publisher and including any front or end matter supplied by the Publisher.
b
Audio Masters
The Proprietor shall supply audio tape master, specification 15 inches per second full track Dolby A, for publication and duplication as necessary by the Publisher.
c
Typescripts
The  Proprietor shall supply complete typescripts as listed in Schedule I.
INITIALLED PROPRIETOR.
PUBLISHER SCHEDULE III
PAYMENT AND ROYALTIES
1 The Publisher will pay the Proprietor the sum of Can $55,000 (fifty five thousand Canadian dollars) for the outright purchase of the master video tape as specified in Schedule II.
2 The Publisher will pay the Proprietor the following royalties on sales of the Work
2.1 Video Cassettes (Classroom Version)
6% (six per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on the first 500 copies of each cassette sold (irrespective for format or standard)8% (eight per cent ) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies between 501 and 1,000 copies sold
10% (ten per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies between 1,001 and 2,000 copies sold
12% (twelve per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies between 2,001 and 10,000 copies sold
14% (fourteen per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies sold in excess of 10,000 copies
2.2 Student's Activity Books (Classroom Version)
12% (twelve per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on the first 20,000 copies sold
15% (fifteen per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies between 20,001 and 50,000 copies sold
16% (sixteen per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies sold in excess of 50,000 copies
2.3 Teacher's Video Guide
10% (ten per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies sold
2.4 Self Study Version
4% (four per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on the first 1,000 units sold
8% (eight per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all units sold between 1,001 and 2,000 units
10% (ten percent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all units sold between 2,001 and 5,000 units
12% (twelve per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all units sold in excess of 5,000 units
Net receipts is in all cases defined as the invoiced value of sales of the Work, less any  credit notes applicable.
3 The Publisher will pay the Proprietor £5,000 (five thousand pounds sterling) as an advance on the royalties specified in Clause 2 above on publication of the Classroom Version in English.
4 The Publisher will pay the Proprietor upon receipt by the Publisher, 30% of all amounts received by the Publisher from any sub-licensee of the publisher on the first printing of the Work and 40% on the second printing with the same sub-licensee.
5 All amounts payable by the Publisher to the Proprietor are payable in legal currency of the United Kingdom except for the sum of CAN $55,000 for the purchase of the master video tape which shall be paid in Canadian dollars.
6 Any taxes which the Publisher may have to withhold on payments to be made to the Proprietor hereunder, shall be for the sole account of the Proprietor.
The Proprietor shall not be liable for any such withholding taxes if it has been complied with the relevant tax exemption requirements and has delivered tot he Publisher an exemption certificate or other proof of such exemption satisfactory to the taxing authorities.
INITIALLED PROPRIETOR.
PUBLISHER
13 November 1989
Dear 
We have pleasure in confirming the terms and conditions of your employment with  as Director of our video entitled Grapevine II.
1 DEFINITIONS
Underlying these terms and conditions are two assumptions:
a)
that Oxford University Press is the Producer of the Video, and
b)
that the purpose of the Video is to teach English to learners of English as a foreign language.
Further details concerning the specification of the Video are provided in Schedule A attached.
2 THE DIRECTOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES
The major areas of your involvement are:
a)
to comment on the script of the Video prepared by us and agree on a shooting script with the us;
b)
to specify with us the total production team required whose terms and conditions of employment will, however, be our responsibility;
c)
to cast the Video according to a budget provided by us and subject to our approval;
d)
to rehearse, direct and edit the Video according to the timetable agreed with us and specified in Schedule B attached.
3 THE PRODUCER'S RESPONSIBILITIES
a)
We are responsible for setting the overall budget for the Video and for making any decisions which affect this budget and which relate to the educational purpose of the Video as set out in Schedule A. We have the right to be present at any or all of the stages of production, shooting and editing in order to fulfill these responsibilities.
b)
We will pay you for your services as outlined in Paragraph 2 above a fee of £7,000 (seven thousand pounds).
This fee will be paid in three equal installments as follows:
£2,300 shall be payable on signature of this agreement
£2,300 shall be payable at the beginning of the shoot period or on 27 November 1989, whichever is the earlier
£1,400 shall be payable on 22 December 1989
£1,000 shall be payable on completion of the editing or on 8 January 1990, whichever is the earlier.
c)
We will pay your travel and accommodation expenses during the pre-production, shooting and editing phases.
These will include:
hotel accommodation if you are required to stay away from home, and including meals taken at the hotel, but excluding private telephone calls and drinks beyond normal hospitality expected of a director
travel which will either be provided by us or, where you are required to use your own car, you will be paid an allowance of 30p per mile.
4 COPYRIGHT
The copyright in the Video and in any other work created in the course of the engagement shall belong exclusively to Oxford University Press.
5 RIGHTS
a)
Between 13 November and 22 December 1989 we will be exclusively entitled to your services and to all the products thereof and all rights therein shall be and remain our exclusive property.
b)
The payments specified in Paragraph 3 above are for non-broadcast use of the Video.
In the event of the Video being broadcast or being caused or licensed to be broadcast we will pay you standard residuals in accordance with normal rates.
There is no obligation on us, however, to seek broadcast opportunities for the Video.
c)
We have the right to use any stills taken from the Video and to take any photographs during the shooting and use these in accompanying print materials and publicity matter.
6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
You will be acknowledged by name in the final credits of the Video in the event of it proceeding to completion and in any video credits in the accompanying print material which may be published.
7 TERMINATION
a)
If you deviate substantially and importantly from the conditions laid down in this letter of engagement, we will be free to terminate the engagement by immediate notice at any time and to engage additional and/or alternative directors to perform some or all of the functions set out here.
b)
In the event of termination we cannot reclaim any moneys already paid to you.
c)
In the event of termination and in the event of the production proceeding to completion and publication, any acknowledgements of your contribution will be by mutual agreement between ourselves.
If you are in agreement with the terms and conditions as stated above, will you kindly sign the enclosed copy of this letter where indicated and return it to us.
Yours sincerely For and on behalf of 
Signed  Director Electronic Publishing
I hereby agree the terms and conditions of my engagement as stated above.
Signed Date
SCHEDULE A SPECIFICATION OF THE VIDEO GRAPEVINE II
A video, to be accompanied by print material, of approximately 55 minutes' duration, consisting of 8 programmes of approximately 7 minutes each.
The completed video will be published on two cassettes each containing 4 programmes and each with a total duration of approximately 27 minutes.
Each programme will consist of an independent story encapsulating specific language teaching items within a comic situation.
Given that the purpose of the video is to provide a resource for language learning and teaching, any decisions concerning presentation, acting, editing, etc will be taken so as to give precedence to this educative purpose.
Given that the video is intended for international sale, 's requests concerning the respecting of other countries' mores (especially to do with the representation of minorities, religion, sex and violence) will be adhered to.
SCHEDULE B TIMETABLE
The dates below have been agreed between the Director and the Producer.
Any changes to these dates will be made by mutual agreement.
Pre-production: 13 November to 24 November 1989 (10 days)
Shoot: 27 November to 8 December 1989 (10 days)
Off-line edit: 12 December to 15 December 1989
On-line edit: 20 December to 22 December 1989
Sound dubbing: 4 January to 6 January 1990
In the event that the Director is required to provide his services in excess of five days after 22 December 1989, then it is agreed that he shall be reimbursed at the rate of £200 per diem.
19 January 1990
Dear 
We have pleasure in confirming the terms and conditions of your employment with Oxford University Press as Director of our video entitled Resource Books for Teachers: Making the Most of the Micro.
1 DEFINITIONS
Underlying these terms and conditions are two assumptions:
a)
that Oxford University Press is the Producer of the Video, and
b)
that the purpose of the Video is to teach English to learners of English as a foreign language.
Further details concerning the specification of the Video are provided in Schedule A attached.
2 THE DIRECTOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES
The major areas of your involvement are:
a)
to comment on the script of the Video prepared by us and agree on a shooting script with the us;
b)
to specify with us the total production team required whose terms and conditions of employment will, however, be our responsibility;
c)
to cast the Video according to a budget provided by us and subject to our approval;
d)
to rehearse, direct and edit the Video according to the timetable agreed with us and specified in Schedule B attached.
3 THE PRODUCER'S RESPONSIBILITIES
a)
We are responsible for setting the overall budget for the Video and for making any decisions which affect this budget and which relate to the educational purpose of the Video as set out in Schedule A. We have the right to be present at any or all of the stages of production, shooting and editing in order to fulfill these responsibilities.
b)
We will pay you for your services as outlined in Paragraph 2 above a fee of XXX (XXX XXX XXX pounds).
This fee will be paid in three equal installments as follows:
XXX on signature of this letter of contract
XXX at the beginning of the shoot
XXX on completion to our satisfaction of the final edit of the video.
c)
We will pay your travel and accommodation expenses during the pre-production, shooting and editing phases.
These will include:
hotel accommodation if you are required to stay away from home, and including meals taken at the hotel, but excluding private telephone calls and drinks beyond normal hospitality expected of a director
travel which will either be provided by us or, where you are required to use your own car, you will be paid an allowance of XXXp per mile.
4 COPYRIGHT
The copyright in the Video and in any other work created in the course of the engagement shall belong exclusively to Oxford University Press.
5 RIGHTS
a)
During the shooting and on-line editing of the Video we will be exclusively entitled to your services and to all the products thereof and all rights therein shall be and remain our exclusive property.
There is no guarantee that the production will necessarily proceed to completion.
b)
The payments specified in Paragraph 3 above are for non-broadcast use of the Video.
In the event of the Video being broadcast or being caused or licensed to be broadcast we will pay you standard residuals in accordance with normal rates.
There is no obligation on us, however, to seek broadcast opportunities for the Video.
c)
We have the right to use any stills taken from the Video and to take any photographs during the shooting and use these in accompanying print materials and publicity matter.
6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
You will be acknowledged by name in the final credits of the Video in the event of it proceeding to completion and in any video credits in the accompanying print material which may be published.
7 TERMINATION
a)
If you deviate substantially and importantly from the conditions laid down in this letter of engagement, we will be free to terminate the engagement by immediate notice at any time and to engage additional and/or alternative directors to perform some or all of the functions set out here.
b)
In the event of termination we cannot reclaim any moneys already paid to you.
c)
In the event of termination and in the event of the production proceeding to completion and publication, any acknowledgements of your contribution will be by mutual agreement between ourselves.
If you are in agreement with the terms and conditions as stated above, will you kindly sign the enclosed copy of this letter where indicated and return it to us.
Yours sincerely For and on behalf of 
Signed Date  Director Electronic Publishing
I hereby agree the terms and conditions of my engagement as stated above.
Signed Date
SCHEDULE A SPECIFICATION OF THE VIDEO Resource Books for Teachers: Making the Most of the Micro
A video, to be accompanied by print material, of approximately XXX minutes' duration, consisting of XXX programmes of approximately XXX minutes each.
Each programme will consist of XXX.
Given that the purpose of the video is to provide a resource for language learning and teaching, any decisions concerning presentation, acting, editing, etc will be taken so as to give precedence to this educative purpose.
Given that the video is intended for international sale, 's requests concerning the respecting of other countries' mores (especially to do with the representation of minorities, religion, sex and violence) will be adhered to.
SCHEDULE B TIMETABLE
The dates below have been agreed between the Director and the Producer.
Any changes to these dates will be made by mutual agreement.
Pre-production: XXX days previous to shoot
Shoot: 25 and 26 January 1990
Preparation for edit: to be completed by XXX
On-line edit: XXX
Any over-runs will not result in any further payments to the Director except by prior written agreement between the Director and the Producer.
30 January 1990
Dear 
Reading for English: Authoring Program
This letter is to confirm our agreement that you will provide us with an authoring program for Reading for English.
In view of the fact that we are not seeking, for the moment at least, to produce a marketable product, it is my intention that this letter should constitute our contract.
1 The Product
The product is described functionally as software which will convert ASCII files prepared in accordance with guidelines and templates into data files for use in the software package known as Reading for English.
In making this conversion, the software will attempt an intelligent error analysis of the prepared data and will produce an error file which will flag all errors to enable an editor familiar with the program to make the necessary adjustments.
There will be no attempt to make this process automatic.
Beyond this functional definition of the software, the product will be defined by a demonstrator which you will produce and by subsequent agreed and written modifications between us.
In addition to the software you will provide us with guidelines and templates for use by authors.
The computing environment for the software is MS DOS/IBM compatibles.
2 Payment
We will pay you 2,000 for seeing through to completion the data files from the submitted ASCII files for the first four titles of Reading for English, 50% of this on signature of this letter and 50% on delivery.
We will pay you a further £500 on delivery of the product which is at a sufficiently robust and acceptable stage to allow third parties to operate it.
In the event of our asking you to input other sets of data for subsequent disks we will pay you £250 per disk on delivery.
3 Rights
You, as beneficial owner, assign to Oxford University Press the copyright and all other intellectual property rights in respect of the product by the law in any part of the world, authorise Oxford University Press to make or cause to be made any alterations, adaptations and additions to the product, and waive your rights conferred by Chapter IV of Part I of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
If you find this acceptable, I would be grateful if you would sign both copies of the letter and return one to me, keeping the other for your files.
Yours sincerely
Electronic Publishing & Development
Signed, in agreement with the above
Date
THIS AGREEMENT is made the day of 1990 BETWEEN:
1 THE  whose principal place of business is at  (‘’) and 2  (a general partnership organized under the laws of the State of California) whose principal place of business is at  (‘’).
1 DEFINITIONS
In this Agreement and its Schedules the following expressions have the following meanings:
1.1 ‘The Work’ means The Oxford Students Dictionary of American English.
1.2 ‘The Converted Text of the Work’ means the Work in the machine-readable form in which it is supplied by  to .
1.3 ‘The Licensed Products’ are those products listed in Schedule 1 to this Agreement.
1.4 ‘Net Invoice Price’ means the price charged by  for the Licensed Products to customers and distributors, less the following deductions where they are factually applicable:
1.4.1 discounts, allowed and taken, in amounts customary in the trade,
1.4.2 sales, use, value added or similar taxes and duties imposed upon and with specific reference to particular sales,
1.4.3 amounts allowed or credited on returns (not exceeding the original billing), or retroactive price reductions, and
1.4.4 outbound transport costs prepaid or allowed.
1.5 ‘The Trade Marks’ means the names ‘Oxford’and ‘Oxford University Press’and all other registered and unregistered marks and trade names, artwork and logos reproduced in Schedule 2.
1.6 ‘The Term’ means the period during which this Agreement is in force in accordance with Clause 4.
1.7 ‘The Territory’ means the world.
2 DELIVERY
will deliver the Converted Text of the Work to  no later than 30 days after the execution of this contract and  will be deemed to have accepted the Converted Text of the Work within 30 days after the date of delivery, unless  is notified to the contrary.
3 THE LICENSES GRANTED
3.1 Subject to Clause 4, grants to  during the term in the Territory the following non-exclusive licenses.
3.1.1 to incorporate the Converted Text of the Work in the Licensed Products
3.1.2 to use the Trade Marks (without amendment or addition) in connection with the licenses granted under Clause 3.1.1 (provided always that nothing in this Clause 3.1.2 shall be taken as conferring on  the right to use the Trade Marks, exclusively or non-exclusively, other than in respect of the Licensed Products).
3.2  will inform  of any application of the Work in any Licensed Product as defined in Schedule 1 in writing and prior to publication or release.
3.3 The Licensed Products shall be marked legibly in a permanent manner with one or more of the Trade Marks and a statement that they include the Work under licence from .
agrees that samples of all packaging, advertising, labelling and the like of the Licensed Products shall be provided to  for inspection prior to initial use of the first Licensed Product to be published by  which incorporates the Work to ensure that all Trade Marks are properly identified as the property of .
These initial samples will be used as the guidelines for any such packaging, advertising, labelling and the like on any subsequent Licensed Products to be published and shall not be materially changed by  without  's written approval.
3.3.1  shall not:
3.3.1.1 make without  's consent (not to be unreasonably withheld) any modifications to the work or the converted text of the work, the Licensed Products or their packaging.
Non-textual enhancements for format, sound, and graphics made necessary by the environment of the Work's inclusion in the Licensed Products may be made at  's option.
3.3.1.2 remove or tamper with the Trade Marks or other means of attribution or identification used on or in relation to the Licensed Products 3.3.1.3 use the Trade Marks in any way which might prejudice their distinctiveness or validity or the goodwill of  therein 3.3.1.4 use in relation to the Products any Trade Marks other than the Trade Marks and the trade marks of  and MacEnglish as set out in Schedule 2 B or used by  in the Territory any Trade Marks or Trade Names so resembling the Trade Marks or Trade Names of  as to be likely to cause confusion or deception.
3.4 On the Licensed Products, and in all manuals, will include the copyright notice set out in Schedule 3 and in all manuals, brochures and material marketed with the Licensed Products by , and in all advertising and publicity for the Licensed Products, will include the Trade Mark Notice set out in Schedule 4, in each case in durable and permanent form.
3.5  will preserve the copyright notice and cause it to be brought to the attention of its customers and Distributors in such other ways as may reasonably be prescribed by  from time to time.
3.6  agrees to co-operate with , and at  's expense to execute any documents and do such other things as may be necessary in the opinion of  's Counsel, to enable  to apply for and/or secure any copyright registration that may be necessary for the Work or the Converted Text of the Work.
3.7  will do nothing inconsistent with  's rights in the Trade Marks, including, but not limited to, committing any sort of infringement.
further agrees that all use of the Trade Marks shall be to the benefit of and be on behalf of.
shall also cause the trade mark registration symbol to be placed next to such of the Trade Marks as are registered from time to time throughout the world.
3.8  acknowledges to  that the Trade Marks are and always have been the property of  and that this agreement is made with full knowledge of the need of  to support  's efforts to Register and Maintain the Trade Marks to avoid Trade Mark confusion in the Territory and elsewhere in order that the Trade Marks shall continue to be viable and valuable assets of .
will not attempt to register or use for its own benefit, or aid any third party in attempting to register or use, the Trade Marks or any trade mark the use of which would constitute an infringement of  's Trade Marks.
agrees to co-operate with , and at  's expense to execute any documents and do such things as may be necessary in the opinion of  's counsel, to safeguard the Trademarks (including proof of use and application for recording as a registered user of any or all of the Trademarks or the Trademarks Registers maintained by the relevant Trademarks offices in the Territory and to enable  to apply for and/or secure proper registration of the Trade Marks in the Territory.
3.9  further undertakes to report to  promptly all instances of activities of which  is aware by third parties in the Territory and elsewhere which could have any effect on the validity of  's Trade Marks including:
3.9.1 sale or advertising by others of any products carrying a Trade Name or Trade Mark identical to or similar to any one of the Trade Marks and
3.9.2 publications by others, visual advertising and statements which portray  its Trade Marks and all products or product groups in such a way as to have a likelihood or depreciating the good will in the Trade Marks and
3.9.3 threats or implied threats by third parties alleging infringement of third party intellectual or commercial property rights resulting from sale of the Licensed Products by .
3.10 If in the future  and  agree that it is necessary or desirable to register a copyright or other intellectual property right anywhere in the world with respect to the Licensed Products, and  will co-operate and each take such action as is required to register the right in question in the name of the party to whom said right belong.
The costs and expenses of such negotiation will be borne by the party to whom the benefit accrues.
3.11 The Licenced Products shall carry the full Converted Text of the Work, or sub-sets of the full Converted Text of the Work subject to approvals under clause 3.12.1 below.
3.12  shall obtain the prior written approval of  for:
3.12.1 all editorial matters connected with the Work in the Licensed Products (including textual integrity),
3.12.2 general guidelines relating to the use of the Trademarks and the manner of attribution to  in marketing, advertising and otherwise promoting the Licensed Products including the use of the Trademarks and the manner of attribution in marketing materials, advertising, labelling and packaging.
Such approvals shall not be withheld or delayed unreasonably.  must respond to any such request for approval within ten (10) days of receipt of same failing which  will be deemed to have given its assent.
3.13  shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable legal requirements and Export Control Regulations applicable to  's distribution of the Licensed Products and shall indemnify  against any breach of such Regulations.
3.14 Except as provided expressly in this clause 3, all rights in the Work, the Converted Text of the Work and the Trade Marks are the property of and reserved to .
4 DURATION
4.1 The period of the licences shall begin on the date of this Agreement and end on whichever is the first to occur of the following:
4.1.1 the date of expiry of three (3) months' written notice to terminate given by either party to the other, provided always that it is understood that notice shall not be given under this clause 4.1.1 before the expiry of two (2) years commencing on the date of this Agreement,
4.1.2 the effective date of any termination of this Agreement under clause 11.1.
5 SALES AND PAYMENT
5.1  shall use its best endeavours consistent with its normal course of business to have made, promote and sell Licensed Products, in order to achieve maximum benefit to both parties.
5.2  shall ensure that it invoices the Licensed Products immediately on their despatch to third parties.
5.3 For the licences  shall make the following payments to :
5.3.1 an aggregate sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) as an advance on the sums due under clause 5.3.2 below and made up of the following payments:
5.3.1.1 the sum of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300) upon execution of this Agreement 5.3.1.2 the further sum of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300) upon  's acceptance (the acceptance date) of the Converted Text of the Work in accordance with clause 2, and 5.3.1.3 the further sum of three thousand four hundred dollars ($3,400) upon  's first sale of a Licensed Product or on the expiry of 1 year from the Acceptance Date, this aggregate sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) to be treated as an advance on the sums due under clause 5.3.2 below (‘the Advance’)
5.3.2 a sum representing two percent (2%) of the Net Invoiced Price per Licensed Product sold, to be paid in accordance with the provisions of clause 6 hereof.
5.4  will supply  with three copies gratis of every Licensed Product published which incorporates the Work.
6 ACCOUNTING
6.1 For the purpose of accounting for the royalties payable under clause 5.3.2, there shall be four accounting periods of three (3) months each ending on the last day of each calendar quarter, ie 31 March, 30 June, 30 September and 31 December in each year.
6.2 On the fifteenth (15th) day of February, May, August and November in each year  will:
6.2.1 submit to  a statement in such forms as  shall require in respect of the preceding accounting period giving details of all Licensed Products leased or sold by  during the preceding accounting period including details of the net selling price of the Licensed products and the amount or amounts due to, and
6.2.1 make payment of the royalties in excess of the Advance which are prescribed in clause 5.3.2.
6.3  shall keep complete and accurate records showing all information that is necessary for the full computation and verification of the royalties payable to  under this Agreement, and shall permit any authorized agent of  to examine and inspect such records at all reasonable times on reasonable notice not more than one time in any calendar year.
6.4 Payments shall be made by cheque in US dollars to the bank account of , details of which are set out in Schedule 5, or to an account at such other bank in England as  may from time to time nominate for the purpose.
6.5 Where  is obliged to make a payment to  under this clause which attracts sales, use, excise or other similar taxes or duties, shall be responsible for paying such taxes and duties.
,
its advisors and affiliates know of no circumstances under which this  license agreement with  would attract any taxation.
7 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
All copyright and other intellectual property rights in the Work and in the Converted Text of the Work are the property of and are reserved to , and  agrees that it will not commit any act of infringement or misappropriation with respect to the Work or the Converted Text of the Work.
However, the rights in all of the components of  's original work that was not provided to  by , including but not limited to, curricular text, sound, graphics, screen design and layout incorporated in the Licensed Products remains with .
warrants and represents that it is the true and lawful owner of all rights in the Work and the Converted Text of the Work as well as the Trade Marks and that such Work, Converted Text of the Work and Trade Marks do not and shall not infringe the rights of any third party and that  is fully empowered to make this Agreement.
8 LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT
8.1 Neither party shall be under any liability to the other if and for so long as it is prevented from or delayed in performing any of its obligations under this Agreement by reason of circumstances beyond its reasonable control.
8.2 No failure, delay or indulgence on the part of either party to the other in exercising any power or right conferred upon that party in this Agreement shall operate as a waiver of such power or right.
Further, no single or partial exercise of any such power or right shall preclude any other or further exercise or the exercise of any other such power or right under this Agreement.
8.3 Subject to clause 8.5, the liability of  for any breach of this Agreement, or arising in any other way out of the subject matter of this Agreement, will not extend to any incidental or consequential damages or losses including (without limitation) loss of profits.
8.4 If either party becomes aware of any proceedings or threat of proceedings relating to the sale or other dealings in the Licensed Products, to the Licenced Products themselves or otherwise relating to the subject matter of this Agreement (including, but not limited to, proceedings alleging infringement by use of the Trade Marks or infringement of copyright), that party will notify the other immediately.
8.5 In the event that any proceedings are brought against , alleging that the whole or any part of the Work constitutes an infringement of copyright or other intellectual property rights, or contains any obscene, indecent or defamatory matter, or alleging that use of the Trade Marks infringes the rights of third parties, will notify .
will at  's option either give to  all assistance reasonably required by  in connection with such proceedings or take over their conduct.
will indemnify  against all claims, demands, liabilities and expenses (including legal fees and expenses, and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by  to compromise or settle any claim) incurred by  in connection with such proceedings.
8.6 If proceedings are brought against  as described in clause 8.5, may, if appropriate, at its own option and expense either:
8.6.1 procure for  the right to continue to use the Converted Text of the Work, or
8.6.2 replace or modify the Converted Text of the Work so that it becomes non-infringing.
If neither of these alternatives is in  's opinion practicable, will give notice to  to that effect and  will immediately upon receipt of such notice cease all use of the Work and/or the Converted Text of the Work for the purposes of this Agreement.
In this event, may give written notice to  to terminate this Agreement immediately.
8.7 In the event that any proceedings are brought against  other than in the circumstances described in clause 8.5 (and including, but not limited to, those arising out of any acts or omissions of  in its exercise of its rights under this Agreement or otherwise in connection with alleged defects in the Licensed Products), will at  's option either give all assistance reasonably required by  in connection with such proceedings or take over their conduct.
will indemnify  against all claims, demands, liabilities and expenses (including legal fees and expenses and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by  to compromise or settle any claim) incurred by  in connection with such proceedings; provided, however, that no expenditure, compromise or settlement shall be made or determined without  's prior written approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld;
Also provided always that  will not be obliged to assist with or take over the conduct of any proceedings which are principally based upon allegations of negligence, breach of contract, or other acts or omissions by , nor will  be obliged to indemnify  in the manner set out in this clause in relation to any such proceeding;
Provided further that this clause shall not apply to any claims  initiated by , its agents, affiliates, employees, or other persons or entities related to .
8.8 If any sub-clause of this clause 8 is held to be invalid or unenforceable under any applicable statute or rule of law then it should be deemed to be omitted and if as a result either party becomes liable for loss or damage which would otherwise have been excluded then such liability shall be subject to the remaining sub-clauses of this clause 8.
9 PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THIRD PARTIES
9.1  shall initially decide whether or not proceedings shall be brought against third parties, and shall name the conduct of any such proceedings, where these are based upon infringement or the Trade Marks or  's copyright or other intellectual property rights in the Work or the Converted Text or the Work.
In the prosecution of any such proceedings, agrees at  's expense to execute such documents and do such things as may be necessary in the opinion of  's Counsel to carry out such prosecution, including without limitation, joining as a party.
shall pay the legal fees and costs of both parties incurred in the prosecution of such proceedings and shall be solely entitled to any monetary recovery by way of settlement or judgement.
On  's refusal within thirty (30) days notice from  to bring any such proceedings, shall have the right to bring any such proceedings at its own expense and with the full cooperation of .
9.2 If either party shall become aware of any infringement or threatened infringement by third parties or any rights of the other under this Agreement, that party shall forthwith notify the other.
Neither  nor  shall be obliged to bring proceedings against any such infringer but if, subject as provided in clause 9.1, either party shall bring such proceedings the other agrees to execute such documents and do such things as may be necessary to assist in connection with such proceedings.
10 ASSIGNMENT
may not assign any of its rights or obligations under this Agreement without prior written consent of .
11 TERMINATION
11.1 If:
11.1.1 either party commits any material breach of this Agreement and fails to remedy it within a reasonable period (which, where the breach consists of non-payment of sums due under clause 5, shall be construed as a period of one (1) calendar month) after receiving written notice  from the other party,
11.1.2 either party suffers distress or execution, commits an act of bankruptcy, goes or is put into liquidation (otherwise than solely for the purpose of solvent amalgamation or reconstruction), or seeks any form of protection against its creditors from any competent Court or tribunal,
11.1.3 a receiver or  administrative receiver or similar is appointed over any substantial part of either party's business, then the other party may by written notice terminate this Agreement immediately.
11.2 Upon termination under clause 11.1 or otherwise, each party will immediately deliver up any materials or equipment which are the property of the other.
agrees:
11.2.1 wherever possible to remove and destroy signage carrying any of the Trade Marks,
11.2.2 where the Signage of 11.2.1 cannot be removed or destroyed painting or otherwise covering from sight all signage incurring any of the Trade Marks in so far at least as it relates to the Trade Marks,
11.2.3 destruction of all letterhead, invoices and advertising material referring to the Trade Marks,
11.2.4 discontinuance at the earliest possible opportunity of all listings and telephone books, trade directories and the like of any and all wording involving the Trade Marks,
11.2.5 avoiding the use in any Trade Name or any Word or mark confusingly similar to any of the Trade Marks,
11.2.6 discontinuing identifying  verbally or otherwise by use in any way whatsoever of any of the Trade Marks.
11.3 At the end of the Term of this Agreement, may continue for an additional period of six (6) months to complete orders and sell off its existing stocks of the Licensed Products and will pay to  all royalties attributable to such sales in accordance with clauses 5 and 6.
11.4 In the case of termination by  for  's default in payment of the Advance or royalties due under clause 5.1, shall be entitled to retain any moneys already paid to it by  under the terms of this Agreement.
11.5 Clauses 7, 8 and 9 and, to the extent necessary, clauses 5 and 6 shall continue notwithstanding termination of this Agreement or the fulfillment of the parties' other obligations under this Agreement.
12 NOTICES, GOVERNING LAW, ENTIRE AGREEMENT
12.1 Any notice, document or request falling to be given or served under this Agreement may be given or served by sending it by registered post or certified mail, postage pre-paid, or by tested telex or facsimile transmission to: in the case of 
in the case of 
Either party may give written notice to the other of a change of address, and after notice of such change has been served and received, any notice, document or request given or served thereafter shall be given to or served upon such party at such changed address.
12.2 This Agreement and all the terms, provisions and conditions of this Agreement and all questions of construction, validity and performance under it shall be governed by English Law.
The English Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with any dispute which has arisen or may arise out of or in connection with this Agreement, unless the Publisher voluntarily submits itself to the jurisdiction of some other tribunal.
12.3 This Agreement and its Schedules constitute the entire agreement between  and  and supersedes all earlier communications about the subject matter of this Agreement.
Nothing in this Agreement or in its operation shall be interpreted as constituting a partnership or joint-venture  between and .
No amendment or other variation shall be effective unless it is in writing, is dated and is signed by or on behalf of both parties.
AS WITNESS the hands of duly-authorised signatories for the parties on the date first mentioned above
SIGNED for and on behalf of SIGNED for and on behalf of OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS PROFICIENCY
NAME: NAME:.
POSITION: POSITION:
SIGNATURE: SIGNATURE:.
 SCHEDULE 1
Licensed Products
The software packages published or to be published for general release or as customized packages by  and known as Inform, Workbase and Executive English for use in the computer environment of Apple Macintosh and CD-ROM.
Software packages as yet to be developed and published for general release or as customized packages by  with the same overall features of Inform, Workbase and Executive English.
SCHEDULE 2
Trade Marks
Oxford Oxford University Press Oxford Students Dictionary of American English (University crest)(artwork of OSDAE cover)
SCHEDULE 3
Copyright Notice
Oxford Students Dictionary of American English Second Edition 1986 © Oxford University Press 1983, 1986
SCHEDULE 4
Trade Mark Notice (Insert Trade Mark used) is a (registered) Trade Mark of (Oxford University Press) SCHEDULE 5
Bank Account Details
Bank account held with:
DATED 9 OCTOBER 1989 (1)(2)
AGREEMENT for
Agreement for Commissioned Computer Software
THIS AGREEMENT dated 9 October 1989 is made BETWEEN:
1 THE CHANCELLOR MASTERS AND SCHOLARS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD trading as OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS at , England (’ the Publisher’) and
2  (’ the Programmer’)
1 PROGRAMMER'S DUTIES
1.1 In accordance with the specification in Part 1 of the Schedule the Programmer will prepare a computer program and related materials for Reading for English MS DOS version (’ the Program’).
1.2 The Programmer will deliver the Program to the Publisher by the dated specified in Part 1 of the Schedule (or by any later date agreed between the parties); in this respect time shall be of the essence of the contract.
Should the Programmer be prevented for any reason from completing and delivering the Program by the agreed date, then as an alternative (in the case of the Programmer's breach) to terminating this Agreement the Publisher, after giving the Programmer reasonable notice, may commission the completion of the Program by another programmer on terms that the Publisher shall consider fair to all parties; the payment due to the Programmer under Clause 2 shall be altered accordingly; and the Programmer will immediately deliver to the Publisher such materials as he has prepared, and refund any advance of payment which he has received.
1.3 The Programmer will use his best endeavours to produce the Program in robust and bug-free form, and will assist the Publisher in the alpha and beta testing of the Program to be conducted before publication in accordance with Part 2 of the Schedule.
Within 21 days after receiving particulars of the errors or defects from the Publisher, the Programmer will correct any bugs or other errors or defects in the Program which come to light in the course of the alpha and beta testing.
2 PAYMENT
In return for performance of the Programmer's duties, the Publisher will make the payments detailed in Part 3 of the Schedule.
3.
RIGHTS
3.1 The Programmer as beneficial owner assigns to the Publisher the copyright and all other intellectual property rights now conferred in respect of the Program by the law in any part of the world.
3.2 The Programmer warrants that all material times he has satisfied the requirements as to nationality/residence set out in Section 154 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, and that the Program will not reproduce any copyright matter not assigned in this Agreement.
The Programmer will indemnify the Publisher against any loss or damage (including all legal costs and expenses, and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by the Publisher to compromise or settle any claim) occasioned to the Publisher by any claim, action or threatened proceedings arising out of a breach or violation of the warranty in this sub-clause.
3.3 The Programmer authorises the Publisher to make and permit the making of alterations, adaptations and additions to the Program.
The Programmer unconditionally and irrevocably waives the rights conferred by Chapter IV of Part I of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 on such (if any) of the Program as does not consist in a computer program or a computer-generated work: this waiver extends to the Publisher's sub-licensees and successors in title: it relates only to the components and not the Programmer's works generally or to works of a particular description.
3.4 The title of the Program shall belong exclusively to the Publisher.
4 OTHER PROVISIONS
4.1 Confidentiality
The Programmer agrees to use his best endeavours to keep all details of the Program confidential both during the currency of this Agreement and after its termination.
4.2 Joint Programmers
Where two or more persons participate in the writing of the Program and are parties to this Agreement, then the term Programmer shall be understood to mean Programmers in the plural, and undertakings given by the Programmers shall be so given jointly and severally.
In the event of a dispute between Programmers over any matter arising under or in connection with this Agreement, then (after full discussion with the Programmers) the opinion of the Publisher shall prevail.
The Publisher shall not be obliged to take account of any partnership or other relationship between the Programmers.
4.3 Entire Agreement
This Agreement and its Schedule (which is incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement) constitute the entire agreement between the Publisher and the Programme for the writing of the Program, and supersede all earlier communications on that subject.
4.4 Modifications
No amendment or other variation shall be effective unless it is in writing, is dated and is signed by or on behalf of both parties.
4.5 Assignment
This Agreement shall not be assigned, sub-contracted, or sub-licensed in whole or in part by the Programmer without the prior written consent of the Publisher.
After notifying the Programmer, the Publisher shall be free to assign its rights and obligations under this Agreement to another publisher.
This Agreement shall continue for the benefit of, and shall be binding upon, the parties and their successors and assigns.
4.6 Notices
Any notices permitted or required under this Agreement shall be made in writing and shall be deemed given when mailed by first-class post (airmail in the case of overseas programmers) to the addresses listed in the heading to this Agreement or to such other addresses as either party may elect after notice similarly given.
4.7 Clause Headings
Clause headings are inserted in this Agreement for convenience only, and they shall not be taken into account in the interpretation of this Agreement.
4.8 Applicable Law
This Agreement shall be governed by English Law.
The English Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with any dispute which has arisen or may arise out of or in connection with this Agreement, unless the Publisher voluntarily submits itself to the jurisdiction of some other tribunal.
4.9 Certificate of Value
It is certified that the transaction effected by this Agreement does not form part of a larger transaction or of a series of transactions in respect of which the amount or value, or the aggregate amount or value, or the consideration exceeds £30,000.
AS WITNESS the hands of the parties or their authorised signatories on the date first mentioned above.
SIGNED for and on behalf of SIGNED for and on behalf of THE PUBLISHER THE PROGRAMMER
Name:
Position: Position:
Signature: Signature:
THE SCHEDULE
Part 1: Preparation and Delivery of the Program
On or before 30 November 1989 the Programmer shall prepare and deliver the following materials for the Program to the Publisher:
1 A copy of the Program in Object Form in the following format:— on floppy disc for use on an IBM PC and compatible machines
2 A copy of the Program in Source Form, together with a complete set of all such listings, diagrams, logical flowcharts, diagnostic messages, descriptive texts and other documents as are necessary for a clear understanding of the Program, and for its future operation and application without recourse to human memory.
3 Draft Notes for use which will be incorporated into the documentation for the Program.
Part 2: Beta Testing Procedures
1 The Programmer shall prepare and deliver to the Publisher on or before 13 October 1989 a draft version of the Program suitable for Beta Testing.
This version shall be delivered on floppy disc for use on IBM PCs and compatible and shall incorporate data already supplied by the Publisher.
2 The Publisher shall be responsible for placing copies of the Program with Beta Testing assessors, for collecting feedback from these assessors and assembling it in a form which shall be interpretable as a specification to be met by the Programmer in preparing the final version of the Program.
This feedback shall be made available to the Programmer not later than four weeks after receipt of the draft version of the Program.
Further changes deemed necessary by the Publisher will be subject to separate negotiation.
3 The Programmer shall prepare and deliver to the Publisher the final version of the Program in accordance with the conditions laid down in Part 1 of this Schedule.
Part 3:Payments
The Publisher shall pay the Programmer a total, once-and-for-all fee of £4,000 for the Program.
The fee shall be paid according to the following schedule:
50% (fifty per cent) on signature of this Agreement 25% (twenty five per cent ) on receipt of the final version of the Program following Beta testing 25% (twenty five per cent ) on publication of the first packages of Reading for English
PRO FORMA AGREEMENT for Commissioned Computer Software
DATED 19[] (1) OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
DRAFT 2.8.89
PRO FORMA AGREEMENT for
Commissioned Computer Software
PRO FORMA AGREEMENT for Commissioned Computer Software
THIS AGREEMENT dated — is made BETWEEN:(1) THE CHANCELLOR MASTERS AND SCHOLARS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD trading as OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS at , England (’ the Publisher’) and (2)[—]of /whose Registered Office /Principal Place of Business is at [—](’the Programmer’)
1 PROGRAMMER'S DUTIES
1.1 In accordance with the specification in Part 1 of the Schedule the Programmer will prepare a computer program and related materials for [—](’ the Program’).
1.2 The Programmer will deliver the Program to the Publisher by the dated specified in Part 1 of the Schedule (or by any later date agreed between the parties); in this respect time shall be of the essence of the contract.
Should the Programmer be prevented for any reason from completing and delivering the Program by the agreed date, then as an alternative (in the case of the Programmer's breach) to terminating this Agreement the Publisher, after giving the Programmer reasonable notice, may commission the completion of the Program by another programmer on terms that the Publisher shall consider fair to all parties; the payment due to the Programmer under Clause 2 shall be altered accordingly; and the Programmer will immediately deliver to the Publisher such materials as he has prepared, and refund any advance of payment which he has received.
1.3 The Programmer will use his best endeavours to produce the Program in robust and bug-free form, and will assist the Publisher in the alpha and beta testing of the Program to be conducted before publication in accordance with Part 2 of the Schedule.
Within [–––]days after receiving particulars of the errors or defects from the Publisher, the Programmer will correct any bugs or other errors or defects in the Program which come to light in the course of the alpha and beta testing.
2 PAYMENT
In return for performance of the Programmer's duties, the Publisher will make the payment(s) detailed in Part 3 of the Schedule.
3.
RIGHTS
3.1 The Programmer as beneficial owner assigns to the Publisher the copyright and all other intellectual property rights now conferred in respect of the Program by the law in any part of the world.
3.2 The Programmer warrants that all material times he has satisfied the requirements as to nationality/residence set out in Section 154 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, and that the Program will not reproduce any copyright matter not assigned in this Agreement.
The Programmer will indemnify the Publisher against any loss or damage (including all legal costs and expenses, and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by the Publisher to compromise or settle any claim) occasioned to the Publisher by any claim, action or threatened proceedings arising out of a breach or violation of the warranty in this sub-clause.
3.3 The Programmer authorises the Publisher to make and permit the making of alterations, adaptations and additions to the Program.
The Programmer unconditionally and irrevocably waives the rights conferred by Chapter IV of Part I of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 on such (if any) of the Program as does not consist in a computer program or a computergenerated work: this waiver extends to the Publisher's sub-licensees and successors in title: it relates only to the components and not the Programmer's works generally or to works of a particular description.
3.4 The title of the Program shall belong exclusively to the Publisher.
4 OTHER PROVISIONS
4.1 Confidentiality
The Programmer agrees to use his best endeavours to keep all details of the Program confidential both during the currency of this Agreement and after its termination.
4.2 Joint Programmers
Where two or more persons participate in the writing of the Program and are parties to this Agreement, then the term Programmer shall be understood to mean Programmers in the plural, and undertakings given by the Programmers shall be so given jointly and severally.
In the event of a dispute between Programmers over any matter arising under or in connection with this Agreement, then (after full discussion with the Programmers) the opinion of the Publisher shall prevail.
The Publisher shall not be obliged to take account of any partnership or other relationship between the Programmers.
4.3 Entire Agreement
This Agreement and its Schedule (which is incorporated into and made a part of this Agreement) constitute the entire agreement between the Publisher and the Programme for the writing of the Program, and supersede all earlier communications on that subject.
4.4 Modifications
No amendment or other variation shall be effective unless it is in writing, is dated and is signed by or on behalf of both parties.
4.5 Assignment
This Agreement shall not be assigned, sub-contracted, or sub-licensed in whole or in part by the Programmer without the prior written consent of the Publisher.
After notifying the Programmer, the Publisher shall be free to assign its rights and obligations under this Agreement to another publisher.
This Agreement shall continue for the benefit of, and shall be binding upon, the parties and their successors and assigns.
4.6 Notices
Any notices permitted or required under this Agreement shall be made in writing and shall be deemed given when mailed by first-class post (airmail in the case of overseas programmers) to the addresses listed in the heading to this Agreement or to such other addresses as either party may elect after notice similarly given.
4.7 Clause Headings
Clause headings are inserted in this Agreement for convenience only, and they shall not be taken into account in the interpretation of this Agreement.
4.8 Applicable Law This Agreement shall be governed by English Law.
The English Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with any dispute which has arisen or may arise out of or in connection with this Agreement, unless the Publisher voluntarily submits itself to the jurisdiction of some other tribunal.
4.9 Certificate of Value
It is certified that the transaction effected by this Agreement does not form part of a larger transaction or of a series of transactions in respect of which the amount or value, or the aggregate amount or value, or the consideration exceeds £30,000.
AS WITNESS the hands of the parties or their authorised signatories on the date first mentioned above.
SIGNED for and on behalf of SIGNED for and on behalf of THE PUBLISHER THE PROGRAMMER
Name:.
Name:.
Position: Position:
Signature: Signature:
Part 1: Preparation and Delivery of the Program
On or before [—]the Programmer shall prepare and deliver the following materials for the Program to the Publisher:
1 A copy of the Program in Object Form in the following format:
on floppy disc for use on a [–––]
on a computer-readable tape to the following specification [–––]
(insert other appropriate alternatives).
2 A copy of the Program in Source Form, together with a complete set of all such listings, diagrams, logical flowcharts, diagnostic messages, descriptive texts and other documents as are necessary for a clear understanding of the Program, and for its future operation and application without recourse to human memory.
3 [Manuals, Notes for Use, etc.]
Part 2: Alpha and Beta Testing Procedures Part 3: Payments
Actors Payments
THIS AGREEMENT is made the day of one thousand nine hundred and
BETWEEN
Oxford University Press of  (hereinafter referred to as the Publisher) of the one part
AND
(hereinafter referred to as the Artist) of the other part ********** WHEREBY it is agreed as
1 The Artist accepts an engagement to appear in the video provisionally entitled Project English Video (hereinafter referred to as the Video) and during shooting to be available for stills photography.
2 The Artist will be on call to the Publisher from 18 to 22 June and 24 to 29 June inclusive.
3 The Publisher will pay the Artist a fee of £150 per day for the engagement.
The total fee (£1,650) will be paid at the end of the engagement.
4 In consideration of the above payments the Publisher will be entitled to distribute the Video worldwide and for an unlimited period of time for non-broadcast use only and to use any still photographs in any books published to accompany the Video or in any publicity or promotion material for the Video and accompanying books.
5 The Artist may be required to attend for up to ten hours per day.
During this period the Artist will be allowed at least one hour's break.
6 The Artist will be provided with expenses to cover travel from home to location for the engagement and will be provided with transport to all locations during the making of the Video.
7 Accommodation of good standing will be provided for all days the Artist is required.
The accommodation will include breakfast and evening meal and a midday meal will be provided on location each day.
8 The Artist hereby authorizes the Publisher to pay all fees due to him at Ashmount 182 Main Street Warton Carnforth Lancs LA5 9PT.
As witness the hands of the parties the day and year first above written
Signed by on behalf of Oxford University Press in the presence of
Signed by the Artist in the presence of
SCHEDULE I DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUTHOR
The Author shall be responsible for the preparation of the Work and in particular the Author shall
1 Prepare a script which shall meet the following requirements: the complete typescript to make a book of not more than 32 pages a complete list of any textual or illustrative copyrighted material to be included together with full information on source of such material supply a complete art brief for any illustrations required
2 Deliver the Work by 31 August 1990
3 Deliver the script as typescript, double-spaced on one side of A4 paper, but should the Author ask the Publisher to prepare the script as required such costs shall be borne by the Author.
SCHEDULE II ROYALTIES
The Publisher shall pay to the Author the following royalties on sales of the Work
1 Bound Copies
1.1 10% (ten per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies sold
2 Copies sold in Sheets
On all copies sold in the form of unbound printed sheets a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts
3 Licensed Reprints
In the event of the Publisher licensing its overseas Branch offices or another third party to produce an edition in return for a royalty payment to overcome special local circumstances the Author shall receive from the Publisher a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts exclusive of any direct or first costs.
This royalty shall not exceed the amount that would have been paid had such copies been printed and sold by the Publisher and which is set out in Clause I of this Schedule
4 Bilingual Editions and Adaptations
On all copies of the Work rendered into bilingual editions, or adapted specially to suit the educational requirements and syllabus of particular countries a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts
5 Secondary Exploitation by the Publisher
In the event of the Publisher exploiting the Work in any other form (for example audio or video cassettes) the Publisher shall pay a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts
6 Subsidiary Rights
In the event of the Publisher receiving from other parties payments for exploitation of the Work in any other form or manner then the Publisher shall pay the Author a portion to be based on the Publisher's net receipts from such other parties.
VIDEO PRODUCTION AGREEMENT
This AGREEMENT is made the day of 198
BETWEEN OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS of  (‘the Publisher’), and
(‘the Distributor’)
WHEREBY IT IS AGREED as follows:
1 DISTRIBUTOR'S RIGHTS
1.1 The Publisher hereby grants to the Distributor a Licence to manufacture copies of the Publisher's Educational Videos in accordance with the terms of this Agreement and as defined in the attached schedules.
1.2 The Distributor hereby agrees to pay for the Licence in accordance with the price and terms agreed and to comply in all respects with the terms of this Agreement and as defined in the attached schedules.
2 DISTRIBUTOR'S DUTIES
2.1 The Distributor hereby undertakes:
i
to obtain any necessary Government Censors' clearance for the Videos,
ii
to use its best efforts to manufacture Videos to a standard similar to the Publisher's own work,
iii
to package Videos using only the Publisher's own insert cards and labels,
iv
to attach to each video offered for sale an official government serial-numbered sticker.
2.2 The Distributor hereby further undertakes
i
not to add, take away or otherwise tamper with the content of the Videos including the copyright notices and the credits,
ii
not to use the copy masters or back up copies for reproducing any copies outside the terms and conditions of this agreement,
iii
not to sell the Videos outside the Territory,
iv
not to hold itself out as being entitled in any way whatsoever to contract on behalf of the Publisher.
3 PUBLISHER'S OBLIGATIONS
3.1 The Publisher will supply the Distributor on loan with copy masters for each video.
The Distributor may specify the standard and format of these copy masters and may make one U- Matic back-up copy of each copy master.
The copy master and the backup copy remain the property of the Publisher and they must be returned to the Publisher's appointed representative when not required for making licensed copies.
The Publisher's appointed representative has the right to be present while the copies are being made.
3.2 The Publisher will supply the Distributor with labels and insert cards according to the formats, standards and numbers specified by the Distributor and as set out in Schedule 2 or additions thereto.
4 TRADE MARKS
4.1 The Distributor agrees to register on behalf of the Publisher in the Territory only the Trade Mark ‘Oxford’ or any other trade mark or trade name being used and owned by the Publisher and after termination (for whatever reason) of this contract the Distributor agrees to endorse the above-mentioned trade marks or trade names to the Publisher.
4.2 The Distributor hereby acknowledges that the Publisher is the owner of the trade mark ‘Oxford’ and of other trade marks used by the Publisher and undertakes to inform the Publisher immediately of any possible or alleged infringement of the Publisher's trade mark or of any other matter which may affect the continued use of the Publisher's trade mark in the Territory or elsewhere.
4.3 The Distributor hereby undertakes that in the event or any infringement of the Trade Mark it will offer all such assistance as the Publisher may reasonable require to enforce its rights in the Territory.
The Publisher shall be under no obligation to initiate legal proceedings.
4.4 The Distributor agrees to enter into a Trade Mark Licence Agreement with the Publisher to use the Publisher's Trade Marks if and when requested by the Publisher.
5 MARKETING
5.1 The Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with such assistance as the Distributor may reasonable require in promoting the Videos and in particular the Publisher agrees to provide the Distributor with publicity material and such sample books on terms to be agreed.
5.2 The Distributor agrees to provide the Publisher with an annual sales report to the Publisher with sales figures and other such information as the Publisher may require.
5.3 The Distributor agrees to undertake an annual stock count on 1 January of each year and shall supply details of stock figures to the Publisher and shall permit a representative of the Publisher to be present at the stock count should the Publisher so request.
6 DURATION
6.1 This Agreement shall continue for a period as shown in the Schedules.
6.2 Either party shall be entitled on written notice to the other to terminate the Agreement forthwith in the event of any substantial breach by either party which shall include:
i
the Distributor being compulsorily or voluntarily put into liquidation other than for the purposes of reconstruction
ii
a Receiver being appointed to manage the Distributor's business
iii
failure to comply with any of the terms of this agreement including items listed in the Schedules.
7 GENERAL
7.1 The Agreement shall be binding upon all the parties and may not be assigned without the prior written consent of the other party.
7.2 The failure of either party to enforce any of the terms or conditions of this Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver of future performance of any such term or condition.
7.3 The terms and conditions shown in Schedule I and Schedule 2 shall be a part of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have placed their signatures the day and year first before written
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Publisher))) Witnessed by)) Date)
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Distributor))) Witnessed by)) Date)
SCHEDULE 1 — DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT
Distributor:
The Publications: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS ENGLISH LANGUAGE TEACHING VIDEO MATERIALS
Territory: TURKEY
Distribution Rights: EXCLUSIVE FOR THE TERRITORY
Price of Publication: SHALL BE SET IN AGREEMENT WITH THE PUBLISHER'S APPOINTED REPRESENTATIVE.
Moneys Payable: ON EACH CASSETTE REPRODUCED SHALL BE £10 (TEN POUNDS STERLING) NET RECEIVABLE PAID IN THE UK.
FIFTY PERCENT OF THIS PAYMENT WILL BE MADE WITHIN 30 DAYS OF RECEIPT IN TURKEY OF THE LABELS AND INSERT CARDS FOR A SPECIFIED VIDEO, AND THE REMAINING FIFTY PER CENT WILL BE MADE WITHIN SIX MONTHS OF THE FIRST PAYMENT.
Duration: SHALL BE FOR TWO YEARS FROM THE SIGNING OF THIS AGREEMENT.
SCHEDULE 2 — SPECIFIED VIDEO REPRODUCTION AGREEMENT
The Video titles and the initial quantities according to formats and standard are specified below.
The license permits the Distributor to manufacture the Videos for a period up to twelve months of the signing of this schedule.
TITLE FORMAT/ QUANTITY STANDARD
A WEEK BY THE SEA CASSETTE 1 VHS PAL 10
A WEEK BY THE SEA CASSETTE 1 BETA PAL 40
A WEEK BY THE SEA CASSETTE 2 VHS PAL 10
A WEEK BY THE SEA CASSETTE 2 BETA PAL 40
In witness whereof the parties have placed their signatures on the day of 198
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Publisher))) Witnessed by)) Date)
SCHEDULE 2 — SPECIFIED VIDEO REPRODUCTION AGREEMENT
The Video titles and the initial quantities according to formats and standard are specified below.
The license permits the Distributor to manufacture the Videos for a period up to twelve months of the signing of this schedule.
TITLE FORMAT/ QUANTITY STANDARD
A WEEKEND AWAY CASSETTE 1 VHS PAL 10
A WEEKEND AWAY CASSETTE 1 BETA PAL 40
A WEEKEND AWAY CASSETTE 2 VHS PAL 10
A WEEKEND AWAY CASSETTE 2 BETA PAL 40
In witness whereof the parties have placed their signatures on the day of 198
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Distributor))) Witnessed by)) Date)
SCHEDULE 2 — SPECIFIED VIDEO REPRODUCTION AGREEMENT
The Video titles and the initial quantities according to formats and standard are specified below.
The license permits the Distributor to manufacture the Videos for a period up to twelve months of the signing of this schedule.
TITLE FORMAT/ QUANTITY STANDARD
THE MAGIC MUSIC MAN CASSETTE 1 VHS PAL 5
THE MAGIC MUSIC MAN CASSETTE 1 BETA PAL 10
THE MAGIC MUSIC MAN CASSETTE 2 VHS PAL 5
THE MAGIC MUSIC MAN CASSETTE 2 BETA PAL 10
In witness whereof the parties have placed their signatures on the day of 198
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Publisher))) Witnessed by)) Date)
SCHEDULE 2 — SPECIFIED VIDEO REPRODUCTION AGREEMENT
The Video titles and the initial quantities according to formats and standard are specified below.
The license permits the Distributor to manufacture the Videos for a period up to twelve months of the signing of this schedule.
TITLE FORMAT/ QUANTITY STANDARD
MYSTERY TOUR CASSETTE 1 VHS PAL 5
MYSTERY TOUR CASSETTE 1 BETA PAL 20
MYSTERY TOUR CASSETTE 2 VHS PAL 5
MYSTERY TOUR CASSETTE 2 BETA PAL 20
In witness whereof the parties have placed their signatures on the day of 198
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Publisher))) Witnessed by)) Date)
SIGNED BY) On behalf of the Distributor))) Witnessed by)) Date)
THIS COLLATERAL AGREEMENT
dated.
1989 is made BETWEEN:
and  both of  (‘the Authors’) and
THE CHANCELLOR MASTERS AND SCHOLARS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD trading as OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS at  (‘the Publisher’)
1 THE AUTHORS enter into this Agreement in consideration of the Publisher at their request entering today into an agreement (‘the Publishing Agreement’) with their Company THREE VEE LIMITED for a publication (‘the Work’) provisionally entitled Grapevine Video Level II and Grapevine Activity Book II.
2 IN THE PUBLISHING AGREEMENT the Company agrees to procure that the Authors undertake various duties and responsibilities and provide various services to the Publisher.
The Authors jointly and severally warrant to the Publisher that the Company is entitled to the relevant services of the Authors and is therefore in as position to contract in this way with the Publisher, and that this will continue to be so throughout the period of the Publishing Agreement.
3 THE AUTHORS as beneficial owners assign to the Publisher all (if any) their present and future copyright in the Work and in their contributions to every revised impression or subsequent edition of the Work.
4 DURING THE CONTINUANCE of the Publishing Agreement, neither of the Authors shall without the consent in writing of the Publisher prepare or edit for any other publisher any work that is an expansion, abridgement or revision of the Work or of part of it; or publish or cause to be published any work on the same subject which may reasonably be regarded as likely to conflict with the sale of the Work.
5
a)
The Authors jointly and severally warrant that the Company has the unfettered right to authorise the publication of the Work; that the Authors' own contributions to the Work are original and contain no libellous, defamatory, obscene or otherwise unlawful or misleading matter; and that all statements therein purporting to be facts are true.
b)
The Authors jointly and severally agree to indemnify the Publisher against loss, injury or damage (including damages for loss of profits and all legal costs and expenses and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by the Publisher to compromise or settle any claim) occasioned to the Publisher by any claim, action or threatened proceedings arising our of a breach or violation of the warranty in the preceding sub-clause a) PROVIDED THAT such damages, costs and expenses are incurred pursuant to the judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction or settlement reached with the Company's prior written consent, which consent will not be withheld or delayed unreasonably.
6 IN THE EVENT of the Publisher being involved in or threatened with legal proceedings arising from the publication of the Work, the Authors agree to provide such assistance as may be requested by the Publisher PROVIDED THAT the Publisher shall provide the Authors with a satisfactory indemnity as to costs whenever assistance is required for proceedings brought or threatened in circumstances where the Publisher is unable to recover under the warranty and indemnity in clause 5.
7 NEITHER PARTY shall be liable to the other for non-performance in the event of circumstances occurring outside his, her or its control which shall include for the avoidance of doubt strikes, material currency fluctuations and in the case of the Authors serious illness.
8 IT IS CERTIFIED that the transaction  effected by this Agreement does not form part of a  larger transaction or of a series of transactions in respect of which the amount or the aggregate amount or value, or the consideration exceeds £30,000.
IN WITNESS of which the Authors have set their respective hands and seals to this Agreement on the date first mentioned above.
SIGNED SEALED and DELIVERED by) in the presence of:)
SIGNED SEALED and DELIVERED by) in the presence of:)
PUBLISHING AGREEMENT
THIS AGREEMENT is made the day of one thousand nine hundred and
BETWEEN THE CHANCELLOR MASTERS AND SCHOLARS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD trading as OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS at  (‘the Publisher’) and
whose registered office is at 24 Elgin Road Talbot Woods Bournemouth (‘the Company’)
WHEREAS  and  of  (‘the Authors’) have prepared scripts for publication provisionally entitled Grapevine Video Level II and Grapevine Activity Book II (together ‘the Work’) and
WHEREAS the Authors have assigned the copyright in the Work to the Company together with all future copyright arising in connection with the Work whatsoever, and have also given the Company full authority to negotiate the exploitation of the Work (including the re-assignment of copyright) on such terms as the Company may so decide and
WHEREAS the Company is entitled to the exclusive services of the Authors and the products thereof
NOW IT IS AGREED as follows:
1 DUTIES
1.1 The Company has procured that the Authors have undertaken the duties and responsibilities shown in Schedule I.
2 PAYMENTS
2.1 The Company shall be paid for preparation of the Work the payments shown in Schedule II.
3 PUBLISHER'S OBLIGATIONS
3.1 The Publisher shall subject to its approval of the finished material publish the Work at its own risk and expense and in such form as it considers appropriate and shall have exclusive control over the design illustration production promotion price distribution and sale of the Work.
3.2 Should the Company be prevented for any reason whatsoever from completing the Work in the time agreed in Schedule I then the Publisher after giving the Company reasonable notice may commission the completion of the Work by another writer on terms that the Publisher shall consider fair to all parties and the terms in Schedule II shall be altered accordingly or the Publisher may withdraw from the Agreement.
4 INSURANCE OF MANUSCRIPTS
4.1 The Publisher shall not be legally responsible for any loss or damage (howsoever arising) to the Work its illustrations and other related material while it is in the Publisher's custody or in the course of production.
The Company will keep a copy of all material delivered to the Publisher.
5 COPYRIGHT AND TITLE
5.1 The Company as beneficial owner hereby assigns to the Publisher the copyright and all rights in the nature of the Work throughout the world in the Work (including any renewal) together with any future copyright arising in connection with the Work.
5.2 The title under which the Work is published shall belong exclusively to the Publisher.
6 PERMISSIONS
6.1 The Publisher shall be responsible for obtaining permissions to reproduce illustrations photographs and other copyright material for use in the Work and the cost of such permissions shall be borne by the Company.
7 PROOFS AND ARTWORK
7.1 The Company shall procure that the Authors read the Work in proof and apart from keyboarding errors all charges for carrying out author's corrections additions or deletions in the proof sheets exceeding 10% (ten per cent) of the charge for composition shall be borne by the Company and shall be deductible from payments due to the Company.
7.2 The Company further agrees that all charges for carrying out the author's corrections additions or deletions in the preparation and reproduction of artwork apart from errors for which the Publisher or printer is responsible exceeding 10% (ten per cent) of the charge for preparation of such artwork shall be borne by the Company and shall be deductible from payments due to the Company.
8 ACCOUNTING AND ADVANCES
8.1 The Publisher shall compile statements of sales twice annually and render them together with cheques for the amount due to the Company within six months after the accounting dates.
The accounting dates are to be 31 March and 30 September.
8.2 In the event of the Publisher making any payment to the Authors or the Company prior to the first accounting date such payments shall be treated as an advance on royalties unless otherwise agreed in writing.
8.3 Should the Publisher notify the Company in writing of a high risk sale of the Work then royalties on such sale shall not become accountable as a sale until one month after the Publisher has actually received payment.
8.4 The Publisher shall keep full and proper books or accounts and records showing clearly all transactions and proceedings relating to this Agreement and in particular all transactions undertaken by or through the Publisher in relation to the Work.
8.5 The Company or its appointed representative shall have the right to inspect such books or accounts and records relating to this Agreement upon reasonable notice and during normal office hours but not more than once in any calendar year.
9 PRESENTATION COPIES
9.1 The Publisher may present copies of the Work to the Libraries entitled to the Privilege and shall be entitled at its discretion to present copies of every edition of the Work to the Delegates of the Oxford University Press and their Secretary and the Chancellor of the University editors of periodicals teachers and other persons through whom in its judgement publicity for the Work will be gained and shall retain the copies needed as samples by their showrooms and travellers throughout the world and all such presentation copies shall not be taken into account as copies sold.
10 COMPANY'S COPIES
10.1 The Company shall receive on publication six copies of the printed Work and six copies of the video Work (in the format and standard of the Company's choice) and one copy of any revised or corrected impression all free of charge and shall be entitled to purchase at two-thirds of the United Kingdom published price any further copies of the Work required for the Authors' personal use and not for resale.
11 CONFLICTING EDITIONS
11.1 During the continuance of this Agreement the Company shall not without the consent in writing of the Publisher prepare or edit for any other publisher any work that is an expansion abridgement or revision of the Work or of any part of it or publish or cause to be published any work on the same subject which may reasonably be regarded as likely to conflict with the sale of the Work.
12 REVISED IMPRESSIONS
12.1 The Company when called upon by the Publisher shall procure that the Authors undertake routine updating revision and correction of the Work after publication and from time to time informs the Publisher of corrections and revisions which the Authors may consider desirable.
12.2 Should the Company for any reason whatsoever not procure the preparation and delivery of such updating revision and correction within such time as may be reasonably required by the Publisher the Publisher shall be free to employ for that purpose such writer (or writers) as it may think fit and to deduct all or part of the remuneration payable to such writer(s) from any monies due to the Company.
13 SUBSEQUENT EDITIONS
13.1 The Company if called upon to do so by the Publisher shall procure that the Authors prepare subsequent editions of the Work.
The Publisher and the Company shall agree on the nature of each new edition and on the date of its completion.
13.2 Should the Company for any reason whatsoever not procure the preparation of or fail to deliver each new edition then the Publisher shall be free to employ an alternative writer (or writers) to edit the work in such manner as the Publisher may consider appropriate and the Publisher will be entitled to deduct all or part of the remuneration payable to the alternative writer(s) from royalties payable to the Company on that edition.
14 AUTHORSHIP
14.1 The Publisher shall publish the Work in the names of the Authors and in the event of the Work being revised by other persons in the future the Publisher shall be free to publish the Work in joint names or as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances.
15 WARRANTY AND INDEMNITY
15.1 The Company warrants that:
15.1.1 it has the unfettered right to authorise the publication of the Work; that the Authors' own contributions to the Work are original and contain no libellous defamatory obscene or otherwise unlawful or misleading matter and that all statements therein purporting to be facts are true
15.1.2 neither completion of this Agreement nor publication of the Work will constitute or evidence any breach of any partnership or other contract or any breach of any contractual, fiduciary or other duty between the Authors (or either of the two individuals together referred to as ‘the Authors’) or the Company or any third party; or give rise to any other liability on the part of the Authors (or either of the two individuals together referred to as ‘the Authors’) or the Company to any third party; or give rise to any liability on the part of the Publisher to any third party.
15.2 The Company agrees to indemnify the Publisher against loss injury or damage (including damages for loss of profits and all legal costs and expenses and any compensation costs and disbursements paid by the Publisher to compromise or settle any claim) occasioned to the Publisher by any claim action or threatened proceedings arising out of a breach or violation of the above warranty, PROVIDED THAT such damages, costs and expenses are incurred pursuant to the judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction or settlement reached with the Company's prior written consent, which consent will not be withheld or delayed unreasonably.
16 WASTING AND REMAINDERING
16.1 If in the Publisher's opinion the Work should cease to have a sufficiently remunerative sale the Publisher may either remainder or waste any copies remaining on hand.
Should the price received per copy be less than one-third of the published price then no royalties on such copies shall be paid.
17 TERMINATION
17.1 If the Publisher notifies the Company that it no longer wishes to publish the Work then on written request by the Company the Publisher will execute such documents and do everything necessary to re-assign and vest the Work in the Company's ownership.
18 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
18.1 In the event of the Publisher being involved in or threatened with legal proceedings arising from the publication of the Work in circumstances where the Publisher is unable to recover from the Company under the warranty and indemnity in clause 15 the Company agrees to provide such assistance as may be requested by the Publisher.
19 ARBITRATION AND CHOICE OF LAW
19.1 This Agreement and all matters arising out of it shall in all respects be governed by the Laws of England.
20 FORCE MAJEURE 20.1 Neither party shall be liable to the other for non-performance in the event of circumstances occurring outside its control which shall include for the avoidance of doubt strikes and material currency fluctuations.
21 CERTIFICATE OF VALUE
21.1 It is certified that the transaction effected by this Agreement does not form part of a larger transaction or of a series of transactions in respect of which the amount or value, or the aggregate amount or value, of the consideration exceeds £30,000.
AS WITNESS the hands of the authorized signatories for the parties the day and year first above written
SIGNED BY SIGNED BY on behalf of OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS on behalf of in the presence of: in the presence of:
SCHEDULE I DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUTHORS
The Authors shall be responsible for the preparation of the Work and in particular the Authors shall
1 prepare a script for the video which will permit the Publisher to shoot eight episodes of video of a maximum total duration of sixty minutes and within the budget set by the Publisher, and
2 prepare a script for an Activity Book which will make a book of not less than 40 pages, together with a complete list of any illustrative material required.
Where textual or illustrative copyright material is to be included full information of the source of the material shall be provided.
INITIALLED COMPANY PUBLISHER SCHEDULE II ROYALTIES
The Publisher shall pay to the Company the following royalties on sales of the Work.
1 Bound copies Activity Book
12% (twelve per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on the first 12,000 (twelve thousand) copies of the Work sold, increasing to 15% (fifteen per cent ) of the Publisher's net receipts thereafter.
Video Cassettes 6% (six per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on 1 to 2,000 copies, 8% (eight per cent ) on 2,001 to 4,000 copies, and 10% (ten per cent ) on 4,001 or more copies of the Work sold irrespective of standard or format.
2 Copies sold in sheets
On all copies sold in the form of unbound printed sheets a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts.
3 Broadcast
If the videos are at any time broadcast for public viewing the Publisher will negotiate a residual fee which will be in line with the agreement for minimum fees that exist at the time between the Society of Authors/Writers' Guild and ITCA/BBC.
4 Licensed reprints
In the event of the Publisher licensing its overseas Branch offices or other third party to produce an edition in return for a royalty payment to overcome special local circumstances the Company shall receive from the Publisher a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts exclusive of any direct or first costs.
This royalty shall not exceed the amount that would have been paid had such copies been printed and sold by the Publisher and which is set out in Clause 1 of this Schedule.
5 Bilingual editions and adaptations
In the event of the Publisher creating bilingual editions or otherwise adapting the Work specially to suit the educational requirements and for syllabus of particular countries the Publisher shall pay a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts.
6 Secondary exploitation by the Publisher
In the event of the Publisher exploiting the Work in any other form the Publisher shall pay a royalty to be negotiated and based on the Publisher's net receipts.
7 Subsidiary Rights
In the event of the Publisher receiving from other parties payments for exploitation of the Work in any other form or manner then the Publisher shall pay the Company a portion to be negotiated on the basis of the Publisher's net receipts from such other parties.
INITIALLED COMPANY PUBLISHER Video Script Contract
THIS AGREEMENT is made the day of 1988
BETWEEN: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS of  (hereinafter called ‘the Publisher’)
AND: WHEREAS:
The Author has prepared a script (hereinafter called ‘the Script’) at the request of the Publisher for incorporation into a video entitled (hereinafter called ‘the Video’) to be published in two parts (hereinafter called ‘Cassette One’ and ‘Cassette Two’)
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:—
1 PAYMENT
1.1 The Publisher hereby agrees to pay to the Author for the use of the Script the following payments:
a)
On sales of the Video: % (per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on 1 to 2,000 copies, % (per cent ) on 2,001 to 4,000 copies, and % (per cent ) on 4,001 or more copies of the Work sold irrespective of standard or format
b)
On the broadcasting of the Video: A reasonable payment to be negotiated which will be in line with the agreements for terms that exist at the time between the Society of Authors and/or Writers' Guild on the one hand and the ITCA/BBC on the other hand
c)
On the licensing of overseas editions: A reasonable royalty to be negotiated in line with standard publishers' rates which will be payable on the Publisher's net receipts, but the Publisher shall be entitled to deduct from its net receipts any direct or first costs
d)
On sales of bi-lingual editions or other adaptations: A reasonable royalty to be negotiated payable on the Publisher's net receipts and in line with standard publishers' rates.
This royalty shall not be less than the royalty on sales of the unadapted Video
1.2 In anticipation of the royalties that are payable under clause 1.1a the Publisher agrees to make a single advance payment of to the Author on signature and return of this contract.
This sum is recoverable from royalties due to the Author on sale of the Video
1.3 ‘Net receipts’ means payments due and actually paid and received by the Publisher arising from the sale or exploitation of the Video and converted into sterling at the current rate of exchange existing at the date of receipt in the United Kingdom
2 PAYMENT TERMS
2.1 The Publisher agrees to provide statements of sales twice a year and to render this statement with a cheque within six months of the accounting dates.
The accounting dates shall be 31 March and 30 September
3 COPYRIGHT
3.1 The Author hereby warrants that the Publisher is the owner of the copyright in the Script and for the avoidance of doubt the Author hereby confirms the assignment to the Publisher of the copyright (and future copyright) arising in respect of the Script
4 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
4.1 The Publisher agrees to credit the Author for his/her contributions by including the Author's name in the end credits of the Video and on the front and spine of the video cassette box.
The Publisher further agrees that only the Author will be credited on the video cassette box
5 AUTHOR'S COPIES
5.1 The Publisher agrees to supply the Author with six copies of the Video and one copy of any revised or corrected impressions of the Video.
The Author shall be entitled to purchase at two thirds of the UK published price further copies of the Video for their personal use only
6 WARRANTY AND INDEMNITY
6.1 The Author hereby warrant that he/she has the right to authorise exploitation of the Script in accordance with the terms hereby agreed and the Author hereby agrees to indemnify the Publisher against any breach loss or damage arising out of any breach or violation of the above warranty
7 TERMINATION
7.1 If the Publisher fails to publish the Video within one year of the Author's signature of this agreement or notifies the Author that it no longer wishes to publish the Video then on written request by the Author the Publisher will do everything necessary to vest the script in the Author's ownership
D
8 GOVERNING LAW
This agreement shall be interpreted according to English Law without regard to the place of its physical execution
AS WITNESS the hands of the parties the day and year first above written
SIGNED BY))) on behalf of the Author)
In the presence of:
Video Director Contract
Dear XXX
We have pleasure in confirming the terms and conditions of your employment with Oxford University Press as Director of our video entitled XXX.
1 DEFINITIONS
Underlying these terms and conditions are two assumptions:
a)
that Oxford University Press is the Producer of the Video, and
b)
that the purpose of the Video is to teach English to learners of English as a foreign language.
Further details concerning the specification of the Video are provided in Schedule A attached.
2 THE DIRECTOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES
The major areas of your involvement are:
a)
to comment on the script of the Video prepared by us and agree on a shooting script with the us;
b)
to specify with us the total production team required whose terms and conditions of employment will, however, be our responsibility;
c)
to cast the Video according to a budget provided by us and subject to our approval;
d)
to rehearse, direct and edit the Video according to the timetable agreed with us and specified in Schedule B attached.
3 THE PRODUCER'S RESPONSIBILITIES
a)
We are responsible for setting the overall budget for the Video and for making any decisions which affect this budget and which relate to the educational purpose of the Video as set out in Schedule A. We have the right to be present at any or all of the stages of production, shooting and editing in order to fulfill these responsibilities.
b)
We will pay you for your services as outlined in Paragraph 2 above a fee of £XXX (XXX XXX XXX pounds).
This fee will be paid in three equal installments as follows:
£XXX on signature of this letter of contract
£XXX at the beginning of the shoot
£XXX on completion to our satisfaction of the final edit of the video.
c)
We will pay your travel and accommodation expenses during the pre-production, shooting and editing phases.
These will include:
hotel accommodation if you are required to stay away from home, and including meals taken at the hotel, but excluding private telephone calls and drinks beyond normal hospitality expected of a director
travel which will either be provided by us or, where you are required to use your own car, you will be paid an allowance of XXXp per mile.
4 COPYRIGHT
The copyright in the Video and in any other work created in the course of the engagement shall belong exclusively to Oxford University Press.
5 RIGHTS
a)
During the shooting and on-line editing of the Video we will be exclusively entitled to your services and to all the products thereof and all rights therein shall be and remain our exclusive property.
There is no guarantee that the production will necessarily proceed to completion.
b)
The payments specified in Paragraph 3 above are for non-broadcast use of the Video.
In the event of the Video being broadcast or being caused or licensed to be broadcast we will pay you standard residuals in accordance with normal rates.
There is no obligation on us, however, to seek broadcast opportunities for the Video.
c)
We have the right to use any stills taken from the Video and to take any photographs during the shooting and use these in accompanying print materials and publicity matter.
6 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
You will be acknowledged by name in the final credits of the Video in the event of it proceeding to completion and in any video credits in the accompanying print material which may be published.
7 TERMINATION
a)
If you deviate substantially and importantly from the conditions laid down in this letter of engagement, we will be free to terminate the engagement by immediate notice at any time and to engage additional and/or alternative directors to perform some or all of the functions set out here.
b)
In the event of termination we cannot reclaim any moneys already paid to you.
c)
In the event of termination and in the event of the production proceeding to completion and publication, any acknowledgements of your contribution will be by mutual agreement between ourselves.
If you are in agreement with the terms and conditions as stated above, will you kindly sign the enclosed copy of this letter where indicated and return it to us.
Yours sincerely For and on behalf of Oxford University Press
Signed Date  Director Electronic Publishing
I hereby agree the terms and conditions of my engagement as stated above.
Signed Date
SCHEDULE A SPECIFICATION OF THE VIDEO XXX
A video, to be accompanied by print material, of approximately XXX minutes' duration, consisting of XXX programmes of approximately XXX minutes each.
Each programme will consist of XXX.
Given that the purpose of the video is to provide a resource for language learning and teaching, any decisions concerning presentation, acting, editing, etc will be taken so as to give precedence to this educative purpose.
Given that the video is intended for international sale, 's requests concerning the respecting of other countries' mores (especially to do with the representation of minorities, religion, sex and violence) will be adhered to.
SCHEDULE B TIMETABLE
The dates below have been agreed between the Director and the Producer.
Any changes to these dates will be made by mutual agreement.
Pre-production: XXX days previous to shoot
Shoot: XXX
Preparation for edit: to be complete by XXX
On-line edit: XXX
Any over-runs will not result in any further payments to the Director except by prior written agreement between the Director and the Producer.
CONTRACT WITH SCRIPT WRITER
Dear — VIDEO
I am writing to confirm the arrangements surrounding your preparation of the script for the video of —.
The terms and conditions we should like to agree are as follows:
1 You have prepared for us the script for ten episodes of a video entitled —.
2 The purpose of this script is to provide the basis for a video which will be used to teach English as a foreign language and as such is based on the syllabus of — by —.
3 On receipt of this letter signed and endorsed by you, we will pay you a fee of — in outright purchase of the copyright in the script for use in the videos and accompanying print material for world non-broadcast use.
4 We will acknowledge your contribution by including your name as — in the credits of the video.
5 If the videos are at any time broadcast for public viewing, we will negotiate a residual fee which will be in general line with the agreement for minimum fees that exist at the time between the Society of Authors/Writers' Guild and ITCA/BBC.
6 If you wish to make use of the scripts as they stand or in some adapted form for some purpose and use distinct from those outlined in paragraphs 2 and 3 above, you will please first seek our written permission to do so.
This permission will not unreasonably be withheld and we will not have any claim on any recompense you may negotiate for yourself.
We would be grateful if you would signify your agreement to the above by signing the letter below and the attached copies, and returning the original letter to us.
Yours sincerely
Date: on behalf of Oxford University Press in the presence of
Date:
Agreed
Date:— in the presence of
Date:
THIS AGREEMENT is made the day of 1990
BETWEEN: of  (hereinafter called ‘the Publisher’)
AND: of  (hereinafter called ‘the Author’)
WHEREAS:
The Author has prepared a script (hereinafter called ‘the Script’) at the request of the Publisher for incorporation into a video entitled Project Video 2 (hereinafter called ‘the Video’) to be published in two parts (hereinafter called ‘Cassette One’ and ‘Cassette Two’)
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:—
1 PAYMENT
1.1 The Publisher hereby agrees to pay to the Author for the use of the Script the following payments:
a)
On sales of the Video:
4% (four per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on 1 to 2,000 copies, 5% (five per cent ) on 2,001 to 4,000 copies, and 6% (six per cent ) on 4,001 or more copies of the Work sold irrespective of standard or format.
b)
On the broadcasting of the Video: A reasonable payment to be negotiated which will be in line with the agreements for terms that exist at the time between the Society of Authors and/or Writers' Guild on the one hand and the ITCA/BBC on the other hand
c)
On the licensing of overseas editions: A royalty of 6% (six per cent) of the Publisher's net receipts on all copies duplicated by licensed overseas agents.
The Publisher, however, shall be entitled to deduct from its net receipts any direct or first costs
d)
On sales of bi-lingual editions or other adaptations: A reasonable royalty to be negotiated payable on the Publisher's net receipts and in line with standard publishers' rates.
This royalty shall not be less than the royalty on sales of the unadapted Video
1.2 In anticipation of the royalties that are payable under clause 1.1a the Publisher agrees to make a single advance payment of £1,000 (one thousand pounds) to the Author on signature and return of this contract.
This sum is recoverable from royalties due to the Author on sale of the Video
1.3 ‘Net receipts’ means payments due and actually paid and received by the Publisher arising from the sale or exploitation of the Video and converted into sterling at the current rate of exchange existing at the date of receipt in the United Kingdom
2 PAYMENT TERMS
2.1 The Publisher agrees to provide statements of sales twice a year and to render this statement with a cheque within six months of the accounting dates.
The accounting dates shall be 31 March and 30 September
3 COPYRIGHT
3.1 The Author hereby warrants that the Publisher is the owner of the copyright in the Script and for the avoidance of doubt the Author hereby confirms the assignment to the Publisher of the copyright (and future copyright) arising in respect of the Script
4 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
4.1 The Publisher agrees to credit the Author for his/her contributions by including the Author's name in the end credits of the Video and on the front and spine of the video cassette box.
The Publisher further agrees that only the Author will be credited on the video cassette box
5 AUTHOR'S COPIES
5.1 The Publisher agrees to supply the Author with six copies of the Video and one copy of any revised or corrected impressions of the Video.
The Author shall be entitled to purchase at two thirds of the UK published price further copies of the Video for their personal use only
6 WARRANTY AND INDEMNITY
6.1 The Author hereby warrant that he/she has the right to authorise exploitation of the Script in accordance with the terms hereby agreed and the Author hereby agrees to indemnify the Publisher against any breach loss or damage arising out of any breach or violation of the above warranty
7 TERMINATION
7.1 If the Publisher fails to publish the Video within one year of the Author's signature of this agreement or notifies the Author that it no longer wishes to publish the Video then on written request by the Author the Publisher will do everything necessary to vest the script in the Author's ownership
8 GOVERNING LAW
This agreement shall be interpreted according to English Law without regard to the place of its physical execution AS WITNESS the hands of the parties the day and year first above written
SIGNED BY))) on behalf of the Publisher)
In the presence of:
SIGNED BY))) on behalf of the Author)
In the presence of: