

Introduction
UNTIL RECENTLY, each of the great religions of the world developed independently and had little contact with one another.
In each of the corners of the civilised world, men and women pondered the flawed and tragic conditions of human life and attempted to find solutions that would enable them to survive the suffering that flesh is heir to.
In the period of transition that historians call the Axial Age (800–200 BCE), the great confessional faiths developed which have continued to be a crucial influence in the consciousness of the people of each region: in China Lao Tsu developed Taoism, in India, Hinduism and Buddhism reformed the primitive pagan vision and made it a means of analysing the self; in the Middle East the monotheistic faiths analysed history and the Greek rationalists of Athens analysed the cosmos to find an ultimate meaning and significance in the apparently random flux of life.
For geographical and political reasons, there was little contact between the various religious systems.
In the Middle East there was a tradition of religious pluralism and the new faiths of Judaism and Zoroastrianism and — later — Christianity and Islam coexisted in relative harmony; in India during the seventeenth century, some Muslims and Hindus pooled their ideas and attempted to find a common vision: Sikhism was born of this attempt.
But in general the world religions kept to themselves, separated by linguistic, cultural and geographical barriers that seemed insuperable.
Each religion developed its own particular insight, but had to cater for a number of different needs: if you were born in India, for example, you were likely to be either a Buddhist or a Hindu.
It was not possible  to seek an alternative faith in China or Greece.
Men and women, therefore, had to work out their salvation in a particular religious perspective and the original faith had to be adapted to meet the inclinations and spiritual gifts of all its members.
In the twentieth century, however, there has been a major change.
The improved communications are beginning to enable ordinary men and women to understand and appreciate systems of faith and belief which would once have seemed impossibly alien.
For the first time in history, people are beginning to adopt the religion of other cultures or are finding inspiration in more than one faith.
Thus Buddhism is enjoying a great flowering in the West at present; Jesuit priests are studying meditation from Zen practitioners; Christians have been profoundly influenced by the thought and spirituality of the Jewish philosopher and theologian, Martin Buber; and the great classics of religious literature have been ably translated and are easily accessible.
The effect of this change could be profound: it has been compared to the revolution that science produced in the consciousness of men and women during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
We shall never be able to look at either our own or other people's religions in quite the same way again.
One of the lessons we have already begun to learn is the almost uncanny universality of the religious experience.
Men and women may express their faith in different terms, but there is an underlying and profound similarity beneath all the differences.
We now realise that the great religions of the world are not monolithic institutions but that they all contain several spiritualities — many of which are found right across the board of the world religions — which reflect different attitudes of mind towards our ultimate end.
Mysticism is one such spirituality, found in all religions and is a startling example of this deep unity of the religious vision.
Mystics often have different beliefs which inevitably affect their experience.
They will describe their interior journeys in terms of the orthodox traditions of their faith: Jews, Christians and Muslims, for example, believe in a personal God  while Buddhists feel that this is an unreligious idea and prefer to speak of an ultimate but indescribable Reality.
But the actual experience of all mystics is strikingly similar: all encounter a reality in the depths of the self, which is, paradoxically, Other and irrevocably separate from us.
All emphasise that this ultimate reality, which gives meaning and value to human life, is ineffable, transcending our limited words and concepts.
Mystics are aware that their experience can never be explained in rational terms and insist that it is unhelpful and can even be dangerous to attempt to define the ultimate reality in terms of reason and logic.
They encounter a presence which transfigures their lives and, provided that they are temperamentally suited to this type of spiritual activity and have the benefit of expert advice, they experience a satisfaction which is real but inexpressible.
They feel that they have transcended the confines of their limited and isolated egos and also feel that they have been somehow absorbed into the ultimate truth and are at one with the world.
People who have no religious faith find this baffling, but it would be wrong to dismiss the mystics as deluded and credulous.
However one chooses to interpret it, the mystical experience has been a fact of life, once human consciousness has developed to a particular point.
Mysticism is not for everybody, however.
Certain men and women have a propensity for this type of spirituality and have devised techniques and disciplines to create the sense of presence within themselves.
Again, these techniques are revealingly similar in widely different cultural contexts.
At the very least, therefore, mysticism must tell us something important about the human mind.
Buddhists, indeed, have insisted that there is nothing supernatural about such enlightenment: the visions, ecstasies and other alternative states of consciousness experienced by an adept are not a meeting with an alien, divine reality but are natural to the human condition, even though most people have not developed this spiritual potential within themselves.
But the Buddhists also point out that, unless a man or woman has a special gift or potential, these techniques will not work infallibly.
Zen  masters insist that no amount of teaching and practice will help people who are temperamentally or intellectually unsuited to contemplation.
The guru or the spiritual director will have to tell the novice when he has reached the limits of his ability.
Entering the depths of the mind can be extremely dangerous if the would-be mystic has not the mental or physical capacity for this interior quest.
The higher states of consciousness cannot be attained by will-power and application, any more than any other talent.
An unmusical person will be unable to progress beyond a certain point, no matter how many piano lessons he has.
I myself discovered that I did not have this mystical ability, even though I spent seven years in a Roman Catholic convent, engaged in daily meditation and intensive spiritual exercise.
This is difficult for people brought up in the Protestant tradition to accept, perhaps, because Protestantism has always insisted that every single Christian has the ability to become a great spiritual athlete.
Roman Catholicism has been more in line with the other great world religions in insisting that mysticism is only for a few chosen souls and that, unless one has this special propensity, mysticism can be a serious health threat.
Its inaccessibility to the rank and file may be one reason why Protestants were, until the beginning of this century, extremely distrustful of the mystical experience.
If, however, a man or a woman has mystical ability, it will become essential.
Mystics cannot be prevented from contemplation any more than a poet can be prevented from writing poetry.
The compulsive drive towards a mystical mode of religion is particularly interesting in the three faiths of historical monotheism.
It might seem that Judaism, Christianity and Islam would find mysticism alien and difficult to incorporate.
The mystic claims that the reality which monotheists call ‘God’ is essentially unknowable, but these revealed religions claim that he has spoken very clearly to men and that his divine Word has been expressed and can be experienced in very tangible ways.
They are active faiths, dedicated to implementing the divine will in the world in order to ensure that God's will is done here on earth as it is in  heaven, but the mystic withdraws from the world into his own psyche.
Yet each of these monotheistic faiths developed its own distinctive mysticism, which was instinctively recognised by the establishment as an authentic — even an honoured — spirituality, though relations with it are sometimes strained.
Indeed, the mystics played an extremely important part in each one of these three monotheistic religions, even though only a few people could undertake the mystical life.
The mystics became an important elite and their ideals and interpretation of the faith strongly influenced popular piety.
Thus in Europe, the mystical Kabbalism of Isaac Luria (d. 1572) had a deep and enduring influence on the thought and spirituality of Jews which has persisted to the present day, even though it may seem far in spirit from the Talmud.
Sufism, the mysticism of Islam, was extremely influential in the Muslim world and became the dominant Islamic piety in many areas of the empire until the eighteenth century.
In the Greek Church, the mystical writings of the fifth century author who wrote under the pseudonym of Dionysius the Areopagite achieved near-canonical status: not only did they inform the devotional and liturgical life of the people, but they also influenced the development of Orthodox theology which became hostile to any rationalistic or naturalistic ways of interpreting the reality of God and religious truth.
Mysticism in all these traditions gave the original revelation new life and significance.
Instead of being a definite historical event, a message delivered to Moses, in Jesus and to Muhammad, which in effect put an end to any further direct contact between God and men, the revelation became a constantly repeated experience in the heart of the individual.
The development of mysticism in a particular tradition represents a stage in the evolution of the religious consciousness.
In his classic book Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism , Gershom Scholem points out that it is incompatible with certain earlier stages of religious development.
In a pagan world which was full of gods and where men and women encountered the divine at  every turn, there was no need for the mystical disciplines to help people to cultivate a sense of presence and unity: they already felt at one with the world.
But as society developed, men began to take control of the world and felt their separation from it; instead of seeing themselves as deeply identified with their environment, people became aware of the personality as perspicacious to itself and as a unique, distinct entity.
They became aware, therefore, of the vast gulf that separated them from the supreme Reality and the great confessional religions were born to meet these new conditions.
After the great divide had been effected, it was time for the mystics to find a new way to cross the abyss and rediscover the old unity — not, this time, in the outside world but in the depths of the self.
Yet the utter transcendence and separation of the Other remained a vital mystical theme: mystics warned their co-religionists against the dangers of human projection and the creation of a new kind of idolatry by confusing ideas, concepts and doctrines of ‘God’ or the Absolute with the ineffable Reality itself.
Western Christians, however, took longer to reach this stage in their development than other traditions because of their peculiar historical circumstances.
When Rome fell to the barbarian tribes during the fourth and fifth centuries, Europe was reduced to a primitive backwater.
The Goths, the Franks, the Angles and the Saxons had converted to Christianity but in the absence of an effective establishment to instruct them in their faith it inevitably remained superficial.
They still clung to many of their old pagan beliefs and practices.
The Benedictine monasteries regarded themselves as islands of true Christianity in a sea of pagan barbarism and it was not until the eleventh century that the monks of the abbey of Cluny and its affiliated houses began a campaign that was able to educate the laity and local clergy.
The Cluniac reformers promoted the ideal of the pilgrimage, for example, as an external discipline which would help these new Europeans to cultivate an inner attitude.
The long journey to a holy place where they would encounter the divine in a special way was a graphic demonstration of the Christian orientation to God; the hardships  of the road, which rich and poor shared side by side, gave the pilgrims an impressive experience of community, charity and poverty, with its rider: dependence upon God alone.
By the end of the eleventh century, the Cluniacs really had begun to reform the consciousness of Europe in institutions like the pilgrimage and the West was ready to embark on its Age of Faith.
The great cathedrals bore witness to a towering vision of transcendence yet, at the same time, expressed a confidence in the human ability to make the great leap necessary to bridge the gulf between heaven and earth.
In the early twelfth century, therefore, a distinctively Western spirituality was born.
St Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux, developed a cult of inward sensibility that was unprecedented in Christian Europe and his mysticism became the hallmark of the newly-founded Cistercian order.
Later in the century, Francis of Assisi began to develop a more romantic spirituality that took mysticism out of the cloister into the world.
But it was not until the fourteenth century, when Christian monotheism had really taken root among the people, that the people of Europe had evolved sufficiently to develop a widespread mystical tradition of their own.
But once this change in their consciousness had been effected, great mystics appeared all over Europe.
This phenomenon was particularly impressive in the north, which had hitherto been far less advanced and progressive than the southern, Mediterranean countries, the seats of ancient empires.
The peoples of France, England, Germany, Scandinavia and the Netherlands — which had previously been barbarous regions — had begun to catch the Greeks, Latins and Spaniards up and develop their own religious insights.
St Bridget of Sweden (1302–73) and the Fleming John Ruysbroeck (1293- 1381), both independently cut straight into the mystical life that had long informed other religious traditions.
Germany produced a veritable flock of mystics: St Gertrude the Great (c. 1256–1302), Meister Eckhart (1260–1327), John Tauler (1300–61) and Blessed Henry Suso (1295–1306).
Some were canonised and others — like Eckhart and  Tauler — were hounded by the Church, but all were seen to be of enormous importance by their contemporaries, even by people who could not follow them into the inner world.
They were the pioneers of a new human experiment in the West and seemed the men and women of the hour.
It is perhaps not inappropriate to compare them to the astronauts in our own day: they had broken into an uncharted region, blazed a new trail to God and to the depths of the self and had returned to earth like the heroes of antiquity, bringing news of a hitherto unimaginable realm which gave an entirely new perspective on the human condition.
England too made a significant contribution to this new Western development and produced four great mystics who quickly attracted a considerable following on the continent as well as in their own country: Richard Rolle of Hampole (c. 1290–1349), the unknown author of The Cloud of Unknowing , Walter Hilton (d. 1376) and Dame Julian of Norwich (c. 1342–1416).
We know very little about their lives but we get a strong sense of the individuality of each one in their writings.
Though some of them seem to have been familiar with the writings of some of the others, each worked independently and developed a personal view of the mystical life.
But all addressed the themes that had been crucial in other traditions.
In their writings we also see the first attempt to express the reality of the mystical life in the English language.
It was a sign of the dawning self-consciousness of the age that more and more people were turning to the vernacular to express their deepest thoughts and feelings.
Instead of reverting automatically to the universal European scholarly tongue of Latin, they were gaining a new confidence in the language of their own people.
All four of our mystics wrote in what we now call Middle English, a language which had developed after the Norman Conquest and which grafted French onto the old Anglo-Saxon.
It was used until about 1500, when it was superseded by Modern English, which was based on the dialect of the East Midlands used by Chaucer.
Rolle, however, wrote his mystical treatises in Latin, even though he wrote his popular ascetical and ethical tracts in Middle English.
It is a paradox — one of the many paradoxes of mysticism — that even though mystics insist that their experiences are radically ineffable, many of the great mystics have felt compelled to write them down and to try to communicate them to others.
Richard Rolle and Dame Julian both wrote about their personal experiences, yet both clearly felt that they had an important message to deliver to the world.
The Cloud of Unknowing and Walter Hilton's The Ladder of Perfection were both manual for novices in their mystical life and attempt to trace a coherent path through the nebulous and tortuous complexities of the inner man.
Rolle tends to the lyric and rhapsodic, a style which does not cohere easily with the logical demands of Latin, but the other three all express the inexpressible cogently and methodically, with a calm which approaches these extreme states of mind quietly, shrewdly and, sometimes, with irony and wry self-deprecation.
Our four English mystics may lack the imaginative and mythical depths of the great Kabbalists and Sufis, they may not be as daring and extreme as Eckhart and they certainly do not have the lyrical passion of the sixteenth century Spanish mystics St Teresa of Avila (1515–82) and St John of the Cross (1542–91), but they bear witness to the profundity and intelligence of the new English spirituality of their day.
All claim that they are not writing for clever people but this does not mean that theirs is the voice of a simple, unlettered piety.
When they dissociate themselves from the academic world of their time, they are making the time-honoured mystical point that what Wordsworth would call ‘the meddling intellect’ had nothing to do with the vision of God.
The mystic addresses a level of the mind and an apprehension of reality that is deeper and, perhaps, more archaic than the rational and cerebral.
But in fact all four were educated people.
Even the incoherent Rolle had studied at Oxford — and possibly at the Sorbonne — in his unregenerate days and Dame Julian, who calls herself ‘a poor, uneducated creature’, was obviously familiar with scholastic theology and philosophy.
Hilton was rooted in patristic and scholastic theology and the author of The Cloud of Unknowing has been profoundly influenced by the writings of Dionysius the Areopagite.
The Cloud of Unknowing is, I have to admit, my favourite of the four mystical works anthologised here.
I remember the excitement and relief I felt when I read it for the first time as a very young nun.
After some years of struggling anxiously with the knotty complexities of Catholic devotion before the reforms of the Second Vatican Council, I found The Cloud of Unknowing 's stark insistence on the one thing necessary deeply liberating and felt that a weight had fallen from my shoulders.
I soon discovered, of course, that this discipline was not as simple as it seemed — as indeed the author tirelessly points out.
The Mystical Theology of Dionysius the Areopagite had also dwelt upon a thick cloud of unknowing that separates the ineffable God from mankind and this image dominated Greek theology.
Even the most eloquent Orthodox theologians insisted that the ineffable God, a mystery which transcended all human words and concepts, must be approached in the darkness of silence.
Jewish and Muslim mystics also emphasised the transcendence of the God who would never be known by the human soul in its entirety — even in the next world.
Kabbalists even claimed that God En Sof , God as he is in himself, was not mentioned in either the Bible or the Talmud.
The Western tradition, however, has never subscribed to such an extreme theology of silence and unknowing.
Western Christians have been more ready to ascribe qualities and attributes to God.
Both Walter Hilton and Dame Julian insist that God is transcendent and cannot be described or grasped by the human mind, but they belong more to the Western tradition than the author of The Cloud of Unknowing .
They are both deeply influenced by the theology of the great St Augustine of Hippo (354–430) who had described the Trinity in psychological terms: just as the human mind, which was created in God's image, had  three powers — memory, understanding and will — so God's unity contained Three Persons, which corresponded to these human powers.
The Greeks distrusted this theology, even though they had a deep respect for Augustine, because they thought that it was too anthropomorphic.
But Walter Hilton and Dame Julian both demonstrate the rich spirituality that Augustine's theory could inspire.
Some modern Christians may find the Trinitarian emphasis alien and difficult.
The Trinity has remained the kingpin of Greek and Russian spirituality but in the West it has tended to retreat to the sidelines and many find it an impossible concept: God is seen as One and Jesus often becomes a sort of divine friend in a vision which robs the Christian mystery of much of its transcendent power.
Many of the mystics of the fourteenth century came from countries which would later become Protestant.
But it would be a mistake to see this new personal spirituality of the West as a preliminary ‘protest’ against the institutional power of the Catholic Church.
All four English mystics repeatedly declare their loyalty and affection for ‘Holy Church’ and, again with the notable exception of Richard Rolle, had no problems with the establishment.
Since the historians of the nineteenth century dubbed the immense complexity of sixteenth century religious change in Europe ‘The Reformation’ many of us have rather simplistic ideas of what was involved.
The English mystics, like their European contemporaries, did foreshadow these changes, but not in a way that people who are familiar with more well-known fourteenth century English literature might expect.
It is all too easy for us to think of the religious life of fourteenth century England solely in terms of Chaucer and Langland.
Langland's denunciation of a corrupt and venal religious establishment and Chaucer's ironical portraits of cynical, hypocritical friars, lax monks and nuns and of pardoners selling indulgences paint a grim picture.
The hungry sheep seem to look up in vain to their religious leaders and, if this was the whole reality, it is surprising that the Reformation did not happen a good deal earlier.
But the English mystics and their followers give us the other side of the picture.
Their immediate appeal combined with their inspiring vision of Christian community shows that they also reflected a religious reality in their day.
There was a new awakening to the life of the spirit and an intense interest in all religious issues.
Modern historians warn us not to rely on the old text-book accounts of the causes of the Reformation, pointing out that the reality was far more complex than these suggest.
It is certainly not to be accounted for simply by the clerical abuses of the time.
They also argue that far from there being a decline of religious fervour in fifteenth and sixteenth century Europe, there was more interest and deeper involvement in religion than ever before.
This meant that people were no longer willing to put up with unsatisfactory Church officials; laymen especially were developing a personal spirituality which gave them a new confidence and commitment to their faith and which also enabled them to form an independent view of theology and Church organisation; they no longer had to rely on the educated establishment.
In the fourteenth century mystical awakening we see the first signs of a deeper and more committed type of religion, which would finally culminate in both Protestant and Catholic reformations.
The English mystics, indeed, were interested in some of the issues that would later exercise the Reformers.
All stress the role of grace and man's total dependence upon God for salvation: they point out that good works are not the result of human will-power but are in some mysterious way the actions of God himself.
Hilton links his mystical insight to traditional theology on this point: like Luther and Calvin, he found a solution in St Augustine.
Again like Calvin and his later disciples, Dame Julian agonises about the eternal damnation of those who are not numbered among the elect and struggles to square this with the goodness and love of God.
These mystics are aware that the religious demands of the Church could induce a deep anxiety, which Luther certainly experienced.
Buddhists call such anxiety an ‘unskilful state’ because it can only embed a person in the ego he is seeking to transcend.
Our mystics come to a similar conclusion and try to help their readers to develop a quiet confidence based on an imaginative vision of an over-arching but indescribable benevolence that will ultimately make all things well.
Like art, religion is an imaginative and creative attempt to find a meaning and value in human life.
Mysticism is a particularly interesting example of the attempt to interpret the faith in a new way and which discovers a new richness that was there in embryo waiting to be developed.
But after the initial enthusiasm, mysticism in Europe waned somewhat.
Perhaps because Western Christianity tended to express the faith in more rational and conceptual terms, mysticism never became as normative in popular and official piety as it did in other traditions.
Later Western mystics remained isolated from the mainstream in their cloisters and, though they may have been regarded as saints, they and their particular religious ideals remained a minority form of Western Christianity.
The various reform movements of the sixteenth century were another attempt to adapt the Christian vision.
The Protestant reformers wanted to return as far as possible to the spirit of primitive Christianity and looked askance at the mystical tradition which seemed to have no warrant in Scripture.
As they were also hostile to monasticism, where most mystics had their roots, they virtually abolished this particular type of spirituality in Protestant countries like England.
Our four mystics had no successors; the type of spirituality they had developed for their countrymen was blotted out.
The deeply egalitarian Puritan ethos could not stomach the idea of a mystical elite and promoted the idea that any Christian could gain an immediate experience of God.
Radical sects like the Quakers, the Shakers and the Methodists all encouraged the faithful to feel the divine in tangible forms; some Pentecostal sects would speak in tongues, hear voices or experience powerful feelings which came upon them with such force that they were believed to come from God.
But this type of  spirituality has nothing to do with mysticism.
As we shall see, mystical teachers tirelessly proclaimed that visions and voices were not an essential part of the mystical journey and could in fact be a distraction; the mystical apprehension of God certainly had nothing to do with the ordinary emotions.
Poets and artists would see the world in a visionary light: thus Thomas Treherne (1637–74), William Blake (1757–1827) and William Wordsworth (1770–1850) were all visionaries in this sense, seeing the world as informed by a presence, piercing the veils of the commonplace to glimpse another order of being.
But none of these visionaries descended into the depths of the self to find God there or confront the apparently impassable gulf between God and the world as our mystics do.
It was not until Evelyn Underhill (1875–1941) and Dean Inge (1860–1954) began to consider mysticism seriously that Anglicans started to see it as a spirituality that was authentically Christian.
In some ways, the modern experience of psychoanalysis resembles mysticism.
Both can only be undertaken with expert guidance, both make a journey to the depths of the self and claim to experience a deep liberation which unlocks hidden reserves of power.
More and more people are turning to this type of therapy and are discovering in it many of the consolations and insights that were once the preserve of religion.
Today we have less confidence than before in the power of more external, socially oriented ideologies to change the world.
We have watched the demise of enthusiasms like nationalism, Marxism and Thatcherism, which promised a salvation of sorts.
Many people feel that a deeper solution is necessary and seek the interior transformation of psychotherapy or counselling.
In the late twentieth century, therefore, people may find the mystical experiment, which also urges the adept to look within himself for the truth and warns against the danger of simplistic ideas and projections about God, a more attractive form of religion than the more conventional and dogmatic types of faith.
Richard Rolle of Hampole
RICHARD ROLLE'S conversion to the solitary life tells us a good deal about his spirituality.
Born at the end of the thirteenth century in the Yorkshire village of Thornton-le-dale, he had studied for some years at Oxford, sponsored by Thomas Neville, Archdeacon of Durham.
At that time the Oxford course lasted seven years and Richard left before taking his degree when he was nineteen years old, feeling, as he explains in his mystical treatise The Fire of Love , that his youth was being wasted on worldly and dissolute pursuits.
Accordingly he returned home to Yorkshire with the firm intention of becoming a hermit.
But, unsurprisingly, his father was not sympathetic to this idea and Rolle decided to run away.
The Legenda , the lessons for the special Office that was composed in Rolle's honour after his death, tells us what happened next:
A new hermit was supposed to get a licence or blessing from his bishop, but Rolle had no time for these forms.
His spiritual life would follow the same unorthodox and aggressively assertive pattern.
Rolle is said to have fled to the nearby village of Pickering, where the squire John de Dalton was impressed by the strangely-clad hermit and agreed to support him and give him an anchorage to live in.
Rolle did not stay with him, however.
As he tells us himself, he frequently fell out with his patrons and became a peripatetic solitary, roaming from one place to another.
The Legenda tell us about a few miracles that he is supposed to have performed, but otherwise he seems to have lived a fairly uneventful outward life.
He ended up in the village of Hampole near Doncaster, where he became the spiritual director of the local anchoress Margaret Kirkby, who lived a solitary life in a cell next to the Church, and the nuns of the enclosed Cistercian convent.
He died in 1349, probably of the plague known as the Black Death.
Miracles were performed at his tomb and until the Reformation there was a cult of St Richard the Hermit there.
Rolle made a great impression on his contemporaries.
We will see that the author of The Cloud of Unknowing and Walter Hilton both warn people against the dangers of his kind of mysticism.
All sound mystics insist that the experience of the divine has nothing  whatever to do with emotion and certainly nothing at all to do with physical sensation.
Many of the disciplines of contemplation have been designed precisely to wean the mind and head away from these earth-bound modes of perception to help them to discover another kind of experience, which they call ‘spiritual’.
To stay and luxuriate in ordinary emotions and sensations means that the contemplative is trapped in our normal limitations.
A mystic has to learn to transcend these by means of the special techniques and carefully cultivated attitudes which his spiritual director must teach him.
But Rolle not only did not have a spiritual director, he had absolutely no intention of getting one.
He was convinced that he had no need of human advice because he was instructed directly from within by God himself, who made his presence felt in strange but delightful experiences.
Few mystical treatises get off to a more intriguing start than The Fire of Love , which describes the first time Rolle became aware of a heat in his breast which, he insists, was not imaginary or metaphorical but which could be felt as a finger felt the heat of the flames in which it had been thrust.
Rolle fingered his chest in consternation, trying to work out where this strange warmth had come from, but soon decided that it was from God, because it brought with it a flood of pleasurable and consoling emotion.
His treatise was an attempt to argue that, despite what his critics said, this kind of religious experience was not only valid but a sign of God's special favour.
That was not all.
Rolle also claimed to hear a heavenly music which was inaudible to the outward ear but real enough to make any church music absolutely intolerable to him.
This music, which sometimes came with the heat in his chest and sometimes separately, also released a flood of pleasurable emotion which Rolle identified with the love of God.
This miraculous experience was far more appealing to many of his contemporaries than the sober, austere disciplines of the more conventional mystics.
But though Rolle's sincerity is not in question, his account would have given many people cause for  concern.
The mystical life should carry a health-warning: it can seriously damage your mental and physical health.
Plunging into the subconscious is risky: you never know what you will find in there.
That is why mystics in all religious traditions insist that this journey must not be undertaken without the close guidance of an expert.
The Cloud of Unknowing repeatedly insists on the necessity of taking expert advice from a spiritual director at every stage.
The spiritual director or guru played a role that is similar to that of an analyst today, who leads his patients safely through the perilous regions of the psyche.
In The fire of Love Rolle emphasises the joyful aspects of his experience and his excitable, intense religiosity gives the reader the impression that he was on a perpetual — even a manic —‘high’.
Yet in one telling passage he speaks of his loneliness and of a crushing depression.
Why, he asks God, has he never sent him a friend who would have been able to make sense of his inner experience and translate the ‘music’ he has heard in his soul into intelligible sound?
A good spiritual director would have been able to interpret this experience and have led him, step by step, past these dangerous swings of mood to a disciplined equanimity which was rooted in a deeper part of the self and which was not so dependent upon exterior circumstance.
It is no accident that in all the great religions, people who want to engage in this kind of contemplative activity have organised a monastic life to cater to their needs.
Details and emphases differ from one culture to another, but the similarities are evident.
The withdrawal from the world, the silence, the disciplines of community and the deliberate cult of monotony in a system where everybody wears the same clothes and does the same things day after day have been found to support the mystic during his frequently lonely journey, to earth him in reality and to wean him away from an excitement and drama that is inimical to the mystical experience.
All religions have had their solitaries too, but the greatest of these usually made sure that they had a spiritual advisor and some kind of structure.
This provided an element of stability  to counterbalance the mental extremity to which they were continually exposed.
Rolle, however, was a freelance and, as we see in his headlong flight from home at the beginning of his vocation, discipline had no place in his spiritual quest.
Nor did compassion, consideration and respect for others.
In all traditions, the iron rule of contemplation is that the mystic must be able to integrate his experience successfully with his daily life.
A disorderly, uncontrolled and egotistic  lifestyle is a very bad sign indeed.
The mystic is seeking to transcend his ego and acquire a disciplined compassion — a crucial virtue in all religions.
Rolle, alas, must fail this test.
He is often an engaging writer: he is blunt and sometimes disarmingly frank about his attitudes and dealings with others, but there is a stridency and arrogance that jars with the lush descriptions of his joy in the love of God.
Nobody at all should presume to criticise him!
He certainly doesn't have to submit to normal disciplines!
People who do not understand his religious experience are fools!
His prose too is highly mannered in both his Latin and his English treatises; it calls attention to itself and to the writer in striking contrast to the calm, lucid prose of our other mystics, who are all careful to make it clear that their word is not law but only their own opinion.
A true mystical experience is not only intended to make the adept less egotistic but it should also make him more alert and help him to function better.
A spiritual discipline should not make a practitioner lose control, become vague, dreamy and inept in his daily life: eccentric or uncontrolled behaviour is a sign that the mystical experience cannot be integrated with the mundane.
But all religions have had their mystical failures who have used their experiences to prop up the ego rather than transcend it and whose behaviour has been very odd indeed.
Rolle's great contemporary St Catherine of Siena (1347–80) once fell into the fire when she was in ecstasy though she was supposed to be cooking a meal.
That is precisely the sort of dangerous and unhealthy state which the mystic is cautioned to avoid.
Catherine's problem was that she  was an extremely clever woman with a real talent for mysticism, but she never found a spiritual director who was either intelligent or knowledgeable enough to control her and lead her beyond this perilous psychic hinterland.
Rolle also hints that he might have been damaged in some way.
He says that somebody who experiences the fire of love will find that he is affected physically: he may find that he develops a stammer and is unable to speak quickly or clearly any more and that his whole body has slowed down: a job that once took half an hour will now take a whole morning.
More experienced mystics, like the author of The Cloud of Unknowing and, later, St Teresa of Avila, continually warned their readers against these kinds of unhealthy physical and emotional states.
They are nothing but ‘foolishness’ or ‘egotism’.
No true contemplative must indulge this kind of behaviour.
Continually adepts are warned that they must not strain themselves or try to experience these unnatural things.
Both The Cloud of Unknowing and Walter Hilton suggest that some people who had read Rolle's work or who had heard about his experiences were almost breaking all bounds in order to encounter something similar themselves and were, consequently, damaging themselves as well as wasting their time.
It is tempting to think of Rolle not as a mystic but as a charismatic or pentecostal Christian.
This type of spirituality, which relies on feelings and even on bodily experience like trance or speaking in tongues, has nothing to do with mysticism but is an entirely different type of religious experience.
It can also — though by no means always — result in a similar egotism and aggression.
Charismatics can be very dismissive and intolerant of those who do not share their religious perspective and Rolle frequently reminds us of such an attitude.
He might have been more at home in some of the radical Protestant sects that began to appear in England and — later — in America during the seventeenth century.
It is also possible, perhaps, that Rolle was a musician manqué .
He may well have heard in some reach of his mind an as yet uncreated harmony, as a composer hears the music that he is  about to translate into sound.
The music Rolle ‘heard’ in this way could have been quite nut of its time and incomprehensible to medieval ears.
If this was in fact the case, it makes Rolle's aversion to church music more understandable.
In the small village churches where he worshipped, the singing and organ playing was likely to be intolerable to somebody with an acute musical sensibility.
In Spain, the Jewish mystic Abraham Abulafia (1240-c.1291) had propounded a mental discipline that he compared to the science of harmony and music.
To wean himself away from concrete, physical sensation, the Jewish adept should learn to contemplate language in a way that would divorce it from meaning and physical reality.
He was to combine letters of the Hebrew words of a text into new combinations which, Abulafia said, produced a sensation that was similar to listening to musical harmonies, the alphabet taking the place of notes on a scale.
But this was a music of thought, not sound, and its purpose was to stimulate an alternative state of consciousness.
Abulafia used the phrase ‘to untie the knots’ to describe this process of getting beyond our normal sense-perceptions — it is a phrase that is also used in Tibetan Buddhism.
In a rather similar way, mystics in certain sects of Shiite Islam — like the Druze — use mathematics, a science that is akin to music, as a way of weaning the mind from the physical to the abstract in the preliminary stages of meditation; it is a first stage in the long, disciplined process of discovering a different mode of perception.
Rolle, however, did not have the benefit of such expert advice.
His ‘music’ tied him to his sense perceptions and to his normal emotional experience.
But he acquired many followers and The Cloud of Unknowing describes in detail the strained antics of people who had embarked on an unhelpful quest for sensational experiences and weird and wonderful states of mind.
It is salutary to begin our exploration of English mysticism with Rolle, because he reminds us that the mystical experiment could lead the unwary  into all kinds of spiritual and physical dangers or to a sterile solipsism.
The Author of The Cloud of Unknowing
WHEN I was about eight years old, I had to learn this answer to the question: ‘What is God?’ in the Roman Catholic catechism: ‘God is the supreme spirit who alone exists of himself and is infinite in all perfections.’
It was an answer that did not mean much to me then and I confess that it means very little to me today: it is not only a rather arid and pompous definition, which seems to drain the idea of God of imaginative life, but it also seems arrogant — even hubristic.
The compilers of the catechism seemed to have no doubt that it was perfectly possible to define God and say precisely what he is.
The author of The Cloud of Unknowing gives a much more honest, humble and thought-provoking answer to the question ‘What is God?’
He simply replies that he hasn't the faintest idea.
It is sometimes suggested that the mystical flowering of the fourteenth century was a reaction against the scientific and scholastic enthusiasms of the thirteenth century, which had sought to reinterpret the Christian experience in terms of the rationalistic philosophy of Aristotle.
This, as we shall see, is not quite true: some mystics were inspired by scholastic ideas.
But St Thomas Aquinas (1225–74), the leading scholastic theologian, is said to have had a reaction against the spirit of his work.
There is a story that when he had dictated the last sentence of his monumental Summa Theologiae , he laid his head in his hands sadly.
When the scribe asked him what was wrong, Thomas replied that everything he had written was straw compared with what he had seen.
The Greek Orthodox Church had earlier reached the same conclusion.
The Greeks regarded rational  discussion as the lowest and least reliable form of theology: the true theologian saw and experienced the content of his theology, which was inseparable from contemplation.
At the same time as our mystics were writing in England, this principle became definitive in the Greek Christian empire of Byzantium.
Greek theologians who had been trained in Italy and who had been very impressed by Aquinas and his Aristotelian Christianity were opposed and defeated by St Gregory Palamas, who refused to consider God in any sense as a concept, however inspiring, that could be rationally discussed and analysed.
We know nothing at all about the author of The Cloud of Unknowing .
He concealed his identity with such success that his desire to remain hidden was probably deliberate.
We do not know, therefore, whether he had himself been repelled by an arid scholastic theology that so frequently reduced ‘God’ to an idea that our limited minds could grasp.
He seems to have been more attuned to Greek than to Latin spirituality, however.
The mystical writings of the fifth century author who had adopted the pseudonym Dionysius the Areopagite were quite well known in Europe, even though they never had the same appeal for Europeans as they had for the Greeks.
Our author, however, also seems to have translated Dionysius's Mystical Theology into English.
In The Cloud of Unknowing he did not present the whole complexity of the Greek mystic's vision, but dwelt upon his central belief that God is ultimately and essentially incomprehensible to the human mind and that if we want to ‘know’ God in this life, we must divest ourselves of all our ideas about the reality that we call ‘God’.
Jewish and Muslim mystics had also made the same radical claim.
In the sixteenth century, St John of the Cross would repeat that all human conceptions and preconceptions had to be left behind and that the soul must approach the utterly transcendent deity in a Dark Night.
Dionysius, like some of the earlier Greek fathers of the church, was inspired by the story of Moses's revelation on Mount Sinai.
Moses had made the arduous climb to the top of the mountain, but on the summit he did not experience God himself but a thick cloud of unknowing.’
He had come to the place where God was but had not encountered the ineffable reality itself.
The Greeks pondered this image lovingly and urged Christians to realise that all our human ideas about God, no matter how inspiring or helpful they might seem to be, must be treated with the very greatest caution and cast aside if necessary.
God, said Dionysius, is not only above our notions of goodness but he is above ‘God’ himself as we understand him.
Dionysius the Areopagite had adopted the name of St Paul's first Greek convert.
Since the earliest days of their conversion to Christianity, Greek Christians had been involved in a creative effort to baptise their glorious past and to wed it to the originally semitic Christian experience.
Yet this meant that they also wanted to transcend the limitations of the Greek achievement in the light of the new faith.
They were never as enthusiastic about ancient Greek rational philosophy as the Latin Western Church but felt its limitations acutely.
The image of Moses enveloped in the cloud of unknowing seemed to express the kind of spirituality they were trying to create.
This was not an ecstatic vision of God which laid aside human intelligence.
It was an attempt to cultivate an attitude of mind that recognised that this intelligence — however glorious — had its limitations when it was confronted with the ineffable and ultimate reality.
Hence their wariness of any human concepts about God which threatened to become a new idolatry that could be mistaken for the reality itself.
Thus one might, said Dionysius, say that God was ‘good’ but it was necessary to qualify this in the same breath: he was Goodness itself but he was not ‘good’in the limited way that human beings understood this quality.
The Greeks found this agnostic approach yielded a sense of presence and bliss that transfigured their lives: it gave them the discipline to apprehend a reality infinitely greater than they could conceive, even though at the same time its absence was acutely felt.
This Greek venture shows the creative nature of the religious experience.
It was obviously different from the religion of Jesus, as far as we understand it, and also from the Jewish vision of St Paul, who had been the first to bring the semitic faith to the hellenistic world of the Roman empire.
Greek negative theology was able to make the original revelation particularly their own and offered a constant corrective to their hellenistic love of rationalism and intellectual debate.
They took the Jewish scriptures as their starting point but evolved a unique and inspiring spirituality that spoke to their own condition.
Their agnostic approach may prove to be more robust than the more rationalistic and positive vision evolved by the Christian West.
It is not as vulnerable to logical and scientific attack, because, as the Greeks have always insisted, God is above, and essentially opaque to, rational discussion.
Russians adopted the orthodox spirituality of the Greeks and it is interesting that, even after decades of Soviet oppression, they do not have the same problems about the reality they call ‘God’ as we do in the West, where Christians always behaved as though God could be discussed like any other metaphysical entity.
The author of The Cloud of Unknowing had been able to overcome a deep historical prejudice in his enthusiasm for Greek spirituality.
By the fourteenth century relations between the Greek and Latin churches were at a nadir.
The Latins had felt jealous and hostile to their eastern Christian neighbour for centuries and in 1204 the armies of the Fourth Crusade had sacked the Byzantine capital of Constantinople with horrible and immoral savagery; they may also have fatally weakened the Greek empire.
The Greeks could not forgive this outrage and when, during the fifteenth century, they repeatedly asked the West for help against the Ottoman Turks, the Latins were decidedly lukewarm in their response.
The Roman Church had become very powerful and dismissed the Greeks as impious heretics who were not on the same level as the holy church of the West.
But, unlike most of his contemporaries, the author of The Cloud felt that the Greek  experience of God had something to offer the Christians of Western Europe.
His is an example that we should, perhaps, consider carefully in our own day, when occasionally an inherited prejudice or imagined superiority makes us dismiss the religions of people who have followed other venerable and inspiring forms of faith that could revitalise our own tradition.
The Cloud of Unknowing is a monograph.
The author makes no attempt to form a comprehensive view of the spiritual life, as Walter Hilton would attempt in The Ladder of Perfection .
He is quite frank about this.
He acknowledges that before a contemplative is ready, like Moses, to climb the mountain, he must prepare himself by the time-honoured Western disciplines of Lectio ,Meditatio and Oratio — study of scripture, meditation and prayer — but he tells his readers that other authors will tell them all they need to know about these.
Instead he seeks to expound the agnostic attitude, which refuses to consider concepts or ideas about God — however inspiring and beneficial — in place of the ineffable reality of God himself and tries to interpret traditional Christian beliefs and morality in the light of this mystical discipline.
He is aware that many Christians of his day — as in our own — find the whole idea of the contemplative life alien.
What is the good of people who shut themselves away from their fellow-men?
He realises it is probably impossible for the people he calls ‘actives’ and ‘contemplatives’to understand one another.
Both do what their temperaments and the grace of God dictate: neither can live their religious lives in any other way.
We have seen that the ubiquity of the mystical compulsion has made most religions cultivate a contemplative strain, even when this seems alien to the original spirit of the founder.
Our author is aware of these objections but, even though Christ plays little part in his religious vision, he does find a contemplative exemplar in the gospels in the story of Martha and Mary.
It was common for Western Christians of the Middle Ages to see these two friends of Jesus as the first  exponents of the active and contemplative life respectively.
Walter Hilton also refers to this story 
Like many readers before and since, the author of The Cloud identified Mary the contemplative with Mary Magdalene and with the woman who had anointed the feet of Christ, washed them with her tears and who was told by Jesus that her sins had been forgiven because of her great love.
The Cloud suggests that Mary gazed through the humanity of Christ and glimpsed his divinity, albeit in a veiled and incomplete form.
The Greeks preferred to find their gospel example of the contemplative life in the story of the Transfiguration of Jesus on Mount Tabor, when his glory shone through his humanity and his garments became as white as snow to the astonishment and joy of three of his disciples who were privileged to see the vision.
In their original context both stories had a different significance, but it was as impossible for fourteenth century Christians to experience the Christian revelation in the same way as the first Christians as it is for us today.
The history of religion demands a constant imaginative and creative effort to plumb the sources for new insight to meet the demands and needs of the present.
Both Greeks and Latins had transformed the original Christian message to meet their own condition and both needed to develop a  contemplative tradition within this active faith when the time was right.
The author of The Cloud is aware that his view of the Christian life is controversial.
But he is never arrogant, strident or aggressive when he presents his case.
He is a born teacher, who always keeps his pupil in mind, gently leads him from point to point and is always ready to anticipate his next question or objection.
In particular, he urges his disciple not to become anxious about his failures and not to strain himself in his quest for perfection.
Perhaps the most moving sentence in the whole book comes in the last chapter as he takes his leave of his reader: ‘For it is not what you are nor what you have been that God regards with his most merciful eyes, but what you would like to be.’
The spirituality of The Cloud of Unknowing never became as popular in the West as the Mystical Theology of Dionysius has remained in eastern Orthodox Christianity, but perhaps in our own day when many people in the Western world have reacted against inadequate human ideas of God, this book might prove to be a refreshing and useful corrective.
Walter Hilton
WALTER HILTON was probably the most influential of our mystics.
Manuscripts of his treatise The Ladder of Perfection were passed from monastery to monastery and were soon found as far afield as southern France.
But even though his book was intended for contemplatives, it was also widely read by lay men and women.
As the most popular spiritual English classic, it helped to form the religious outlook of Catholics in England right up to the Reformation.
The Ladder may lack the charm of some of the other works anthologised here but it was the first systematic and comprehensive account of the spiritual life to be written in English and its immediate popularity shows that it answered a real need.
Many people today also find it the most accessible and the least esoteric of the English mystical works of the fourteenth century.
We know very little about Hilton himself, however.
He was probably an Augustinian canon of Thurgarton Priory near Newark in Nottinghamshire and died on 24 March 1396.
It was thought for a long time that he was a Carthusian but there is no firm evidence for this.
The Carthusians, a reformed branch of the Benedictine order, were particularly enthusiastic about The Ladder and this tells us something important about the nature of Hilton's achievement.
The Carthusians lived — and still live — a more solitary contemplative life than their other Benedictine brethren, but retain certain traditional and communal monastic observances.
Their solitary life meant that they were in the forefront of the new mystical spirit of the fourteenth century, and through The Ladder of Perfection Hilton helped them to graft the  new spirituality onto the old Benedictine pieties.
The Ladder is divided into two parts: the first deals with the preparation that is necessary before the novice is ready for advanced contemplation and the second part deals with the mystical experience.
Hilton was certainly conscious of writing for a wide monastic audience, but The Ladder is ostensibly written for a nun, who was enclosed in a convent and bound by traditional monastic disciplines, but who also seemed about to begin a more solitary life.
Like the Carthusians she needed help to wed the old and new forms of spirituality so that her new contemplative vocation was not a painful dislocation from the past.
The solitary life did not mean that a contemplative was deprived of all human contact, however.
Enclosed monks and nuns, hermits and anchoresses, were sought out by the secular clergy and by the laity for advice and help.
They offered in effect a free counselling service and many of the problems brought to them were of a spiritual nature, which in itself showed the high level of spiritual and religious interest in England during the fourteenth century.
It is a reminder that Chaucer and Langland do not give us the total picture.
Hilton clearly attached great importance to this apostolate: he tells his nun that she will meet God in her visitors just as surely as in the solitude of her cell.
But he also warns her not to let these spiritual conversations degenerate into gossip — an obvious danger and one which could ruin the religious life.
In the sixteenth century, St Teresa of Avila complained bitterly of the perils of the parlour in her fashionable convent, where the nuns practically ran a salon!
The first part of The Ladder discusses the early stages of the religious development of a contemplative in a monastic context.
Hilton calls this stage the ‘reformation of faith’ and declares that it is the bedrock and indispensable preparation for the mystical life.
This spiritual transformation is seen as an active struggle on the part of a religious (who is, of course, assisted by grace) to rid the soul of sin and impurity.
It is an attempt to conform to a divine reality and standard that the soul cannot ‘see’ at this early stage but  which she has to take on faith.
The ascetic and penitential purification was also seen by The Cloud as an essential prelude to the contemplative life together with the related monastic disciplines of Lectio, Meditatio and Oratio .
But the author of The Cloud does not discuss these in his monograph.
Hilton, however, devotes a considerable part of the first section of The Ladder to these practices, which a modern reader could easily misunderstand.
Since the sixth century, the Benedictine monks of Europe had evolved a uniquely Western spirituality, which centred round these disciplines.
Lectio or Reading was considered essential for prayer (Oratio ); it enabled a monk to enter into himself and discover what had to be changed in the light of divine truth.
It was not a grim, agonising programme but was undertaken in a calm and relaxed way.
Monks were supposed to enjoy Lectio : in the scriptures and in the writings of the fathers of the Church, the monk had an encounter with the divine and felt that he was in some mysterious sense studying God himself.
Muslims evolved a very similar attitude towards the Qu'ran.
As the monk studied God's Word he would frequently find his heart lifting itself up to God for a few brief but intense moments.
This prayer (Oratio ) was the goal of Lectio but it was not a prolonged exercise.
The Benedictines believed that prayer should be brevis, pura and frequens — brief, pure and frequent.
The intensity of these aspirations meant that they were inevitably ‘brief and ‘pure’ and the constant reading ensured that they would be ‘frequent’.
In Lectio , therefore, God revealed himself and in Oratio the monk offered himself to God.
Hilton is writing for a nun for whom Lectio is apparently impossible, even though she was obviously able to read.
Convents of mere women probably did not have much access to precious books in those days before printing.
But we can see the influence of this traditional Western monastic spirituality in Hilton's discussion of verbal prayer.
His nun is bound by her order to recite the Divine Office, which St Benedict had called the opus dei , the work of God, at eight appointed ‘hours’ which regularly punctuated her day.
Each ‘hour’— Matins, Lauds, Vespers and so on— consisted of psalms, prayers and readings from scripture and the fathers and so it gave the nun a form Lectio .
Hilton warns her not to skimp these obligatory verbal prayers in her enthusiasm for the new contemplation.
They are shaping her mind with God's sacred Word.
From time to time, he says, she will be moved to speak to God directly in the brief, intense ejaculations of Oratio .
The modern reader is likely to be particularly confused by Hilton's discussion of Meditatio , the third great monastic practice.
Today we use the word ‘meditation’ quite differently: in Hilton's time it meant study rather than a purely contemplative exercise.
It was more like Jewish rabbinical study, where students chant the words of the Talmud aloud as they memorise them, rather than the silent, interior disciplines of a Buddhist monk.
In Meditatio the Christian monk committed the divine words of his Lectio to memory as he pondered their meaning and, as he did so, he recited them aloud.
This was not a dreary exercise: rabbinical students feel that chanting the sacred words reveals the inner music to the soul and learning something ‘by heart’— a revealing phrase — helps one to interiorise it and make it one's own.
In the Middle Ages, people often depicted their monks as ruminative animals, chewing over the Word of God repeatedly, as it were, rolling the words around in their mouths and absorbing it into themselves just as they received Jesus the Word in the Eucharist, in a symbolic and sacramental manner.
The result of this Meditatio was that the monk or nun experienced the truths of faith in an entirely new way.
It was a process of rediscovery and re-vision in which the deeper significance of familiar truths flashed into new life.
When Hilton talks about meditation, therefore, he is not using the word as a Christian would use it today.
He is describing the sudden new apprehension of divine truth bestowed upon people who have just embarked on the spiritual life when they are rediscovering the truths of their faith during their periods of study.
They will, he  suggests, gain a new appreciation of the meaning of sin or a fresh sympathy with the Passion of Christ.
In the early Middle Ages,Lectio, Meditatio and Oratio were all designed to lead to Contemplation, but Contemplatio was not regarded as an esoteric discipline, an advanced state of prayer or the cultivation of an alternative mode of consciousness.
Contemplatio was traditionally an attitude of constant attention to God.
It was certainly not a highly emotional state, nor was it an abandonment of old modes of perception.
The regular, monotonous monastic discipline gave the monks a peace and equanimity which they saw as a tranquil experience of God which was fully in tune with their normal lives.
But by the fourteenth century, contemplation had become something very different and in the second part of his book, Hilton explained to his nun what the modern, innovative Contemplation involved.
It was a more advanced type of prayer called ‘the reformation of feeling’, which, in Hilton's view, was only for monks and nuns.
Since Hilton is at pains to show that true contemplation had nothing to do with the emotions and clearly disapproves of Rolle's spirituality, the term seems puzzling.
But the ‘reformation of feeling’ is a literal translation of St Paul's words:Reformamini in novitate sensus vestri as they appeared in the Vulgate — St Jerome's Latin translation of the Bible.
The word ‘sensus ’ can be translated as ‘feeling’or ‘experience’.
The Jerusalem Bible translates this verse: ‘Let your behaviour change, modelled by your new mind’.
Hilton interprets ‘new mind’ or ‘new feeling’as the creation of contemplation, which now demanded far more than the old Benedictine ideal where the monk did not experience God in the achievement of higher states of consciousness but in the mundane details of daily life.
Like Dame Julian, Hilton was inspired by the theology of the scholastic theologians of the thirteenth century.
Quite frequently it happens that mystics are deeply influenced by philosophy, even though they tend to decry ‘the meddling intellect’.
Kabbalists and Sufis were often moved by the ideas of the Jewish and Muslim rationalists, which they translated into a mystical mode.
In much the same way, Hilton and Dame Julian were both inspired by the scholastic rediscovery of St Augustine's theology of the Trinity, which, St Thomas Aquinas said, was ‘the fruit and goal of our entire life’.
They did not engage in an abstruse discussion of the technicalities of Trinitarianism but saw it as a paradigm of the religious experience of God.
The Kabbalists developed a similar mythical conception of the inner life of God in their depiction of the world of the Sephirot , the divine spheres which emanated from the unknowable God and enabled him to be known by man: these emanations provided man with the means of ascending to the deity.
In St Augustine's interpretation of Trinitarian doctrine, Hilton also found a way of showing how sinful man could learn about the incomprehensible God and return to his creator.
It explained the shape of the mystical experience that came to him in prayer.
Mystical experience never arrives out of the blue; it is always influenced by the religious milieu of the mystic, even though he may want to transcend the beliefs and attitudes that he found there.
St Augustine taught that God had created man in his own image and so it was by looking at his own soul that man would discover God: ‘May I know myself! may I know thee!’ he had cried.
There was a trinity within everyone, consisting of the three powers of the soul which corresponded to the three divine Persons: memory, understanding and will; it enabled us to be, to know and to love what we are in the same way as God knows and loves himself.
By learning to know his soul, therefore, man would achieve a vision of God himself, albeit in a glass darkly.
Hilton now urged his contemplatives to look into their own depths and, by means of the disciplines of contemplation — the ‘reformation of  feeling’— to re-fashion the image of God there which had been destroyed by original sin.
But the inner reformation demanded that we abandon our old earth-bound modes of perception and Hilton uses the metaphor of the pilgrimage to depict this process.
In itself this showed the direction in which European spirituality was heading.
Earlier the physical journey of the pilgrimage had been one of the chief disciplines by means of which the Cluniacs had managed to reshape the consciousness of Europe.
By the fourteenth century the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, City of Peace, had become an interior journey to the depths of the self.
During the journey away from his old un-reformed self, the mystic has to enter a dark night of the senses.
Hilton tells him to wait patiently in the darkness and acclimatise himself to this new existence, stripped of all the things that had made life worthwhile before.
Hilton's dark night is clearly similar to ‘the cloud of unknowing, and it seems that he was familiar with the older work.
But his description of the journey to Jerusalem is even closer to the Ascent of Mount Carmel, described in the sixteenth century by St John of the Cross.
John also tells the mystic that, if he wants to approach God, he must cast aside every single scrap of knowledge he owns and divest himself of all his own ideas and opinions:
John describes the agony of the ensuing Dark Night of the soul but Hilton writes more calmly and with an acceptance of this dereliction which is required by all mystical traditions.
All over  the world, mystics had told the adept that he must die to himself and to all that he knows; he must experience annihilation and extinction, which the Sufis call 'fana .
Only then will he rise again to an entirely different life in the Reality which exists beyond thought.
Like the other English mystics, Hilton does not want the contemplative to agonise and strain unduly.
He makes the point that the love of God is not an emotion that we have to drum up in ourselves.
It is the Holy Spirit at work in our souls, a gift of the divine Love of the Trinity, which enables us to love God with the same love whereby he loves himself.
Again, this is a common mystical theme.
It is memorably expressed in an Islamic mode in the famous sacred tradition (hadith qudsi ) which makes God say that when one of his human servants turns to him:
The calm approach of Hilton and his contemporaries to the mystical extremity may not have been simply due to British phlegm but may also have been the legacy of the relaxed and tranquil spirituality of Benedictine monasticism.
It was Hilton's impressive achievement to root the new mysticism firmly in the old.
Dame Julian of Norwich
JULIAN OF Norwich had an entirely different religious experience from the other writers we have considered in this book.
She did not discover a numinous cloud of ignorance or an impenetrable darkness between herself and God; her apprehension of the divine did not end in silence, but in an eloquent message for her contemporaries.
She calls her experiences ‘revelations’ and is, perhaps, more like a prophet, who brings a message of God to mankind, than a mystic.
Julian, of course, would not have described herself as a prophet, because like all monotheists at this date, she believed that God's revelation was complete and that the day of prophecy was therefore over.
Yet it remains true that Julian's experience can be fruitfully compared to that of the prophets of Israel, for example, or to that of Muhammad, the prophet of Islam.
Julian was the latest of our four mystics.
She was born in about 1342 and was still alive in 1416.
She was an anchoress, one of the many recluses of the period who shut herself away from the world to pray in solitude: we can still see the foundations of her anchorage next to the church which is now called St Julian's in Norwich.
Anchoresses were believed to confer great spiritual benefits on a neighbourhood and all big towns liked to have one.
The people also valued the spiritual counsel that the recluse would provide.
She generally lived in a room next to the church, which had a window in the wall through which she could watch the Mass and receive the sacraments.
The anchoress would be interred in this room in an impressive if rather disturbing ceremony during a Mass for the Dead.
She would  publicly don her religious habit  and walk into the cell as into her grave, while the presiding bishop sprinkled ashes in her wake.
Henceforth, like St Paul, she was dead to the world and alive only to God.
But it would be a mistake to imagine that the anchorage was a tiny, smelly little room, as it is sometimes depicted.
It was usually a suite of rooms with a garden, rather like a ground-floor flat.
Some anchoresses lived together in adjacent apartments and nearly all had servants.
An anchoress had to be a woman of means or she would become a drain on the community.
We know that Julian had at least two servants called Sara and Alice, who did her shopping and ran errands.
They fulfilled rather the same role as extern sisters in contemplative convents today.
These women do not feel called to the seclusion of their sisters inside the enclosure, who never leave their convent, but feel called to serve them and act as essential intermediaries between the cloistered nuns and the world.
The life of the anchoress was hard but she did not necessarily give herself over to excessive penance.
We have seen that all our mystics stress the importance of attending to the needs of the body.
All argue that the contemplative life is quite hard enough without seeking an extravagant asceticism which could weaken the body and keep the contemplative from prayer.
We do not know exactly when Julian was immured.
It has been suggested that she had once been a Benedictine nun of the convent of Carrow, which was situated near the church where she eventually had her cell: to this day Benedictine nuns take the title ‘Dame’, the honorary title of any woman of rank at this time.
But there is no evidence that Julian had ever been a nun before her immurement, nor is there anything distinctively Benedictine about her spirituality.
She may well have lived in her parents' house before her enclosure: when she describes the circumstances of her visions in The Revelations of Divine Love , she says that there were a large number of people round her bed and that priests were able to come and go as they pleased, which would not always have been possible in an anchorage.
But we cannot be certain: all we know about Julian is what she tells us herself in her book.
In The Revelations of Divine Love , Julian describes the climactic experience of her life, which took place in about 1373 when she was thirty years old.
She was extremely ill at the time.
We do not know anything about the nature of her illness.
Was it purely physical or did it have a psychosomatic dimension, as her sudden and dramatic recovery could indicate?
Naturally nobody would have made this distinction at the time and certainly Julian and all her friends thought that she was at death's door.
When a priest came to give her the Last Rites, she gazed on the crucifix that he held before her eyes and felt her illness leave her.
She fell into a trance and for about five hours received fifteen consecutive visions and revelations in which she saw Christ, the Virgin Mary and the Trinity itself and heard Jesus' explanations of these ‘showings’.
In the morning, Julian came to herself and, to her dismay, she felt her illness returning.
For a while she thought that her visions had been a delirium, but then fell into an exhausted sleep when she received her sixteenth revelation in a dream which reassured her and made her deeply ashamed of her doubts.
Julian then made a full recovery and lived for another forty years.
She never had any more visions, but spent the rest of her life pondering the meaning of her sixteen revelations of God's love.
Other people, in widely different cultures and circumstances, have had a very similar experience.
Thus, like Julian, the Prophet Muhammad said that his revelations seemed to come to him in two ways: some were clear and others were obscure and very difficult to understand.
St Teresa of Avila also spoke of the obscure type of revelation, which both Julian and Muhammad described as ‘spiritual visions’:
This type of religious experience is often traumatic.
Where mystics like the author of The Cloud of Unknowing and Walter Hilton insist that their apprehension of the divine brings with it a calm joy that has nothing to do with either physical or emotional sensation, these prophetic visionaries feel, like Julian, that the shock of the divine impact has brought them close to death.
When Isaiah had his vision of God in the Temple, he cried aloud in anguish that we lost: even the angels could not bear the sight of the divine majesty but shielded themselves from it with their wings, and he had gazed upon the Lord of Hosts with his own impure eyes.
Jeremiah experienced God as a pain that invaded his every limb, and Muhammad said that he never received a revelation without feeling that his soul was being torn from his body.
Unlike the mystic, the prophetic visionary believes that he undergoes this fearful experience for the sake of mankind: God does not send these revelations for their own edification but for the sake of their people.
Often these prophets saw themselves as reformers, who had a vocation to transform the religious vision of their time.
The prophets of Israel reformed the old tribal religion of the Hebrews, brought them a more transcendent conception of God and a deeper morality.
Muhammad believed that he had to reform the old pagan religion of al-Llah, the High God of the Arabs.
Teresa of Avila became one of the great reformers of the sixteenth century.
True, she did not reform dogma or the social organisation of the Church like Luther or Calvin.
She reformed the religious life of her time for both men and women, teaching them to distinguish between a good and an unhealthy spirituality.
These reformers, however, were not passive recipients of a message from on high.
They were engaged in a creative and demanding attempt to revise the religion of their day and transform it from within.
In his classic book The Prophets , Abraham Heschel has shown that Amos, Hosea, Jeremiah and Isaiah all considered their own input to be a crucial part of their  message.
Similarly Julian was nor afraid to put her own words and reflections onto the lips of Christ when she wrote her book.
Julian had a humbler conception of her task than the other prophetic reformers I have mentioned, who all experienced God as an absolute imperative to action and felt that they had a mission to defy the religious and secular establishment of their day.
Julian did not feel called to reform the church or to take part in public life: she remained a loyal daughter of Mother Church and stayed in seclusion for the rest of her life.
But she did believe that her revelations had not been bestowed upon her for herself but for everybody.
Her book asked Christians to take a deeper look at some of their religious beliefs.
How, she asks, can we account for evil in a world that has been created by a good God?
How can a God, in whom there is no evil, love sinful creatures like ourselves?
The problem of evil has exercised people in all three traditions of historical monotheism and nobody has ever been able to find a logical way of reconciling it with the concept of the one God.
Julian's solution does not make rational sense, but it does reverberate emotionally with an important dimension of the Christian religion of love, which sometimes gets lost in the more cerebral doctrinal formulations of the faith.
The problem of sin would be a key theme in the sixteenth century reformations.
This was an age of high anxiety in the West, when people felt deeply disturbed by the vision of God's purity and their own failings.
Like Julian, who tells us that she wrestled for years with the problem of sin, Luther and St Teresa both struggled for some twenty years with a paralysing sense of their own sinfulness.
Like Julian, perhaps, Teresa also had an illness that may well have had a psychological aspect and which brought her to the brink of death; her autobiography and spiritual writings show how she brought herself a physical and spiritual healing.
Calvin and his successors came up with the dark doctrine of predestination to explain the fearful paradox of God's love and his implacable wrath.
Julian reached a far smaller audience than any of these later reformers and she has never had a decisive effect on the history of  Christianity as they did, but she has acquired a considerable following in our own day.
It is not difficult to see why Julian has become so popular in the twentieth century and has inspired writers as different as T. S. Eliot and Iris Murdoch.
In recent years people have found it increasingly difficult to accept the conventional doctrines of Christianity, but a visionary like Julian penetrates the cerebral crust of the religious experience, which has little to do with logic and reason, to reach its core.
In doing so, she touches on themes that are common to the mystical traditions of other faiths.
Her vision of God in the depths of the self is reminiscent of the basic insights of Buddhists, Hindus and Sufis.
Like Jewish and Muslim mystics, Julian stresses the paradox of God's mysterious need for mankind and also explores the notion of the female dimension of God, a frequent theme in Kabbalism and Sufism.
A religious insight like Julian's shows that a passive, unquestioning acceptance of received dogma is not enough.
Each age and each individual has to make the imaginative effort to appropriate the religious tradition and make it their own, as Julian did.
She does not expect her readers to accept her own conclusions verbatim, but urges them to make a similar creative attempt to listen for the deeper implications of the Christian message, to reach through the dogmas and intellectual propositions, which can never do justice to the ineffable mystery of the divine, and touch the heart of the faith.
In the West, where many people have lost the will to create a faith for themselves and where many have fallen into despair, Julian's imaginative approach to religion shows a possible way forward.