

Jackie Stewart
Jackie had finished racing by the time I got involved in the sport, but it is utterly fitting that this collection of drivers' portraits should begin with Jackie: not only because he was a great champion, not just because he changed the course of the sport, but because he's really never been away.
His influence on F1 racing, both while he was in it and after he retired, probably remains greater than that of any other single driver.
He is also, by a long shot, one of its most interesting and articulate characters.
I remember particularly well a long discussion we had on a bright sunny day in Austria in 1983, on the subject of the relative importance of car and driver.
We had two statements before us: Teddy Mayer's of McLaren, who had asserted that drivers were ‘just interchangeable light bulbs: you plug them in and they do the job’ and Bernard Ecclestone's classic, ‘no driver is worth more than $25,000 ‘.
A good beginning for Stewart, who thought both statements rubbish.
‘The talent required to drive a machine to the ultimate of its ability is the same as always.
Very little has changed.
The same inherent chemical element is present today as when the sport began.
Machines exist to be interpreted and understood.’
He went on to call the relationship between man and machine a marriage.
‘In all my years of motor racing, I can only think of a couple of times when I mastered the machine as at the Nürburgring in 1968.
It was foggy, rainy and aquaplany: that day, the machine was my passenger.
Otherwise, I was always doing my best to reconcile a difficult marriage.’
I then quoted to him a remarkable analysis of how drivers must use their minds.
Didier Pironi, who was one of the brightest ones, had said, ‘Driving is more a state of mind than the use of intelligence.
The driver's problems are psychological rather than intellectual.
But that said, and God's gift and the will to succeed apart, all has to be harnessed to the mind.
Making a machine work may be mostly ‘feel’, but that ‘feel’ has to be translated through the mind and conveyed to the machine.’
Jackie agreed, so I asked him why constructors like Mayer and Ecclestone so looked down on drivers.
‘Perhaps they may think the  sport is in a period of relative driving mediocrity,’ answered Jackie.
‘The constructors and team-managers have enjoyed for some years now such unrealistic power and influence, have commanded so much attention, they have begun to think of themselves and their cars as the stars.
Were a great talent to appear, all that sort of talk would be hushed.
No team-owner had the guts to belittle a Clark or a Fangio.’
Or, Jackie might have added, a Stewart.
Ferrari had the temerity to do so with Lauda, another remarkable talent, and Niki didn't put up with it.
And to my recollection, no one for whom Prost has ever driven has had a bad word to say about him, save at the very end of Prost's career with Renault, when other factors that had nothing to do with driving intruded.
In the modern era, those three must be bracketed together: they, with Piquet — who, despite his achievements, is rarely mentioned in the same company — have totally dominated the sport for the last twenty years.
The first time I ever spent any time with Jackie was also my baptism into driving around a circuit fast .
Elf had arranged that Jackie take me around Monaco and the experience — of living through what a grand prix driver lives through every time he races — remains engraved on my mind.
There are two parts to the experience.
One is myself, white-knuckled and terrified, as Jackie heads past the Casino towards the open sea at something like 150 m.p.h.
Ahead is a concrete wall, beyond it the water, fifty metres down; somewhere, I think I know, there is a sharp right-hand turn.
There is no notable deceleration, but I don't know that my mind was recording anything but fear, nor is there any particular screech or roll, but suddenly we're around the corner and accelerating down towards the tunnel and Jackie's saying, ‘You can relax now, Keith.’
The other part is Jackie, to whom going round that tight course as fast as Elf's insurance would allow him to is a mere nothing.
I learned from that outing that there is in top-level racing, as well as intelligence, a physical dimension which is vastly important.
There are, of course, a few physically awkward, gawky, uncoordinated drivers.
To watch Reutemann on a tennis court, for instance, was painful; even Hunt, a splendid athlete, really lacked that sort of fluency which expresses real ‘style’; Jody Scheckter, doing almost anything, was incredibly clumsy.
But most of the real champions have a physical quality in common: there is no doubt that they see better than most of us.
I believe firmly that John McEnroe is not lying when he says he sees the small print on a tennis ball, and Jackie himself has  often referred to his vision as a paramount essential in driving.
Certainly depth-perception and rapid reflexes in adjusting what is seen standing still to oneself moving at great speed, is essential: that corner in Monaco must have appeared to Jackie exactly as it was: such-and-such a distance away, to be approached at such-and-such an angle, such-and-such a speed and so on.
The other essential attribute is obviously that of being able to link what one perceives through the brain to what one is doing with one's body.
Well, Jackie was a shooting champion before he was ever a driving champion and, listening to him recently at Gleneagles, when he was taking my neophyte self through the task of shooting at moving targets, I was conscious of how simply Jackie takes these complicated relations between brain and body.
The very words he uses, to ‘sight’, to ‘follow’, to ‘go through’, to ‘relax’, are all part of a physical vocabulary.
They are things we tell our eyes or our muscles and limbs to do: much practised, they probably come more readily, but the body needs constant reminding.
In a way, mentally, there is no such thing as a ‘natural’ driver.
But there are those for whom the task is easier than it is for most.
They are especially gifted and I can hardly think of a sport in which the eye is not the essential informer of the mind.
But there is, of course, a lot more to Jackie than an eye.
There is an extraordinary record in racing at all levels, but especially in F1.
Jackie's grandfather was a gamekeeper, his father owned a garage, his brother Jimmy raced before him — until a bad accident at Le Mans in 1954 — and Jackie himself started at twenty-one, in 1960.
His early career was with Ecurie Ecosse and largely in endurance racing: until the moment when, in 1964, his path crossed that of Ken Tyrrell.
Ken has often told me the story of how Jackie came to drive single-seaters: how he had lost a driver in F3 (Teddy Mayer's brother Timmy) and how John Cooper had reported to him (belatedly, Ken says, because he'd already spotted Jackie) that there was some tiny Scot going around whom he absolutely must sign.
Ken did and Jackie promptly produced results: on his first day's testing he was as quick as Bruce McLaren; in his first race he won and scored eleven victories in thirteen starts.
The next year, 1965, he had his choice of three F1 teams competing for his services and chose BRM: as he has said, he wanted to be in a team ‘where they wouldn't rush me, a team where I wouldn't be battling for my place every time I took the grid, a team where I could learn from a man like Graham Hill’.
The result of that first year?
His  first victory (at Monza) ahead of Graham Hill, Dan Gurney, Luigi Bandini and Bruce McLaren and a third place in the championship behind his fellow Scot Jim Clark and his mentor Graham Hill.
The next two years were not at all successful, and there were reasons for that which Jackie himself will admit.
First, that he was pushing himself too far too fast, that his appetite was outstripping his ability and his knowledge of the sport.
And that was, at least in part, a consequence of another attribute that is highly marked in the man.
Put at its baldest, Jackie was a young man on the make.
Not so much for fame, but for money.
No sooner was he in the sport than he was already scheming to make his first million; he has never stopped scheming since, to make many more than the first.
It is simply an appetite, like any other, and Jackie can be at his funniest when he is mocking this propensity in himself: the endless appearances, the systematic use of his celebrity, the unlimited sponsorships, the directorships, the new business ventures, the life that is taken up, 100 per cent, in ‘making it’ and, having made it, in making some more.
Jackie's greed is no more, really, than an inversion of the competitive spirit he showed in shooting, racing and everything else he did.
Then, too, Jackie made a misjudgement in 1966 and 1967: he stayed in BRM when that team was already on the slippery slope towards oblivion.
In terms of engineering, the BRMs were behind their time; the cars gave endless trouble; Jackie's dissatisfactions grew; accidents intervened, especially at a rain-soaked Spa where Jackie went off the track at high speed and lay trapped in his car, his shoulder broken, his ribs cracked and petrol from his ruptured tanks soaking through his overalls, burning his skin.
One bit of good news in 1966, however, was when Ken Tyrrell brought a new Matra to England for Jackie to test.
Though he found the new car handled very well, it didn't immediately have the success it might have had in F1, partly because Jackie missed a number of races after his Spa accident; it improved the following year with a Cosworth engine, but by then he was already thinking of what his next move in F1 would be.
There was a (typically) abortive contact with Ferrari, but meanwhile Ken Tyrrell had persuaded Matra to upgrade their F2 car to F1 specifications.
It was a race to get the car ready in time.
In South Africa, Jackie was already on the front row of the grid but the engine gave up on him.
Then in practice for the next race, at Jarama in Spain, he suffered another accident, severely damaging his wrist.
He had to scratch at Monaco and did not return until Spa, nearly a month later: there, despite a wrist-brace and a lot  of pain, Jackie led the whole race until he ran out of fuel, finishing fourth after a pit-stop.
At Zandvoort, on another rainy day, Jackie lapped the whole field except Jean-Pierre Beltoise, to win his second grand prix.
At Rouen, he finished third, a lap down, and at Brands Hatch, crucified by the pain in his wrist and driving mostly one-handed, the best he could do was sixth place.
Then, in the race Jackie refers to above, the only time the car was his passenger, at the Nürburgring, again in pouring rain, Jackie scored one of the most remarkable victories ever notched up, winning by something over four minutes from Graham Hill.
The conditions were appalling and Jackie's mastery absolute.
I may not have seen the race, but I've had enough people describe both the race and Jackie's driving to know what a result it was.
By Monza, Jackie was still well down on his former team-mate Graham Hill, now driving in a Lotus, and Jackie retired with engine problems while Hill had a wheel fall off.
Canada was next, at the old Mont Tremblant circuit, and Hill's fourth place was worth two more points than Stewart's sixth.
Jackie and Hill then did a one-two at the Glen, leaving the championship to be decided in Mexico.
Jackie had a nasty puncture in practice on the 150-m.p.h. straight and though he was not injured, his Matra was only just repaired in time for the race.
A sick engine cost Jackie the championship.
It was all different in 1969.
The MS-80 was a winning car and Jackie pulverized the opposition.
Though the old car was used in South Africa, Jackie promptly started the new season with a convincing win, repeating the feat in Spain, at Montjuich in Barcelona.
At Monaco, his drive-shaft failed and all he had to show for the race was his twenty-two laps in the lead.
At Zandvoort, Clermont-Ferrand and Silverstone, he won handily and though he had only third and fifth gears, Jackie virtually clinched the championship with his second place at the Nürburgring.
At Monza, he beat Jochen Rindt by a few feet and the championship was his, even though he did not win another race that season.
The 1970 season produced the only posthumous champion in the history of F1, Jochen Rindt, who was killed in practice at Monza.
By that year, Ken Tyrrell had some sponsorship money from Ford and abandoned the Matra in favour of a Robin Herd-designed March.
The car had the usual teething problems and was not the equal of either the Lotus or the Ferrari, and Jackie's only victory of the year was at Barcelona.
But the last three races of the season were in the  new Tyrrell.
Designed by Derek Gardner, it was a world-beater; by the time it was fully developed during the 1971 season, Jackie was again able to run away with the championship, scoring nearly twice as many points as his nearest rival, Ronnie Peterson.
Even his new team-mate, the much-lamented François Cevert, won at the Glen in that car.
Not only was it a superior car, but quite clearly the engines which Ford furnished for Jackie and the Tyrrell team were quite exceptional.
Jackie retired only once that year because of his engine and won six races, just as he had in his previous championship in 1969.
Was there any reason to doubt that 1972 would be just as successful?
If there were, they were not immediately apparent, because in Argentina, Jackie led from start to finish.
But in South Africa, after having been in the lead for forty-three laps, he had to retire with a seized gear-box.
By Spain, Jackie was beginning to feel the first twinges of the ulcer which was to hamper him for some time and keep him out of racing properly — and out of Belgium altogether — until July.
The ulcer was no real surprise.
Jackie lived at a high pitch, he was making hay while the sun shone, he was spreading himself thin with a young family and as many interests as he could cram into the year; for someone always highly strung, always working at a high pitch of nervousness, an ulcer was the logical consequence.
At Clermont-Ferrand, however, he came back and brought the famous 003 to its final win.
The 005 followed the troubled 004.
It should have started at Brands Hatch, but Jackie crashed it and had to race again in the 003.
Emerson Fittipaldi was having a triumphant year at Lotus, he led the championship and wasn't about to yield it up: the best Jackie could do was a second.
Then at the Nürburgring, the 003 ran its last race, with Regazzoni pushing him off.
The 005 came into its own in North America at the end of the season, but by then Fittipaldi had the championship wrapped up.
Jackie's third and final championship, 1973, was another story, with the season starting in ascending order: a third place in Argentina was followed by a second in Brazil and a victory in South Africa.
A retirement in Spain was followed by another win in Belgium and triumph in Monaco.
The midseason was disappointing, but by the end of July, in Holland and a fortnight later in Germany, Jackie had notched up his fourth and fifth victories of the season and a second place in Austria put him well in the lead.
Monza was to be decisive for his championship, and Ken Tyrrell has written that it was Jackie's finest race, not least because he knew he led the championship and  because, having already decided to retire, he needed to do no more than the minimum, particularly since he was starting only from sixth place on the grid.
During Sunday morning warm-up, Jackie's engine — his and the team's favourite — went off and had to be replaced.
as if that were an omen, the race itself went just as badly and after nine laps Jackie had to come in to change a deflating tyre.
With a minute wasted, Jackie rejoined the race in nineteenth place.
In no time at all, he was faster than he had been in practice, something I have never seen since in a race by a leading driver.
Nine laps later, he was thirteenth; at the halfway mark, eighth; seventh came when Niki Lauda went off spectacularly; sixth when he overtook a faltering Mike Hailwood; fifth when on lap fifty-five he overtook Reutemann after many laps of cat and mouse with the Argentine, never an easy man to get by; fourth, his finishing position, when his team-mate François Cevert gallantly waved him by.
As that was a race in which Lotus, knowing that Fittipaldi was planning to leave, had given no team orders to Ronnie Peterson to be obliging to Fittipaldi, Ronnie won — as he could have done several times previously — and with Ronnie's win, Fittipaldi was eliminated from the title race.
That was Jackie's third championship in the bag and there was to be only one more race for him, his ninety-ninth, in Canada, where he finished fifth.
The Glen would have been his hundredth race, but Cevert was tragically killed in practice and Ken withdrew his Tyrrells.
It was an unhappy end to a great career, but Jackie's decision to retire had been taken long before: in April.
The decision was as rational a move as every other move in Jackie's career.
Though we have several times discussed the subject of retirement, in connection with other drivers, on his own withdrawal from the sport I would rather let Jackie have the word.
Jackie wrote in 1974, explaining his reasons, that ‘when the racing bug bites, it is often impossible to shake it off…
It can be the world's most exhilarating sport, but it can also be the most cruel.’
Like many another driver, Jackie had clearly contemplated the risks he was taking; he had had several severe accidents, so he knew what was involved; he knew the odds.
But when his friend and fellow Scot Jim Clark died in 1958, Jackie — like so many others — simply rationalized and sublimated that fact: ‘Somehow his death had become impossible to accept.
It had been a freak accident.
It didn't seem to apply to me.’
But friends continued to die: Jo Schlesser at Rouen a few months later.
‘I suppose that I was still naive and intoxicated by the candyfloss world that racing can seem to be.’
What one can read between the  lines was that Jackie wasn't yet a champion, that he knew he was good enough to be one and that the pressures and opportunities to make money were too good to be passed up.
In 1969, he won his first championship.
Retire?
‘It never even entered my mind.’
Ipse dixit .
After all, success brings its own rewards: and demands.
The rewards are goodies; the demands keep a driver too occupied to think too much.
The 1970 season brought a less efficient car — a good moment for a driver to pack it in.
For Jackie, it also brought a number of painful reminders that in those days, perhaps only a trifle more than now, driver mortality was a fact of life.
First was the death of Bruce McLaren during testing.
Then came the horrifying death of Piers Courage at Zandvoort, when despite many a brave effort, Courage died in his flaming car.
‘I saw Piers's helmet lying on the track, so I knew whose car it was…
That was the first time I was to see pain and suffering at close quarters.’
What was worst for Jackie, in a way, was the follow-up: the melancholy task faced by his wife Helen as she and Courage's wife Sally had to pack up Piers's things back at the Bouwes Palace.
Gathering up the  relicts is a hard business at the best of times, and Jackie had to know how the task, carried through with Helen's usual bravery, would have affected her.
Then Jochen Rindt was killed at Monza in practice:
I was to see the effect, in my own home, on my own children, that such tragedy could bring.
Both Piers and Jochen were close friends of our children, as well as of ours.
It is a strange thing continuing to do something by choice which has taken the lives of your close friends…
It is difficult to explain to those you love why you want to go on doing the same thing…the easy thing is to avoid looking at reality, to run away from it.
And the easiest way to escape is just to slip back into the cockpit of a racing car.
Once in there and on the track, all the awkward questions are forgotten.
You are anaesthetized: no more pain, no more conscience, no more guilt.
Let it be said here that Jackie is not one of the wild ones; he was never, like a Villeneuve or a Depailler, a death-seeker; his thrills did not come from risk, from playing Russian roulette with life, and unlike them, he had everything to live for.
I interpose that merely to point up that when Jackie talks of ‘guilt’ and ‘conscience’and ‘pain’, these were perfectly real things to him.
He was consciously continuing to race.
Then in 1972, Jo Bonnier was killed at Le Mans.
That put a direct pressure on Jackie's family.
As he puts it:
Helen had been hurt by Jochen [Rindt's]death but somehow, perhaps because it was near the end of the racing year, we both seemed to mend before the next season got underway.
I do remember that that was the first time I wondered if I could bring myself to retire…
Perhaps I needed more courage to retire than to carry on.
But with Bonnier's death, it was different.
Especially with Helen.
‘I could now see the strain was beginning to tell.’
Then came the day when his own two sons came home and asked their mother ‘when their Daddy was going to be killed, because all racing-driver daddies got killed’.
Even by April 1973, when the final decision had been taken, it still weighed heavily on Jackie: so much so that he finally sought advice from an Anglican priest and prayed God to give him enlightenment.
With that, ‘something came out of me…it was like having an unbearably heavy weight cut loose.’
Mediaeval theologians would have called it an incubus: racing was Jackie's devil, his familiar, and it had to be cut out, exorcized.
The record was anyway there: three world championships, twenty-seven grand prix wins — a record that remained untouched for fourteen years until Alain Prost finally beat it — and a meteoric career.
Since I didn't know Jackie in his racing years, I can only speak of his character as I've known it since I975, a period by which he had already become obsessed with driver safety and a real force in improving conditions for drivers.
It is an observable fact that the greatest drivers I have known have all been highly safety conscious: a sign that their minds ruled their instincts.
But driver safety was far from being Jackie's only hobby horse and the first thing I noticed about Jackie — and I don't think he'll hold it against me to say so — was his incredible garrulity.
There wasn't any subject on which Jackie would not discourse: at length.
In another, this might be offensive.
But in fact, Jackie had by then given so much thought to the sport, to its rules, its techniques, its politics, its characters, that he was unendingly fascinating.
The only thing that could get one down — as it eventually did his American television followers — was his high-pitched, breathless, Scots delivery.
It was only a decade later that Jackie began to learn how to listen to others.
Otherwise, it was always what Jackie said that counted.
But I have an explanation for that.
The fact is that Jackie is so fully occupied, every minute of the day, every day of the year, that he is under a sort of compulsion to do everything, including talk, faster than anyone else.
He exists in a series of time-capsules, deeply aware of personal responsibilities, of demands made on his time, of kindnesses he wishes to offer, but nonetheless often unable to escape from the maelstrom he has created around himself.
Some of that has to be insecurity and often I have thought that what makes Jackie run is the fear that if he stops running the world will all fall apart about him.
Then, too, there are overriding ambitions in Jackie.
There is the ambition, desperately normal in the self-made man, to be recognized, to leave a mark on the world.
To those bred in greater ease, I suppose this is one of his less attractive sides.
You can't exactly call it social climbing, because Jackie is, financially and in terms of celebrity, already at the top.
Still, a suspicion lingers that the gamekeeper's grandson would like to be the laird, and I think it scandalous that Jackie's rewards from a nation whose standard-bearer he has so long been, should be a mere OBE.
But it is well known that there is a prejudice against awarding the bigger gongs to those who have fled England: especially for Switzerland.
Still, it is something unrequited in Jackie and it curiously twists his character, making him sometimes use people on his upward path.
Another ambition has been financial reward, and it is a lucky man who escapes a conversation with Jackie without being reminded of his various positions, his bankers, his lawyers, his accountants and his courtiers.
That, too, is explicable, and though Jackie himself puts it down, with much humour, to being a Scot, it is more likely the product of a powerful drive to succeed left over from his motor-racing days.
Just as I am sure twenty-seven victories seemed utterly insufficient to Jackie — and had he not retired, he was certainly fit enough and a good enough driver, given the right cars, to which he would have had total access, to notch up another fifteen or twenty — I am sure that his first million seemed a trifle.
Jackie is, I suspect, a far more complex personality than most people give him credit for.
He has a passion for information and a like passion for exactness in whatever he does.
Absolutely punctilious, he is prone to mood swings which only the exhilaration of activity can overcome.
I have known others like Jackie, not in motor sport but in other areas.
I have seen the growth of obsession, the inability to leave well enough alone, to relax, to play enough, to be oneself at all times.
Once I talked with a doctor about one such personality, asking if in his opinion X did not need psychiatric help, just so he could let go a little.
My friend answered that he wouldn't for the life of him ever tinker with such a volcano: ‘If I did,’ he said, ‘the whole man might fall apart.’
I think that is true of Jackie.
You take the whole man as he is, foibles and all.
Take out a single cog and the gears might grind to a halt.
Emerson Fittipaldi
When I first knew Emerson, the days of his glory were in the past.
He was still driving for the McLaren team, this time with the amiable German Jochen Mass, but the team had fallen on relatively lean times, and Emerson, a man short on patience and long on a sense of his own worth — and with two championships to his name — was a sometimes angry and often frustrated man.
Emerson had begun his career with Lotus in 1970, scoring his first grand prix victory at Watkins Glen in 1971.
He had steadily improved his performance in the shadow of Jochen Rindt and, with Rindt's death at Monza in 1970, he had inherited the mantle of Number One driver and, by 1972, had won his first championship at Lotus.
A short but commanding figure with bristling sideboards, an underslung slouch and a heavily ridged face, Emerson is not the sort of Brazilian most people expect to meet.
Though he was fully capable of relaxation, what marked him most was a restless irritability.
That is because Emerson wasn't truly a Brazilian, but a Paulista.
The Paulistas are to Brazil what the Milanese are to Italy: they are the businessmen, the ones with the energy and the drive and, as a consequence, they are disliked by the rest of the Brazilians.
Sao Paulo is a place of immigrants and, as is obvious by his name, Emerson's paternal heritage is Italian; his mother is Russo-Polish.
In many ways, therefore, Emerson is a cross-breed.
There is a part of him which always loved the soft life of the Brazilian beaches, the sun, the sea, the sport, the girls; and there is another part of him that is quite ruthless, highly organized, very self-promoting and ambitious.
In many ways, the dichotomy derives from his own family.
As Emerson's father, Wilson Sr, is a journalist, I got to know him quite well in my early years in the sport.
Wilson is a typical FI fanatic, an enthusiast who is excited, vicariously, by the sport and can see no wrong in any aspect of it.
Both the Fittipaldi brothers, Wilson Jr, known as Wilsinho, and Emerson, three years his junior, were strongly pushed towards motor racing by their father's enthusiasm.
In a nation which is as sports-crazy as Brazil, and which has produced a number of greatly distinguished drivers, of which Emerson was the first world  champion, the interest is hardly surprising.
If you had the money and the leisure in Brazil, and Emerson's family gave him both — though not so lavishly as, say, Piquet's family — motor racing was something perfectly natural.
Brazil is a huge country and the car — and hence competitive cars — is very much part of national life.
Brazil is also a country of frontiersmen, pioneers —bandeirantes , they are called — and it would be an understatement to say that ethics and morals play a relatively small part in the art of being Brazilian.
It is a place of wide expanses, immense opportunity, widespread corruption, constant violence, sexual laissez-faire and general fantasy, appalling gulfs between rich and poor, between survivors and the condemned.
All these factors have some role in Emerson's make-up, but it is that old Paulista go-ahead mentality that made him one of the most disciplined, most consistent and, in his prime, ablest of drivers.
It was the same mentality that led him into the folie de grandeur of thinking that, having been a champion driver, he was also fitted to run a motor-racing team — indeed, to think that he was better fitted to do so than those for whom he had worked and driven.
Thus Emerson's career breaks into three parts: his years as a champion and at the top of the FI drivers' hit parade, his years as an unhappy and frustrated team-manager and his last years as an itinerant driver in search of a lost career.
Everyone who raced against him in his good years says roughly the same thing: as a driver, Emerson was enormously consistent, not especially aggressive, very thoughtful and possessed of an excellent racing technique, the source of which was undoubtedly a long apprenticeship spent in motor-cycle racing, karting, Formula Vee, in Renault Gordinis, sports-car racing and so on.
On his arrival in England in 1969, he signed on at the Jim Russell school and raced in Formula Ford, passing from there to F3, winning the championship, and moving on in 1970 to F2 for Lotus.
Even in those early days, accounts of Emerson's races all speak of his smoothness, his restraint, his carefulness.
It was also sometimes said that he was ‘mediocre’ and ‘uninspired’.
The truth is — and it is an old truth in FI racing — that a driver is often only as good as his car.
In a poor car, it takes a driver of great  aggressivity and unbounded self-confidence to make such a car even moderately competitive.
Keke Rosberg and Alan Jones, among others, were always in the thick of things even when they were driving what each of them calls a ‘shit-box’.
Emerson, on the other hand, required a good machine, solid backing, a lot of mental caressing, to perform at his best.
When  confident, few drivers were in his ultimate class, technically; when unconfident, he could be quite ordinary.
For Emerson I972 was a fine year: with a full season in FI behind him and with a winning car, he drove with assurance, confidence and verve, though still finicky if conditions were not favourable to him, as at Monaco in the rain.
It is detracting nothing from his ability as a driver to say that his first championship, in I972, he owed to a markedly superior car.
The fact is that he had much to do with the development of that car, that he worked hard, drove cleanly and finished steadily: those are the marks of a real champion rather than a flash in the pan.
He carried into 1972 the kind of driving which had made his reputation in 1971, and if you study the fact-sheets for that year — the inaugural race at Paul Ricard in France is a good example — you will see Emerson well back on the grid and yet prevailing in the end to finish well enough.
So it was that in 1972 the knowledge that consistency paid off, that concentration was necessary, that racing went to the prudent as well as to the bold began to pay off for Emerson.
In Argentina, he was betrayed by his car, but after a bad fright in practice at Kyalami when a wheel came off, he came in second behind Denny Hulme after race-leader Jackie Stewart lost all the oil in his gear-box.
By then, and with a couple of non-championship wins under his belt, Emerson and the whole Lotus team knew they were onto a winner in I972.
Not all the Lotus problems had been solved — the car was still very light at the front and had trouble coming out of the corners — but it was certainly thoroughly competitive and Fittipaldi's confidence was high: especially when he won going away at Jarama in Spain, with only Ickx's Ferrari providing any real opposition.
Monaco, however, was to be a set-back.
It was a track which Emerson had never favoured, it rained and the best Emerson could do, after a couple of sorties, was third behind Beltoise and Ickx.
The next race was at Nivelles in Belgium and Emerson took both pole and the race, leading for seventy-seven of the eighty-five laps.
That brought him to Clermont-Ferrand for the French Grand Prix firmly in the lead of the championship but with a bad bout of flu.
Despite not knowing the circuit and rain during practice, he scored another second place behind Stewart, who had recovered from an ulcer.
Emerson and Jackie swopped positions at Brands Hatch, with both of them missing gears at critical points and having to drive some time in oil thrown up by Ickx's Ferrari.
Fittipaldi's victory made the championship score 4– Points to the  pretender and 27 to the reigning champion.
If Jackie were to close the gap, it would have to be at the Nürburgring.
There, Emerson made a superb start but got caught in traffic at the first left-hander.
Ickx was leading, Peterson (in a March) behind him and Regazzoni was as usual making life difficult for those behind him.
Stewart lay behind.
Eventually Emerson got past Regazzoni and then Peterson whose car was more like a wrestling opponent than a smooth machine But just as Fittipaldi was beginning to think he might be able to make up Ickx's fifteen-second lead, his gearbox went off and caught fire and Emerson made a hasty emergency exit.
Another victory in the incandescent heat of Austria, where Stewart had led for twenty-three laps, brought Emerson to Monza with the title within his grasp: he needed just three points to clinch the championship.
The race weekend, however, was one in which, Emerson had said ‘everything went wrong’.
First, the transporter bringing his race car crashed on the autostrada and two of his mechanics were injured.
It looked like the run of Lotus troubles at Monza — Clark's run-in with von Trips, Rindt's death — was continuing to dog the team.
A spare car was in Chamonix and Emerson was the one who went to fetch it, so that he was exhausted by the time free practice began on Thursday afternoon.
Then the newly installed chicane turned out to be a terrifying obstacle, though Emerson still preferred it to the old flat-out curve.
A series of mechanical difficulties in setting up the car caused further problems and on Friday he had constant braking problems; an experiment on Saturday did little to change matters for the better — Emerson finished practice in sixth place.
Finally, on Sunday morning Emerson woke up to find it raining — and Monza is not the track for rain, nor is rain a help to someone on the third row of the grid.
Meanwhile, Chapman had flown in from his palatial home on Ibiza and was in his usual itchy, touchy, irritable pre-race state.
Relaxation was impossible to him: not just because he was a superb ‘detail’ man looking into absolutely everything that could affect the outcome of a race, but because he was by nature a thoroughly driven and often neurotic man.
I often suspected a touch of sheer paranoia in Colin on race weekends: as though he felt that the gods out there were all conspiring to deprive him of his advancement and rights.
It would blow away with victory, it would calm itself off circuit, but at the track — always impeccably attired, natty, cleaned and scrubbed — he fairly sizzled.
That day, the rain mercifully stopped, but Emerson was close to  being late, as he often was.
He jumped into the car for warm-up and the brakes were as bad as ever.
The front discs were changed and that was all that could be done.
But Colin remained, in Emerson's own account, very twitchy: winning meant a great deal to him, he was the arch-competitor and in a way he also wanted to take revenge on a track which had both hurt and humiliated him.
Not long before the race started, a fuel leak developed in the cockpit.
Shut up in the motor-home with Colin while the mechanics desperately mopped up the mess and changed the fuel bag, Emerson was reasonably sure he wouldn't be able to race.
Hindsight says that if the Lotus mechanics hadn't worked so hard and so efficiently and if Emerson hadn't been able to race, Jackie Stewart's two victories in the last grands prix of the season would have given him the championship.
That was how close it was, and as Emerson once said to me, he learned that weekend, sweating out the last half-hour before the start, that when you're running for the championship, you simply can't give anything away: give Stewart an inch and he would have taken a yard.
Even when the change had been made, in the nick of time, the questions remained in Emerson's mind: would the engine work?
Would the fuel go through satisfactorily?
Would the cockpit be full of fumes?
In the event, and despite a last-minute change to the rear roll bar, as Eddie Dennis has said, Emerson's calm won out.
Where ‘you see little bits of nervousness showing on other drivers, moving their hands, fiddling with the mirrors, feeling their switches, he just sits there…
’ Dennis said.
And I can testify to that.
Like his compatriot Nelson Piquet, Emerson in the cockpit is a somnolent cat.
The race, and the championship, were won at Monza, but not without difficulty due to Emerson's fear of running out of fuel, which he conserved with characteristic prudence.
The year 1973 came close to repeating the triumphs of 1972 but, as usual in FI, other cars were catching up with the Lotus, though not in qualifying, for 1973 was the year in which Ronnie Peterson notched an astonishing nine pole positions and a place on the front row in twelve of the season's fifteen races, as against one and five for Emerson, Peterson finishing a mere three points behind Fittipaldi.
That year also saw Jackie Stewart end his racing career with his third championship, with Emerson as his runner-up.
In 1974, Emerson decided to move from Lotus to McLaren, a move dictated by the kind of restlessness and self-interest which characterize  most racing drivers and, more than possibly, by the fact that 1974 was the year in which the multi-million-dollar multinational, Phillip Morris, took over the sponsorship of the McLaren team.
It is safe to say that Emerson made a leap in earnings by joining McLaren.
A former world champion who had narrowly missed a second championship, he had a position of huge popularity in an important market for Marlboro (Brazil), exactly the kinds of characteristics needed to develop a new car, and fitted in temperamentally very well with the racing ‘philosophy’ of the McLaren boss Edward Everett Mayer — known on the circuit as ‘the Wiener’due to his squeaky voice, short stature and constant presence.
In many ways, McLaren was an early, if not the first, prototype of the modern racing team, and it did indeed seem as though Emerson fitted in very well.
In the first place, its very structure, financially and administratively, was ‘corporate’ in nature.
Mayer is a Yale-trained lawyer, his background is equally in racing and business, he knows the value of money and how to extract it from sponsors and also was among the first to appreciate, in the changing nature of the sport that the big bucks and the big battalions give any team a better chance of achieving championship results.
Smart-liveried, amply motor-homed, luxurious to a degree, fully equipped with the best that money could buy in research and development, McLaren made a thoroughly businesslike and professional attack on the championships.
It was to be a championship forged from hard-earned placings against a very closely balanced opposition.
Peterson, who stayed behind with Lotus, began the season with a pole position in Argentina but failed to finish; Emerson won one of his three races at home in Brazil; but it was already plain that the main opposition was going to come from Regazzoni and Lauda and the Ferraris, who were on one of their ascendant curves, Lauda in fact winning his first grand prix in Spain in April.
Ronnie won at Monaco, outlasting both Rega and Niki, and from there to the very end of the season, Fittipaldi had to fight hard to keep his place among the front runners.
In July, after Jody Scheckter carried off the race at Brands Hatch, the point situation was: Lauda 38, Fittipaldi 37, Regazzoni and Scheckter 35.
At the Nürburgring, Emerson failed and fell seven points behind Lauda and four behind Jody.
In Austria, Clay was the only leader to score any points, and in Italy, while Ronnie won his third race, Fittipaldi scored an important second place to keep his chances alive.
His narrow victory at Mosport over Regazzoni put the two men equal on points with one race to go at Watkins glen, with Scheckter still in with an  outside chance, and when Rega retired, Emerson settled in behind Reutemann, Pace and Hunt for the fourth place which was to give him the championship.
As runner-up to Niki Lauda in the I975 championship, a year of Ferrari triumph, Emerson further consolidated his reputation.
In Jochen Mass, the amiable, brave, sometimes outrageous German driver, Emerson had the perfect foil for his own hard-headed attitude towards ‘building’ championships, and his character — at the time I met him — was, I think, best described by Jackie Stewart, who noticed that Emerson was amiable, easy-going, fun-loving, relaxed and serious about his job, but ‘you don't drive a racing car because you are all nice.
When you are driving a racing car and you are taking it up to the limit, you can be nice, you can be charming, but somewhere there are undercurrents going for you that make you a pretty aggressive individual.’
The truth was that for four years Fittipaldi had come close to dominating motor racing in the way Jackie had before him: after two indifferent early years learning his trade, he had been champion twice (in 1972 and 1974) and come second in 1973 and 1975.
It was only natural, part of his family ethos and his own psychological make-up, that he would seek new fields to conquer.
Remembering my conversations with him at the end of 1975 and the beginning of 1976, it was clear that he wanted fresh fields to conquer, that he thought he had more than proved himself as a racing driver and that he thought he could, with no great difficulty, follow a Bruce McLaren, for instance, and make his own way in cars of his own.
The manner of his handling his departure from McLaren was, however, characteristically inept.
For a long time, Emerson simply failed to sign the contracts which would have kept him in front-rank racing.
Neither McLaren nor their sponsor, Marlboro, could figure out what was going through Emerson's mind.
There were rumours of all sorts and I recall Teddy Mayer speculating on the subject at the time.
He felt that Emerson was going through a hard time in his own life, that he was confused, that he was having marital problems, that Brazil and his family were getting him down: in other words, that Emerson was under a lot of pressure.
Whatever the reasons, the result was a disaster for him personally.
He managed three points in 1976 driving his own Copersucar Ford, 11 in 1977, 17 in 1978, 1 in 1979, 3 in 1980 and absolutely nothing in 1981, the year when he finally stopped racing his own cars and quit F1.
The whole enterprise was ill-founded from the start.
As his team's sole driver, Emerson suffered the usual fate of one-car teams: development was hampered, accidents or breakdowns prevented the team from making its mark and the management and financing of the team distracted Emmo from the task at hand, which was to win races.
In theory, Emerson's brother Wilson Jr, or Wilsinho, was to look after the team's administration and sponsorship.
This was a task for which Wilson Jr, who had been at best an indifferent driver himself, was palpably unfitted.
Much more choleric than his brother — who was never in those years very far from outright rudeness — Wilson offended people, and important people, right and left.
He had stubbornness and tenacity, but no real knowledge of the development or maintenance of cars; Emerson, who did, was constantly frustrated and increasingly disaffected.
His mood turned, and though he could, off the track, retain much of his charm, on the track or at race meetings, very little of this was evident.
The team was underfinanced from the start and indeed, some of the finance Emerson did get-like some of the companions and hangers-on he began to attract in those years — was distinctly off-colour.
Copersucar, the Brazilian sugar giant and Emerson's chief sponsor, found itself in serious political trouble when it turned out that it was indirectly financing the vigilante groups who kept Sao Paulo in a state of severe political repression during those years.
The revelation of these connections clearly did not help Emerson greatly in the ever more sophisticated world of FI and the truth of the connection, plus Emerson's failure to succeed with a Brazilian team, affected his popularity back home to a substantial extent.
Inside FI, it was known that Emerson could have gone on driving for a major team and many thought it a pity that he had not stuck to doing what he knew best.
Likewise, in that same world, where financial probity may not be widespread in general but is strictly enforced within the sport, Copersucar's interminable financial difficulties, its frequently delayed payments, its general insecurity and inability to meet its commitments, took their toll of most people's tolerance.
It was widely thought, for instance, that too much of the team's money was going to the Fittipaldi family and too little into the preparation of the car.
Emerson was offended by these suggestions and reacted with characteristic vehemence.
My own view is that he did not understand, nor admit to himself, the extent of his own error in starting off on his own without experienced and able people around him.
That is, he thought he was still the amiable, easy-going champion  he had been, when in reality he was a harried man who was beginning to learn about defeat and humiliation.
It is also true that when a decline sets in in F1, it is very difficult to retain one's status.
Those of us who remember the horrid cruelties applied to Frank Williams in the days when he was generally considered ‘Wanker Williams’, an outsider with no chance to make good, can remember how it felt for Emerson to climb down off his mountain and to try to make good in a changing and by then wholly different world.
Unfortunately, ill luck, in his case compounded by ill judgement, dogs the unsuccessful, and the only way into the sport, for some who should never be in it, is around the less successful teams.
There, a little money will buy you a good deal of swank.
Because of his fame, his history and his continued presence in the sport, as well as the strength of his personality, Emerson remained a figure; but also the shadows lengthened about him and few who worked with him in those years have much good to say about their relationships with him or with his team.
Then, too, there are the marginals who somehow seep into the paddock, and one of my unhappiest memories of Emerson's decline has to do with the opening of the season which in those years invariably began with the Argentine and the Brazilian grands prix.
The whole FI family would stay at the Sheraton in Buenos Aires and the Hilton in Sao Paulo while, between races, a majority of the drivers would take a week's break at Guaruja on the Brazilian coast near Santos, an hour or so away from the smog-filled city of Sao Paulo.
As Emerson and his family had a house on the beach in Guaruja and as, like all Brazilians, Emerson, his lovely wife Maria Helena and his whole family were extremely hospitable, that house became a natural venue for a bunch of cronies and hangers-on whom Emerson, with more good nature than judgement, would invite to stay with him.
Naturally, that something less than attractive fringe also found its way to the beach house.
In FI, such people are tolerated by some: either because they are good company or because they provide ‘services’, whether these be the producing of Mercedes cars which are then flogged off at a profit or the procuring of girls.
They are flash people who have money to throw about, and not all the money they throw about is honest money.
I do not think those were happy times in Emerson's marriage and they certainly did not enhance his general image in the sport.
They offended some of the more straight-laced among the constructors — people who might have been more inclined to help the Fittipaldis if  they kept better company — and generally put a question mark over the Fittipaldi team: how it was surviving, with whose backing, by what means.
Rudimentary Mafiosi, such as Franco Ambrosio, who was shortly to be a founding member of Jackie Oliver's and Alan Rees's Arrows team, an egregious former self-styled gun-runner and mercenary later gaoled for escaping up Holland Park Avenue throwing bags of cocaine out the windows of his car, floated around on the edge of those early South American season-openers, the former offering fantastic deals (on which he rarely delivered) and the latter procuring the kind of girls that racing drivers can relax with.
It was hardly a wholesome scene.
If Emerson had had the finance to develop a team properly, if his brother had been a better manager and if Emerson himself had not become frustrated as a driver by his car's constant failures and retirements, if, in short, he had got his act together, he would quite possibly have made a first-class constructor and been hailed as a Brazilian Ferrari or Chapman.
In fact, he had all the mannerisms of the major proponents of the sport but few of their skills.
Very good at setting up cars, he was less fortunate in his choice of engineers and, when he had good ones, did not know how to leave well enough alone.
By driving his own cars when he was past his peak as a driver, he lost out on the development that could have been contributed by a second opinion.
By running a marginal operation that staggered from week to week, he was unable to put together a long-term plan for success.
The best account of Emerson's last year in FI is in Keke's memoir of his two years with Fittipaldi.
It is a bitter tale of unfilled promises, cash shortage and Emerson's inability to allow others who knew more than himself to perform their functions properly.
It makes a sorry epitaph to a great career, ended Emerson's FI ambitions, wound up breaking up his marriage, alienated the public, caused dissent in his own family and forced Emerson into retirement.
Later, Emerson was to continue racing in other forms, in the US Cart championship and elsewhere: the bug was still in him, success came occasionally, but the spirit seemed to have gone out of the man.
He was happier than he had been during the seven bad years between 1976 and 1982, still self-assured but now far more reasonable.
The final verdict has to be that the underlying intelligence of the man, for all his shrewdness, combativity and skill in a car, was insufficient to match an ambition that was almost forced upon him by his milieu, by his family and by his status as a Brazilian national hero.
Niki Lauda
There was an early view of Niki Lauda — affectionately known as ‘the Rat’ to much of the FI family — which thought of him as an automaton.
Whatever the business at hand was, he got on with it, rather as if you poured Draino into a sink.
Detergents don't discriminate between tasks and Niki was so good at what he was put to doing that this notion stuck, especially when his Ferrari was doing so well that victory seemed almost automatic.
There was a still earlier view which said that he was an arrogant little brat and that what he liked best was having fun, preferably at the expense of others.
Then there is the post-Nürburgring view of Niki which apotheosized him: the way the press and the media treated him, you would have thought Richard Wagner was about to consider fitting him into Valhalla and Charlton Heston play him as El Cid.
The man who the media said could do no right, because he wouldn't give straight answers and most of all enjoyed mocking the stupidity of the press, suddenly became the man who could do no wrong.
I would have thought Niki could take all these views of himself with a grain of salt.
They are all partly true and they all make up the totality of a man whom I think very few people — perhaps least of all Niki himself — really understand.
Either he is as simple and as straightforward as he would like us to believe, or he is, as many who have been around him think, so infinitely and deviously smart that, like a fox, he just can't be captured.
Where all these views would concur is in saying that on the track Niki was as much the natural successor to Jackie Stewart as Alain Prost is the natural successor to Lauda.
About his effectiveness in a car, any car, there is very little doubt.
About his mastery of the mysteries of driving strategy and deriving the best out of the materials at hand, there is unanimous consent.
If Niki the man slips through this net of approbation, much of the fault must rest with his own capacity to mythologize, his utter disrespect for those who seek to read his mind and the kinds of people he has always kept about him, like court jesters, to keep his market value high.
The last is important.
Niki is an Austrian and, at that, an Austrian in the full sense of the word, and Austrians, at least after the collapse of their empire in 1918, are a little bit aslant to the world.
As an Austrian, Niki is divided against himself, and there are not just two Nikis but several dozen of them.
The job of keeping them together has been entrusted to a series of ‘confidants’ who write his books, churn out his articles, furnish his quotes, capture his image and sweeten the sour, and when I once asked Niki why he wouldn't ever do a serious — and in consequence, a truthful — book about himself, he replied, why should he?
The only thing such books were good for, he added, was starting the fire back home: he kept a pile handy by the hearth.
I don't just think Niki doesn't want to be known, I know it.
I had a long talk once with the very bright lady who accompanied him in his early days, a lady of charm and accomplishment and infinitely more mature than Niki was.
She said she wouldn't know who Niki really was.
He was a child, he was a Mensch ; he was a massive egotist, he was generous; he was foolhardy and petrified; he loved company and loathed it; he was ambitious and careless; he was smart but stupid.
Whatever he was, she found him charming and exasperating at the same time and no, she didn't think her relationship would last because you can't keep mercury in your hand, not for long.
The point of all of this is that Niki is an excellent self-publicist and a determined mystifier.
He has ‘written’ far more books than any other driver in the history of the sport; he has given an infinite number of ‘in depth’interviews; he has been the subject of as much and as adulatory film footage as the Fellini-like Enzo Ferrari, and while everything he says seems absolutely straight, nothing he says is without a sharp edge to it.
The sharp edge of what Niki thinks: about racing, about people, about socialism, about Austria, business, the world; The trouble being that what Niki thinks, beyond the basics of his craft, changes from day to day.
The transparent ‘honesty’ with which he will say good and bad about the people he's worked with and around has always to be taken as having a ‘point of view’; that ‘point of view’is governed by what Niki is looking for at any particular moment.
Some of this undoubtedly derives from Niki's background, which is proper to the point of pedantry and very much old Austria.
Just take the ambiguous sentences at the beginning of Niki's latest book,To Hell and Back : ‘In Austria, the Laudas are a ‘good’ family.
At any rate they were.’
It is not a historical statement; but is it the  declaration of a creed?
That whatever the Laudas were, they are not, in Niki's hands, the same?
Certainly nothing about Niki is particularly reverent: the coldness of his family (their ‘twenty-room garret’ in Vienna), the autocratic ‘old’Lauda, his grandfather, his school-and-garage days (hopeless), the various ‘borrowings’by which he wangled his cars, all that passes in a breeze.
What he is saying is that he always wanted to drive, his family was against it and he defied them and did it
But the way he did it was with the same connections he defied, and to get into serious racing in his early days, he got a bank to give him credit and a sponsor to give him some backing: though he hadn't, of his own, a sou in the world.
What the young Niki did have was expectations, which the bank recognized.
He also had expectations of himself.
He started out with March in F2, where Ronnie Peterson was a budding star —‘they therefore,’ writes Niki, ‘did not feel the need for anyone particularly good in the Number Two slot.’
That cost Niki 20,000 borrowed quid.
That was 1971.
By 1972, he needed a fresh injection of capital and he wanted to get into FI.
The price at March this time was £100,000.
The managing director of the bank that had advanced the first £20,000 was willing, the board, influenced by Niki's grandfather, wasn't.
So Niki went to another bank and raised the hundred grand.
1972 gave him thirty starts: in FI, F2, Touring and Endurance.
The last three worked passably; the March car he had was a fiasco.
Niki knew it, Peterson long refused to believe it and March (in the person of Robin Herd) soldiered on too long.
‘The experience was certainly salutary,’ wrote Niki, adding that what he learned was that he should trust his own judgement, that engineers get carried away and some drivers don't understand their cars.
Still, 1972 left him bankrupt: financially and in terms of a drive for 1973.
‘Rescue’ appeared in the form of Lou Stanley of BRM.
Except that Stanley, too, wanted money.
A further £80,000 was extracted from the Austrian coffers, repayable in three instalments.
Only the first would Niki have the slightest chance of repaying.
Did 1973 respond to his plans to leapfrog into the elite who would be actually paid to drive?
BRM was in decline, the best Niki could do was one fifth place in Zolder.
But after Monaco, a real miracle did occur: Stanley said to forget the rest of the payments to the team — as long as he agreed to stay two seasons more.
Niki signed.
With his debts, what choice did he have?
Ah, but Maranello has heard of him.
Enzo Ferrari has watched  him in Monaco, where in the superannuated BRM he had held on to third place for a third of the race, and then at Zandvoort.
The offer came, there was still a contract to be abrogated, but Lauda is Lauda: what he wants, he gets.
And at this point, finally, Niki's career takes off.
Niki has ‘written’ a whole book on what it is like to drive for Ferrari.
It is not a particularly good book and Niki despises it, but it does have some home truths in it.
One of them is that for all Enzo Ferrari's mythomania — and God knows he loves the pomp and circumstance of his legend and exploits it in his dealings with the outside world — the Ingegnere knows his stuff and can be perfectly straight when he wants to.
The main fact about Ferrari is that he is old .
Because he is old, he is a legend.
He's a link with the past.
He is old and sad because he lost his son.
He is old and sad and weak because while the sport dominates his thinking, he no longer dominates the sport, and his thinking, for many years now, has not really dominated the Ferrari sporting division at Maranello.
That is because as a racing team, Ferrari is like Britain before the Norman Conquest: a bunch of fiefdoms, with all sorts of lesser people shoving against each other for power in a small factory where there isn't any ultimate power to be had: at least not until the Grand Old Man goes.
Niki was lucky when he began at Ferrari in that he had a powerful intermediary in Luca Montezemolo, a gentleman in the Italian style, enormously suave, even-tempered, civilized and amiable.
Luca is now in charge of Italy's arrangements for the 1990 World Cup.
A better choice there could not be.
But Ferrari, even then, was not just Luca.
The other major force was Mauro Forghieri, the Ferrari engineer, of whom Niki writes that ‘he has the psychological finesse of a sand viper’ and that ‘when the Ferrari went well and all was perfect, he considered me a very good driver, perhaps the best.
When things went wrong, I was an idiot.’
Whether or not Niki ever said any such thing, since his books are ghost-written without any great elaboration from Niki, who says he never reads them, the facts are true.
Forghieri, technically, was a fine engineer; as a human being, he was mercurial, unpredictable, self-contradictory and irascible.
Niki's years at Ferrari were a set of ups and downs.
More ups than downs on the track, more downs than ups within the team.
We have several times talked about this period of his life, which Freud himself would find hard to fathom, and I think the answer to the manic-depressive cycle lies in the fact that Niki is Niki.
He's not the sort of  a man whom you can change by external circumstances, for I honestly think he puts very little value on externals.
For instance, though he has always been supremely competent at wrestling the best contracts out of his teams, I don't think his real interest lay in the money itself, but in the definition of himself as the best in the world and therefore entitled to the best treatment and the most money.
The record shows that in 1974, his first year at Ferrari, Niki's success was modest.
Regazzoni came second.to Fittipaldi in the championship, and Niki followed in fourth place behind Jody Scheckter of Tyrrell.
What happened to him that year is typical of what has often happened at Ferrari: questions of detail.
These are the hardest things for ambitious drivers to live with.
Little bits fall off the car, some trifling part has been improperly milled, a mechanic makes a mistake.
In the best teams, this sort of thing rarely happens, but if it does, a collective effort is made to put it right.
At Ferrari, the only effort to put things right is either to find the scapegoat or to cover up the mistake and deny it ever happened.
That year, Niki had his chances: he dominated the race in South Africa and the car went sick four laps from the end; he had Monaco in his gift, the same defect did him in; at the Nürburgring, his mechanics rolled his race tyres over debris.
Not all the faults are Ferrari's.
Niki got himself into a series of accidents, some from ill judgement, some from overanxiety, some from inexperience.
And in this respect, it should be recalled that the man I later compared to the mechanical rabbit who runs on.rails at a greyhound track was far from being the smooth, meticulous driver he later became.
In I975, he began the European season with the 31ST, which was simply the best car on the track that year.
Niki had nine pole positions in fourteen races, but nine out of eleven in the new car.
He notched up five victories and was simply unstoppable.
I watched him go round and, as it was my first year in the sport, I thought — so this is what FI is like, eh?
It just seemed that the Ferrari superiority was such that racing must be terribly boring for all the rest of the drivers.
What I didn't know then was the amount of work Niki had put into not only creating, testing and developing that car, but also dragging an unwilling and divided racing team in his wake.
By the end of that season, when he won his first championship by a large margin, I had little doubt who had achieved the triumph: Niki is no  braggart , but in the first of many longish talks, he explained to me that his nature was such that he really just couldn't stand the second-rate; and if you saw the second-rate around you, you had a clear choice — either you  cleared out and found yourself the first-rate or you simply demanded that second-rate people became first-rate.
He had chosen, he said, the latter path, and what was more, it was obviously so.
I have seldom, before or since, seen a man spend so much time with his car, be so obsessive about it, put so much work into it, understand it so well and be so unable to divert his attention from it for so much as a minute.
As Niki rightly points out, that year proved something to the whole of FI.
Technical development, intensive development, research and rigorous attention to every detail were what paid off.
At the same time, he wryly noted, success helped ‘create a Ferrari crisis, because it could never be bettered, and the tremendous success brought new problems’.
That is equally true.
I noted a new aspect to Niki at the end of I975, which he concluded with a fine victory at Watkins Glen.
That was that all the fame in the world meant bloody all to him.
His ego was and is such that the outside world can neither add to nor subtract from it.
He was in love with Marlene, had left the lovely Mariella and was determined to keep his private life private.
Otherwise?
‘I revise my market value, naturally…
Otherwise nothing was changed as a result of being world champion, absolutely nothing…
My know-how has reached the summit of effort, and surpassed it.
Any further increase of the star image is nothing but a nuisance…
I don't want to be a magazine hero.
I want to be known for my driving, not as a society man or a lover or God knows what.’
Probably this was damned difficult for the people at Ferrari to understand and Niki was always capable of being the supreme turn-off.
He was simply his own man and had no intention of playing Ferrari or any other games.
But from Ferrari's point of view, this must have seemed like grave disrespect: if one legend runs a company, it has an inbuilt interest in creating accompanying, subsidiary legends.
It was at this point, with Ferrari flushed with success, and as usual— like an Italian after a filling bowl of pasta — somnolent in regard to the future, that Montezemolo went back to Fiat and a successor had to be found.
Daniele Audetto was out of the same mould as Luca, but his job was now infinitely more delicate and difficult.
Daniele might be running the team for 1976, but Niki and Clay Regazzoni had very much the upper hand.
Niki's statement is cut-throat in its clarity: ‘If he [Daniele]is to give the orders, he must make the right decisions: right for me, for the team, for success.’
Kindly note the order.
‘If he makes the wrong decision,’ continues  Niki, ‘he becomes my opponent…
Not for nothing is water polo an Italian expression to describe business life: the fouls are done with the feet under the water where the umpire cannot see them.’
Here, a few words about Niki's strained relations with Italy and Italians.
The truth is that what Italians do well — live, survive and enjoy — Niki is not interested in, and what they do equally well — knife, subvert, rage, seduce, charm, infuriate, bureaucratize — are all things Niki cannot stand.
For him, there is not enough room in life for anything but one-to-one relationships and then as now, Niki has always been better in such relationships than in the goings-on of a board or a team.
Then, too, Niki has a low opinion of the media.
He can be hugely intelligent when he thinks they can be of assistance to him, but most of the time he knows they're a poorish and raffish lot, living off their own enthusiasms and frustrations.
If he feels that about the media in general, he feels it particularly about the Italian press.
On whom I think the world ought to take a little pity.
Italy has three daily sporting newspapers.
They cover sport completely and well.
But they are paid, like the tabloids in England, to titillate their public.
And nothing in Italy — except perhaps the national football team — so titillates the Italian public as Ferrari.
With an obligation, daily, to fill a whole page of the paper on motor racing, and on race weekends, three or four, their poor, harried reporters are frequently forced to invent what they cannot find out.
And since Niki — though he always did his duty — was ever notably surly with the press, what they invented about him caused Niki little joy.
The 1976 season was, anyway, going to be an exceedingly difficult one for Niki.
The old car went well at the start of the season, but attention to detail was wanting.
Nonetheless, Niki soon built on an overwhelming lead in the championship, though a first crisis came at Long Beach when Audetto suggested that Clay Regazzoni ought to have his day in the sun.
Niki objected, but Clay did win — because Niki's car failed him.
Then, before Spain, Niki managed to overturn a tractor on himself He could have been killed; he escaped with cracked ribs and bad bruising.
The Italian press had a field day: Niki should be replaced.
Regazzoni was the true Ferrari star.
It all came back to that greatest of Italian national defects, which is less an attitude of xenophobia than a reflection of its people's belief that Italy is God's country and Italians God's chosen.
Australians are not so different.
Nor, for that matter, are Brits.
Well, Niki was not an Italian.
He might drive for Italians, but he couldn't be made of the right stuff.
As Niki puts it, ‘you can drive  like a god, say nothing but nice things in Italian and always eat spaghetti, it doesn't do the slightest good, you are still a swine…
‘And Audetto was urging Niki to rest, let Clay take care of Spain.
Lauda again declined.
The man who put Niki together again after that little mishap was one Willy Dungl, a masseur-cum-dietician who became Niki's physical guru for years to come and made Niki into the fitness freak he became.
The intra-family dispute with Clay continued.
Niki acknowledges that they were never friends; he also has kind words to say about Clay being a good, steady driver and so on.
That is more or less what he has to say.
Frankly, it is hard to imagine two people more temperamentally opposed.
In his racing days, Clay was both a crazy and a hard man.
He caused more suffering among his allow drivers than any other man I ever saw race and the only man who could possibly come closer to him as a road-hog, even when his own position was hopeless, was Riccardo Patrese, a far more refined driver than Clay in every other respect.
As a technician, he was grossly inferior to Lauda.
To continue to advance Rega's claims against Lauda's, as Daniele did, was inexplicable in racing terms.
In Ferrari terms, it wasn't, and Niki should have smelled earlier that yet another Ferrari plot was under way, and without Montezemolo, his flanks were unprotected.
Matters came to a climax over Brands Hatch and its aftermath (a subject fully treated in the chapter on Hunt).
This time, it is God himself who descends from his empyrea.
Enzo, the Jove of the motor-racing world, who may get all the statistics and results and data from the circuit but hasn't been on the inside of modern racing on the track since prehistoric days, announces to the world that Lauda isn't taking care of his car, he neglects his work, he's got himself married and buggers off home and more of the same.
The ensuing scene back at Maranello, when Niki confronts God Almighty, makes funny reading.
Whether it makes good history or not is another matter.
Audetto, who was present in the later stages, once denied to me that it transpired entirely as Niki says.
I doubt it too; it is simply too good comic opera to be true.
But what is undoubtedly true about the account is Enzo Ferrari's rage, which is formidable.
Because what Niki was doing-the subject was Niki's contract and terms for 1977 — was putting himself on the same level as Enzo.
In Enzo's mind, there is no one else at his level, so that any such pretensions are just lèse majest é'; , and lèse majest é'; , we know, is just a step up from  insolence, and who does this little Austrian think he is?
Only someone as lofty and as besotted with himself as Ferrari could conclude the negotiations by saying, OK, Jew, you win.
After that pleasant scene, which ended with Niki getting a substantial increase in his pay, fate struck again: at the Nürburgring on 1 August.
The Ring was a place Niki knew well, and he knew the place was unsafe.
Niki had an ambition to drive it perfectly.
Why the Ring?
Because it was in those days simply the most difficult, challenging and interesting circuit around.
If his own tally is correct, 1976 was his eighteenth actual race on that wooded, long and perilous track in the Eiffel Mountains.
He'd already had his fair share of accidents there.
The difference between the early days and 1976 was that cars were going a lot faster — Lauda himself had been the first to break the magical seven-minute lap in 1975 — and that very little had been done to make the track safer.
Jackie Stewart had started the protests and the action to force the sporting authorities to do something, Niki had kept up the pressure.
As he has written, ‘I steeled myself to drive that fast lap in 1975 although my brain kept telling me it was sheer stupidity.
The antithesis between the modern-day racing car and the Stone Age circuit was such that I knew every driver was taking his life in his hands in the most ludicrous degree.’
At a drivers' meeting in the spring of 1976, Niki had proposed the Ring be boycotted.
He was voted down.
He accepted the decision.
He had been merely stating ‘a professional opinion’.
Whatever, when he arrived at the Ring, Niki was pilloried in the sporting press for his opposition to a great track in which all the other champions had raced: if he was so craven-hearted, they said, he shouldn't be racing.
The actual accident, Niki doesn't remember.
He remembers before especially some idiot handing him a photo of his friend Jochen Rindt's grave through the window of his car, and he remembers after, the sound of a chopper as he's wafted off to hospital, but not the accident itself.
Mercifully.
He watched a film taken by a fifteen-year-old-boy later, at home in Salzburg.
The film showed his Ferrari jerking right (Ferrari never carried out an inquiry, but Niki's chief mechanic at the time conjectured a snapped rear left tie-rod), crashing through the chicken wire into the embankment — it was one of several dozen such places at the Ring and spectators were few — bouncing back onto the track, its petrol tank flying through the air.
The Ferrari was on the ideal line for the bend, Brett Lunger came through, struck it and pushed it a hundred yards down the track where it burst into flames.
The marshals. who were not exactly close by.
could do little: they  had no fire-proof clothing.
The first drivers through — Guy Edwards, Lunger, the bearded Harald Ertl — leaped from their cars and tried to rescue Niki, but it was the old Ferrari driver, Arturo Merzario, a tiny figure usually decked out in a cowboy hat, who simply waded into the flames and undid Niki's harness: not a second too soon.
The damage was double: the exposure to the flames had been long enough to cause severe burns to his face, head and hands; worse, he had been forced, as the flames consumed the oxygen, to inhale volatile fuel and smoke, both of which critically affected his lungs and blood.
Fortunately, though all memory of the accident had been erased, Niki was not unconscious for very long, therefore his mind had a chance to work.
On the one side was the pain and a great big black hole into which he wanted to sink — it was so restful down there — and on the other there were the surgeon, the nurses and his wife Marlene talking to him constantly, trying to get him to react, to fight back.
It's something that Niki plays down in his book, but I know from others who were in touch with him at the time, that the mental effort and courage required were tremendous.
And inordinately fatiguing.
It was four days (during which he was given the last rites) before his doctors gave him a chance to live through.
After that, it was all willpower and the result was an extraordinary recovery.
Niki's phlegm about the whole incident can be summed up in what must be the driver's quote of the decade: ‘There is no point in having a complex about losing half an ear.’
He came back at Monza, five weeks later.
He wore a cap on his head ('I even capitalized on my semi-baldness by signing with Parmalat to wear a cap with their name on it') and my memory is of a certain artificial constraint on the part of many in paddock and pit-lane in approaching him.
Whatever Niki says, the accident had put him apart and it was, then — for later his scars became part of his persona — difficult to look at him.
One knew he didn't want pity, yet he received it.
There is no doubt the accident at the Nürburgring cost Niki a second successive championship.
James Hunt was able to capitalize on his absence and even when he came back to racing, Niki was hampered in his driving by the healing of his scars, particularly about his eyes.
And the fear of what had happened in Germany still lived with him.
He played the hard man and pretended he was beyond fear, but that was nonsense.
If restoring himself to full driving fitness was one thing, Ferrari was no help on the psychological front.
They really didn't know what  to do about Niki and, like all people who are doubtful and afraid, they reacted defensively.
They gave themselves back-up by putting Carlos Reutemann into the team.
If Regazzoni was little help to Lauda within Ferrari, Reutemann was even less.
In the first place, Niki couldn't stand him personally — and this had to do with a clash of personalities, the Argentine being in every respect the antithesis of Niki — and in the second, the Ferrari tactic was quite clear: if Niki doesn't recover, we get rid of him.
Still, as the season drew to a close in Japan, Niki led the championship by three points.
The majority of drivers — by Niki's account, or a minority, if you believe James Hunt — had already decided they would not race in the appalling conditions at the Fuji track.
The exceptions to the general feeling among drivers were, however, important ones.
Hunt, who lay second in the championship, said he would race if the officials decided the race should start, and Clay Regazzoni, his Ferrari team-mate, said he would anyway.
Inside Ferrari, Niki's decision was again made to seem that of a man intent on going it alone.
Anyway, the fact is that if it hadn't rained in Japan, if he hadn't withdrawn from the race after a few laps and waited until the weather improved, he, not James Hunt, would have been champion.
I spent some time with him after he drove back into the pit-lane and he was very categorical about his decision: ‘It is simply not worth it,’ he said.
‘If conditions are not safe, drivers should not be asked to drive.’
They weren't asked: they were told.
That is the way of FI.
But Niki, again, was his own man.
I admired him for his decision then, I admired him for not thinking being world champion was worth the risk, and I admire him still for maintaining a moral stance.
But at Ferrari, they were enraged.
Lauda the coward, screamed the Italian press.
The Grand Old Man offered Niki a contract as team-manager when he got back to Europe.
Niki smelled the rat and said unless his driving contract were honoured, he would move to McLaren.
No one had — at least officially — offered him the job, though he knew Hogan of Marlboro would be glad to have him, but the bluff worked.
He was asked to leave Ferrari's rather funereal office while a major argument took place; when he was invited back in, he was told Reutemann would be the team's Number One driver.
As things work out in FI, contracts to that effect or not — and Reutemann was to have his troubles with Alan Jones on that score later — the Number One position in any team is pragmatically judged on results, and though Niki did not make a brilliant start to the 1977  season, he did re-establish his hegemony within the Ferrari team by the South African Grand Prix.
But the 1977 Ferrari was by now outmoded and no longer had the same competitive edge.
Niki won in South Africa, Germany and Holland; he came in second six times and beat Jody Scheckter to the championship by 17 points; Reutemann was fourth, 30 points off the pace behind Andretti.
Fed up with Ferrari, Lauda secretly signed for Brabham at Zandvoort.
Ferrari made a generous offer for the following season, but Niki told him, ‘I don't want to stay, that's all there is to it.’
With the championship wrapped up, he declined to start in Canada and Japan and was replaced by Gilles Villeneuve.
The move to Bernard Ecclestone's Brabham was to a team which had a lot going for it — it was owned by the man who was consolidating his hold on FI and had an outstanding engineer in Gordon Murray — and one serious defect.
It had a very poor engine indeed, the twelve-cylinder Alfa Romeo.
It was plagued by trifling mechanical problems and its chief technician, the charming bon vivant Carlo Chiti, seemed overwhelmed by its problems.
As Niki relates it, Chiti spent more time looking after two score stray dogs that roamed through the Alfa factory than he did making sure his engines actually ran.
Anyway, 1978 was the year of the Lotus, and Mario Andretti ran away with the championship.
The 1979 season was even worse: Niki's four points were only double those he had earned in his first FI year seven seasons before.
The season came down to Montreal and Brabham was trying out the new version of the famous Cotsworth engine instead of its disastrous Alfa Romeos.
After months of negotiation, Lauda had wrested a $2-million-a-year contract from Ecclestone — no mean feat in itself.
Gordon Murray's new design looked splendid (it was to become steadily more successful in–e following years).
It was Niki who had lost heart.
It was a rainy day, a bad day in the heart.
Niki just quit shortly after practice started.
He told Ecclestone he didn't want to drive any more, he wanted out.
And Ecclestone, being the man he is, that is, a creature who understands straight talk and who despises hypocrites, understood at once .
As it happens, I left the circuit with Niki.
He was a completely changed and infinitely more relaxed man, patient and courteous and easy.
He made his reasons absolutely clear.
He had always said he would retire when he no longer enjoyed his racing and he no longer did.
His reasons for no longer enjoying it had nothing to do with his  accident, now well past him, or with the failure of the Brabham venture; it was within himself.
He had looked out the window of his hotel that morning, seen the rain, thought of the day that lay ahead of him and none of it any more seemed worthwhile.
He was suffering from third-degree ennui, and that was all there was to it.
He loved flying, he loved his home on Ibiza, he loved his wife and child, he no longer loved racing.
Was he weary?
Yes, he was weary of exploiting and of being exploited.
He wanted privacy and not the struggles of circuit and paddock.
He wanted to be a different kind of man doing a different kind of thing.
What could one do but applaud his decision?
I doubt that anyone really thought it would last.
Racing is in the blood, and while a driver still thinks he can do it, at or near the top, he is always going to be tempted.
In the interim, Niki had created his own airline, Lauda Air, but it wasn't going all that well.
He had also maintained his FI contacts: principally with Ron Dennis, who had bought McLaren out from Teddy Mayer, though here again, the hand behind the scenes really belonged to Marlboro's John Hogan.
The result was that after two years out of racing, Niki asked Ron Dennis to give him a private test — mainly to assure himself that he had not lost his skill and that he could face the new world of FI wing cars, quicker and much more road-adhering than the old generation.
He was a little out of shape (or a lot, if you take into account Niki's manic standards) but the money Dennis and Marlboro offered (the rumoured figure is $5 million) was an inducement.
Willi Dungl was still around making Niki work out and adjusting his psyche and Niki knew, if he wanted to, he could make his comeback.
Which he did, smiling, at a McLaren press conference.
No sooner back than at the very first race of the 1982 season, at Kyalami, controversy broke out again.
As it happened, the morning that the drivers decided to go on strike, I was up early at Kyalami.
I saw the drivers holding a conference in a bus in the lower reaches of the car park and decided to mosey down to see what was going on.
Didier Pironi told me they were about to leave the circuit for a hotel to meet in private where they could not be coerced by their bosses and, as it happens, along with a half-dozen other early colleagues, my car was well placed to follow the bus as it drove off.
An altercation took place at the entrance to the circuit when the irascible John McDonald sought to block the bus with his car — the idea of drivers striking and being independent of their owners struck him as positively mediaeval — but was resolved by a little gentle persuasion and a show of force by an angry Jacques Laffite.
The bus took off for  downtown Jo'burg, followed by our small convoy of about three cars, though in the ensuing hour, every reporter in FI was shuttling back and forth between the drivers' hotel and the circuit, where the angry bosses and the choleric Jean-Marie Balestre, president of FISA, met in angry conclave.
The ostensible issue was simple.
At the beginning of the year, the drivers make application for their super-licence, a recently introduced, sensible measure designed to make it more difficult for the totally unqualified to buy themselves drives.
When applications that year were made, Lauda and others were smart enough to realize that the licences had been so designed as to tie them to their teams, a move cleverly designed by certain constructors to lower the price war among drivers and to prevent desertions in the ranks.
The hidden agenda, which has never been properly discussed, was an attempt by American superagent Mark McCormack to muscle into the world of FI via Didier Pironi, then president of the drivers' association.
Niki was a leader of the strike: not merely by seniority but because he was a natural leader and because Pironi was out at the circuit doing the negotiating.
As it happened, speaking a number of languages, I had more access to the room in which the drivers were locked up than most, and I filed a long despatch to The Times about the issues in the strike and the feeling among the drivers.
It was a despatch which The Times never printed: its sports editor was out to dinner, as usual, and the subeditor who got the copy missed a major scoop through ignorance.
The problems the drivers faced were two.
First, their own solidarity was questionable.
Drivers are noted egotists and pride themselves on being hard men who are in a given place to race and the devil take the hindmost.
That was certainly the attitude of the ineffable Rosberg, to cite but one superego.
Then, as in any strike, solidarity tends to erode as time goes by.
The younger drivers were obviously under heavy pressure from their teams: they had spent years getting into the sport and they were being threatened with dismissal.
Second, the pressure exerted by the team-owners and the sporting authorities was exceptionally violent.
Some, like McDonald, were willing to risk physical contact.
Others, like Frank Williams and Ron Dennis, were simply scornful and mocking.
The French teams had their own problems because Balestre was French.
The Italians were divided and tried to mediate.
Overall, Ecclestone and Balestre both seemed to have lost their minds.
Their first tactic was to say they would take away the licence of any striker: their second was to say all striking  drivers were in breach of contract and fire them.
At this remove, the whole incident seems insane, but at the time it only proved once again what any driver has always known, that the constructors as a class are hard-nosed men with egos every bit as big as their drivers' and that there isn't enough concern among them for driver welfare or safety to fuel a heart for a minute.
Some constructors may, on affable evenings and in the afterglow of victory, admit that drivers are human beings; most of them consider them as nothing better than servants.
It is the lower class of constructor, the McDonalds and the Jackie Olivers, who are, and were in Jo'burg, the most intractable.
Eventually, the drivers ‘won’ their case.
That is, all firings and dire threats were forgotten and they raced.
In fact, FISA took its revenge in the form of a $5,000 fine and, in some teams, the constructors took other forms of revenge that were no less petty.
Once again, however unwillingly, Niki was in the limelight.
It was he who held the troops together in their communal dormitory, and it was he who led them out the next morning.
On other fronts, too, Niki, was proving a leader, the sort of senior driver whose participation in a team was greater than that of a mere employee, and it is to the merit of Ron Dennis and McLaren that Lauda was allowed to play a wider role.
Here, for instance, there is no doubt that Niki was of substantial help in closing the deal which brought McLaren the hugely successful TAG/Porsche engine, developed by Porsche but financed and sponsored by Mansour Ojjeh, the son of the head of Techniques d'Avant Garde, a French high-tech company with a substantial role in the development of weaponry.
Because FI, in the wake of Renault, was shifting towards the turbo engine and because McLaren was beginning to develop the TAG/ Porsche engine, 1982 was something of a transitional year at the team and both Niki and his team-mate John Watson suffered in the results table, Watson actually finishing ahead of Niki in the championship, the first time he had ever been upstaged within his own team.
The year belonged to Keke Rosberg at Williams — though Ferrari's Didier Pironi might well have won the championship had it not been for his grave accident in the rain at Hockenheim.
Williams had soundness and reliability going for them; the rest of the field was extremely well balanced.
In both 1982 and 1983, in fact, Niki seemed curiously abstracted from the business on the circuit.
Not that he drove any less well, but there seemed to be an unusual number of niggling little problems, a certain tension in the team; there was Watson's departure, Prost's  arrival; there was tension between designer John Barnard, a man considerable force and conviction as to his own genius, and Ron Dennis, who had worked his way up the ranks in FI and was in a somewhat Olympian mood.
I felt Niki was trying to be as much an elder statesman as a driver and though to say he was perfunctory in his driving would be an exaggeration, it was clear that he was looking to the future, and the development of the new engine, rather than to the present.
The engine came on stream in the middle of the 1983 season, and right away one could note that Niki was optimistic.
In his usual thrusting manner, he fought inside McLaren to get the engine put to use as soon as possible, knowing full well that engine development on a bench or in testing is very different to developing an engine that will be competitive under the stress of FI racing.
Barnard was as uncompromising as Lauda: he wanted the engine in a brand-new car, and that would not be ready until the 1984 season.
Niki had his way — in part— and the engine was tried out in the last four races of 1983: with mixed results.
The entry of Alain Prost into the McLaren equation galvanized the whole team, and Niki as well.
Prost had come cheap — virtually free for the first year — and Niki had re-signed for a very large sum indeed.
Prost could be said to represent the next generation of drivers and Niki the past.
Prost was every bit as good at intra-team politics as Niki; he was his equal in testing and perhaps slightly his superior (as would be proper for a younger driver) in combative driving.
Knowing both men as well as I did, I was one of the few who did not think there would be any major friction between them — both men were far too smart for that-but I did think Niki would find himself struggling for a primacy which he had long taken for granted.
I also knew that, when challenged, Niki would rise to the occasion.
In fact, the next year, 1984, was to be a memorable one in motor racing, distinguished by an extraordinary battle fought by the two men with all the means at their disposal, but always honestly and intelligently, on the circuit.
If Niki had sought to impress Prost with a victory at the very start of the season, the ploy didn't work: an improperly soldered battery cable put him out of action and it was Prost who impressed.
As Niki said at the time, his Number One position (an unofficial title, though Prost had made it clear to me, as to others, that he considered his first season at McLaren to be very much a learning process) was under threat, and that was not a situation Niki appreciated.
At  Kyalami, Niki won handily, but Prost still finished second: the TAG/ Porsche engine was beginning to show its superiority.
Michele Alboreto won the next race, at Zolder, and neither Prost nor Lauda finished in the points.
Then, at Imola, Niki again failed to finish — he was, I recall, disgusted with himself and with the engine, which was still having some teething problems — and Prost won.
Early days yet, but Prost already had 24 points to Niki's nine.
The French Grand Prix that year was at Dijon, high on a plateau over the city and a race that, for one reason or another, had always favoured the French.
Patrick Tambay, driving the Renault, seized pole position, Elio de Angelis was second on the grid for Lotus.
The McLarens had not been brilliant in practice, and Niki started ninth.
Niki somehow felt this was a make-or-break race for him; his pride was dented, his dander up.
After a while, Niki worked his way up through the field until only Tambay and Prost were ahead of him; then Prost had to abandon the race with a loose wheel, a stupid mechanical mistake, which put Niki on Tambay's tail.
Lapping Laffite, Tambay got back easily, but Niki had to go airborne over the kerb to avoid an accident.
Watching the race, it was obvious that Niki was driving with a sort of ill-controlled fury: instead of the steady, irreproachable Niki, here was a man who was fighting for his life.
Right below the press box he tried to get past Tambay and I could swear his wheels weren't more than inches from the pit-wall as he tried, and failed, to get by.
Then Tambay, perhaps unaccustomed to such pressure, made a tiny mistake, slipping a little wide, and Niki got past him.
But Niki's tyres were going fast: worn by all his attempts to get past Tambay.
Niki ducked into the pits, changed tyres and came out twenty seconds behind Tambay.
He caught up two laps before the end, Tambay's brakes failed and Niki was home.
That restored the balance in the team, but Monaco was next, a race for which Lauda has a particular aversion.
For the sixth consecutive time that year, Prost had qualified ahead of Lauda.
At Monaco, that is particularly vital and by then Niki knew in his heart that in the majority of cases he was probably going to start behind Alain.
In the paddock, he said, ‘I must be getting old.’
And there was some truth in that.
Qualifying is a young man's job, it requires a huge burst of adrenalin; also, except at Monaco, it is far less significant than it seems.
Niki was ever a patient, careful driver and not being on pole never bothered him, because what mattered was the race.
What did bother him was that in his duel within McLaren with Prost, the Frenchman, six years his junior, always  started with an advantage.
That meant that he had places to make up before he could challenge his principal rival, and in ma, king up places, especially at Monaco, there is always an element of risk.
Rain fell at Monaco — providentially for Prost, who was being pushed to the extreme by the young Ayrton Senna, and would certainly have been overtaken one lap later.
In fact, there was a widespread suspicion that the decision to stop the race at the halfway mark, when conditions were actually lightening, had been taken to favour the darling of France.
Half points were awarded (less than half the race having been completed) and Prost's lead over Lauda increased: 29.5 points to 18.
By this time, I think the fact that Prost was not only good, but better in the results department, was the least of Niki's worries.
‘Prost no problem,’ he said that weekend, and I think he meant it.
He knew that Alain was a fair fighter and that he was only doing what every driver does, taking advantage of his superiority in performance.
If Alain wasn't the problem, what was?
Well, the answer was obvious to anyone in the paddock.
The problem was Ron Dennis and in a way, this clash between the two men is a microcosm of life in FI and deserves a brief aside.
To start with, no matter how the public may consider it, FI is a sport governed by human relations.
FI is a family.
People live together and work together.
They are rich people, independent people, egotistical people and often extraordinarily unperceptive people.
The sport itself and the money, shelter them from the kind of rough-and-ready exchange that brings ordinary people back from the brink of conflict and leads them to see their adversaries as people .
Then there is a natural antagonism between drivers and bosses.
Jackie Stewart stated that when he contributed to ‘professionalizing’ the sport; drivers continued in his wake, creating an adversarial relationship between those who drove and risked their lives and those who lived, on sponsor money, high on the hog and risked little but their reputations.
Constructors resent the celebrity of drivers; drivers resent the anonymity and distance of constructors.
But between Lauda and Ron Dennis there was a further gulf.
For all his qualities, which are many, in those days Dennis still had a huge chip on his shoulder.
He had come up from the bottom and made it to the top: no one was to forget that he was at the top and everyone was supposed to forget where he had come from and how he had got where he was.
Niki, on the other hand, was a patrician born.
There was no social or any other kind of insecurity in the man.
Ron Dennis's McLaren, TAG/Porsche, Lauda, Prost, Ho–an and  Marlboro — that was the top.
It had money, fame and everything that goes with it, the biggest motor-home, the best-oiled publicity machine, you name it.
In my view, it went slightly to Dennis's head in one way and to Niki's in another.
To Dennis's in the sense that he thought he could act as team-boss without regard for Niki; to Niki's in that he thought his personal world outweighed Dennis's and the team's.
The original bitterness was over the way Niki had pointed a gun at McLaren's head and taken the team for a great deal of money.
The results of the first two years really did not warrant such astronomical sums and Dennis knew that the following year he would have to pay Prost a sum equal to his evident worth.
That meant Niki would have to take a cut.
This Niki was not inclined to accept.
The two men had it out.
Dennis reproached Niki with ‘aloofness’ and an ‘egocentric attitude’.
That, coming from one of the biggest egos in the paddock, was a bit much.
Next came an accusation, which Niki reports as follows, with Dennis saying, ‘If you pay somebody such an amazing amount of money, you can surely expect a little friendship in exchange.’
That got to Niki.
Niki has very few close friends, and none of them, to my knowledge, are in FI.
And, responding as a patrician, what could he say to a man who confused friendship with money?
Thus, when Dennis offered him exactly half what he had been making, Lauda thought he'd had a touch of sun.
From that moment on, that relationship settled into a form of sullen resentment that lasted throughout Niki's season.
Niki went fishing for another drive, and thought he had one at Renault; but the big-manufacturer politics of that season and Gerard Larrousse's increasing weakness therein, sabotaged that: Niki was kept dangling, offered the drive and then dropped.
Dennis, in revenge, said he had been ‘talking’ to Keke Rosberg.
Meanwhile, on the circuit, the season continued; so did McLaren's domination, so did Prost's rise.
In Canada, Niki narrowly lost out to Nelson Piquet and Prost trailed in third; on Detroit's bumpy street circuit, which Niki liked no better than he liked Monaco, Piquet scored a double.
Only five cars finished and Prost was fourth among them, well back.
Coming up to the first ever and only race in Dallas, a race run on a track that was breaking up and in the most intense heat imaginable, neither McLaren scored in a race that was brilliantly won by Keke Rosberg.
Back in Europe, Niki made a fine come-back at Brands Hatch, winning the race handsomely; Prost was forced to retire.
That put the two drivers on fairly even terms, Niki having 33  points and Prost 36.5.
At Hockenheim, the roles were reversed and for all Lauda's efforts, he finished just behind Prost.
It was at the Österreichring that Ron Dennis chose to put his foot in his mouth with Niki.
He said that unless Niki gave in and raced on the terms offered, he was going to go with Keke the following year.
At the same time, it was becoming obvious that between his two drivers, Dennis was favouring Prost.
The differences were tiny, nonetheless significant.
It's the sort of thing it is easy to observe if you stand around in the garage during practice or generally stick around a team, watching who gets the first briefing, who is paying more attention to whom.
The Zeltweg race was, after all, on Niki's home territory, and when Prost spun off on a patch of oil, the race took on a new perspective for Niki: he found himself in the lead, with Piquet behind him and no threat with badly worn tyres.
With fifteen laps to go, the race was his: if he could make it to the end.
Suddenly, there was a big bang and Niki lost all power.
Coasting a bit, fiddling with his gears, he found that third gear worked.
Fourth didn't, but fifth did.
A driver like Niki knows how to improvise.
But having only two working gears was going to cut his lap times.
In the end, Piquet was out-bluffed.
Not knowing how much was wrong with Niki's car, he thought Niki was only letting up and could apply the power whenever he wanted to.
So Lauda won and for the first time he led the championship: 48 to 45.5 for Prost.
And he said to me, pugnaciously, ‘That ought to show Ron.’
At Zandvoort, Prost was on pole and destroyed the opposition with an impeccable race.
Niki was second.
Prost's lead was a half point.
We all knew we were into an end-of-season of extraordinary interest, despite the fact that Niki conquered Monza in style and Prost again failed to finish.
It seemed that everything in the championship really hung on the reliability of each driver's car.
When both worked, it was down to the skills of the two drivers and there seemed very little to distinguish them.
Prost was always ahead on the grid; Lauda was always quickly up through the field.
Prost was more open, more ‘brilliant’; Lauda was safer, surer, more conservative.
But otherwise — if both cars were given equal care — what could distinguish them?
The next race, the Grand Prix d'Europe, was taking place on the newly rebuilt Nürburgring, much shorter than the old, infinitely safer, but also less interesting.
Time was running out.
Niki had not yet signed with McLaren; he had been dumped by Renault; he was on  his own.
As he admitted, ‘The tension got to me.’
Not for the first time, John Hogan at Marlboro played his skilful middleman's role.
Niki re-signed, for better terms than Dennis had offered, but less than he had wanted.
Both men's pride was assuaged and one could sense that a corner had been turned, that the two last races of the season would be run with strict fairness and impartiality.
On the day, Prost was unbeatable.
On a new ultra-smooth track, and in a race which began with a multi-car shunt at the start, he drove an absolutely perfect race, while Niki got himself held up in traffic by the inexperienced Mauro Baldi and could do no better than finish fourth.
One race remained, and that too was on a new and unknown track: at Estoril in Portugal.
Lauda led the championship by 2.5 points, not exactly a comforting margin, especially when Prost again qualified ahead of Lauda: not just ahead, but five rows ahead of him.
Pursued by the press, both men hid themselves as well as they could.
I played a round of golf in a group which included Prost and Mansell.
Prost seemed utterly at ease with the pressure being put on him.
Niki still thought Ron Dennis was giving Prost the better service.
Prost moved out of the team hotel for quiet, Niki stayed and fretted, with only Willi Dungl to keep him in moral and physical shape.
When it came to practice, the weather was appalling, with low clouds streaming in from the sea and rain falling constantly.
Though Niki's car had a series of defects, his low placing was also the result of his own mistakes.
The night before the race, Dungl massages Niki to sleep.
Prost has the runs.
Running into him in the paddock early on Sunday morning, I sense all is not well with him; he is nervous, he bites his nails, he runs his hands through his thick hair, he keeps scampering through the paddock to the hideous toilets, he is off his feed.
In the warm-up, Niki is three tenths of a second faster than Prost, but he doesn't like his engine and gets it changed.
Marlene, whom we never see at the circuit, is sitting in the Marlboro motor-home, a talisman.
Niki starts with one advantage.
A second place will give him the championship.
Prost has to finish four points ahead of Lauda to be champion (having more victories; it would have been three if Monaco had not been curtailed by rain, but then, if rain had not fallen, Prost would not have won in Monaco).
Niki also has, he has written since, ‘an indescribable feeling of power.
I have never felt as strong as this in my whole life.’
Still, with all the experience Niki has, he knows that the tiniest defect in his car could lose him the championship; any  mistake on his own part and his title is gone.
So he decides to be cautious and for the first few laps, he just sits and waits.
Piquet is in the lead and Nelson and Niki are as near friends as any two drivers are; Niki can count on Piquet doing Prost no favours.
Then suddenly he sees Piquet go into a spin and doesn't get back into the field for a long time.
‘I have the kind of feeling,’ Niki writes, ‘you have when your only friend has suddenly disappeared.’
Niki eats up a few places and then finds himself at the back of a bunch of five cars behind Prost, who is running second.
Niki is behind Johansson and he can't get past: Stefan's Toleman is faster on the straights and the track has few other places for overtaking.
Johansson is driving the race of his life and he knows he is in charge of the championship, even if it's not going to be his.
Niki thinks his engine isn't giving enough power; he boosts his turbo pressure from 2 bars up to 2.5 and that is taking a hell of a risk with his fuel consumption.
Finally, Johansson makes a mistake: he brakes too late and Niki is unable to avoid having his wing clip his own rear wheel as he goes past.
No apparent damage, because Niki is now reeling in car after car and when he overtakes Senna, he thinks he's in second place.
But he isn't.
Mansell is in front of him and behind Prost, who is now in the lead.
One more position, Niki thinks, and the championship is mine, whatever happens to Prost.
But Mansell is no less than thirty-nine seconds up on him, which means he has to make up at least a second a lap and preferably more.
Everyone watching knows what is at stake.
The French in the press box, for whom Prost is not just an idol but their feed-bag, are on the edge of their seats watching the monitors as they show Niki closing in on Nigel.
The process is relentless, until…
Niki comes up on a tightly bunched group of lapped drivers.
Berger moves over promptly for his fellow Austrian; the rest all want to be heroes.
Niki loses six seconds to the sort of ill manners to which even the greatest drivers are subject.
When Niki finally breaks through the crowd, he finds a Lotus in front of him.
He thinks it must be de Angelis, because surely Mansell is further ahead.
It isn't, it's Nigel and Nigel has a bad brake problem.
A grateful Niki coasts towards the finish, with Nelson, a lap down, riding pillion behind him, as though to push him across the line if he runs out of fuel.
There was no danger: the crowd would have blown his car across if it could have.
It had been a hard year, the public felt Lauda had been ill done by, and everyone felt that they were seeing the apotheosis of one of the great drivers and the first signs of greatness in his natural  successor, Alain Prost.
Least of all did Alain begrudge Lauda his third title.
He said, ‘I am younger, I have the time.’
There is a postscript to this valedictory.
One can say that Niki continued to drive on for McLaren in 1985.
One can also say that with his third championship he had thrown in the towel.
He and his Ibiza neighbour, Keke Rosberg, were both fed up with the sport, and things were going badly for both of them.
Keke was having a totally unsatisfactory time at Williams and Lauda the miseries at McLaren.
Both were no doubt reflecting on their families and their good lives and the absurdity of the Monaco circuit.
They were in Monaco, the home of poseurs, and when Keke said he was fed up, Niki could say, ‘That makes two of us.’
He wrote, ‘That very day, everything had struck me as totally mad…
I was in the wrong place and in the wrong job.
This had to be ridiculous, zooming round here like so many trained monkeys, 1000 hp on this circuit?
Madness.
For the first time in my career, I was assailed by doubt.’
Well, doubt is something that strikes drivers when they have reached, and imperceptibly slipped past, the apex of their careers.
Is it worth tempting fate?
Keke was to try another year, slipping into McLaren in Lauda's wake, because it is always worthwhile if you think you can win .
Niki was convinced he couldn't.
So far, nothing had gone right for him.
Little things were wrong.
Endless little things.
Brakes, the on-board computer, pistons, the electrics, the rear axle, a differential, a loose wheel, a turbo.
Of course part of it was that McLaren were placing their bets on Prost.
That was reasonable.
He was well ahead in the championship race.
They did not screw up Niki's car deliberately, but they probably thought the wind had gone out of his sails.
‘The plain fact is,’ Niki noted, ‘that I am caught up in an insane series of setbacks which are oppressive in their consistency and which seem to…prey on my mind.
Ten cases of ‘bad luck’ in a row is something I wouldn't accept from any driver in the world.
I would tell him he had to be at fault somewhere along the line.’
Once it goes, it goes quickly.
Everyone notices it.
By the Nürburgring, Niki had told Ron Dennis he wouldn't be racing the following year.
Ron asked for secrecy so that he could sign another driver without its being known that he was truly needy.
It was one of the less well-kept secrets in the paddock.
Anyone who knew Niki knew, in spite of his denials, that he was at the end of his rope.
The only question was when he would announce his retirement.
Rosberg was signed and Niki chose Austria.
I remember the occasion well.
We all heard Niki was going to give a press conference on the Saturday morning.
It was one of the least gracious occasions I recall in my years in motor racing.
Niki's speech was short and succinct and perfectly clear.
He wanted to live, he'd put in long years, he'd been champion three times, it no longer excited him to race, this was it, goodbye and thanks.
Then Ron Dennis got up and said it was all John Barnard's work and.McLaren's and they were bloody geniuses and Niki…
Well, he didn't mention Niki, he didn't congratulate him, embrace him, he didn't hand him so much as a crumb.
I walked out, numb and disgusted.
What a way to end, I thought.
A big ego so utterly ungracious and another big ego, Niki's, that had to swallow that kind of shit.
It was too much a paradigm of what the sport had become to be forgotten.
It was like the star chefs, like the film directors who think they make films single-handed, it was a world of overblown egos in which someone like Dennis — and, goddamn it, he had known some tribulations in his day!— could forget or, worse, overlook the common decencies of humanity.
The rest of us there were moved by Niki.
We were glad he was getting out.
Now, while the going was good.
We were glad we'd probably be seeing him again some time, unlike some who hadn't got out while the going was good.
And someone had just stubbed a cigarette out in Niki's cake.
James Hunt
The reason I called James Hunt ‘Master James’, a sobriquet which his sponsors, Texaco, took up and plastered (without payment!) on billboards all over the country, was that he appeared to be exactly that, -a rather well-brought-up young man, properly educated, well-mannered (when I gave him the name, though not in some of his more flamboyant later incarnations!) and thoroughly at home in the establishment circles in which he moved.
When I first knew him, he also did not seem quite grown up enough to be called ‘Mr Hunt’ or ‘James Hunt, Esq.’.
Everyone called him just ‘James’, including not only the denizens of the sport but all the periphery of FI life, discotheques, tennis courts, night clubs, fancy hotels, good restaurants, etc., and I saw no reason to do otherwise.
Certainly, he was the world's familiar, as well as familiar with the world.
It was in that respect that James differed most radically from the other drivers I was getting to know.
Though mischief or simply tomfoolery played a large part in his life, he was certainly not track-mischievous in the way Niki Lauda was.
At Regine's, where Jody Scheckter would have been as out of place as a hyena at a symphony concert, James was thoroughly at home.
Ronnie Peterson, off-track, was a model of milk-drinking virtue and not unlike a whole set of happy-family cards; James was no model of deportment anywhere, least of all in his marital and other personal relations.
Carlos Alberto Reutemann, that cunning, solitary ace from Argentina, worried about his racing twenty-four hours a day; James seemed to give it scarcely a thought — technically, as a contributor to development he was something less than a devoted genius (but on the track he had extraordinarily good reflexes and a lot of savvy).
Fittipaldi was arrogant, James debonair.
Some of his difference obviously came from the milieu from which he came and the milieux — there were a half dozen of them — in which he moved.
He and Niki had started out together in Robin Herd's and Max Mosley's March team.
Good friends from the start, as well as matchless needlers of each other and trigger-happy competitors, they put together such a record of collisions and accidents and general ‘brouhaha that by the time I reached the FI scene, both were considered as ‘wild men’ who needed some settling down.
Niki got his training in fortitude and temperance when he moved to Ferrari, where they do not like drivers to be so  adventuresome as to wreck cars; James-took a year longer to learn his lesson, at McLaren.
There he became a world champion in a year filled with controversy and difficulty and there he learned that he neither really liked being world champion (it was inhibiting) nor really driving fast cars as fast as he was expected to (they were thoroughly frightening).
The milieu in which I met James in 1975 was that of the florid young Lord Alexander Hesketh, undoubtedly the last figure of unbridled fun ever to have competed in what is now a grimmish, strictly money-oriented sport.
What Hesketh was (besides being the heir to a grocery fortune, with a mother of enormous talent and charm and a rather large estate near Towcester) was simply ebullient and fun.
He went into motor racing for the fun of it and it seems unlikely that he ever took it as seriously as others thought it should be taken.
Not that Alexander was anyone's fool.
He simply did not want to be solemn.
He had grown up in the splendid sixties, had been born with a silver spoon in his mouth, enjoyed whatever he did to the hilt and was enough of a gentleman never to look back.
The delicious Rob Walker who, in a journalistic disguise, was and is still around in the sport, must be the only other man I ever met in FI who while at the heart of the sport never took it with the grim tenacity with which the more parvenu consider the business of winning and losing.
Besides that endearing characteristic, and like his eccentric mother (a friend to S. J. Perelman, the great humorist) Alexander had ample funds of wit.
He may have been called ‘Bubbles’ because of his corpulence, his high spirits and his weakness for champagne, but he knew who he was and considered the whole business of being in FI, and being taken seriously in it, as something of a lark.
He was the sort of man who, when caught riding up in a lift in Rio's rather staid and old-fashioned Copacabana Palace Hotel with a lady whose skin was some forty shades darker than Alexander's own pink and cream, told a desk clerk who remonstrated that ‘ladies’ were not allowed in guest bedrooms, ‘What do you mean by ‘ladies’?
This is my sister.’
James was in every respect the kind of driver Alexander would get along with and that their enterprise did not finish so very far from winning, and failed to win not a few times only through misfortune — or the injustice of fate, speaks creditably of an underlying seriousness that they rarely allowed to show.
The externals were champagne.
extravagant marquees, immaculate helicopters, the best suites at the best hotels, the best restaurants, the handsomest girls, the best company, the most ease and the most fun possible; behind the scenes, real work was done, not least by Master James and the March engineers who, then as now, were no slouches.
James had several other aspects to his life which set him apart from many of his colleagues.
First was his upbringing and education — at Cheam and Wellington College.
The son of a stockbroker and part of a large and easy-going family, James was brought up with more options than most.
The fact that he was an outstanding, if not completely graceful athlete, that he played anything with a racquet commendably well — I remember battling him at tennis in the oppressive heat of Guaruja to an 8–8 deadlock before we both gave up to avoid heat prostration — that he is a better than average golfer and could just as well have played football or cricket and enjoyed all sports, made him less exclusively obsessive about racing.
Then there is the fact that he remains, even within the constraints of his later career as a commentator alongside Murray Walker on the Beeb, remarkably open and frank in his judgements, both of himself and of others.
Where most drivers pussyfoot when talking about their colleagues, James was always ready with a sound analysis: or, for that matter, with a personal prejudice.
Finally, though all drivers are at heart egotists and publicity-seekers (it is part of the game), James always played his life right out in the open: sex life, life style and all.
I happen to think that behind much of that flamboyance in his earlier years there was a fund of timidity and reticence.
Where James might well have preferred to be a private man, it was quite clear that circumstances would not allow him to become one.
He carried on his life in the full glare of publicity as though to say to one and all: ‘this is the way you want to read me, well, so be it.’
Underneath all that razzmatazz, the girls sneaked aboard the Queen Mary in Long Beach or into his room in Guaruja, there was a man of some sensitivity who felt that both fame and sexual prowess had somehow been thrust upon him; I think he found both hard to resist, and it must be acknowledged that a chauvinistic British press, his looks, his celebrity and his companions made it hard for him to do anything else than accept the role thrust upon him.
The very first time I met him, we lunched in downtown Barcelona with his first wife, Susy.
It was Susy who took up most of the lunchtime conversation, partly because I probably didn't know enough about the sport to talk about it sensibly to James.
Susy was a long, tall, romantic girl who had grown up — lonely, she said — on a farm in Rhodesia.
Most of her talk was about music, about Chopin ballades in the moonlight; she was trailing a gossamer childhood behind herself and James was clearly infatuated by it.
Knowing Susy with James, it is hard not to believe that inside Hunt there was every bit as much affection and sensitivity as there was extrovertedness and snook-cocking.
It is, however, a side of himself that I suspect James did much to conceal in those early years.
I think the toughening and, if you like, the coarsening of his nature had much to do with his own insecurities, his fears, his shyness and his realization that he was somewhat out of place among the more gung-ho and simple-minded types who make up the bulk of racing drivers.
Hunt's beginnings were supposed to take him, as his parents wanted, to medical school.
Whether he would have made it with his fairly anaemic academic record at Wellington is another matter.
The fact is that he went to a race meeting at Silverstone in 1965 and decided right then and there that what he wanted most was to be a racing driver.
His way into the sport was typical of the drivers of his generation: not having any money of his own, and his parents being both unwilling and unable to finance a career on which they must have looked with some distaste, Hunt had to start where he could: in the event, with a stripped-down Mini in which he learned the rudiments of the sport.
From thence he progressed into Formula Ford, with an Alexis that he bought on the never-never.
He didn't do badly in F. Ford, but F3 beckoned soon enough, a step which his biographer Eion Young rightly says proved a rite of passage from racing as a hobby to racing as a profession.
In F3, he started with a two-year-old Brabham BT 21 and ended with the Grovewood Trophy.
The general opinion around the paddock when I first started in motor racing was that James had early shown himself to be a driver of exceptional reflexes and considerable competitive temperament.
The latter quality was to remain with him throughout his career, for whatever else his faults may have been, no one ever slighted James's desire to win: to win at anything and everything, from backgammon through girls to any sport he ever played.
By the end of 1969 his success had been just sufficient for him to collect some sponsorship for 1970, when he raced in a Lotus 59.
James has always recalled this as a happy period in his racing career: F3 was friendly, money was short, but everyone mucked in together  and drivers were friends, not just gigantic slot-machines into which money was to be poured.
It was a period of penury such that James and his team spent one night in Pau furtively thieving back the petrol that had been stolen from their car and eventually hitchhiking back home via Le Havre, with no food on the way — and it brought out in James qualities of tenacity that he hadn't really suspected in himself.
He learned his trade and was reasonably competitive in an old car for someone who had no money for either equipment or spares.
In 1970, his hard times continued: not for the first or last time in his career, he found himself in trouble with the authorities, being disqualified twice, once when he was winning and once when he was in second place.
Because he had only two wins to his name that year, James decided to struggle on in F3 in 1971 while other drivers of his generation, such as Fittipaldi, Lauda and Pace, moved up.
But his 1971 season was ruined by an uncompetitive March 713 and by the beginnings of his reputation as Hunt-the-Shunt, including a spectacular accident at Zandvoort which looked far worse than it actually turned out to be.
His troubles in 1971, however, were not just the March and his propensity for accidents: the fact was that he was now an experienced F3 driver, known to be quick, but by the nature of the formula was racing against a lot of people who were just beginners and knew far less than he did about the sport.
As a result, he was, when involved with other drivers in a confined space, somewhat excessively  temerary and suffered for it; given a good lead and a clear field, he showed his worth.
He stuck to March in 1972, but quit the team in Monaco after a first-lap accident in qualifying.
As he says of himself at that juncture in his career, his quitting in Monaco was ‘the climax to a situation which had existed all year, stemming…basically from a lack of interest and enthusiasm’.
He did what he could to motivate himself in adverse circumstances, but finally decided he would be better off racing on his own.
It was then that first contact was made with the egregious Hesketh, who provided an F3 car, a Dastle, in which ‘Bubbles’ Horsley and Hunt raced for part of the 1972 season.
It was a gamble of sorts on both sides.
Hunt was acquiring something of a bad reputation: both for being accident-prone and for being excessively forthright.
The pair of them added a fair number of crashes to the record that year and when both Hunt and Horsley crashed at Brands Hatch (Hunt made it a double by crashing his Mini on the way home!)
Hesketh dropped out of F3.
Picking up the pieces of his career, Hunt managed to move into F– at the end of the year.
Hesketh backed him, Horsley (intelligently) moved into team-managing and Hunt began to finish in the points.
The March 912 in which Hunt drove proved competitive and some reasonable results enabled the Hesketh team to stagger through the year.
For Hesketh, now committed to racing and to Hunt's career — with a generosity unparalleled in FI — it seemed as sensible to take Hunt straight up into FI, and Hunt duly made his debut at a non-championship race at Brands Hatch early in 1973, there earning, in a used Surtees TS9B, a third place just behind Denny Hulme — and Hulme was, let it be noted, driving the McLaren M23, a far more advanced car.
The die was cast, then and there, and Hunt and Hesketh and company hit Monaco in style: yacht in the harbour, helicopter to hand and a March 731 to drive.
To the general surprise, the March — it was worked on by Harvey Postlethwaite, now at Ferrari and one of a handful of the really bright ones — proved an effective foil for Hunt's driving style: Hunt qualified ninth and was running sixth when his engine gave up the ghost.
His first FI point came in France, a fourth place followed at Silverstone, a third at Zandvoort, a sixth in Canada and a fine second behind Ronnie Peterson at Watkins Glen.
Fourteen points put Master James eighth in the championship and Hesketh made of him a public figure, a British hope at a time when Graham Hill, Mike Hailwood and others were fading from the scene and Jackie Stewart was about to retire.
In 1973, Lord Hesketh had been able to race — as against party — for quite a reasonable sum.
1974 was to prove a different story.
My own opinion is that the causes for the increased budget were two.
First and foremost, going to the races had gone to the team's collective head and with Master James as a media star — and few have known how to manipulate the press with such skill, to make so many journos think they were ‘particular’ friends or to understand the voracity of Fleet Street's sports editors' avidity for upbeat Brit stories — the Hesketh operation became something of a Back Britain campaign, with patriotism overcoming business common sense.
Secondly, with a car that was not far off competitive standards, the costs of taking that next step upwards rose sharply.
Results in 1974 were not in keeping with aspirations.
The new 308 offered a lot of frustrating retirements.
Hunt admits that he is not a ‘natural’ developer of a car: he would test because he had to, but his temperament was far more adapted to racing.
Still, though 1974  provided only I 5 points for Hunt, it did offer him his first FI victory, in a non-championship race at Silverstone.
The year 1975 was in all respects better for the Hesketh team.
The car's reliability increased immeasurably and Hunt finished eight of the fourteen races and scored a total of 33 points.
The high point of the season was the team's first championship victory at Zandvoort in Holland.
The race had started on a wet track — it is almost never dry for a whole weekend in Holland — and Hunt's victory resulted from the finest sort of judgement about when to come in and change his wet tyres to slicks.
It is the kind of judgement that Hunt had in generous portions, and something that makes him, even today, a capable judge of the more refined points of racing on television.
Lauda and Regazzoni had had their turn in the lead when Hunt ducked into the pits; once he had changed his tyres, however, there was no holding Hunt.
Pressed very hard by Lauda in the final laps —‘leading a race was a brand-new experience for me,’ he admitted at the time — he simply clung to his lead by driving as hard as he could.
The boost in his own confidence was tremendous and I recall James feeling, quite rightly, that he had now proved his right to be included among the top drivers.
The last lesson, quite simply, the lesson of Zandvoort, was how to keep his head while under pressure.
But if Hunt had now set his mark on the F1 scene and matured, at Team Hesketh matters were quite different.
A new car, the 308 C, was introduced and, like many new cars, didn't succeed right away, and the end of the season was a struggle on the racing front.
But neither the car nor the team was the real problem.
The real problem was money.
Lord Hesketh had poured his own fortune into the team and it was in his nature to run the whole show.
He wanted it to be his personal team.
It was made up of friends, of people he enjoyed being with, and he didn't want to become like the other teams with their heavy commercial involvements.
As a result, he consistently neglected the search for sponsorship and, when in desperation he got around to looking for it, it was too late.
At the end of the 1975 season, he threw in the towel — though Hesketh, under Horsley, was to stagger on for two more years, with indifferent results.
This faced Hunt with a professional dilemma.
Having finished fourth in the 1975 championship behind Lauda, Fittipaldi and Reutemann, he was now an ‘established’ driver.
But where could he get the best possible drive?
To keep his FI empire going, and because he was also fundamentally a patriot, Brabham's Bernard Ecclestone offered  Hunt a drive in a Cosworth-powered Brabham, while Reutemann and Pace would use the new BT45s with the Alfa Romeo engines.
Though Hunt was grateful, this was hardly an ideal solution.
Another possibility was Lotus, but Lotus's Colin Chapman was notoriously stingy to his drivers.
As Hunt puts it, far straighter than anyone else has ever dared do, ‘They seemed to be of the opinion that their drivers shouldn't be paid.
The meeting with Lotus comprehensively wasted three hours of my life.
They didn't even buy me lunch — we went out to lunch, but we didn't get any.’
Fairly standard stuff for Lotus, but not exactly what Master James was used to!
Actually, to anyone close to the motor-racing scene at the end of I975, it was fairly obvious where James would wind up.
The man in charge of Marlboro in FI was John Hogan.
Wooed from being European marketing director of Coca-Cola, Hogan was then, and remains now, the architect of FI'S promotional side, if only because Marlboro controls so great a proportion of the FI budget: through direct sponsorship of its teams, through individual contracts with drivers, through sponsorship of races, through general advertising, through supporting the press, through the general glamorizing of the sport.
Hogan not only controlled vast funds — subject of course to the complaisance of his superiors, a number of whom were also deeply interested in marketing — but he is also an extremely intelligent, able, shrewd, engaging and, if desperately shy, perceptive Australian.
I would think that his knowledge of the inner workings of FI is second only to that of Bernard Ecclestone, and even that is doubtful.
The two men share confidences, for they both have equal vested interests in the sport.
But Hogan is the sharper of the two when it comes to understanding (and manipulating) drivers.
Certainly I thought at the time that Hunt would end up sponsored by Marlboro and driving a McLaren.
The one problem was Emerson Fittipaldi, who spent the latter part of I975 in something of a dither.
McLaren boss Teddy Mayer as much as admitted at the end of 1975 that he thought Emerson wanted to move — or that he was in personal trouble of one kind and another — but the official news reached Hunt before it got to the team, and got to Hunt through Domingos Piedade, an eccentric figure close to the cheerful groupie Googie Zanon, a wealthy (textiles) Italian aristocrat whose support has been crucial to many drivers at critical points in their career, then ‘manager’ to Emerson and now to Ayrton Senna — a fringe career from which Domingos, hugely personable, but also often more a talker than a doer, has made a more than reasonable living.
In fact, as soon as Domingos told James, James renewed his long-standing contact with Teddy Mayer, had a brief conversation with Hogan and that was it.
That year, Hunt came cheaply.
The contract resolved his own financial difficulties and gave him a very competitive car.
Later, after his championship, the relation was to make him rich.
In entering the world of Marlboro McLaren, Hunt was shifting from a privateer's caravanserai into a highly professional, completely race-minded team.
It was a radical change in style as well as manner.
Gordon Coppuck, who was to build two McLarens of great distinction — the M23 and the M26 — was quiet, immensely competitive (he had been a motorbike driver of distinction) and utterly absorbed in solving the engineering and design problems associated with FI racing.
Gordon is a purist.
He acknowledges that FI is the cutting end of technology and yet his solutions have always been simple, economical and remarkably ‘easy’ in their handling.
In that sense, he is no ‘revolutionary’, but rather a deep student of solutions, with a solid capacity for the kind of apparently trivial details that make all the difference between winning and losing, between safety and risk.
He and Hunt — who had always been deeply interested in driver safety — worked in excellent cooperation.
Over the years, James had become more sensitive and careful in his handling of machinery.
He provided Gordon with excellent feedback from the track and by now he rarely got into trouble on the circuit.
His relationship with Alastair Caldwell, his team-manager, was also one of extreme friendliness.
As for team-boss Teddy Mayer, he knew that he had a winning combination going and didn't interfere as much as he does when things are going less well.
The question in Hunt's mind, when I saw him at the beginning of the 1976 season, was whether changing teams and style was going to make a substantial difference in his way of life: in his informality, his private life, his sense of his own personal liberty.
McLaren was a pretty buttoned-up place (it still is), keen on uniforms, regularity, cleanliness, smartness.
None of these are Hunt trademarks.
With Marlboro's backing, McLaren made the right decision: Hunt could continue to be himself.
It was his own insistence —‘Life,’ he wrote in his authorized biography, ‘is too short to be bound by regulations when it isn't absolutely necessary.’
He wanted ‘to do what I want to do whenever I can’.
Fair enough.
Marlboro and McLaren gained  infinitely more publicity and a far better return on their money in terms of free advertising by letting James run loose.
Hence the inevitable scruffy T-shirt (or naked torso), the jeans and the high-jinks.
In all respects, 1976 was an extraordinary year for Master James and for motor racing.
Hunt more than earned his championship: he earned it against the envy of some and the bloody-mindedness of others.
From beginning to end of the season, nothing was clear: neither his championship possibilities nor whether the fates would conspire to deprive him of it.
To start with, though his new car was an excellent and reliable machine, it lacked that complete superiority over its competitors which would have made it — as the Lotus, say, did for Mario Andretti — a necessary world-beater.
Secondly, the championship itself was especially rich in first-class drivers: Ferrari, his chief rivals, had Niki Lauda and Clay Regazzoni as its main drivers (with Reutemann filling in for the grievously injured Lauda at Monza), and Lauda, far more than Hunt, was at the very peak of his form, the peak of Lauda's form being, together with Alain Prost's, the summit of racing artistry.
Even if Lauda had been James's only opponent, there was no way in which at the beginning of the season James could foresee the possibility of a championship.
But Ferrari, on paper at least, was not the only opposition.
Brabham had come quite close to the championship in I975, and in Reutemann and Pace it had two first-line drivers of the highest quality.
Nor was Lotus a negligible factor: it had taken a severe dip in I975, but anyone knowing Chapman had to know that Lotus declines were generally followed by Lotus ascensions; with Andretti and Peterson driving against him, Hunt was starting the season in a star-studded field.
Even Tyrrell, with Scheckter and Depailler, was still hunting with the leaders.
Thirdly, something James could not know when the season began, 1976 was going to be one of the most contentious seasons, politically and administratively, that I have ever known in the sport, and there were several times in the year when it really looked as though the fates were conspiring to make it impossible for Hunt to win.
Fourthly, one could not describe James's home life as entirely perfect background for a racing championship.
His marriage with the lovely Susy, designed to give him stability, peace and quiet — things that I believe James actually, despite occasional appearances to the contrary, cherishes — had broken up.
With his characteristic candour, James accepts his share of the blame and, knowing Susy, I  think his estimation valid.
‘I thought marriage was what I wanted,’ he has written, ‘but in fact it wasn't.
I really wanted to go racing on my own.’
The travelling, the exigencies of the business, the constant promotional activity, prolonged absences, his own mercurial nature, made life difficult for Susy if she stayed at home and not much better if she accompanied James on the circuit, something she never much liked to do.
It was the kind of life that ‘was making life miserable in the extreme for her and since I felt responsible for her it was making me miserable too.
So we…agreed to split up and then Richard Burton came along and solved all the problems…
We all ended up happy, anyway, which is more than I can say for most marriages.’
OK.
Fair enough comment.
But no marriage ends without mountainous difficulties and no marriage that ends with one's wife marrying Richard Burton, in the full glare of publicity, both James's and Richard's, is going to be easy.
Susy's affectionate and gentle nature eased it on the one side, James's common sense and recognition of Susy's value to his life made it easier on his.
Burton, too, contributed: a wayward genius, too much of a drinker for his own good, Richard did in this instance behave like the very bright and perceptive gentleman he could be.
But then there was the question of replacing Susy, without James running himself ragged with the thousand-and-one chicks who wanted nothing better than a quick hop in the bed with a world star.
That was solved by the delicious Jane Birbeck, a girl as pretty and as fresh as a primrose.
Though Jane — scurrilously known as ‘hot-pants’— earned her share of notoriety in that year, she was also a creature of considerable balance and judgement, no fool, certainly not just a pretty face.
The year was not without James's usual sloping adventures, but behind it there was something solid.
When the 1976 championship year began for Hunt, he was driving a car with which he had no more than a nodding acquaintance.
The season began in January in Brazil and prior to that he had had only a couple of rainy test-sessions at Silverstone.
Even fitting Hunt's body into the old made-for-Fittipaldi M23 was no easy job.
The venue was the old Interlagos circuit in Sao Paulo, a bumpy, quick and tiring circuit whose main high-speed curves faced the opposite direction from most tracks, causing many drivers severe neck-strain from the opposite G-forces.
Friday was spent squeezing Hunt into the car; Saturday morning an engine blew; Saturday afternoon, Hunt earned himself pole position.
Alongside him on the front row was  Nikki Lauda.
As Hunt saw the situation on that first Sunday in a new team, he could not be certain about his own capabilities.
So far, he'd been driving in a one-car team and in that situation, there is no way of knowing who is quick.
Is it the driver, or is it the car?
In São Paulo, he was about to find out, but a complex series of engine mishaps put him out of the race.
Nonetheless, he had proved he could stay up with the leaders, and he went to South Africa in March in good spirits.
The Kyalami Ranch was very much the sort of place where James liked relaxing: you might have to wait two hours for your dinner, but never a moment for the sun, and James is a basker, the deckchair his habitat.
His car was thoroughly competitive, he won pole position again, and this time — after a hard end-of-race charge after Lauda's Ferrari — Hunt finished second and his team-mate Jochen Mass third.
But Niki was still on a roll.
He was the reigning world champion and he'd won the first two races of the season.
Hunt had the greatest respect for his capacity as a driver; on the other hand, as Hunt said at the time, the difference between Niki's Ferrari and the McLaren was really negligible.
I think that James knew in his heart that Niki was a more complete driver than himself and I remember him saying back then that while he was taking himself more seriously every race that went by, he knew that, compared to Niki, he was still the less ‘thoughtful’ and the more ‘instinctive’driver.
What he admired in Niki was his capacity to wrest the best out of whatever situation he was in: that, James said, was the mark of the champion.
The word ‘championship’, however, no matter how much he may have been thinking about it privately, I did not hear from him until much later in the year, when the scales began to tip in his favour.
The next race was at Long Beach in California, billed as the US Grand Prix West, and though it ran through some streets, its relationship to Monaco, much hyped in the local press, was pretty tenuous.
The Long Beach of those days was just emerging from the sleaze of being a naval base; its downtown was full of porn-movie houses, run-down discount shops and ‘boutiques’ for the geriatric, who formed a large part of its population.
The track itself, which contained a wicked ninety-degree right-hand turn with a steep gradient to follow, was much less varied and taxing than Monaco.
Running well in the race, just behind Regazzoni, first Hunt's engine faded for three seconds, stranding him behind Depailler, and then two laps later, when he was trying to overtake Depailler on the outside, Depailler moved over and blew Hunt into the wall.
I well remember Hunt standing by the side of the track and waving his fist at the feisty little Frenchman when he next came by.
The incident was much discussed and analysed, the question being whether Hunt's car was even with Depailler's at the crucial juncture or not.
It's the sort of fruitless post-mortem that bridge-players do but the point of the incident is that it showed the extent to which Hunt's temper could affect his judgement, for in motor racing, as Nigel Mansell was to find out a decade later, to lose one's cool harms only oneself.
Clay won that race, with Lauda second, so that in three races, Niki had accumulated 24 points and Hunt exactly a quarter of that.
Spain, which came next, was a most unusual race in many respects.
It was at Jarama that we first saw Derek Gardner's revolutionary six-wheeled car and it was there, too, that a few silly millimetres deprived Hunt of his first victory of the season, achieved against stern opposition from his team-mate Jochen Mass and a Niki Lauda who had been quite seriously injured in a tractor accident back in Austria and was therefore not entirely fit.
The millimetres, eighteen, were in the width of Hunt's McLaren and the facts were not disputed by team-boss Teddy Mayer.
As I wrote at the time, though the error may appear small, any error is significant given the close tolerances of FI cars.
As there is every advantage to a team cheating, I thought it right that the sporting authorities had stomped on McLaren for an avoidable mistake, and I retain that view.
Nonetheless, at the time, having a win taken away hurt Hunt badly: his reaction was one of numbness and defeat.
To the public, especially the British public, fed by its rabid tabloid press, it seemed an absurd technicality; further, given the power of Ferrari within the sporting authorities, there was a widespread belief that there was a plot against Master James and to hand the championship to Lauda, who was awarded the race while Hunt was disqualified.
Mayer immediately protested the decision, saying the extra width could have been of no possible advantage to Hunt, a view with which I disagreed then and still disagree now, for a sporting rule is a sporting rule.
To widen a car eighteen millimetres is equivalent to widening goal posts by half a foot; to violate the rules is always to seek an advantage.
In mid-summer, however, FISA reversed its decision, Hunt's victory and points were restored and the team merely fined.
I do not think this reversal did much to uphold the seriousness or credibility of the sporting authorities; it did, however, solve certain in-house problems and — until Monza — lower the temperature in the great debate about Ferrari ‘influence’.
Coming to Belgium in mid-May, Hunt's championship seemed fairly hopeless: Lauda had (though temporarily) increased his championship points to 33 and Hunt was still stuck on six.
It was the beginning of a frustrating period for Hunt and his mood swings were on the downturn.
His normal raggedness became positively disreputable and he spent much of his time sulking inside the McLaren motor-home: the joy had gone out of his life.
Not because the decision in Spain weighed on him, but because while Niki's Ferrari continued to perform with unfailing reliability, his own car, due to minute adjustments to accommodate new regulations, was turning into a pig: proof once again that even the tiniest changes in a car can gravely affect its performance and that it is the smallest defects that are the hardest to detect.
At Zolder, Hunt's transmission seized up and he retired, while Niki scored another victory.
For Hunt, an added discomfort was that his team-mate Mass was now ahead of him on points.
At Monaco, a race which Hunt does not greatly admire — since the race is meaningless if one is not well up on the grid at the start and passing is well-nigh impossible — he qualified well back on the grid, spun in frustration and then had his engine blow on him.
Result: zero.
The winner, Niki Lauda.
At this point, even the most ardent admirers of Master James would have written the championship off.
Niki had 51 points, Hunt 6, Mass 10.
Anderstorp in Sweden improved the situation not at all: the team was, in Hunt's words, ‘tearing its hair out’, and with reason, for ‘the car was still evil’.
Scheckter and Depailler made it a double for the Tyrrell six-wheeler (which was later to be banned, like many another intelligent innovation), Niki came third and Hunt limped in fifth, nearly a minute off the pace.
That gave Niki an apparently unbeatable lead: he had 55 points, Hunt eight.
There were nine races left, but the odds on Hunt you could get in the betting shops were astronomical.
France was to be a turning point in what is rightly called a ‘miracle year’.
There were two more turning points, probably more significant– to come.
But history will record that McLaren solved its problem (by setting up the car as they had for Spain), Hunt was on pole alongside Niki, Niki led the race for eight laps until his engine blew, Hunt then led it but was put under heavy pressure by Depailler, was suffering from the dry heaves inside his helmet and somehow survived to win a race from which Niki garnered nothing.
That was not all.
First and most importantly, confidence was  restored at McLaren.
This was quite tangible and I remember the mood of the victory party that night: James was at his most exuberant, Teddy Mayer was all smiles and squeaks, the whole team was on a new high.
They had known all along they had a good, competitive car; a single mistake had mired them for three races; it was now solved and they could build for the future.
The next day there was further good news when McLaren went to Paris for the hearing of their appeal over the Spanish race.
Hunt's points were restored and Niki lost three, so that the position was now one which could be contemplated with some equanimity: Niki had dropped down to 52 points and Hunt leapfrogged up to 26.
The Italian press and the Ferrari team were furious, their fury only slightly lessened by the fact that Niki's championship cushion still seemed ample.
In England for the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch, I had a long conversation with James, of which I recall principally that it was about fate.
He was saying that the gods had so far been unkind, that they might turn kind, but that what the gods did for him was secondary to what they might do for Niki, a remark that turned out to be prophetic.
Hunt meant that no matter how well he now did, Niki had to do considerably less well than he had done so far if he, James, was going to have any chance to catch him.
As he says in his autobiography, ‘I had to take every race as it came and just try to win it because whatever happened to Niki — and the Ferrari was not relevant to me at that point.
There was nothing I could do about it.’
Only fate could.
At Silverstone, Hunt was the national hero.
Not that he had only supporters — for there were many who thought he was, and behaved like, a spoiled brat — but because Britain was thirsting for sporting heroes (as it was to do again with Nigel Mansell a decade later) and the British circuit should by rights have favoured his chances.
The grid positions were reversed at Brands Hatch, Niki having taken pole, but that was strictly secondary to the appalling accident that took place just after the start at Paddock Bend, with its fierce ensuing drop.
James's own description of the accident is worth repeating, if only because it shows how much (and how little) racing drivers really observe in a multi-car shunt:
I'd made my usual lousy start, Niki had made a reasonable one and Clay [Regazzoni]had made a super start.
He went up on the left of me, sliced back in front of my car and dived at the inside of  Niki from way too far back…
I was able to enjoy it for I suppose a half a second…two Ferrari drivers take each other off the road.
But it quickly became obvious I was in it too.
I got on the brakes because there was no way through.
Then all hell broke loose.
I was into Regazzoni's car which was sliding backwards and my rear wheels climbed over his.
My car was in the air, flying…
Hunt was able to continue for a while but his car was severely damaged and the race was stopped.
That decision was the second major controversy of Hunt's extraordinary year: this time not just Ferrari but many others felt that the race had been stopped to give Hunt time to repair his car, an argument given plausibility by the fact that Lauda had made his way out of the trouble and was clearly leading the race when it stopped.
I confess that I felt that way at the time: the track was, despite the massive pile-up, clear.
That was only the beginning of the controversy.
For next the stewards decided that only those drivers who had completed the first lap would be allowed to re-start.
At the time, I was on the tarmac, where Hunt, with the offending Regazzoni, whose fault it had all been, behind him, sat in his repaired race car, which he had abandoned around Druids —not having completed a lap.
Both the crowd and Hunt reacted with extraordinary vigour and I remember Hunt saying he'd start no matter what, the elegant Daniele Audetto holding a desperate argument with the stewards, who were insisting that no one would be allowed to start in his spare car, which Ferrari's Regazzoni was clearly seeking to do.
An hour had passed, the crowd was in a grumbly mood, the pit-lane a scene of chaos.
Eventually, it was ruled that if, when the race was stopped, a driver was still running, he could re-start in his original car.
Lauda made the better start and led for about half the race, but Hunt's car, suffering from severe understeer, was catching up fast.
On lap forty-five, he finally got past Lauda (who was having trouble with his gear linkage) going up Druids and the crowd went wild.
Niki had a big cushion on the third-place car, eased off and placed second.
For James, it was a moment of triumph.
But it was not going to last for long.
Protests were lodged by Tyrrell, Fittipaldi's Copersucar team and, most urgently, by Ferrari.
There was an immediate inquiry at which evidence was given that Hunt had been running when the race was stopped, but not really racing.
Given the division of evidence, the stewards offered the three protesting teams the chance to withdraw their objections to Hunt's victory.
Two did, Ferrari didn't.
Hunt  says in his autobiography that he thinks Audetto didn't withdraw his protest because he couldn't do so without consulting the old primadonna of Maranello.
It is generous of him to give Daniele an out.
But the fact is that a Hunt victory was not on the Ferrari books if they had ceded — after a re-start which looked as though it favoured Hunt — they would have been lynched in Italy, where only a Ferrari is allowed to win.
So the Ferrari protest was upheld, an appeal lodged and Hunt's result nullified.
Niki picked up an extra nine points, James got nothing.
Score: Niki 61, James 26.
Now fate was about to take a hand in the outcome of the championship, for at the next race, at the Nürburgring — a great track, in its old version, for its challenges but a wooded retreat for Germanic savages, drunks and the wettest clouds of Europe — Niki came very close to death.
Ironically, it was a track which Lauda had always opposed on safety grounds and there had been much discussion about the Ring's lack of safeguards and medical access (the track is so long,–kilometres, that marshals and safety equipment were not only widely scattered but often whole stretches of the track, such as that where Niki's car went off, could not be seen from any marshal's post).
The drivers had finally agreed to race: more or less coerced by their bosses (including McLaren), 99 per cent of whom care rather less about safety than they should.
Once again, the race was held in two stages, the first being handsomely led by Hunt's team-mate Jochen Mass.
Hunt needed the win, but how could anyone stop Jochen on his home track?
Before the final decision could be taken, Niki had his accident and the race was re-started.
The rain had stopped and Hunt had a relatively easy time of it to win.
Like many people at the end of the race — even in that world of wild rumour which is FI — Master James had underestimated the extent of Niki's injuries.
To his credit, he excoriated the lack of safety at the circuit, had the highest praise for the drivers who pulled Niki out of his burning car and did not even think in terms of his now enhanced championship chances, not only because he thought Niki would be back in Austria, but because he was honest enough to know that without the accident and Jochen having to re-start, he might himself have placed no better than third.
Still, in the next few days as the news began to filter in from Niki's hospital that Niki had been given the last rites, that he had inhaled burning fuel and damaged his lungs, that his face had been appallingly burned, the facts did begin to sink in.
A week after the Nürburgring, I think anyone would have  been hard put to imagine that Niki could possibly return to racing.
James's victory gave him 35 points to Lauda's 61, his car was clearly among the best, he had matured greatly as a driver, he was on a good roll himself: the championship seemed to be there for his taking.
There is in fact a fine line in Hunt's book in which he describes his reaction, on getting to Austria — Niki's home circuit — and learning that Niki was a very sick man indeed.
James says simply that ‘it was suddenly very important to me that he should live’.
We talked about Niki in Austria and from that conversation I realized that the two drivers were reverse medals of each other and that if you could combine the two, you would probably have the perfect driver.
To my mind, Niki was technically and mechanically the better driver; he was willing to make the absolute best of even the most minimal chance.
Hunt, on the other hand, was — that year at least— a driver more utterly dedicated to victory in the Churchillian sense: he wanted the unconditional surrender of the rest of the field.
Furthermore, James had something that Niki never had, at least a smattering of general culture, and there is no doubt that appreciating some of the finer things of life is no impediment, but an adjunct, to success in many fields, sport no less than others.
What happened in Austria, however, and in Monza two weeks later, simply confirmed the sheer awfulness of the Ferrari camp and their myriad sycophants.
With Niki still on his bed of pain, but perhaps beginning to turn his iron will towards recovery, Ferrari did everything they could to try to get the Austrian Grand Prix cancelled.
They said first they would never race again, then that they were withdrawing for the season, then that it was unpatriotic of the Austrians to run a grand prix while their hero was near to death.
It was all the usual Maranello balderdash and came down, basically, to the inflated notions Ferrari had of his own importance.
True, they were furious about Spain and England, but much more to the point, as redoubtable in-fighters, they were determined to do whatever lay in their power to ensure victory for themselves, by fair means or foul.
Despite Ferrari, the race went on, and a memorable race it was, with thunder-clouds overhead, a wonderful high-speed circuit to urge drivers on and a hugely combative field in which Hunt, who held pole position, went into an early lead, was swept aside by John Watson in a Penske, with Ronnie Peterson in his March coming up almost right alongside the leaders, eventually overtaking both.
Then for a lap Jody Scheckter took his six-wheeled Tyrrell into the lead; then Gunnar Nilsson joined the fray.
Hunt, with his car damaged by  a piece of debris from Scheckter's eventual crash, finished fourth: not the best result for his championship hopes.
Hunt's fine victory at Zandvoort, which I remember as one of his most controlled and patient races, also marked Hunt's twenty-ninth birthday.
He won by a whisker from Regazzoni with Niki still absent, so that the score, going into Monza, was 61 to 47, with four races left in a hugely dramatic season.
Niki's comeback at Monza was, as anyone will remember, one of the most moving occasions motor racing has ever witnessed and the way Lauda pulled it off — both on the personal level, in facing his disfigurement, then much more extreme than now, and at the professional, getting back into the car which had nearly destroyed him and finishing fourth — remains the most outstanding moral and physical achievement I have ever seen in motor racing and an example to all.
Hunt was unlucky at Monza.
Once again, Ferrari did all it could to hamper his chances, to upset his equilibrium, to seek to guarantee their own success.
They protested the octane rating of the McLaren's fuel and managed to get James relegated to a lowly position on the grid.
Monza, after all, was in Italy.
Countless times, before Longines took up the electronic timing of practice, Ferrari had managed to surprise every one else's chronometers with their ‘times’: they had a rabid press and rabid fans behind them and the Monza authorities, besides being among the least efficient on the circuit, were also the most pliant.
Starting twelfth, Hunt got caught in a battle with Tom Pryce and went off the track and into a sand trap.
Finis to the race, but not to the incidents which marred his season.
First the marshals wouldn't even let Hunt get back into the car to try to get himself going again; then, on the long walk back to the pits, Hunt, head hung, had to face the most vituperative barrage of noise and insult I have ever heard.
I walked back behind him for the last several hundred yards, and was shocked at the sheer, mindless, bestial ferocity of the crowd.
Niki's three hard-earned points made the score 64 to 47 and the race was no sooner ended than the Ferrari dirty-tricks brigade was at work again in Paris, wrapping up their exclusion of Hunt from the podium at Brands Hatch.
Hunt was understandably bitter.
As he has written, ‘it was an exploitation of the rules by Ferrari that hurt everybody.
It hurt us, it hurt them and it hurt the sport.
It was another nail in the coffin of the F1A governing body.
Worse, the decision briefly poisoned relations between Niki and  James, which until then had been well within the bounds of friendly competition.
When Niki said the Paris decision had been the right one, one knows two things about Niki that explain his position: first that any Ferrari driver has to speak through both sides of his mouth, and second, that even were that not so, there is nothing Niki likes as much as winding someone else up.
What Hunt took as high seriousness, I took as a typical Lauda sideswipe, the fox laughing at the huntsman.
The Mosport track where they next met was perhaps the most awful track I have ever seen.
Unkempt, ill-favoured, ugly, it was also hugely run-down and dangerous.
It was a poor place for bad tempers.
James's book rather rewrites history when he says that he wanted Niki to think he'd been psyched out.
The truth is simpler: Hunt was in top form and Niki wasn't.
After the race, the two men met and sensibly buried the hatchet.
Since Hunt won and Niki dropped out with suspension troubles, Hunt was now within reach of Lauda.
Watkins Glen was a race Hunt and McLaren expected to win, Japan was an unknown.
The gap between them, with those two races remaining, was down to eight points.
The Glen was really a race between Jody Scheckter and Hunt.
Lauda was never really in it.
After much hard work — Hunt castigates himself for driving the first third of the race like a ‘grandmother’— Hunt eventually got by Jody when Scheckter was held up by a back-marker.
Next it was Hunt's turn to be confused by the Australian Warwick Brown, who was driving his first race and who, practically without gears, was going as near zero as possible in the middle of the chicane.
Snatching at his gears, Hunt missed, Jody caught up with him and blew past.
So once again, getting past Jody was essential.
Hunt knew he had the faster car; what he needed was the opportunity.
It came again as James slipstreamed Jody at the chicane, ever so close to the edge of real peril, and pulled away from the start line.
With Niki well back and holding an honourable third place on a circuit unsuited to the Ferraris, only three points separated champion and aspirant as the FI family headed for Japan.
Japan will always be memorable for two things: for Niki's moral courage and for Hunt's  perseverance in adversity.
Eion Young wrote at the time that Lauda had become human, and thus vulnerable, that victory was no longer his consuming goal, and he is right: one comes out of an inferno, as Niki had, with a renewed appreciation of the value of life.
The morning of the race, Fuji obscured under a bank of moist  clouds, fog drifting over the track, the circuit itself full of huge puddles which men with brooms sought vainly to sweep, a whole season was in the hands of a malignant fate.
Drivers are an odd lot, and even in these absurd and hugely dangerous conditions, there will always be those who want to race.
Few of them are to be found in the top echelons of racing.
Which is fortunate.
At the top, drivers know what is involved.
There are difficult conditions in which it is possible to race honourably; there are absurd conditions in which one may race honourably if slowly; and there are conditions in which it is impossible to race.
Fuji was such a race.
Yet Fuji held the world championship.
We were all out early.
It was cold, damp, clammy.
The two men who were fighting for the title met privately.
Hunt, an honourable man, said he thought they should race another day.
Niki thought so, too.
But Hunt said that if the race were officially started and the cars lined up on the grid, he would have no choice but to race.
He would not race hard — no more than Lauda did he wish to risk his life — but he would race.
He could not agree with those drivers who were considering refusing to drive, and they weren't — at least in those days — a majority.
The drivers were deeply divided.
We moved among them, asking them what they thought.
We got a lot of different answers.
I well remember Alan Jones referring contemptuously to the elements and the obstacle they represented.
Alan was the sort of driver who would have gone out on an ice-skating rink.
There were crazies like Vittorio Brambilla: when I asked him if he raced in conditions like this, what about his wife and kids?
Vittorio shrugged.
He said he was paid to drive and drive he would.
Some were rinky-dink experts on the wet, like Hans Stuck; he was one who thought the conditions actually favoured him.
Behind the drivers lay the real power-brokers, the people who owned the drivers.
Not one of them, to my recollection, gave a second thought to the risks involved.
They, after all, did not have to drive in them.
And there was all that television waiting to watch.
The sporting authorities, who could easily have postponed the race, tergiversated: as much by habit as from reason.
The Japanese were new to FI.
Something like their national honour was at stake.
It was they, in growing darkness, who took the decision to race.
As the cars lined up on the grid, Andretti on pole, Hunt alongside him, Pete Lyons wrote a wonderful paragraph which said it all: the mechanics drilling holes in Hunt's visor so that he could see in the mist.
Niki gave up after two laps.
With his visibility problems aggravated  by the scar tissue around his eyes, he couldn't see; he thought it was just stupid to race under these conditions; the world championship wasn't worth the risk involved.
And when a man like Niki said that as he climbed out of his car, no one present doubted his courage.
Conditions improved, but Hunt, in the lead, began slowing down.
In the McLaren pits, it was plain that something was very wrong.
Depailler went by Hunt as though Master James were standing still.
With ten laps to go, he fell back with a puncture and Andretti inherited the lead, with Hunt second.
Hunt's steadily deflating tyre held up until the last corner before the pits; in he came for a tyre change.
When he went out again, he lay sixth.
Or so said the signals on the pit wall.
Sixth was not enough.
He needed to finish at least third to wrest the title from Niki.
He himself was, as he later said, in a sort of blind rage: at the fates, at his tyres, at Fuji, at everything.
He went past Regazzoni and Jones in his Surtees almost without knowing it.
On the last lap, we watched three cars coming towards the chequered flag almost side by side: Andretti, Depailler and Hunt.
First, second and third.
Few realized that Depailler and Hunt were both a lap down on Andretti.
The melee was extraordinary, because it took some time for Hunt to realize that he was world champion.
He wanted proof , he said.
And only when he got it did he accept that his day had arrived.
Who took the braver decision?
Niki to withdraw?
Hunt to go out after his pit-stop and storm through, whatever the odds?
Champions have to continue racing after their championships.
It is in the year following that they can command the fees for appearances, endorsements and so on that will allow them to live a life of ease in their eventual retirement.
Hunt's championship was a narrow squeak, achieved in a car that was far from being all-triumphant; it was achieved by Hunt's merits and by Lauda's misfortune.
It was hardly likely to be repeated in 1977, when Niki returned to form with a vengeance and ran off with the championship by a huge margin, leaving Master James stranded in fifth place.
And once decline has set in, it is hard to reverse.
Niki moved to Brabham and produced good results but no wonders there; Hunt stayed with a McLaren in serious decline and was able to do even less in 1978 than in 1977: he and team-mate Tambay totalled a mere 16 points between them.
There are many reasons one could argue for this descent into retirement.
One of them would undoubtedly be Hunt's physical condition.
There is no doubt in my mind that the many years spent  wrestling indifferent cars around the track, trying to make up for what Lauda calls the ‘evil’ that dwells in all of them, must take its toll.
Hunt is a big man and a strong one, and while at his peak, he stayed in remarkable physical condition for someone who put so great a strain on himself.
He worked out regularly, jogged, played tennis and squash, swam and generally kept fit.
That was especially true of his championship year, when so much was at stake.
In a way, smaller men do better at driving under FI conditions.
Races take less out of them, the G-forces involved seem to affect them less.
Neither Stewart, Lauda nor Prost, to mention the three most successful in the modern era, are large men.
In many ways, it is easier for smaller men to keep fit; they are less subject to variations in weight and musculature.
Further, someone as competitive as Master James in as many fields puts additional strains on himself, particularly on his joints.
Then there is the cumulative effect of accidents, small and large.
Master James had his fair share, if not slightly more; they undoubtedly marked him.
Success brings its own problems and there is no doubt in my mind whatever that the Hunt we saw in 1977 was no longer the Hunt of 1976.
The demands of F1 at the top are very nearly as ascetic as those imposed on jockeys.
Abstinence, abstemiousness and a carefully controlled diet keep them in one piece.
In none of these departments was Master James particularly careful.
He was a muncher and sometimes a devourer.
Then there is the matter of sex and lifestyle, on which subject I recall a curious interview between Stirling Moss and Hunt in which Hunt says something like, ‘Luckily, I never made no-sex a rule before a race.
I never thought that it had to be a ‘rule’.’
I think that's rather cute, coming from someone who led, before, during and after a race weekend, the kind of life that would exhaust most even if they did not, additionally, have to engage in one of the most physically demanding sports in the world.
If James had any rules whatever during the years of his ascent, I never observed them.
I know that whether it was trying to dig him up for some doubles at Kyalami or just dropping in on him aboard the Queen Mary , I always called up first to make sure he was not otherwise engaged, and I can recall many times when James appeared at the track looking benign but far from fresh.
Success has another effect, which is that of slackening effort.
The difficulty of winning a championship, the strain and gamble it  involves, are so great that if a driver does not carry through to the following year sufficient momentum and he does not have the same advantage — of car, team, etc. — that he had the previous year, the results are often disappointing.
This was as true of Hunt as it was of Jones, Rosberg, Scheckter or Andretti, all great champions, but one-time champions.
And there is, whatever one might think, a very great difference between the driver who wins the championship once and those who go on to win it twice or three times.
The difference is part luck and part circumstance; but it is also in the driver's mind.
Motivation of course plays its part and in Hunt's case, lamentably, it was quite clear that the overriding motivation was waning fast.
He had his house in Spain, his ease, his investments; when immediate success did not come his way, it led to disaffection.
Neither Jochen Mass nor Patrick Tambay did much to push him towards fresh championships; his Number One status in the team was assured without effort, and I have often been led to wonder what would have happened if Teddy Mayer had been smart enough to hire a young hot-shot to give Master James a needed shot in the arm.
But what I saw when we went to Spain in 1978 and I had a long, relaxed talk with James in the patio of our common hotel, actually frightened me.
In the first place, his appearance had changed: what had been youthful good looks had changed into a sort of equine distress.
His face had lengthened and hardened; the lines on his face were deeply etched.
True, he was quite relaxed and, as always, full of bonhomie, but somehow he seemed to be looking with far greater intensity towards the past than the present.
He said, as all drivers say, that when he ceased to enjoy racing, he would stop; he did not say that he had stopped enjoying it, it was simply evident.
So that, when cornered, he admitted that over the year he had become affected by simple, inexplicable bouts of fear.
He hated the car and he hated himself in it; he hated what it could do to him and what it had done to him.
Some of this fear he controlled, and had controlled for some time, by smoking the odd joint.
It relaxed him and drove the nightmares away.
After all, Niki did too on occasion — until it brought Niki a recurrence of the Nürburgring nightmare and he never touched another joint in his life.
At the time, I was far from alone in wondering if he had not wandered further down that path than he knew, whether the playboy and gilded youth had not taken over from the redoubtable fighter.
James denied it categorically, but the fact is that after a small part of another season in Walter Wolf's car, Master James gave up  the sport with relief.
By the end, I think it had become quite intolerable to him.
Then, the moment he had given it up, the old Hunt returned.
Therein surely lies the proof.
Mario Andretti
‘Now there is one of nature's gentlemen,’ someone had told me at Monaco in 1975 when I first met Mario.
With his broad, beaming face, an eternal smile which you'd think could never contain an ounce of malice, his burly body, Italian charm and American friendliness, he was what Americans call a ‘natural’.
I can't say we really got to talk properly until we played tennis together at Kyalami in 1976, just before he took up his Lotus drive, but it was evident from the first that he was of sound mind and body and somehow radically different from any other driver I've met before or since, and if I were pressed to say why that is so, it has to be because of his utter imperturbability.
With Mario, you felt that if you were walking through the wilds and a bear came bellowing from behind a tree, Mario would seize its paw, shake it vigorously and tell it a good story.
I put a lot of Mario's cool, his unflappable nature, his congeniality, down to America: to a sort of wide-eyed gratitude that life had offered him an opportunity to survive and become a star.
His temperament, in fact, was rather more a golfer's than a racing driver's and I can't be sure that the likes of Arnold Palmer and other big sportsmen who'd made good in the States weren't in some way role models for the young Mario.
In some ways, he was so sleepy and relaxed that you wondered how he ever got the adrenalin up to race.
At Kyalami Ranch, he'd have a blade of grass in his mouth like a kid on a picnic, he'd never think of holding court or taking himself so seriously (as later champions did) that you wanted to needle him.
If you strolled up to him and started a conversation — on anything — he was anecdotal, pleasant and often revealing.
He had mind coordination more than body coordination.
He knew exactly what he wanted, how to get it and how to exploit it.
He was just as straight about what he didn't want, what he wouldn't do and what he couldn't be bothered to do.
One of the sport's most natural drivers — no one, ever, participated in more forms of motor sport, for as long or even remotely as successfully — he favoured, as a simple man, those things which gave him simple pleasures.
Winning gave him pleasure.
Not winning didn't.
If he saw he wasn't going to win, he just moved on: no matter what the temptations and the beguilements offered.
In his early days, he must have been hell to tie down.
It was obvious he was good, it was obvious he should be in FI, but somehow he dallied and twiddled and procrastinated and didn't get around to it seriously until he was thirty-six years old and then it took him only three years to become champion.
But what Mario liked to talk about most often — aside from the intricacies of the sport, its management and its personalities, all of whom fascinated him, and its machines, which absorbed much of his mind — was his past, his ‘folks’, his kids, his life and how funny it was that he should have wound up where he was.
It was all part of a private mythology that Mario had worked up to fit the American Success Story, and quite wonderful it was.
Mario was one of twin brothers, born on 28 February 1940, at the beginning of a lousy war which no one wanted.
His brother Aldo wanted to race just as much as Mario but — due to a couple of accidents — never did as well.
His place of birth, Montona near Trieste, was one day just handed over to the Communists and became a part of Yugoslavia.
As a result, Mario is no admirer of socialism in any form — though, quite untypically of racing drivers, he has some serious thoughts about politics.
His father was a farm administrator, and that went, too, when they were offered the chance to leave Yugoslavia.
Mario described himself to me as a hungry kid, adding that maybe those early experiences had left him with a permanent sense of insecurity.
Maybe that is why — unlike some drivers with a more refined sense of a balance sheet — it was Mario's practice always to travel and live first class.
That might help undo memories of living in or around Lucca in a displaced persons' camp when they left Trieste; a little cosseted security makes up for the times when there were seventeen families in one room.
He went on at some length, complete with the appropriate gestures and noises, on his experiences as a car jockey in a parking garage: other people's cars were part of his early training as a driver and, like every Italian kid his age, he had had a burning admiration for grand prix racing and the great heroes of his day, especially Alberto Ascari.
In one of the most touching passages, he recalled coming up to America on his emigrant ship in 1955, his father and brother and he standing by the rail, feeling this sense of opportunity, this relief that the bad times were over, that a new world was out there waiting to  be conquered.
Being Mario, that brought to mind his mother crying back in the camps because there wasn't enough food to put on the table, and that led to considerations of the importance of the family in his life, of the value of tradition, thoughts of how Italian he was as well as American, of the kind of clean life America had offered, of his gratitude, of his feeling for his father who'd made this giant move at such cost to himself, who had suffered so long and who now saw some chance for his kids of bettering themselves.
If it hadn't been Mario, you'd have thought it was schmaltz; with Mario, it was peppered with self-irony, with seriousness, punctuated with laughter, with suddenly remembered incidents.
There was always that about Mario, that if he hadn't been one hell of a racing driver, you still would have wanted to talk to him; and that, although he was one hell of a racing driver, you still preferred to talk to him about other matters.
You knew he was smart about cars; he was savvy about life too.
Nor has he ever changed.
Moping around Meadowlands last year when Mario's son was racing and the old man was too and the whole scene was as unglamorous as the Jersey flatlands can be, the burgers blazing on wet barbecues, Karl Haas's cigar smouldering briefly in the foreground, it was as if Mario had brought a whole world of his own into the paddock, a world he'd always had, that was completely self-sufficient and had a cleaner, friendlier air.
And his son Mike was just as nice as he was.
Mario and his brother both did some racing while still in Italy: in miniature, underpowered versions of grand prix cars called Formula Junior.
Otherwise, Mario's apprenticeship was served in all sorts of bangers on Pennsylvania tracks near Nazareth, where the family settled in 1955 when Mario was fifteen.
The relevance of this early experience, in Hudson Hornets and the like, is that Mario was always mechanical.
That was what he did for a living and it stayed with him all his life.
It is also one of the big dividing lines between champions and the rest.
Champions understand cars.
They have to.
Their performances and their lives depend on that knowledge.
You can be a hot-shot driver and very quick and gutsy, but it does no one any good if all you can do when your car isn't performing is pull into the pits and say the car's a pig.
You have to know why.
Mario always did.
Another thing that distinguished Mario back in the very earliest days was that he always wanted to win at everything .
Before he was twenty (an age at which most FI drivers today are already well established in the regular line of ascent towards FI), Mario was racing several times a week — sometimes five races in a day — in whatever  cars he could get his hands on: jalopies, sprints, three-quarter midgets, midgets.
As Nigel Roebuck points out in his book with Mario, ‘on 21 June 1964, Jackie Stewart (born seven months before Mario) would have been racing Ken Tyrrell's F3 Cooper somewhere and James Hunt playing tennis at Wellington College.
Mario…was at Langhorne for his first championship race on the dirt.’
That sums up Mario's early days in a nutshell.
Langhorne was an impossible, fiercely dangerous dirt track, practically round, full of ruts; hot and unprotected, but Mario — as he often liked to point out — hadn't been born with a silver spoon in his mouth; he couldn't afford the fare to Europe; meanwhile, while dreaming of his grand prix heroes, he'd just have to be better than anybody else at what was available.
Langhorne was it just then, and the race was won by one A. J. Foyt, not by Mario, who came in ninth in his Windmill Truckers Special: for $637, to be split with the owners, and with hands like hamburgers.
There are two people Mario always said had the deepest influence on his life in motor sport.
One was obviously Colin Chapman.
The other was a man called Clint Brawner who in his own field of American racing was just about as big a winner as Ferrari or Chapman in FI: over fifty wins in eighteen years.
To hear Mario talk about him, Brawner was one of those woolly American health freaks: suffering from chronic asthma he spent half his time talking about pollen counts and his symptoms.
Later on, Brawner was to go down hill, working on low-grade cars for low-grade drivers, but back then
Brawner was the tops and he gave Mario his first nibble at the big time.
Not only that, but they struck up a partnership which produced thirty championship races in six seasons.
Brawner recalls the young Mario as being ‘real hard-working and ambitious’ and tuned in to the cars as if they were human beings.
He remembers telling his wife he was tired of working with ‘old guys’ and thought he'd try a ‘new kid.
It turned out to be a good choice.’
USAC was fine and Mario was a star there, but to be a real star in America, you have to win Indianapolis, and that was one place, Mario recalls, where he had a really lean time of it.
Often favoured to win, he was just as often out of the race before the pace car finished its lap.
In fact, he only won it once, and that was after a bad accident when a hub sheared on a brand-new Lotus 64.
Strapped into his back-up car, a Hawk, Mario qualified second and won the race going away.
The Indianapolis 500 is one of those races with a special mystique  about it and if you talked to Mario about that one victory, he would admit the sheer joy of victory, ‘going from chump to champ’ in three hours, he called it in his autobiography.
But he would also say as a race it was nothing special: as a race it was ‘out of all proportion to the fame and fortune’ and needed ‘no more ability than any other place’.
Typically honest, he admits his win wasn't one of his more brilliant races.
Push him a bit and under Mario the American driver you'll always find the Italian kid who wanted to make good in grand prix racing.
Indy is a one-off; to be a world champion in FI it takes putting all the marbles together over a whole season.
Anyone could get Mario to talk endlessly about the difference between American racing and the worldwide top formula.
He never knocked his origins in American racing, but also he knew damned well that technologically America was behind and that in America you could do spectacular things but in grand prix racing you needed savvy, experience, strategy; you had to have the smarts.
The two couldn't be compared: it just took so much more to be really good in F1.
Mario's first outing was in a Lotus 49 at Monza in 1968.
He was twenty-eight and at the top of the profession in America, a place where he had commitments, a secure job, money coming in, young kids, a home, a life style.
As it turned out, Mario wasn't allowed to race at Monza because he'd driven a dirt-track race within the previous twenty-four hours, and it wasn't until Watkins Glen at the end of 1968 that he first drove in a FI race.
New to the car the circuit and the formula, Mario took pole position ahead of the eventual winner, Jackie Stewart, Graham Hill, John Surtees, Dan Gurney, Jo Siffert and Bruce McLaren, four champions and two others of no indifferent talent.
He had three further drives for Lotus in 1969: in South Africa he was sixth on the grid and dropped out with damaged gears; on his first Nürburgring, he qualified twelfth and fell victim to a shunt on the first lap — one of his very rare accidents, for Mario has a finely honed sense of doing things the safe way.
Back at the Glen, he qualified a lowly thirteenth and his rear suspension went on lap four.
By Lotus standards of the day, it was a poor year all around.
Jackie Stewart won the championship, Graham Hill broke both his legs at the Glen and aerofoils became common, though banned at Monaco.
He put in a year, or rather five races, with Andy Granatelli's STP team — Granatelli being a lifelong friend and Mario's fellow opera buff,Aida ,Rigoletto , the kind of music Mario says fits his ear — but  the heavy clumsy March 701 of those days was no great success, despite a remarkable win in Spain.
The times were changing, and fast.
The old crew were giving way to younger, more ‘professional’ drivers.
Graham Hill was on the wane — though he raced until I975 when he was killed in a plane crash, he scored only 11 points in the seventies.
The year 1970 was the great Bruce McLaren's last in racing and he died on 2 June testing a Can-Am car.
Jochen Rindt, the sport's only posthumous champion, was killed in his Lotus practising at Monza, and at the end of the season, the affable, tough and brilliant Jack Brabham was to announce his retirement.
Jo Siffert was to go the next year in a non-championship race at Brands Hatch.
Mario's results in 1970 included a retirement at Kyalami, third place at Jarama, another at the Nürburgring and an accident in Austria.
In between times, among the many kinds of racing in which Mario indulged his taste for speed — and his need for money — there had been a bunch of sports-car races for Ferrari, generally teamed up with Ickx, the team-leader.
The connection led to an invitation to drive in FI for Ferrari, an arrangement which in those years seems to have been a rather casual affair.
Certainly it appears so to Mario who's given to saying things such as‘Yeah, I had a couple of years back then with Ferrari…
’ Mario's lack of awe towards that highly operatic team of great divas and sweltering foot-soldiers in the chorus is something I always found highly refreshing.
He's the only man I've met who doesn't fall obsequiously to his knees and bow in the direction of Maranello when the name of Enzo Ferrari is mentioned.
Mind you, perhaps Ferrari should have taken more notice of Mario a lot earlier, but 1971 and 1972 were indifferent Ferrari years.
I personally never rated Ickx as a driver or as a human being and Regazzoni, though a great step upwards from the slick gigolo type that Ickx liked to play, like a second-rate understudy for Jean-Paul Belmondo, always struck me as stronger on brawn and stubbornness than on brain.
The car, with everybody saying their piece simultaneously back in Maranello, was a weakish compromise.
The fault, however, was not all Ferrari's.
Mario himself was of a divided mind.
As he notes in his autobiography, he was torn between the conflicting demands of American and F1 racing: ‘I recall saying to Peter Revson at the time that I really envied the hell out of him.’
Why?
Because Revson just did a small number of American races and spent the rest of the time on the FI circuit.
And why didn't Mario follow his example?
Mario says it was because of his commitments to the Firestone Tyre Company, who had ‘their own guys in Europe’.
It was, Mario says, ‘time to be practical.
There isn't much security in this business and the Firestone contract represented a lot to me.’
I remember discussing this with Mario on the way back from Brazil once, and I don't think that's the sole reason.
It may indeed have something to do with the thoroughly ambivalent American attitude towards FI racing, for there is a golden rule in American sporting life: if it ain't American, it ain't real.
That's why Americans spurn soccer for their own (wonderful but still local) game.
The same is true of motor racing.
By and large, despite the many attempts made to persuade Americans that FI is the top of motor sport, the Yanks remain unconvinced.
Long Beach, which succeeded Watkins Glen as an American F1 venue, eventually gave up the world formula for the more local Cart.
Detroit, which remains on the calendar, often seems much more a social event than a real race.
New York and Dallas both failed to get off the ground, either financially or politically.
Mario's living, like that of many drivers, depends on their fame.
As an American, what could Mario, and Mario's sponsors, derive from FI?
Have American sponsors — apart from multinationals, like the tyre or tobacco companies, or Ford — really taken to FI?
Mario and I agreed during that long flight that part of the trouble had to be media coverage.
In America, if the media aren't interested in something, it won't get covered, and the media won't be interested unless the public is.
A law of American life says that the world is a market, and markets are what you cater to.
You don't educate or create a market; you simply pander to an existing one.
Hence America's trade troubles throughout the world: the nation produces what America wants but not much of anything anyone else wants.
Without a base, then, Mario had only his private ambitions to fulfil, and it was to be some years before he did.
Not that there weren't offers for Mario's services, but they weren't very convincing.
The ineffable Louis Stanley, operating from his suite in the Dorchester, launched new but already outmoded cars with monotonous regularity; Stanley gave Mario ‘his sales talk’, but Mario could spot a loser a mile off.
So that in 1974, after a year out of FI racing, he did the one logical thing remaining; he sought to persuade Americans to get into FI.
In USAC and F5000, Mario was driving for the Vel's Parnelli Jones team.
Their chief designer was Maurice Philippe, designer of the Lotus 72 then, and now for a number of years Ken Tyrrell's designer.
Philippe produced his new car for the last two races of 1974, in Canada and at Watkins Glen, where it qualified third.
It seemed the future was not without promise, and a European base was set up with the amiable Andrew Ferguson as team-manager.
Like many other such dreams, this one did not work out and the reason would seem to be that same old American resistance to working seriously in FI — it happened with Roger Penske, it happened with Parnelli as it was later to happen with Karl Haas.
Parnelli never really got into it,’ Mario says.
‘Vel [Miletich]was keen on the programme, but neither he nor I got any psychological support from Parnelli.’
There were other reasons, too.
FI by I975 was a radically changed sport technically.
It seemed hardly a week went by without a new ‘breakthrough’ in the technological aspects of the sport; costs were inflating; teams couldn't be run without proper (i.e. large) budgets.
‘They used their failure to get sponsorship as an excuse to get out,’ says Mario with understandable bitterness, and what hurt him most was that they strung him along until well into 1976, despite the fact that he could easily have had another drive.
The end was curt and unpleasant: Mario not only lost his FI deal but also backed out of racing for Parnelli in America.
At this point begins Mario's love affair with Lotus and theirs with him.
In a way, it has to be put down to mutual dependence.
Mario needed an FI drive; Lotus needed someone with Mario's skills in development, his instinctive understanding of machines.
I975 had been one of the most disastrous ever at Lotus.
The once dominant Lotus 72 had lost its edge; Chapman was developing the 77 and had abandoned the 76.
Here I must admit to a certain prejudice, in that much as I admired Chapman's engineering brilliance — it was intuitive, radical, lateral-thinking and extremely sharp — I did not share, then or now, the belief that Colin was a constructor in the class of Enzo Ferrari, nor did I feel any faith in him as a man or a leader of men.
The Chapman I knew and observed over a decade and more seemed to me never to have outgrown his background, his appetites, his ambitions or his selfishness.
He often struck me as the kind of wide boy one found in England right after the war, people who made deals of the spivvier sort and didn't care who went down as long as they went up.
If there was one thing Chapman couldn't stand, it was criticism or interference in his affairs.
As a result, at least off the track and in business, he had about him only sycophants.
At one time it was quite obvious that his main sponsor, Essex Petroleum, run by the  flamboyant American ex-decorator and former Brussels bus-boy, David Thieme, was in some sort of dire trouble and that this trouble was bound to affect Team Lotus as it did; Chapman knew I was looking into the complex affairs of Thieme and Thieme's longstanding relations with Lotus.
As a result, he once stopped his car as I was walking up the track in Monaco, opened his door and said, ‘Hop in.’
Thanking him for giving me a lift, I sat down in the passenger seat and waited for Chapman to get moving.
He did.
He got about fifty yards up the road, stopped, turned towards me and said, ‘I hear you're looking into my affairs.
Don't!’
At that point, he leaned across me, opened the door on my side, and shoved me out of his car.
I understood the threat and resented the bully-boy who made it.
Not so much because of the menace in his voice and manner, but because it caused me to lose what little respect I had for him.
It was simply the action of a stupid man who hadn't considered the consequences of his action.
When, not too long afterwards, an emissary came to ask me how much money I wanted not to look too closely into Thieme's affairs, I knew what many an ‘investigative’ journalist knows: for some people, there are no rules, no codes they do not think they can break.
This was long before the De Lorean affair began to cast its long shadow over Chapman's empire, but the two incidents served to keep me on my toes.
The other matter which Chapman could not accept was any charge that his cars had been ‘dangerous’, despite the fact that an inordinately large number of people had been killed or injured in his cars.
On one visit to Chapman in Norfolk, he told me that it was true he always worked ‘to the most minimal margins’ and that he ‘subordinated everything to creating the fastest possible car’.
My own opinion then was that this was a characteristic sentiment.
Chapman not only wanted to win; he had to win.
At a time when FISA, the sport's organizing body, helped by the drivers' own association, had belatedly begun to pay some attention to safety in a notably risky sport, Chapman's remarks showed a callousness towards his drivers — and by implication, towards other human beings — that I found it hard to admire.
The late and lovely Ronnie Peterson, one of the sport's true gentlemen, and in 1976 about to become, after a disastrous season, Mario's team-mate, said laconically that Chapman's creation of ‘marginal’ cars — that is, of cars stripped of weight and precaution — was  ‘something you just had to accept’.
But then Ronnie, in his own phlegmatic way, could live with it better than most: his skills as a driver were so refined, his reflexes so quick, that he could handle even the trickiest cars.
Still, when Mario embarked on his four-year career with Chapman, I was not the only one who felt a certain apprehension.
Mario was vastly experienced, he was certainly no coward, but he was also, in his later days, a very ‘correct’ driver and a very prudent one.
Characteristically, he explained that he thought he could ‘handle’ that sort of problem.
The way he did so was by contributing greatly to the development of the new Lotus.
Still, when he arrived at Interlagos in São Paulo, a very fast and difficult track with a bumpy, deteriorating surface, Mario records that ‘that Lotus was really frightening.
I don't think I scare easily, but I sure as hell scared myself that weekend.
It was twitchy like a go-kart.’
In fact, in the race, he and Ronnie bashed into each other on the sixth lap.
Still, the point is Mario needed Chapman and had faith in him.
There is also no doubt that Chapman needed Mario.
One part of the need was obvious: Mario was a first-class driver and extraordinarily savvy in development work.
Another, less obvious factor, seldom mentioned, was that Chapman was planning a major expansion of Lotus (his road cars and not his race cars) in America, and Mario was to be, for him, an important marketing tool.
The 1976 season started with Mario and Peterson in the 77, but the 78, which promised great things, was already in the works.
Apart from a few lesser results, the high point came at Fuji in Japan — the race that saw James Hunt crowned champion when Niki Lauda, his nearest rival, still recovering from his terrible and incendiary accident at the Nürburgring, withdrew from the race on the second lap because, as Niki said, ‘only a fool would race in these conditions’— when Mario was on pole and won the race magisterially.
It was Mario's first F1 win in five years.
The 78, which appeared at the beginning of the 1977 season, was one of Chapman's greatest and most revolutionary contributions to motor racing and the concept which it employed (the so-called Venturi effect, by which the air was channelled under rather than over the car, thus giving it infinitely superior down-force and road-holding ability) set the standard for many years to come.
As Mario was to say at the time, though the 78 was obviously a ‘fantastic’ car in concept, it was going to take a while to work all the bugs out of it: the braking system was twitchy, the steering too flexible and it was, due to its side-pods, slow on the straights.
The first two weekends of the 1977 season were for Mario anyway marred by accidents: in Argentina the nose-mounted fire extinguisher exploded, and in Brazil he found himself sitting in a pool of petrol and got out of the car while it was still moving just as his cockpit went up in flames.
Rolling in the grass, he doused his fiery overalls and luckily suffered no severe injury.
South Africa was marred by the fatal accident to Tom Pryce when a marshal ran across the track: a memorable moment when a dead man's car kept running down the straight.
At Long Beach, Mario notched up another victory and by Spain, the new car was beginning to show its real value: Mario was on pole position, led the race from beginning to end and put the opposition into disarray.
Throughout 1977, Mario's team-mate at Lotus, Peterson having moved over to Tyrrell, was Ronnie's fellow Swede, the hugely talented and much-missed Gunnar Nilsson.
After 1976 and a disastrous Lotus season (a mere 29 points), Ronnie had thought he could do better at Tyrrell, though once again fate was to forestall his ambitions.
But Nilsson was something of a phenomenon: he was brave, audacious but controlled on the circuit, quiet, affable and engaging off it.
As Mario tells it, ‘there was no outward sign of any big problem, except that I used to think he got tired very easily for a guy his age’.
A big problem there meant cancer, from which Gunnar was to die in October the following year.
It was Gunnar who won brilliantly in the rain in Belgium: his only victory, but certainly not the only one he would have scored had he lived to go on racing.
Engine failures cost Mario a number of races that he was leading and at Silverstone he had an unpleasant run-in with Hunt, putting Hunt off the track, which caused a lot of bad blood in the hugely provincial and chauvinistic British press, which backs a Brit no matter what.
My memory is that Mario was dead right, that Hunt was (correctly) hogging the insides of the curves and that Mario had no choice but to go outside, at which point Hunt just moved over on him.
When it comes to racing etiquette and forthright language, Mario has few equals.
He says he told Hunt, when the latter came barging into the Lotus motor-home in protest, that if Hunt ‘didn't know I was alongside him, he was like a horse with blinkers on’.
A particularly apt image, since Master James's hotter moments increased the equine nature of his features.
As the season moved on, the Lotus continued to improve, but its engine remained unreliable and Mario began to have doubts about Lotus.
We talked about it at the time (since journos are often good sources of information for drivers) and it was quite clear there was only one place Mario could even think of going: Ferrari.
I stated my objections: first, there was still Lauda there and with Niki in the Number One seat, Mario couldn't possibly accept that.
But what if Niki left?
Had I heard any rumours to that effect?
Sure I had.
One of Niki's tactics in that elaborate form of board game called ‘driver negotiations’(i.e. how does a driver get the best car and the most money?) was always to talk to a lot of teams, hinting, not so subtly, that ‘if the package was right’, he could be seduced.
Not just Niki did this, but every smart driver does.
I knew that Niki had not been happy at Ferrari, that he found the pressure of the Italian press and of Italians in general something abhorrent, that he didn't like being attacked in that country's three sporting dailies as a failure, and that he found the byzantine intricacies of Ferrari's Maranello a bit hard to take.
I also happened to know that Brabham's Bernard Ecclestone wanted him badly.
There was movement that year among all the teams and Pace's death in March not only upset Brabham plans but also caused Ecclestone, who was very attached to Carlos, both as a man and as a driver, considerable grief.
Well, of course, if Niki left, Mario said back then, he'd have to give that a good long look.
I said, ‘Wouldn't you find exactly the same problems Niki did?’
Mario smiled in that offhand way of his and said he didn't think he would.
Look that to mean, quite correctly, that he was a different sort of animal from Niki.
That's true and, indeed, it was tribute to Mario that though, like all drivers, he always adjusted the world about him to his own advantage, he also got along supremely well within any team.
A second problem that might have caused Mario to leave Lotus was money.
Though in some ways Colin was quite close to his drivers — closer to some than to others — he was, in financial matters, something of a cheese-parer and though his sponsors were generally reasonably generous, even at the height of Lotus's reputation he neither enjoyed the kind of largesse available to some teams nor, with his many other commitments and his fairly flamboyant life style, could devote all of what he did receive to his team.
Furthermore, he was a stern opponent of ‘inflated’ driver salaries.
Like many other constructors in FI, Chapman thought drivers were good, bad or indifferent tools to do a job: if they did the job well, so much the  better, and if they didn't, the fault was theirs.
Whatever, they were all replaceable.
As a result, Mario was earning considerably less at Lotus than he could have commanded in any major team, and certainly less than Ferrari was offering him, which was in the neighbourhood of $2 million, a fairish fee for those days.
There was no doubt in my mind at the time that Ferrari wanted him and that negotiations had reached a fairly advanced point: perhaps exactly the point Mario wanted, the point where he could go to Chapman and say that he'd like to stay at Lotus but that Chapman had to be able to match Ferrari's money.
In the event, Chapman did, having also, Mario reports, made sure that Mario understood the kinds of problems he might encounter at Ferrari.
The deal was signed at the Monza driver bazaar, and at the next race, at Watkins Glen, a new difficulty arose, when Mario learned that Colin Chapman was dispensing with Gunnar Nilsson and that Ronnie Peterson was returning to the team.
Ronnie's return was to cause all sorts of problems in Mario's championship year of 1978.
Mario was always very clear on the subject, and I also talked at length with Peterson during the following year.
Mario's position was that two stars in one team was one too many.
He liked Ronnie, he admired Ronnie, but he thought, rightly in the event, that having two principal drivers in one team was an invitation to trouble.
Chapman's position was unequivocal.
Two factors — besides Nilsson's growing illness — had influenced his decision to bring Ronnie back.
First, he wanted a double-pronged attack.
He needed the championship to restore Lotus's fortunes.
This was both a matter of pride and of business sense at a time when he was making a major export drive towards America.
Secondly, he knew Mario's skills as a preparer of cars were second to none.
‘His personal contribution to the development of the 79,’ Chapman has written, ‘was immense.
Without him it would have been a different car.’
Where Chapman perhaps got it wrong was in underestimating Ronnie's ambition, his ruthless quality of self-appraisal, the total superiority of the Lotus which made it equally possible for either driver to win the championship, Ronnie's far more exuberant and attacking style and the pent-up frustrations of Ronnie's own career.
Ronnie had been in F1 since 1971, he was recognized as one of the sport's quickest ever drivers, he had given Lotus four years of loyal service during relatively lean years and he thought he thoroughly deserved the reward when Lotus came good.
Mario, however, had a contract with Chapman and that contract had stipulated, as at Mario's insistence it always did, that he was to be the team's Number One driver.
‘I mean, that was unequivocal,’ wrote Mario at the end of the 1978 season.
I felt it was my due.
And Ronnie signed as Number Two, which he well understood and accepted.
I knew he was an honourable guy.
The man was a Number One driver, nothing else.
It seemed ridiculous to me that a guy with his experience and ability should have to accept the restrictions of a Number Two.
The agreement was that if both cars were running at the front with no problems, then I was to win.
Ronnie accepted that when he signed his contract.
In the many conversations I had with Ronnie that year, I never heard Ronnie deny it; nor did I ever know him to be disloyal.
What I do know is that whatever Mario says (‘I don't think he was too unhappy about it’) or Colin thought (‘The atmosphere within the team was the happiest I can remember’), that was not the way Ronnie saw it.
Throughout the year, until Ronnie's awful accident at Monza, the two men raced very much on even terms.
Mario got the preferred equipment and Ronnie made up for it in sheer aggression.
Until Ronnie's death, as a result of his injuries at the start of the race — I was among the first at the scene and recall vividly the exsanguine look on Ronnie's face and the mangle of his legs — they were separated by a mere 13 points: the final margin between them, because Mario scored no further points that season.
Nothing takes anything away from Mario's championship, which was solidly built and solidly achieved by his own and the car's merits.
What Ronnie might have achieved, had he been allowed to race on completely even terms, is a matter of pure speculation.
What is, however, very clear in my recollection is Ronnie's bitterness.
He knew Mario was the Number One and he knew why Mario was Number One: it was a matter of business.
I think it is also fair to say, in retrospect, that Ronnie undoubtedly thought — and the proof is there in the figures — that he was fully Mario's equal on the track.
One image sticks in my mind from Brands Hatch that year, a race at which Ronnie, who was then lying just about level with Mario, had taken a notable pole position.
I was on the grass below the paddock when Ronnie's car pulled off the road with a completely inexplicable failure: inexplicable in that Ronnie could find no reason why his car, which had been going so well, should suddenly come to a halt.
I  remember saying, ironically, ‘Sugar in the petrol?’ and Ronnie shrugging and saying, ‘What do you expect?
Mario has to win, doesn't he?’
It wasn't meant disloyally; it was just a statement of his frustrations.
His anger was fully under control, but his pride in his own craftsmanship was disturbed beyond recovery, and though he was on the front row again in Holland at the next race, I know that by Monza he realized he had been defeated by forces beyond his control.
To the extent of his death, I don't believe.
Mario went on to win the next race at the Glen and the championship by a handsome margin, with Ronnie posthumously second.
The next year, he raced again for Lotus, only the Lotus was a less good Lotus, the Ferrari was a lot better car, his team-mate Carlos Reutemann finished consistently ahead of him and some of the smiles had gone out of Mario.
He continued to do a workmanlike job, but the pleasure had gone out of it and he finished joint tenth.
1980 was even worse.
Elio de Angelis was his team-mate and he garnered such points as a deeply disappointing Lotus offered, winding up with a single point.
The next year he moved over to the Alfa team, but could score only three points in a car whose engines rarely survived a race.
In 1982 he was an occasional driver in the Williams car when injuries created an opening, but the dominant Mario had disappeared back to America.
By then he was forty-two years old, he was tired of the strains of FI racing, his kids were grown up and beginning to race themselves, his business interests (and, by now, his reputation) were all in the USA and, as he said phlegmatically at Las Vegas after his last race in FI, ‘I just don't see any reason to continue any more.
I am an American, this is my home, it doesn't do me any good commercially to race in a formula the people back home don't understand.
Why should I go on?’
The question was a rhetorical one.
Mario of course went on racing in America.
He's still racing in America.
And probably they'll have to crowbar him out of the sport before he quits on his own, he's that enamoured of the business of driving cars fast.
In FI he'll be remembered more as Mr Nice than as a great driver: he won his championship in a car that probably a half-dozen drivers would have driven equally competently and successfully, and in that one year lost the one man who could really push him to greater excellence, Ronnie Peterson.
After that, he never had a competitive drive again, and without that, no driver can prove his real quality.
But I think that by the end of his career, Mario knew that he belonged to another time  and another place.
FI is no place for the ageing.
The smart ones drop out, the less smart linger on and eventually the sport gets them.
In America, Mario knew nothing but success and when I last saw him with Karl Haas at the Meadowlands, a world away from FI, he was still a happy man, still at ease with himself and without regrets.
When I asked him once whether his FI career had really mattered to him that much, he answered characteristically that of course it had, but that he enjoyed racing in any form, and of all the forms of racing he enjoyed winning best: ‘I win more over here,’ he said, adding with a characteristic grin, ‘and it's easier.’
I think what he meant was that it was easier on the man.
Not easier on the driver.
In America he had planted roots.
His kids were grown up and racing.
It was his home.
And a true gentleman he remains to this day: ever sunny, ever a pleasure to be with.