

In My Beginning
I was born in 1902 in Windsor, where my father was head gardener on a small estate named Abbey House, and where my mother had been cook.
The daily contact between a young gardener and a young cook, conferring about the fruit and vegetables needed for their employer's meals, led to their falling in love and marriage, and my birth nine months later.
My father came from a peasant family in Berkshire, consisting of three sons and five daughters, all of whom entered some kind of domestic service, the women rising to responsible posts as head housemaids, housekeepers and parlourmaids.
I remember very little of the four years spent in Windsor except the arrival of a small suit sent by one of the powerful aunts for my fourth birthday.
My mother was left an orphan as a small girl, and adopted by an uncle who worked in the library of Eton College.
He had two daughters, a little older than my mother, both of whom attended a secondary school.
Lily, my mother, was not allowed to receive this additional education and from her early teens had to work as a very junior housemaid, at the beck and call of older staff.
Paul's description of the first Gentile Christians scattered round the Mediterranean coastlands of the first century AD would be true of the family into which I was born: ‘not many wise as men reckon wisdom, not many in positions of power or from noblest families, not many wealthy’(1 Corinthians 1:26).
My parents were from a long line of good people with a strong sense of duty, living at peace with their neighbours, quick to be helpful when it was in their power, understandably a little feudal in their outlook, with a cautious eye on the squire for whom they worked, liking a glass of beer or homemade parsnip wine, and not above a bit  of rabbit poaching.
My father was a gardener who never earned more than two pounds a week, but we always had good vegetables.
His two passions were roses (he often exhibited on behalf of his employer at the Windsor Rose Show) and his onion bed.
I can see him now, treading down the soil, making shallow drills and sprinkling the seed, and watching anxiously several weeks later to see if they had germinated.
My mother was a cook who could make the most of three-pennyworth of meat pieces to enrich my father's vegetables.
I can't ever remember being more than healthily hungry, nor can I ever remember coming home from school or play when my mother was not there to welcome us.
My father was a gentle person, wanting peace at any price.
My mother was more restless and ambitious, wanting for her children the education she had been denied.
Shortly after my fourth birthday we moved to a village in Somerset with my father's employer, a retired lawyer, a bachelor, whose household was presided over by a sister-in-law whose husband had died at about the time of my birth.
Our new home at Marston Magna, a village about five miles from Yeovil and Sherborne, was a rather dilapidated old manor house, attached to Marston Court where the squire lived.
I was enrolled at once in the village school which had two teachers who were sisters, one taking all the younger classes and the other the older children.
We were given a thorough training in reading and spelling, in writing and arithmetic, with a weekly lesson in history, geography, nature study and drawing.
When we moved some six years later to a small town again, in Berkshire, I found I was more competent in the three Rs than any other school child of my own age.
Village life at that period has been beautifully described in Flora Thompson's Lark Rise to Candleford .
We seldom saw a motor car and any journey of more than two or three miles was accomplished by horse or pony cart.
On May Day each year, we school children were taken round the houses, carrying posies of spring flowers, to sing songs of spring.
Similarly the choir boys went round singing carols in the week after Christmas, being  regaled with refreshment at most houses, and afterwards dividing the small sums given by those who allowed us to sing.
At the age of seven I joined the village church choir and from that time on the parish church was the main context of my life.
My family were too poor ever to have a holiday together, and my first glimpse of the sea was on a choir outing shortly after my joining.
We went by excursion train to Weymouth; I took with me from my parents twopence to spend; on the journey the vicar distributed small sums calculated on services and practices attended.
From that source I received fivepence.
A kind choirman gave me a threepenny bit, so my total spending money for the day amounted to tenpence.
Most of this was spent on a cup and saucer for my brother Stanley Basil, two years younger, the cup bearing the inscription ‘A Present from Weymouth’.
Our home was on the village green, less than fifty yards from the church, and across the main road through the village lay the vicarage.
The vicar had two sons much about the same age as my brother and myself, so we were often invited into the vicarage to play.
The schoolmistress did not live in the School House, which was occupied by an old grannie, who every day called me to come and talk to her when she was out in her small garden, or in the cottage when the weather was less promising.
She was taken ill suddenly and died.
Her daughter invited me into the house, as one of her mother's friends, to see the body.
That was my first touch with death.
She looked very peaceful, and I was quite unafraid, interested to know what had happened.
Living next door to the churchyard, I was also interested in the occasional work of the gravedigger, and after school hours would help him with the digging or the filling in of a grave, again without any sadness and certainly no feeling of fear.
One of the most frequently recurring memories of childhood is of picking primroses.
Every year after the three-hours service on Good Friday, in which we choir boys were divided into three groups to lead the singing of the hymns, each group for an hour, a number of villagers went off to look for primroses in the  hedgerows and woods.
We would pick baskets of these, which would be taken home and bunched, and on the next morning taken to church to line the choir stalls and to be put in jam jars and attached to the outside of the pews down the two aisles.
Not only were we children interested in primroses but in other small flowers of spring such as violets, cowslips and later daisies, buttercups, bluebells and honeysuckle.
Somehow it was the small flowers that attracted my imagination.
My parents were too poor to be able to give one another a birthday present each year, though there was always a present for each of us four children, Stanley, Laura, Edith and myself.
However, on mother's birthday which fell on 24th May, father would always bring home for her a bunch of lilies of the valley.
Next to church and school came the relationship of our family to the squire for whom my father worked.
My parents lived in constant awareness of the big house and its occupants, and we children were imbued with the problem of what the squire and his household would think of any action or behaviour.
I remember a recurring nightmare that has only become clear in recent years through an interest in dreams.
In the nightmare my father, the under-gardener, my brother and I were throwing sticks to bring down walnuts from the great tree halfway between our home and the Court.
Suddenly in the dream the great tree began to fall, and we were all running in terror to escape its fall.
Looking back I can see that the fall of the tree and the resulting fear were symbolising my anxiety lest the squire should come and catch us raiding his walnut tree.
On the green outside our house my father, as the chief gardener of the village, organised the bonfire for Guy Fawkes night.
All the village children had coloured flare matches, and small squibs, while all the more well-to-do people supplied rockets, Catherine wheels, and the bigger fireworks.
Every autumn my mother would make a football out of old rags and we had some rare games, often getting literally bogged down after any rain, with the imitation football getting too heavy to kick any distance.
Once or twice a year there would be a village concert in the  schoolroom, with recitations and songs by villagers.
My mother used to sing at these.
She had a lovely sweet voice, and always had to sing without piano accompaniment, for she alone knew the songs.
I remember two of them by heart after over eighty years.
Her favourite, and the one the villagers liked best, ran like this:
If I should plant a tiny seed of love
In the garden of your heart,
Would it grow to be a great big love some day
Or would it die and fade away?
Would you care for it and tend it every day
'Till the time when all must part,
If I should plant a tiny seed of love
In the garden of your heart?
The second song was rather a sad one with the refrain of a forsaken lover or a widower:
It was only a beautiful picture
In a beautiful golden frame.
Just before my tenth birthday the squire moved up to Maidenhead, taking his whole staff with him.
Here my brother and I were immediately enrolled in the choir of St Luke's church.
At that time we choir boys sang the whole of Evensong every night of the week.
I remember in my early months, often being cornered by the other choir boys after service or practice and being asked to say the collect for the week, which we always had to learn for Sunday school.
In my simplicity I duly said the collect, which was listened to with silent interest until the end, when there would be a great burst of laughter, which mystified me.
It was only much later that I realised the reason for the request and also for the resulting laughter, namely the enjoyment of a broad Somerset accent which had come with me, and traces of which can still be recognised by West Country people nearly seventy years later.
Training in the choir gave me a fine knowledge of the Psalms, though I must say that none of us choir boys looked forward to the fifteenth evening of the month when the set psalm had no less than seventy-three verses.
We were expected to follow the lessons in our Bibles, with the result that I knew my way about the Bible very competently.
Learning the collect each week was interesting; for I found that some of them were short and easy to remember, others were longer and somewhat involved in thought and language.
It was only years later that I came to learn that the easily remembered collects were those that had been translated by Archbishop Cranmer from the Sacramentaries of Popes Leo, Gregory and Gelasius, while the difficult ones to remember were in almost every case the work of reformers in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
The parish church helped us in other ways.
At morning Sunday school every week there was a clothing club into which each child was allowed to pay threepence a week and at the end of forty-eight weeks was issued with a voucher for fourteen shillings, a very high rate of interest in those days.
The voucher was then taken to a clothing or boot shop where goods were supplied to that value, often with another shilling discount.
Four of my family contributed regularly, and each of us received something new just before Christmas.
In the National school attached to the church a ‘penny bank’ was organised every Monday, generous interest being given again, and withdrawals allowed at a week's notice.
I think it would be true to say that my two brothers and sister and I were products of the Anglican parochial system, at a time when almost all charitable work was carried on by the churches.
At the age of eleven I became an errand boy for a working tailor, and every Saturday, and perhaps on an evening in the week, delivered the suits and costumes that he had made, though often the finished article was well behind the promised date, so the errand boy received critical comments rather than a small tip.
Before long I was promoted to sewing seams, and woe betide me if a stitch showed on the face of the cloth.
One shilling on Saturday  and threepence for an evening were welcome additions to the family income.
Nearing my twelfth birthday, I was fortunate enough to secure a free place at the local secondary school.
This achievement stretched the small family income to purchase a school cap and satchel, and pay the school book bill every term.
With the threat of war approaching, a Cadet Corps was formed and my Sunday school teacher provided the fifteen shillings necessary for the purchase of a second-hand uniform, which had to be cut down to boy's size.
The annual camp for secondary schools Cadet Corps gave me my first holiday away from home, but I was so homesick that a fortnight seemed an impossibly long time before I could get back to my parents and family.
For a time we small cadets guarded railway bridges, with empty carbines, but were more frightened of the dark than of possible German invaders.
After two years I won an Intermediate County Scholarship which brought fifteen pounds a year in addition to free education.
The termly payment from this scholarship was an evening of joy in the family, and when at sixteen the scholarship money was increased to twenty pounds per annum, it was enough to avert the danger of becoming a clerk on the Great Western Railway, a temptation which my struggling parents generously resisted.
I can never be grateful enough to them for the sacrifice they made to keep me at school, when even ten shillings a week would have relieved the pressure on the food bill.
My father enlisted during the Kitchener army recruiting campaign, and life became even harder for my mother.
We were allowed to live rent free in the gardener's cottage, but the family allowance from the army was less than my father had been earning.
So my mother went out to work on Saturdays and some evenings, either to cook or to clean.
On the Saturdays I would scrub the kitchen floor, black and polish the kitchen grate, and polish the knives, so that my mother could have a little rest on her return from several hours cleaning, sometimes having to walk at least a mile to her regular place of work.
The war was an anxious time, for the daily newspapers were  filled with the lists of men killed in the battles in France, and we lived in daily dread of the routine telegram from the War Office.
Father was invalided out before the end of the war with a poisoned hand, and a year after his return my youngest brother was born, there being over seventeen years difference in our ages.
My mother insisted on my being one of his godfathers, a unique responsibility which has allowed me to offer him some tactful advice from time to time.
From the age of seven I had always wanted to be a missionary and I well remember my mother returning from a missionary meeting in the village to hear me say that was what I hoped one day to be.
The hope persisted, though often it seemed impossible.
The clergy at our parish church of St Luke, Maidenhead, encouraged the hope.
The vicar, Charles Fry, taught me elementary Greek on Saturdays in my latter years at school, and in return I wrote some letters at his dictation, for which he generously gave me a shilling an hour.
A curate at St Luke's, an older man from the West Indies, almost persuaded my parents to let me go out to Codrington College in the West Indies, but my headmaster was firm against this, expressing the hope that I might get a scholarship to an English university.
The hope of the scholarship meant specialising.
I would have liked to specialise in classics or literature, but the teachers of these two subjects were away at the war, so it was necessary to take up mathematics which the headmaster himself taught.
I had passed the London Matriculation in all the necessary subjects for Oxford, Cambridge and London.
Finally Selwyn College, Cambridge offered me a scholarship, Berkshire County Council doubled this amount, and the Ordination Candidates Fund made up the two hundred pounds per annum necessary for university life in 1921.
Looking back I am increasingly grateful to the many people who took a share in this fortunate happening, though now I realise that I might have expressed my gratitude to them more often and more appreciatively.
Getting Shaped
I went up to Cambridge in the Michaelmas term of 1921.
Selwyn was the smallest of the colleges of the University, also its students lived in, and during my three years the number of students never exceeded 150.
For some reason known only to the Fellows I was nominated as senior of the four scholars of my year.
Roughly half of the students came from public schools and the other half from county or secondary schools.
I soon discovered that those in the first group had a poise and confidence that the rest of us did not.
They seemed to have a different attitude to the lecturers and were not afraid to go to them for elucidation of points they did not fully understand, and in tutorials showed their wider knowledge, and their readiness to think for themselves rather than just reproduce what they had learned from textbooks and lectures.
The college authorities did not aim solely or mainly for brilliant scholars or outstanding athletes, but to develop and train those who were capable of a good pass or honours degree.
Looking back I can see that I was somewhat raw material that could benefit from such provision.
The sports clubs were eager to discover promising members.
It was soon clear that rowing was not my strong point.
At hockey there was a vacancy for the goalkeeper and that had been my position in the school team.
I was ultimately awarded colours but in my third year lost my place after a sharp attack of influenza which weakened my confidence.
At cricket I played in the second eleven, and was its captain in my third year.
In the same year I was elected as president of the Junior Common Room, and presided at debates and business sessions of the student body.
At one point I was able to take an unusual  initiative .
Unlike most other colleges, Selwyn had a college mission working in city areas which needed social activities in a club or institute.
As Selwyn had been founded to commemorate the great Bishop of Melanesia it seemed appropriate that the college should make Melanesia its special interest and perhaps in time raise enough money to pay one of its own men to go out and serve as priest and educationist in that diocese of so many islands.
However at a recent annual Commemoration I was glad to discover that the offerings of the two services are still sent to the Melanesian Mission.
Cambridge is conveniently close to Newmarket and a group of friends went to watch several of the great races there.
In my final year the same group decided to have a little flutter on the Derby.
Each of us invested ten shillings and we met to decide our bets.
We placed bets on three horses, then decided to allow the gyp or college servant who placed the bets for us to make his own choice for the same amount as each of our three bets.
Finally, I suppose to salve our consciences, we put the same bet each way on a horse for Dr Barnardo's Homes.
When the results became known, we found that our own bets were lost, but the gyp made a handsome winning and Dr Barnardo's did quite well.
When I wrote to Dr Barnardo's, I said that they might not approve of money from such a source but the secretary who answered the letter said he was an old Selwyn man and the more we could send him the better.
After a reasonable second class in Part I of the mathematics Tripos I transferred to theology: my tutor, Fred Marsh, gave me a deep love and critical understanding of the Old Testament, but was realistic about my chances in the theological Tripos.
‘You are a good second class student,’ was his verdict; ‘my job is to help you scrape up enough marks to push you over the border line.’
He succeeded in doing so, but confided afterwards that no single examiner thought me worthy of a first, but when the marks were added up, mine were within a few marks of those who were obviously in the first class, and so my name was added to the list of three others.
Further theological and pastoral training came at St Augustine's Missionary College, Canterbury, where Arthur Knight was Warden, after being invalided home from Burma, where he had been Bishop of Rangoon from 1902 to 1910.
Arthur Knight was a scholar, and had been Fellow and Dean of Caius College, Cambridge.
He was a man of stern self-discipline, whose highest value was that of truth, not only in word, but in thought and theological study.
He was also one of the humblest of men.
‘Tapeinosis , my dear Appleton; be humble, be humble,’ was said to me a score of times, and I imagine to many another student.
My wife and children have felt that their vocation in life was to carry on this early training so that I have had a lifetime's pressure towards humility, reinforced by the effect of biblical meditation and involvement in the worship of the Church.
It was a rule at St Augustine's College that the part of the world to which each student should go should be decided by the Warden and Fellows.
Signs were not lacking of my probable destiny.
I had been enrolled as a student at Canterbury before I went to Cambridge; during the next four years I was visited by missionaries home on leave from Burma, though nothing definite was said.
Towards the end of my last year I was called by Bishop Knight and asked where I would like to serve.
I replied with caution and a slightly playful evasion that I understood that he would decide that, to which he replied that naturally he would like to take into account any hopes of mine.
When I mentioned Burma, his feeling of satisfaction was obvious, though his sense of integrity had prevented him from deciding that I should go to a country so close to his own heart.
But before Burma I was to serve a curacy in East London at Stepney parish church for two years.
Here, in addition to a solid training and discipline for a priest, I was to get a widening and somewhat disturbing understanding of the task of a missionary.
At Canterbury the students were given very little direct teaching about other faiths, and what there was seemed designed to show that Christianity was the only true religion and that the fate of people of other religions was to be absorbed in a triumphalist  Church.
In Stepney 40 per cent of the parishioners were Jews, and almost in the first week I was to become aware of something new, when the rector, Bertram Simpson, later Bishop of Southwark, suddenly said to me, ‘Tomorrow is the Day of Atonement.
You had better attend the closing hour of it in the synagogue in Rectory Square.
I will arrange it with my friend, the rabbi.
Don't forget to wear a hat!’
So next day I duly went to the synagogue, rather self-conscious in my trilby hat, surprised to find women sitting in the gallery only, much impressed with the singing of the cantor and the blowing of the ram's horn, and a little taken aback by the quick exit at the end of the fast, presumably to get back home for the first square meal of the day.
But the thing that impressed me most was the friendship between the rabbi and the rector.
They gave each other presents at the Hanukha-Christmas festival, and the rector showed me his latest gift, a book with the inscription ‘To my friend the rector, from his friend, the rabbi’.
During my crowded two years at Stepney, the Church of England Missionary Council initiated a study of world religions.
For the East London course, speakers were sent from Church House to be responsible for the study of Hinduism and Islam, but no one was available for Buddhism and Confucianism.
My missionary vocation landed me with the task, the experience probably did more for me than for the fifty to one hundred loyal missionary supporters who attended.
The study of the Buddha made me feel that I was in the presence of a very great religious teacher, a man of great compassion, who diagnosed man's original trouble as greed, desire, attachment, the escape from which was the treading of the Noble Eightfold Path.
In Confucius and his teaching about right relationships — parent-child, teacher-pupil, ruler-subject, man and his neighbour, I saw the presentation of the cultured Chinese ideal of learning, virtue and duty.
Neither of these two great figures said much about God, the Buddha being involved in the human situation, and Confucius in the cultural.
Living five hundred years before Christ, when there was not much in the way of religious encounter between the Middle East and  the Further East, their spiritual greatness and the influence they exerted on the people of their own area and era, raised questions in the mind of any would-be missionary.
But the question was being only vaguely suggested — the next forty-five years would see it become more sharply pointed, demanding an answer from the interested individual and from the missionary Church.
In October 1927, the young missionary was steaming at 15–20 knots towards Rangoon.
In the early-morning sun the incomparably beautiful Shwe Dagon pagoda with its gold-plated spire could be seen from some miles away.
I was to serve at St Michael's church, Kemmendine, a suburb of Rangoon, where there was a parish church, a teachers' training school and a blind school.
Kemmendine was the headquarters of a large rural mission in the delta of the Irrawaddy, with some forty villages where there were groups of Christians, mainly Karens; but some Burman.
In most of these villages there would be a small one-teacher school, built of wood and bamboo with palm leaf thatching.
With smaller Christian groups the school would also be used as a church, but several larger communities had separate churches, built in the same way.
At Kemmendine, there were two experienced missionaries, men of outstanding ability, character and devotion.
The first was William Purser who over twenty-five years had built up the Delta mission, originated work for the blind, organised teacher-training and supervised the small theological school of the diocese.
A day or two after my arrival he said to me, ‘In nine months’ time I am retiring from missionary service.
During that time I shall give you no set work, you are to take no services in English nor preach in English, your sole task will be to become competent in Burmese.
The Sunday after I leave, I shall expect you to preach in depth and at reasonable length!
I shall find you a good language teacher, and second a catechist, to take you round the villages and ensure that you can converse with Christians and Buddhists alike.
''
I had made a start in Burmese at the School of Oriental Languages in London, going up from Stepney for a weekly lesson, so I could read haltingly and use a score or more greetings and  questions, which deceived the kindly village people into thinking that I knew more than I did, with the result that an opening sentence of mine would elicit a whole string of Burmese from which I would only pick up a word or two.
However, Will Purser helped me with a few defensive sentences such as, ‘Please talk slowly, I have only just begun to learn Burmese.’
He also gave me his own way of planning little dialogues, and his technique of distinguishing the three tones of the language, which could alter the meaning of what looked to an English eye to be the same word, often with unexpected, humorous or even disastrous effect.
Will was a man of self-discipline and order, and also one of quiet, confident calm which nothing seemed to shake, mishaps being greeted with a reassuring acceptance and often a laugh.
The second early influence came from his brother-in-law, William Jackson, a blind priest, who had joined him to develop the work among the blind.
William Jackson, always called ‘Father’,A-pay-gee (big father) in Burmese, had done an amazing job in giving confidence to his blind pupils, reducing Burmese to Braille, planning weaving, making baskets and mats of all descriptions.
He was a very high churchman, preferring Roman ways of worship, though reserving the right to make changes of his own.
He loved his blind boys, taught them how to play football, arranged sports days for them, took them swimming.
He trained them to regular confession, and whenever any one of them was dying would prepare them for death, and be thankful when they died in penitence, peace and hope.
He taught me two things in addition to the pastoral spirit.
The first was how to use the various organs of speech to pronounce Burmese correctly, for the vowels were pure, some consonants unaspirated, and there was always the tonal complication.
The second thing I welcomed from him was the need to get away from outward Western forms in worship and adopt meaningful indigenous forms.
So at baptism, the new Christian would be immersed and go down into the river or the immersion font in Burmese skirt and coat, and on emerging from the water be clothed with the three garments of a Burmese monk, only  white in colour instead of saffron, this signing acceptance as a mature member of the religious community and the cleansing from sin.
In church, his flock would sit cross-legged on mats, and touch the ground with their foreheads at moments of deep worship.
For preaching he would sit cross-legged on the chancel step, there would be bells to make up in sound what was missing in sight, and incense to enlist a further sense.
We shared the one church, but the mission side of worship was western — the two ways continuing independent, like Roman and Celt in early British Christianity.
A-pay-gee and I agreed to unify our rites.
We booted out the pews, the pulpit, the kneeling desks, had Burmese lacquer altar frontals, did away with the alms bags and their seasonal colours and used a monk's begging bowl instead.
But we forgot to dispose of the discarded furnishings, and six months later when I went to spend a few days with a senior Burmese colleague, he showed me with great satisfaction his small-town church, furnished with the discarded pews, pulpit, litany desks, with the collection bags being changed according to the ecclesiastical season!
It is not always the missionary who is reluctant to change outward forms.
I had a further powerful incentive to learning the language, for SPG, the missionary society which supported me and thirty or more other missionaries in Burma, men and women, had a rule that no missionary could marry before passing the first two language examinations.
I was in love before I left England and the hope of marriage was such a spur that with help from the two Williams, I was able to pass with distinction not only two, but three exams.
However, credit must also be given to Saya Yá2wshu (Saya means teacher), the seconded catechist, who for my first year followed me like a shadow, to enlarge my vocabulary and lengthen my conversations and sermons.
(My first sermon in Burmese, delivered very slowly, took just over three minutes!)
I came to believe that Yá2wshu must have been descended from the importunate widow, for he seldom left me alone in those early months, and I was glad to crawl under my mosquito net at night, only to be woken at earliest dawn by my faithful and dutiful friend.
The lady I hoped to marry was Miss Marjorie Alice Barrett, who was a teacher in the National school of St Luke's, Maidenhead, which I had attended when the family moved up from Somerset, and from which I gained a free place to the local county school.
We had first got to know one another as young teachers in the parish Sunday schools and in the Band of Hope, where we both signed the pledge against any intoxicating drink, a pledge withdrawn when we became adults.
Her family, like mine, was a respectable working-class one, her father being the groundsman at a private preparatory school.
We both took part in Christmas plays and also in temperance plays.
After the Epiphany play of 1922 we were taking the home-made costumes back to the storage centre when I suddenly became aware of what an attractive, lovable person she was.
When our storage duties were done we shook hands and I drew her to me and kissed her.
Her response was, ‘Oh George, you mustn't!’
I was able to follow up that evening, for my father gave me a lovely chrysanthemum bloom from his greenhouse and the next day I took it to her home and asked her mother, who opened the door to my rather nervous knock, if she would give it to her daughter.
Her response was, ‘You'd better come in and give it to her yourself.’
From that day on, our future together was assured.
Language exams and medical tests duly proved no obstacle and in September 1929 Madge (as her family called her) sailed from Birkenhead and arrived in Rangoon on 1st October, having politely declined a proposal of marriage on the way out.
We were married in Rangoon cathedral on 3rd October.
Bishop Tubbs presided at the service.
Madge was attended by six little Burmese bridesmaids, who as soon as she arrived started off up the long aisle, and she followed with the kind friend at whose house she had spent the previous two nights and who ‘gave her away’.
One little oversight became apparent in the service.
Madge and  I had discussed beforehand whether or not she should promise to obey her husband, and had agreed that this promise should be omitted.
There were several clergy taking part in the service, but we had only one 1928 Revised Prayer Book, which was passed round.
Bishop Tubbs did not have this copy in his hand and so asked the 1662 question, and Madge was asked if she would obey.
She kindly said she would, but we both used a spiritual eraser to delete that particular phrase.
In our fifty years together we both worked out plans and decisions without any friction.
Curry and Rice
My main task in my first five years in Burma was to tour the villages of the Irrawaddy Delta, encouraging the small Anglican congregations and visiting some forty village schools, most of them having only one or two teachers.
The teachers had been trained at two training colleges in Kemmendine, those for primary schools studying for one year and those for middle schools for two years.
There was very little in the way of school equipment, the children sat on the floor with slates and chalk, reading books had to be shared and the rough blackboard made on the spot.
In many cases the school was also the church, where the small groups of Christians, almost entirely Karen in race, gathered for Sunday worship and for Holy Communion when I was able to turn up, or occasionally one of my four Karen ‘curates’.
The Karens were animists, feeling some kind of presence in the forest, the spring or the great banyan tree.
They had some beliefs and practices that seemed to link with the early days of the Old Testament, possibly due to some earlier Christian influence, believed by some missionaries to trace back to Nestorian missionaries moving through parts of Burma into China.
Whatever it was, it gave them a sense of reverence, and services in these little churches always had a great spirit of worship.
If a Karen died away from home, his body would be buried and later his bones would be brought back to his native village.
We missionaries were rather slow to respect this return to the home village by a second funeral service, though in my time it became more acceptable.
There were no doctors in the villages and the town centres of government administration were far away.
Infectious diseases  came regularly — smallpox, dysentery, malaria, cholera; and in addition there were the regular happenings — broken limbs, snake bite, toothache, injury from treading on a sharp bamboo or from a misdirected blow from the dah , a long chopper-knife which every family kept for domestic and jungle use.
So the missionary had to try to take the place of the doctor and the nurse, and had to keep with him a stock of basic medicines — iodine, castor oil, Epsom salts, santonin (for worms), quinine tablets for malaria, and a plentiful supply of aspirin in which the village people seemed to have a great faith.
Cholera epidemics happened regularly in my early years, when the filth from one village would be thrown into the river and water drawn from the same river for the villages downstream.
In such epidemics we tried to get people to boil their water and to eat their food hot from the rice and curry pots, but it was rare for cholera victims to recover.
No one was able to give us at that time the valuable advice which I only picked up years later, namely that the great danger in cholera was dehydration, necessitating that the sufferer be given frequent drinks of cold water previously boiled.
I well remember my first Christmas in Burma.
I had gone to a town about a hundred miles north of Rangoon and had spent Christmas night in a village seventeen miles away.
We had had our Christmas Communion and the Nativity play which every Christian village made up and acted on Christmas evening.
I had gone to bed when shortly after midnight I was wakened by the teacher to say that one of the elders of the village was in great pain.
I enquired what seemed to be wrong, and after a little embarrassing silence was told that he was suffering from a stoppage of urine.
Stones in the bladder were a very common ailment in middle life, and something for which my first aid training had given me no preparation.
I hurried to the house of the sick man, which was a bamboo hut with a palm leaf roof like the schoolroom in which I was sleeping.
Somehow I had picked up the idea that putting the patient in a tub of hot water sometimes had the desired effect.
We duly did this, with no result.
My next thought was that the stone might be closing the outlet from the bladder.
So several of us tried standing him on his head and quickly reversing him.
Again no result.
The only thing left to do was to get him in to the government hospital seventeen miles away, so we set out across the rice fields and village tracks, with the patient in a bullock cart.
The teacher and I preferred to walk, for bullock carts had no springs and the tracks were rough.
It was a lovely starlit night and except for anxiety for the sufferer a pleasant journey.
We had not been going for more than half an hour when the driver of the sick man's bullock cart came to me and said that all was now well, we need go no further.
What the hot water and applied gymnastics had failed to do had been achieved by the rough journey in the bullock cart.
However, I insisted that we should get him to hospital and soon after dawn we arrived at Prome, where after considerable appeal and importunity on my part the patient was admitted to hospital.
That evening while wandering round the bazaar I was suddenly greeted with great friendliness by the erstwhile sufferer, who announced that he was now all right and was going back to his village next morning.
I warned him that the trouble would probably recur, but with a smile he said, ‘If it does, I will go for another ride in a bullock cart!’
One of the things that bothered me most in the villages of the Delta was the treatment given to women in childbirth.
This was undertaken by one of the more experienced older women who had little understanding of possible complications.
To make matters worse it was generally believed that the spirit of the child would remain in the body of the mother, and so for three days after the actual birth the mother had to sit by a wood and bamboo fire and sweat out the child's spirit so that the child should be completed and the mother freed from what was now an alien spirit inside her.
I could do little to help in this experience of childbirth except to urge that the mother should be kept in her rough bed on the floor and given proper nourishment.
But centuries-old practices are difficult to change, and my protests  were written off as those of an ignorant missionary, with no respect for traditional customs.
Relief came more quickly than my troubled heart expected, for it had been decided that the matron of the SPG hospital at Mandalay could be spared for rural medical work.
I jumped at the offer and within a week or two she arrived and reform was started.
After seeing what Avice Cam could do, we decided to plan a long-term revolution.
A small hospital built of wood and bamboo and thatched with palm leaves, with one ward for about ten beds, a labour room and a room for Avice, was built, and six village girls agreed to come for training.
News of the care and comfort supplied to mother and child soon got round and there was no need to go out and persuade pregnant women to come in to have their babies.
After a year's training the village nurses were placed in local dispensaries and went to look after mothers in childbirth in their own homes.
Avice Cam deserved the highest honour that could be given for service to others.
She was a woman of fine physical strength, ready to go out on foot or in a canoe when called for.
Her service demanded more than just strength and devotion, for she had a most sensitive skin which attracted mosquitoes and during the rainy season and its close, was constantly itching and scratching.
Years later when I became chairman of the medical missions of SPG, I realised how in mission hospitals all over the world, the same devoted healing mission was being carried on, which spoke much more eloquently of divine and human love than the preaching of less qualified friends like myself.
People in the villages were poor.
They grew their own rice and a surplus for sale, and often the villagers were able to catch fish from the many streams of the Irrawaddy Delta.
But clothes had to be bought, and medicines, and cooking pots and kerosene for the hurricane lamps.
Life generally was hard.
Some pattern of what might be done needed to be worked out, and after a great deal of discussion and searching for funds, we transferred one of the men's teacher training classes from Kemmendine to a Delta village.
The new training school was built as a village with school  and church and shop.
The students had not only training in teaching methods but in growing their own food, and we had twenty acres of rice land, an acre of garden, a Berkshire boar imported to improve the strength and size of the village pigs, and several pure-bred cocks to convert the village hens from laying two clutches of a dozen eggs each year to something like 150 bigger and better eggs.
The Berkshire boar attracted great attention, and was given the name Norman, after our bishop, Norman Tubbs.
He was somewhat taken aback by this honour and we were quick to explain that this was the finest tribute that could be paid to both Normans.
Sows were brought from miles around for mating, while settings of eggs were supplied for broody village hens, who were never fed but had to pick up their food from the village or the rice field.
Another devoted woman missionary, Phoebe England, did the professional training, while a third noble woman continued touring the other villages and linking them up with the training village.
In such ways we learned to care for people's bodies and homes as well as for their inner spiritual life.
To someone recently out from England village life in Burma seemed desperately poor.
It was only when I got to know something of the poverty of India's villages (some 500,000 of them) that I really saw far worse poverty.
As I learned more of missionary work all over the world, I began to realise that there had to be a tremendous effort to help undernourished people to grow their own food for themselves, a task which is still tragically unfinished, and will remain so until the nations of the world, rich and poor, combine together to sacrifice a meagre percentage of their gross national product, which experts calculate to be necessary to abolish hunger in a generation.
But, thank God, we now have the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, and the World Health Organisation, but alas, are still waiting for the developed countries to engage in this world-wide task.
The Smile of the Buddha
I have visited many countries in the world and can think of no other which can compare with Burma for the permeation of its cultural and social life with religion.
Everywhere there were reminders of Buddhism: on almost every hill there would be a small pagoda, its graceful, tapering spire coloured white or occasionally gilded with gold leaf; in every village there would be a monastery, usually with several monks, though sometimes with a single bhikkhu living more as a hermit.
The monks used to be responsible for the education of the boys, teaching them the three Rs and the elements of Buddhism, the learning being almost entirely by rote, so that approaching a village one could often hear from a distance the shrill boyish voices as they repeated the lesson after their teacher.
Every Buddhist boy became a monk for a period, it might be for a lent, or a year or two, it might continue for a lifetime or be as short as a week.
Until he had undergone this religious initiation and probation he would not be regarded as a mature member of the Buddhist community.
It did not take me long to wish that we Christians might have a similar preparation for confirmation and acceptance as a full worshipping and working member of the Church.
Every day there would be a reminder of religious dedication, for each morning the monks would process round the village or town in file, carrying their begging bowls into which devout Buddhists would put offerings of food, very respectfully and without expecting any thanks, for supporting the monks was a most meritorious deed.
In addition there would be religious festivals, a commemoration of some event in the life of the Buddha, or the founding of a monastery, sometimes even a commemoration of the appearance  of a nat or spirit, and interestingly the funeral of a monk, a time of great rejoicing and festivity, for had not the holy man entered Nirvana, and he would return no more to the wearisome cycle of human rebirths.
William Purser was very wise.
He left me to become acquainted with the religious environment, and then handed me a paperback entitled Modern Buddhism in Burma , which he had edited in cooperation with Kenneth Saunders, warden of the YMCA hostel, and already a translator of the Dhamma-pada , a collection of short sayings thought to go back to the Buddha.
This book of 100 pages consisted of an edited summary of answers to a questionnaire which the two editors had sent out not only to missionaries but also to Buddhist laymen and government officials.
It was inspired by the report of the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910, which set in motion the new ecumenical movement among the Christian Churches.
The official report of that conference expressed regret at the omission of any adequate treatment of Southern Buddhism, and the questionnaire and its answers attempted to remedy the omission.
It aimed at understanding contemporary Buddhism, and deprecated any intention of an attack on Buddhism, appealing to Buddhist readers to correct any inaccurate or biased statements.
I was impressed with the open mind which the writers brought to their task, though their missionary motive could not be hidden.
The survey also made me realise that it was not enough to have read about the early beginnings of any religion; one needed to study it as a living faith and see the development of thought and interpretation.
This report, the standard books, the growing number of translations of the many books of the Scriptures, and discussions with scholars in Rangoon University or simple yet thoughtful Buddhists in the villages, aroused in me a reverent admiration for the Buddha, a deep interest in his teaching, and a nagging need to build some bridge in my own mind between the two religions.
The return of William Purser to England released me from my obligation not to preach in English, and shortly after his departure  I was invited to preach in Rangoon cathedral, then very much a chaplaincy parish church, and only rarely having great services in Burmese.
I chose as my subject the person of the Buddha, tried to relate his teaching to Christians, expressed my deep admiration for him and pleaded for a more tolerant and positive attitude towards the religion which he had founded.
Further sympathetic understanding came through the study of two books by Mrs C.A.F. Rhys Davids.
With her husband she had taken an active part in the publications of the Pali Text Society, both in Pali, the classical language of Buddhism, and in English.
The two books were Gotama the Man (sometimes spelt Gautama), and a splendidly substantial one entitled Sakya .
On my first furlough I sought her out, and attended her course of lectures.
I was excitedly interested in her attempt to get back to the original Gautama, instead of the stereotyped figure of the Scriptures and Buddhist tradition, and still more thrilled by her insistence that the Buddha had a gospel, good news to the people of his contemporary India and to later generations.
What was that gospel?
It was expressed in the Four Noble Truths, which may be paraphrased as: 1) Human life is characterised by frustration, meaninglessness, suffering.
2) The cause of this is desire, attachment, greed.
3) Desire must and can be stopped.
4) The way to achieve this is by following the Noble Eightfold Path — right views, right thought, right speech, right actions, right employment, right mental discipline, right endeavour, right meditation.
So there is a way of escape, a cessation of desire, an achievement of ineffable peace and blessedness.
Men are the product of their past thoughts and deeds, according to the working of the law of karma, the harvest of deeds; as a man sows so shall he reap, a principle accepted by St Paul in Galatians, a nexus of cause and effect.
But men are not in the hands of blind fate, for karma speaks not only of the actions and thoughts of the past as explaining a man's present condition or character, but also as creative of the future.
Do good deeds now and the result will be a future of happiness and blessing.
The Buddha warned men not to rely on  mantras, incantations, sacrifices, rites and ceremonies; he insisted that they cannot be saved without their own co-operation.
They must be creative workers for their own future.
According to the Thera-vada school of Buddhism, the Southern Buddhism of Burma, Ceylon, Siam and Cambodia, there is no grace from outside man's being to support, strengthen and save him; he must rely on his own efforts, and the task will need more lives than one, countless lives in this world, alternating perhaps with lives in a heaven or hell.
Buddhists of the Northern school of China and Japan evolved their own theory of grace and came to believe in the Buddha as a Saviour, though in the earliest Scriptures he himself claimed to be nothing more than a teacher, a shower of the way.
The Buddhist goal is Nirvana, which some Western writers have thought of as completely negative, annihilation or nothingness.
The word itself means ‘blown out’, ‘cool’, meaning that the fires of desire, hatred and illusion have been extinguished, the heat of desire has become cool.
The Buddha did not define it, but a modern Buddhist scholar, Edward Conze, has summarised references from the Scriptures in the following moving description:
We are told that Nirvana is permanent, stable, imperishable, unmovable, ageless, deathless, unborn and unbecome; that it is power, bliss and happiness, the secure refuge, the shelter and the place of unassailable safety, that it is the real truth and the Supreme Reality; that it is the Good, the Supreme goal, and the one and only consummation of our life, the eternal, hidden and incomprehensible Peace.
Christians could apply almost all these attributes to God himself, in which Nirvana becomes the presence of God.
As Psalm 16:11 says, ‘In thy presence is  fullness of joy; in thy right hand bliss for evermore.’
Nirvana, like eternal life in the teaching of Jesus, can be attained in this life, as it was in the case of the Buddha who consented to stay on in this world for the sake of men, rather than move on at once to Para-nirvana, the final and highest heaven.
Inevitably Buddhists and Christians compare Gautama the Buddha and Jesus the Christ.
Both had a great compassion for men in their frustrations, sufferings and lostness.
Both underwent deep spiritual experience before they embarked on their public ministry, the Buddha in his night of illumination under the Bo tree when he discovered a way of escape for men from suffering, and the Christ in the forty days in the harsh countryside of the Dead Sea, when he was shown and accepted the way of love, sacrifice and service, as the way of salvation in the Kingdom of God.
Both trained bands of disciples and sent them out to preach their respective good news.
Both made great sacrifices — the Buddha by consenting to live, and the Christ by being willing to die.
Both were prophetically critical of the religions in which they were nurtured, the Buddha in Indian religion, and the Christ in Judaism.
Both aroused the opposition of the traditional teachers, the brahmins in Hinduism and the rabbis in Judaism, though it was their adherents in following generations who heightened the differences until they resulted in complete separation and the founding of two new religions.
There were vital differences.
The Buddha discouraged speculation about the origin of things, about the existence of God and the soul in man.
He wanted men to go on with living the good life.
To Jesus God was the great reality and the essential priority.
He believed that he came from God, revealed God, spoke for God, acted for God, was a channel for God's grace and salvation.
‘There is only one whom we might be inclined to compare with Jesus: Buddha.
This man is a great mystery.
He lived in an almost super-human freedom, yet his kindness was powerful as a cosmic force.
Perhaps Buddha will be the last religious genius to be explained by Christianity.’
These words of Monsignor Guardini, written nearly thirty years after my early musings, expressed a growing need in my thinking to account for the Buddha in the providence of God.
‘God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,’ says St Paul.
Can we not say that ‘God  was in the Buddha, teaching men the way of virtue and righteousness’, even though the Buddha did not clearly acknowledge God?
Bishop B.F. Westcott in his book The Gospel of Life , written in 1892, had a paragraph which comes near to this crystallisation:
Buddhism started with being morality without worship; and it is as a system of morality, but of morality as being of inherent obligation, that Buddhism claims to be reckoned among the religions of the world.
In this respect it is among the noblest as it is the vastest moral spectacle in history.
May it not be the mission of Buddhism today to lead the world back to moral values and to help people everywhere to find an ethic, related to conditions in the modern world, which will gain acceptance and inspire right effort?
Yet the Buddha had an ultimate in which he believed:
There is, monks, an unborn not become, not made, uncompounded, and were it not, monks, for this unborn, not become, not made, uncompounded, no escape could be shown here, for what is born, has become made, is compounded.
But because there is, monks, an unborn, not become, not made, uncompounded, therefore an escape be shown for what is born, has become, is made, is compounded.
In short, there is an eternal into which men can be liberated, suggesting something which exists in its own right and is not dependent on any prior cause.
When I first came across this text my mind went to the Athanasian Creed which describes the Godhead as uncreated, infinite, eternal and incomprehensible.
The Buddha spoke often and at length to his disciples about what he called dhamma (the Pali word for the Sanskrit dharma ).
Dhamma is the principle of order in the universe, truth in both cosmic and inner sense, a manifestation of ultimate truth, reality.
It is something other, independent, with a dynamic quality of its  own, and an initiating activity.
Dhamma is a Reality, inwardly seen, not handed down as tradition.
An alert monk, says the Buddha, guides his conduct by it.
The Buddha's first sermon after his enlightenment, given in the deer park at Banaras, is entitled ‘The Turning of the Wheel of Dhamma’.
When he sent out his disciples he instructed them to preach Dhamma, the Truth, the Norm.
‘The gift of dhamma’, says one of the pithy sayings in the Dhamma-pada (verses about dhamma), ‘exceeds all gifts; its sweetness exceeds all sweetness’; reminding the Christian of Psalm 19 where the Torah, the Law of the Lord, is described as ‘sweeter than honey’.
When the Buddha lay dying, his devoted attendant Ananda asked for instructions about the Sangha , the Order of Monks.
The master replied that he had ever taught dhamma, and dhamma must be their light and guide: ‘Therefore, Ananda, dwell making yourselves your island, making yourselves, not anyone else, your refuge; making dhamma your island, dhamma your refuge, nothing else your refuge.’
Earlier, the Buddha had said, ‘He who sees dhamma sees me, he who sees me sees dhamma.’
They are to depend on dhamma only, revere dhamma, esteem dhamma, with dhamma as their banner, with dhamma as their guard and protection, with mastery in dhamma.
Dhamma is for awakening, for taming, for calming, for crossing over, for utter Nirvana.
Dhamma is the charioteer that drives the chariot along the road to Nirvana.
In other references dhamma is the raft on which men may cross the ocean of existence to the farther shore of Nirvana.
Dhamma is the master principle in ‘a Tathagata , perfected one, wholly awakened one, a dhamma-man, a dhamma-king, depending on dhamma only, honouring dhamma, revering dhamma, esteeming dhamma, with dhamma as his standard, with dhamma as his banner, with mastery as to dhamma’, and he will provide dhamma-guard, love and protection for monks, nuns and lay followers.
He will do this by teaching the right kind of deeds, speech and thought, the right way of living, even the right places to visit or live in.
A Christian may relate this concept to that of the Word in the prologue to St John's Gospel, or to the idea of Wisdom in the Old Testament and the Apocrypha with its quasi-personal cause.
He will be reminded of the saying of Jesus, ‘’ He who has seen me has seen the Father.’
In the growing meeting of religions, he will want to discuss with Buddhist friends the possibility of equating dhamma with the Christian concept of God, though without the personal elements.
He will examine more confidently his own intuition and hope, that there is Something or Somebody at work behind the scenes in all religions.
Thera-vada Buddhism, the Buddhism of the Elders, has no belief in a soul or entity in man.
If belief in an Ultimate develops, belief in a self will not be difficult.
There is, however, help from Buddhism itself.
The Buddha deprecated argument about whether there is an atman or self in man.
He wanted people to get on with the urgent business of living the good life set out in the Eightfold Path, and not to waste time or energy in speculation and debate.
He taught that the natural order of things was marked by three characteristics:
dukhha,
suffering, frustration, meaninglessness
a-neissa,
impermanent, not eternal
an-atta,
no self, no soul, non-substantiality.
The question arises as to what he was describing — ultimate reality or the life of men?
Was he really saying that blessedness, permanence and true being had to be sought elsewhere?
According to Buddhists the constituents of being are the five Khandas — form or body, feeling, perception, mental activity and consciousness.
When these five aggregates are in combination, there is life, a being is in existence, though the aggregates themselves are always changing.
When they disintegrate death takes place.
The Thera-vada deduction from this is that there is no self.
Might not the Buddha have been saying that the self is none of these constituents, nor all of them in combination, but something other, something that owns, uses and directs these  faculties?
This is a question which we in the West need to ask ourselves, for too often we identify the self with the body, or feeling or thinking or consciousness.
What happens when we sleep or are unconscious?
Is there not a deep self that keeps active in the subconscious, expressing in dreams the thoughts that it evades in conscious life?
There are references to a self in the Scriptures attributed to the Buddha.
In one of the poems of the early Buddhist saints there occur the following two stanzas:
Within this little five-doored hut an ape
Doth prowl, and round and round from door to door
He hies, rattling with blows again, again.
Half ape! run thou not forth.
For thee
‘Tis not herein as it was wont to be,
Wisdom doth hold thee captive.
Never more
Shalt roam far hence (in freedom as of yore).
The five doors are clearly the five senses, the restless ape is the ego, but who is it that gives the order ‘Half, ape!’?
The Dhamma-pada has two relevant verses:
Self is the lord of self, who else could be the Lord?
With self
well subdued, a man finds a Lord such as few can find.
Rouse thyself by thyself, examine thyself by thyself, thus
self
protected and attentive wilt thou live happily, O monk.
For self is the lord of self,
self is the refuge of self,
therefore curb thyself as the merchant curbs a noble horse.
A passage reminiscent of the Buddha's final word to Ananda.
There is clearly a self which needs to be repudiated, an ever-changing, superficial, grasping, possessive thing, the stream of feelings, thoughts and desires, which insists on taking over the  direction of life.
This is surely the self spoken of in modern terms as the ego, the lower nature which St Paul urges Christians to crucify, so that the true self, created by God and nourished by the Spirit of Christ, may take over.
So there is much for Buddhists and Christians to discuss together, much indeed for Buddhists to discuss among themselves, for in the early days there was a group of atta-vadins , people who believed in a self, while in Maha-yana, the Buddhism of the north, a more developed doctrine of salvation and grace would seem to make belief in selfhood logical.
Another point at which Buddhist and Christian thought touch is in their respective views of what is wrong with man.
I cannot do better than quote a semi-paragraph from The Grail Legend by Emma Jung and Marie Louise Von Franz (English translation 1971):
The growth of consciousness about myself proceeds simultaneously with an awareness of guilt.
This realisation is already expressed in the bible story of Paradise, providing the occasion for the concept of original sin, as well as the Eastern belief in Karma, equivalent to a debt that has to be paid, which the individual brings with him into his present life.
Buddhists believe that Gautama the Buddha was the successor to a long line of earlier Buddhas, all distinguished by shrewdness, wisdom, love or sacrifice.
Many believe that there is a final Buddha still to come, who will be the Buddha of Love, as Gautama was the Buddha of enlightenment and wisdom.
This final Buddha is known as Maitri, Maitreya or Arimaddeyya .
In the answers to the questionnaire circulated by Purser and Saunders, a monk living among the Shans near the Chinese border described the transformation which would take place when the Maitri Buddha comes: ‘’ the mountains will be levelled and world become a vast plain full of orchards, gardens and rice fields.
Man then will be without an enemy among men and without fear of ravening  beasts.
It will be an age of plenty and good will.’
This winsome description fits in with the descriptions of the messianic age in the book of Isaiah, with the wolf lying down with the lamb, the lion and the ox eating straw together, and the little child playing happily and fearlessly with them and even putting its little hand unhurt into the hole of the poisonous viper.
Buddhists with this expectation of Maitri, Jews with their longing for the messianic age, Christians with their hope of the second coming of Christ, can talk together about the golden age ahead — their respective eschatologies, their glimpses of an eternal city, the abiding home of the human spirit.
Reviewing my years in Burma, it is I hope clear how one who went out to preach a gospel also heard another gospel, a complementary one, and learned from the gentle, tolerant Buddhists of Burma something close to what the Buddha tried to teach.
Strengthening the Foundations
Just before I went on my first furlough after five years' service, the Bishop of Rangoon, Norman Tubbs, called me and told me that on my return from furlough he wanted me to take over the training of the Burmese clergy.
He had previously appointed me as an examining chaplain, as most of the duties involved were in connection with the ordination of European clergy.
The training of the vernacular clergy had been in the hands of Arthur Dilworth, the first time that a missionary had been completely set aside for this important task.
Arthur had set up a rural-type training settlement on an island in the middle of the Kokine lake, just outside the university of Rangoon.
Under the bishop's plan he and I were to change places, and while I was on furlough he was to keep both jobs going, and I would do the same on my return.
When both of us were back the new arrangements would come into full working.
Another temporary need fitted in to this plan, for Robert Slater, the Anglican chaplain at the university, was also to go on leave, and I was to keep services going in the little wooden Anglican church on the university side of the lake, as well as the other two quite heavy responsibilities.
Out of all this crowded year came the thought that the divinity school might well be accommodated in the ample compound of the university chapel.
It was thought that this would stimulate our divinity students in being close to the university and so involved in contact with university students who would in future years be leaders of the nation, just as we hoped the divinity students would become leaders of the Church.
When Robert Slater returned he accepted this idea with enthusiasm, and it was he  who planned the new hostel and took a very active hand in raising the modest sum necessary for the building.
At the same time it was agreed that we should call the divinity school by the name ‘College of Holy Cross’, which would give it added dignity and incentive.
 This missions, chaplaincies and institutions of the diocese all combined generously to provide the necessary money, grants were secured from SPG and from SPCK, and in just over two years the new building was raised, waiting for the foundation stone to be laid during the opportune visit of the Metropolitan of Calcutta, the Most Reverend Foss Westcott, son of the famous biblical scholar and bishop of Durham.
While on furlough in England my thoughts had naturally been on the new tasks ahead.
Missionary interest had been greatly stirred by the work in training ordinands in what was then the Gold Coast, by Dom Bernard Clements OSB.
I went to visit him at the Benedictine monastery at Nashdom and asked him for any insights which he could give me from his experience in Accra.
He emphasised the need for devotional discipline and training in holiness, and added that in West Africa he had introduced a choir practice on every day of the working week.
This immediately caught my imagination, for in the indigenous churches in Burma we had no musical instruments and no choirs.
The priest had to act as both choirmaster and precentor, setting the pitch and intoning the first line of each hymn, as well as training his people to sing the Merbecke setting which Father Jackson had adapted for Burmese use.
Starting each hymn on the right note was a great problem for most of us, but I found that if I did not think too deeply about this but started off almost instinctively I generally hit something like the right note, thanks to my years as a choir boy in Maidenhead.
But there were mistakes and sometimes a wrong tune was precented which did not fit the words, and on one or two occasions the congregation took up a tune of their own which was not intended in my precenting.
Once the new building was in use, we started the daily choir practices.
At the same time we began another daily exercise in a  period of devotional Bible study.
At 9.30 each morning staff and students would meet in the little oratory of the hostel, a completely bare room with just a crucifix on the wall.
We followed the Bible Reading Fellowship monthly notes.
A student would read the passage for the day, I would explain any background needed and then we would all keep silence for a quarter of an hour to let the Scripture passage make its own impression.
We would then spend a few moments sharing any relevant and deep intuition that had come to any of us, and it was remarkable to see what a full and varied message the daily passage gave us.
Before long, the diocese appointed a sub-warden, a Canadian priest with a splendid knowledge of the Old Testament, and a ‘’ young'' Anglo-Indian priest whose main study had been the New  Testament .
Quite a number of the students knew no English when they arrived, and the first year was spent in giving them a working knowledge.
The teaching had to be simple and as there was no appropriate textbook, summary notes had to be dictated.
I was the only one of the three who had any confidence in Burmese, and so was able to be bilingual in teaching and in giving notes.
It was quite an exciting and exacting task to work out the meaning of basic Christian terms, for in Burmese almost all the abstract nouns and religious words came from the religious language of Buddhism.
After five years my two colleagues left, one to return to Canada and the other to become assistant priest at Rangoon cathedral, so I was left to do my best with all the subjects of the curriculum, except for occasional help from visiting clergy or teachers.
This one-man effort had its advantages, for it meant that one mind was responsible for the training, rather like the method which our Lord followed with his disciples, or the Buddha with his.
It also did me a world of good, for I had to study the basic faith, teaching and life and express it in as simple words as possible.
This gave me a deeper basis for my own thinking, devotion and ministry.
It meant however that we had little time to relate our studies at any deep level to Buddhism, but it seemed unanswerable that people must have a deep understanding of their own faith before  they can go on to study that of other people.
However, we were able to study the basic history of Buddhism, the life of the Buddha and the simplified summaries which every Buddhist learns.
The work at Holy Cross became further integrated when Robert Slater became the chaplain of Rangoon cathedral.
He had lectured on philosophy in the university and had made numerous friendly contacts which were of great use to myself, though I was unable to follow on his very able lectures to university students.
There were two colleges in the university, one a government institution with very able staff, mainly European in my early years, and the other Judson College, founded and maintained by the American Baptist Church which was the biggest Church in Burma.
We at Holy Cross were able to have a happy relationship with the Baptists at Judson College, and I was invited to give a regular course in the comparative study of religion, which I attempted to do in the way which would now be described as that of dialogue.
The discussions at the end of each lecture were animated and sometimes a little heated, for Hindu students, Muslims and Buddhists were a little critical at having to attend any Christian lecture and were very emphatic that they much preferred their own religion to that of Christianity.
The relationship between staff and students of University College, apart from the pastoral care of the few Anglican students and staff, involved me increasingly in a study of the history and culture of Burma.
There was a Burma Research Society in which both Burmese and European scholars took part, and I was able to learn much from its regular lectures and its quarterly journal.
My closest friend in the university was Professor B.R. Pearn, first Registrar and then Professor of History.
He had been secretary of the BRS and when he went on furlough I was asked to take on his duties.
When he returned he became editor, and a year or two later I had to fill in again for his editorial duties.
It was a most fruitful involvement and I can never be grateful enough for what I learned about the long history of Burma and the Buddhist culture which was woven into the life of the people.
In 1928 a new Prayer Book had been authorised for use in the  Anglican Church in England.
Naturally the overseas extensions of the Anglican way of life were interested to revise their own prayer books.
The translation of the new book was in the hands of a very scholarly missionary, Charles Garrad, and before long he enlisted me as his assistant.
With meticulous care and wide knowledge of Burmese, acquired through years of membership of a Bible translation committee, he bore the main burden, and I received invaluable experience and training.
When he left Burma, the task of seeing the new Prayer book through the Press fell to me.
The students at Holy Cross took their share in the very considerable proof-reading, for we included collects, epistles and gospels, which had not been done except by reference in the earlier Burmese prayer books.
With a team of proof-readers working together, we did a very competent job and there was hardly a misprint in something like four hundred pages.
The satisfaction with which the new prayer book was received and used quickly resulted in a request that the Burmese hymn book should be revised and enlarged, and I was asked to be the editor and secretary of the small revision committee.
We badly needed new hymns, more critically translated, and I, with a Burmese colleague, was able to add something like eighty new hymns.
I well remember the first one to be accepted, ‘’ Firmly I believe and truly’, which was sung for the first time at the dedication of Holy Cross College.
Almost all the hymns were just translations of English hymns, working very much on English rhythm and rhyme-principle.
We had not the experts in Burmese poetry who were really needed for this task, only a handful of hymns in the true Burmese style were available, and these had been composed earlier by Father Jackson.
Following Burmese patterns the lines were usually of four syllables with the rhyme coming back diagonally from the fourth word of the first line to the third of the second, the second of the third and the first of the last line.
At the time of this translation we were not sufficiently in touch with Burmese poets and authors or with Buddhist monks, who together might have helped us to be more truly indigenous.
However, we did our best at that stage, and perhaps Christian  poets in Burmese literature will arise and help our people to produce hymns more satisfying to the Burmese spirit and understandable to our Buddhist friends.
The principle on which students were admitted to the Holy Cross was for testing and training, with no guarantee that they would finally be ordained.
In the course of ten years, some fifty students were trained, about half of whom went on to ordination and a few of the others were ordained after my time.
We tried to live together in a very simple fashion of worship and life.
Staff and students sat on mats on the floor in chapel, meals were taken at little low tables, squatting on very low stools, the food was not luxurious but sufficiently nourishing and appetising.
The students came from different races in Burma — a few Burmans, more Karens, a Chin or two, a Kachin and several Anglo-Burmans and one Indian; so living, learning and worshipping together called for and indeed produced a spirit of racial understanding and unity.
Of the students in my time, one has since become an archbishop, John Aung Hla; another, John Maung Pe became the first bishop of Akyab, and another who came for a short term of study and an even shorter curacy was John Richardson, the saintly schoolteacher, catechist, priest and bishop in turn of Car Nicobar, where under his influence the whole of the island population, including witch doctors, became Christian.
The Japanese invasion brought an end to this initial stage of Holy Cross; the war years were to be a severe testing of the training given.
I look back with great thankfulness to God and deep affection to Holy Cross students for what was a most happy and satisfying central period of my life.
Learning to Pray
One of my most treasured possessions is a small book of prayers and meditations, now very dog-eared and patched up.
It was written and circulated privately by Evelyn Underhill for the retreats she gave at Pleshey and elsewhere.
An introductory note says that she used to read prayers very slowly with frequent pauses, which led almost instantaneously to prayer.
I have forgotten how I picked up my copy, it may have been at a retreat which I was asked to lead at Pleshey.
When I discover from time to time this tiny book tucked away in my bookcases, I happily peruse it again and always find something, perhaps unnoticed before, which leads me into deeper and more silent meditation.
Among the many Old Testament characters I learned much from the prophet Elijah.
After his sensational (and bloodthirsty?) triumph over the priests of Baal on Mount Carmel, he was told of the threat to his life by Ahab's foreign queen Jezebel, and decided to flee down to the desert around Mount Sinai, the home of many prophets and a place of pilgrimage for many more.
On his journey, fearful and probably suffering from reactionary depression, he slept a night under a broom bush, where he dreamed that an angel touched him on the shoulder and bade him rise and eat.
As he did so, he found a jar of water and a flat loaf of bread still warm from being baked in the hot ashes.
He obeyed the dream voice and then lay down to sleep again.
The dream recurred, and this time the voice urged him to ‘’ rise and eat lest the journey be too great for thee’.
He did so, and when he woke next morning felt refreshed and encouraged.
The Scripture account says that in the strength of that food he was able to  accomplish the journey still many days on.
It was not a magical experience, enabling him to go without food for the rest of his flight, but it was a meal for the spirit that kept him nourished and firm in his intention until he reached Horeb the mountain of God (1 Kings 19:1–8).
Christians generally associate this incident with the Eucharist, in which our souls are nourished through all the difficulties and adventures of life.
Undoubtedly this is so, but God can nourish the soul in additional ways.
Every touch with God and every touch of God can strengthen the soul for the journey through life and cleanse and sanctify and prepare it for life in the world to come.
I was often reminded of Elijah's revealing dream, for I often passed the traditional site of the sleep under the broom tree, now commemorated by St Elijah's monastery, halfway between Jerusalem and Bethlehem.
Arrived at Sinai, Elijah sheltered in one of the caves with which the sacred mount is honeycombed.
Here he underwent a fourfold experience, the memory of which teaches me more about his experience and the life of prayer.
One day as he was meditating in his cave there came an accusing voice within him which he immediately interpreted as a word from God.
The voice said reproachfully, ‘’ What are you doing here, Elijah?’
He poured out his heart about the faithlessness of Israel, his own loyalty to God, his loneliness in his dangerous situation, and a feeling that he alone was left to defend the divine cause.
Then there followed four episodes that banished his depression.
In the first as he stood at the mouth of the cave, a typhoon burst on the mountainside, bringing rocks crashing down.
Elijah was unperturbed by this: ‘’ the Lord was not in the wind.
'' A day or two later an earthquake shook the whole area and the same thing happened: ‘’ the Lord was not in the earthquake.’
This was followed by a desert fire.
Having lived in Australia for some years and witnessed forest fires, leaping from tree to tree and running along the thin covering of bush and grass, I could enter imaginatively into the prophet's experience.
His verdict was, ‘’ the Lord was not in the fire!’
The writer of the book of Kings then speaks of ‘’ a still small voice’, and this time Elijah wraps himself in his cloak, and hears the reproaching voice again.
‘’ What are you doing here, Elijah?’
A modern translation has ‘’ a sound of gentle stillness’instead of the still small voice.
Both phrases have spoken to me.
The still small voice suggests a quiet listening, a quietening of the noises in the heart, as well as the noises going on outside.
The sound of gentle stillness reminds me of a field of ripening corn stirred by a gentle summer breeze, or the sound of waves on a sandy beach, some distance away.
Elijah heard a divine message sending him back to troubled Israel, with intuition as to definite things to do, one of which was to find a successor to carry on the prophetic ministry.
So he must have been elderly when this Sinai experience took place.
He went back as directed, and found the man he had in mind, who was ploughing his family fields.
He placed his own mantle on Elisha's shoulders, who said his farewell to his parents, and became Elijah's companion and understudy, following him faithfully on a journey of farewells, and finally inheriting the mantle which fell off Elijah's shoulders as he was actually or mystically carried off in ‘’ a whirlwind into heaven’.
The Elijah-Elisha saga made a further deep impression on me.
Elisha was a gentler person than his master and proved to be a wise adviser to the kings of Israel, with the result that the danger from the Syrians was outwitted and avoided.
The Syrian king, told by his captains that Elisha was the shrewd adviser, determined to capture him, and surrounded the hill town of Dothan where the prophet was said to be.
In the morning, when Elisha's young servant discovered the surrounding troops, he reported his alarm to his master, to be told, ‘’ Fear not, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.’
Elisha then prayed that the Lord would open the eyes of his young attendant.
His prayer was answered, and he saw that ‘’ the mountain was full of chariots of fire round about Elisha!’(2 Kings 6:8–17).
The hosts of God were no longer as hostile troops, but as guardian angels protecting God's obedient servants.
The restoration of sight was made a general activity of Jesus in his answer to John the Baptiser, who was imprisoned by Herod, but seemed to have had doubts about whether Jesus was the expected one.
‘’ Go and tell John what you hear and see,’was the instruction of Jesus to John's messengers; ‘’the blind receive their sight and the lame walk, lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them’(Matthew 11:4–5).
Our spiritual eyes need to be opened, that we may see into the spiritual order, and become aware of the constant activities of God.
Anyone who has enrolled himself as a disciple of Jesus will want to study the Gospels to discover his teaching about prayer.
In the Sermon on the Mount we are told, ‘’ When you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you.’
The room is not the material one with four walls and a door, but it is the quiet one in the depth of the heart (Matthew 6:6).
Later, the only Gentile writer in the New Testament tells us that on one occasion the disciples found Jesus praying and when he had finished they asked him, ‘’ Lord, teach us to pray.’
In response to this request he gave them the Lord's Prayer, in which we pray first of all for God Himself, that all may know him and revere Him, that his mile may be extended over all, and that his will, so right and good and loving, may be done on earth, as it is by angels, prophets and saints in heaven.
Then we are to pray for the things we need for the doing of that holy will — food for the body and soul, forgiveness for the failures and sins of the past, and help to forgive others who sin against us, protection in temptation and deliverance from evil.
The first two words of that universal prayer are perhaps the most important, for they express our faith in and our filial relation to Him.
They are so full of meaning, that if we got no further than these two opening words, our hearts would be warm with the thought of his loving relationship with us, especially if we use his own loving familiar word,Abba .
The last words of that great prayer express the worship with which we began: ‘’ For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever’, the final  word denoting our agreement with all that precedes it: Amen.
So be it!
As I look back to my inner training in prayer, I see an early stage when it consisted of asking God's blessing on myself and those I loved, then through a stage of mental meditation, and finally a merging into contemplation, which did not need words, but a silent awareness of the presence of God, which sometimes continued for a quarter of an hour or more.
When the Second World War broke out in Europe, it was difficult to get supplies of helpful books, and when the Japanese came into it after the disaster of Pearl Harbour, I myself, as well as the clergy and students for whom I had a pastoral responsibility, felt the need of prayers to meet the threatening danger, as well as the provision of prayers which would express a Christ-like spirit about war, enemies in war, dangers in war and sufferers in war.
I tried to meet this personal and pastoral need in a four-page leaflet with printed prayers for the occasions mentioned above.
That was the beginning of a series of small books of prayers spread over the next fifty years, which were prayed first and then made available for others who felt the same spiritual need as myself.
From that small beginning I noted down quotations that I found meaningful, prayers that I found helpful to my spiritual life, occasionally writing a prayer that almost wrote itself after a meditation.
That continued with some effort for the next twenty-five years, when I had the good fortune to be introduced to Lady Collins, who had inspired a succession of what was eventually called Fount Books, some reprints of more expensive books, some specially written for her series, both varieties being published in paperback, at the lowest possible price.
Our friendship developed and she invited me to write a Fount book.
Pondering on her invitation, suddenly the idea came to me that my collection of quotations and prayers could form the basis of a helpful book, and in a short time an anthology took shape under the title of Journey for a Soul .
It was finally accepted during the 1973 war between Israel and the surrounding Arab nations.
In the sixteen  years since, it has sold 75,000 copies, and people are still finding it helpful, and I myself often take a chapter for meditation, when my own spirit feels low and dry.
There had been several small books published earlier.
Among them was In His Name , which was put together in response to the need expressed by the Conference of the International Missionary Council held at Willengen in Germany in 1952, for a book which would help missionary-minded Christians pray for the Church and the World in a way integrated in the full range of Christian faith and worship.
In my five years in Jerusalem, I used to spend two early hours each day in the private chapel of Bishop's House.
From this devotional discipline there developed a book of prayers from the many duties of an  archbishop in that troubled area, which SPCK published in a beautiful form with the title of Jerusalem Prayers for the World Today .
The opening prayer was one prayed by a Muslim woman who lived in Jerusalem around the year AD 800.
Rabia's prayer has been a most inspiring one to me, living in Jerusalem 1100 years after she did.
I learnt it by heart and pray it often:
O my God,
if I worship thee in desire for heaven,
exclude me from heaven;
If I worship thee for fear of hell,
burn me in hell.
But if I worship thee for thyself alone,
then withhold not from me thine eternal beauty.
That prayer, convinced me, if I needed convincing, that God was active among people of other faiths and traditions than my own.
Since retiring in 1973, I have been able to continue my early morning devotion, from which has emerged every six months a small book of personal prayers or musings about prayer.
One such little book was the Practice of Prayer .
Another, which I value highly and use almost daily, was Understanding the Psalms , which gained much from the Jewish commentary on the Psalms by Rabbi  A. Cohen, published by the Soncino Press in 1945.
Both of these small books are published by Mowbrays of Oxford.
There is one other book which I must mention in this survey which is in danger of becoming a self-advertising catalogue.
This is The Oxford Book of Prayer .
Soon after my retirement the Oxford University Press approached me with the suggestion that I might collect and edit an anthology of prayers.
I did not feel capable of doing this adequately, so I suggested that they should approach Mother Jane of the Sisters of the Love of God at Fairacres in east Oxford.
She replied that she and her community would co-operate in this task on one condition, namely that I should be the General Editor.
My response was to make one condition of my own — that the anthology should include prayers from other religions.
This was willingly accepted by Mother Jane and the Oxford University Press.
So began eight years of happy fellowship, under an editorial committee of six members.
The book was finished in 1985, and in the first year 30,000 copies of the hardback edition were sold; later a paperback was published, and still further The Pocket Oxford Book of Prayer , in an attractive and durable format, for long life with regular use.
The prices fixed by OUP were extremely reasonable.
The members of the editorial group spontaneously agreed that the royalties should be devoted to spiritual and charitable purposes.
During that eight years' task, those at the heart of it were learning themselves how to pray more deeply and contemplatively.
I myself was greatly encouraged and inspired by Eric Milner-White, Dean of York and before that Dean of King's College, Cambridge.
His early books were Daily Prayer , compiled jointly with Canon G.W. Briggs of Worcester in 1941, and After the Third Collect .
The book of his that still nourishes my inner spirit is My God My Glory , published by SPCK in 1954.
His Procession of Passion Prayers gives welcome prayers for devotion in meditation on our Lord's revelation of God's eternal love.
The following prayers have inspired me more than any comments can adequately express my gratitude:Help Me to Pray 
My God and Father
help me to pray
as my first work,
my unremitting work,
my highest, finest, and dearest work,
As the work I do for Thee, and by Thee,
and with Thee,
for thy other children and
for the whole world.
Let my prayer be a channel for your love, your grace,
your peace for those for whom I pray, and for
myself, O dear and blessed Lord.
Right Choice
Lord, in the choices of every day,
Grant me to choose aright
as in thy presence and to thy glory:
to discriminate not only
between the good and the evil,
but between the good and the better,
and to do the best.
Before Bible Study
Convey to me, O Holy Spirit,
through the familiar phrases, fresh understanding,
through passages passed over or unapprehended,
new treasure;
through thy grace — insight, conviction, guidance,
revelation, glory.
Crucified with Christ
O God our Father, help us to nail to the Cross of
thy dear Son our selfish nature,
the wrong desires of the heart,
the sinful devisings of the mind,


the corrupt apprehensions of the eyes,
the cruel words of the tongue,
the ill employment of hands and feet;
that the old man being crucified and done away,
the new man may live and grow
in the glorious likeness of the
same thy Son Jesus Christ;
Who liveth and reigneth
with Thee and the Holy Ghost,
one God, world without end.
In addition to that great teacher of prayer, there were others to whom I owe a debt of gratitude.
Among them is Boethius (480–524), whose lovely prayer I regularly use;
O Father, give the spirit power to climb
To the fountain of all light, and be purified.
Break through the mists of earth, the weight of the clod,
Shine forth in splendour, Thou that art calm weather,
And quiet resting place for faithful souls.
To see Thee is the end and the beginning,
Thou carriest us, and Thou dost go before,
Thou art the journey, and the journey's end.
Another is Alcuin (735–804), who was called from York by the Emperor Charlemagne to be head of his Palace School.
In a letter written shortly before his death to his friend Adelhard, Archbishop of Canterbury, he foresees that day and requests his old friend:
That day, remember me, and say:
‘’ O Christ most gentle,
Have mercy on a poor man, Alcuin.
''
And now,
Beside the shore of the sail-winged sea
I wait the coming of God's silent dawn.
Do thou help this my journey with thy prayer.
I ask this, with a devoted heart.
I cannot forget the visits I paid to Norwich and sat quietly in the reconstructed cell of Julian the hermitess of Norwich, meditating on the Sixteen Shewings of Divine Love which she received in May 1373.
This is the first book known to have been written by a woman in English, and is recognised as one of the great spiritual writings.
One of the passages that I can never forget says
He showed me a little thing, the size of a hazelnut, in the palm of my hand, and it was as round as a ball.
I looked at it with my mind's eye and I thought, ‘’ What can this be?’
And answer came, ‘’ It is all that is made.’
I marvelled that it could last, for I thought it might have crumbled to nothing, it was so small.
And the answer came into my mind, ‘’ It lasts and ever shall because God loves it.’
And all things have being through the love of God.
In this little thing I saw three truths.
The first is God made it.
The second is God loves it.
The third is that God looks after it.
About pain, trouble and distress, Julian says another unforgettable thing.
He did not say, ‘’ You shall not be tempest-tossed, You shall not be work-weary, you shall not be discomforted.’
But he said, ‘’ You shall not be overcome.
''
Julian urges us, ‘’ Every morning put your mind into your heart and stand in the presence of God all the day long.’
She insists that we should see God primarily as all loving, and claims that ‘’ Love is his meaning'' and that we are all enfolded in that love.
Another writer of the fourteenth century who has helped my spiritual life is the anonymous author of the Cloud of Unknowing , another early devotional book in English.
He teaches that all thoughts, all concepts, all images must be buried beneath a cloud  of forgetting, while our love divested of thought must rise toward God, hidden in a cloud of unknowing: ‘He is not to be gotten or holden by thought but on'y by love.’
A longer quotation speaks of the cloud between God and the praying soul:
For at the first time thou findest but a darkness and, as it were, a cloud of unknowing, thou knowest not what, save that thou feelest in thy will a naked intent unto God.
This darkness and this cloud is betwixt thee and thy God, and telleth thee that thou mayest neither see him clearly by light of understanding, nor feel him in sweetness of love in thine affection, and therefore shape thee to bide in this darkness as long as thou mayest, crying after him that thou lovest…
Then he will sometimes peradventure send a beam of ghostly light piercing this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt thee and him, and show thee some of his privity of the which man may not nor cannot speak.
The same mystical author wrote another treatise entitled The Epistle of Privy Counsel , in which he speaks more simply;
That I am and how that I am, as in nature and in grace, all I have it of thee, Lord, and thou it art.
And all I offer it unto thee, principally to the praising of thee, for the help of all mine even Christians and of me.
There are others in the six hundred years between us today and Julian and our unidentified author of The Cloud .
I must limit myself to two others who have thrilled and inspired me.
The first is George MacDonald (1824–1905).
He was educated at Aberdeen University.
He became a Congregational minister, but his views about God's inclusive care for the ‘’ heathen’and his views about the divine revelation in the Bible, brought him into conflict with the narrow-mindedness of some of his congregation, and in 1893 he left the ministry to devote himself to writing.
My interest in MacDonald began when I was given a well-worn copy of his Unspoken Sermons .
I managed to secure all three volumes and also a copy of the Miracles of our Lord , and learnt much about prayer, and trust in God.
I was grateful for C.S. Lewis's George MacDonald Anthology , in which he declared that his conversion to Christianity was humanly due to the posthumous influence of MacDonald.
His series of short, pithy quotations, mainly from the Unspoken Sermons , stimulated my heart and mind.
George MacDonald was a friend of John Ruskin, Lewis Carroll, Charles Kingsley, F.D. Maurice, and many others.
He wrote a whole series of novels in which the characters personified some of his leading insights.
He said that he took to writing novels to support himself and his family and to enable him to devote himself to his religious writings and poems.
C.S. Lewis followed MacDonald in writing imaginative and mythical stories about the spiritual life.
If any readers want to learn more about MacDonald, I would urge them to read William Raeper's splendid biography of the great Victorian visionary, published as recently as 1987, and now in a paperback edition.
It will be a great happiness to meet George MacDonald in eternity, if I get there as well.
The other writer who has deeply interested me is Jan Struther, the Mrs Miniver of the Second World War.
I first came across her in a marriage hymn in Songs of Praise , which I still feel is the best that has ever been composed for a Christian wedding.
The first verse gives one the feeling of the whole Poem:
God, whose eternal mind
Rules the round world over,
Whose wisdom lies behind
All that men discover:
Grant that we, by thought and speech,
May grow nearer each to each:
Lord, let sweet converse bind
Lover unto lover,
Bless us, God of loving.
A morning hymn, sometimes used in Advent, sings:
High o'er the lonely hills
Black turns to grey,
Birdsong the valley fills,
Mists fold away;
Grey wakes to green again,
Beauty is seen again
Gold and serene again
Dawneth the day.
So, o'er the hills of life,
Stormy, forlorn,
Out of the cloud and strife
Sunrise is born;
Swift grows the light for us;
Ended is night for us;
Soundless and bright for us
Breaketh God's morn.
All the twelve hymns included in Songs of Praise could be happily quoted, if time and space allowed.
I must content myself with the last verse of a hymn in honour of St Bartholomew:
Time, take our words and do what thou wilt with them;
Death, take our hands and all that we built with them;
Only our faith, our soul's endeavour,
Take it, Lord, make it, Lord, shine for ever.
There are some recent lessons that I have learnt about prayer, and meditation.
I have become aware of three stages, all three of which deserve equal attention and time spent on them.
They are preparation, actual prayer either vocal or silent, and listening to God.
In the first, we detach ourselves from our preoccupations, even  our plans for his service, quieten our minds and fix our attention on God, lifting our hearts in hope, trust, and love.
In the second, we thank God for all that He is and does, especially for his revelation in Jesus Christ.
Then we bring before Him our needs, hold before Him those whom we love and for whom we have a concern.
We may pour out our hearts about the situation in which we find ourselves, expressing our trust, hope and confidence.
Finally, we open mind and heart, so that He may shed his light on our path, and tell us anything that He wants us to do.
I find often that nothing clear and definite comes until sometime later, possibly on the next morning, sometimes when carrying out the seemingly pedestrian duties of the day, when a short, crystallised thought comes into the mind with clarity and authority.
It isn't that God delays his guidance and message, but that our perception takes time to put it into words.
Another insight that has been coming to me consistently is that instead of beseeching God to undertake certain actions or to grant certain mercies or blessings we should state our faith that He is already and always at work in the way that we desire, so that our petition becomes an expansion of our address to Him, a relative clause expressing our conviction of faith that He is already doing what we were about to request Him to do.
Thus, ‘’ O God, You are always more ready to hear than we are to pray’; or, ‘’O God, You are preparing for those who love You, such good things as pass man's understanding, You pour into our hearts such love toward You, and help us to love You above all things, and give us your promises which exceed all that we desire.’
Alongside this, I have to remember the teaching of Jesus, ‘’ Ask, and it will be given you, seek and you will find, knock and it will be opened to you.
'' It is as if we have to be deeply conscious of our need and eager for God's promised blessings.
So far, I have thought mainly in terms of our personal relationship with God.
I have also to think of how our prayers may be helpful to God, especially in regard to desperate situations in the world.
My hope is that by praying about such situations I  am helping to keep God from being pushed out, forgotten or ignored.
The second clue is that most man-made tragedies arise from wrong attitudes within the minds and wills of people.
So the struggle is basically a spiritual one.
Our wrestling, as St Paul reminds us, is not against human foes, but against cosmic powers, against organisations and powers in the spiritual milieu.
The psychologist Jung believed that there is a common unconscious in which we are all included and so able to influence the psychic dimension in some degree.
I often think that our sociological relationships are like an action in which each person is a small knot so that we can influence the common situation in four directions.
Further, as we link these seemingly hopeless situations to God in prayer, he will help us to see hidden possibilities within them.
I must never forget that He can influence us to right interpretation and thinking and even to some inspired initiative of love.
A very last thought is that we must do everything possible to answer our own prayers.
Not all that happens is God's will.
There are situations for which we humans are responsible, either by neglect or corporate selfishness.
We need penitence for these, and a determination to set them right, and above all the confident belief that God is always at work to bring blessing out of everything, however seemingly tragic and hopeless.
All manner of thing shall be well.
The War Comes to Burma
Christmas Day 1941 saw a bad air-raid on Rangoon in which many were killed and injured.
A party of Holy Cross students and I went to the Dufferin Hospital, most of whose nurses had fled.
We washed the blood-stained floors, while my wife and other missionary workers helped in the wards and the laundry.
As the fear of raids increased, I became an ambulance driver, on duty mainly through the nights, while women drivers took the day shifts.
Fortunately there were never again as many casualties, so our service consisted mainly in standing by.
Japanese troops moved into Burma from Thailand and Malaya and advanced threateningly on Rangoon, so on 30th January 1942 my wife and three children left the city on a crowded river steamer, to go north to Mandalay and from there on by road to Maymyo.
On the journey our eldest child picked up bubonic plague, and when the steamer moored at Chauk my wife managed to get medicines from the BOC Hospital shortly before it closed.
With the fall of Singapore the fate of Rangoon seemed sealed and on 19th February I paid my last visit to the Delta, to bring back our missionary nurse and to confer with village clergy and elders and teachers about what should be done if the worst happened.
The scene will always live in my memory.
We were squatting cross-legged on the floor of the mission house at Nyaung-ngu, half a dozen priests and a dozen men and women teachers.
The first question to be settled was what the missionaries should do.
I explained that we men were ready to stay if the meeting felt it was right for us to do so.
Ma Pwa Sein, the stalwart  headmistress of St Mary's, Kemmendine, which had transferred to the Delta at the outbreak of war, was very emphatic that we should not fall into the hands of the Japanese.
Another speaker said that our presence would only draw attention and suspicion to their villages.
The tension was relieved by Own Bwint, our senior Karen priest.
With a kindly and humorous look at me he said, ‘’ Well, we could dress you in Burmese clothes, we could darken your skin and dye your hair.
You speak Burmese well enough.
But we could do nothing with that English nose of yours.
The meeting decided that the missionaries should move to Upper Burma, for at that time we fully believed the government's assurance that we should be able to hold part of Burma at any rate.
So that evening Sister Websper and I, with a dozen or more girl students, scrambled on board an already crowded steamer, which waited in mid-stream while we pulled out to it in sampans and canoes.
Neither we, nor the shadowy crowds on the bank calling out blessings and affectionate greetings, realised that it was a last farewell, though we had misgivings.
Yet it was so, for when we docked at Rangoon next morning civil evacuation had been ordered, to be completed within forty-eight hours, and the wharves were black with excited refugees, who insisted on crowding on to the boat before we could get off.
I spent the rest of 20th February, which happened to be my fortieth birthday, taking the girl students back to their homes in and around Rangoon.
The next day I went to see the military commander to ask for permission to stay on to look after stray people and perhaps give pastoral care to the officials and troops left in the city.
He refused, so after a visit to the General Hospital, almost empty of patients and deserted by Burmese staff, with the remaining civilian doctors and sisters about to leave, I set off sadly with several stragglers and drove through the night to Prome.
At Prome my car, a rather seedy second-hand one, broke its big end.
No spare parts were available but a small bus-load of Indian servants from our diocesan girls’ school in Rangoon picked me up and took me on with them.
At Pyinmana I called on  Brayton Case, the gallant Baptist agricultural missionary who had for twenty years organised a training farm.
He was feeling critical about a number of his American missionary colleagues who weeks earlier had left their posts to obey the early warnings of the US Embassy to leave Burma.
A heart-warming incident took place at a little up-country town where we rested to get a midday meal.
I went into what seemed to me a Burmese restaurant.
The hostess came to greet me, and in reply to my question said that chicken curry was cooking, which I ordered with satisfaction.
After making a good meal I asked how much I owed.
‘Nothing,’ was the reply of the smiling Burmese matron.
‘But you can't run a business on these lines.’
‘That is true,’ she said, and then with a friendly twinkle, ‘This isn't a restaurant; it's a private house.’
I mention this incident because it is typical of Burmese friendliness and hospitality, and during the retreat many people like myself experienced similar kindliness.
Finally I reached Maymyo, to find my family camping out in a very small house, all three children down with scarlet fever.
In Maymyo I was at first rather at a loose end, for most of the civilian families had left, and the Establishment chaplain was there to carry on the church services and to look after the few people left.
So I began to visit the civil hospital which had been taken over by the military for wounded and sick men from the British forces further south.
It soon became apparent that men were being discharged too soon, to make room for a growing number of casualties.
A convalescent home was needed, so I got permission to use two houses which had been the homes of senior staff of the Bombay Burma Trading Company.
These were used to house twenty to twenty-five convalescent officers.
For the other ranks we took over St Michael's girls' school which was able to take about seventy men.
My wife acted as housekeeper for the officers' houses and Mrs Weaverhurst, the headmistress, took charge of St Michael's.
It was not easy to get the necessary equipment, bedding, etc., for army regulations did not deal with the issue of such things to an unattached missionary.
However, there seemed to be nothing against lending equipment to non-military personnel, and we got most of what was wanted.
Lady Dorman-Smith, the wife of the Governor, came to our rescue with two generous gifts of money.
Dry and tinned stores were issued readily, but meat, vegetables and fruit were not so easy to procure, and often I went out into the surrounding villages to buy up food which normally would have come into the Maymyo bazaar.
We did our best to keep the men amused with socials and off-the-cuff concerts, but the thing which was most appreciated was the homely atmosphere provided by my wife and three children and by Mrs Weaverhurst and a few Maymyo friends still left.
As the war moved northwards, there was greater pressure on the hospital and our convalescent homes.
Stocks of petrol were low, and late one afternoon cars passing the orderly room were stopped by an irate major-general, who berated us for using valuable petrol at such a time of crisis.
Approaching the car I was driving, he reproved me, saying that a padre ought to know better.
I replied somewhat heatedly that I was more or less on duty, visiting men in the hospital.
He then asked my name, and on hearing it, asked if I was the padre at the convalescent homes, adding, ‘A damned fine job.
Pass, friend!’
The war came nearer and my family went with the last train out of Maymyo, with hundreds of Anglo-Burman mothers and children proceeding northwards to Shwebo or Myitkyina for air evacuation to Assam.
Domestic help grew more difficult, but things were eased by the arrival of the Reverend George Tidey, another SPG missionary.
There was no water-borne sanitation, and every other day Tidey and I had to empty the few sanitary buckets, burying their contents in holes dug in the garden, as well as trying to keep the houses clean and collecting fruit and vegetables.
It was clear that our troops would not be able to hold out much longer, so we got most of the convalescent men away, making for  Mohnyin where there was a small hospital organised by the Bible Churchmen's Missionary Society.
That was on Saturday, 25th April.
Two sergeants and I stayed behind to try to salvage as much as we could of our stores of food.
The next day Professor Pearn, who was working in intelligence, came in to warn me that the Japs were breaking through from Taung-gyi and that it was only a matter of hours before they would reach Maymyo.
I think it was on that Sunday, but it may have been on the Sunday before, that I gave the last message from the Burma Broadcasting Service.
The Indian in charge of it had to do all the technical work himself, and I gave the short address that had been scheduled.
I remember saying that there were dangerous days ahead which would call for faithfulness and courage, quoting the text from the Psalms: ‘He will not be afraid of any evil tidings, for his heart standeth fast in the Lord.’
I said that one day we should be back, and that in the meantime our affection for the people of Burma would not fail.
I have never met anyone who heard that broadcast, but the Indian superintendent and I felt we had seen the job through to the end.
As soon as I had finished speaking, the small emergency wireless station was dismantled, and I rushed back to my two sergeants to get ready to leave.
At nine o'clock that night we set out in the pouring rain, our car packed with people and stores of food, picking our way through lorries, mules and men on foot.
By the time we reached the Ava Bridge it had stopped raining and having got across, we just lay on the ground and got a few hours' sleep.
Refreshed, we drove on to Shwebo and had breakfast with a small group of SPG missionaries who had camped out there, looking after the stream of refugees hoping to be flown to India.
The airlift had now stopped and people were being moved on to Myitkyina, hoping to get a plane there.
In the hospital was the Reverend E.C.
Turner from St Michael's Mission to the Blind, who had been attacked by dacoits a few days earlier and left for dead a few miles out of Shwebo.
For several days he was at death's door, and a grave had been kept ready in case the worst  happened.
He was making a wonderful recovery and in the few hours we were there we managed to get him on to an ambulance train — off to Myitkyina to be flown out to India.
We motored on a further thirty miles and when the road ended were lucky to get on a goods train with our precious stock of food.
At Naba we were overtaken by the hospital train and discovered that their food supply had run out, so we handed over a whole case of sausages and one of tinned peaches.
I also heard that a party of girls from Bishop's Home orphanage school in Rangoon had got stranded at Katha and I was able to send a telegram to Jack Cardew of the Burma Railways asking him to extricate them and get them on a train to Myitkyina.
At Mohnyin ten convalescent officers and twenty-eight men, the two faithful sergeants and myself got off the hospital train and made for the hospital of the BCMS where Dr Russell and the two nursing sisters took us all in and gave medical treatment to those needing it.
Food was short and for two days I was kept running round trying to buy up supplies, with the result that I had to retire to bed with blistered feet.
The next morning orders came through that the able-bodied were to begin the trek to India and the rest get to Myitkyina to take the chance of a plane.
Dr Russell insisted that I went with the convalescent men and we were lucky to pick up one of the last trains to go northwards.
At one station we were stopped for several hours alongside a troop train on which I discovered the Reverend R.H.L. Slater, now enrolled as an army chaplain, who told me the comforting news that my wife and three children had got away from Myitkyina a day or two earlier.
This was the first news I had had of them since they had left Maymyo a fortnight earlier.
At Myitkyina we camped out for the night in a mission schoolroom and early next morning managed to get a lift out to the airstrip two miles away.
The rough emergency airfield was crowded with several hundred people, mainly women and children, and in the whole day only two planes came in, dropped some cases of food, took on wounded and as many women and children as they could pack in, and were quickly off again.
Towards nightfall most of the refugees went back into Myitkyina for the night, but the remaining convalescents and I were too tired to do this, so we stayed on the airfield.
The men asked my permission to open a case of tea and a case of tins of sausages from the stores brought by the two planes.
I had no authority to do this, but agreed that it was a sensible thing to do.
No sooner had we done so when a staff officer drove up in a car, accused us of looting and ordered us to put the tins back in the cases.
We did so, obediently, waited for an hour, then took them out again, made a fire out of the cases and ate one of the most welcome meals I have ever enjoyed — of tea and hot sausages.
Then we wrapped ourselves in every bit of clothing we could find and lay down on the ground to get some sleep.
At dawn next morning two Chinese planes came in and we got almost everyone on board and away.
Only half a dozen men and I were left, but almost at once a third plane arrived, and having been warned that they dared not wait as there were Jap planes about, we got on board and the plane took oft almost empty.
I have never felt so unhappy in my life as I did on that short airlift to Dibrugarh, leaving Burma almost entirely in the hands of the Japanese, and knowing how many hundreds of people were stranded on the railway line below Myitkyina.
A fourth plane came in at Dibrugarh while we were waiting there, and that was the last.
The next day the Japs bombed the Myitkyina airfield and air evacuation ceased.
Reflecting afterwards on that short first Burma campaign, several things came to my mind:
Most of us civilians accepted the official assurances that some part of Burma would be held, and so we stayed put.
We should have known that once Singapore fell there was little hope of holding Burma.
The Japanese had been trained in jungle warfare, and knew how to trek across country and live on the jungle.
Our troops could only move on the roads and had to be supplied with food.
I could not help feeling proud of the missionary personnel who had done so much to help the fleeing refugees at Shwebo, Mohnyin and Myitkyina, and elsewhere.
And I remembered our faithful Christians — Burmese, Karen, Chin and others — left on their own, with the certainty of being suspected as friends of the British and Americans, their hearts heavy with fear about our safety.
The Burmese people had been quietly loyal and kind.
There was little or no sabotage behind the lines.
Burmese women were at the railway stations with food, fruit and water for the refugees on the crowded trains.
General Alexander and his troops carried out a magnificent fighting retreat and held up the Japanese advance until the rains broke, thus saving four months' valuable time in which preparations could be made to repel the Japs if they attempted to invade India.
Dibrugarh was crowded with refugees.
British, Anglo-Indians and Indians did a splendid job in receiving us.
Beds were provided in churches and halls, two meals a day were available for all of us.
Slowly we made our way by steamer and train down to Calcutta, to join our families and wonder about the future.
In India we missionaries were at a loose end.
Military and government people were quickly absorbed into the war effort, but the churches were at a loss what to do with us.
My wife and I went to Poona and for nine months took charge of the Willingdon Soldiers' Club, at a time when welfare and amenities work was only just beginning.
At the end of that period, in May 1943, Hugh Wilson, who was in charge of the Rangoon diocese, Bishop West being in the USA recovering from a severe motor accident, agreed that we should move to Simla so that I might maintain liaison with the Burma Government-in-exile that had made its headquarters there.
In Exile
It was a great joy to get back to so many Burma people, government officers from almost all the departments, and a small number of Burmans, including Paw Tun, chairman of the Executive Council, Htun Aung Gyaw, the Finance Member, and three brilliant members of the Indian Civil Service from one family — Tin Tut, Kyaw Min and Kyaw Tha.
B.R. Pearn had been appointed Information Officer, and had already produced a booklet for the Indian Army HQ, compiled with the help of experienced District and Forest Officers, with valuable advice on how to live in the jungle.
With the help of departmental officers a Burma Handbook was being compiled, dealing with the country and peoples of Burma, production, communications, a short history, a valuable Who's Who, health notes, and a map with the scale of thirty-two miles to the inch.
Pearn and I were very concerned to ensure that the troops who would liberate Burma should know something of the country and its people, for the army that fought the retreat in 1942 had had little time to learn any of the background.
Few of the troops could distinguish easily between Burmans, Chinese and Japanese.
The Japanese had been very clever in disguising themselves as Burmans and sometimes as Buddhist monks, with the result that many of the troops looked upon the Burmese as a lot of traitors.
Professor Pearn and I had for the last ten years been interchangeably secretary and editor of the Burma Research Society, and when we discovered that the Society's bank had been able to get our balance safely into India before the break-up, we conceived the plan of a series of Burma Pamphlets, describing various aspects of the national life.
We were fortunate in finding  Longmans (India) interested in the project, and with the aid of a subsidy for each book were able to put the price as low as eight annas a copy, and in return for the subsidy were able to hand over a sizeable number of each book for distribution to the Army, Navy and RAF.
All the authors gave their manuscripts free, to help make Burma and its people better known, not only to the men of the forces, but more widely.
It concerned me deeply that the men going back to Burma should have a smattering of the language, especially those who would go in with the Wingate levies into occupied Burma.
So I compiled a booklet entitled Rubbing Along in Burmese , adapting the pronunciation as closely as possible to English and dispensing with niceties that involved training in phonetics.
I offered the booklet to GHQ, Simla, but after two months had had no reply.
So I went in person to enquire what had happened to it, and after several more weeks heard that a first edition of fifty thousand copies was being printed.
I never saw any acknowledgement nor received a word of thanks.
However, a year or more later I got a note from Colonel Leslie Glass saying that in a report received from an officer dropped behind the Japanese lines there occurred the statement, ‘’ I think I ought to add that I owe my life to a little booklet entitled Rubbing Along in Burmese .’
In the latter part of 1943 I was appointed Archdeacon of Rangoon, in which capacity I was enabled to visit groups of Anglo-Burman Anglicans and others who had settled in various Indian centres.
I also took part in conferences of Burma missionaries in Lahore, Lucknow and Mussourie, in which we began to think about the revival of our considerable educational work.
In a letter to my wife I spoke of a whole-day conference about the future of Judson College, in which I pressed the representatives of the American Baptist Mission to make Judson into an ecumenical college and to be ready to be integrated into a University unitary system.
I realised that the standard of scholarship of the staff of Judson was not as high as that of the rest of the University, but their care of the students seemed to me more personal.
I was critical of the plans of the Burma Educational Service and  government advisers to absorb Judson into the one system, and I hoped that through Judson Western members of staff might be able to continue to serve students when the process of Burmanising the University inevitably took place.
For Christmas 1943 I was asked by Air India to broadcast a Christmas message to Christians in Southeast Asia, which I was glad to do, having our Christian friends of different races in Burma much in mind.
Some time towards the end of 1943 I was approached by the US Office of War Information to see if I would join their staff as adviser on Burmese subjects and language.
This office was to move to Assam in preparation for developments planned for the Katha-Naba-Bhamo area.
They seemed ready to take me on my own terms, with a Burmese assistant to be selected by myself, a stenographer, a salary four times as big as my missionary stipend, with considerable amenities.
The proposal sounded attractive and I was eager to get into any part of Burma.
But enquiries from two missionary friends already recruited as Kachin advisers made me realise that there would be little opportunity to influence policy and relationships.
Everything would be geared to quite ruthless war operations.
So, being more concerned for understanding relationships with the Burmese, I declined the USOWI offer.
While Rubbing Along in Burmese was being printed, I was working on a bigger handbook for learning the language, under the title of Three Months' Hard Labour .
This followed the technique of the book which had helped me most in my early years — R. Grant Brown's Half the Battle in Burmese .
The Roman script was phonetic and the book consisted of a series of dialogues, building up with phrases rather than individual words.
Only in the final chapter was the transference made to Burmese script.
The book was printed at the Jubbulpore Mission Press where the Reverend L.A. Crain of the ABM Press of Rangoon was superintending.
Burmese printing.
The publication was subsidised by the Burma Government-in-exile.
I had at one time abandoned hope that the little book would ever be published, for the only copy, typed laboriously by myself, was stolen from a railway carriage on Delhi  Station.
However, an extra month's hard labour made good the loss.
At the same time I was working on a small English-Burmese dictionary with about 3,500 of the most common words likely to be needed by government workers going back into Burma when liberation should come.
This was the only one of the three language efforts for which I received any payment; in this case an honorarium from the Burma Government of thirty pounds.
In the latter half of 1943 George West, Bishop of Rangoon, got back from the USA.
Shortly after his arrival he got together a conference of Anglo-Burmans, who agreed that when they returned to Burma they would ally themselves more closely with the people of the country rather than as exclusively with the British side of their heritage as they had tended to do in pre-war days.
George Kirkham sent out an appeal to all Anglo-Burman Associations asking their members to go back to Burma in this spirit, and demanding no special safeguards.
In early 1944 I was asked by the Burma Government if I would consider deputising for B.R. Pearn while he went on a much-needed furlough.
I was glad to do this, for I had kept in close touch with his work and took a deep interest in it.
It was an interesting time to be at the centre, for news was beginning to get through from Burma and plans for reconstruction after liberation were being drawn up.
In February 1943 Wingate had made his first long-range penetration into North Burma, cut the railway in seventy places and crossed the Irrawaddy.
These raiders maintained contact with their base by wireless, and were supplied by air.
Their guides and interpreters were Anglo-Burmans, Karens, Kachins and Burmans.
They were splendidly received by the villagers wherever they went, although the Japanese took brutal revenge afterwards on all who had welcomed them.
This expedition, in addition to proving a new method of jungle warfare, did another great thing for British troops: it convinced them of the friendliness of the people of Burma, for many of them who had fought through the 1942 campaign had prejudiced memories of those hard days.
In  this first Wingate expedition many Christian Karens took part.
Bernard Fergusson, who was in charge of one of Wingate's columns, pays this tribute to them in his epic account,Beyond the Chindwin :
These men form the bulk of the Burma Rifles, and my platoon consisted entirely of them…
Nobody who has served with Karens could fail to like them.
Thoroughly biddable, and mostly Christian (to a degree which would put to shame most people who profess and call themselves such), they make admirable soldiers — intelligent, willing, energetic, brave…
Billy, the Havildar-Major, was a tiny, wizened man, always smiling and very devout, who never went to sleep without first singing softly to himself all three verses of ‘Jesus loves me, this I know’.
He was a particular favourite among the British troops.
The early months of 1944 saw two further Allied successes.
In February the Japanese made a great effort to surround a British and Indian force in Arakan, but the result was a resounding victory for our men, who had indeed been cut off for some days, but supplied by air.
Fighting with tremendous courage, they turned the tables completely.
Meanwhile, General Stilwell advanced up the Hukawng Valley with American-trained Chinese troops.
To aid him, a large airborne force of Chindits was landed on the wide bend of the Irrawaddy between Bhamo and Katha.
Two SPG men accompanied this force as chaplains — David Patterson and John Matthew.
Unfortunately David was killed when his glider made a crash-landing.
He had served since the outbreak of the war with Japan.
His quiet friendliness, calm courage and sense of humour endeared him to all, Burmans and British alike.
His death was a great loss.
In a letter written just before this last trip he asked the Bishop to act as his next-of-kin, mentioned a small legacy to the diocese, and added that he hoped to benefit the Church in Burma with many years of service rather than with a paltry sum of money.
Large parts of Upper Burma began to be liberated, including mission districts of the BCMS.
Bill Crittle, the Field Secretary, was able to visit the Kamaing-Mogaung area in his capacity as a worker of the USOWI.
He found that Christians had stood firmly by their faith and practice; only one family had lapsed, and that had been very weak, even in the best of times.
Christians had been compelled to give up meetings for corporate worship, but still kept up small prayer meetings in houses.
The care with which Christians had treasured their Bibles, prayer books and hymn books was very touching.
Military chaplains moved in with the troops, and news of the Christian community came to us through them.
Letters from one of them told of Mohnyin, another BCMS centre, where the nurses from the Mandalay Children's Hospital had settled.
One of these had married an Indian Christian doctor, and together they worked for the sick and wounded, although badly handicapped by the lack of medicines.
In a nearby village girls of the Mission to the Blind had been settled before the final evacuation; they continued with their weaving, and a recent army photograph showed them at work at their looms, surrounded by admiring soldiers and villagers.
About this time Brayton Case, the American Baptist missionary, lost his life.
He had been touring in the liberated areas trying to get agriculture going again.
Proceeding up a flooded stream flowing into the Indaw-gwi Lake with a heavy load of paddy (rice) seed, the boat capsized and Case was thrown into the water and drowned.
He had lived most of his sixty years in Burma, being the son of missionary parents.
He built up the Agricultural Training School of Pyinmana, spoke Burmese like a Burman, and was an out-and-out evangelist.
One was always conscious of him as a great Christian; only later did you become conscious of his denominational affiliation.
Pearn and the members of his staff had started a monthly publication called Burma Today , giving news brought out by men who had gone in with Wingate, photographs taken by army photographers or by RAF planes on patrol, and first-hand  accounts by people smuggled out of occupied Burma or coming out from the growing number of liberated areas.
This was naturally continued and copies were distributed all over India, sent to all publicity agencies and taken into Burma.
It made people conscious that we were in touch with our friends in Burma again and it generated a spirit of confidence that liberation was only a matter of time.
In one of the monthly issues I tried to express the affection of British government officers, missionaries, and commercial people for the country in which they had worked and to which they longed to return.
It was as follows:A Briton Speaks (Lines written in exile in 1944)
‘It is
As I suppose
The fairest place
In all the earth.’
So told
That Briton first
Who visited
This Burma and appraised her worth.
Pagan…
Where Burman Kings
The desert made
Flower to beauty,
Buddha's
Peace enshrining,
Age of greatness
Given to spirit, teaching five-fold duty.
Ploughing…
Fields of water,
Women planting
Laughing voices.
Reaping…


Rustling paddy,
Wind-touched music,
Bounteous harvest, Burma's heart rejoices.
Smiling
Happy faces,
Nor proud nor fearing,
Equal brothers.
No itch
For wealth or greed
 Contented if
Wun-sa sufficient for life's need.
But now
At hostile word
Those friends of old
Learning to hate!
Those friends
Who underneath
Shy outer shell
Would labour still to make her great.
Together with other departments, the Department of Public relations, as the Information Office was now called, was asked to submit its plans for reconstruction when we should get to Burma.
We were warned by the Governor and senior officers of Government not to be extravagant, but to say what we thought would be needed to do an efficient job.
Our link with Civil Affairs Service (Burma) in Delhi was Colonel Leslie Glass, and plans were so laid that when the civil government took over from the military, there should be an easy transition from the initial operation under the military.
A broadcasting station would be necessary, with as many radio sets as could be provided; film units to tour the towns and villages; a news service for the newspapers in Burmese and English being  published in Rangoon; a daily newspaper in English and a weekly one in Burmese to give reliable news and print government communications; and a network of public relations officers at the headquarters towns of District Commissioners.
Equipment for these services and staff had to be worked out and costed.
In the Department of Public Relations we were fortunate to have the temporary services of U Kyaw Tha of the Burma Civil Service to undertake all this planning.
He was a most able officer, and I was able to hand over this part of the work to him with confidence, while I concentrated on the current activities of the department.
I was happy in the work because of the acceptance by the government of my own interpretation of the task of public relations, namely not to be a propagandist agency acting on the assumption that the government was always infallibly right; not only to be an information service about government policies, plans and activities; but to be an agency interpreting the government to the people, and feeding back to the government the reactions and feelings of the people.
I was not a trained publicity man, nor had I any professional competence in publicity media, and I felt the need of competent advice from someone expert in this field.
We were fortunate in getting as a consultant Fred Spence, who was the advertising manager in Calcutta of the Imperial Tobacco Company.
Both in India and after our return to Burma his expert help was invaluable.
Newspaper correspondents and representatives of the Ministry of Information were frequent visitors to Burma, and we did our best to give them what news we had, to tell them about government hopes and plans, and to extract from them any news and wisdom they had to give us.
One interesting visitor was a man with whom I had a long and interesting talk.
Towards the end of our conversation he asked me what use I would make of documented evidence that the Japs in Burma had a far-reaching plan to destroy the Buddhist system of monasteries and monks.
Before the war it was estimated that there were 100,000 monks  in Burma, supposedly concentrating on religious duties and doing no menial work in their monasteries but relying on daily gifts of food from the faithful.
Any threat to this monastic system would clearly be material for damaging propaganda.
My reply was that I doubted if any such plan had a remote chance of success, and that I would want to be assured of the truthfulness and authenticity of the document he was planning to send me.
The argument became heated when I refused to agree that it did not matter if the document was authentic or not.
Afterwards he complained bitterly to other government officers of the uselessness of such a DPR, and on being told of my background, retorted angrily, ‘Why didn't somebody warn me that the man was a bloody missionary?’
Some time during late 1942 an active young Communist named Thein Pe was smuggled out of Burma.
He and his friends had collaborated with the Japs, but had quickly seen that the independence granted to Burma was fictitious and that the Burmese people were being exploited for Japanese imperialism.
He wrote a short book entitled What Happened in Burma , described on the cover as ‘the frank revelations of a young Burmese revolutionary leader who has recently escaped from Burma to India’.
Edgar Snow, in a review of it, said, ‘Here is a young man with a message which ought to be read by every Indian who hopes to see his country free.
To achieve its maximum purgative effects, it ought to be digested by every intelligent Englishman who wants to win the war…
Reading Thein Pe's eye-witness account of what has happened in Burma makes it apparent to any still in doubt that Japan's slogan of ‘Asia for the Asiatics’ means in reality ‘Asia for Japan’.
''
At the Governor's request I accompanied Thein Pe on a speaking tour.
He made no bones about his own nationalistic aims for Burma, but he kept faithfully to his brief and certainly helped Indians to see what would happen if the Japanese were victorious.
I went on tour frequently from Simla to most of the main cities of India, speaking to Indian audiences and getting together groups  of refugees from Burma to give them the latest news and to encourage them with hopes of victory and return.
I also spoke at various military and RAF centres to tell men in preparation for the invasion of Burma, about the people of the country.
At such meetings I was able to commend and distribute copies of the Burma Pamphlets, and also many copies of our information booklet entitled Burma — Through the Eyes of an American Friend , written by John L. Christian, a former missionary in Burma, and published by the Department.
Christian completed in 1944 a full-length book entitled Burma and the Japanese Invader .
In his preface he pays tribute to ‘the hearty and valuable assistance of B.R. Pearn’.
My close friendship with Pearn had made me aware of the work that he had put into that assistance.
A further book by Christian was published in Bombay in 1945.
While it was printing two things happened.
Christian was one of the few killed in the capture of Rangoon, which had come about more quickly than most of us expected.
So I wrote the epilogue in Christian's book, bringing his account up to date.
Another book on Burma, published in 1945, was The Burma We Love , by U Kyaw Min, ICS, who had been secretary to three Premiers of Burma in turn, Dr Ba Maw, U Pu and U Saw, before the evacuation.
He accompanied the Governor, Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith, to India and was a valuable member of his staff.
In early 1945 I went with U Kyaw Min to Ceylon to talk to British forces which were then thought to be waiting for a seaborne invasion of Burma.
At one crowded meeting a British soldier got up and said, ‘Why is it that you Burmese are always talking about independence and self-government?
Do we ill-treat you?
Aren't you satisfied with the government we give you?’
My colleague was on his feet in a flash.
‘You British people,’ he said, ‘come to our country, you take it over, you make us learn your language, you teach us your history which is full of your own struggles for freedom, you teach us your literature which enshrines just the same principles of freedom, and then you expect us not to want freedom!
If we didn't, we should be bad pupils!’
After a short, stunned silence at this impassioned outburst, there was a spontaneous burst of applause, much greater than any given to my less colourful effort.
While in Ceylon we visited Allied Headquarters in Kandy, where I was taken one afternoon by Colonel Christian into the ‘War Room’ to hear the reports received during the last twenty-four hours, and a commentary on them by a senior staff officer.
The news of the day was that British tanks had got across the Irrawaddy near Meiktila, having come down the Chindwin valley.
The plan, according to the staff officer, was that if sufficient tanks got across, some would move northwards towards Mandalay and others southwards towards Rangoon.
It looked even then as if the seaborne invasion might not be necessary.
Pearn returned from Simla in the early part of 1945 and it was decided that both he and I should stay with the Department, go with it when the civil government returned to Burma, and get it working as effectively as possible.
It was agreed that as the European War was over I should take my family back to England for a short period of leave.
In a copy of Burma Today for March 1945, which has somehow survived in my papers, I see an editorial which I wrote under the heading ‘Britain's Best Ambassador’, namely the BOR (British Other Ranks), who had been fighting for over three years to liberate Burma.
I quoted reports of the quick friendships which were springing up between Burmese villagers and the BOR, and included the following paragraphs:
…the people of Burma are friendly hospitable folk; they meet you on a friendly equal basis, without cringing or self-assertion.
And the BOR is a friendly fellow too; he may sometimes be a rough diamond, he may swear and complain about the weather, the food, the British Government, but he shrewdly weighs up the people he meets.
He likes the other fellow to have a square deal.
He is fond of children, so is the Burman.
He likes a joke, often a broad one, so does the Burman.
He may not know a word of Burmese but he will  share a fag with the interested Burman who is watching all that is going on, and as they puff away together contentedly, something intangible will pass from the one to the other.
Soon they will be playing football together; it was British troops who brought football to Burma years earlier and the game has become a national one.
Almost the brightest episode in the history of St John's College, Rangoon, concerns the great day when the boys defeated the crack army team for the Burma Championship.
That was in the time when Dr Marks was principal and a young master named George Scott was on the staff, two of the best remembered Britishers who ever lived in Burma.
The British Tommy's good humour will be appreciated by the Burman of today as it was during the days of the Rangoon riots in 1939.
British Tommies were helping to restore order and a small patrol of them were on duty at the crossing of Commissioner and Pagoda Roads when a busload of young ruffians armed with sticks and dahs came tearing into the city.
The bus was stopped and its occupants ordered to alight —‘Come on Maung, put those b — knives in a heap.’
The weapons were surrendered.
‘Now get back into your b — bus and hop oft back to Tharrawaddy.’
The bus reversed its direction and the would-be rioters went off with laughter and cheers, no bad blood on either side.
The Burman is a generous, often thriftless fellow; to him money is not the chief value in life.
If he likes you he will give you anything, if he doesn't, no money will get what you want from him.
All reports speak of the satisfaction of the British troops at finding such an unusual attitude, for most of them have been stung in almost every other theatre of war.
The BOR is generous too, especially to those in trouble, and many reports are coming out of men sharing their rations with hungry villagers or of bringing the MO to see some sick Burmans.
In one area where the troops were being maintained by air droppings, the Corps Commander gave  orders that all parachutes were to be handed over to the local Burmese who were in rags.
So now they walk in finest silk which many a woman in England would give much to obtain.
In another village in the hills where there was a Christian community the village pastor came to find the chaplain and explained that they were about to hold a service of thanksgiving for their liberation and would like some of the troops to attend.
The service was duly held, and afterwards the Britishers present were asked to give a choral item.
This was a bit of a bombshell, but after determined encouragement from the chaplain the party managed to sing several verses of ‘The Church's One Foundation’, and were, in fact, rather pleased with themselves as several members had been able to put in the tenor and the bass.
As they sat down one BOR retaliated by asking for a special item from the Baptist villagers.
To the amazement of all the British party a choir stood up and sang the ‘Hallelujah Chorus’!
Liberation
My family and I had to wait for three weeks in Bombay before getting a boat for England, but during that time I was able to do some useful PR work with newspapers and radio.
We were there on 3rd May 1945 when Rangoon was liberated, and that evening I gave a short broadcast over All-India Radio, telling our friends in India and Burma that we should shortly be back in the liberated city to help with the tremendous task of reconstruction.
In London I was kept busy — liaison with the Burma Office and frequent contact with Sir John Clague, the very able and wise adviser to whom the Department in Simla had reported regularly, interviews with the BBC, the MOI, the British Council, Chatham House.
I attended a fortnight's training course at the BBC, which gave me some understanding of the part I would have to play in supervising the work of the Burma Broadcasting Service.
I was able to arrange that U Khin Zaw, working in the Burmese section of the BBC, should return to be in charge of broadcasting, and in the meantime to ensure that he got some experience of the drama, music and talks departments.
We had heard that the University library and the small library of the Burma Research Society had practically disappeared, so I visited second-hand bookshops to Pick up out-of-print books on Burma, and for the modest expenditure of one hundred pounds managed to gather a very good collection of standard books on Burma and Buddhism.
Burma had been starved of books and so with the assistance of W. Lockett, who had worked with J.S. Furnivall in the pre-war bookshop, I secured the co-operation of the SPCK in a plan for a general bookshop.
This was implemented early in 1946 and  opened in temporary quarters in St John's College, later transferring to a good site in the centre of the city.
With the help of the MOI, I was able to recruit a Deputy-Director for the Department of Public Relations, a first-class newspaper man, F.W. Benton, who was also experienced in radio news work.
Shortly after I reached England the Governor paid his first post-liberation visit to Rangoon and on 20th June began his conference with Burmese leaders.
I was deeply interested in the outcome of these talks and the spirit animating them, for both would affect the task of public relations.
Burmans, having been deceived by the promises of the Japanese about independence, would be very careful not to be deceived again.
They wanted the return of civil government as early as possible, and on this point they seemed satisfied by the assurances of Lord Mountbatten's representative and Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith.
They were anxious that there should be no action taken against those who had co-operated with the Japanese.
They wanted any interim government to be as Burmese in composition as they could secure from HMG.
Above all they were eager to find an acceptable constitution for the future, with a constitutionally elected and representative government.
On this last point they were reassured by the Governor's mention of December 1948 as the outside date for this.
So far, so good, as far as Public Relations were concerned.
The time factor was obviously the most urgent one and my five months in England were used to forward the plans for operating the Department when once it got back to Burma.
I knew that the military and particularly the Civil Affairs Service (CASB) would be urgently at work, and that Colonel Glass in charge of publicity, who had taken part in our Simla planning, would be preparing the way.
Bishop West arrived back in Rangoon on 9th July to find that army chaplains and volunteer workers from the forces were hard at work to clean up and restore the cathedral, which had been used throughout the occupation as a factory for sauce and saki .
The restoration and re-furbishing were completed in time for a great service of re-hallowing on 27th July.
An equally great occasion was a Dedication Service held on 16th October and attended by the Governor who had reached Rangoon that day.
Bishop West welcomed His Excellency and a great congregation in the following words:
We are met here in this place humbly recognising God's power to direct the destinies of men and of nations.
We acknowledge that human wisdom alone is not enough for the perplexities of these days.
At this momentous hour His Excellency the Governor of Burma is to dedicate himself to Almighty God for the task with which he has been entrusted.
We also, with him, dedicate ourselves to serve the King of Kings.
Only His standards of purity and righteousness can exalt a nation, and we pray that we may make these paramount everywhere.
We are nation builders, consecrated to God and to one another, and are ourselves stones in the very building we wish to see raised by the Divine Architect of our country.
We have shown our greatness as a people in the darkest hour of adversity.
Humbly we will ask God to make us great in simplicity and obedience, as we seek to bring to birth a human society in which it is normal for men to love one another.
Charity is the bond of peace.
We shall love all men, not in weakness, not in sentimentality, but with the strong love that unites all to seek the good of each and the happiness of this whole country.
Of the races and communities of Burma may it be said, ‘See how these people love one another.’
Nothing can withstand a mighty onslaught of the spirit.
Therefore we pray that a new spirit may be born in our midst this morning and that we may be carried on its tide to the work of national reconstruction.
As this spirit rules our hearts and minds we shall be fashioning a Burma after God's own heart.
In the next few days the Governor was out among the people, and newspaper reports spoke of ‘the friendliest reception everywhere’.
Behind the scenes, Sir Reginald was negotiating with political leaders about the composition of the Executive Council which was to assist him in the government of the country until elections could be held.
The main question was whether the Burma Patriotic Front, otherwise known as the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League, of which General Aung San was the leader, would co-operate.
Aung San's demand for eleven seats out of fifteen was not conceded and at the end of the month the Governor appointed a Council of ten members, of whom only two were British.
I had hoped that Aung San would co-operate, but I felt that he was asking too much, though I hoped that the appointment of a smaller Council left the door open for AFPFL membership at a later date.
The Department of Public Relations got back to Burma in the latter part of October, and in November I flew back to join it.
There was some criticism among Burmans about the appointment of a missionary as DPR, but after a press conference or two and visits to key people, the criticism died down, and in a public lunch given by the Chinese to welcome their new Consul-General, I was asked to speak.
U Ba Lwin, in a later speech, said: ‘There is a saying that an apple a day keeps the doctor away, and Saya'gyi Appleton has returned to Burma with a ton of apples.
Burma is very sick and we hope that he will produce a lot more apples like this one.’
At this lunch I was introduced to General Aung San by U Tin Tut.
The General was a rather brooding, not very talkative man, but with an aura about him.
He spoke simply and forcefully.
Everyone's attention was fixed on him and he would obviously strengthen HE's Executive Council if he could be persuaded to join.
I also had a useful talk with U Ba Pe, an old politician who was critical of the composition of the Governor's Council.
My impression of Rangoon in those first days was that it was only just beginning to come to life again, with everyone rather hopeless about the difficulties involved.
Heads of Departments seemed tired and depressed, rather frustrated because the  idealistic schemes of Simla were clearly not going to get the necessary money.
In a letter to my wife I said that it looked as if my job was to try to give them new faith and hope.
The Civil Affairs Service had done a good job in my estimation.
Most departments had their offices, though there were constant difficulties about telephones and electricity supplies, and very little in the way of fans; communications between departments had to be carried on by messenger, for internal postal services were taking time to be reorganised.
However, the external airmail was good and this greatly helped the morale of the British personnel.
One of the first things that needed to be done was to get a short survey of existing conditions, and with the help of all departments the following summary was made:Burma Today 
‘When two buffaloes fight the grass in between gets the worst of it’; so runs a Burmese proverb, and that is what many Burmans think of Burma's fate in the war.
Twice fought over, she has suffered as badly as any country in the world.
In Rangoon it is reckoned that 60% of the commercial buildings and 30% of the residential were destroyed.
Hundreds of others were looted of furniture, electric and sanitary fittings, doors, windows, roofing, sometimes even wooden staircases.
Roads after three years of neglect are full of potholes; even now the general public cannot get electric light for streets or houses, though water and sewerage systems were got working very shortly after the liberation.
A great deal of bomb debris still remains to be cleared, but valiant efforts have been made to remove refuse.
Outside Rangoon there is great competition for the title of Burma's most devastated town.
Mandalay claims it, and the claim seems reasonable until you see Meiktila, a city of tents, or Myingyan in ruins, or Myitkyina a big sprawling village of huts, or Yenangyaung a derelict area of rusting oil derricks, or Prome flat and deserted.
Almost every town has got to be rebuilt.
Burma's communications were knocked to pieces by the Allied air forces.
Great feats of restoration are in progress.
The railway lines to Prome and Mandalay are working again but it is hard work with only 1/5 of the number of pre-war engines, and only 1/3 of the goods wagons and hardly any of the passenger coaches.
Railway travelling cannot yet be opened to the general public.
Before the war Burma had the biggest inland water fleet in the world; practically all of it went.
Last year small river craft were brought in by air or overland to Kalewa and driven down the Chindwin to the Irrawaddy.
Others have been brought in by sea from India, a few have been recovered from the graveyard at Bhamo, in January 19,000 tons of goods were carried, about 1/6 of the pre-war freight.
18,000 miles of new telegraph and telephone wires have been erected on 30,000 new poles, mainly by the Army.
Trained civil staff is much below the normal level and cannot carry on without military help.
200 post offices have been re-opened out of a pre-war total of 700.
In Rangoon port the import tonnage has equalled pre-war records, but the difficulty is to get enough transport to take the goods and machinery to other parts of the country.
75% of Burma's people live in villages and the lot of the villager is hard.
He used to export half his rice crop, but for four years there has been no export and so no incentive to grow more than he needs.
The harvest just gathered is hardly enough for Burma's own food.
The countryside lives in fear of dacoits, many of them armed with automatic weapons left behind by the Japs.
So far 30,000 arms have been recovered; there must be at least another 10,000 somewhere.
There are no consumer goods for the villager to buy — no soap, clothing, tools — Burma needs those more than anything.
Plough cattle are short owing to war losses and disease.
Yet a full rice crop this next rains would do much to restore Burma's economy and help save India from hunger.
A shipload of India's textiles in the next two months would encourage the villager  and ensure 1,000,000 tons of rice from Burma's surplus for India next Christmas.
There is plenty of money in the country, but nothing to spend it on.
So prices are inflated and will remain so until there is a steady flow of imported goods.
Yet the downward trend has started; and a Burmese economic expert reckons that last month the cost of living figure has fallen from 800% above pre-war level to 600%.
Oil was once one of Burma's major industries, producing 800,000 gallons of petroleum a day, now daily production is a few hundred gallons from the old hand-dug wells.
Mining for lead, silver and wolfram has not yet started again.
The timber industry has re-started, but most of the wood it produces is needed for military and official purposes.
Medical services practically ceased under the Japs.
New hospitals are open and working at full pressure.
But we need medical supplies, especially the new medicines which the war has developed — penicillin, mepacrine, M & B, which have proved so effective in the liberation campaign.
Education also needs equipment — buildings, books, scientific apparatus, even paper, pencils and slates are woefully inadequate.
Despite these difficulties there are almost as many children now attending primary schools as there were before the invasion, and many teachers are carrying on without regular salaries.
But higher school education is far behind the pre-war level, with only 43 schools as against over 270 in 1941.
Emergency University classes on a small scale have been organised, and some 3,000 students are expected to enroll for the University for June next, but only a small proportion of the University buildings can be released by the Army.
There is a hunger for reading material, for books of all kinds, educational and recreational.
Hardly any public cinemas are functioning, most of them were destroyed in the bombing.
Gramophones and records would be a boon.
There are barely 500 wireless sets in the whole country.
And as to fans and frigidaires, even hospitals cannot have them.
Yet there is a brighter side.
There is hardly any bitterness for the devastation caused by the war; there has been hardly any outcry about the inability to redeem Japanese notes-and the Japs issued Rs562 crores worth £420 million, over 30 years of Burma's national revenue.
The Burmese are an amazingly philosophic people.
They are great improvisers too — you should see the things they are making out of old war scrap — ploughs, nails, tools and utensils of all kinds.
You should see the ramshackle buses with boiling radiators that are tackling private road traffic.
Up-country the spirit of self-effort is better than in Rangoon, and there is more talk there of reconstruction than politics.
In Mandalay Burmans are making bricks because they cannot get enough timber to rebuild their houses, tho' Burma is a land of timber.
Burmans are wanting to go into business more — a little group of Burmese businessmen have formed an industrial corporation; young Burmans are doing well in the petrol and kerosene retail trade.
Young men everywhere are thinking hard about Burma's future — political and economic.
Here and there Burmans are replacing Indians in hard and dirty labour.
Much still remains to be done before Burma becomes once more her happy and prosperous self, but much has already been done.
The Army has done a grand job of work in the initial stages of rehabilitation, and without its aid progress would have been far slower.
But Burma cannot depend on the Army indefinitely.
It must and indeed is already beginning to work out its own salvation.
The times are hard and there is a terrific struggle still ahead.
But there is always real satisfaction in a fight against great odds.
Shortly after my return, the Governor was to make a tour of Central Burma and it seemed a great opportunity for me to gauge  conditions outside Rangoon, so I was invited to accompany him.
We visited Meiktila by plane and continued by air to Mandalay, landing on a very rough airstrip.
Mandalay had been very badly damaged in the 1942 fighting and had hardly recovered.
We went on to Shwebo and Katha, and returned to Sagaing, where we boarded an old Irrawaddy steamer which had been sunk twice during the war and recovered on each occasion.
Leaving Sagaing for our return journey by boat to Prome we got on to a sandbank and had to wait there until two tugs pulled us off.
While the steamer was on the sandbank HE and I and one or two others went ashore and spent an hour in a village on the bank.
In another letter to my wife I have the following comment:
HE was at his best and became a farmer once more.
The Headman too was bright and intelligent, and they had a cheery conversation with me as interpreter.
It was a great thing to get HE into a village to see conditions and what needs to be done, and I was able to press home some of my own ideas about village life and health.
After dinner, back on the boat, he sat and talked about the soil as the common link between people of all nations, and spoke almost lovingly of husbandry and caring for the soil almost as if it were a human being.
He wants to see agricultural societies developed throughout Burma, with something like the flower and vegetable shows in an English village.
He certainly has a vision for the Burmese farmer, and I have never liked him so much as I did last night as we sat talking together under the stars.
This trip up country has been most valuable, and has convinced me that reconstruction must be our theme more than politics.
Men in the forces were very good at getting into friendly relationship with the Burmese people.
An East and West Association had been formed and I took an early opportunity of asking if I might address it.
A day or two later I received the following letter:
OF PARAMOUNT IMPORTANCE January 1946 MR G. APPLETON DIRECTOR, PUBLIC RELATIONS DEPARTMENT GOVT: Of BURMA
Mr Appleton!
I heard your most disgusting talk at the EAST and west Association (PROPAGANDA ASSOCIATION would be better).
You think that WE BURMANS are all ‘suckers’ EH!!
You are  damm well mistaken, Mr Crafty Blooming Appleton.
Ho!
Ho!
Most of us BURMANS who heard your slimy, slippery and soft propaganda talk — knew at once that your ‘move’ was a ‘STOOP TO CONQUER’stunt.
We know you were ‘soft soaping us’ Appleton — Yes!
We could see right through your crafty but loose Propaganda.
You fancy you're smart and you know plenty about our fine country — THATS JUST IT!
You know bugger all-Perhaps Appleton you'd like to know whats in store for you British IMPERIALISTS — Hah!
Don't wait for it Appleton if you want to save your insipid self from being punctured or badly handled all you can Do for the Better of our ESTEEMED BURMA is GET OUT!
MALDOM!
You are seeing what is happening in our poor ORIENTAL brother land INDONESIA — DON'T BE SURPRISED IF THE SAME thing happens in BURMA — SOME DAY — IT IS NOT SO FAR OFF — WE BURMANS AND INDIANS UNITEDLY WILL KICK OUT you blood sucking BRITISHERS AND your GODDAM children the Eurasians — Ho!
Ho!
Ho!
The eyes of BURMA and its growing generation is opening with speed and certainty — the PINNACLE OF BRITISH and European superiority is crumbling to dust — BEWARE the pent up strength of all Asiatics is well near bursting point-THE STRUGGLE FOR TOTAL FREEDOM OF ALL SUBJECT PEOPLES IS SURE TO BEGIN IN THE NOT DISTANT FUTURE.
When we triumph Appleton — don't  forget we shall mark you down as one of the War Criminals: DOWN WITH  FACISTS , IMPERIALISTS AND THEIR LOUSY TOOLS.
LONG LIVE AUNG SAN, THAN TUN AND THE REST OF OUR CHERISHED FREEDOM LOVERS DOWN WITH TWERPS AND LOW DOWN PUNKS LIKE APPLETON — DOH BUMAH!!!
It was fairly clear to anyone who knew English and Burmese that this had not been written by a Burman.
My own opinion was that it was written by a Communist infiltrator.
It encouraged me to feel that something I had said had evidently gone home.
The PR Department had made a good start in the CASB period with Colonel Glass in charge.
He had got a Burmese staff together with quite a good Anglo-Burman as editor of a daily paper in English called The Liberator with a daily circulation of about five thousand.
A weekly Burmese paper called Khit Thit was also published and distributed as widely as possible throughout the country.
Information Centres had been established in some twenty places.
A radio station was in operation, and a number of mobile film units, which were only able to show news or educational films brought in from outside.
All this initial provision had been handed over to the Department.
We worked under considerable difficulties as the five main sections of the Department were in different buildings, and integration and direction were not easy.
However, a weekly meeting of the Sectional Heads was held when our planning was thought out.
Colonel Glass had arranged that Reuters press telegrams should be handled by the Department and distributed to the Burmese newspapers, so international news was regularly published, and the liaison with the Burmese editors established.
Shortage of newsprint was another link, and I was constantly in touch with Singapore, London and Calcutta about supplies, which when they  came were divided as fairly as possible between ourselves and the independent newspapers.
There was a further link with editors, not such a happy one, for false reports and rumours were constantly appearing, and what seemed to be a campaign of vilification of the police.
Hardly a day passed without my Information Officer, U Khin Maung, interviewing some editor, after making careful enquiries about the accuracy of the reports.
Before returning from England I had been able to recruit a very competent English journalist, F.W. Benton, who soon improved the quality of our English daily.
I think it was before he arrived that we changed the name to New Times of Burma .
Pearn and I wrote most of the leaders, though occasionally we had help from the various departments of government.
As neither he nor I were long-term government servants, we were rather more critical of policies and decisions, and did our best to see that reasonable criticism was reasonably answered.
If there were some point under heated discussion, either he or I would write a letter to our own newspaper, using a Burmese pseudonym, and the other would answer it in the name of government.
This stimulated letters from ordinary readers of the paper.
I have mentioned that, while the Governor was still in Simla, a very able Burman, U Khin Zaw, had been sent to train with the BBC.
Before returning from England I had arranged the date when he would join the Department.
His coming meant that the radio station could deal with more than news bulletins and official talks.
Drama and poetry were included, in both English and Burmese.
I had always hoped that the Buddhist Sangha, meaning the Community of Buddhist monks, might take a hand in the raising of morale, the deepening of the Buddhist emphasis on the Noble Eightfold Path, and in getting all sections of the nation to work together for peace and reconstruction.
We were not very successful in doing this, although an officer of the Department, U Sein Ywet, was charged with the task of getting in touch with abbots and monks.
In several talks given by myself in both English and Burmese, I tried to emphasise the part which Buddhism could  play in the national life.
In a short series of talks entitled Let the Figures Speak , I meditated on the Three Gems, the Four Truths, the Five Great Precepts, the Eightfold Path, and then went on to deal with some of the statistics of Burmese life — birth figures, infant mortality, crime figures, etc.
In early April 1946 U Sein Ywet and I did a seven-days tour in the Delta in which we visited two towns and ten villages, listening to government officers, elders, headmen, and representatives from nearly a hundred villages, which convinced me that much more needed to be done for the towns and villages outside Rangoon.
My report on this tour concluded with the words: ‘I shall be grateful for any suggestions as to how this Department may co-operate in helping to meet the desperately urgent situation that is about to develop in the Delta villages.’
One of the most urgent things throughout Burma was to encourage rice production.
Before the war Burma had produced seven million tons of rice a year, about half of which was exported.
The cultivators became discouraged during the Japanese occupation and lack of export facilities, with the result that much land went out of cultivation.
Through the New Times of Burma and the Burmese Weekly we did everything possible to appeal for a concerted effort to restore the cultivation of rice to the pre-war level.
I prepared the following appeal for the Governor to make to the whole nation:
There is going to be a serious shortage of food all over the world during the next year.
Burma is fortunate in that she has enough for her own needs, though she was only just able to ensure this during the last harvest.
Other countries are now asking Burma for help: our great neighbour India particularly is going to be in sore need.
I appeal to farmers and cultivators to plant every possible acre during the coming planting season.
I assure them that every extra basket of rice produced will be immediately sent to the countries in need.
They have the money to buy it, if we will produce it.
I appeal to the people of Burma to  economise as far as  possible in the consumption of rice and foodstuffs; so that we may have some surplus to send to a hungry world.
I suggest that in our social hospitality we should follow an example set by India during the war years and limit the number of guests at all such functions to fifty.
In every way possible let us discipline ourselves so as to help feed a hungry world.
In this way Burma can win an honoured place in the United Nations and live up to her recognised standards of charity and hospitality.
This appeal was plugged in our two newspapers and on radio, and in special leaflets for the thousands of villages.
The appeal with this accompanying publicity played a useful part in the achievement of one million tons surplus as a result of the planting season of 1946, earning not only welcome export currency but also considerable goodwill.
At about the same time, April 1946, U Tin Tut, the brilliant and most able indigenous member of the Burmese Civil Service, who won his place by competition in the earlier days of the ICS, decided to leave Government service and go into politics.
He had been closely associated with U Saw before the war and had accompanied the Governor to India.
His decision encouraged many of us, for he was a man of great integrity as well as ability.
Both before and after this decision I was able to benefit from his friendship and advice.
His assassination early in 1947 was a tremendous tragedy, which I and many others still mourn.
One of my great regrets is that in the period immediately after liberation Burmese leaders and people generally seemed more interested in the political future of Burma than in the urgent task of reconstruction.
This however had to be accepted as a fact and due attention paid to it.
All these nationalist aspirations found a focus in Aung San, who had distinguished himself in his university days as the leader of a well-organised strike of university students.
He then became a leader of the thakin group —thakin was the name given to a European, equivalent to sahib in India — and in 1940 fled from the  country and was later joined by about thirty others.
These young thakins accompanied the Japanese when they invaded Burma in early 1942.
It is important to note that these young men were not so much-pro-Japanese or anti-British as intensely Burman.
Later, when they realised Japan's true intentions, Aung San and the small Burmese army, backed by an underground movement, decided to come over to the British, a very courageous step when you realise their numbers, and their limited arms.
Their exploits have been greatly exaggerated by Burmese writers, but I don't think British writers have adequately recognised the courage demanded to revolt, or possibly we have been jealous for the unswerving loyalty through defeat as well as victory of Karens, Kachins and Chins.
Aung San awakened a martial spirit amongst the Burmans, and the young men looked up to him with intense loyalty.
In their new patriotism and hero-worship they were ready to undergo discipline and do hard work, two duties which in the past they had been accused of lacking.
Aung San was a real leader with high ideals.
I heard him say at one gathering that there were certain things he thought ought to be done, and he was going to do them, whether people followed him or not.
At a great mass meeting at the Shwe Dagon Pagoda in January 1946, some twenty thousand people attended to hear him speak, I being one of them.
It looked as if the stage was set for a carefully planned and timed entry of the leader, on the totalitarian model, but when the time came Aung San passed almost unobserved through the people to the platform, and quietly began his speech.
There was no ostentation, no rehearsed ovation.
His speech lasted three and a half hours; most of it he read quickly in an even tone.
There were surveys of history, patriotic passages, vitriolic outbursts, Socialist and Marxist doctrine, for the manuscript was a composite one.
Occasionally Aung San put his manuscript aside, and then he spoke with fire and humour.
It soon became clear that there was a struggle going on within his party, between the Communists, who wanted violent measures, completely unscrupulous, and the more moderate Socialists, aided by one or two older leaders who saw the promise of Aung San.
In a review of the political situation written in the spring of 1946, I concluded with the statement, ‘If Aung San can be detached from the Communists it will be a great day for Burma.’
One afternoon the Governor summoned me to Government House and informed me that he had instructions to institute proceedings against Aung San for an alleged murder in the early days of the Japanese invasion of Burma, and instructed me to prepare the case to justify this to the country.
I was deeply disturbed by this and quite convinced that it would lead to serious trouble.
After a troubled night I went to Government House next morning and said to HE that I was convinced that this would be a disastrous step and that if it was decided to take it I must resign on the spot and announce in public my reasons for doing so.
A day or two later he had come round to my view and, after consultation with London, had decided to drop the matter.
The Communists, under two very astute leaders, had advanced their cause very considerably by working within the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League and trading on Aung San's popularity.
It was not till after Aung San and AFPFL had victoriously entered the Governor's Executive Council in October 1946, after an organised strike of police and government officials, that the split with the Communists came.
When it did, Aung San and his friends were outspoken and firm, and Communist popularity waned, even in the country districts where they had organised cultivators' unions, advocated the non-payment of taxes and rent, and promised the confiscation of land and its division among the landless and debt-ridden peasants.
I doubt if Communism will ever have any chance in Burma, unless by intimidation and violence, for the Burmans have no class distinctions to be inflamed, and they resent, as a slur against their national religion, the stereotyped Communist doctrine that religion is the opiate of the people.
Aung San's courage and leadership were shown again in January 1947, when his political opponents, including the Communists, stirred up agitation against the London Agreement  before Aung San had time to get back to Burma and explain the facts.
He stood by his convictions and had little difficulty in keeping public confidence.
Being in office had not been easy, for he inherited situations which he and his supporters created when in opposition.
They had used the police in the political struggle and then found that the police were no longer reliable.
They had backed up huge demands for cost of living allowances and then found that they had to find the money.
They had insisted that their youth organisations should be organised on a semi-military basis, and other parties had followed suit.
Through hard experience they were learning the price of government and the cost of leadership.
Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith sympathised with the general outlook and tried to prepare people for the necessary discussion and negotiations which would have to precede any expression of national opinion and the consequent negotiation with the British Government.
The Governor constantly emphasised five necessary steps to self-government:(1) decide who shall vote;(2) compile electoral rolls;(3) hold a free election;(4) agree on the constitution; and (5) settle future relationship with Great Britain.
The departure of Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith was regretted by those who shared his emphasis on the political issues.
In many ways he understood the Burman, and his relationship with the pre-war leader of the Executive Council, U Saw, was a close one.
Sir Reginald told me that on the night before U Saw went to London in the hopes of getting a promise of some kind of independence for Burma from Winston Churchill in return for full co-operation in the war, he had warned U Saw that the hopes of success were very slender.
Sir Reginald added, ‘If you don't get what you are going for you will be a great nuisance when you return.’
To which U Saw replied, ‘You are right, and you will probably have to put me in prison.
But if ever you are in real difficulties, send the car down to the jail about midnight and I will come and show you how to get out of them.’
Sir Reginald also told me that on one occasion when there was suspicion of corruption about a certain appointment, he had called  U Saw to him and said, ‘I hear that you have accepted Rs5,000 for this appointment.
Is it true?’
To which U Saw replied, ‘Oh, Your Ex cell ency, how could they say such a thing.’
HE then asked, ‘Saw, how much did you get?’
The reply was, ‘Not Rs5,000, Your Ex cell ency, but Rs25,000, but now that you speak to me about it I will not take it.’
The sums involved seem very small in comparison with corruption dimensions in other East Asian countries.
This, in my opinion, was fairly general in Burma and the smaller level of bribery was due to the influence of Buddhism.
With the departure of Sir Reginald Dorman-Smith, Sir Henry Knight was appointed as Interim Governor until a permanent appointment should be made.
He was experienced in government administration.
Right from the start he visited every department of government activity, listening to the plans of the officers concerned, and issued instructions for emphasis on reconstruction and efficiency.
He had a sure knack of putting his finger on the heart of matters under discussion, and of asking questions which helped to clarify planning and decisions.
I could not help feeling that if we could have had him from the moment of the return of Civil Government Burma would have been in a happier and more disciplined condition, ready to see the real task which the nation would have to face as soon as its political future was decided.
The announcement of the appointment of Sir Hubert Rance was received with interest, for many had grown to feel his friendliness and simple directness during the period of military government.
A very interesting incident took place shortly after the announcement.
One day I received a note from the Indian High Commissioner saying that a press cable had been delivered to him which was obviously meant for me, and he therefore sent it on.
It consisted of about one thousand words and purported to be an interview with the new Governor, putting down to him statements which would obviously arouse considerable concern with Government authorities in London.
The telegram was unsigned.
I took it to Sir Henry Knight and we tried to trace its origin back through the telegraph service.
It turned out to be a report from the representative of the New Light of Burma .
Simultaneously we  had been in touch with Sir Hubert and had discovered that he did indeed give an interview to the representative in London and had spoken ‘off the cuff’ to quite an extent but not justifying the outright statement attributed to him.
A further discussion with Sir Henry led us to agree that the telegram must be delivered, but that I should take it in person to the Editor and see if something less embarrassing could be agreed.
The Editor read the cable through and asked what steps I proposed to take.
I told him I should have to publish Sir Hubert's disclaimer, and warned him that an unedited publication would endanger implementation of an appointment from which Burmans expected so much, and would also lead to an unhappy relationship between the paper and the government.
The Editor was in a very reasonable mood and asked what I could suggest.
I suggested that he should let me write a version of the press telegram in a more discreet way, trying to keep the reporter's expectations and hopes.
The Editor agreed and so a day or two later my edited statement was published in Burmese on the front page of the New Light of Burma in a translation which U Khin Maung, my talented and faithful Information Officer, approved.
On the day Sir Hubert arrived in Rangoon he sent for me to thank me for the way in which this delicate matter had been handled.
I was eager that Burma should remain within the British Commonwealth, for the sake of Burma and not in the interests of Britain and her trade.
I tried to explain to people the real meaning of Dominion status with its opportunity of self-government within a wider membership which would always come to its support.
What seemed to me a golden opportunity came to hand largely through Pearn's connections with the History department in the University, to which he had now returned.
A history lecturer, U Myo Min, brought to him a book that he had written about the subject.
It was a splendidly factual and clear analysis of Dominion status, and he wished to find a publisher.
It was clear to me that we dared not and could not use money from the Department.
I therefore cabled the Burma Section of the India Office asking for a loan of £1000 to publish the book as it stood in Burmese, also  a much shorter book, and finally a leaflet giving the gist of its arguments.
The reply from London was in the negative — to me a tragic decision.
Aung San and his supporters were demanding full independence, but I happened to know that they would have been content, possibly even pleased, to be granted Dominion status.
Their thing was that they must ask for more than what they really hoped to get.
I felt unhappy and critical once more at the decision of Mr Attlee and his government to grant independence without further effort.
An incident on the frontier near Myitkyina confirmed my judgement.
One of the semi-independent Chinese generals had come over the border from China and encamped not far from Myitkyina.
Every diplomatic effort was made to get him and his army to retire back over the frontier, but without success.
In the end the threat was made of calling a squadron of the RAF from Singapore to ensure withdrawal.
The threat proved successful.
I wanted to publicise this outcome without making the implied criticism too hostile.
People in Burma would then see the protection afforded by continuing membership in the Commonwealth.
I was not allowed to make any public mention of the matter.
Over the whole of my year in Burma after liberation, nationalist feeling had been worked up, fomented cleverly by the Communists under Than Tun.
The earlier attempt to discredit the police had not succeeded, although the way the police treated the public was by no means satisfactory.
The parries in opposition to Government now decided to infiltrate the police and also to influence government servants.
The result was a general strike early in September 1946 in which police and government workers camped out in the Shwe Dagon Pagoda where they were guarded against any persuasive attempts from authority.
I managed to get in hundreds of leaflets, through a few loyal workers in the Department, but these were either destroyed or had little effect; or more likely, were not adequately distributed out of fear.
Benton and his Assistant Editor managed to keep the New Times of Burma going and we could still use the radio, but it was obvious  that things were moving to a climax, and I was desperately afraid that violence would develop throughout the country.
On the morning of 17th September I went to see U Tin Tut to get his estimation of the situation.
The Executive Council under Sir Paw Tun were inert and helpless, and later that morning I went to the Governor to say that I did not think we could hold the situation any longer without grave risk, and advised him to call for the resignation of the Executive Council.
He did this on the same day, with the result that the situation became much calmer and negotiations opened for a new Executive Council which would include General Aung San as its leader.
During the next ten days negotiations and discussions went on, in some of which I was the messenger for Sir Hubert, particularly in the efforts to get U Saw and U Ba Maw into the Council, successful in the first case but not in the second.
The new Council was appointed on 26th September, and from that date on General Aung San was the right-hand man of the Governor and the hope of the whole nation.
Soon after his appointment he went to the north to meet representatives of the non-Burman races, and in effect asked them to state their own terms for participation in a Union of Burma.
The settlement brought great relief to the whole of the Public Relations Department and clearly the indigenous officers of it needed to be trained for the new situation.
Training courses were arranged and at one of them General Aung San himself presided and listened to my opening speech to the PROS.
Later he called me to a meeting of the Executive Council and asked me to say what I thought the principles of the Department should be and how they could be implemented.
I commenced to talk in English, whereupon he said, ‘Speak in Burmese.’
I did so and after a few minutes he said, ‘Good enough, now you can continue in English.’
It was however becoming quite clear that the Department would now be used much more explicitly for publicity and propaganda, and this, combined with failing health because of amoebic dysentery and exhaustion, led to my resignation.
Readers of these pages may feel curious as to how I combined my religious convictions and duties with those of the Director of Public Relations.
On my return to Burma in November 1945 I was Archdeacon of Rangoon, but it soon became clear that my main attention would have to be devoted to working for understanding and peace.
So in February 1946 I resigned as Archdeacon.
Every Sunday I took certain Christian services, and I was always available for individual Christian clergy who wanted friendship and advice.
Every Sunday I also contributed a religious meditation to the New Times of Burma under the heading ‘Thought for Today’, following on a Buddhist meditation for the preceding day.
I left Burma sadly, though glad at the prospect of being reunited with my family in England.
One of the last things I was able to do was to help in the preparations for a Service of Reconciliation to be held at the Burma end of the Burma-Siam railway line, both in the preparation of the details of the service and the plans for its publicity.
Unfortunately I was not able to be present at the actual service in January 1947.
A Burmese proverb sums up what I felt about Burma: ‘If you fall in love when young you can never forget through ten thousand years.’
It expresses my love of Burma and its people which continued well into old age.
In this context I would like to pay a tribute to the British officers who served Burma during the years it was part of the Commonwealth.
These officers of the Indian Civil Service and later the Burma Civil Service, were immensely devoted people.
There was not any suggestion of racial pride in their relationships with Burmese colleagues.
Part of the responsibility for this lies with the innate friendliness and courtesy of the peoples of Burma, and behind that the long record of the Buddhist tradition.
I doubt if Burma will get any more devoted duty and service from any other group of officers.
Many of them worked late into the night with their files and their problems of decisions, or if they were in the Judicature, their judgements.
Their service, as well as that of government officers in the much bigger country of India, is rightly  commemorated in a memorial tablet in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey.
I would like to make one special mention in this general tribute — to Philip Nash who was the Secretary to Sir Hubert Rance.
During the critical weeks of growing unrest and public strike, he and I were in daily touch, trying to understand the situation and see what could be done to solve the difficulties.
After my return to England I was able to continue my interest in Burma's future, for when General Aung San and his colleagues came to London for consultations with the British Government, Mr Attlee asked me to 10 Downing Street to introduce the various members to him.
Several months later, when General Aung San and six of his colleagues were assassinated on 19th June, 1947, the Burma Office of the British Government got in touch with me several days before the public announcement was made.
It was a hard blow to all who loved Burma, for at one stroke the country lost outstanding leaders, men of real character and great promise, whom she could ill afford to lose.
U Aung San was succeeded by an intimate and trusted colleague, Thakin Nu, who had been Secretary of the AFPFL.
He was a gentle character, who perhaps would have been happier as the abbot of a Buddhist monastery.
He might still be a force for peace and unity in a country that calls itself The Union of Burma .
When I got the news of the assassination I had a heavy foreboding that U Saw was involved, and this indeed proved to be the case.
He was tried and executed, protesting that he had nothing to do with the affair.
Afterwards Thakin Nu told the Bishop of Rangoon that had U Saw confessed, he would not have been executed.
Family Adventures
At various points in this book of memories and some attempt at self-examination in a long and adventurous life, I have mentioned the love and help I received from my wife Marjorie.
After she died in Eastertide 1980 at the age of seventy-eight, I found in her desk a handwritten letter to our three children, which she put together in Jerusalem at the repeated request of Rachel, our elder daughter.
Before allowing her own words to express her story, it might be helpful to speak of the policy and practice of nearly all missionary societies fifty years ago.
I have already mentioned the stipulation that before I could qualify for married status I should have passed two language exams.
We both accepted this without question, and a marriage allowance was duly added to my salary.
There was also a scale for children's allowances.
It was accepted as a general practice that children would be better educated in the sending country after the age of seven.
As each period of service in Burma was five years, it meant that children left at home hardly knew their parents.
So Rachel at six years and Margaret at five years were left in England after our second furlough, and generous help was provided for them by the organiser of a preparatory school.
After this last furlough we paid a last sad visit to the school and found a small girl crying her heart out.
When I enquired what was the matter she said, ‘I can't remember what my mummy looks like.’
In July 1939 it seemed clear to me that war was inevitable.
I asked for special leave and borrowed the eighty pounds for a short-term return ticket on the letter-mail route to the UK.
Marjorie was already in England convalescing after a serious  operation.
Tim (aged two) was with her.
So without more ado, I gratefully include what she entitled ‘Salute to Rachel, Margaret and Tim’.
In 1939 we were all in England when Pop came back from Burma to decide what we should do — stay in England during the war, or go back to Burma.
Bishop George West thought that we should stay, but Pop knew that he, at least, must return, and finally he and I decided that we should all return, mainly because a separation when you three were still so young — and needing parents and not grandparents to care for you — seemed not the right course.
We had to wait for some months in order to get a passage and finally set oft on my birthday in January.
We embarked at Liverpool and the Mersey was full of ice and so cold.
We had to wait for some days until a convoy of ships was ready.
We could only travel at the rate of the slowest ship, and once out in the Irish Sea were ‘blacked out’.
I think that there were about thirty ships in the convoy.
I remember two lady missionaries, who were also returning to Burma, saying, ‘Well, of course we shall arrive safely because we are going out to do the Lord's work.’
When Pop said, ‘What about all those other people in the convoy, doesn't the dear Lord care about them too?’ this worried the two ladies considerably, and I rather think after that they either thought that we were faithless, or became a little apprehensive themselves!
You children were excited on the journey to Gibraltar and kept running from side to side of the boat looking out for the small destroyers that were guarding the convoy.
We could not undress for a week in case of a submarine attack, and you all got a little cross, I remember.
Pop had bought a large inflated life jacket for me to wear in case of our ship being sunk, in which case you were all to hold on to the cords round my waist, and he would swim round and act as a watchdog!
We were very glad to pass Gibraltar into the relatively calm waters of the Mediterranean, and that night we were able to  undress and sleep in peace.
I remember a terrific noise in the night, and thinking that a submarine must have got through after all, dashed into Pop's cabin to be told that it was only coal being poured into the bunkers below decks!
We still had to keep our life jackets at the foot of our bunks in case of raids.
Once through the Suez Canal and into the Red Sea the ‘black out’ rule was relaxed somewhat and you children then enjoyed the warmth and the swimming pool, and the kindly Scots captain who greeted Mig every morning with ‘Hoo's Maggie the morn?’and the nice stewardess who had taught Mig to reply in a Scots voice, ‘Maggie's fine, thank you for spierin' (asking).’
Do you remember looking over the ship's side at the flying fish, and the phosphorus gleaming along the side of the ship at night — and of course looking for the Southern Cross in the stars at night?
Pop and I remember going up to the captain's cabin after you had gone to bed and eating lovely bala chaung sandwiches.
I think that nice Captain Meek went down with his ship later on in the war.
I remember Tim and another small American boy racing round the decks, Tim saying, ‘Let's go wound and wound the deck,’ and the other saying, ‘No, let's go yound and yound.’!
We were glad to reach Rangoon which at that time of the year, early March, was very hot, and so Pop sent us up to Taungin-in the Shan States where we stayed with a delightful elderly American missionary, Miss Hughes.
You two girls went to an American school for a while and were puzzled by the American accent.
When Rachel was asked to spell ‘ba-na-na’ Margaret took over and said, ‘It's all right Rachel, she means ‘baa-naa-naa’! '' Then the nice teacher taught you a little rhyme in American and English —‘The little calf (căf) went down the path (păth) in a minute and a half (hăf) to take a bath (băth).’
When we returned to Rangoon, you and Margaret went to the Diocesan School where Miss Hardy was headmistress.
I expect you remember being taken and fetched each day — some four or five miles — sometimes by me and sometimes by Ruth Donnison  — and how you used to fume when we picked up the Khin Zaw's children who were always late.
I expect you remember the lovely lake at the end of our road, and the rides in the sampan, or going out with the Moothams when Maria used to say, at the end of an excursion, ‘Rachel never stops talking!’
Then, do you remember Chief Justice Mosley who lived just below us?
He used regularly to stop me and congratulate me on your charming manners and pretty frocks!
It was his old Persian runner that we used to tie up our bundles when we came out of Burma — I expect you remember that we still had it in Leatherhead.
I expect you remember the students at ‘Holy Cross’, Maung Pe, now Bishop of Akyab, John Aung Hla, Bishop of Mandalay, and Ba Maw, Bishop of Toungoo — all Pop's students, who have done so well and were so faithful during the Japanese occupation of Burma.
Do you remember Stephen the gardener, and darling Bessie your nanny who still writes to me, and whom we found again when we went into Burma on our way home from Australia?
Everybody whom we met at that time remembered you all with great affection.
We had two lovely years in Rangoon before the Japanese invasion.
You all learned to swim and dive at the Kokine Swimming Club, and you and Mig became Girl Guides at the school.
Do you remember Uncle Charles Lane building a bomb-proof wall outside the kitchen?— and how you were so excited when the raids came because it meant Pop and I were able to stop work and play idiotic games with the three of you?!
Pop used to go off some evenings to drive an ambulance, and then Christmas 1942 — when Rangoon was badly bombed.
We had gone to Uncle Charles for Christmas lunch and were sad to find that Aunt Edie Mann did not appear.
She was matron of the large Dufferin Hospital which was bombed on Christmas Day, and in fear eighty of her Burmese nurses fled, leaving her with two English sisters, and a few good Anglo-Indian nurses.
That  evening Pop and his students went to the hospital to help her, going in white cassocks, which was silly, because in the morning they returned covered in blood and dirt!
I went next morning with Bessie and the sweeper and helped Edith.
Her laundry had been bombed, and the hospital was full of casualties, as well as the maternity block.
I found an Englishman wandering round asking if he could help; I said, ‘If you can stand the sight of blood, and filthy bandages, without being sick come on, but if you are sick you'll have to clean it up yourself!’
I remember trying to help one of the sisters dress a badly wounded back — something I had never thought I could do.
I don't think I finished it!
One of the doctors managed to get the laundry going again and in a few days the hospital was evacuated to a small country town.
At the end of January Pop decided to go south to our villages, and sent us up the Irrawaddy to Maymyo.
Do you remember saying goodbye to him on the wharf with Tim's tiny topi sitting on top of his head to amuse you?
Captain Tizzard and his wife and baby took us on board.
The steamer was full of refugees and many Chinese — the railway was full of troops moving south so that it was easier to go by river.
You all thought it was great fun — going off for a hot weather holiday!
On the third day out, Rachel went down with a high temperature and swellings in the groin.
An Indian doctor on board said it was appendicitis and wanted to operate, but Captain Tizzard and I were doubtful, and in any case the boat was ill equipped and dirty.
We were due at Chauk, an old field town, next day and Captain Tizzard advised me to take Rachel to the hospital there, but warned me that he could not delay his sailing for more than a few hours.
I managed to find an old taxi, and Rachel and I rushed to this gleaming American hospital only to find it apparently empty!
At last I found a young doctor who gave me a curious look, but I begged him to examine Rachel, which he did, and then looked up and said, ‘My dear lady, your daughter has bubonic plague!’
I said, ‘But what shall I do, can you take her in?’ at which he smiled sadly and said, ‘I'm afraid not, I have orders to blow up this hospital, at eight o'clock tomorrow  morning!’
But he was very kind, and brought me all the M & B tablets he could find, with instructions to get you back to bed, and to keep you from other children, and give you M & B every four hours until you were sick, and then try them again very slowly.
So we dashed back to the steamer which was just pulling out from the bank — you two were jolly glad to see us.
That night we were stuck on a sandbank in the middle of the river, and a small Chindwin paddle steamer came along to take us oft until the tide rose again.
I carried Rachel, and Margaret held on to me, and I hoped Tim would be hanging on to Mig, but when we reached the small steamer Tim was missing.
So many refugees had panicked and he was lost in the throng.
Having settled Rachel in a corner and piled our luggage round her and left you, Mig, on guard, I struggled back against the refugees and climbed the gangway again to find Tim looking a little bewildered in the midst of a seething mass of humanity but remarkably calm, and soon we were back on the small boat.
When the tide turned, we all had to struggle back to the large Irrawaddy steamer again.
In two days' time we reached Pakoku where many of the Anglo-Burmans begged me to disembark and try to walk out of Burma with them, but Rachel was still very sick and I said I would go on to Mandalay and hope to find a doctor there.
We reached Mandalay and I went straight to the Winchester Mission where dear Willie Garrad looked shocked to see me and said in a scandalised voice, ‘Oh, but you can't possibly stay here’— it was a Brotherhood you see!
However, he soon found a car which took us up the hill to Maymyo, and Madriya and his wife and daughter came with us.
We found an old ‘godown’ and all slept that night side by side on the floor.
Tim was happy for he was very fond of Madriya.
Next day we found a good army doctor who examined Rachel and said with care she would soon be well, the M & B had done its work, and then to add to our trouble you all went down with scarlet fever — caught on the boat I expect.
By this time people were organising treks out of Burma and the chaplain's wife begged me to take you three out by a plane leaving Shwebo next day, but you were all too sick, and so we  stayed on and I hastily sewed boiler suits against mosquitoes if and when we could trek out.
However, it wasn't necessary, for within a week with a sudden shout of joy (while I was in a tin bath!)
I heard you three yelling ‘Daddy’.
We then elected to stay on and opened up those two houses (Bombay Burma) for thirty officers who had been turned out of hospital from the fighting lower down, and Pop opened up St Michael's school for about eighty soldiers until they were fit enough to go back to duty.
One of our fine teachers elected to stay and run that, while we did what we could, with Madriya's help, to feed our officers.
Do you remember helping us?
Pop would go out in the morning scouring the countryside for meat and vegetables, and sometimes having to dive into a culvert if there was a raid; meanwhile the officers would shepherd us into trenches and play games until the raid was over.
I remember an officer diving into a culvert during a raid — he thought he had been hit again but it was only a lump of mud on his seat!
There were no anti-aircraft missiles but the soldiers erected large bamboos to deceive the Japs.
Finally the army ordered you children and myself out — the Japs were getting very close.
We were told to take food and water on a train going down to Mandalay and I remember taking the Mothers' Union tea urn!
When we reached Mandalay it was in flames, Auntie Edie Mann's hospital from Rangoon had been evacuated to Mandalay, and again it was bombed, so she, clad in a man's shirt and shorts and tennis shoes, was flown out to Calcutta.
We stayed on the train for nearly a week, first being drawn down the track to Myinge where dear Jack Cardew took us into his house while the railway was repaired.
Do you remember the swimming pool and a snake in it?!
Later we were taken slowly up to Myitkyina.
Tim was fascinated at seeing overturned engines on the side of the line, and you girls were a little anxious as you saw me and a nice Salvation Army wife tear down the track when the train stopped to get water from the engine!
We used to stand it in the window to cool down so that we could get a cool drink — it was April and temperatures were up in the nineties and there  was no water on the train.
At one station a nice old Burmese woman brought us limes — her old arms scratched by the thorns — she asked no payment, it was her gift of love to this train load of refugees.
We wondered how Pop was getting on in Mayrnyo without us, but dear Madriya and his wife had stayed to look after him and the soldiers.
Pop, as the Japs drew nearer, had organised the men with one of our Mission doctors, and they hoped to walk out up the Chindwin Valley and over into Assam, but unfortunately for Pop his feet had gone septic, and at the end he was dumped on Myitkya airfield for a night and a day, waiting for a plane to take him over to Dibrugarh in Assam.
Fortunately a lone plane touched down, and took him off.
Then of course he was in hospital in Assam for some weeks.
Meanwhile we four arrived in Myitkyina.
Do you remember waiting on the station in the rain?
The rains had just started.
I dashed across to the DC's house to tell him that this train with several hundred refugees was standing in the station, and some shelter must be found for them.
He looked up from his desk and said, ‘My good woman, where do you think I can put them?’
I said, ‘What about opening an old cinema, or even a church?
There are old women and children sitting in the pouring rain.’
At last he sent for a chaprassi and sent him with me to look for something, but on the way I found nice Mr Dickensen, an American from the University in Rangoon.
You used to play with his children, do you remember?
I told him of the plight of all the refugees on the station, then he thought for a minute and said, ‘Well, I'm running a camp at the moment, and have over a thousand in it, but I'm sure we can squash you all in somehow.’
So back we went to the station and with joy picked you all up and out we went to his refugee camp.
The camp was near the river which gave you all great joy-it had to be our bathroom — but that was fun to you too.
We lay side by side on the floor all over the house — there must have been a dozen or more of us, including nice old Ma Mi who was delighted to see us.
A nice government official helping to run the  camp asked if I would mind staying until all the old and sick and pregnant women were flown out, and of course we were only too pleased to stay.
You children helped in dishing out plates of curry and rice every day.
I remember one day Tim saying to me, ‘Mummy, do you think the ‘Jackanese’ are sleeping in my bed in Rangoon? '' I thought that they probably were, tho' his bed was a drop-side cot!
After a fortnight we were told to go down to the airfield for a possible lift into Assam, but often refugees went in the morning but were back in the evening as the planes were so busy taking out wounded soldiers.
However, we sat round waiting patiently, and then a nasty-looking plane circled round.
We thought it was probably a Jap plane, and they were in the habit of swooping down and machine-gunning anybody, so, although it was a boiling hot day, I said to you children, ‘Let's play a game of tag round that heap of stones,’ thinking that at least we would not all get hit.
I can remember Rachel looking at me with scorn and saying, Mummy, you must be mad, in this heat! '' However, if was one of our own small fighter planes, and we rushed across to see it land.
By the evening we were lined up with our small bundles, hopefully waiting for a returning plane, when we spotted some of our nice soldiers from Maymyo.
I remember one of them coming over to see us, and being shocked that after a month from our last meeting we were still in the country.
We asked after Pop and were glad to hear that at that time he was still well.
I remember thinking of the 121st Psalm as we looked longingly towards the hills —‘I will lift up my eyes…’
Naturally the wounded had to be got away first, but later that day a plane came back over the mountains, and we were lined up again, and told that we could take only a small amount of personal possessions.
Do you remember being dressed in everything that you could wear and protesting at the heat?
And then the official on the airport saying that you couldn't carry out your Beatrix Potter books or your dolls?
However, after my saying, ‘Oh, you wouldn't part a mother from her child, would you?’ he allowed  the dolls and a teddy bear.
We found that the plane had had all its seats taken out to make enough room for all of us.
There were a few benches round the edge, but most people had to sit on their small bundles on the floor of the plane.
The plane was loaded down so much that it had difficulty in skimming the tops of those large mountains, but I was not troubled, thinking that the pilot was a well-trained American, until after an hour of this mountain hopping a small Chinese face appeared at the cockpit door and said, ‘Is you all all-lite?’
Then I discovered that he was our pilot!
I wasn't quite so happy after that; however, we landed safely on a tea estate in Assam, and then were packed into lorries and driven a few miles into Dibrugarh.
We arrived at a Roman Catholic church where kind ladies gave us food and blankets, and soon we were all cosily asleep on the hard church floor.
At midnight, the nice Salvation Army wife, who had travelled with us, shook my arm and whispered in my ear, ‘Be careful, there's a man at your feet.
He's probably going to steal your money.’
I lay still and looked at him in the dusk and began to laugh, and whispered to her, ‘It's all right, it's a statue of St Joseph!’
The next day we were taken down to the Brahmaputra river and loaded on to large river steamers.
So many refugees had passed that way already, and the steamers were dirty with no accommodation, so that again we slept side by side on the decks, and ate cold and rather horrible curry and rice on filthy plates.
Some kindly English Burma police were with us and whenever the boat tied up to the banks would slip ashore and bring back fruit for us.
In two days we reached Tezpur, and again found kind ladies from the tea estates waiting to give us a meal and a bath — bliss indeed!
From there we went in a funny little train with open trucks which fascinated Tim, until we got to a railway junction where we had to wait on the station for some hours for another train to take us to Calcutta.
Here the dirt of the steamer, and the filth of the station, caught up with poor Mig who went down with dysentery.
There were no lavatories on the station, or only filthy ones, so she and I chased down the line and out to the fields every  ten minutes or so — poor Mig, she was so good and patient.
After some hours a train came in and fortunately we found a carriage, packed with refugees of course, but it had a lavatory at the end of the corridor.
The journey to Calcutta took some hours, and when we arrived the Army met us and wanted to put us all in to some barracks, but I protested and rang up the Bishop, Foss Westcott, and asked if he could advise me what to do as Margaret by this time was very ill.
He immediately rang the Oxford Mission sisters, and by the time we reached them in a taxi they had beds prepared and a doctor called, and in two days Mig was well again.
How good they were.
Then came the long wait to find out when or if Pop would be out of Burma.
This news came within a week, as he had been picked up on Myitkyina airfield, unable to walk, and a lone plane came down and took him over to Dibrugarh, where he had to stay in hospital for over a week.
When he finally arrived in Calcutta he was not of course allowed to stay with us at the Sisters, which puzzled you children, but he stayed with the Oxford Mission Fathers and came over every day to see us, until a kindly businessman heard about us and took us along to his palatial house until we could decide what next to do.
The first thing was to find a school for you three — for six months you had had no teaching, except what I could give you, and then kind Miss Budden, the headmistress at Auckland House school, Simla, said she could take you if I could come too and help her nurse about twenty children down with measles in the san., because Matron was coping with some children with suspected diphtheria in another block.
So oft we went, leaving Pop at ‘Prospect Lodge’ in Simla (a holiday home for missionaries) until he was asked to go down to Poona and look after a soldiers' club.
I stayed until the measles epidemic was over, a matter of a few weeks, and then joined him with Tim in Poona.
It was horrid leaving you two girls in Simla, but within a few weeks — at the end of that term — we were able to have you down with us in Poona, and you went to the Wantage Sisters' school there, and Tim went too.
Pop and I had never had much to do with a soldiers' club-except for that brief time in Maymyo, which was more of a hospital than a club, but now we had to feed and house soldiers on leave, poor men who were tired and bored and away from their families.
I think you children were a delight to them and they would gather round the swimming pool and cheer you on with swimming lessons.
We ran a Monday night dance for them, but sometimes they got drunk and would chase each other through the club, and one night one of them fell into the swimming pool and climbed up the stairs to sit on the end of Rachel's bed!
I can see him now, and you three children comforting him because he had left his family in England!
But I was a bit apprehensive!
After six months Pop was asked to return to Simla to help the Burma Governor, Dorman-Smith, as Director of Public Relations, and to help the Administration and the Army who were by this time getting ready to go back into Burma.
People like General Orde Wingate were training men, one of whom was David Patterson, one of our clergy, and Pop helped by writing a book on Burmese for them in case they got separated from their units.
He travelled a lot in India at that time, talking to troops and meeting leaders, and so met many interesting people.
While we were in Poona we bought darling Sally because Rachel had become rather afraid of dogs, and while we were there who should turn up one day but dear old Madriya — he had come out of Burma on foot with his wife and daughter — he carried my old sewing machine for some time!
Then his wife died on the trek and he and his daughter walked into India and asked people everywhere — Did they know where Padre Appleton was? until at last he tracked us down to Poona.
Bless his faithful old heart!
I think about five thousand died on that trek.
We took him with us to Simla, and what a blessing he was.
Do you remember Padam Cottage on ‘Jacko Hill’, and later moving down to Christ Church Lodge near to the dear Claydons?
What fun you children had skating on the tennis courts down in the valley, and putting on plays and dances with the Claydons.
I hope they remember too.
I remember Elizabeth Thursfield with John Richard and Anthony, waiting anxiously for Rupert to come out of Burma, and John Richard coming down to have lessons with me.
Do you remember those lovely Himalayas with snow on them in the distance, the picnics out to Wildflower Hall (Lord Kitchener's old residence), the horrible rock pythons twined round an Indian's neck (they were harmless), the lepers that bothered Rachel, and the teas at Davico's?
Then Sally's lovely nine puppies — I remember you waylaying an army captain to let Sally mate with his dog, and he ringing us up laughing and saying of course he could, and you three making a lovely bridal room for them in Pop's study!
Then the nice soldiers on leave who came to stay with us-and silly but nice old Narodo, our second bearer, who always forgot to give us plates at meals?
Tim falling down the Kud and brought in by a kind Indian, unconscious for a day, and in hospital for a week.
Tim going to school with his arms round a nice Indian boy's neck.
Mig in hospital with horrible jaundice, me in the next room with suspected typhoid — but it wasn't!
Both of us taken down to hospital in a kind of litter — there were no cars in Simla, only rickshaws.
All the nice Burma people attached to Government who lived in Simla, and were so kind to us, who opened a room on the top of the library just below our house for soldiers on leave.
Margaret Brewitt ran it (old Burma Railways).
I remember going to Government House with Pop to lunch with the Wavells who had divided their house for wounded and men on leave, and had heard of our soldiers in Maymyo and in Poona.
Do you remember the Mall — that large expanse at the top of the Ridge, where Kipling must have walked and written his Just So stories?
Then back to England at the end of the war, waiting in Bombay  for the boat, no black out this time!
Malvern, and you and Mig going to ‘Ellerslie’ and Tim to Colwall.
Pop having to return to Burma for another year with the Governor, and finally my going to meet him in Liverpool when he was sent home at the end of that year very sick, never to return to Burma.
But you know the rest — this is just a tribute to three lovely unselfish children, and it may bring back some lovely memories, as it does to Pop and myself.
Bless you!