

What's new
GREAT IDEAS FOR HAIR AND BEAUTY
Face packs are a fairly regular part of our beauty routine but how about a hair pack?
TiGi Linea have formulated Conditioning Clay Pack, made from organic china clay and crammed with vitamins and minerals.
Simple to apply, just towel-dry your hair after shampooing and rinsing then massage Clay Pack on from the scalp to the ends.
Dry with a hairdryer (it should take approx 10–15 minutes) and rinse with warm water — it makes a wonderful treat for your hair.
From salons only, call  for details of your nearest stockist.
If you want to achieve those glamorous set looks then try a new style with Hot Shapes.
Hairdresser or the Year Trevor Sorbie has added this new styling product to his range to make achieving ‘the set’ much easier.
Simply spray Hot Shapes onto clean, dry hair before setting to get instant hold with a glossy finish.
New Hot Shapes is available at Boots stores for £3.65.
Vidal Sasson have recently developed Salon Intensives — a unique range of salon-formula conditioners.
Designed to give high-level treatment and protection to damaged hair, Salon Intensives can be used in addition to your normal shampoo and conditioner or as part of your weekly haircare routine to give your hair a new lease of life.
Available at Boots and usual stockists around the country, prices range from £1.05 to £3.15.
With spring in the air, why not let some flower power go to your head.
You can try anything from a single stem to a braided bunch with Antenna's new collection of flowery Monofibre extensions.
All styles are individually made an can be worn up to three months.
Prices start at £25 — call Antenna on .
Clynol have gone colour crazy — they have added six stunning shades of Color Mousse to their Viton S range.
Color Mousse is fast, fun and so easy to use.
It can be brushed, combed or scrunched into your hair to enhance natural hair colour.
The colour lasts up to five washes and a 100ml bottle gives between 12 and 15 applications.
Available from salons only — call  for your nearest stockist.
Look out for a new range of shampoos and conditioners called ShiKai, which means ‘fruit for hair’, and aptly so because the main ingredient for this range originates from shikaki fruit in the Far East.
It has unique lathering properties so if you don't like using soaps or detergent, ShiKai makes a great natural alternative.
Available at £3.75, call free on  for stockists.
With British women travelling more than ever Clairol have developed a new range of mobile curling appliances.
The Free Curl cordless styling Brush, Free Curl cordless styling Tong and Free Curl cordless combination Brush and Tong have been designed specifically for women on the move which makes them so easy to travel with.
The Free Curl stylers have been approved by the Civil Aviation Authority, come with twinpack gas cartridges and are available at Boots and usual stockists from £14.95.
Silvikrin is the UK's best selling hairspray so their formula speaks for itself and now they've added a new design to their range.
Silvikrin Pumping Spray acts like an aerosol but uses pressurised air to deliver a fine, concentrated spray.
Its unique refill system makes it very economical — when you have finished one bottle simply take the pump-mechanism out and put it in a refill — you can do this up to ten times.
Silvikrin's new Pumping Spray is available in three variants and costs £2.39, the refills are around £1.99.
Top model Claudia Schiffer — who was recently called ‘the most beautiful girl in the world’ by G.Q. Magazine — has moved into make-up.
This blond-haired, blue-eyes, six-foot stunner has just signed an exclusive megga contract with Revlon cosmetics.
It's national smile week this month from the 18th to the 24th and we've got some toothy tips from the experts at Jordon.
They recommend at least three minutes brushing twice a day to keep your teeth looking pearly white.
Stop smoking and cut down on sugary snacks.
Use a flouride toothpaste
Remember to change your toothbrush at least 4 times a year.
If you're looking for a new toothbrush, try the brill new brush from Aquafresh.
The Flex Toothbrush has a unique flexible neck which has been created to actually absorb any excessive pressure during brushing which can help to avoid gum damage.
The Flex is out at £1.49.
May 1992 sees the first Female Focus Exhibition.
Designed with women in mind, it covers every aspect of the female world including beauty, fashion, home and career.
If you are in the south of the country over the weekend of the 23–25 May, then pop along to the English Riviera Centre in Torquay.
Another good show to look out for this month is the Afro Hair & Beauty exhibition which this year celebrates its 10th Anniversary.
It is the only exhibition in the UK to combine black hair, fashion and beauty under one roof and is all set to take place on the 24th and 25th of May at The Business Design Centre in London.
DARK, SULTRY LOOKS BY 350 SALON
GENO BENTII'S STYLISH CURLS
SEXY CURLS BY NICK AT N.F.B.
LONG, UPSWEPT CURLS BY SCHUMI
VOLUMINOUS CURLS FROM D.L.C.
SEXY SET LOOK FROM EDMONDS
PERFECT COILS BY M&M ACADEMY
BY GUY KREMER AT FRENCH CONNECTION
CORKSCREW STYLE BY CAT'S WHISKERS
INNOVATIVE STYLE BY 350 SALON
TWO CURLY STYLES BY GUY KREMER
HAIR BY KEVIN MURPHY FOR CLYNOL
STYLED WITH BAIN DE TERRE PRODUCTS
HAIR BY CARLOS GALICO, MADRID
WILD STYLE BY WILLIAM AT M&M ACADEMY
Style file
Put a spring in your curls with some of the latest, most exciting styling products.
There are serums to smooth, sprays to add bounce and spritz's to enhance shine and because sets are such big news this season, new products are springing up every day!
This month's special collection of at-a-glance styles focuses on some of the loveliest looks for curls.
BODY WORK
For many years the French have firmly believed that regular pummelling is vital to the body beautiful.
Now the idea is catching on in Britain, so Lydia Ascroft says have a bash at massage and look forward to a sexier, slinkier you for the long, hot summer!
MIRACLE SLIMMING?
Wouldn't it be wonderful if you could melt away the flab simply by smoothing in a special cream, or break down fat by rubbing away at your wobbly bits?
Unfortunately, it's not so easy.
But, although massage alone won't work such miracles, in conjunction with a low-fat diet and plenty of exercise, it certainly helps in the battle of the bulge around problem areas such as your hips, thighs and bottom.
MASSAGE MAGIC
One of the main benefits of massage is that it boosts the blood circulation.
This in turn helps your body to pump out toxins and excess fluid.
If allowed to remain this waste matter will eventually get trapped into pockets by fibres deep in your skin leading to the familiar spongy, dimpled skin texture known as cellulite.
Other bonuses of massage are relief from the misery of muscular aches, pains and tension, as well as toned up, tingling, glowing skin.
There are, however, many different massage methods, creams and gadgets on the market, so to help you find one that tickles your fancy, read our guide.
MAKE THE RIGHT MOVES
You don't have to a professional masseur — try these movements yourself.
PINCH flabby areas gently between your thumb and fingers.
PUNCH them lightly with clenched fists.
STROKE firmly upwards from knee to waist with your hands or a massage gadget.
RUB in a circular motion with the palm of your hand or a massage gadget.
GREAT GISMOS
Arm yourself with a simple massaging weapon.
These are gentle enough to use on your back, legs and arms as well as your hips.
Many have complementary anti-cellulite products to boost the effects.
Try:
The Body Shop's rubbery Body Buddy,£4.50, has a knobbly side for problem areas as well as a gentle, bristly side, and can be used in the bath — lather up with some shower gel for lubrication — or after your bath, ideally in conjunction with The Body Shop's Massage Oil for cellulite, £3.30/60ml which contains citrus essential oils to help ease water retention.
Boots' Bodytone After Bath Massager works with a ‘rolling ball’ action and comes complete with Massage Oil for £8.12 from major branches.
Yves Rocher's Massage Glove,£9.95 a desc with rounded spokes and a handle which has been designed by a physiotherapist and promises an effective massage.
Along with a range of body care products detailed below, it's available by mail order.
for details.
Bronnley's 8″, £2.60 or 12″ Loofah, £3.45 .
The rough texture of loofahs help buff away dry, dead skin as well as pepping up your circulation.
PLUG INTO BEAUTY
Alternatively, you could try a labour-saving electrical gadget which should give an even deeper massage, generally designed for use on your hips, thighs and bottom.
BaByliss' BodyToner Plus,£35 — has eight rotating massage ‘fingers’ which manipulate your flesh.
Carmen's Celly Massager,£39.99 — one half of this gadget has five spring-loaded spheres which gently rotate and massage whilst the other half has 47 microfingers to stimulate the circulation.
Clairol's Cellutherapie,£39.95 — this offers a choice of two detachable heads.
There's the Oil Dispensing Massage head with spherical rollers and the Concentrator Massage Head with specially moulded ‘stimu-nodes’ to work on problem areas.
Also included is Cellutherapie Massage Oil and Smoothing Lotion.
For best effect, Clairol recommend you treat yourself to some Cullutherapie for five minutes every day after a shower or bath when your muscles are relaxed and your skin is warm.
G5 — this is a very powerful type of massage available from beauty salons.
It's so called because the electrical vibratory massager has a choice of five heads according to the intensity of the massage and which part of the body is to be treated.
Prices vary from salon to salon, but at Glemby the average is £15 for 20 minutes, or £25 for 45 minutes.
For details of your nearest Glemby salon offering G5, call .
FAT BUSTERS
Many doctors are very scathing about anti-cellulite creams but the secret is not to expect too much of them.
‘Most include plant extracts which have a stimulating effect on the circulation so they top up the benefits of a massage and boost your blood flow for a little longer.
But don't be fooled into thinking they can help you shed inches.
Claims that they can break down fat and disperse excess fluid are controversial.
However, they do appear to gently tighten and tone up the surface of the skin (albeit temporarily) and moisturise at the same time so skin feels softer and smoother.
And, even if they don't cure cellulite, they should help to stop it getting worse.
Elizabeth Arden's Anti-Cellulite Toning Treatment,£19.95/150ml contains technospheres, which according to Arden, release Celluplex, a concentrate that helps to convert excess fat into energy.
Alternatively, try Arden's Body Firming Treatment, £18/150ml, with moisturisers said to nourish the cells for healthier, firmer, younger looking skin.
Elancyl's Compact Cream-Gel,£8.95/125ml, contains extract of ivy and should be used in conjunction with their Compact Massage System.
Clarins offer a vast range of body shaping and firming buys.
If you're not really overweight but still suffer with a little sponginess and skin slackening, try Clarins Firming Body Cream, £20.40/200ml, with stimulating rosemary, sage and mint extracts.
Vichy's Hip and Thigh Cream,£13.25/125ml, is formulated to smooth out ‘orange peel’ skin texture and is pleasantly perfumed with rosemary and iris extracts.
Used regularly, skin will feel firmer, more supple and better toned.
SUPER SEAWEED
Superdrug's Hydrotherapy Body Care Collection — includes Sea Kelp & Ivy Body Firming Bath Soak, £1.95/25 ml and Sea Fennel & Horsetail Body Firming Cream, –1.99/50ml.
Yves Rocher Dynamic Corp Bio-Vegetal range includes gel, tonics and creams all with a high proportion of sea algae.
The Body Shaping Treatment, £13.95/125ml, claims to smooth and firm within 15 days.
Mail order details as before.
Oriflame use seaweed extracts too in their Body Slender Contouring Gel, £9.75/150ml.
Also give yourself a good rub down in the shower or bath with their Body Sea Scrub Bar, £3.95.
For details of your nearest Oriflame consultant, call them on .
Boots Natural Collection Hydrotherapy Firming Body Gel,£2.95/100ml, and Anti-Cellulite Massage Oil, £1.69/75ml.
CHEAP TRICKS
If your budget can't stretch to such luxuries as massaging gadgets and slendering creams, try these tips to tighten and tone slack, unattractive skin.
Massage some vegetable oil over your flabby bits, then sprinkle some sea salt onto a flannel or natural sponge, and rub gently.
Rinse off and moisturise.
Do the bottom shuffle while watching telly.
Sit on the floor with your legs stretched out in front of you and move backwards and forwards by ‘walking’ on your bottom.
Cut down on caffeine (tea & coffee), dairy products and foods containing additives.
Drink lots of mineral or filtered water to help you body's natural ‘flushing out system’ work more efficiently.
After your bath or shower, grit your teeth and splash yourself with cold water!
Eat plenty of fresh fruit — vitamin C, in particular, helps detoxify the system and promote healthy cell production.
Nine years ago, after seven years of development by a French biochemist, lonithermie was launched in Britain.
It's a unique beauty treatment that uses thermal clay and electrical currents to combat cellulite.
Administered by trained beauty therapists, there are special lonithermie formulations for home use too.
Prices usually range from between £30-£40 for a single treatment — call  for your nearest therapist.
STYLIST PROFILE
Britain is the centre of the hairdressing industry and British hairdressers are among the best in the world.
But what do the top stylists think about each other?
We got together a jury of 13 good hairdressers and asked them to nominate the hairdresser they most admired.
This is their verdict:
THE HAIRDRESSERS' CHOICE
TREVOR SORBIE
[British hairdresser of the year 1991 and 1992.]
Trevor was working in the States at the time of this interview.
His comments were short and sweet.
‘Sam McKnight, I admire him because he is just so creative in his work’.
CHARLES WORTHINGTON
[Creative director and co-partner of Worthingtons, one of the country's leading hairdressing and beauty groups.
‘My guru has always been Raymond, because he has the skill of making women look beautiful.
I love very polished and dressed looking hair and he has always worked in that way’.
JOSHUA GALVIN
[Joshua is one of the most respected names in the industry and at 54 years old is still at the top of his craft.]
‘If we are talking about who has contributed most to hairdressing, it would have to be Vidal Sassoon.
But among hairdressers today, I would nominate Michael Rasser of Michaeljohn.
I am a great admirer of longevity and Michael has been a friend and colleague for 32 years.
He is one of the finest hairdressers we have and there is nothing he can't do with hair; whether it's chignons for Princess Alexandra, wigs for Cher of shoots for vogue.
He is most definitely the best’.
ANDREW COLLINGE
[Regular hair expert for the BBC programme This Morning.
He runs a chain of salons and clients include Peter and Zara Phillips and the Duke and Duchess of Westminster.]
‘If I can I would like to nominate my father Peter Collinge.
He founded the Collinge business, which celebrates its 50th anniversary this year with eight salons and two training schools.
The majority of hairdressers in the North West have at one time been trained by him.
He is past President of the Hairdressers Fellowship and in the 50's was a leading competition hairdresser.
His hair cutting is as good as ever — he has not lost his touch.
There are so many talented hairdressers in this country, it is difficult to single any one out.
But I would like to add Anthony Mascolo, whose work has always inspired me.
He is the most artistic and brilliant hairdresser’.
ROBERT LOBETTA
[One of Britain's most innovative hair stylists.
Famous for imaginative hair designs in commercials and print advertising.]
As an individual artist, I nominate India Miller.
Her work is different and always tries to break new ground.
Her work with long hair is excellent.
She has a good taste level.
Quite superb.
As a team I nominate award-winning Toni & Guy.
Here is a collection of people led by Anthony Mascolo, working and thinking together in taste and simplicity.
As a group they work exceptionally well together.
ANTHONY MASCOLO
[International Artistic Director of Tony & Guy.
British Hairdresser of the Year 1988 & 1990.]
‘Jean-Louis Davide.
He is based in Paris and has salons all over Europe.
I admire the way he has managed to build up such a successful salon network and still produce creative, beautiful and commercial looks every season.
Also I must say Robert Lobetta.
He has an eye — his work is not just about technique, but has a balance and a feeling that make it exceptional’.
RITA RUSK
[1987 Hairdresser of the Year.
1990 voted Best in the World (France) and Master of the Art (USA).
Founder of the Rital Rusk International School.]
‘I would have to say Trever Sorbie.
His work is truly original and always executed with impeccable taste.
He is never one to go for gimmicks or flavour of the month hairdressing.
With an exceptional eye for hair in fashion photography, Trevor manages to capture the essence of his work in photographs that are profoundly unique and reflect his individuality and sense of style’.
INDIA MILLER
[Current holder of the title Scottish Hairdresser of the Year]
‘I admire Trevor Sorbie because he has contributed an incredible amount to the industry.
He has brought so many new techniques to hairdressing.
His work is always very elegant, always beautiful, but there is an element of surprise in it too.
I would most definitely nominate Trevor Sorbie’.
MICHAEL RASSER
[Founder member of top London salon Michaeljohn.
His clients include Princess Alexandra, Princess Anne and the Duchess of Kent.]
‘I vote for Sam McKnight for helping to keep the British hairdressing industry at the forefront of the world.
Also I would like to say Joshua Galvin, for all the unsung work he has done in British hairdressing’.
SAM MCKIGHT
[Top session hairdresser and hairstylist to Princess Diana.
We tracked Sam down to Calcutta where he was travelling with the royal party.
His comments over a bad long distance connection were necessarily brief.
‘Garren Of New York and Trevor Sorbie have been the biggest influences on me’.
TERRY JACQUES
[3 times holder of the title Afro Hairdresser of the year.]
‘My favourite hairdresser would have to be Trevor Sorbie.
I have followed him for a long time and his work just gets better and better.
If I could have a second choice it would be Anthony Mascolo’.
CHARLIE MILLER
‘[3 times awarded the title Scottish Hairdresser of the Year and past Avante-garde Hairdresser of the Year.]
‘The person I admire the most is my daughter-in-law India Miller.
She has a very special talent and her work is completely fresh.
I would also like to nominate Trevor Sorbie.
Quite simply, he is a master of the trade’.
SIMON FORBES
[Founder of the Antenna salon and inventor of Monofibre Extensions.]
Simon was to the point: ‘It is impossible to credit any single hairdresser, so I would like to put forward three greats — Trevor Sorbie and Anthony Mascolo’.
So, just who is the hairdressers' choice?
Dominating our survey is current Hairdresser of the Year, Trevor Sorbie.
Well done Trevor!
BEFORE AND AFTER
THE GLAMOUR GIRLS
If you want a new look but you've had a bad experience in the past or simple don't know which style to opt for, here are a few pointers.
Follow them and we'll guarantee a successful hairstyle every time .
If it's a drastic change you're after, take your time and choose a new style carefully.
Don't be afraid to chat to your hairdresser first — make an appointment for a consultation prior to having your hair cut.
Once you've found a style you like, it always helps to take a picture of it with you to the salon.
Do be prepared for some honest advice, though.
A good hairdresser will tell you a) if she thinks it will suit you or not and b) if it will actually work on your hair type.
If you're opting for a perm or colour, always tell your hairdresser what you've been doing to your hair.
Previous chemical processes will affect the results — even if you THINK they've grown out, the chances are they probably haven't!
When your hair is being cut, if you're unsure about what the hairdresser is doing, SPEAK UP!
It's no good complaining after the event when your hair is on the floor.
Hairdressers aren't mind readers and you must communicate with them.
Ask your stylist what they are doing and which products they are using.
Sometimes a trick with a tong or a particular brush will benefit a certain style and make home haircare much easier.
Styling products such as mousses and gels are often available from the salon and your hairdresser can ‘prescribe’ the correct variants for your hair type.
If you think you've got the dullest hair in the world, take a little inspiration from our four models.
Each of them has been transformed into a breathtaking beauty!
To draw emphasis away from a square jawline, hair was permed and left to dry naturally.
It was then razor cut into long graduated layers to give a full but very natural look.
Hair by MacMillan London,.
Styling made simple
You don't have to be rich or beautiful to look absolutely ravishing.
Quick, easy styling methods make glamorous hair achievable for everyone.
Remember though — condition is the key to any stunning style creation .
A well cut, short style is possibly more versatile than any other hair length.
With a good selection of styling products, it's possible to achieve a fabulous array of shapes, providing, of course, that hair is in tip-top condition.
This short, layered style (left), has been finished with a light application of Silvikrin's new Pumping Spray which, like all products in the Active Care range, contains superb conditioning ingredients.
To ring the changes, hair was sprayed at the roots and lightly backcombed for an alternative look.
Pumping Spray costs £2.39/100ml and is available in three variants.
Maintaining beautiful hair means finding a range of caring products and sticking with them Interactive ingredients in products from shampoos through to mousses and sprays are formulated to complement each other, leaving your hair in maximum condition.
Permed hair will benefit from Silvikrin's new 2 in 1 for dry/treated hair.
Pumping Spray for permed and curly hair refreshed and protects curls with hold
The correct hair care regime results in beautiful hair that's shiny and healthy 
Sometimes hair can look a little out of sorts, even with regular conditioning.
Include an intensive conditioner in your routine and treat your hair to an additional boost every week or so.
After applying, comb through to ensure even distribution and leave for a minimum of three minutes.
We used Silvikrin's Intensive Treatment (£1.59/100ml).
To create great styles from one cut, you need versatile styling products.
Silvikrin Active Care Gel Spray can be used on damp or dry hair to mould, control and add shine! £1.99/150ml.
Choose styling products formulated to give a natural-looking hold for casual styling.
STYLE COLLECTION
PARTING SHOT FACE FRAMERS SOPHISTICATED LADY MEN ONLY
Full, texturised style incorporating heavy layering and subtle shading.
Created by the artistic team at the 
NEW SHAPES NEW COLOURS NEW CUTS
PARTING SHOT
The timeless ‘marcel wave’ is proving to be a big hit with clients at Paul Nath hair
Wet-look, sculpted waves created by Nigel at MacMillan of London
Dramatic styles showing a crown of precision curls by the Martin Gold team
Stunning creation by Guy Kremer at French Connection, Winchester
Vici Moorhouse at Rare Moods styled this asymmetric bob with a high crown
Striking side-parted style on blonde hair.
By Terence Renati in London
Sleekly styled shoulder-length hair created by Joy Agar
Vici at Rare Moods used Copper Gold Colorance on this 60's style
Precision parting on an ultra sleek bob achieved by the MacMillan team
Rich velvet brown vegetable colour adds warmth.
Colour by Sara Jane and colour by Maria, both at the N.F.B. salon
A 90's update of the classic Vidal Sassoon bob shape, using their latest colouring technique.
By the Sassoon team in London
FACE FRAMERS
Dramatic evening styling by Mo Nabbach at the M & m Hair Academy in London
After setting hair on medium rollers, George at Cat's Whiskers styled this 1940's look
Simon Rattan used the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range of styling products on this look
Kevin Murphy used Clynol's professional colourants to achieve this vibrant effect
Unusual wispy tendrils frame the face.
Created by the Avant Garde styling team
Clynol's Corregin Active Blow and Hold was used on hair to give style and control
Maximum condition achieved with the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range — from salons only
Rich, red colourant enhances the condition and cut of this style.
By Geno Ventti
Short, texturised layers enhanced with copper highlights.
By Terence Renati
Damson and elderberry colour enhance this cut.
Style by Denise, colour by Sarah, at N.F.B.
Angela at Clayton Stripe used TRESemmé 4+4 High Lift Bleach on this look.
Style by Sean Murphy
Cropped and heavily texturised, this look has been finished with wax.
By Mitch at the 350 Salon, Battersea
Gary Hooker at Saks used two wigs to create this fabulous dressed evening look.
Styling products emphasise the curls
A hint of seventies styling with this feathered cut.
By Terence Renati
A vibrant shade of copper emphasises short waves.
By Aveda in the U.S.A.
Short style, finished off with an uneven hairline.
By Cutting Garden
Carl Shaw at New Dimensions used Goldwell's Topchic colourant
Bain de Terre Spa Therapy styling products add texture and shine
Wild style, full of volume and movement.
Created by C.B. Academy
John Frieda's successful home styling range was used to create this full look
Innovative highlighting and texturising by Simon Rattan for Bain de Terre
SOPHISTICATED LADY
Beautifully elegant styling by Guy Kremer at French Connection in Winchester
Exquisite styling on beautifully conditioned long hair.
By Mo at M&M Hair Academy
Soft, elegant look for long hair, created by Simon Rattan for Bain de Terre
Teri Donnelley used Redken colourants and extra hold hairspray for this look
Wayne at the M&M Hair Academy created this fabulous corkscrew curl style on long hair
Very long hair has been twisted into this great shape for evening.
By Norman Ellis at Options
Longer layers on short hair makes for a versatile style.
This look is by Terence Renati
Michael at Cat's Whiskers set hair on rollers then loosened the curls into ringlets
This beautiful style forms part of Charles Worthington's Continental Cool Collection
Superb shine on this simple yet striking style.
Created by Ozzi Rizzo at the Sanrizz salon in London
High drama achieved by Angela and Marcia at Clayton Stripe using products by TRESemmé
The height of elegance achieved by the 350 Salon, Battersea
A combination of dramatic blonde and high style by Bruce Hunter
Beautiful red hair styled with Clynol products, from salons only
Natural curls cut into a bob, swept back for evening.
By Schumi
Fun beehive variation created by the John Peers team in Rochdale
Short, asymmetric cut by the Rita Rusk International styling team
New London salon, Max & Co, created this softly backcombed look
A combination of sleek styling and set curls by the Jazz Hair Co
Short cut and sensational colour by award-winning salon, Gatsby International in N. Ireland
Striking style, softly emphasised with Wella Contrasts Highlighting Kit, in shade Golden Blonde
MEN ONLY
Severe, wet-look styling by Mo Nabbach at the M&M Hair Academy in London
A basic square shape has been softened with layered front sections.
By Jingles International
This cropped shape works well on fine or thick hair.
By Norman Ellis at Options
Fab styling emphasised with warm colour.
By the artistic team at Zoo
Ultra short hairline contrasts with thick natural waves.
By Brian Andrews, Rochdale
Thick, shiny hair styled casually by Guy Kremer at the French Connection salon
Natural waves sculptured with styling products from the Bain de Terre range
Longer top layers styled with wet-look gel by Hatley's Hair for Clynol
Great styling by Tin Tin using finishing products from the professional Goldwell range
Spring is here so it's time to wave goodbye to winter and go for a splash of colour.
We take a look at some of the spectacular shades on show this season.
BEAUTY SPECIAL
COLOUR ME GOOD
For the perfect face this spring remember that more is not necessarily better.
You can achieve the freshest look with minimum make-up.
This soft, spring face is achieved with minimal colour, soft subtle shading and clever toning.
FACE
Find a foundation that is the same colour as your skin — the aim is to enhance your skin tones rather than totally block your complexion.
Something like Helena Rubinstein's Contact Finish or Natural Touch Tinted Moisturiser from Outdoor Girl will give a natural, sheer coverage.
To set your foundation and eliminate any shine, pat loose powder lightly all over your face and dust off with a big brush.
For a natural glow to your skin mix a subtle shade of blusher with loose powder.
Try Mary Quant's Blushbaby or Refined Blush Powder from 2000, sweep over your cheek bones and up to your temples to emphasise your bone structure and give a lovely glowing complexion.
EYES
Lightly cover the eyelid with a neutral block of colour, increasing in depth towards the outer lid and smudge a small amount along the edge of the lower lashes, Clinique's Naturalist collection of colours are perfect for this.
To make eyes look instantly wider use a little black eyeliner just above your upper lash line and blend in.
A Rimmel Eueliner is excellent value at £1.19.
Give definition to your lashes with a touch of vaseline and a sweep of mascara — try Lashbuilding Mascara from Colorfast or Revlon's Innerlash.
Brush your eyebrows to smooth and shape them or try a gel to gloss them.
We liked Eyebrow Emphasiser from Charles of the Ritz.
LIPS
Achieve that soft, stained look by firstly applying a lip hold like 17's Lipstick Base or new Lip Fix from Cutex which will coat your lips with moisturisers and give a secure base for your lipstick.
Next, choose a soft, strong colour — good collections to look out for are Max Factor's High Definition, Colorissimo from Bourjois, Helena Rubinstein's Rouge Forever and Intensités by Chanel.
Apply lipcolour with a brush, blot with a tissue and lightly dust with loose powder.
Finally, sweep a light gloss over your bottom lip to give it fullness, try Cover Girl's Lip Advance or Colour Tints from Colourings — the result is a natural hint of healthy colour that will last.
Beauty without cruelty has produced a booklet that proves you can look great whatever your age.
Through The Ages gives full make-up, colour and application info together with useful tips for each age group.
If you would like your own free copy of the BWC Through The Ages booklet, write to  
‘This spring the focus will be on eyes and lips’ says Mrs Evelyn Lauder of Estée Lauder Companies
Main pic: Sensational soft styling with Philips Geometrics, using the Straightener Tong attachment.
Available at Boots and Argos for £25.99.
Accent Soleil Limpide Rose Frêle Three soft, luxurious lip colours from Chanel's Intensities range in a Minor Key with co-ordinating nail enamels.
Fresh faced Yasmin Le Bon looks sensational in soft spring colours, Skin care by Pure and Simple
Beautiful classic browns from Clinique.
The Naturalists is a new range of soft-pressed eye shadows Bronze Satin Claret Dusk
COLOUR ME BAD
SOFT AND SULTRY
Warm subtle shades, cool corals and natural neutrals make this spring face glow with femininity!
SHADES TO STUN WITH:
The Naked Fantasy range from Ultima II is a delicate collection of warm colours which gives a very light, natural look.
Sensiq's New Age Neutrals range comprises of no less than seventeen superb shades for eyes, face, cheeks and lips.
Charles of the Ritz have created Bamboo, a rich selection of seasonal shades to give an exotic look.
Colorfast from Max Factor has some bright and bubbly colours, look for Peach Sparkle, Copper Spirits and Passion Peach.
The 2000 collection of spring colours are a combination of warm topaz and cool opal.
Rimmel Silks have a warm earthy collection of colours.
Its moisturising crease-resistant formulations make the range great for older or dryer skins.
Nature's Brights from Outdoor Girl
Exotic Bazaar from Cutex
Neat and sleek Hair was styled with the Philips Pro Dryer costing £18.95 from Boots and Argos
Avoid pale blusher on a dark complexion, choose tinted powders to enhance your skin tone.
Create structured curls with the Geometrics Spiral Tong from Philips priced at £25.99
DARK AND DAZZLING
These rich vibrant colours look sensational on dark skin.
Be bold with strong shades — that's the key to this fabulous face!
CREATIVE COLOURS:
Mary Quant's inspiration comes from the glam style of the 70's — Colour Quantastic can guarantee some really groovy shades.
From 17 comes Colourmania, a bold collection of shimmering shades and bright ideas — great fun for the young.
Rimmel's Island Paradise range of hot colours has been influenced by the tropics and madi-gras.
Bourjois is well known for its vibrant collections and their spring range is no exception — ideal for dark skin.
Colour Explosion from Revlon has vivid colours like Orange Fire and Vicacious Pink making up the range.
If it's sultry shades you're looking for then the Preludes collection from Helena Rubenstein is one to try.
Colour Quantastic by Mary Quant
Naked Fantasy by Ultima II
PRACTICAL HAIRCARE
MIAMI STYLE
STYLING TRICKS FROM CLAIROL FOR LIFE IN THE FAST LANE
Miami, Florida is THE place for girls who like to live life to the full.
Clairol decided to put their new gas powered styler to the test on a jet-setting local.
TONGING TIPS
Always work on dry hair
Hair that was washed the previous day will be easier to style
Apply setting lotion or hairspray before curling for added control
For fuller, looser waves, work on larger sections of hair and brush through gently after tonging.
For a more curly effect, tong smaller sections of hair then run your fingers through the curls to separate them out
Wind hair diagonally down the barrel of the tong to ensure even heat distribution and uniform curls
Hold the tong in place for five seconds them release hair
FREE CURL is the latest heated appliance in the extensive Clairol range.
Available as a Hot Brush (£17.95); Tong (£14.95) or a combination of the two (£19.95), Free Curl is powered by a ThermaCELL gas cartridge which is accepted on any aircraft in checked-in-luggage.
We have ten Free Curl Combi stylers to give away — turn to page 54 for details.
DOUBLE TAKE
The 90's woman leads a hectic lifestyle, often juggling a high flying career with family life and an exciting social scene.
She needs a style that she can transform at the flick of a brush or the twist of a curler to complement her every mood.
First, hair was lightened with Majiblond using easi-mesh, woven highlights then Majirel Wild Fox was painted on through the front.
The set look was achieved with L'Oréal's Tec-ni-Pli rollers.
By Maureen at Headfirst Beauty Two
Mid-length hair has been softly highlighted to emphasise movement when down.
For a more formal look, hair was scraped back and softened with a loose fringe section.
Both styles by Nicki at Group Montage in Sheffield, using Clynol's Salon Formula styling and finishing products 
Richard Thompson at Mahogany enhanced this dressed style with a rich dark mahogany colourant.
Before Antony Licata styled the alternative look, dashes of golden copper lights were added to the longer areas at the top and sides.
These dramatic styles have been influenced by the look of the sixties.
Both were coloured using the Colorap highlighting method, available at professional salons around the country.
Two looks from one incredibly versatile cut.
Wet-look gel was used to slick down the front sections as an alternative.
Hair by the team at Mane Street in Bournemouth.
Volumising a style can make a terrific difference.
You can achieve this by adding a touch of spray to the roots and blowdrying hair upside down.
By Bessay in Ohio.
A curly style can easily be changed to a swept back look by brushing curls through and drying with firm hold mousse.
Both styles were created by the La Moda Styling team.
Add a subtle yet striking change to your hair, simply by alternating your styling products.
These styles were created with the Bain de Terre range 
EXPERT ADVICE
Q&A
This month, Redken's Education Manager, Joan Newton answers your hair problems.
Q The natural colour of my hair is between a light brown and a dark brown.
The style is a bob.
My problem is that over the last 4 or 5 years, I've been having my hair highlighted and gradually I feel that it has become too blonde.
What I'd like to do is go back to my natural colour.
Should I wait until the highlights have grown out or could I have a colour put on top?
A There is no need to have your hair cut short to get rid of the bleached highlights before you have your hair coloured back to its natural shade.
We recommend a course of protein treatments to reinforce the hair structure, making it firmer, stronger and more receptive to the colour service.
Redken's CAT, Extreme or PPT treatments contain effective ingredients which penetrate into the hair to strengthen the hair structure and ensure an even colour service.
Q I am at my wits end.
A year and half ago I had my hair permed and didn't like it.
A month ago I decided to have it straightened by an acid perm.
However, the perm has just come slowly back again.
I would really love to have long hair but it never seems to grow at the back, only at the fringe!
Is there anyone in the world who could make my hair straight and stay straight?
A Firstly, to help your hair to grow we recommend you use a professional treatment such as our Vivagen — this conditions the scalp and helps create a healthier growing environment for the hair.
At the same time, you will need to strengthen your hair so that you can have it straightened successfully.
If the hair is chemically processed too often, it might break so treating it first will prevent it becoming very dry and damaged.
Q I have always had fine, flayaway and dry hair but it was fairly thick and grew quickly.
I am now 70 years of age and whilst my hair still grows quickly in length, it is getting thin on the scalp and it is still fine, flyaway and dry.
I have a soft perm every 3 to 4 months.
There are so many products on the market I am at a loss as to what to buy and so would appreciate your advice on the type of shampoo, conditioner and spray which would make my hair look thicker and also which perm to try.
A The best shampoo for fine hair in the Redken range is called Glypro L. It bathes the hair in proteins and carbohydrates to give body and strength.
Condition with Climatress Moisturising Treatment.
The best perm for your hair type would be a conditioning perm which contains protein ingredients to strengthen and condition during the perming process.
Q I have been using extra red Henna on my hair for almost two years while I've been growing my hair.
Now I've achieved the length, I want to have a perm for my wedding in two month's time, only to find that due to the Henna, my hair won't take a perm.
A recent strand test showed that it has been over processed.
A Because Henna is a plant, it can absorb the minerals from the soil in which it is growing.
These in turn can upset the perming process.
To remove these minerals from the hair and ‘purify’ it, we recommend our Hair Cleansing Creme.
To strengthen your hair prior to a perm and ensure that it is the best possible condition, apply a combination of protein and moisturising treatments.
Q I have recently had my hair permed and love it!
My problem is that although I am only 24, I have noticeable grey hairs in my fringe.
My hair is a very light brown/dark blonde colour and I can never find a permanent colour that covers evenly and naturally.
Please help as I feel I'm going to look old before my time!
A To blend grey hair as opposed to covering it completely you need an intensive semi-permanent.
One such product that's available in salons only is Redken's Shades EQ.
This will help to blend the grey and condition the hair at the same time.
There are 14 different shades which can be inter-mixed by your colourist to achieve any colour.
Q I hope you can help me.
I am 59 years of age and for the last fourteen years I have had curly perms.
My hair is very fine and going grey.
I now find that the perms don't take very well and I have to have it repermed and even then there is some part where it does not take.
A Hair is always affected by the chemical changes taking place within our body, which can account for the fact that perms will sometimes be successful and sometimes not.
We cannot change what is happening inside, but we can change the hair condition by applying correctly prescribed, penetrating protein treatments to the hair.
We would strongly recommend you seek the professional advice of your Redken stylist who will analyse your hair.
Q My problem is that my hair falls out all the time.
I have thick black hair and it's always falling onto my clothes.
It's so embarrassing — I really hope you can help me find something to solve my problem.
My hair is greasy and I've got a little dandruff.
A For falling hair you need to condition your scalp with Vivagen Shampoo and Treatment.
This will help all three of your problems — the shampoo will effectively cleanse away the oil and control the dandruff and the treatment will condition the scalp and help your hair to grow longer.
Redken products are only available from selected professional salons to ensure that they are correctly prescribed according to individual hair types and requirements.
The products are not tested on animals.
For details of your nearest Redken salon, please 
HAIR HELPLINE: if you've got a problem with your hair and you'd like an answer from an expert, write to us 
celebrity interview
From Bread to Brookie — this month we talk to Hilary Welles, Brookside's new hairdresser Angela.
Is this independent, single parent who doesn't stand for any of Barry Brant's messin' anything like the real Hilary?
NAME:Hilary Welles
AGE:28
HOME:London
WHO'S YOUR FAVOURITE HAIRDRESSER?
A friend does my hair for me, she's a freelance hairdresser.
She's out of the country at the moment so I'm pretty stuck until she comes back.
WHICH HAIR PRODUCTS DO YOU USE?
I use all types of shampoos and I have to use loads and loads of conditioners — I like L'Oréal's Protelene conditioner and Henara Wax.
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE CURRENT HAIR FASHIONS?
Igo by what looks good rather than‘what's in’.
I love the Bardot look and all the wigs and extensions around at the moment are great.
WHAT'S THE MOST DISASTROUS THING YOU'VE EVER DONE TO YOUR HAIR?
I used to model for a hairdresser — Herberts in Liverpool — and I had my hair dyed blonde and red, it looked great — honest, but as it started to grow out I neglected it.
Anyway, one day me and my mates were all going to a party so I decided to do a home perm.
I will always remember undoing that first roller — I had forgotten to put the  neutraliser on, it looked like a nightmare and all my mates were calling me poodle head.
So I had it all cut off, it was about 2 inches all over — never again!
WHO DO YOU THINK HAS GOT GOOD HAIR?
I'm a real sucker for blondes, I love the idea of being this really sexy blonde.
Michelle Pfeiffer is gorgeous — I wouldn't mind looking like that!
WHICH MAKE-UP AND HAIR ITEM WOULD YOU BE LOST WITHOUT?
Conditioners for my hair because it gets really dry and definitely lipstick, I have to have my red lippy.
DO YOU LIKE TO BUY EXPENSIVE HAIR AND COSMETIC ITEMS OR DO YOU THINK CHEAPIES ARE JUST AS GOOD?
I think good skin care is really important so I get sucked in by anti-wrinkle creams and things like that.
It's worth spending money on your face, especially cleansers, toners and moisturisers but as for lipsticks and eye make-up, the cheapies are just as good.
ARE YOU HAPPY WITH THE WAY YOUR HAIR LOOKS?
It's O.K. I wouldn't mind having it cut though.
It's really out of condition at the moment because it's permed and highlighted and when I'm filming it gets sprayed to death so it just gets even dryer.
HOW DO YOU RATE YOURSELF — OUT OF 10?
Well, I know in the interview you did with Patsy Kensit she gave herself a 4 so I'll have to go for 2.
IF THERE WAS ANYTHING YOU COULD CHANGE ABOUT YOUR LOOKS WHAT WOULD IT BE?
My thighs and bum — I'd definitely like them to be a lot smaller.
WOULD YOUR HAVE ALL YOUR HAIR SHAVED FOR A PART?
Yes, if it was essential for the character but I wouldn't do it just for hype.
ARE YOU A FAIRLY HEALTHY PERSON?
Yes I would say so.
I go to a gym regularly and I use to swim for Liverpool so swimming still keeps me fit.
I tend to play hard but I work-out hard and I take vitamins and try to eat well and stuff like that.
DO YOU HAVE A SPECIAL BEAUTY ROUTINE?
I always cleanse, tone and moisturise and I put on a face masque every week.
I like to use Plenitude, Vitamin E is good too.
WHERE DO YOU SEE YOURSELF IN FIVE YEARS' TIME?
I just live life for today really but I would like to pass my driving test.
HOW DID YOU GET YOUR BIG BREAK?
When I got the part of Rachael in Bread back in ‘89 I thought ‘this is it’.
I was driven around in limos and everything was great — but these things are as good as they last.
I've done quite a few ads, the latest Marmite ad is mine and now I've got the part in Brookside which is great, I'm really enjoying it.
DO YOU LIKE ANGELA, THE CHARACTER YOU PLAY?
Yeah, she's great — she has split up from her husband and works for her and the kids, a really independent woman who's been messed around by men and is now looking after herself.
it's great that Barry Grant is running after her.
CAN YOU GIVE US ANY HINTS ON HOW THINGS ARE GOING WITH YOU AND BARRY?
Well, no not really but I will say that my husband may be making an appearance!
NEXT MONTH: DANI BEHR New Presenter on The Word
Beautiful Brides
It's going to be one of the most important days of your life and you want it to be perfect.
This special ten page section is all about you and how you can look your best on your big day.
We've put together some great hairstyle ideas and teamed them with beautiful outfits and accessories.
All in all, we've compiled the ultimate bridal guide for all those little extras that will make yours a truly polished performance.
Main pictures: Photography:Chris Lane; Hair: Group Montage for Clynol; Make-up: Katya for Helena Rubenstein; Styling: Mandy Pritty.
cool, classic and simply stunning
BEAUTY DAY
Treat yourself to a complete top-to-toe a week before the wedding.
Make it a really relaxing experience, both physically and mentally by choosing treatments that de-stress and de-toxify.
A day at The Sanctuary in London costs £35 and this includes full use of facilities such as pools, sauna, steam room and jacuzzi plus a 20 minute solarium session.
If you're not in London, Glemby have 50 Beauty salons in major department stores around the country offering a top-to-toe service.
Prices range from £40 to £58 but expect to pay up to £100 in London — call  for your nearest salon.
SHAPE BREAK
Why not go the whole hog and book yourself into a health farm for a really relaxing break.
Ragdale Hall in Leicestershire has two special three-night breaks coming up in June, offering you the chance to lie back and be pampered for just £275 per person.
This includes accommodation and meals, Ragdale Facial, Body Massage with Infra Red, Slendertone and a Self-Tan Treatment plus full use of all facilities.
There will be a 20 % discount on all DeCleor treatments, depilatory waxing and eye-lash tinting plus a free beauty gift for every guest.
Call  for more details.
MAKE-UP LESSON
Walk into any branch of The Body Shop around the country and ask for a make-over and you'll get one completely free of charge.
The beauty consultant will use the Colourings range of products, talking you through shades and techniques as she goes.
A make-up lesson at Glemby will cost from £10.50 — phone number as before.
Harrods, Boots and many large department stores offer free make-up consultations so just ask at the counter.
If you're tying the knot at a registry office, this timeless style is ideal.
It was created by Michael Lewis using clynol's Salon Formula Volume Builder which enhances movement and fullness.
An application of Styling Spray holds the look in place all day.
Linen jacket by Trixi Schober.
THE MAKE-UP: Face: Sublimmescence foundation, shade Radiant Honey.
Cheeks: Colour Fusion Impalpable Powder Blush, shade Desert Flame.
Eyes: Colour Fusion Eyeshadow Duo, shade Sandy Topaze and Black Immensity Volumatic mascara.
Lips: Rouge Forever, shade Golden Copper.
All by Helena Rubinstein
dramatic, daring and boldly beautiful
You'll certainly turn lots of heads with this stunning creation.
To create this graceful and sophisticated look, Michael used Salon Formula Mousse to smooth hair into a perfect conical shape.
He then used Hairshine to even out any stray hairs and add a beautiful sheen to the finished look.
‘Van Gough’ wedding dress by Beverley Summers; head-dress by Carol Young at Flowers by Jayne.
THE MAKE-UP: Face: Luminescent Finish, shade Luminous Beige.
Cheeks: Soft Berry Eyes: Rich Brown eyeshadow, Black Kohlstyler and Black Perfect Liquid Liner Lips: Rouge Forever lipstick, shade Fatal Ruby All by Helena Rubinstein
Smart skull cap detail by the Panache salon in Edinburgh
Sheer elegance from Michael Lewis at Group Montage for Clynol
Heavenly head-dress and perfect plaiting by the Panache salon
Romantic styling on long, luxurious hair from Schwarzkopf
Feminine style is enhanced by soft silk.
Dress by Berketex
This dramatic design on a medieval style was created by Greys
Avant garde glamour.
This high style comes from Panache
Fresh and simply stunning.
Hair by W.M. Mackenzie Hair
SAVING FACE
A couple of carefully chosen make-up items will see you through the day with confidence.
New from Colourings at The Body Shop is Complete Colour (£3.95).
It/s an all-in-one product for eyes, cheeks and lips and comes in two shades — Rosewood and Terracotta, both specially selected to enhance all three areas of the face.
It comes in a streamlined compact so it's ideal for popping into a tiny bag.
There's a strong possibility of a shiny T-zone (forehead, nose and chin) on a warm day, especially if you're a bit nervous.
Eliminate this with an application of Sensiq's Translucent Face Powder (£3.49), which contains exceptionally fine jet-milled powders to give your skin a super-smooth, almost creamy texture.
Its moisturising matte formula is designed to be particularly long-lasting, too.
LASH-OUT
It's going to be a very emotional day and the last thing you want is panda eyes!
You have two options.
The first one is to have your eyelashed tinted professionally at a beauty salon — this costs between £6.00-–9.00 at Glemby, takes just 15 minutes and will last up to six weeks.
The second is to buy yourself a good waterproof mascara but remember you may need to buy a suitable eye make-up remover, too.
Look for Revlon's Innerlash Mascara (£9.50) or Cil 18 Heures' from Bourjois (£3.79) which are both waterproof but easy to remove or go for the super, long-lasting Marathon Mascara (£2.81) from Cover Girl which will need specific waterproof make-up remover.
UNDER COVER
Don't spoil the look or feel of your bridal garment with badly fitting underwear.
Spend as much time choosing it as you do your wedding dress and make sure the two complement each other— unsightly  bulges and visible straps will ruin your entire appearance.
Gossard's Smooth Basque is ideal for wedding gowns made from satin polyester so it feels luxurious and has detachable shoulder straps and suspenders.
It costs £29.99 from specialist shops and department stores throughout the U.K. and comes in White, Pearl and Black.
Shown here is another beautiful basque from Gossard.
PAMPER YOURSELF
Check out Worthington's Bridal Schedule.
This top London salon will work out a personalised hairdressing programme for any bride to suit her budget.
Charles Worthington also works in conjunction with wedding dress designer Andrea Wilkin and top florist John Carter.
Call  for more details.
enhance natural beauty with subtle styling
THE CROWNING TOUCH
A general rule when choosing a suitable hairstyle is to let your hair play a supporting role to the veil.
Face shapes matter, too.
Follow these simple rules for the perfect accessorised combination:
Round Face:Choose a veil with some height to minimise width and make your face look longer.
Try tiaras and crowns and always wear hair below your jawline to create the illusion of length.
Oval Face:You'll look good in a veil that frames your face like a halo — bands around the forehead will suit you too.
Keep hair height on top to a minimum and wear hair at least to chin length if you can.
Square Face:Wear a headpiece that sits on the back of your head and opt for an understated veil style, although your face shape will carry a long veil beautifully.
Keep the width of your hairstyle to a minimum at the sides but create height on top.
Heart Shaped Face:Veils that become fuller below the ear will suit you best because they'll add width to the jawline.
Bear this in mind with your hairstyle, too.
Avoid width at the top but create volume at the chin — do not wear your hair shorter than chin level.
The ultimate in simplicity, this beautiful style is the perfect choice to complement an elaborate neckline.
Michael used Corregin Active Blow and Hold, finished with an application of Hairshine.
Dress by Hollywood Dreams.
THE MAKE-UP Face: Contact Finish 12 Cheeks: Colour Fusion Impalpable Powder Blush, shade Natural Peach Eyes: Colour Fusion Impalpable Eyeshadow Duo, shade Tender Taupe; Bronze Kholstyler and Brown Perspective Volumatic mascara Lips: Rouge Forever, shade Forever Coral All by Helena Rubinstein
softest curls for timeless appeal
WEDDING BELLES
Your wedding day is the one time in your life that you can live out your wildest dreams and most romantic fantasies.
The eye-catching gypsy style, worn with an intricate headband from Hollywood Dreams, was styled into a cascade of spiral curls with Clynol's Styleset Lotion.
Corregin Active Dynamic Control adds the ultimate hold.
Wedding Dress by Hollywood Dreams.
THE MAKE-UP: Face: Bronze Velvet Luminescent Finish Cheeks: Colour Fusion Impalpable Powder Blush, shade Elegant Rose Eyes: Colour Fusion Impalpable Eyeshadow Due, shade Tender Taupe and Brown Perspective Volumatic mascara Lips: Rouge Forever, shade Desert Spice All by Helena Rubinstein
If you've enjoyed this month's Brides Special you'll love next month's too!
We've got lots more beautiful style ideas to show you plus there'll be a chance for you to win a fabulous bridal make-over and appear in the magazine.
Watch this space!
A dream come true — this elegant style was achieved by setting hair on flexible stylers with Clynol's Styleset.
The crisp curls were then carefully worked through with Salon Formula Mousse for a softer, more delicate wave.
Wedding dress by Beverley Summers.
THE MAKE-UP: Face: Contact Finish 22 Cheeks: Colour Fusion Impalpable Powder Blush, shade Impalpable Pink Eyes: Colour Fusion Impalpable Eyeshadow Due, shade Smoky Turquoise; Brown Perspective Volumatic mascara and Taupe Kholstyler Khol pencil Lips: Rouge Forever, shade Beryl Rose.
All by Helena Rubinstein.
HOT OFF THE PRESS
TOWER POWER
Hair designer, Steven Jones of Manchester, recently undertook the challenge to create a hairstyle in the shape of Blackpool Tower.
Modelled here by Adele Curry, a student at the Blackpool and Flyde College of Hair and Beauty, the amazing creation which took two weeks to complete and stands well over a foot high is in celebration of Blackpool Tower's £13 million transformation into Tower World.
STUDENT DISCOUNT
Anyone under 20 is entitled to a 20% discount at trendy Convent Garden salon, Macmillan London.
The Student Discount Card costs =4.00 and is obtainable on the first salon visit — your 20% discount is valid immediately.
Your discount card can be used against any hairdressing service, including colours and perms.
The card is valid until the holder reaches his or her 20th birthday.
FAMOUS FIVE
If you live in London, all your hairdressing problems could be answered this summer.
Five of London's finest hairdressers have teamed together and will be opening their new salon, Parsons Skott, on Midsummers Eve, June 20th.
Services include individual hairstyling instruction, head and shoulder massage, product bottle refill service, customer advice line and complementary hair analysis.
The salon is at .
RUN FOR YOUR MONEY
On 26th April, approximately 14,000 people will exercise for four hours to raise money for the Royal Marsden Hospital Cancer Appeal.
One of the four associate sponsors is the Paul Mitchell Luxury Haircare range and their aim is to raise £1,000,000 AND get a place in The Guinness Book of Records.
Celebrities such as Fiona Fullerton, Roy Castle, Joe Brown, Paul Daniels and Debbie McGee helped launch the 1992 Boots Aerobathon.
LOOK GOOD IN LONDON…
Pop along to the London institute of Beauty Culture and treat yourself to their new Specialised Back Treatment.
It uses Dermalogica products combined with massage to relieve tension by working on pressure points and costs only £10 for a 45 minute session.
Call  for appointments.
London's newest and brightest beauty salon has just opened at the Pineapple fitness studio, South Kensington.
Balance Health & Beauty Salon is open seven days a week until late in the evenings and the emphasis there is on rebalancing mind, body and spirit.
Call  for details.
After running a successful hair and scalp clinic in New York, Philip Kingsley has returned to London.
With him come 13 exciting new hair products, including PN36 which keeps hair smooth, shiny and well protected — it was formulated after observing the well-groomed appearance of ducks!
Call the Philip Kingsley Trichological Clinic on .
PARTY LEADER
A great time was had by all at the opening of Mo and Margaret Nabbach's salon, M&M Hair Academy in Ealing.
Glenys and Neil Kinnock have been regular customers for several years and it was Glenys who had the honour of cutting the ribbon.
For appointments call .
FREE HAIR ANALYSIS
During April, the Hair Professionelle range will be launched at Selfridges.
The Company's Managing Director, Elaine Reeves, will be there personally offering customers a free hair analysis.
None of the 18 products in the range have been tested on animals, they're ozone-friendly, perfumed with Oil of Rosemary and contain no colourants.
Prices start at £3.95 for the finishing products — if you can't make it to Selfridges, for details of your nearest stockist.
gift box
we have over 700 fabulous free gifts to give away this month!
10 free
Whether you're planning to spend your summer hols in exotic places, touring the highlands or simply sitting in your own backgarden, one thing is for sure— you're going to want to look your best (well, there's always the neighbours to consider!)
Clairol's Free Curl heated styler has been designed with moving style in mind — it's a cordless, gas powered appliance which has been OK'd in the checked-in luggage on planes so it goes wherever you do.
Normally priced at £19.95, we have 10 Free Curl cordless combination Brush and Tong stylers to give away!
Send your details to.
120 free
Condition is essential for this season's set styles.
The experts at Gliss Cormist recommend their cleansing, conditioning and styling range to give your hair the ultimate sheen.
Their Shine Tonic is an excellent spray-on, leave-in conditioner that adds instant gloss to any style and leaves hair feeling soft and manageable too.
We have 120 to give away so send your name and address on a postcard to.
200 free
The benefits of massage are endless and aren't confined to body alone.
Scalp massage, for instance is an effective way of promoting healthy hair by encouraging and stimulating blood flow to the hair follicles.
Wella's Balsam Massaging Hot Oils have been formulated to combine these benefits with the nourishing and moisturising ingredients of the oils.
They're easy to use and are available for permed/chemically treated hair and dry/damaged hair in handy packs of three 15ml single application tubes for around £1.89.
We have 200 packs for dry/damaged hair to give away so write to.
20 free
Get set to do the twist with Schumi Squiggles.
These soft foam curlers can be used on damp or dry hair to create beautiful curls and volume — without clips or pins!
To uses these ‘kind to hair’ curlers, simply twist a section of h air around each curler, bend the plastic antennae across the hair to hold it firmly in place and dry as normal.
A pack of 18 Squiggles usually cost £10.50 from Schumi but we have 20 packs to give away absolutely free.
Write to.
150 free
Hair needs moisturising all year long which is why more and more products are formulated with effective conditioning ingredients.
VO5's Moisturising Plus is a range of luxurious shampoos and conditioners which help replace natural oils and moisture lost through a combination of styling and environmental wear and tear.
There are four shampoo variants and three creamy conditioners to choose from and we have 150 Moisturising Plus Frequent Use Shampoos to give away — usually priced at £1.29/300ml.
Write to.
20 free
Mud, mud — glorious MUD!
It's not just hippos who benefit from wallowing in it, you know.
Ahava's Dead Sea Mud Masque contains a high level of natural minerals, including Potassium, Magnesium and Sodium which can actually penetrate into the deepest layer of skin to improve cell regeneration.
It also helps draw out toxins and excess oils, leaving skin feeling totally revitalised.
In two variants — oily/problem skin and dry/normal skin — it costs £8.95/120ml but we have 20 to give away.
Write to, stating which variant you'd like.
200 free
Regular Hairflair readers will have read about Silvikrin's new 2 in 1, a shampoo/conditioner combination product that leaves hair with a fabulous shine AND saves time!
The dry/treated hair variant is particularly good for revitalising lacklustre locks and chemically treated hair that's lost its shine.
Its protective agents prevent further damage and the delicate almond fragrance leaves a lingering scent on your hair.
We have 200 bottles, priced at £1.19/200ml to give away free.
Write to.
15 free
We all know about the sorry state of the environment but are we doing enough about it?
Disappearing Earth is a fabulous new range of high quality T-shirts made from 100 % unbleached cotton, each featuring one of eight environmental designs.
Printed with a new thermal chromatic invisible ink, the animals and trees actually disappear from the T-shirt when you get hot — just as quickly as they are disappearing from the wild, in fact!
Then they magically reappear, leaving your T-shirt looking as good as new!
And the good news is that 10 % from every sale will go to help the World Wide Life Fund For Nature in its quest for earth's survival.
Available in medium, large and extra large, long sleeved T-shirts usually cost £15.99 but we have 15 to give away.
Send your details to stating which size  you require.
Everyone who writes will receive a colour brochure or call the credit card hotline on.
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
BEAUTY BEAT
Win one of these fantastic prizes and you can work your way to a beautiful body, courtesy of Clairol!
One of the most important factors for maintaining beautiful skin and a glowing complexion is good circulation.
You can effectively fend off the unsightly fatty areas known as cellulite, or ‘orange-peel’ skin by stimulating a healthy blood flow, taking regular exercise, and eating a sensible diet.
To keep you feeling good about yourself, Clairol has introduced two exciting beauty products, both available at Boots — and we've got 18 to give away in this easy-to-enter competition!
FIRST PRIZE
Cellutherapie is a Vibromassage system to help improve skin tone and texture on hips and thighs.
It has two detachable heads.
An oil dispensing massage head dispenses oil at the touch of a button to give a smooth, drag free massage.
The second, a concentrator massage head has specially designed stimu-nodes to work on problem areas.
Cellutherapie has two speeds and two massage action, a continuous vibromassage action gives a penetrating massage and a pulse action, which is more gentle and deeply relaxing.
The package also includes a smoothing lotion to leave your skin especially silky after massage.
Usually priced at £39.95, we have SIX Cellutherapie Vibromassage systems to give away!
SECOND PRIZE
Everyone knows that a daily skincare regime of cleansing, toning and moisturising is essential for a healthy complexion.
Skin Tonique from Clairol is a complete battery operated facial skin care system which incorporates a Cleansing Brush to keep skin scrupulously clean; a Toning Massager to gently stimulate circulation and encourage natural exfoliation and an Exfoliator to help speed up the process.
The Skin Tonique comes in its own compact and stylish vanity case and would normally cost £19.95 but we have no less than TWELVE to give away!
HOW TO ENTER
Simply answer our question by ticking the appropriate box and then tell us in no more than 12 words why you would like to be a Clairol winner.
Send your completed coupon to 
BEAUTY BEAT!
1.
What is the name given to ‘orange-peel’ skin?
a
Cellulose
b
Celluloid
c
Cellulite
I WOULD LOVE TO MASSAGE MY WAY TO A BODY BEAUTIFUL BECAUSE (no more than 12 words)
1
This competition is open to all readers in the U.K.
2
No responsibility can be taken for entries lost, delayed or damaged in the post or otherwise.
3
The employees of Hairflair and the companies sponsoring the competition are not eligible to enter.
4
Winners will be the first correct entries drawn from the bag on 11th May 1992.
NAME ADDRESS POSTCODE
RULES