

Granny's Funeral
It was a cold, wet, wintry day in November 1913 when the undertaker brought the coffin with Granny inside it to our house.
Before he arrived Mum made us children bustle about making the place ‘spic an' span’ to create a better impression on the visitors who were expected to drop by to pay their last respects to the memory of a notable local character.
I was then aged ten and we lived in a ‘yard’ of back-to-back cottages in the Jewellery Quarter of Birmingham.
My brother Frankie and sister Liza were a little older than I was, so perhaps it was for this reason that I seemed to end up doing most of the chores.
I didn't mind; it kept my thoughts off morbid fancies about Granny in her wooden box.
The house was buzzing from early in the morning.
Mary, my eldest sister, had taken the day off work and had washed the curtains but for lack of time to dry them properly had hung them back up wet.
The blinds were drawn to darken our downstairs room where the coffin rested on the table in front of the range.
My oldest brothers Jack and Charlie had turned up and were shuffling about, getting in everyone's way, and Dad lit the candles so that the flickering glow shed an eerie light.
My attention was attracted by Granny's big black eyes staring down from her photograph on the wall.
To my childish imagination it seemed as if she was still alive to what was happening and was showing her disapproval.
I hadn't noticed this picture much while she was alive, but now she was dead it seemed as if her eyes sparkled with the same vitality that they had appeared to possess when I had seen her lying cold on her straw mattress a few days earlier.
Granny had been living with us for some time.
She was a contrary old woman and a match even for our Mum, with whom she was continually arguing.
She was Dad's mother  and I suppose there was a certain amount of rivalry between them.
So it was little surprise to me when one evening after a skirmish Mum had blown up at Dad with more than her normal vehemence.
‘I can't stand any mower of 'er.
She 'ave ter goo,’ she stormed as soon as he got through the door.
As usual he tried to smooth things over, but Mum was adamant.
‘I mean it this time.
I can't stand 'er.
If 'er don't goo,.
I goo!’
Looking back with seventy years' hindsight, Dad might have been wiser to have accepted this offer, but things were different before the First World War and couples might quarrel and argue all their married life as Mum and Dad did but rarely separated and never divorced.
As bad luck would have it, just as Mum was shouting, Granny walked in and surprised them.
‘What's all the row about? 'Ave yer med up yer minds ter be rid of me?’ she demanded.
Dad must have recognised the inevitable so he began gently.
‘Polly an' me think it's best fer yer ter go ter yer own 'ouse now it's ready,’ he told her firmly.
Granny had originally come to stay with us while her house was being fumigated but that had been months before and there was no excuse for her to continue living in our overcrowded home.
But I could see he looked sad as he added, ‘I think it'll be fer the best fer all of us.’
‘Oh!’ she cried, beginning to gesticulate as she did when excited and then to square up like a boxer.
She did calm down shortly, though.
‘I know when I ain't wanted.
No, I can 'elp meself.’
She turned round and stormed out and I followed her as she marched down the street to Mr Kiniver's ‘hire shop’ where you could rent a horse and cart for two hours for one shilling.
The boy in the stable said that Mr Kiniver was out at a funeral and was not expected back until late.
‘Can't wait!’
Granny told him.
‘I want a loan of one of the 'orses and a cart, now.’
The lad was obviously frightened and backed away from her.
‘Giss yer shillin' then,’ he managed to mumble.
He came forward warily and took the coin she offered and then he went off to one of the stables to fetch the horse and cart.
I was glad when we were able to leave that yard.
It reeked of wet straw and stale horse manure, and the old nag the lad fetched smelled sweaty.
The flat cart was none too clean but Granny didn't seem to mind and was only anxious for the horse to be hitched to it.
When this was accomplished she took the reins and walked the old horse down the street.
This was by no means an easy feat and she soon attracted an interested audience who speculated loudly about her intentions.
‘Where's 'Annah gooin'?’ asked one of another.
‘I bet yer that Polly's told 'er ter goo,’ said another.
‘Where's 'er got that old nag from?
It oughta be in the knacker's yard,’ exclaimed a third.
As they gossiped noisily I followed Granny who was pulling the reluctant animal towards our house.
The horse's hooves and the iron cart rims made a terrible clatter on the cobblestones but at last silence fell as she came to a halt outside our door.
The neighbours and their children crowded around to see what was going on and to hear the conversation between Granny and Dad.
‘There's no need to get that old nag, mother,’ he said.
‘I would 'ave helped yer move yer trunk and chair if yer'd waited.’
He spoke quietly, but Granny wanted to create a scene.
‘Get me things on the cart,’ she ordered him loudly.
Dad went indoors and brought out her belongings and placed them as she directed.
He looked sad and I knew he didn't want her to leave but I also knew that he hated the constant uproar of quarrelling, so what was he to do?
All he wanted was a bit of peace and quiet.
‘Well, I'm off now,’ she yelled and glared round at the neighbours with her finger on her nose.
Then she tried to heave herself up onto the driving seat but couldn't manage without Dad's help.
However, when he tried to assist her she pushed him away indignantly.
‘I don't need any 'elp from yow.
I can get meself up.’
And she did, by pulling herself up backwards.
Dad returned to the house but I remained to watch her, seated now erect and looking proud, whip in one hand and reins in the other, for all the world the expert driver as she prepared to move off.
‘Gee up now,’ she cried, clicking her tongue at the old mare.
But she just turned her head and stared at Granny.
‘Gee up!
Gee up!’ she repeated but it was no good, the horse stood still.
Crowds were gathering by now, and many were laughing with amusement.
Granny paid them no heed.
She reserved her temper for the horse.
She yanked the reins and brought the whip down hard upon its bony rump.
The toothless old mare only turned her head and gave Granny what seemed like a horsey laugh too.
Granny decided to dismount which she did with some difficulty on account of.having to keep her frock pulled down to hide her torn drawers.
Once on the ground again she tried pulling the horse, but still it would not budge an inch.
At that moment I spotted Jonesy, the son of a neighbour, throw a stone which caught the animal on the rump and caused it to rear up.
Jerking the reins out of Granny's hand, it galloped off, leaving Granny standing in the road waving the whip and cursing.
She appealed to the onlookers for help.
I would have given anything to have been able to do something, particularly since nobody else seemed interested in assisting, but Granny was a difficult person to help and I was young and afraid of horses.
Then Mr Mitchell the muffin man came to the rescue.
He jumped off his cart which was nearby and ran after the runaway.
He soon had it back with Granny's belongings intact, and I could hardly believe my ears and eyes when I heard her thank him and allow him to lift her back onto the driver's seat, in gratitude for which she kissed him on the cheek.
At this Mr Mitchell may have regretted his generosity for he coloured, but nothing could stop Granny when she wanted to create a drama.
‘Yer'll be all right now mother, off yer goo.’
He gave the horse a gentle slap and the old grey mare, the cart, Granny  and her possessions went slowly on their way.
However, before she'd gone many yards she recollected herself and turned to the bystanders.
‘Yer a lotta nosey parkers.
Yow'll never goo ter 'eaven.
None on yer!’
I watched her go with sadness in my heart because I felt for some inexplicable reason that I would never see Granny again.
When I returned indoors Dad asked me if Granny had got off all right.
I thought he looked upset, so I didn't mention the pantomime I had just witnessed and instead offered to make him a cup of tea.
He nodded and returned to his chair while I stoked the fire.
‘I want yow and Frankie ter pay yer Granny a visit every Sunday and let me know how she is.
Do you understand?’ he said, and I replied that I would.
However, each time we called she wouldn't answer the door although we could see the curtain move so we knew she was at home.
I told Dad and suggested that if he called she would open up, but he said, ‘No.
I don't think so.
She'll come round if she wants anything.’
So our house got back to normal and our life carried on as before.
Then one cold afternoon later that winter when we were all huddled round the fire for warmth from the snow falling outside, Dad sighed, looked at his mother's photo and said, ‘I wonder how yer Granny is faring in this cold weather?’
‘Perhaps you could take her a lump of coal in yer cart, Katie?’ he suggested.
‘Goo on then get yer coat on,’ Mum told me.
Dad said I should wait until it stopped snowing so hard, so I watched from the window, and before very long it did ease and I was sent down the cellar for the fuel.
One lump Mum told me to fetch.
But I thought to myself, I'll take two when she isn't looking, which I did.
Dad saw what I had done but he covered the coal with an old sack, winked and whispered, ‘Good girl.’
Mum had a habit, whenever she sent me any distance on an errand, of insisting that I had clean bloomers on, ‘in case yer get knocked down by a 'orse’, which was why I was scared of  them.
But for some reason she forgot on this occasion and I did not stop to remind her.
Granny lived about half a mile away, in a narrow street with drab shops dotted between the houses, which were one down and two up, like ours.
I was walking down the street, singing happily to myself, when I was startled to hear the sound of hooves on the cobbles.
The first thought that came to me was that I hadn't got my clean bloomers on.
I looked round to see how far away the horse was and saw there were two galloping towards me.
I ran onto the pavement, dragging my cart after me.
There was a wet fish shop just there and in my eagerness to escape I darted in.
But the floor was wet and I slid along before colliding with a slab of sprats, cod and ice which showered over me.
I began to cry.
I couldn't pick the fish up because they were slippery and eluded my grasp, and when I tried to stand up I'd slip back again amongst the icy cold debris.
I had just succeeded in sitting upright when the fishmonger appeared.
‘What yer think yer doing down there?’ he asked, looking at me quizzically.
I was frightened and began to sob.
‘I'm very sorry but I'm afraid of horses and my Mum forgot to change my bloomers,’ I blurted out in confusion.
‘Well I never!’ he exclaimed, laughing.
‘I've 'eard some things in my life but that beats 'em all.’
And with that he bent over and lifted me to my feet and told me to be off, which I did not need to be told twice to do.
A few minutes later I arrived at Granny's where I found a crowd of people outside her door.
In the middle of them were Mrs Phipps and Mrs Taylor, our neighbours, sitting on the step crying.
I couldn't tell what was happening so I asked them to move so I could take the coal into Granny's house.
‘Yower Granny won't need that where 'er's gone to,’ Mrs Phipps said.
‘Where's she gone to then?’
I asked, wondering what she meant.
‘She's dead.
Don't yer Mum know?
Everybody else does,’ Mrs Taylor replied.
‘That's right.
She's 'ad 'er chips this time,’ Mrs Phipps added.
‘I don't believe yer,’ I exclaimed.
‘Come 'an see fer yerself.
I'll tek the coal.’
And so saying she helped herself.
I didn't want to go in.
I was so shocked I just turned tail and ran home as fast as I could.
I stumbled across the threshold but before I could say anything Mum shouted at me, ‘Where 'ave yow bin all this time?
An' what yer cryin' for now?’
‘Granny's eaten some chips and now she's dead,’ I stammered, tears dripping off my nose.
‘What yer talkin' about?
An' where's that lump of coal?’ she yelled, shaking me.
‘Mrs Phipps took it.
She said Granny wouldn't need it where she was going.’
‘Oh!
She did, did she?
Well, we'll see about that.’
She slapped Dad's flat cap on the top of her bun and marched out of the house.
She thought more about losing the coal to Mrs Phipps than about Granny, it seemed to me then, but I expect it was the shock that caused her to react in that way.
She wanted me to accompany her but I hung back, afraid that she'd find out that I had taken two lumps of coal, and Dad had gone out, so he was not there to protect me.
‘Come on.
An' don't 'ang back theea.
An' bring yer cart along with yer.
I might need it fer summat else beside the coal.’
I snatched up my doll, Topsey, and laid her in the cart and ran after Mum who was half way down the street before I caught her up.
I was confused and still worried that there might be horses and that I had not changed my bloomers which were wet from where I had fallen in the icy fish.
When we arrived at Granny's house Mrs Phipps and Mrs Taylor were still standing outside gossiping with the neighbours.
Mum went straight up to Mrs Phipps and demanded to know what she meant by saying Granny had had her chips.
‘She's dead Polly.
I come in this mornin' to see if she wanted anythink, an' there she was, stiff an' cold.’
This made me shudder but I was brought back to my own worries when I heard Mum demand that she gave the lump of  coal back.
At that Mrs Phipps began to back away from Mum's fierce stare.
‘Oh, I forgot about that.
Now she wunt want it will she?’
‘No, she wunt, will she,’ mimicked Mum.
‘Well goo on 'an fetch it.’
Mum was insistent.
I watched and held my breath, but to my relief she only brought one lump out of her bag, and that the smallest of the two, which she gave to me and I put it quickly into my cart.
Granny's neighbours were still looking on, watching for further developments, because they all knew Mum's temper.
But Mum just gave them one of her black looks and elbowed her way past the two women and went into Granny's house.
I followed and peered round.
Everything was so still and quiet and there was dust everywhere.
I wondered why this should be when Granny was so particular, but I was soon roused from my thoughts by Mum.
‘Katie, I want yer ter stay 'ere with yer Gran while I goo out an' get Mrs Taylor.
An' don't let anybody in.
I don't trust 'em.’
To make doubly sure of this she turned the key in the lock as she went out.
At this I was more frightened than ever.
Granny was seated in her rocking chair facing the fireplace, but her back was to me and I could only see the paper curlers she had in her hair.
There was something strange about these and they seemed to scare me though I could not take my eyes away.
I put my hands over my eyes to shut out my fears: I'd never seen a dead person before.
But after a bit my curiosity got the better of me and I spread my fingers slowly to peep through.
Then I crept forward to look at Granny.
I wished I hadn't.
I started back petrified.
Granny was staring at me with her eyes wide open.
I never wanted my Mum so much in my life as I did at that moment.
I wanted to run out and scream, but Mum had the key and all I could do was stand stock still, listening to the thumping of my heart.
I literally jumped for joy when I heard that key turn in the lock and saw Mum and Mrs Taylor enter with another woman.
As they banged the door shut, the vibration set Granny's chair rocking and I put my hands over my eyes.
But Mum wouldn't have that.
‘Yer don't 'ave ter look if yer don't wanta,’ she said sharply, pulling them away.
‘We're gooin' ter tek 'er upstairs an' lay 'er out,’ she said.
I felt safer now that they'd arrived and I was curious to see what she meant by ‘laying out’.
So, avoiding Granny's staring eyes, I watched Mum, Mrs Taylor and the big-bosomed woman they called Aggie lift Granny with some effort out of her chair and up the creaky stairs.
I stood engrossed by this until I heard the rocking chair creak behind me, and at that I scampered up after them.
They stripped off Granny's clothes and then washed her all over.
Then Aggie dressed Granny in a brown calico shift which she had brought with her.
Then they laid her back on the straw mattress and covered her with a sheet.
When this had been done they made to go downstairs again, but I was in front of them going down two at a time.
Mum flopped into Granny's chair, heaved a sigh and exclaimed, ‘My God, she was 'eavier dead than alive.’
And her companions nodded in agreement.
Then Mum thanked them and said she would pay them later for their trouble and invited them to the funeral.
Then she showed them to the door.
When they had gone I was surprised to see her lock the door again.
Then she returned upstairs with me close behind.
We entered the room and Mum began to look round, but my eyes were drawn to the bed.
I let out a shriek.
The sheet had slipped off Granny's face and I was horrified to see that her eyes were still open.
‘What's the matter with yer now?’ she demanded, shaking me.
‘I want to go home.’
My voice was trembling now.
‘Get outa me way.
An' wait,’ she muttered irritably, pushing me to one side.
I walked over and looked out of the window into the yard below where several of the neighbours were looking up at me.
They must have heard my scream.
I couldn't look at them; nor could I look back into the room.
I wanted to run away, and if that window had not been so high I believe I would have jumped through it.
But I turned round and watched what Mum was doing, avoiding looking at the bed.
Then Mum went over and I gazed on as she replaced the sheet and  then rolled Granny onto her side and began feeling under the mattress.
At last she found what she'd been looking for.
It was a small, battered tin money-box.
She opened it and took out several half crowns, silver threepenny pieces and some pennies.
There were some faded letters but she wasn't interested in those and shoved them back in the tin, unopened.
Then, pocketing the money, she placed the box back underneath the straw mattress and rolled Granny onto her back again.
I squatted on the stool at the foot of the bed while Mum searched the drawers, from one of which she pulled a bottle of gin.
She consumed the contents quickly before replacing it as she had the box.
Amongst the assorted contents of the other drawers she found another small box.
Her eyes lit up when she opened it and found it full of farthings.
These she slipped in her pocket, then she tidied the stuff away.
As she was poking about for more loot I glanced back at Granny and saw that the sheet had moved again.
‘Mum, Granny's watching you,’ I sobbed.
‘Don't be silly.
It's only the sheet that's slipped.
I'll soon fix that.’
And with that she took two of Granny's pennies from her pocket, put her fingers on Granny's eyes to push her eyelids down and placed a penny over each eye.
‘That'll keep 'em shut,’ she said with satisfaction and replaced the sheet.
At last she stopped searching and said, ‘Come on, there's nothing mower 'ere.’
But I was already fleeing downstairs to the door.
When we emerged we found the neighbours still standing around discussing what had happened, but Mum just pushed her way through them without a word.
However, we hadn't gone more than a few yards when she stopped and turned around.
‘Where's the cart with the coal in?
Yer betta goo back an' fetch it.
'Ere's the key,’ she said, fumbling in her pocket.
I stood and looked at her, petrified.
I could no more return to that house alone than face the devil.
‘No!
No!
No!’
I screamed and ran off down the street.
I turned to look back once but Mum was nowhere to be seen.
When I got in I found the house was empty and the fire nearly out.
I felt so miserable.
I was cold and wet.
I pulled down my damp bloomers and changed them for a warm, dry pair that were hanging on the line over the fire.
Then I just sat on the floor and wept for Granny, and for myself.
When I recovered myself and controlled my weeping, my attention was attracted by Granny's photograph hanging over the mantelshelf.
She seemed to be glaring down at me with her deep-set, black eyes.
I thought about the chips that Mrs Phipps had spoken of and remembered that I had nearly choked on them once.
No more chips for me, I vowed.
I didn't want to die like Granny had.
I was deep in such thoughts when I heard Mum's unmistakable heavy tread coming towards the door.
I thought, I'm for it now, but all she said when she'd bustled in and taken the coal from the cart, was, 'Ere yar.
Tek 'old a this an' mek tha fire up before yer Dad comes in.’
I was only too happy to be busy breaking the coal up with the hammer, pulling out the drawer pan and stoking up the fire with the bellows.
Soon Dad returned.
I could tell immediately by the look on his face that he knew about Granny, for news travelled fast in our district and nothing was secret for long.
I ran over to him.
‘Dad!’
I cried.
‘Granny died from eating chips.
Mrs Phipps said so.
Shall I die too?’
‘No,’ he replied.
‘It's just a saying.’
‘How did she die then?’
I asked.
‘She was just getting old,’ he said sadly.
Now I was talking to Dad I wanted to tell him about how Mum and I had found Granny and what wicked things Mum had done, but I knew Mum's eyes were on me so I thought better of it.
Whether she ever told what she'd found I never discovered, but for my own part I only wanted to forget the whole frightening incident.
But I never did.
That episode has lived with me all my life.
When Dad had eaten his tea I heard him ask Mum if she'd kept the payments up on the insurance policy.
‘Course I have,’ she told him.
I knew this was right because every Saturday I had the job of taking the insurance book and sixpence along the street to the insurance agent's house.
Mum didn't believe in paying any premiums for herself, though.
‘Why should I waste a penny a week?
I shan't be 'ere ter spend it,’ she always said.
No matter how Dad tried to explain the principles of insurance to her she didn't want to know.
That was how she was.
She always looked at every farthing twice before parting with it.
Later, when Frankie and Liza, my brother and sister, came in from playing I told them the sad news, but they didn't seem very upset.
This was no surprise: neither of them cared much for Granny.
Mum got me to reach down a tall vase from the mantelshelf.
From this she drew the policy and with  it lots of pawn tickets.
I was given the job of going to fetch the agent, but Dad offered to go and so I went with him.
When we got to his house we found he was out so Dad poked a message under his door.
Then he told me to go back home and explain to Mum.
‘Aren't you coming back with me, Dad?’
I asked, surprised that he was leaving me.
‘No, I'm going down to the pub,’ he answered and he wiped a tear away from his eye.
I felt very sorry for him then.
If I'd been older and known the words to comfort him…
But I was only a child, so I just stood and watched him out of sight and turned reluctantly to deliver his message.
When I entered our room I found Mum had down two more vases and was sorting out a pile of pawn tickets.
Some she discarded and threw into the fire, others she kept.
‘I'll be able ter get some of these things out,’ she mumbled.
‘An' I must set a good table for the funeral.’
Just then there was a knock on the door.
Mum lifted the corner of the curtain and peeped out to see who it was.
It was Mrs Jonesy, Mrs Phipps and Mrs Taylor.
‘An' what der yow three wanta borra?’ she inquired sarcastically.
‘Can we speak to yer, Polly?’
Mrs Phipps asked, ignoring her last question.
Mum opened the door to them.
‘Well?
Spake up then.’
‘We're very sorry about poor 'Annah passin' on, so we thought we 'ad better come to pay our respects.’
They stood there with their aprons to their eyes.
But Mum knew them for crafty rogues and she hadn't forgotten the coal.
She probably knew too that they had been none too fond of Granny when she'd been alive.
She made to close the door on them when Mrs Phipps added, ‘We're gooin' from dower to dower ter get a collection up for a few flowers.
Is that all right with yow, Polly?’
‘That's the least yer can do!’
Mum replied and stared at them hard and long
‘Well,’ Mrs Taylor said.
‘We'll do our best, Polly.’
Then off they went but I had noticed that Mrs Taylor was really crying.
I liked her.
She was always kind to me and she was the only neighbour Mum could really trust.
When Dad returned he didn't speak a word to either of us.
He just sat in his chair and gazed up at Granny's picture in its faded gilt frame.
‘May God rest your soul, Mother,’ I heard him say to himself at last.
‘If only I'd 'elped you more you might still be 'ere.’
And he put his face in his hands and sobbed.
Mum went over and tried to console him but he pushed her gently from him.
I suppose his grief was a personal thing which he could not share with anybody.
So that was how we came to be sitting in the darkened room with Granny's coffin on the table, waiting for the neighbours to come and show their last respects.
I remember the undertaker asking if anyone wanted to see her before she was screwed down and the people filing past one by one, their heads bowed.
Some shed real tears too.
Some of them I had never seen before and some were there to satisfy their curiosity.
Wreaths and flowers were piled up outside in the yard, waiting to be heaped on the coffin.
I remember going upstairs while they were looking at the corpse and writing a note with trembling fingers.
It went something like this:
Good bye Granny and God bless you.
And please forgive my Mum.
I really did love you and so did my Dad.
XXX
I rolled this message into a little ball and returned downstairs.
Dad was still standing by the coffin and I whispered to him, ‘Dad, can I have another look at my Granny?’
He nodded and turned away, and while the others' attention was elsewhere I put my hand down inside the coffin until I felt Granny's cold fingers.
My stomach went all queer inside but I managed to push the message between her icy fingers and kiss her forehead before I pulled my hand away.
‘Good bye, Granny, I'll try to be a good girl,’ I sobbed before I stood back for the undertaker to screw down the lid.
I was pleased he hadn't seen the note or the tears that I left behind on my Granny's face.
I wiped my eyes and felt a bit better, knowing that Granny was taking my message with her to heaven.
Then I wandered outside to look at the wreaths and the Salvation Army Captain touched me on the shoulder.
‘Katie, will you tell your father I'd like to speak to him?’ he asked me.
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Will you come inside?’
I thought I ought to ask him.
I could see the neighbours looking curiously at the big box he had with him.
I heard him say to Dad how sorry he was about Sister Hannah and how he'd have liked to have seen her before she was screwed down.
Then he handed the box over, saying, ‘Here's the crocks I promised to lend your wife…and some extra food.
It's not much but it'll help.’
It was amazing how people did rally round at times like this.
They didn't bother much at other times unless asked, and then they often had to think twice.
But now the Captain was on his knees beside the coffin praying.
When he'd finished he stood up and asked Dad the time of the funeral so, he said, he could be there with the other brothers and sisters and the band.
Mum kept out of sight until he had left, then down the stairs she came, all dressed up in a long black taffeta dress, which rustled when she moved.
She wore new black button-up boots and on her head was perched the largest black hat I had ever seen with a black bird on top.
‘Now 'ow do I look, Sam?’ she asked as she stood preening herself.
Dad didn't take a bit of notice but Mary stared at her.
‘Anyone would think you was going to a weddin' instead of a funeral,’ she let out.
‘Disgustin' I call it.’
I looked at Mum and thought if only she was as nice as she looked maybe all our lives would have been better.
But I knew this was wishing for the impossible.
Mary was dressed as usual, for she always wore a black tam-o'-shanter and a black coat.
Dad, Jack and Charlie just wore a black armband each with their Sunday suits, and I was dressed in a white lace dress with a wide black sash of silk ribbon.
I also had real boots for the first time.
I remember the argument there had been too between Mary and Mum over keeping her wages back that week.
‘What about buying the kids some clothes?’
Mary had said.
‘Instead of spending all the insurance money on yerself.’
But Mum's reply had been, ‘I'll see what I've got left when I've got the grub in.’
‘I shouldn't bother yerself if I were you,’ had come the reply.
‘I'm keeping my wages to buy them some myself.’
So that was how I came to have a new dress and boots and a real ribbon for my hair instead of the usual string.
She also bought Frankie new clothes and Liza too, but neither of them was able to attend the funeral: they both had bad colds.
Liza had to stay in bed and Frankie was downstairs in front of the fire.
Mum said he had to watch the house and the food in case anyone slipped in while we were out and helped themselves.
By this time there was quite a crowd gathered in our little room.
There was Mr Phipps, Mr Jones, Mr Smith, the lamplighter and another of Dad's drinking pals, all having a drink and talking quietly.
They were to be the pall-bearers.
This was all new to me and interesting for that reason.
I'd seen plenty of funerals, but this was the first I'd been involved in and I was fascinated by the splendid flowers and the well-groomed horses of the hearse and I forgot, for a moment, my fear.
Anyway I had my clean bloomers on.
When we went out the sun had come out and the horses' coats shone like black silk.
They were so different from the dustman's horses and those that pulled the water carts.
Then the bearers carried the coffin out and the Salvation Army band  struck up with ‘Nearer My God to Thee’ just as we climbed into the carriage.
We passed along slowly so that the cortège could be seen and all could have a last look at the coffin.
I looked through the window and there were people lined up on both sides of the street, the women with black aprons and the men with their caps and hats off, bared heads bowed as we passed.
Even the dustcart and the draycart pulled over to one side.
Shops had their blinds drawn down and the shopkeepers stood in their doorways as a mark of respect.
I saw some of my school friends on tiptoe, straining their necks to see.
‘Hello Katie,’ Annie Buckley called out and waved.
‘Hello Annie,’ I called back from the half-open window.
At this my sister Mary slapped my face.
‘Behave yerself,’ she whispered.
‘This is a funeral not a wedding.’
But this did not deter Mum who leaned out of the window.
‘Some people 'ave got no respect for the dead.’
Mary pulled her back from the window and closed it.
She was obviously disgusted.
‘You're as bad as the rest!’
And after that no more was said.
Dad sat there quietly throughout.
The church bell was tolling mournfully as the carriage entered the cemetery gate.
We stopped outside the church door and the driver handed us down.
There seemed to be crowds of people lined up on each side of the door and lots were already seated inside the church waiting for the coffin to enter.
Just inside the vestibule there was coconut matting, and seeing this Mum looked about then began to wipe her feet.
I thought she was never going to stop until I heard a woman say, ‘I see 'er's still showin' off.’
At this Mum turned round and gave her a dirty look before she moved along with Dad, followed by the rest of us.
However, it was obvious that she was intent on making a spectacle of herself.
She wanted to be noticed in all her finery and as she walked up the aisle she kept stopping to give a little cough on the back of her hand and looking from side to side.
Dad simply pushed her forward but I heard him whisper, ‘Move along, yer 'olding up the service.’
She moved but she still kept  glancing about.
She would touch her hair then fiddle with her hat and pretend to straighten her dress.
Everybody's eyes were on us, especially on Mum.
Then I heard someone say, ‘It's disgraceful the way she keeps standin' there preenin' 'erself.’
Then another joined in.
‘Who does she think she is?
The Queen of Sheba?’
All at once people began ‘shushing’ and those who were not ‘shushing’were commenting on Mum's behaviour.
Finally Dad pulled her down into her seat.
Then everyone fell silent as the preacher entered and the service began.
When it was over we filed out to the accompaniment of the organ.
It seemed all were anxious to see Granny's coffin lowered into the ground.
There were people from everywhere in the district standing around that wet, muddy graveside that day.
Some of them wept as the preacher opened up his prayer book and the coffin was gently lowered into the grave.
He delivered a sermon during which everyone stood still, until he picked up a handful of earth and spoke in a deep voice: ‘Ashes to ashes.
Dust to dust.’
Before he could continue little Jonesy chipped in: ‘An' if God don't 'ave yer, the devil must.’
All heads turned as his father gave him such a clip that he landed in the muddy, freshly dug grave behind him.
The preacher held his hands together and looking skywards said, ‘Forgive them Lord, for they know not what they do.’
Then, walking away in disgust, he said, ‘I've never come across such a disgraceful congregation in all the years I've given burial services.’
Jonesy was still struggling to get out of the grave, and this he managed only with his father's help, after falling back in once.
By now some were laughing openly, but Mrs Jonesy did not think it was funny.
She turned round angrily: ‘It's no laughin' matter.
We might 'ave 'ad another funeral,’ she wept.
Then we were walking back towards the carriage, and as we passed I heard Mr Jonesy say to the preacher, ‘I'll give 'im the devil when I get 'im 'ome.’
But the preacher just walked slowly away, taking no notice of anyone.
When we arrived home Frankie was still sitting by the fire with a coat round his shoulders and Mrs Taylor was there in Mum's starched white apron ready to serve.
Mum had given  her permission to wear her pinafore.
At that time it was a tradition that when someone in a family died there was always a bow of black ribbon draped over the top of their photograph frame.
But we had had to make do with black crepe paper, which was the next best thing.
It was also said that if the bow should move of its own accord after it had been draped it was a bad omen.
While we had been out Mrs Taylor had placed the paper in position.
Then we squeezed round the table — Mum, Dad, the bearers, and several neighbours who had been ‘helpful in her hour of need’ as they called it.
I had never seen such a mouthwatering display of food on our table.
There was cheese, pickled onions, corned beef, cottage loaves, pig's pudding and even a gallon jug of ale.
However, Mary, Jack and Charlie didn't stop but made the excuse that they had to go back to work.
They left, and while the adults were talking and stuffing themselves, I picked up a piece of pig's pudding for Frankie who was still huddled by the fire.
I found it was stale so I replaced it and was about to make him a corned beef sandwich when Dad asked, ‘Where's Pete?’
‘Who's Pete?’ the lamplighter asked.
‘Our cat.
He's usually waiting here for scraps.’
All at once Frankie jumped up, knocking over the stool.
‘Oh dear, oh dear!’
He sounded worried.
‘I forgot 'im, Dad.
He went out in the rain and I put 'im in the oven to dry!’
‘Yer what?’
Dad gasped, dashing to the oven door.
Pete shot out with his hair standing on end like the bristles of a brush.
This proved to be only a minor diversion and they quickly settled down to their food and drink again.
Frankie did not escape though.
Mum went over to him and delivered a hard slap then ordered him off to bed.
After they had consumed all they could the guests began to leave, saying what a good send-off Mum had given Granny.
Mr and Mrs Jonesy apologised to Dad for their son's behaviour and promised that he would get ‘what's comin' to 'im when we get 'ome’.
After they had all left — Dad too — Mum hung Granny's death card beneath her picture then went off to join the others in the local.
Now that the house was quiet I  filled a plate with some of the leftover food and took it up to Frankie.
I found him with Liza sitting on the edge of the bed fully dressed reading a comic.
‘Have they all gone?’
Liza asked.
‘I thought you was ill.’
I glared at her.
But I suppose she had pretended to be ill because she didn't want to be at the funeral.
I turned my attention to Frankie, who still looked pale but who insisted on going downstairs.
We sat round the fire with our leftovers and I answered their questions about the day's events.
Then I thought of a way to cheer them up.
‘Tell yer what.
I'll bring in some of the kids who were there and Jonesy can imitate the preacher.’
To this they laughingly agreed.
I went into the yard, rounding up those I could find.
I knew Mum and Dad would be out until late drowning their sorrows.
The pubs didn't shut until eleven o'clock so we would have a good three hours' fun.
I had to go to the next yard to fetch Jonesy.
I didn't like him much because he was a terrible liar but it wouldn't have been fun without him.
I knocked on his door and when he answered I could tell from his face that he'd been crying.
I told him our plan but he was none too eager until I told him we were going to play at funerals and that Frankie wanted him to imitate the preacher; then he came along at once.
When we were all seated in our kitchen Frankie wanted to know who was at the graveyard and what had happened.
‘Well I'll tell yer what the bloke said if yer'll all be quiet,–said Jonesy.
With that he pulled Dad's shirt off the line, put it over his head and, pushing his arms through the sleeves, picked up the Bible which was on the sideboard.
‘Ashes to ashes, dust to dust,’ he intoned, just like the preacher had.
We roared with laughter.
Then he put his hands together and continued.
‘Forgive them Father, for they know not what they do.
But my Dad said, ‘I know what I'm gooin' ter do when I get 'im 'ome.’’
He changed into an imitation of his Dad.
But Florrie Mitchell from the next yard was not convinced.
‘'E dain't say that did 'e?’
‘'E did!’ he replied angrily.
‘An' I've got the marks to prove it.’
With that he replaced the Bible, tore off the shirt and dropped his trousers.
We could see the red marks when he bent over but that was not all we saw.
We burst out giggling at the sight of his bare bottom and we were still tittering when the door burst open and Mrs Taylor entered.
Seeing Jonesy she cried out, ‘Pull yer trousers up yer dirty lad.’
But he was out the door, tripping over them in his anxiety to avoid another whack.
‘What d'yer want?’
Liza asked in her surly way.
‘Yer Mum asked me to call in and clear away the crocks and tek the chairs outside ready ter goo back ter the mission 'all.’
Then she added, ‘An' why ain't yer all in bed?
Yer'll catch it if yer Mum knows yer've 'ad that Jonesy lad in.’
‘I'll 'elp yer ter move the chairs if yer don't tell ower Mum,’ pleaded Frankie.
‘Very well then,’ she conceded.
‘But see that yer behave yerselves in future, or I might.’
We were happy helping Mrs Taylor tidy up.
I liked her: she was different from the other women.
She was always ready to do odd jobs for anyone in need.
She bustled round finishing her jobs and was just about to leave when she noticed that the crepe paper had slipped from Granny's frame.
She stood on the stool and reached up to replace it, and when she stood back down again she bent over and whispered to me, ‘That's a bad omen, luv.
I should get up ter yer bed before there's any more trouble.’
I was really scared at this.
‘An' remember to be careful what yer say or do, fer yer Granny's eyes will be on yer in the future.’
Then she went off.
I tried to remember what my sister Mary had said about ignoring old wives' tales and I tried to put them from my mind, but after that I often caught myself glancing at Granny's picture and it seemed to me that her black eyes came alive and followed me round the room.
Mary's Wedding
One day, a few weeks after Granny's funeral, Mary came home earlier than usual from work.
I heard her tell Mum the news that she was getting married.
‘Why dain't yer tell me before?’
Mum said loudly.
‘Yer don't 'ave ter shout so loud.
I can 'ear yer.
You knew I was getting wed.
I told Dad weeks ago.’
‘Yower like the rest on 'em,’ Mum replied irritably.
‘Yow tell yer Dad everythink but I'm the last to be told.’
‘Oh be quiet and sit down,’ Mary yelled back.
‘I tell yer lots of things but you never even listen.
You always say ‘shut up’ or you've got no time or ‘tell me later’.
You aren't interested.’
I could see they were losing their tempers and I wished Dad would come home.
‘Don't yer give me any of yer lip!’
Mum started going red in the face.
‘Yow ain't too old ter 'ave yer face slapped!’
I was afraid, waiting for Mum to raise her hand, but she did not move.
Mary was no longer scared of Mum; she stood up to her and matched her temper.
‘Strike me if you dare!
I don't fear you any more.
You can't push and slap me around like you do her,’ she said, pointing her finger at me.
‘But don't forget, she'll grow up one day too and then yer'll be sorry.’
Mum went quiet for a moment but then she started on Mary again.
‘I suppose yower in the family way, is that it?’
‘That's 'ow your dirty mind works.
Yer'll 'ave ter write the date down and wait an' see won't yer?’
Mary must have forgotten that Mum couldn't write.
They were still arguing when Dad came in.
‘What's all the shouting about?
I could 'ear yer 'alf way  down the street.’
He loathed the constant uproar of our house and only wanted peace and quiet when he was in the house.
‘It's 'er,’ Mum told him, pointing at Mary.
‘She wants ter get married.’
‘Well, what about it?’
Dad answered.
‘She's old enough to make up 'er own mind.’
‘But 'er Gran's only bin dead a few weeks.
And I shall miss 'er wages when she goes,’ moaned Mum.
‘That's all yow ever think of,’ Mary retorted.
‘Money!
Money!
Money!
Yer'll 'ave ter drink less beer then, won't yer.‘
Dad put his hand on Mary's shoulder.
‘Now, now Mary.
You mustn't talk ter yer Mum like that.
Anyway we'll try to manage.
I'll put a few more hours in at work.’
Mary shook her head, obviously upset, and rushed out into the yard.
Dad followed her and I slipped out as well and heard him talking softly to her.
‘Don't tek any notice of yer Mum's tantrums, Mary.
You know she'll always 'ave the last word, so please come back and tell 'er yer sorry fer yer 'arsh words.’
‘No, never,’ she told him firmly.
But Dad pleaded with her and this had its effect.
‘All right,’ she sulked.
‘But only fer your sake, mind,’ she told him.
So we went back in and things were patched up and Mum made a pot of tea and tried to make amends by promising to do her best to make the wedding the best in the district.
However, Mary was still upset and sulking and wouldn't have any tea, and with a ‘so long’ to Dad she walked out, head held high, just like Mum.
I didn't want to stay so I followed her and asked if I could go along with her.
After some hesitation she agreed, and taking my hand we went off to her young man's house.
Albert his name was, and he greeted her with a kiss when he opened the door to us.
He didn't give me so much as a glance.
He only had eyes for Mary, especially as she immediately burst into tears.
‘Now what's the trouble?’ he asked, getting out a white handkerchief.
When she'd finished telling him he went wild.
‘You're not to go back to that place any more!
An' I don't want anything from that house or yer mother,’ he told her.
‘But I've already bought the new bed, Albert,’ she sobbed.
‘Never mind about that.
You can leave it.
We're going to start afresh.
My mother will take care of you while I get the house together,’ he said, embracing her gently before taking us into the house.
Albert's father was a bookmaker and they were partners in the business.
Sometimes Albert's mother helped with the book-keeping in a side room she called ‘The Den’.
She was a kind woman and whenever I called with a message she would sit me down and fetch me a biscuit or a glass of milk.
They were a happy family and very hospitable, but Mary told me I was not to call too often or I would wear out my welcome.
So I would walk down Mrs Lewis's street in the hope of bumping into her.
Once I met her carrying several parcels and she called to me.
I didn't answer at once, pretending to be surprised.
‘Oh, hello, Mrs Lewis.
Can I carry your parcels?’
I asked her.
She smiled at me and gave me two small ones and I followed her to their house.
She fumbled in her pocket for the key then let us in the side door.
She was a smartly dressed woman, different from the other women in our district, but then she could afford to be because they were very comfortably off.
She was generous, though, and helped anyone that was really in need — if she liked them, that is.
Our Mum was not one of these and she knew it, but the knowledge didn't bother her; she couldn't care less whether she was liked or not.
I placed the parcels on the table and Mrs Lewis gave me a piece of cake and a penny.
I thanked her and left after slipping the coin down my stocking for safe keeping.
When Mary came in from work the day after the row she told Mum that she and Albert had had a talk and that she was going to stay with his parents for a bit while Albert sorted out a house and furniture and the paraphernalia of married life.
‘That's nice,’ Mum said sarcastically.
‘They can afford it with all the money they tek off people, can't they?’
Mary resisted the temptation to answer her back and after a moment's silence Mum continued.
‘Yer won't want yer bed then, will yer Mary?’ she spoke slyly.
‘No, I won't.
Albert's told me to leave it.’
This pleased Mum, until I made the mistake of asking Mary if I could sleep in it.
Mum scowled at me when Mary said I could have it.
‘Huh, we'll see!’
Mum shrugged noncommittally.
I vowed to do anything to please Mum so I could have that bed, but I should have known better: it was impossible to please her.
I went over to the range to get the kettle and make a pot of tea and listened to their conversation.
‘When's the 'appy day then?’
Mum asked.
‘It'll be soon.
I'll let yer know in plenty of time,’ Mary answered.
‘But yower gooin' ter get wed from 'ere, ain't yer?’
Mum asked anxiously.
‘Yes.
That's the usual thing isn't it?’ said Mary, gulping down her tea.
I could see she wanted to leave and soon she pushed her chair back from the table and stood up to leave.
But Mum put her hand on her arm.
‘Will yer 'elp me out?
Yer know what I mean.
With a little money, so's I can give yer a decent wedding.’
Mary knew what she meant all right.
She wanted to show off in front of the neighbours.
Mary didn't want the wedding from our house, but she was prepared to concede to get away from Mum as quickly as possible.
She even promised she would speak to Albert and see what could be done in the way of money.
With that she lifted the latch, but before opening the door she turned to me and asked if I would like to go shopping with her.
‘Can I, Mum?’
I asked eagerly.
‘I s'ppose so, but don't be back late,’ she said grudgingly.
I was really glad to be going out with Mary instead of Mum; I don't think Mary had ever asked if she could take me with her before.
We boarded a tram which was a treat on its own for me.
Finally we got off in a street with enormous  shops with beautiful window displays: I could have stood gazing at them for hours, but Mary pulled me away.
Liza and I had wanted to go into the big shops in New Street and Corporation Street for ages but we'd never dared to pass the attendant who stood in the doorway ready to shoo small children off.
But I wasn't afraid now with my big sister, and while Mary tried on garments I stood gazing in awe at all the sumptuous clothes that hung in the display cases.
I would have loved to touch them to see what they felt like but I could see out of the corner of my eye that I was being watched.
So I sat down on a chair that stood by the counter and looked around the shop while waiting for Mary to emerge from behind the colourful painted screen where she was trying things on.
I was fascinated by the nearly naked figures of ladies in different positions that were painted on it.
Some wore only frilly drawers and black camisoles so you could see their bare thighs on which they wore fancy garters and suspenders.
It seemed quite shameless to me then but it would probably seem tame to today's youngsters.
I sat there imagining all the pretty clothes I would have when I married a rich husband, but then Mary appeared with the assistant.
Mary was carrying a long white veil and dress over her arm.
These were wrapped up together with a pair of white satin shoes.
Then we left the shop.
By now it was getting late and I began to worry.
Mary must have noticed my changed mood because she asked why I was so miserable.
‘We told Mum we wouldn't be late and it's getting dark,’ I mumbled.
‘Never mind about Mum.
You're with me and you'll go home when I take you.’
She was firm.
‘Would you like to come with me to Albert's and see his Mum?’
I forgot my fears when she said this and we went off.
When we arrived, Mary let herself in the front door and we entered the dining room.
My eyes were immediately attracted to the table and my mouth started watering when I saw the home-made cakes and jam tarts laid out on a white lace tablecloth.
I was starving; it was hours since either of us had eaten but Mrs Lewis made me wash my hands before sitting at the table.
When I sat down I was handed a plate made of real china which had bread and butter and cakes on it.
We only had enamel plates at home and never had food like this.
I wished this could go on for ever but I realised that all too soon I would have to return.
Just as I was thanking Mrs Lewis and getting ready to leave Albert came into the room.
‘Hello littl'un and how are you?’ he asked pleasantly.
‘Very well, thank you,’ I answered shyly as he patted me on the head.
‘I think you'd better stay a bit longer and Mary and I will take you home.’
I was only too glad to sit down and wait.
Mrs Lewis left the room and Mary and Albert talked.
‘Well love,’ I heard him say.
‘Did you tell your mother?’
‘Yes,’ said Mary.
‘I've explained everything.
But you must understand, Albert, I must get married from my home.
And we must both help Mum to do the honours.
I promised, so if we give my parents some money towards the expenses it will make me very happy.’
‘Say no more about it now.
We'll both see your Mum and Dad together and make all the arrangements.’
They hugged each other, and then taking me by the hand we went into the street and made our way home.
When we arrived they kissed each other good night and Albert kissed me on the cheek before he turned and walked off.
Mum was waiting up for us when we got indoors, but before she could speak Mary began telling her about the agreement she had with Albert to pay for the wedding and this took the wind out of her sails.
‘You'll see Albert when he calls tomorrow and he'll give you enough money to get the food and whatever you want to get.’
So saying, she turned abruptly to go upstairs.
Mum was satisfied with this.
She started talking excitedly.
‘I'll mek this the best weddin' in the district,’ she blustered, but Mary wasn't interested and climbed the stairs without another word.
Next day Mary took Frankie, Liza and me to the shops to buy us some new clothes for the wedding.
Liza and I had  white satin dresses and shoes with bows on, and Frankie had a suit of small grey and white checked material with a cap to match and a pair of new boots.
After the shopping spree Mary took us to a little tea shop for tea and cakes and then we returned happily with our presents.
Mum was pleased as punch when she found that Mary had bought us new clothes, but she was not so pleased when Mary told her she couldn't see them until the day of the wedding and took them straight up and locked them in her trunk.
We all knew why: left with Mum they would have been in pawn before we had the chance to wear them.
One afternoon the following week, Mary was coming into the yard having been to hear the banns read for the last time, when she came upon a group of local women standing around gossiping about the wedding.
I was sitting on the wall between our yard and the next, so I could hear every word.
So could Mary; they hadn't noticed either of us.
‘I wunda if 'er is?’ asked one.
‘An' 'er's gooin' ter get married all in white, orange blossoms an' all,’ said another.
‘I bet 'er's in the family way.
‘Er's deep like 'er mother,’ added a third.
I jumped down off the wall and joined my sister who was standing behind them listening.
Then she elbowed her way through them with her head high.
‘You'll all have to do the same as me and put down the date and see, but if yer want ter know it's the first of May.’
They went quiet at that and moved away.
I put my tongue out at them as far as it would go.
Mary never liked our neighbours and she seldom even spoke to them, but she knew Mum had invited them all.
Even so, she wanted to keep the peace so she said nothing when she got indoors.
I never knew how much Albert and Mary gave Mum and Dad, but they threw money around like water; as Mum had said, she was going to give Mary the best turn-out in the district.
She and Mrs Taylor went around the shops ordering what they thought was necessary and Dad and his cronies, Fred the lamplighter and his workmate Willie Turner, went  along to The Golden Cup to order the drink.
When she returned from the shops, Mum told me to accompany her to the Captain's to ask if we could have the Mission Hall for the wedding.
She was disappointed when he told her he was sorry but it was being used for band practice that day.
This put Mum in a terrible temper and to make matters worse, when we got home Dad and his friends were there pouring out beer from bottles.
I could see at once that they had all had a skinful.
This made Mum livid.
‘It's all right fer yow.
Leavin' me ter do all the dirty work,’ she wailed, appearing to burst into tears.
‘Now what's wrong with yer?
Can't a man 'ave a drink ter celebrate?’
Dad asked, continuing to pour the beer.
‘'Ere, 'ave one an' shut up.’
He pushed the mug under her nose.
Mum took the mug from him but she didn't drink it.
She slapped it down on the table, spilling some of its contents.
‘I wanta know whater we gooin' ter do.
The Captain can't let us 'ave the 'all for me daughter's weddin'.’
She sagged into her chair and sobbed.
Fred went over to her.
‘Can I make a suggestion missus?’ he asked.
‘Anythink as long as it'll 'elp us out,’ she wailed through her apron.
‘Why don't yer 'ave yer celebrations in the yard?
It's big enough and besides yer'll be near the closets when yer need 'em.’
He laughed, as did Willie and Dad, but Mum wiped her eyes and smiled.
‘Now why didn't I think of that?’
On reflection, though, she doubted if she'd got enough crocks or cutlery and ‘what was they going ter sit on?’
After a pause for thought she told Dad that he must go and ask the Captain if he could let them have some cups and saucers and whatever else was available, even if they could not have the hall.
Dad was less than enthusiastic about this suggestion.
‘No, no, go yerself if yer want 'em.
Yer never took the last lot back.
‘E 'ad ter come an' fetch 'em.’
‘Oh well,’ she answered, ‘I'll goo meself.
Yow carn't do anything in that state any'ow.’
She drank down the remains of the mug of beer and off we went again to see the Captain.
Mum pushed the door open wide and marched up the room as if she owned it.
I hung back and watched to see what was going to happen.
I could see Battling Billy Bumpham, a well-known local ‘character’, and the Captain seated facing each other at the other end of the room, deep in conversation.
At the sound of footsteps the Captain looked around, and frowned when he saw it was Mum bearing down on him.
‘What's 'e doin' 'ere?’ she demanded, pointing at Billy.
‘He's come to sign the pledge and become one of us,’ he replied.
‘I wish more would do the same.’
Then Mum changed her tone, as she always did when she wanted to wheedle something out of somebody.
‘I've come ter ask yer, if we carn't 'ave the 'all, would yer be kind enough ter lend us some crocks an' chairs?
Yer see, we're gooin' ter 'ave the party in the yard after the weddin'.’
‘I'm very sorry,’ he answered sharply.
‘I shall be needing them all for the meeting.’
‘But what am we gooin' ter do?’ she wailed tearfully.
After pausing for a second he must have relented, because he told her that if it was any help she could borrow benches and trestle tables.
‘That'll do.’
She brightened up visibly.
‘I'll send somebody to fetch 'em in the mornin'.
Yer see it's tomorra the weddin'.
An' yow come yerself if yer like.’
But the Captain didn't reply.
He just waved her away and turned his back on us, and while he wasn't looking Mum whispered in Billy's ear: ‘Yer wunt ter keep that up fer yer bung!’
And with that she dug him in his ribs so hard that he nearly fell off his chair.
Then she turned on her heel and we marched back down the hall.
When we reached the door Mum called back, ‘Good afternoon Captain’, as though nothing had happened.
When we got back home Dad's mates had left and he himself was snoring in the chair.
Mary was there too.
She'd washed her hair and was drying it on the hessian towel.
Mum told Mary about the changes in the arrangements but Mary  wasn't at all pleased.
She threw down the towel and turned on Mum.
‘Whatever are yer talking about?
I thought everything was arranged for using the Mission Hall?’
Mum tried to calm her but Mary was not impressed by the thought that the money for hiring the hall had been saved.
In the middle of the fuss Dad woke up.
‘What's all the bloody shouting for now?’
‘We carn't 'ave the use of the 'all Dad, and we carn't 'ave the celebrations in the yard neither!
Whatever will Albert's people think?’
Mary sobbed.
Mum chipped in with, ‘They'll 'ave ter think what they like.
The stuck-up lot!’
Mary was now in tears.
‘I wish I hadn't agreed ter get married from 'ere.
In fact I wish I wasn't getting married at all.’
Mum made a half-hearted attempt to calm her daughter down, but Mary shrugged her off and continued sobbing bitterly.
Then Dad tried.
He told Mary that it would be all right and that anyway it was too late now to do anything else.
He put his arm around her shoulder and she wept some more.
I could see that it was time for me to make the tea.
While I busied myself, I listened to what Dad said to Mary.
‘Now Mary,’ I heard him say, ‘dry yer eyes and listen ter me.
It's yer weddin' day termorra and we all want ter see yer 'appy.
Yer Mum's done the best she can under the circumstances.’
‘But Dad, I feel so ashamed to think that Mr and Mrs Lewis will 'ave ter mix with our kind of neighbours, and you know what Mum's like when she's 'ad a few drinks.’
Mary glared at Mum who was pretending not to listen.
‘Leave everything to me, Mary.
I'll keep yer Mum and everyone else in order.
But I knew that was easier said than done.
It would be as much as Dad could do to keep himself in order after he'd had a drop too much.
Dad was a jolly chap sober, or could be, but when he'd had a few he thought himself a bit of a lady-killer.
Mum knew this too, which was why she always kept an eye on him when he was the worse for drink.
I handed Mary and Dad their cups of sweet tea and they both smiled.
Mum picked up hers as well and we drank in silence.
Then when they'd finished Mary and Dad went out together.
Mum followed them and I too decided to find Frankie to tell him the news after I had cleared away the crocks.
When I got outside I found Mum in the yard, waving her arms about and giving directions to the neighbours whom she was organising for the party.
‘I want this 'ere,’ she said, pointing.
‘An' I want that there,’ she said, indicating where the chairs and tables were to go.
‘An' bring some crocks, an' knives, an' forks an' anything else we can use.’
She was not asking, she was demanding; but they were all used to her ways and were probably scared of upsetting her in case she changed her mind about the invitations.
I slipped away before she spotted me and renewed my search for Frankie, but I could find neither hide nor hair of him, or of Liza either.
I finally came to the churchyard, ‘Titty-Bottle Park’, where there were literally dozens of kids running about the tombstones.
Frankie and Liza were there with some of our friends, who gathered round to hear me excitedly telling my tale.
‘Better than the Mission Hall,’ Frankie said.
The others agreed that it would be more fun to eat in the yard.
We wandered back home and when we entered the yard we were called in to go to bed early so we could get up to help in the morning.
So it was bright and early when, with a clatter of buckets and bowls, we started to swill down the yard.
The lavatories also had a birthday, and Dad left ours unlocked with plenty of fresh newspaper on the nail.
The women even cleaned their windows.
This was a red-letter day indeed.
The clothes lines were taken down and rolled up by the dustbins, together with the props.
I couldn't remember such a bustle and hubbub in our yard before.
Everyone was singing a different song out of tune and taking no notice where they were throwing the water.
Several people ended up with wet feet and all the cats vanished and even the kids who were trying to help got the odd clout for ‘gettin' under our feet’.
Eventually Frankie and I were called in by Mum and told to  get a wash and change as it was nearly time to go.
But it was worse in our house than in the yard.
We were all at sixes and sevens, getting in one another 's way.
Mum and Mary kept calling for this, no that, yes that, to be brought upstairs.
It was pandemonium.
Then to top it all, two of Mary's friends squeezed in with several more parcels.
They were what were then called ‘buxom young women’ and I thought them very pretty.
They had come to help Mary dress but there was no room at all when they started busying themselves.
Still, they were efficient.
They put the parcels on the table and tidied the room while Frankie and I sat on the sofa and watched.
Then brother Jack strolled in and he wasted no time in chatting them up.
He joked and playacted, then put his arm round one's waist and kissed her on the cheek.
This started them both giggling and they fled upstairs in hysterics.
But they were no strangers to Jack because he called out ‘See yer later Molly’ as took his leave.
I was expecting that at any minute Mum would shout down to find out what was going on but she must have been preoccupied, trying on her new frock.
Just then the postman called with more packets and greetings cards, amongst which was also a letter.
I recognised the handwriting.
It was from Auntie Nellie.
Although she was Mum's youngest sister she always addressed her letters to Dad.
Mum couldn't read anyway but she always seemed to know when Auntie Nellie wrote and Dad made it my job to hide these letters and give them to him when Mum was out of the way.
I never read any of them although it was not for want of trying.
But once I'd given them to him I never saw them again so I imagine he must have burnt them.
Auntie Nellie only came to visit on special occasions so I expect Dad must have written to invite her to the wedding.
I knew Mum would not have done so because they didn't get on, although I never found out why.
Dad had a soft spot for Auntie Nellie and perhaps Mum had something to be jealous about.
I surveyed the scene around me and vowed that when I grew up I would marry a rich man who would carry me  away from all this noise and squalor.
I little knew then what the future held for me and looking back I can see what a lot I had to learn.
After a while Mary came down with her two friends.
Molly removed the rags that Mary had put in my hair and it fell down in ringlets.
Then she helped me put on my white satin dress, after which I pulled on my shoes.
Frankie dressed himself, and he looked smarter than I had ever seen him in his check suit, waistcoat and matching cap.
Liza looked good too.
Then Mum came rustling down the stairs in her almost-new taffeta dress with its leg o' mutton sleeves.
I could hardly believe my eyes.
She looked years younger.
Her hair was done on top like a cottage loaf with bits dangling around her ears, in which she had long red glass earrings, and peeping out from under the long russet-coloured dress were her brand new button-up boots.
She twirled around the room but Mary wasn't interested and returned upstairs with her friends to complete dressing.
Mum kept preening herself in the glass until Frankie could contain himself no longer.
‘If yer don't watch out yer'll crack that mirror.’
Mum scowled at him and slapped him hard across the face.
However, he wasn't bothered.
He'd expected it and just shrugged his shoulders and sat down on the stool.
Mum returned to the mirror and replaced strands into the bun which had become dishevelled during the twirling.
Then, looking satisfied with herself, she marched out into the yard to see how well her orders had been carried out and, incidentally, to show off her fine clothes.
We followed.
All eyes turned, filled with admiration and envy.
Even Dad looked at us proudly as he paused in his job of putting up the bunting.
All our playmates crowded round to marvel at our get-up and touch our finery, but Mum soon put a stop to this and sent us indoors.
‘Goo inside, we don't want their dirty maulers on yer clothes.’
We were disappointed but we could still watch through the windows as Mum gave her final instructions to Mrs Taylor and Mrs Buckley.
Then we stood down when Mum and Dad  came to the house.
The young women had come downstairs and Dad, who had already had a skinful, addressed Molly in a jovial manner.
‘Why 'ello Molly.
I didn't know yow'd bin invited.’
Then he pulled her towards him and asked her to give him a kiss, but she pulled away quickly when she saw Mum's scowl.
‘No yer don't!
I ain't 'avin' none a that in my 'ouse.
An' yow,’ she turned on Dad, 'ow long 'ave yer known them two?’
Just then Albert put his head round the door and I could see that Dad was relieved that he did not have to go into explanations.
Mum turned her wrath on Albert.
‘Out!
Out!
Get out!
Don't yer know it–s bad luck ter see yer bride before yer married?’
He was probably as glad as Dad to do as he was told and leave and I noticed that Mary's two buxom friends slipped out after them.
But Mum's attention was elsewhere.
She was upstairs at once to tell Mary what had happened, though I don't suppose Mary paid her much heed.
In any case, Mum was soon down again in front of the mirror.
She didn't say anything to me and I was too scared to speak in case she started on me, but her mood changed in a flash when Mary came down, and she was all smiles.
‘Are yer ready now Mary me luv?
We'll be late if we don't 'urry.’
Mary ignored Mum and just smiled at me.
I could hardly believe my eyes.
She looked a picture, radiant, all in white.
Over her orange-blossom headdress she had a long flowing veil which flowed down her back; her dress of white satin rustled and crinkled as she walked.
She seemed to glide on her little satin-shod feet.
As I watched her I thought Granny would have been proud if she'd been alive to see Mary now.
I glanced up at Granny's picture and for once she seemed to be smiling.
Dad came in and I was struck by how handsome he seemed with his moustache freshly waxed and his hair brushed flat and parted in the middle.
He wore his best suit which had been redeemed from the pawnbrokers and was freshly cleaned  and pressed.
He even had on a collar and tie, which I'd never seen before and which he would tug at every now and then as if it were too tight.
When he had finished looking in the mirror to put in his buttonhole rose, it was time to go.
Mary picked up her bouquet of white roses from the table and placed her hand through Dad's arm.
He looked at her proudly then they turned and we walked out into the crowd.
Confetti showered down on us and congratulations were shouted from all directions.
Then the people moved aside and we passed through the smiling, cheering crowd, some of whom I noticed had tears in their eyes.
I wondered where all that confetti came from; knowing Mum I guessed she must have supplied it, but none of us children were given any.
But we'd anticipated this.
One night we had sat up late while Mum and Dad were at The Golden Cup and had cut up old Christmas decorations into tiny squares and diamonds and then hidden them in envelopes.
Now we hung back and got them out of our pockets and joined in with everyone else.
Mary and Dad ducked their heads to avoid the waving arms as they walked along and everyone was smiling, including Mum.
This was not a wedding such as we see today.
This was an old-fashioned wedding.
There were no wedding cars nor yet carriages.
The church was within easy walking distance of our street so everyone went on foot.
It was a warm May day and everybody seemed to be out in the street or standing on their steps.
There was quite a procession by the time we got to the church, St Paul's, and as we entered the organ played ‘Here Comes the Bride’.
We walked down the aisle and the church seemed really awesome.
I looked from left to right to find somewhere to sit and could see nowhere.
Then before I had gone a few yards I felt a tug on my back.
It was my friend Nellie who lived in the yard next to ours.
She pointed to the pulpit where the parson was beginning the words of the service.
Suddenly I was frightened because he had once caught us playing in the churchyard and had shouted at us and chased us out.
Nellie and I tiptoed quietly back down the aisle and out of the door.
While we waited for the service to finish we amused ourselves rearranging the flowers on the graves.
Some  had no flowers at all so we shared the flowers out more equally.
When we ran out of jam jars we pressed the daffodils and tulips into the earth.
I don't suppose that that graveyard ever looked prettier than on our Mary's wedding day.
Then the people came streaming out of the church.
We joined the crowd before our handiwork was noticed and watched as Mary and Albert had more confetti thrown over them as they stood on the threshold of the church.
Mary was kissed and hugged by her workmates and Albert's back was slapped and his hand shaken by his friends.
Mum and Dad and Mr and Mrs Lewis entered into the spirit of the occasion but I thought I could see some sadness in Mrs Lewis's eyes.
She didn't smile and this perplexed me because I knew she liked our Mary.
But I also knew that she was far from pleased with the arrangements.
I heard her say so, though she would not interfere in anything Mum had organised.
When we reached our yard again I could see that Mrs Taylor and her friends had worked hard.
The trestles had been put up and were covered with white tablecloths of American oilcloth.
They were piled with corned-beef sandwiches, cheeses, sausage rolls, sliced pickled onions, beetroot, all kinds of pickles, watercress, pig's pudding and every mouthwatering delicacy you could think of.
And standing in the centre was a two-tiered, iced cake.
At one end of the table there were four stone gallon jars of ale, bottles of stout, gin and whisky.
There was room on the benches for twenty guests each side, facing each other.
We children had a table to one side to ourselves on which were laid out bottles of pop, cakes, buns and bread and jam.
While the adults sat on their forms we sat ourselves down on an assortment of broken chairs borrowed from the neighbours.
There was a plate, knife and fork and a paper napkin for everyone.
Some, the lucky ones, had a glass for their drink but the rest had to make do with a cup or a mug.
After we had settled down, brother Jack stood up and banged the table and called for order for Dad to say grace.
Everybody bowed their heads, then as he said ‘Amen’ they dived into the 'eats’.
You would have thought some of them hadn't eaten for days, but  then perhaps they hadn't.
Many seemed not to know what the knives and forks were for and took the napkins for handkerchiefs.
Mrs Taylor kept an eye on us, ready to rap our knuckles if we got too greedy.
As everyone feasted themselves Mum went round with the drink, pouring out gin and whisky or stout as they preferred, making sure to test them all as she did so, while Dad and Fred did the same with the ale.
Even the newly converted Battling Billy broke the pledge that day.
His wife Maggie kept on eye on him but said it was all right for a special occasion and that he could rejoin the pledge tomorrow.
Things were beginning to hum when I noticed Mrs Lewis get up from her seat and go over to Mary.
Mum was out of earshot but I could hear.
She said, ‘Fred and I will have to leave now as we have to catch the early train in the morning, Mary.
But we'll see you as soon as we get back from our holidays.
In the meantime, I hope you and Albert will be very happy.
You have my blessings, my dear.’
‘Thank you, mother,’ replied Mary with tears in her eyes.
‘I didn't want the weddin' this way.’
‘I quite understand,’ Mrs Lewis assured her.
‘But I've never liked your mother and I never shall.’
They embraced briefly and I heard her say quietly, ‘Remember I shall always love you and if there's anything I can do or that you want, don't be afraid to come to me.’
And with that she and her husband left.
Soon after this Mary and Albert got ready to follow his parents and depart.
They slipped away unnoticed except by me.
I didn't want Mary to go because I thought I wouldn't see her for a long time, and I ran over to her and pleaded.
‘Where are you goin'?
Ain't you stayin' till the end of the party?’
‘No, Katie,’ they answered in unison.
‘But,’ Mary continued, ‘you can come and visit us when we've got settled in.’
‘But remember,’ said Albert, ‘only you and Frankie, mind.’
And they picked me up in turn and gave me a kiss.
Nobody seemed to miss them, only me.
I tried to get Dad to tell me where they'd gone but he was tipsy and only laughed and said they'd gone on their ‘funnymoon’.
They were all pretty well oiled by then so I went back and sat with  the other children.
Battling Billy was attempting to sing one of his war songs and Maggie was merry too; if he went too far she would have to help him indoors.
Mum was leading the chorus and us kids were singing our own dirty ditties.
By now the barrel organ was in action, belting out ‘Down at the Old Bull and Bush’; the noise was tremendous.
When that number was over people started calling for order so that Mrs Buckley could do one of her songs.
Unfortunately Mrs Buckley couldn't sing a note in tune; her throat sounded like it had gravel down it.
There was nearly a fight when her husband heard Fred the lamplighter say to Dad that she sounded like ‘a constipated canary’.
The adults were beginning to get out of hand: some were dancing, having a ‘knees up’; others were arguing with the organ grinder about what should be played.
Then the men got round to the subject of politics.
‘Asquith should be shot,’ someone suggested.
‘This government's never bin any good,’ another agreed.
Others sprang to the defence of their rulers and the argument became furious until a heavy fist banged down on the table and bottles and food went flying.
This started a real rough and tumble, with people falling or being pushed to the ground amongst the debris.
Us kids were highly amused at all this, but I was distracted from the fun by Frankie who suggested that we gather up the bottles and hide them in the washhouse before they all got broken.
We ended up with about a dozen assorted gin, whisky and stout bottles.
We hid them in the copper, closed the lid and crept back into the yard, shutting the door carefully behind us.
When we emerged the women were still at it.
Two were pulling each other 's hair and screaming at each other while the men tried to part them.
Mum was not taking part.
She stood there with hands on her hips, glaring with a face like thunder.
However, the disturbance didn't last long because just then there was a cry of ‘Hey up!
Here's the cops!’
They were not joking.
It was not only the cops but the Black Maria as well.
Dad pushed Mum indoors and Frankie and I followed quickly.
Then Dad shot home the bolt, though this didn't stop us opening the window to see the end of the rumpus.
We saw Maggie drag Billy from under the table  where he was on his knees praying for ‘the good Lord to send down lightning and scatter all these wicked people’.
The police took one look at him and decided to leave him for later.
But while they were hauling various protesting individuals off to the police wagon Maggie got him indoors.
Then in a few minutes they were gone and quiet descended on our yard — but not for long.
Just as we'd closed the window and were breathing a sigh of relief there was a loud knock on the door.
We looked at each other, scared, thinking it was the police come back for us.
Dad whispered to us to keep quiet and not to answer it but then there was an even louder bang and then more knocking.
The door rattled and the pictures shook.
Granny's crepe paper slipped over one eye and she seemed to be saying ‘Serves them right.’
Mum whispered, ‘That's another bad omen.’
Then Dad decided that the banging had gone on long enough.
‘I don't think it's the police, Polly.
Yer better see who it is.’
Mum was taking no chances.
She lifted a corner of the curtain first to make sure it was safe.
It turned out to be Mrs Taylor.
‘Yer tryin' ter knock our bloody door down?’ she shouted.
‘What yer want?’
Mrs Taylor stood there sobbing.
You could hardly make out what she was saying.
‘P-Polly, S-Sam, 'ave yer seen me three young uns?
I carn't find 'em.
I've looked everywhere.
Whatever shall I doo?’ she wailed.
‘Come on Polly, we better help look for 'em before it gets dark,’ Dad suggested.
‘Not me,’ Mum replied, ‘I'll mek yer all a cup of tea when yer get back.
They carn't be far.’
Dad and Liza went inquiring door to door while Frankie and I used this opportunity to see if our bottles were safe in the washhouse.
They were, and so were Mrs Taylor's twins, Joey and Harry, and little Billy.
I tried to lift Joey into my arms but he wriggled onto the slack and ashes on the floor and started giggling.
I couldn't understand what was wrong with him until Frankie pulled out the other two from behind the boiler and found them in a similar state.
‘They've bin drainin' the dregs outta the bottles.
They're drunk!’ he cried.
We stood them up.
They were filthy with coal dust.
We tried to get them to the door but they kept falling about.
They looked really comical, and Frankie and I were in fits of laughter trying to help them.
Then I spotted Dad down the yard and called out to him.
He and Mrs Taylor came tearing down the yard to see what was up.
‘Whatever's up with 'em?
They're filthy!’ he said.
‘Yer'll 'ave ter carry 'em, Dad.
They're drunk,’ Frankie told him.
Then he caught sight of the empties and saw what had happened and began laughing as well.
But Mrs Taylor began crying even more, this time with tears of joy and relief that her babies were safe.
Dad tucked a twin under each arm and took them home, where we helped to wash and clean them before they went to bed.
Mrs Taylor gave Frankie and me a piece of bread pudding each but we didn't like the smell of it so we threw it over the wall on the way back to our house.
When we got in there was no tea waiting for us.
Mum was asleep in her chair, snoring.
Dad motioned us not to disturb her: ‘She's 'ad a busy day.’
But so had we all.
However, we were not hungry for once, so we didn't mind going to bed.
Besides, we had plans to make about how to spend the money we'd get for the empties.
It was therefore with some disappointment that we faced Dad's inquiries about them next morning.
‘How did those bottles come to be in the copper?’ he asked.
We were afraid to tell Dad the exact truth so we said we'd put them there to prevent them getting broken.
‘Good idea,’ Dad replied with a twinkle in his eye: he knew why they were there because he went out and fetched them in and later took them back himself.
So we ended up with nothing for our trouble.
Thus ended Mary's wedding day.
The party did not continue after the police raid.
I can't remember who did the clearing up.
I suppose the adults must have attended to it.
I suppose you could say that the occasion went with a bang.
When Dad went off to the pub with the bottles the following day I followed him.
I thought he'd send me home but he didn't.
‘Here's a penny,’ he said.
‘I want you to sit on the step and watch out fer yer Mum and come in and tell me when you see her.’
I sat there a long time, bored, with a cold bottom, and I was about to open the pub door to tell him I was going home when I saw the organ grinder trundling his barrel-organ down the street.
He stopped outside the pub and started turning the handle.
The music burst forth.
I was delighted and decided to stay and watch a while.
Then the pub door burst open and two women tumbled out, drinks in their hands, and began dancing and singing.
Dad poked his head round the door to see what was going on and to ask if I'd seen Mum.
When I told him I hadn't, he disappeared inside again.
After he'd played a couple of tunes, the organ grinder took off his old frayed cap and handed it round the crowd that had gathered.
At this the women stopped their knees up and went back in without a look at the man.
A few pennies were dropped into it but he didn't look very pleased.
I looked at my penny in the palm of my hand.
I wondered if he would let me turn the handle if I gave it to him.
So timidly I approached him.
‘Please, will you let me turn the handle for you?’
I asked.
‘No!’ he snapped.
‘Little kids should be seen an' not 'eard.’
How many times had I heard that remark?
But I persisted because I loved the sound of the old organ.
‘If yer'll just let me play a tune I'll give yer me penny.’
He peered down at me and scratched his head as he replaced his cap on his bald head.
‘Well littl'un, yer'll 'ave ter stand on yer toes if yer want ter reach the 'andle.’
Then he took the proffered penny and went inside the pub, leaving me to get on with it.
He was right, I did have to stand on tiptoe and even then I could hardly reach.
I couldn't move the handle and yet it looked so easy when the man did it.
I didn't give up; I wanted to get my money's worth.
I pushed with both hands but I  wasn't strong enough to get a squeak out of it.
Then with a renewed effort I managed to get it to moan like a person in pain.
I knew that if the handle moved faster it would sound better, so I really exerted every ounce of my miserable muscle power and the handle jerked forward with such force that I was lifted clean off the ground.
So with a series of jerky motions I pumped that handle, but all I succeeded in producing was the sound of a set of bagpipes.
The noise must have attracted the attention of the people in the pub because the next thing I heard was Dad's voice booming above the bedlam.
‘What d'yer think yer tryin' ter do?’ he asked.
‘I thought someone was bein' murdered.’
Then the organ grinder pulled me away and I began to cry and pull at his coat.
‘I want me penny back.
It wouldn't play a tune for me.’
At that Dad grabbed the man.
‘What's this?
Did you tek 'er penny?’ he demanded.
The organ grinder, however, did not have time to answer, because the drunken women had pushed his organ which began to roll down the hill.
He shook himself free and ran after it.
‘Don't yow ever show yer face round 'ere agen,’ they shouted after him.
Then they drifted back into the pub and left me standing alone.
We never did see that organ grinder again and I felt sorry about what had happened.
But I really wanted my pennyworth.
Our New Neighbour
In the yard next to ours was a tiny cottage squeezed in the corner.
It must have been built to fill a space that was left after the five houses had been completed.
It had just one room up and one down, big enough only for two people to live in.
It was unoccupied, but whether that was because it went unnoticed or because every family was so large it was never taken by anyone, I don't know.
So I was surprised when one morning, while filling the kettle at the tap in the yard, I noticed some of our neighbours looking across at this cottage where a painter was taking the ‘To Let’ sign out of the window.
It was a novelty to see a painter in our district.
The landlords didn't bother and people had to look after their houses as best they could.
So it was to be expected that this sight should arouse some curiosity, and after putting their heads together the women put down their bowls and kettles and went over to ask the painter who was coming to live there.
But he couldn't enlighten them: he only had orders to ‘paint the place up a bit’.
They wandered back to their chores, clearly dissatisfied with this answer.
Here was a new topic for gossip.
I must confess I was as curious as they were so I kept an eye on the cottage to see who came.
But it was not until three mornings later that I spotted a horse and cart arrive.
I knew then that it must be someone special to have their furniture brought in a van.
Everyone in our district used flat hand carts when they moved house — unless they were ‘doing a moonlight’, when their chattels went on a push cart, pram or whatever else was handy.
I dashed back in to make Dad his sandwiches and pour his tea into his billy can.
I saw him off to work impatiently, then over the wall I went to see who our new neighbour was.
I watched with growing amazement a succession of beautiful old pieces of furniture go into the cottage.
There was a new  straw mattress and brass bedsteads on which the morning sun glittered like gold.
There were real carpets, not like our old rags.
There was a leather armchair and kitchen chairs which matched, and brass firedogs and a fender — in fact things that you never saw under the same roof in our district.
However, what caught my eye most was a highly polished harmonium.
How I would have liked to play that, I thought, but chance would be a fine thing.
I gazed at this scene thinking that of all of the things I wanted when I was grown up, the one I wanted most was to play a harmonium.
Little did I think I would soon be playing, or trying to play, this one.
Then the removal men came out of the house for the last time, wiping their brows on their once-white aprons, and then they helped down from the van a little old lady.
She was not a lot taller than me.
She had wisps of grey hair poking out from under a black lace bonnet and wore a long black lace dress down to her feet.
Her face was wrinkled with age but she looked friendly and her voice was pleasant when I heard her talk to the men.
She thanked them for their efforts but although they waited for a tip it was not forthcoming, so they went off grumbling.
Then she went into the cottage and closed the door and I came out of hiding.
She hadn't noticed me, but she had seen the neighbours hanging out of their windows, spectating.
When she'd gone I approached the door timidly.
I wanted to ask her if I could run her errands before the other children had a chance.
So I plucked up my courage and tapped gently on the door.
It opened almost at once and I was confronted by the old lady.
I was nervous but she put me at ease immediately.
‘Well dear, and what do you want so early in the morning?’ she asked, rubbing her hands together.
My voice trembled as I answered.
‘I live over there,’ I said, pointing to our house on the other side of the low wall.
‘I've come to see if yer want any errands fetched.’
She seemed to look straight through me when she continued.
‘And what's your name?’
‘Kathleen, but everybody calls me Katie,’ I told her.
‘Well Katie,’ she said after a pause.
‘If you come back tomorrow I may have an errand for you.’
‘But I can help yer now if yer want me to,’ I said eagerly.
I was anxious to get inside and nose around her furniture.
‘No thank you,’ she said abruptly.
‘My brother will be here later and we shall be busy arranging the furniture.
Now run along like a good girl and don't be late tomorrow.’
I walked away disappointed but I was glad I'd found someone new whom I could confide in.
I was also excited at the prospect of earning some reward, and I couldn't sleep that night for thinking about visiting her in the morning.
But it wasn't till after school the following afternoon that I found time to go.
I washed and combed and plaited my hair and rubbed my clogs, then I went round and knocked on the door.
I had to stand on tiptoe to reach the brass knocker, which had appeared since the previous day.
Then I heard a voice call me to come in so I turned the door knob and entered.
‘Come along in Katie and sit yourself by the fire.
You must be cold,’ she said, but I just stood and warmed my hands: I didn't dare sit down.
She picked up a brass poker and stirred up the fire which already burnt brightly in the grate.
However, I was too excited to notice the cold or the warmth; I was too excited by the sight of all the beautiful objects that filled the room.
There was a copper kettle boiling on one hob and a china teapot on the other and the stove shone clean.
Set out on the white lace tablecloth were matching cups and saucers, and a plate with bread and butter and teacakes on it.
The old lady made me jump when she told me not to stare but to sit down and not be nervous.
I sank into the leather armchair and thought to myself that this couldn't be real; I would wake up soon.
‘Now come along, Katie.’
Her voice brought me out of my daydream.
‘I want you to meet my brother.’
It was only then that I noticed the small man seated in the armchair next to mine.
Anyone could tell they were brother and sister they were so much alike, except that he had a little goatee beard on his chin.
Like his sister he too was dressed all in black and he had the same habit of rubbing his hands together.
‘This is my little friend Katie,’ she told him.
‘She's going to be my little errand-girl.’
‘Good afternoon, Katie.’
And he put out his hand, but I quickly wiped mine on my pinafore before I shook hands.
‘I like the look of her, Louise,’ I heard him whisper to her.
‘But the poor little mite looks half-starved.’
She indicated the pretty flower-patterned basin for me to wash my hands in, then I joined them at the table.
But I was too excited to eat much.
I'd never been surrounded by so many nice things before, not even at the Lewises'.
The old lady spoke to me occasionally, but I noticed that she seemed to lapse into quiet moods.
This didn't bother me.
I just felt this was too good to last and I was right.
I had no idea she was using me for a purpose of her own: I was too naive to realise until it dawned on me what it was, a few weeks later.
After tea she wrapped up some fruit cake for me to take back home.
With that she saw me off with an invitation to visit her the next day after school but that I was to tell my parents in case they were worried where I was.
as if they would be, I thought.
When I got indoors Mum was out but Frankie was sitting in her chair by the fire warming his toes on the fender.
‘Where 'ave yow bin?’ he inquired moodily.
‘I've bin lookin' fer yow everywhere.’
I sat down in Dad's chair and told him all about the old lady and her brother, or at least what I knew, which wasn't much.
But before I'd got very far with my story he shrugged his shoulders and said he didn't believe me.
‘Any'ow what's 'er name?’ he asked suspiciously.
‘I don't know, I never asked 'em.’
‘Yer tellin' lies,’ he said triumphantly.
‘I'm not!
But I did hear 'er brother call 'er Louise.
But if yer don't believe me I'll take yer tomorra to see 'er,’ I told him angrily.
I felt close to tears to think he doubted my word.
‘Is that on then?’ he asked, getting excited.
‘Yes it is,’ I said, although I had no idea what the old woman would say.
We shook hands on the promise anyway.
The next afternoon couldn't come quick enough.
No one was at home when we came out of school so we didn't have to explain where we were going.
I made sure Frankie washed himself and warned him to behave himself as well.
‘I still can't believe you,’ he remarked, but he washed anyway and he dried himself on the piece of hessian and then spat on his hands and flattened his hair.
I couldn't understand why he did this because his rebellious hair always sprang up like bristles on a brush and never stayed flat like Dad's.
I plaited my own hair and then I straightened my ink-stained pinafore and we were ready to go.
We had soon reached the old lady's house and rapped on the door.
‘That won't be there long,’ said Frankie.
I gave him a frown and told him to mind his manners because I wasn't sure what the old lady's reaction would be to my brother.
‘I don't like you when you're like this,’ he said sulking.
‘You sound just like our Mum.’
But I had no time to reply because just then the door opened and there stood the old lady in her black lace dress.
‘Good afternoon, Katie,’ she said to me but she frowned at Frankie and said, ‘And who is this boy?’
‘E's my brother, miss, and 'e's come to pay yer a visit,’ I answered nervously.
‘You should have asked my permission first before bringing him along.
I'm not keen on little boys,’ she snapped back.
I could tell she was angry and I was ready to cry, but Frankie pulled me roughly back off the step and we turned to leave.
She must have changed her mind because she called us back.
‘Well, you may as well come on in now you're here.’
And we turned and followed her in.
Frankie's eyes nearly popped out of his head when he clapped eyes on the room and its contents, especially what was laid out on the table.
It was all neatly laid out as it had been the day before.
The old lady fetched out another plate and cup and saucer, then she checked that our hands were clean and told us to sit down.
Frankie, however, flopped into the leather armchair, and putting his hands behind his head lay back like a grown-up.
‘This is the life for me,’ he said.
I was so embarrassed by his behaviour.
The old lady frowned at him and asked him sharply what his name was and he sat up straight but he answered cheekily.
‘My name's Francis William Samuel after me Dad…but everybody calls me Frankie, except me school mates and they call me….’
But I kicked his shin before he could finish the sentence.
To my relief the old lady smiled and said, ‘Never mind what they call you, Frankie.
But remember not to call here again unless I ask Katie to bring you.
Now come along, sit up at the table and have your tea.’
We sat down then and all the time he was eating Frankie couldn't keep his eyes off her or the things that surrounded him.
When we'd finished I asked if we could wash up and run the errands but she said she'd already been to the shops with her brother.
I was disappointed at this and was afraid she was still vexed at me for bringing Frankie.
‘Don't look so sad,’ she said softly.
‘I shall still want you to come the day after tomorrow.’
‘But that'll be Sunday and all the shops'll be closed,’ I replied.
‘Yes, I know, but if you call early we can have a long talk.’
And with that she said ‘Good afternoon’ and saw us out.
As we left I thanked her for the ‘nice tea’ and off we went.
‘I don't like 'er,’ were Frankie's first words when we were out of earshot.
‘But I loved all that beautiful furniture and the tea she gave us.
What about that brown leather armchair?
I'll 'ave one o’ them when I go to work and don't forget to ask 'er if I can come again.
And don't tell Liza!’
‘I won't,’ I promised and he went off to find his mates while I made my way home to start the chores.
For once I was happy doing them because I had the thought of Sunday to cheer me up.
When I returned from Sunday school the following Sunday I wrapped up in my scarf and tammy because it was a chilly day.
‘An' where do yer think yer gooin'?’
Mum asked when I came downstairs.
‘Back ter Sunday school, I've forgotten me test card,’ I lied.
‘Well, see that yer come straight back.
I want ter talk with yer.
This worried me because I could not make out what I had done this time to annoy her.
So I decided to return to Sunday school to fetch my card.
I ran all the way there and back and handed my test card over.
‘Sit in that chair an' listen ter what I've got to say.’
She paused for a moment before continuing.
‘I 'ear that you've bin runnin' errands an' payin' visits to the new neighbour across at the cottage.’
‘Yes Mum,’ I answered truthfully.
‘I was goin' ter tell yer about that but I thought you wouldn't be interested.’
‘I'm only interested in who she is, an' what she does for a livin',’ she said sharply.
So I had to explain.
I told her the old lady was rich and that she had done the cottage up beautifully.
I had found out that her name was Miss Vulcan and I gave her this information as well as telling her that Miss Vulcan had a brother named Freddie who visited her and that he was a little old man who wore a black cap on his head and sported a goatee beard.
‘Sounds like they're Jews ter me.
I'll 'ave ter pay 'er a visit,’ she said more to herself than to me.
‘I'm goin' this afternoon, Mum.
Shall I tell her you would like to call?’
I asked.
‘Yes, yer can tell 'er I'll be callin' on 'er tomorra.
No, tell 'er I'll come Tuesday, it's washin' day Monday.’
‘Yes Mum,’ I replied dutifully and left before she changed her mind.
A few minutes later I was standing on Miss Vulcan's doorstep.
Before I lifted the knocker I gave my clogs an extra rub on my stockinged calf, then I rapped on the door.
‘Come along in, Katie,’ I heard her voice from inside, so I entered.
This time I went straight to the pretty china bowl and washed my hands.
As before the table was laid out for tea, but instead of bread and butter there were toasted muffins oozing butter.
We seated ourselves and I watched her cut her muffins into quarters.
This was a real treat for me.
I could hardly remember having muffins before, although I'd seen the muffin man in his white apron, a towel over his arm and a tray of  muffins every Sunday afternoon.
But we never saw them in our house.
I picked up my knife and attempted to copy the old lady but I soon got into difficulty.
The old lady only smiled and leaned over to show me what to do.
Thus at my ease, I ate my tea and then I washed up the dirty crocks.
After this I was told to sit by the fire beside my benefactor.
I sat quietly trying to work out how I was going to give her Mum's message.
‘You're very quiet.
Is there anything you want to tell me?’ she asked me.
‘It's me Mum,’ I blurted out.
‘She's coming ter pay yer a visit and she wants ter know all about you before I can come here again.
I don't think you'll like my Mum, Miss Louise, nobody does.’
‘Don't worry your little head about me.
I'll see your Mum and whatever she wants to know I'll be only too pleased to tell her.’
She smiled archly.
‘But,’ she added, ‘would you like me to tell you what I do and how I come to be here?’
‘Yes, I would,’ I answered, perhaps a little too eagerly.
‘First make me another cup of tea and hand me my knitting.’
I did as she asked then settled down again.
Then as she knitted she began to relate her life story from when she was a young girl.
She went rambling on much as I am doing myself now.
She seemed to be talking to herself as she gazed into the fire.
I listened, all ears, to hear what she was saying.
‘I was only a small child when my parents sent my brother and me to an orphanage.
I was twelve and Freddie about fifteen.
I was very unhappy after this because I did not want to be apart from my Momma.
At first they came to visit us once a month but then the visits became few and far between.
I wanted to go home so eventually I ran away.
By this time Freddie had already gone home.
But I had no idea where I was going.
I left early before the nuns were awake but I only got as far as Glasgow before I lost my way.’
I sat stock still, hardly breathing, my chin cradled in my hands.
When I looked at her her eyes had tears in them like my own.
Her story was like a tale from a book.
Then after a pause she started again.
‘A young man came along on a bicycle and asked me if he could help but I refused his offer.
I didn't like the look of him.
Just then two policemen rode past and stopped.
They said they were looking for me and I had to go with them back to the convent.’
She wiped her eyes with her dainty lace handkerchief and I wiped my own on the back of my hand.
She told me how she wrote several letters to her home complaining of the punishment she was given and begging to be taken away but she received no reply until one day her brother paid her a visit and gave her the news that their parents were both dead.
After that she went into service and there she stayed until, when she was about twenty-two years of age, her brother came to tell her he was married and to ask her if she would leave her employer and come to look after his wife who was expecting a baby.
I felt very sorry for her by now and for want of knowing how to express my sympathy I offered to make another pot of tea.
This broke her train of thought and she brightened up.
I made the tea and she drank it, then she continued her story.
‘I was surprised to hear that he was married but I wanted a change of surroundings so I packed my few belongings and went with him there and then.
He told me he was a money lender in a small way and that he lived in London now.
I thought London was a wonderful place but I was disappointed when I saw what a small, tumbledown house my brother and his wife lived in.
And to make matters worse I took an instant dislike to the wife.
When we were introduced she turned to Freddie and said haughtily.
‘So this is your sister.
Well, she'll have to make herself useful while she's here.’
Freddie took my few belongings up to the garret where I was to sleep and spend most of my time until the baby was born.
I was so unhappy but I had nowhere else to go so I stayed until the baby was born.
But it died within two weeks.’
I was fascinated by her story and waited impatiently while she refreshed herself with tea before continuing.
‘She blamed Freddie and me for what went wrong but within two weeks she'd died herself; she had never recovered from the birth.’
A flicker of a smile passed across her face as she said this.
‘Freddie was not sorry and neither was I. I stayed on with him  to keep house.
I did all the cleaning, cooking and kept his books in order, which was no mean feat because he had a lot of clients call and all the money passed through my hands.’
‘Didn't yer want to leave 'im then?’
I interrupted.
‘No,’ she snapped.
‘I loved my brother and he needed me, and you must care for people,’ she insisted.
‘But I do try.’
Her words seemed like an accusation.
‘But no one seems to be bothered with me.
An' when I ask questions no one listens and Mum says I always get under 'er feet,’ I added.
‘Never mind.
I expect she does love you in her own way,’ she said gently.
I wanted to hear more of her life so I asked her why she had left London to come to Birmingham.
‘My brother's married again now,’ she continued, frowning.
‘I didn't like his second wife either.
She's taken over the household and the book-keeping too.
I was treated like a servant so I asked Freddie to find me a place of my own.
He wanted me to stay but I'd made up my mind.
So when he was in Birmingham he bought me this house, which was going cheap, so that I could start a money-lending business here for him.
I have looked after his books for forty years and that's all I know, so he gave me the capital to start and here I am.’
She paused.
‘You see there's lots of shops and businesses here and we think it's a good place to begin.’
I didn't know what she had planned for me but I understood well enough her meaning.
‘But most of the people round 'ere are very poor,’ I pointed out.
‘They 'ave ter go ter the pawnshop.’
She smiled.
‘I can lend them money instead of going to the pawnshop.
And that's where you can help,’ she said archly.
‘But I don't see 'ow I can 'elp,’ I mumbled innocently, waiting to hear her reply.
‘But you can help me, Katie; I'd like you to spread the word around and tell people what my business is, and that if they need me I'll be able to help and charge only a little interest.’
I didn't understand what ‘interest’ was but she'd been kind to me and I thought she would be kind to others and help them.
She was — but only to suit herself.
I learnt this later.
At that  moment all I wanted to hear was more of her story, but she'd lost interest in that now.
‘Off you go now,’ she said, ‘it's getting dark.’
With that she got up, put her knitting away and said she would go with me as far as our house.
She put on a coat, took down her walking cane which hung behind the door and then we left.
She held my hand and we walked slowly up the yard.
She reminded me what she wanted me to do, then as we neared our house I became frightened that she would fall foul of Mum.
So I stopped and turned to her.
‘Me Mum won't let yer in,’ I blurted out.
‘Maybe not, but she will one day,’ she said, very sure of herself.
Then with a queer, knowing smile on her face she made to go.
‘Goodnight, Miss Vulcan,’ I said.
‘You may call me Miss Louise,’ she replied, and with that walked slowly back to her cottage.
It was only after she had gone that I started to ponder why she had confided so much in me.
This was most unlike adults of my previous experience.
But I dismissed these thoughts from my mind and entered our house.
Only Frankie and Liza were in so I decided to tell them both what had happened.
I was too excited to bother about my sister's listening, all ears.
Anyway, I thought, Liza would do my job for me.
‘Where's she going ter get 'er money from?’ asked Frankie.
‘Er brother,’ I replied.
‘She says he makes 'er an allowance.’
‘That won't last long when the vultures round 'ere get their 'ands on 'er money,’ he said.
‘Some people are good at borrowing but she'll have to watch them to pay back.’
‘Well we'll 'ave to wait an' see.
She's kind anyway,’ I said.
‘I hope our Mum don't start borrowin' off of 'er or she'll never get it back.’
‘I don't think Mum will,’ I told him.
‘I don't know about the rest but anyway I've got to pass the word around.’
‘What 'ave you got ter do it for?
They'll find out soon enough,’ he said.
‘I promised,’ was my reply.
Next day it was the usual Monday routine: washing, maiding, singing and sharing the gossip of the day.
The news soon went round the district about why Miss Louise had come live there.
Liza took care of that before I had a chance, but I didn't mind this; she was better at it than me.
I was fetching a tin bowl of water from the tap in the yard when I heard Mum call out, ‘Katie, fetch me a bucket of slack before yer goo ter school.’
I was scared stiff of going down those cellar steps but Frankie wasn't around to do it so I had to do as I was told.
As I was struggling down the yard with the fully laden bucket a few minutes later a neighbour, Mrs Woods, saw me.
I tried to walk past her but she caught hold of the bucket.
‘We want yow in the wash'ouse,’ she insisted.
I followed, and on reaching the door I saw Mrs Jonesy, Mrs Phipps, Maggie and Mum, together with two or three more from the other yards, in animated conversation.
It was cold and snowy outside so I squeezed in with them.
They were chattering like a lot of parrots but I listened to what was said.
‘Well fancy that.’
‘I carn't believe it.’
‘T'ain't true.’
Mum broke in decisively.
‘It might be a good idea an' find out,’ she said.
‘It'd be betta than gooin' ter uncle's,’ one said.
With this it dawned on me what they were talking about so I became more attentive.
‘Well goo on then ask 'er,’ said Mrs Woods.
‘Well goo on then.’
Mum shook me.
‘Tell us.
Is that the truth?
Is she a money lender?’
‘Yes Mum,’ I told her.
‘Right.
That's all we want ter know.
Yer can get off ter school now before yer late.’
She spoke sharply and pushed me outside where it was snowing hard.
In school the girls kept whispering and turning round to look at me; Liza had told everyone.
But it was not until we were in the playground that they could tackle me.
‘Make way for Miss Louise,’ they chorused, but I was not bothered by their sarcasm: it was the snowballs that some threw that mattered.
I was alone; even Liza looked on as the snowballs rained down.
I turned to run but slipped over, and that was too much even for my sister who came to my rescue and dared them to throw any more.
They did not.
‘What's wrong with 'em?’
I cried.
‘What 'ave I done?’
‘I told 'em about you an' the money lender but I didn't know they were gooin' to snowball yer,’ she said, pulling me to my feet.
I rather liked the name ‘Louise’ but not the snowballs, and from that day on until I left school the girls who didn't like me called after me: ‘There goes Miss Louise.’
It was jealousy, I suppose; the fact that I had spotted a chance they had not, although I couldn't get over the suspicion that their reaction to me had something to do with how Liza had told the story.
When I returned home that afternoon I was surprised to find Dad already sitting in his chair by the fire.
‘Aren't you at work, Dad?’
I asked him.
‘No I ain't,’ he answered sharply, which was strange for him.
‘An' where's yer Mum?’
She must have been upstairs because almost as if in answer to him we heard her heavy tread on the stairs.
I could see the mood Dad was in and all I wanted to do was to make myself scarce before they started to quarrel.
‘I don't want any tea Mum,’ I called out quickly before she was down the stairs.
‘Miss Louise will be waitin' for me.’
‘What's all this about?’ inquired Dad grumpily.
‘What yer mean yer don't want any tea?’
‘It's all right Sam, she's fetchin' errands fer the old lady that lives in the cottage.’
Dad stared at her hard before he replied.
‘It seems to me that she's always over there.’
‘I've told yer Sam,’ snapped Mum, ‘she's outa mischief, an' besides, it's one less ter feed.’
I didn't realise that Dad was home early that afternoon because he had been put on short time and had had to take a drop in wages in consequence.
I was too excited about my new job to stop and think.
I made myself scarce as quickly as I could.
When I arrived at Miss Louise's door, out of breath from running, I kicked the snow off my clogs and went straight in.
The first thing she asked was if I had done what I promised
‘Yes,’ I replied.
‘Everyone knows.’
She seemed pleased with my reply and smiled that crafty smile of hers.
Then when we had eaten tea she said she was going to play the harmonium.
This pleased me very much because I was longing to hear her play the instrument.
Quickly I tidied away and washed the tea things, then she seated herself in front of the harmonium, pulled out the stops and began to play.
But after a few notes she stopped and turned round on her stool to face me.
‘Would you like to sing for me?
I hear you've got a good voice.’
I knew there were no flies on her but I wondered how she'd found that out.
‘But I only know the songs I sing at school,’ I told her warily.
‘Well, would you like me to sing for you then?’ she asked.
I nodded.
She arranged herself in front of the harmonium again and after pulling out more stops began to sing ‘On the Banks of Allen Waters’.
She played and sang so plaintively that I almost wept, the song was so sad.
She taught me the song later, and showed me how to control my voice, open my mouth wide and sing loud or sing softly.
I can picture her now sitting at the harmonium in her black lace gown, me standing beside her as we sang together.
Another time I was so fascinated by her clicking needles that she offered to teach me to knit as well.
That afternoon she took me upstairs to her small bedroom for the first time.
I was spellbound by the brass bedstead and all the knick-knacks, but what held my attention most were the knitted bedspreads that were on the bed and draped over the chairs.
They were made out of small, knitted squares, all the different colours of the rainbow.
What I wouldn't give, I thought, to be able to lie down on that bed, just for a minute.
But I was awoken from my daydreaming by her calling me over  to the large chest which stood beneath the window.
She told me to lift the lid, and there inside were packed hundreds of balls of different coloured wool.
She directed me to take as many balls as I could carry and put them downstairs.
As I rummaged through the chest, gathering up as much as I could carry without dropping any, I found knitted scarves, blankets, gloves, socks and all sorts of garments of varying sizes.
I picked out as many balls as I could manage, then she closed the lid and we returned downstairs.
When we were seated facing each other again she gave me a ball of pink wool and a pair of knitting needles and I had my first lesson in how to knit properly without dropping stitches.
As I struggled to follow her directions my natural curiosity overcame me and I asked her how she came to have all that wool and all those knitted garments which were obviously not for her.
‘Well,’ she said, with a twinkle in her eye, ‘if you'll keep a secret, I'll tell you, but first you'll have to promise to keep it a secret.’
‘I'll promise,’ I said, offering my hand for her to shake, but she only smiled and replied, ‘I think I can trust you.’
Then she told me about her knitting sideline.
‘When I go to my clients to collect I always ask if they have any hand-knitted woollen garments they don't need, and if I'm lucky they give me some.
Then I bring them home to wash and I unravel them before they dry.
Then I wind them into balls and put them in the oven to dry, and that's how I come to have all those woollen articles to sell.’
I thought what a good idea it would be for me to do the same and I kept this in mind.
After a while she examined what I had done.
‘You're getting along fine.
Keep up the good work.’
The more she praised me the quicker the needles clicked.
I had soon knitted all sorts of things for her, such as hats, teapot cosies and iron holders.
I would have been pleased to own any of these, but after they were finished she told me they were all ordered.
All I received for my labour was my tea.
I didn't mind this; I was happy just to be there, hoping that one day she would give me  some of the pretty wool to make something for myself but she never did.
I was afraid to ask in case she said I wasn't to come any more.
She was moody at times and easily irritated.
Soon she took my visits for granted and I was given the spare key to let myself in the door.
I was surprised at this.
‘Why do yer want me ter have a key?’
I asked her.
‘Well, I always take a nap of an afternoon and when you rap the knocker it startles me, which is bad for my nerves.’
And she stretched out her hand for me to see it shake.
‘I hope you ain't gonna have a fit.
I wouldn't know what ter do.’
I was frightened.
I don't believe she heard me because she yawned, handed me the key and told me to hang it round my neck so that no one could take it from me.
I was very honoured and proud to think she could trust me.
Another afternoon she took me with her to deliver the knitted garments.
She said that everything was ordered, and that pleased me because I had to carry it all.
We called at several small shops and houses in the better-class district which we called ‘the kippers and curtains’.
I did not find out how much she sold the garments for because she left me standing outside, but she always looked pleased when she emerged from these visits.
When we got back to her cottage she put her hand in her bodice and pulled out a string with her key and a whistle attached to it.
‘What's that for?’
I asked, pointing at the whistle.
‘That's a police whistle in case I'm attacked while I'm collecting the week's takings.’
‘But nobody would attack yer round 'ere.
At least I don't think so,’ I told her, but she just smiled and told me she had no further use for me that day and to call the next day which was to be a school holiday.
The following morning I asked Mum if I could spend the day with Miss Louise.
‘Yow can, as long as yer do yer usual jobs 'ere first,’ she said grudgingly.
Although I was helping out Miss Louise I had to get up at six o'clock in the morning to do all the chores before school.
I had to fetch the coal up from the cellar, chop the wood, light the fire, make the tea and then take up a mug each  for Mum and Dad.
Then I went skipping round to the cottage to see Miss Louise before I went to school.
That holiday morning I found Miss Louise waiting for me just inside the door with a pair of old shoes and a pair of slippers in her hands.
‘I want you to try these on,’ she said, handing them to me.
I did as she said but they were two sizes too big for me; they fitted better after she had packed the toes with scraps of wool.
She wrapped up the clogs and gave them back to me with the instruction that I was only to wear the shoes when I came to call.
‘What about the slippers?’
I asked, delighted by these gifts, tatty as they were.
‘I'll leave them on the mat inside the door so you can change into them, then your clogs won't wake me up from my nap.
As I was pulling on the worn satin slippers I thought of the new ones my sister had bought me for her wedding.
It was no use thinking about them; they were in the pawnshop with the rest of our wedding clothes.
We sat down to knit, but before we had settled there was a loud knock on the door.
When I opened it I was surprised to find Mrs Phipps and Mrs Woods.
‘Is Mrs Vulcan in?’ they chorused, peering past me into the room.
‘It's not Mrs Vulcan, it's Miss Vulcan ter you,’ I told them haughtily.
‘Huh!
Puttin' on airs an' graces ain't yer?’
Mrs Phipps said sarcastically, looking me up and down.
Before I could reply Miss Louise called out, ‘Who's that at the door?’
I thought of what my Dad called them and replied over my shoulder, ‘It's them two vultures.’
‘Now, now,’ Miss Louise called back sharply, ‘mind your manners and let them in.’
I disliked these two intensely and didn't like being told off for being rude to them, so I told her peevishly that I wasn't staying while they were there and kicked off the slippers, put on my clogs and ran out banging the door behind me.
I went home sulking and was still in a mood when Frankie returned.
‘What's the long face for? 'Ave yer worn yer welcome out?’ he asked none too sympathetically.
‘No!’
I snapped, with tears welling up in my eyes.
‘Why are yer cryin' then?’
I tried to explain that Miss Louise was always short with me when anyone called.
‘I s'pose she don't want yer knowin' what's goin' on,’ he suggested wisely.
‘I know what's goin' on so that's not the reason she sends me away.
She said she trusted me but I don't think I like 'er any more,’ I said, pursing my lips.
‘But I'll miss the teas an' my knittin' lessons so I'll 'ave to go back.’
‘Oh you go back if yer want to, but it seems ter me that yow've served yer purpose now an' she don't want yer any more.
Does she ever give yer any money for what yer do?’ he asked.
‘No, she only gives me money ter do the errands an' then I 'ave ter go back twice because I carn't carry them all in one go.
She reckons up the change over an' over like she don't trust me,’ I admitted reluctantly.
‘You know, Katie, she's an old miser and everyone borrows money off her or else they buy the things you knit off her.
I even 'eard Mum say the other day she was goin' over there to get a loan.
Dad 'eard 'er an' 'e told 'er that while 'e 'ad two 'ands she was not to borrow money off 'er.
So I'd stay away from 'er if I was you an' come an' play marbles with me like you used to do.’
I knew he was trying to cheer me up but I was determined to go back to my knitting lessons when the vultures had gone.
‘Please yerself.’
He shrugged his shoulders and went off leaving me to ponder what he had said.
I plonked down on the hard wooden sofa and began musing: was he telling the truth?
Would Mum borrow off her?
Mum always bragged about never borrowing off anyone but I had noticed that since Dad had been on short time she seemed to have more money than ever to spend and was getting more friendly with the neighbours she could not stand as a rule.
Then I remembered an incident not long before.
I'd  been taking a bucket of slack to the washhouse where all the women were gathered gossiping.
They dropped their voices to a whisper when they saw me but I'd seen them taking nips from a bottle of gin.
I didn't think too much about this at the time, although I knew they usually only had money for their ‘little pleasures’ after they'd done the washing and pawned it.
Now I understood and I put all the blame on Miss Louise.
I determined to discover if Mum was going to Miss Louise like the rest.
I was unsure of my welcome when I visited the cottage the next afternoon.
The door was locked but I got out my key and let myself in.
She'd placed my slippers in their normal place on the mat so I slipped into them and crept quietly to her chair.
She sat very still, her eyes closed, breathing softly and regularly.
On her lap lay a large ledger, wide open.
I was tempted to look for Mum's name so I checked that she was really asleep, although I didn't care if she woke up or not.
Gently I lifted the ledger and placed it, still open, on the table.
I looked up again to see that she was still asleep and then I began leafing through the pages, curious to see whose names were entered there.
Most of it was double-dutch to me but I could make out the names entered in columns.
Some I knew, others I didn't.
Beside each entry was the money lent and paid, with the interest and the date.
I felt relief when I couldn't find our name, but then I turned a page and there it was, together with those of Mrs Phipps, Mrs Woods, Mrs Buckley and several more of our neighbours.
My heart sank.
What Frankie had said was true.
Mum was as bad as the rest.
Sadly I turned back the pages and returned the ledger to Miss Louise's lap.
She moved a little but I couldn't have cared less if she awoke.
I slipped off the slippers and quietly left the cottage.
As I walked slowly back I kept asking myself what Dad was going to say when he found out.
I consoled myself with the thought that he wouldn't find out from me; there was enough trouble at home already.
That night as I lay in bed I prayed that it was not our name, only one like ours; I still couldn't believe it.
I thought, I'll ask Miss Louise the truth tomorrow, and I drifted off to sleep.
Next afternoon when I let myself in Miss Louise was not asleep; she was seated, upright in her chair, eyes wide open.
She looked as if she was waiting for me so before she could say anything I spoke.
‘Does my Mum borrow money off you?’
I blurted out.
‘Yes, you know she does.
You saw her name in my ledger yesterday, didn't you?’
She snapped angrily and frowned fiercely at me.
I went very hot and felt myself redden.
She couldn't have been asleep when I lifted the ledger from her lap and scanned its pages: she must have been watching me all the time.
I began to feel ashamed of my nosiness but I hadn't intended to be nosey: I was just curious.
I began to dislike her; she looked sly and I felt indignant that she'd spoken to me like that.
I replied boldly, ‘Yes, I did see our name in that book, along with a lot of others.’
Then, placing my hands on my hips like I had seen Mum do many times when in a– temper, I looked her straight in the eyes.
‘You'll never get paid, yer know, and if my Dad finds out there'll be trouble!’
I shouted.
‘Well, if yer Mum don't pay yer father'll have to.
My brother will see to that.’
She answered calmly and shuffled over to the fireplace, but I hadn't had my say yet.
‘I don't know 'ow because my Dad's on short time now.
My brother Charlie's left 'ome an' sister Mary's married an' Mum 'as to go out cleaning the fish an' chip shop to make ends meet.’
I paused to get my breath and this gave her an opening.
‘Have you quite finished?’ she yelled.
‘If so, you may go.
I'm very vexed with you!’
‘An' I'm vexed with you too!’
I retorted and pushed past her to the door.
Then, as I turned before leaving, I saw she was grinning at me.
I hated her then.
I felt that her character had been revealed and, what was more, that she'd been using me.
I went home feeling miserable and ashamed for being such a fool but I didn't have long to indulge my self-pity, for when I entered our house I found my brother Jack and Mum quarrelling loudly.
They didn't notice me so I made myself unobtrusive and listened.
‘But where're yer gooin'?’
Mum wailed, putting on her tearful act and flopping into the chair as if exhausted.
‘Not far away.
If yer really want ter know I've been courtin' a widow for some time an' we're thinkin' of settlin' down tergether,’ he replied.
‘Don't goo yet Jack,’ pleaded Mum.
‘I'm in a lot of trouble with some debts I owe.’
‘What debts?’ demanded Jack, getting excited again.
‘You always said yer never borrowed off anybody.’
‘I couldn't 'elp meself,’ she confessed tearfully.
‘An' I don't know 'ow I'm gooin' ter pay it back if yer leave 'ome now.’
‘Pay what back?
An' 'ow much? 'Oo d'yer owe this money to, anyway?’
Jack was confused but I was not.
I knew what Mum was talking about.
Then they really went at it, hammer and tongs — so loudly, in fact, that neither of them heard or noticed Dad enter the room.
I coughed loudly and scraped my foot on the floor to draw their attention to who was standing quietly listening to them rowing.
‘I owe five pounds an' some interest if yer must know,’ Mum shouted.
‘Oh blimey, whatever'll the ole man say when 'e finds out?’
Jack whistled through pursed lips.
He always called Dad ‘the ole man’ when we wasn't about.
They finally became aware of Dad and as the penny dropped they both stared at him speechless.
‘What's this yer don't want ‘the ole man’ ter know?
Something about owin' five pounds, is it?’ he inquired quite calmly.
Mum covered her face with her apron and cried noisily, but she got no sympathy from Jack who pushed past Dad and left, leaving her to face the music.
Dad slammed the door behind him with an ‘An' good riddance!’
Then he strode over to Mum and pulled her to her feet, although her face was still buried in the apron and she was wailing louder than ever.
He shook her violently by the shoulders and then pushed her roughly back into the chair.
‘You can turn yer waterworks off now, Polly.
Let's 'ave the truth.’
I was standing mouth wide open afraid of what was going to happen next, but I practically jumped out of my skin when  he yelled at me ‘to stop gorpin' an' fill the kettle’.
I was shaking so much that I had to lift the kettle with two hands when I staggered down the yard.
Outside there were several neighbours obviously listening to what was going on in our house, but I just pushed through them.
Frankie appeared as I was filling the kettle and offered to do it for me.
When we got back to our door Mrs Jonesy and Mrs Phipps were still loitering, all ears, so Frankie deliberately poured some of the icy water on Mrs Jonesy's feet.
‘Yow did that on purpose yer cheeky little sod!’ she cried out in surprise.
‘If yow'd done that ter me I'd ave wrung yer bloody neck,’ Mrs Phipps chipped in, but Frankie only grinned and dropped the kettle, contents and all, on her foot.
That did the trick!
She ran off screaming and hopping down the yard.
Frankie picked up the empty kettle and went to refill it but I noticed that none of the onlookers tried to wring his neck while he had the kettle in his hands.
He poked his tongue out at them and entered the house in triumph.
Indoors Mum was still crying into her apron and Dad was pacing back and forth, fuming.
‘I warned yer what would 'appen if yer got into 'er clutches.
Yow'll never be able ter get out of 'er debt now,’ he stormed.
‘But I ain't the only one,’ Mum managed to blurt out.
‘They all borra off 'er.’
‘Never mind the others!
It's this family I'm thinking about.
Do yer know she can send yer ter prison if yer don't pay?
Did yer think about that?’
He glared angrily into her face.
‘I thought I could pay a bit each week outa yower wages and Jack's, but now 'e's leavin' us,–she wept even louder.
‘And a bloody good job!’ answered Dad.
‘E's gettin' too big fer 'is boots, demandin' this an' that every time 'e enters the 'ouse.
I only 'ope 'e finds time ter marry this 'un, whoever she is.’
All the while I stood listening and Frankie sat calmly on the sofa reading his comic as though nothing was happening.
During a lull in the shouting I made the tea, and as I was pouring the cups out Mum asked Dad what she should do.
‘Goo ter bloody prison with the rest of yer croonies yow've  got yerself mixed up with for all I care,’ he bawled in reply, and with that he stormed out slamming the door behind.
I looked up at Granny's picture and saw the black crepe paper had slipped again — but then it always did when the door was slammed.
Mum jumped up straight away and began rearranging the furniture which had been upset in the commotion.
Then she forgot her tears as Jack came back into the room.
She pointed at the crepe paper and told Jack it was another bad omen, but he only scoffed at her superstitions and went upstairs to collect his belongings.
I poured four more mugs of tea.
Mum didn't touch hers and when he came down neither did Jack.
He had a parcel under his arm, and much as Mum pleaded with him he wouldn't stay.
‘Carn't yer try an' 'elp me out Jack?’ she wheedled.
‘No!
I'm off fer good this time.
Yow've drove us all away.
Them two will be the next.’
He pointed at us kids.
Then he paused, put his hand in his pocket and threw four half crowns on the table.
‘That's the last yer'll get off me an' don't forget I want my suit from the pawnshop when I come back ter fetch me other things.’
And with that he left, making sure he gave the door a good hard slam as well.
The pictures shook and one fell, just missing Frankie's head, but he didn't bat an eyelid and just kept on reading his comic.
As I reached for the fallen picture he said to me, ‘That door's gooin' ter fall off its 'inges one of these times.’
I looked at him and wished I could be so unconcerned.
Frankie always got away with cheeking his elders but I never did.
Mum was crying as she picked up the money and slipped it into her purse which she kept down her bosom.
I went over to comfort her but she shooed me away.
I might as well not have bothered, but then I was too young to know what to do anyway.
Tears came to my eyes as I thought that this was my and Miss Louise's fault.
If she had not lent Mum the money none of this would have happened.
I blamed her and the fact she was a Jew for how she had used us all.
Most of the moneylenders and pawnbrokers were Jewish and they had a  reputation for meanness.
I vowed to have no more to do with her but thought I ought to return her shoes and her key, so I snatched Frankie's comic and tried to persuade him to come with me.
At first he refused, then he softened and consented.
‘You know I will,’ he said and jumped up ready.
We walked together over to the cottage.
I had already made up my mind what I was going to say by the time Frankie had rapped on the door.
He must have liked the sound it made because he gave it another couple for luck; my courage rising, too, I gave it two more.
However, there was no reply, so I opened the door with the key and we entered.
I kicked the slippers that were there waiting for me out of the way and then we saw her standing with her back to the fire.
‘What's all that noise for?’ she asked.
‘Why didn't you just use your key, and why have you brought him?’ she demanded, pointing her bony finger at Frankie.
‘E's my brother an' where I go 'e goes,’ I replied defiantly.
Frankie asked why she didn't answer our knock but she ignored this.
‘We've come ter bring yer shoes back.
We don't want anything more ter do with yow,’ I told her.
‘Well I never,’ she exclaimed, advancing towards us.
‘I never heard such cheeky kids in all my life.
Get out of here at once.’
‘Well, yer 'earin' 'em now!’ put in Frankie.
‘An' do yer know what ower neighbours an' the kids in the street call yer?
An old blood sucker.’
She gave a sly grin at this.
‘Oh that's mild.
I've been called worse than that round here.
Now clear off the pair of yer.’
‘Here's yer key.’
I flung it on the open ledger on the table.
I thought if only I could steal that some time and destroy it, maybe she'd have no proof of what was owed her.
But I knew this was a vain hope because the house was always locked securely.
I walked over to the door before I spoke to her.
‘I'm not coming any more for yer ter use me.
It's all your fault.
You've upset Mum an' Dad, an' ower Jack's left 'ome.
So now I know yer won't be paid, so there!’
I put out my tongue and Frankie did likewise, but before we had got out  she said, ‘You can tell your mother and father that I shall be calling at the usual time on Saturday.
And I expect to be paid.’
I'd never seen her look so evil before.
This was a side of her nature that she'd kept hidden from me but it made me realise my feelings were justified.
I had no regrets as I slammed the door behind me and left the cottage for the last time.
Dad's Business Venture
When we got home I was surprised to see Dad sitting in his usual seat because he should have been at work.
‘Katie,’ he said to me.
‘I want you ter take this letter ter your sister Mary.
‘Ere's a penny for the tram fare and try to be as quick as you can.’
‘Yes Dad,’ I answered eagerly.
I was glad of a reason to visit Mary in her new home.
I combed my hair, then quickly snatched up Topsey, my rag doll, and took the letter from Dad and went off.
The ride on the tram was not far; only a halfpenny each way.
When I arrived and rang the bell it was Albert who showed me in.
I told him I had a letter from Dad for Mary.
But Mary was out so I gave him the letter and began to tell him about the trouble at home.
‘I'm not surprised,’ he said.
‘It's been going on for a long time, but yer Mum's bin very foolish an' so have the rest.
Getting into the clutches of a money lender!’
as if bookmakers were much better, I thought.
I gave him a hard look.
I could see there'd be little sympathy here.
‘I'll give Mary the letter when she comes 'ome.
'Ave you got your fare back?’
I told him I had and left without saying any more.
When I returned home I told Dad what had happened and what Albert had said.
‘Good girl,’ he said.
‘Put the kettle on, I expect she'll have a cuppa when she gets 'ere.’
But we waited and waited all that afternoon and saw neither hide nor hair of Mary.
I could see Dad was worried so after a couple of hours of hanging about I offered to return to Mary's.
‘No,’ he replied sadly.
‘She don't seem to bother about us any more.’
‘I can run there and back in no time if you ain't got the money for the tram,’ I said eagerly.
‘It's not the penny I'm bothered about,’ he mumbled almost to himself, gazing into the fire.
I wished I could help him then; he looked so down in the mouth hunched up by the stove.
‘Can I do anything else for yer Dad?’
I asked quietly.
‘No, I don't think so.
Anyway it's getting late.
Yow better get off ter bed before yer Mum comes back.’
I said ‘good night’ and kissed him on his cheek but he didn't respond.
He just sat there, his thoughts miles away.
I wept a little as I climbed the creaky stairs, and when I got into the attic I knelt down beside the bed, put my hands together and prayed.
I asked Jesus to help us, and to forgive Jack and me and to make Dad happy.
I felt exhausted when I climbed into bed and I fell into a deep sleep from which I awoke next morning refreshed and happier.
I went down to put the kettle on and while I was doing so in walked Albert.
‘Good mornin' Katie,’ he greeted me cheerily.
‘Is yer Dad in?’
I told him they were in bed and I dashed up the stairs, two at a time, to fetch them.
I leant over Mum and whispered to Dad.
‘Dad, Albert's 'ere.
‘E wants ter see yer.’
I could tell Mum was awake but she didn't offer to move or say anything.
She wasn't on speaking terms with Albert.
‘Tell 'im I'll be right down.
As soon as I've slipped me trousers on.’
When Dad joined us Albert greeted him just as pleasantly as he had me, and I thought at least they're all happy this morning.
‘I'm sorry,’ Albert began, after clearing his throat.
‘Mary couldn't come over last night.
She was too upset when she read your letter, Sam.
We talked it over and I've decided to let you 'ave five pounds.
Yer can pay me back when yer can.’
He concluded his speech.
‘I don't know 'ow ter thank yer,’ Dad said, grasping Albert by the hand.
‘I'll see to it that Polly don't get into any debt again, don't you worry.’
Albert nodded.
‘Remember Sam,’ he lowered his voice.
‘I'm doin' this for your sake.
Not your missus's.’
He stroked my head and said as he was about to go, ‘Be a good girl Katie, you've got a good Dad under the circumstances.’
Dad thanked him again and he left, shutting the door quietly behind him.
I thanked God then for answering my prayer.
Dad kissed me on the forehead and asked me to make another pot of tea and he sat down in his chair and smoked a quiet pipe of tobacco looking happier than he had for days.
When Mum came down he told her about Albert's offer and she perked up, too.
Dad told Mum that Miss Louise would be calling later for her money.
‘You'd better be out when she comes,’ he told her, but she didn't want telling twice.
Soon after breakfast she was off.
The rest of us settled down to wait.
Dad warned us to be seen and not heard but we didn't need telling either.
Frankie read his tattered old comic and I busied myself with the crocks.
Just then there was a tap at the door.
‘Come in,’ Dad called out sharply.
The door opened slowly and there stood Miss Louise.
‘Ere's yer bloody five pounds,’ he said, throwing five gold sovereigns on the table.
She stooped and scooped them up.
Dad was angry.
I suppose he must have resented giving this much money to her; it was a large sum after all.
‘Now get out!’ he shouted at her.
‘I don't want ter see yer round 'ere any more an' I don't want Katie to come near yower place either!’
She just glared back and said acidly, ‘What about the interest?’
‘Yow can wait fer that.
Now get out of my house, you bloody old bugger.’
Frankie peered over the top of his comic, unable to resist the temptation to join in.
‘That's tellin' 'er,’ he said.
‘That's quite enough lip from yow,’ Dad snapped at him.
‘Get yerself washed an' put that comic on the fire.
It's filthy.’
Reluctantly he did as he was told.
The comic wanted burning anyway; it was torn and the print was totally obscured by the grimy hands of its previous owners.
Miss Louise stood  quietly observing this domestic scene, grinning.
Dad was furious by now.
He made a move towards her and bawled at her to ‘get out’, which she did but not without slamming the door for all she was worth behind her.
Amazingly this must have been the final straw for it, because its top hinge broke and it swivelled on the bottom one, narrowly missing Miss Louise before it crashed to the floor.
With that she marched off, and after we'd got our breath, I made the usual cup of tea while Frankie went to fetch nails and hammer from Dad's tool box so he could fix the door before Mum returned and explanations were necessary.
In fact the door was mended, and we were drinking our tea when she came in.
Dad told her that it was settled but he warned her she must never borrow again He warned Frankie and me as well.
Just then brother Jack came strolling in to collect the rest of his clothes.
He went straight up the stairs and a few minutes later came down carrying a parcel of his things.
Mum looked pleadingly at him but not a word was said between any of us until he was opening the door to leave and Dad said, ‘Bloody good riddance, an' don't bang the door when you go, I've only just mended it.’
But he did and once again the pictures on the walls quivered in fear.
After that things went more smoothly for a few days, at least until the following Monday.
I got up as usual at seven o'clock to make Dad his cup of tea and his bread and cheese for dinner.
We never normally talked in the morning: he got up at the last moment and rushed out without a word.
But this morning he spoke to me.
He told me to be a good girl for Mum, and that he would give me some money to go to the pictures.
I said I would be good and thanked him, and then quite unexpectedly he bent down and kissed my cheek and turned and abruptly left.
I loved it when he did that.
I couldn't remember the last time he'd shown me so much affection.
I pitched into the chores with a light heart, singing to myself as I worked.
Then after about an hour I heard the familiar heavy tread of Dad's boots on the cobbles.
The door opened and there he was looking pale and worried.
‘Did you forget something Dad?’
I asked, though I knew he hadn't.
‘We've all bin laid off work,’ he said simply.
‘Oh, dear, whatever will Mum say?’
I burst out.
Her reactions in situations like this were never predictable.
‘Matter a damn what she says,’ he muttered almost to himself.
‘We'll all 'ave ter go on the parish relief again.’
Just then Mum, half-dressed, came into the room, but Dad had hardly got a word out before she cut him off.
‘I know.
I 'eard yer.
Whatter we gooin' ter do?’ she demanded.
‘I'll think of something don't worry, but in the meantime we won't starve.
We're all goin' along to see the relief officer,’ he soothed her.
‘When?’
‘Now if yer like,’ he said impatiently and went out.
I followed him and saw him join some of his mates who were waiting on the corner.
Then they all turned and went in a group to the Welfare Offices.
This was the same old tumbledown mission hall which the Sally Army used and which all the neighbours used when there was a wedding or some other big function to be held.
I hung back and watched what would happen.
The men went in and stated their case to the man in charge, but he merely informed them that they would get nothing immediately and that they were to come back when their money had gone.
So there was nothing to be done.
The men drifted away and I returned home.
By the end of that week things were looking grim around our way.
Things were particularly bad for the people who owed Miss Louise because the interest was growing all the time.
The women were to be seen hanging around in the yard talking quietly or trying to wash to get a few more rags to the pawnshop.
The men idled their time away on street corners or outside the pub, cadging a drink or a smoke.
There were more quarrels than usual.
We never had much to eat in ordinary times, but we had less now  and us kids were really glad of the extra slice of bread and jam that we were given for our school breakfast.
The Monday after the men were laid off I came home from school to find crowds of people gathered outside Miss Louise's door chattering excitedly.
There was a buzz of expectation about them and quite a few seemed to be smiling and jolly.
Mum was amongst the crowd; Frankie and Liza too.
‘What's the matter?’
I asked Frankie when I had pushed through to him.
‘Don't yer know?
Miss Louise has died,’ he answered.
‘That's nothing for them to smile about,’ I said, quite shocked at their callousness.
‘But they won't 'ave ter pay 'er what they owe 'er now she's dead, will they?’
I had no time to answer; I spotted Dad edging his way through the throng.
He must have heard what was being said because he rounded on them.
‘Don't yer kid yerselves, yer stupid women.
Yow'll still 'ave ter pay.
Yow'd better clear off before 'er brother comes.’
At that they began to disperse, chatting and nodding all the time.
Mum, Frankie and Liza had been the first to go, before Dad saw them.
I was glad he hadn't seen me either as I hurried away in the opposite direction.
This news provided ample scope for gossip in the next few days.
Next day Mr Vulcan arrived and the first thing he did was to call on everyone who owed money to his sister.
I bumped into him and told him I was sorry to hear about his sister, which I was, despite how she'd treated us.
I also hoped she hadn't told him about Frankie's and my rudeness although why I should have been bothered about him I can't think.
He smiled, thanked me and patted me on the head before knocking at our door.
Dad invited him in and I followed.
‘I suppose yow've come for yer interest?’ said Dad sharply.
‘Well, I ain't got it yet.
I'll bring it when I can.
No need ter call.’
Dad sat back in his chair, expecting Mr Vulcan to leave, but he paused a moment, looking first at Dad then at me, and I thought, This is it, now what'll he say?
‘You have a good girl here,’ he began, much to my relief.
‘She was good to my sister.
I'll forget the interest you owe and cross it off the book as paid.’
‘That's very kind of you,’ Dad muttered grudgingly, but Mr Vulcan carried on without listening.
‘I've locked up the cottage and when I come back in a couple of days I shall sell up my sister's belongings.
So if there's anything Katie would like, she can have it.’
‘Thank you, Mr Vulcan,’ I said as he turned and left.
After he'd gone Dad said he would consider what Mr Vulcan had said but I knew already what I wanted and I knew Dad wouldn't object.
Those two days couldn't pass quickly enough.
Then Mr Vulcan returned from London as he said he would to arrange the funeral.
Everybody in the district came out to watch the coffin being carried away.
It was not a grand affair like Granny's.
There appeared to be only one wreath.
The neighbours didn't have the usual collection for flowers either.
Some had tried but the general feeling was that she wasn't one of us.
The hearse took her to St Paul's churchyard where the service was to be held.
I waited around to watch the burial.
I wept when they lowered her coffin into the ground.
I'd liked her until the money lending began, and I was sorry for being unkind to her.
Then Frankie saw me.
‘No use cryin', 'er's dead an' that's that.’
And in that breath I thought how like Mum he sounded.
He left me to walk home alone.
Later that afternoon I saw a horse-drawn van pull up outside the cottage and soon a burly fellow was fetching furniture out and loading it into the van.
I waited for Mr Vulcan to come out with a group of our ever-curious neighbours.
At last he emerged and called me in.
This caused a murmur of surprise amongst the onlookers.
I pushed past them and went in with him.
‘I want you to look around, and if there's anything you'd like, don't be afraid to say.
I know Louise would like you to have something,’ he said quietly.
I hesitated for a while.
Then I overcame my shyness and said I would like the coloured wool from the trunk upstairs.
‘Very well, go up and help yourself,’ he replied.
He gave me a pretty cane basket to put it in and I went upstairs, opened the trunk and loaded all the balls I could get into the basket.
I looked for the knitted garments that I used to help her with but they must have all been sold.
Just then I glanced through the little bedroom window and saw all the women and kids still hanging about outside.
Then I closed the lid of the trunk and returned downstairs, tears of happiness in my eyes.
As I wiped them on my pinafore Mr Vulcan asked what was wrong with me.
I found myself gazing at the harmonium and my memories of the happy times I'd spent listening to Miss Louise play came flooding back and I wept more.
Mr Vulcan handed me his black-edged handkerchief.
‘I'm happy to have these,’ I said truthfully.
‘But I was thinking about how we used to sing together.’
He looked at me awhile before he said.
‘Would you like the harmonium?
I have no use for it.’
I didn't know what to say: I couldn't believe that I'd heard him correctly.
My mouth fell open and I must have stared wide-eyed at him.
But I hesitated only a second before I accepted his gift excitedly.
‘Run along home then and tell your Dad to come and wheel it away.
I elbowed my way through the nosey parkers gossiping in the yard and ran home to tell Dad my good news.
I fell indoors and crashed into Mum.
‘What's the matter with yer?
What's in that basket?’ she demanded.
‘It's a present from Mr Vulcan.
Where's Dad?’
I blurted out.
‘E's down the pub with 'is mates.
Why?’
She was curious now.
I didn't stay to explain.
I dashed out down the street to the pub to get him round to the cottage before Mr Vulcan changed his mind.
I'd only gone part of the way when I collided with Dad.
‘Well, well, well, an' what 'ave yow bin up to now?’
Excitedly I told him what had happened and begged him to let me have the harmonium.
‘We'll see,’ he answered calmly.
‘Don't rush me.
If 'e says you're ter have it, it'll still be there.’
Then he took my hand and we walked round to the cottage.
There the loading was still underway and the women were still hanging about.
Dad and I went in and Mr Vulcan explained that he wished to give me the harmonium and that there was a clean bed upstairs if we wanted it.
Dad thanked him and said he would return for the bed after he'd wheeled the instrument to our house.
Mr Vulcan wouldn't hear of this but offered to send the removal men over with it.
I was in tears of joy.
I kissed Mr Vulcan: I was overwhelmed.
I was the owner of a harmonium as well as the basket and the wool.
Then we returned to our house under the gaze of the neighbours.
‘I wonder where they got the money to buy them?’
I heard Mrs Woods say.
Then Mrs Jonesy replied.
‘That Polly's a dark 'orse if yow arsk me.’
Mum was pleased as punch when she saw what we'd got, particularly when the men arrived with the brass bedsteads and a red striped flock mattress.
However, she wasn't so pleased with the harmonium.
‘We ain't 'avin' that contraption in the 'ouse.
We ain't got no room fer it,’ she told Dad.
Dad scowled at Mum when one of the removal men said to him, ‘Yow've got a right one theea mate.
I know what I'd do if she was my missus.’
But he ignored the remark and concentrated on bringing the things in.
He hauled the harmonium into the room past Mum, pausing only to wink at me.
That meant it was mine for keeps.
Mum was right though; there was very little room for it and Dad had to move the mangle to fit it in.
Mum was furious at this and demanded to know where her mangle was going.
‘Inside the pantry,’ Dad snapped back.
‘An' yow can come an' give me a hand.
An' shut that door too before all the neighbours come nosing in.’
But Mum didn't lift a finger to help and gave as good as she got.
‘Do it yerself.
I'm gooin' ter put the kettle on an mek a cuppa tea.’
This was a ploy she always resorted to when she  wanted to avoid doing something.
Dad knew it was no good arguing with her and he carried on with the job.
‘That's where the mangle is and that's where it stays,’ he told her when he'd done.
Mum ignored him.
He pushed the harmonium into the place where the mangle had stood, then sat down to sup his mug of tea.
He finished before Mum who was still sulking.
‘When yow've drunk yer tea, we'll get the mattress and the bedsteads in,’ he said impatiently.
‘I s'ppose that's for Katie an' all,’ she snapped sarcastically.
‘No, it's fer Frankie.
He's gettin' ter be a big lad an' he's noticing things.’
No more was said except for Mum's moans and groans as she struggled to get the bedding upstairs to the attic.
Now there were three single beds in our small room; I had Mary's old one, Liza had the one we all used to sleep in and Frankie had Miss Louise's.
I was thrilled with these gifts, especially to have a bed to myself.
When the house was empty I would take the key from round my neck, unlock the harmonium and experiment with pulling out some of the stops.
I began trying to play ‘God Save the King’, but after tapping away for an hour with one finger I hadn't made much progress.
Later I improved and graduated to two fingers, and eventually learnt to play the tune using all my fingers.
I thought I was ever so clever and I wanted everyone to hear me, so each time I spotted one of the neighbours near our house I would bang out the tune.
The noise must have been awful but it was sweet music to my ears.
I was not allowed to play when Mum and Dad were in because they couldn't stand the din, so I had to wait until they were down the pub to enjoy myself.
We used to invite in the other children from the yard and I would pretend to be our music teacher and conduct a lesson.
One night I dressed up in one of Mum's frocks and Frankie donned Dad's billy-cock hat but in the middle of ‘Rock of Ages’ Dad returned.
The kids scattered quickly and Frankie and I had to explain ourselves; he ignored Liza as usual.
We were warned not to dress in our parents' clothes and he threatened Frankie with his belt, but nothing more was said about it.
After a few weeks all our money was gone and everything was in pawn so Dad had to go to the relief office.
When he returned Mum asked what they had said.
‘They're sendin' the visitor termorra to see if we've got anything we can sell.
In the meantime they've given me this to go on with,’ he answered, throwing our ration card across the table.
When Mum had looked at it she cried out.
‘We carn't live on that!’
‘We'll 'ave ter manage,’ Dad replied calmly.
‘Other people 'ave to, an' they 'ave more kids than us.’
‘That's their bad luck,’ screeched Mum.
‘I'd 'ave 'ad mower, if yow'd 'ave 'ad yower way.’
Dad was not prepared to stand any more and got out of the chair into which he had just flopped.
‘Talk ter yerself, Polly.
I'm off out.’
‘Where do yer think yer gooin'?’ she demanded, but he'd closed the door behind him and left.
The next day the visitor came.
He didn't even knock but just walked right in and went through the house looking to see if we had anything of value to part with before we could receive any relief.
Dad didn't object to him nosing around but I wondered what Mum would have said if she'd been home; she was out cleaning at the fish shop.
Dad looked as if he didn't care what happened any more.
‘Is there anything you haven't told me?’ the visitor asked Dad, his eyes settling on my harmonium.
‘No,’ he replied at once, defying him to look under its cover.
‘Then what's this?’ he said, lifting the cloth.
‘That's my Katie's,’ Dad told him, snatching the cover off him.
‘I ain't partin' with that.
It was a gift ter the child.’
‘Well,’ the man replied.
‘I'll have to report it.
That's my job and I doubt whether we can grant you anything until it's sold.
Good day.’
He went and Dad slammed the door after him.
‘Good day and good riddance to you too,’ he said angrily.
The next day another visitor called but he said the same as the first.
Dad looked sad and worried.
I didn't like to see him like this so when the second man had gone I turned to Dad.
‘You can sell the harmonium, Dad, if it'll 'elp.
I can't play it properly anyway and I know the sound of it gets on Mum's nerves.’
He looked at me with a gentle, sad expression on his face.
‘Do you really want me to sell it?’ he asked.
‘No, Dad,’ I answered truthfully.
‘Then it stays where it is.
I'll think of something else ter 'elp us through.
Now put the kettle on an' we'll 'ave a pot of tea an' think.’
A cup of tea was our universal cure-all and comforter.
We sat and drank our tea in silence then Dad stood up and told me to tell Mum, when she returned, that he'd gone to have one last talk to the relief officer.
He'd never told Mum about the words he'd had with the relief officers, which was a blessing really because she would never have shut up about it.
I don't know what was said at the relief office but when Dad came back he just threw the ration card on the table in disgust.
Mum snatched it up to see what we had got but Dad forestalled the outburst he knew was coming.
‘Now don't go off the deep end.
I've thought of an idea to bring some extra money in the house.’
‘What?
Not another one of your bright ideas.’
And with that she went off to the shop to collect the miserable amount of provisions that were due.
Dad sat poking the dead ashes in the grate and sucking on his empty clay pipe.
The tea caddy was empty too.
I had to make do with stewing the old tea leaves.
When Mum returned and saw the teapot on the hob she flared up.
‘Yow can throw that down the sink!
It's bin stewed I don't know 'ow many times.
‘Ere's some.
An' goo careful with it.’
She tossed a two-ounce packet on the table.
This was how we went on then.
It was winter and the weather was wet and cold and our life was hard; we survived only on hand-outs from the parish.
Soon we were down to our last lumps of coal.
Although Mum was working at the fish shop she didn't get much for her labours, sometimes only some fish and chips.
Still they helped, especially if we had a loaf of bread to go with them.
Dad would go out very early  each morning, without even a cup of tea inside him, to tramp round looking for a job — anything to tide us over.
Plenty of times I'm sure he stayed out only to avoid Mum's sharp tongue because there was no work to be had for any of the men.
Late one afternoon as I was packing some old boots I had begged with wet slack and tea leaves to use as fuel on the fire the door was flung open and Dad stumbled in.
I saw at once he'd been drinking.
‘Yer won't 'ave ter do that much more,’ he said.
‘You'll see.
I've got a good idea and this time it'll work.’
I didn't understand what he was mumbling about.
He was looking round with a vacant look on his face and I was frightened.
Then he suddenly told me to fetch the chopper from the cellar.
‘What for?’
I managed to ask.
‘What for?
Never mind what for, just do as yer told at once before I change me mind.’
I fled down the cellar and returned with the chopper.
I handed it to him at arm's length, not knowing what he was about to do.
He snatched it and I watched, terrified now that something awful was about to happen.
He turned and went upstairs muttering to himself.
I wished somebody else was at home because I was afraid to be in the house with him in this mood.
Loud bangs started upstairs and I imagined all kinds of things were happening.
Then I heard him call down from the attic for me to open the stairs door wide.
I was too scared to reply but I opened the door anyway and hid behind it.
The next moment something heavy came clattering down the stairs.
I wedged myself further out of sight.
My first thought was that this was Dad lying at the foot of the stairs having killed himself.
I clasped my hands tight over my eyes and scarcely breathed.
But I knew I had to look, so slowly I peeped round the door.
Then I opened my fingers wide and peered down at the floor.
With a sigh of relief I dropped my hands, because instead of Dad lying there there was the attic door which had fallen in such a way that it was wedging the door back, trapping me where I was.
I called to Dad but he  didn't hear me; instead he sent another door crashing down.
Then he came down himself, managing with difficulty to negotiate the obstacles on the floor.
‘Well I never!’
He smiled when he saw where I was.
‘I told yer ter open the door wide, not ter get behind it,’ he chuckled.
‘Katie,’ he said when he had released me.
‘You know what I'm gooin' ter do?
I'm gooin' to sell firewood an' these doors are gooin' ter give me a start.’
‘But what's Mum goin' ter say when she sees what you've done?’
I began to get worried again.
‘Never mind what yer Mum says.
Any'ow it'll be all cleared away by the time she gets 'ome.’
He was looking pleased with himself as he dragged the table to the side of the room to make space to work in.
He set to with a will and soon the doors were reduced to kindling.
After I'd got used to the idea I helped to count the sticks and tie them up in bundles.
He tore one of Mum's dusters into strips for this purpose and we busied ourselves counting out sticks and piling up bundles.
Then the door opened and Mum walked in.
She saw the mess and flew off the handle at once.
‘Whatcha dooin'?
What's all that wood on me clane flooar?
Ain't we got enough broken quarries without yow cracking any mower?’ she demanded.
‘Sit down and keep calm,’ Dad told her.
‘Listen ter what I 'ave ter say.
I've 'ad this idea for a long time an' if I can get a few customers, we'll be able ter buy some extra food an' we'll be able to rent a better 'ouse, with good strong doors not like these rotten ones.’
He waved his hand at the firewood.
‘Oh my God!’ she shrieked, not waiting for Dad to finish.
‘Where's these dooars come from?’
‘The attic an' our room.
They were hangin' off anyway,’ he told her matter-of-factly.
‘They wouldn't 'ave bin 'angin' off if yow'd 'ave put a nail in 'em.
I don't know what the landlord will say or do when 'e finds out,’ she wailed.
‘E won't find out if nobody tells 'im and 'e ain't likely ter goo upstairs in any case,’ Dad pointed out to her.
‘Now put  the kettle on Polly an' we'll 'ave a nice cuppa tea then Katie an' me'll get cracking.’
By the time we were drinking it Mum had calmed down considerably.
Then she had to go back to the shop to get our fish and chips, so we bundled up the rest of the wood and, as it was dark, ventured out to see if Dad could find some customers for his new business.
We couldn't have gone in daylight for fear that Dad would be spotted and reported to the  relief officers; then as now claimants were not allowed to earn money.
I pushed the go-cart with the bundles inside covered with a cloth, and Dad strolled behind looking nonchalantly about him.
The first shop we stopped at gave Dad an order right away, providing the wood was dry and clean.
It couldn't have been anything else but Dad had put out the best wood the first time; some of the rest was rotten.
Dad's business prospered.
Frankie helped with the chopping and I went with Dad when he delivered the orders.
When the doors were sold Dad went out and bought soap boxes, orange boxes, even smelly fish boxes to use, and Mum was happy with money coming in again.
He always said he did best when I was with him.
One day Frankie was chopping a particularly springy orange box when suddenly the head flew off the handle and cracked our only mirror.
‘Now look what yer've done!’ yelled Mum.
‘Another bloody seven years’ bad luck!’
‘Rubbish!’ he snapped back and ran out.
He didn't come back for several hours, afraid of Mum's temper but Dad said he would replace the mirror and this seemed to pacify her.
Another day we nearly came unstuck altogether.
The previous day the proprietor of a little paraffin shop had asked Dad to deliver the sticks in the afternoon because she was closing early; and to oblige and keep a customer Dad agreed.
Off we went the next day and had nearly got to the shop when Dad spotted a relief officer.
He pushed me into an entry and we hid there until the man had passed by.
Then we hurried to the shop, delivered our wood and hurried back home.
Another day we returned to find an empty space where my  harmonium should have been.
I burst into tears because I was sure Mum had pawned it or sold it.
Dad moved slowly towards Mum and I could see by the look of him that he was furious.
‘Now I warned yow, Polly,’ he began.
‘Where's it gone?’
She turned round without betraying a sign of understanding what he was on about.
‘What're yer talkin' about?
Where's what gone?’ she asked mildly.
‘Yow know very well what I mean!’ he shouted.
‘Katie's harmonium.
If ever yow've parted with that, I warn yer, I'll kill yer!’
And I believe he would have too.
‘Oh that,’ she replied.
‘Well we had the visitor call about four o'clock.
Frankie warned me he was comin' down the street so we wheeled it into the pantry until he'd gone.
But we couldn't get it back agen 'cause one of the wheels 'as come off.’
‘Oh, I see,’ said Dad, calming down.
‘I'll soon fix that.’
Dad fixed it by removing all four wheels and with an effort we dragged it back into position.
‘That stays as a permanent fixture from now on,’ Dad said.
I could have hugged my Mum that day for saving the harmonium but I was afraid if I did she would push me away.
We were all made very wary by this brush with authority and Frankie even refused to go out with Dad that night in case they were spotted by the parish man.
‘Yow'll do as yer told!’ he was told.
‘It's only for another few days then I'll sign off,’ Dad promised.
Towards the end of that week the visitor called on us again.
We knew he was coming because we could see him calling at our neighbours in the yard first.
This gave us enough time to cover the harmonium and clear away any telltale signs of wood.
‘Come in,’ Dad called out as the knock was heard, but the man was already in the room.
Without any preliminaries he began interrogating Dad.
‘What's this I hear about you selling firewood?’ the man demanded.
‘An' who's told you that?’
Dad looked the man straight in the eye.
‘I cannot divulge any information.
You were seen one afternoon this week and I've made inquiries.’
His voice tailed off.
Dad just turned away and didn't reply.
When he could see he would get nothing out of Dad, the visitor continued.
‘You know you can go to prison for failure to report a source of income like this?’ he said.
Dad turned to the man, head bowed.
‘I'm very sorry,’ he said humbly.
‘I was goin' ter call terday but it's bin snowin'.’
We children were huddled together, scared of what would happen.
We knew only too well what could happen to Dad and we were afraid.
I began to weep and so did Liza.
‘Please don't take our Dad away,’ I pleaded with him, and Frankie too chipped in, ‘That's quite so sir, he said he was going to sign off.’
We must have looked pathetic because the man paused, looking at us, then he turned to Dad and said if Dad promised to call at the office he wouldn't report the matter.
‘I'll come now,’ Dad said, obviously relieved.
However the offices were closed so he said he would call first thing in the morning.
Dad thanked the man several times but he just grunted and left.
‘Phew, that was a close shave,’ Dad said, flopping into the chair wiping his brow.
True to his word Dad signed off the next day and we heard no more about it.
In the weeks that followed he built up a regular round of customers and boasted that it was better than going to work, especially on cold winter mornings.
But it was not good enough for Mum.
She always had to find fault with everything; she wouldn't have been our Mum else.
As the days went by she moaned more and more about the mess the wood caused.
‘I ain't 'avin' this mess under me feet every day.
Yow'll 'ave ter doo summat about it,’ she told him.
It put him off his stroke and the chopper slipped, cutting his finger.
Blood spurted and he swore.
‘No?
But yer 'old out yer bloody 'and when the money comes in, don't yer?’
‘Now Mum's goin' ter spoil everything,’ I whispered to Frankie.
‘No, she ain't!’
Dad shouted, having overheard my remark.
‘I'm thinkin' of buildin' me a shed where I can work in peace,’ he added, sucking his bleeding finger.
‘The landlord ain't goona allow it.
We owe too much rent,’ she replied.
‘I'll get round ter that when he calls,’ said Dad not to be outdone.
Mum didn't bother to reply but went off mumbling to herself, not forgetting to shut the door with a bang after her.
The next day, as it happened, was rent day.
No firewood could be chopped up until after the landlord had called so the room was clean and tidy, all except for the odd quarry tile Dad had broken during the wood-chopping.
Eventually there was a knock on the door and Dad called out to the landlord, Mr Priest, to enter.
Mr Priest looked like an undertaker, dressed in his long black frock coat, top hat, long sideburns and grey whiskers.
Dad paid over the four shillings and while he was entering it up in the book said, ‘Mr Priest, I was wondering if yer could give me permission to build a small wooden shed facing the house?’
Mr Priest looked up and stared at Dad for a while and Dad stood there waiting for a reply.
‘What will you be wanting it for?’ he inquired.
‘Well, you can see,’ Dad replied, waving his arm.
‘We have no room for everything an' I thought the place would look brighter if the missus 'ad somewhere to put her buckets an' brooms.’
The landlord thought for a bit, stroking his beard, before he gave his decision.
‘Now if you'll promise to pay off some of the arrears you can build your shed.
But I'll have to raise the rent one and six a week.’
Dad gave his promise and he kept his word.
He built his shed which, made as it was of old floorboards from a couple of hovels that had been empty for years, resembled a shack.
He was no carpenter but he did his best and he began to sell wood on a larger scale.
He supplied shops with the best  quality wood which he bought cheap from sawmills; he even sold sawdust to pubs and butchers' shops to sprinkle on their floors.
When any of our neighbours wanted firewood theirs was from old fish boxes, but they had it cheap at a penny a bowlful, and ‘no tick’, ‘cash on the nail,’ as he said firmly.
Now he was at home more Dad and I became closer.
He listened to me more and had time to answer my questions.
He still didn't know whose side to take when Mum carried on at us but she never came to the shed while we were chopping wood with him, so we had a retreat.
He took us to the pictures sometimes and we shared his intimate refuge from Mum.
Each night when we'd finished our various tasks he would look at our hands by the light of a candle and probe with a needle for splinters.
We didn't like him doing this for he was rough, but we got used to it and our hands became tough.
Kids like us had to be tough in those days.
Liza was like Mum; she never came into the shed to help.
She only came to fetch wood for Mum or bring us our cocoa.
Dad never bothered about her.
He said she was more trouble than she was worth.
One night she brought in the usual cocoa and watched while Dad removed a splinter from my palm Dad looked up and caught her grinning.
‘What are yer waitin' for?’ he asked her, but she just shrugged her shoulders and held out her hands.
‘I ain't got splinters in mine.’
She turned to leave, but Dad got off his orange box and grabbed hold of her hands and proceeded to prod her palms with the needle.
‘How do yer like that?
That's took the smile off yer face,’ he told her.
‘Now goo an' tell yer Mum that!’
She ran off screaming but she never pulled faces at us again if Dad was around.
When we'd finished that night Dad gave us tuppence to go the first half at the Queen's Hall.
He told us to hurry back home after the picture had finished because it might get foggy later.
He told Frankie to take care of me and so we went off hand in hand.
When we got there the chucker-out told us to go in quickly because the film had started.
The board over the door proclaimed that it was The Clutching Hand .
Frankie had  seen it before and thought I wouldn't like it and tried to dissuade me from going in.
I was determined to see it and I pulled away from him and went up to the box office to pay my penny, hoping he would follow.
I started up the cold stone steps to the gallery.
It was dark and dismal.
There were only two dim lights flickering from two iron brackets high up on the wall.
They made weird shadows on the cracked plaster of the walls.
I was beginning to get scared even before I'd seen the film.
My clogs clattered on the steps and I looked back over my shoulder a couple of times to see if Frankie was following me, but he wasn't.
When I eventually reached the gods I hesitated, afraid to push the door open, but after a couple of minutes I became too frightened to stand there in the dark any longer.
I pushed the door and went in.
I could see that the picture had only just started.
Then quietly I walked down the steps and felt for a seat on one of the wooden forms; after being hissed at by several people I found one empty, next to an old woman.
She smelt of snuff when she leaned over and said, ‘Sit down dearie, yer blockin' me view.’
I flopped down in the seat but missed and landed on the floor.
This provoked more disapproval.
‘Shut yer row down theea,’ a voice boomed out from the darkness.
This brought the chucker-out to see what the commotion was about, but luckily he couldn't tell what row it had come from because the old woman snatched me up by the hem of my frock and sat me on the seat.
Then everything went quiet apart from the piano which was played slower and slower and quieter and quieter as a hand moved across the screen.
Then the fingers began to move and the piano got louder and stopped with a final note as the hand fell on to the floor.
Everyone was glued to their seats in anticipation of what was to happen next.
I was almost too scared to look.
I hoped and prayed that the lights would come on so I could fly down those steps.
Then the woman took a paper bag out and I thought she had some sweets and might give one to me.
But she dipped her thumb and forefinger into the bag and took out a pinch of snuff.
She saw me looking at her and thrusting the bag under my nose invited me to take a pinch.
I jumped up  in fright and in the process knocked the snuff out of her hand.
It went all over us.
I began sneezing and couldn't stop; nor could several of our neighbours who'd shared in the shower.
Someone called out, ‘Turn that woman out, an' that brat.’
In the confusion that followed the form tipped up propelling us all on to the floor.
Then the lights went up and I saw the chucker-out standing over us.
‘Who's mekin' all this racket?’ he bawled in a thunderous voice.
‘Me,’ I called out.
I would have been only too pleased to be thrown out, and to no one 's surprise with a poke and a shove I was.
He conducted me back down the cold stone steps by the scruff of my neck and soon I found myself back in the street again.
‘Don't let me see yer here agen,’ he warned me, but I was off at a run.
Dad had been right; it was foggy and getting thicker so I had to slow down because I couldn't see where I was going.
I started to sing to give myself courage and to avoid running into someone.
Ghostly shapes loomed out of the fog and then disappeared again.
A cat dashed over my feet at one point and I began to think about the disembodied hand in the film.
Eventually I reached our yard safely and entered the house breathless.
The gas was unlit and the only light was the feeble glow of the coals.
Mum and Dad were dozing in their chairs but Dad opened his eyes as I sat down and asked if I'd enjoyed the picture.
‘Yes Dad,’ I lied.
I thought that if I told him what had really happened he might not let me go again and I wanted to see Charlie Chaplin and the Keystone Cops ones that were coming soon.
‘Where's Frankie?’
Dad continued, scratching his head.
‘I don't know, Dad,’ I told him.
‘He said he'd seen the film once an' didn't want to see it agen.’
‘I'll give 'im a feel of my belt when he comes in.
I told 'im ter look after yow.’
He was annoyed and I had not wanted to get Frankie into trouble.
‘Eat yer bread an' drippin' an' drink yer cocoa.
Then get up ter bed.’
I was not keen to go yet because I still had a vivid memory of that hand.
I offered to do some jobs until the others returned.
But Dad told me Liza had already done them, which struck me as a miracle.
I asked if I could wait for Frankie but Mum, who I'd thought was asleep, piped up at that.
‘No!’ she shrieked.
‘Tek yer piece of candle an' do as yer told.’
So I took my time over the bread and dripping and I spilt my cocoa on the floor in an effort to play for time.
‘That's the last of the cocoa.
There's no mower in the jug.
An' wipe that mess up,’ Mum snapped at me.
In the end I gave in and reluctantly mounted the narrow stairs.
The candlelight on the peeling walls made scary shapes that I'd never noticed before.
I tried to look straight ahead until I reached the top, then I entered our attic room and stood there as my eyes accustomed themselves to the dim light.
My eyes fell on the bed and to my horror something began slowly to stir under the blanket.
I let out a terrified scream and scuttled down the stairs.
But in my hurry to get away from whatever it was in the bed I missed my footing and fell.
As I did so I grabbed the banister to save myself.
It broke my fall but the strain of this was too much; it ripped out of the wall and landed on top of me at the foot of the stairs.
‘What the devil's the matter?’
I heard Dad ask as he jumped up off his seat.
‘There's something in my b-b-bed,’ I stammered as he bent over me.
He sat me down roughly on the sofa and Mum said she was going to find out what I was on about.
‘I wonder if it's that Jack the Ripper,’ she laughed, and followed Dad out to the shed, leaving me with Liza who had just come in.
We clung to each other, the only time I ever remember this happening.
Mum came back with the chopper and Dad brandished a heavy lump of wood.
They crept up the stairs but can't have got more than half way up when our cat, Pete, came scurrying down followed by the chopper and the lump of wood.
Dad stamped back down, leaving Mum to get her second wind.
‘No more bloody pictures fer yow me girl,’ he said angrily.
‘Yow've frightened the life out of yer mother.’
I was so relieved that I began to weep tears of joy but Liza was not similarly affected.
She pushed me over and said, ‘I knew it wasn't nobody, yow great big baby!’
I knew she was just as scared as I was when we heard the cat on the stairs.
Mum flopped down in her chair and didn't say a word but by her look I could see I would suffer for it later.
Just then Frankie walked in.
He couldn't have returned at a less opportune moment.
‘An' where do yer think yow've bin till now?’
Dad was in a right lather.
‘I got lost in the fog,’ Frankie said, looking at his feet.
‘An' where's the money I gave yer fer the pictures?’ he demanded.
‘An' look at me when I talk to yer.’
‘Spent it,’ Frankie said at once.
‘Right!
Get up them stairs.
There's no supper for yow me lad.’
And with that Dad thrust him roughly towards the door.
But Frankie didn't care; he always had something hidden away in his tuckbox for occasions like this.
Finding Out the Facts of Life
Our next-door neighbours, Mr and Mrs Buckley, had a daughter named Sally who had been staying with an aunt for a year or so.
I didn't realise why she'd been away, but when she returned I soon found out.
She was three years older than I was.
She was mysterious about herself but had plenty to say on the subject of her boyfriends.
I was impressed by her self-confidence; I'd never had one boyfriend, let alone as many as she'd had.
She used make-up and bleached her hair and was a very attractive girl.
The neighbours held their noses in the air when she went out dolled up.
Everybody seemed to shun her but I felt sorry for her and we became close friends.
However, she didn't suit Mum.
The first time she found us chatting in the yard she rushed up and dragged me away.
‘Don't yer 'ave nuthin' ter do with that brazen 'uzzy!’ she warned me, and when we were indoors she rounded on me.
‘Don't yer dare let me catch yer even looking' at 'er agen.’
‘Why?
What's she done?’
I asked angrily.
‘Never yow mind what she's done.
Yer'll find out when yer older,’ she ranted.
‘She's the talk of the district.
After anythink with trousers on, or off!’
‘I don't believe it,’ I said, although I knew she had boyfriends.
‘Whether yer believe it or not, don't ever let me see or know yer've 'ad anything to do with 'er agen,’ she concluded.
Saying this to me was like holding a red rag to a bull: the more anyone told me not to do a thing, the more I tried to do it.
So we continued to meet on the sly.
I bumped into her one evening when I was out fetching Dad twopenn'orth of twist.
We greeted each other and were soon chatting.
She asked me if I'd like to meet her current boyfriend and I agreed.
‘There's two really,’ she said winking.
I didn't understand  what she meant by this but she smiled and asked if I would like to go to the ‘flicks’ the following Saturday.
I agreed and we arranged to go to the second house.
I would have to wait until Mum and Dad went out to the pub so we couldn't make it to the first.
The second house finished at ten so that would give me plenty of time to get home before my parents.
Saturday afternoon arrived and I had the house to myself to get ready.
I sorted through my frocks but could find none that fitted me; I'd outgrown them all and was waiting until I'd grown into Liza's castoffs.
I tried hers on anyway and after rummaging about for a bit I found one I liked.
But it was too big in the bust and too long.
I put it back in the trunk, disappointed that there was nothing right for me to wear and wondering what I was going to do, for I wanted to go out with Sally.
I decided to go round to her place to see if she had anything I could borrow.
Sure enough she offered straight away and gave me some lipstick as well.
‘Yow 'ave ter look nice for the boys.’
She nudged me, and I, innocent enough to think I could have a boyfriend like her, accepted the dress and the make-up.
She was combing out her blonde hair and pouring a colourless liquid from a bottle over her head.
She noticed my interest and offered me some.
‘It'll make your hair blonde like mine.’
I thought her hair was a lovely colour so I took the remains of the bottle and the other things, thanked her and returned next door.
There was still no one home so I was safe to carry on with my experiments in dressing like an adult.
The dress was a little too long, but they were worn long at that time so with the help of a pin or two I was able to achieve the desired effect.
However, it fitted tight across my bosom.
My breasts were developing fast and I was ashamed to see that my nipples showed through the material.
I couldn't wear it so I returned to Sally's.
When I showed her she lent me a silk shawl to drape round my shoulders and over my breasts.
I returned home to admire the effect.
I thought I was the cat's whiskers.
Then I began combing my hair, wondering if I dared use the peroxide.
I'd look better blonde and I assumed that I could wash the colour out before my parents saw: I must have been  naive to think that bleach would affect my hair differently from anything else.
I was engrossed in these thoughts and just about to drip it on the top of my head as I had seen Sally do when, from nowhere, a hand knocked me to the floor, spilling the contents of the bottle.
I was taken completely by surprise to find Dad standing over me.
I was petrified; I'd never seen him like this.
‘Don't yow ever let me catch yow using that terrible stuff agen!’ he bawled.
With that he snatched up the bottle and flung it through the open window into the yard.
I was too scared to cry out as he hauled me roughly to my feet and shook me violently.
I was in floods of tears.
This seemed to calm him down and he spoke more quietly.
‘I'll forgive you this time but I'm warnin' yow, my gel, if I catch yow with that stuff agen I'll cut all your hair off an' leave yer bald, and I'll put this strap–across yer back!’
He pointed to the large brass buckles on his belt.
‘I'm off now,’ he continued, ‘ter meet yer Mum, so when yer've cleared up the table yer can get ter bed.’
With that he left, slamming the door behind him.
This meant that they wouldn't be back before the pubs closed, but I also knew that if they knew who I was going out with they would have locked me in.
I suppose I was kicking over the traces a bit and parental authority seemed as irksome to me then as it does to teenagers today.
I fussed about, preparing myself, washing, combing my hair and putting on my borrowed finery.
When I'd completed this process I turned to the mirror to look at myself for a last time.
Then I received a shock.
When Dad had knocked the bottle out of my hand some of the bleach must have spilled down my face because my right eyebrow was blonde.
No doubt this would be considered fashionable today but the thought of going out like that mortified me.
I'd no idea how I was going to deal with this until my eyes settled on the grate.
Then it came to me.
I spat on my finger, rubbed it in the soot, then applied it to my eyebrow so that although it was not too convincing at close range, from a distance it looked natural enough.
Then, after I'd made sure that I'd left  no telltale traces, I was off.
There was nobody about to see me knocking on Sally's door.
When she came out I stood there waiting to see if she noticed anything but she didn't seem to.
Then we took off down the back alleys in case someone saw us and told our parents.
Finally, by the roundabout route, we reached St Paul's churchyard where we were to meet the boys.
Sure enough they were there and the smallest was introduced as my date.
He was not a bad looker, I thought, and shook hands as he told me his name was Freddy.
‘Frederick the Great, that's me,’ he said with a chuckle.
He placed his arm round my waist, which gave me a pleasurable feeling I'd never experienced, and then we set off to the picture house.
He did all the talking.
I was very shy but his mischievous grin put me at my ease and we strolled along behind Sally and her beau.
We'd hardly gone half way when it began to rain and we had to run the rest of the way to queue under shelter.
Just inside the foyer there was a long narrow mirror with an almost naked woman painted on it.
How shameful, I thought.
I glanced at my reflection to admire the effect and then I got my second shock that evening.
The rain had smudged my sooty mascara and it was streaked down my cheek.
I looked away quickly.
Frederick the Great had been straightening his tie but now he turned round to look at me and after registering a look of surprise he called to Sally and her friend and they all burst into laughter.
I was angry and embarrassed in equal measure and hated them.
I just turned and ran off.
They deserved each other, I thought.
When I got indoors I was still so upset that I tore off the frock, ripping a sleeve in the process, but I didn't care; I was so angry.
I rolled it up into a ball and pushed the shawl and lipstick inside the bundle, then I went to put it on Sally's step.
As I dodged down the yard I noticed the broken bottle lying in the drain.
Picking it up, I rolled that up with the bundle too.
I put it on the step, knocked on the door and ran back home.
I closed the door behind me then heard the door of the Buckleys' open and close.
Nobody saw me, I'd been so quick.
With that I washed my face and went to bed.
I was surprised to find Liza sitting up in bed reading one of her romances.
She hid it away quickly as I entered the room.
‘What's the matter with yow?’ she said when she saw my tears.
I had to tell someone so I told her.
When I'd finished we began to see the funny side of it and ended up laughing.
Liza laughed so much she rolled off the bed onto the chamber pot, spilling its contents on the floor.
This caused more hilarity and we ended in hysterical fits.
My first experience with boys was not a great success but it wasn't the last, and later I found myself in worse scrapes than on that first occasion.
I had nothing further to do with Sally but she didn't seem to be bothered when I passed her in the street without speaking.
In the end I thought it was a good job that I'd cut her dead because I began to pick up the gossip about her and found out that she'd left home when she did because she was pregnant and had had a baby.
She was what was known as ‘a bad lot’ and several times later I saw her standing in alleyways, always with a different man.
Mum summed her up when she said, ‘Any man can have her, with or without his trousers down.’
This experience renewed my curiosity about the facts of life.
All I knew were the half-truths and lies that children were told in those days.
I was afraid to ask Mum any details of where babies came from and the word ‘sex’ was considered a dirty word in our house.
When I saw my first period I was scared to death.
I ran all the way home from school thinking I was going to bleed to death.
I burst into tears when I saw Mum, and told her what had happened.
But all the explanation she gave me was, ‘Now yow keep away from the lads an' never let 'em kiss yer or the next thing yer know yer'll be 'avin' a baby.
Then God 'elp yer.’
I pointed out that I kissed Frankie but she dismissed my puzzlement.
‘That's different.
‘E's yer brother, ain't 'e.
Now be off with yer, I'll see ter yer later.
An' don't forget what I've told yer!
Keep away from the lads.’
I couldn't make head nor tail of this.
Why was Frankie different?
I knew he had something more than Liza and me  because we'd seen him when he had his bath and when he lay in bed in his short shirt.
I was perplexed.
If only someone would explain these things to me, but I was too shy and scared to ask.
When Mum had left I determined to overcome my embarrassment and go and ask Mrs Taylor.
Perhaps she could tell me why I was bleeding.
When I told her what was troubling me she just gave me a piece of clean rag and said more or less the same as Mum had.
‘Is it true?’
I asked her.
‘Will I have a baby if a boy kisses me?’
‘Well, it's a start,’ she answered, smiling, ‘but when yer grow older you'll find out.’
This was clearly little help either.
I knew when people were married and slept together a baby usually followed, but this didn't enlighten me about the facts of life.
In fact, for a while I was almost as afraid of boys as I was of horses and cows.
As far as my education on the subject was concerned I was reduced to listening to gossip in the hope of learning more.
I was in the yard one day when all the women were gossiping and Mrs Smith from the next yard happened to pass.
‘Hello Nell, I see yer've bin eatin' new bread agen,’ Mrs Phipps called to her.
‘Yes, an' it's all me own,’ she replied, smacking her belly as she walked by.
Then Maggie said, ‘Did yer know Mrs Buckley's balloon's up agen?’
‘Yes, we 'eard,’ replied Mrs Jonesy.
Mrs Phipps gave Maggie a cold look and said, ‘Why is it yer've never 'ad your balloon up, Maggie?’
‘That's my affair,’ Maggie replied.
‘Any'ow my Billy ain't got much, an' what 'e 'as got 'e's keepin' it fer 'imself.’
And they all burst out laughing.
I didn't make much of this but Mrs Smith's daughter was a friend of mine.
Her name was Nellie and she was in the same class as me at school and her family had not long moved into the neighbourhood.
Nellie was not a bit shy or timid like I was, and I was attracted by her outspoken ways.
Sometimes after school we would visit their house and she would show  me all her nice clothes.
Nellie promised me one of her old dresses when she had a new one.
Then one afternoon Mrs Smith came in and found us and asked who I was.
‘It's Katie, my school friend,’ Nellie replied.
‘Well, sit yerself down Katie.
Don't be shy, I'm not going ter eat yer,’ she said, busying herself untying the parcels she had with her.
She was a pretty woman and would have had a good figure had she not been pregnant.
She had a pleasant  disposition and always had a twinkle in her eyes.
She had a soft voice and always put me at my ease.
We watched her untie the parcels which turned out to contain pretty blue woollen baby clothes.
When Nellie saw them she asked, ‘Why 'ave yer bought blue?’
‘Because I know it's goin' to be a son…
Anyway,’ she said, ‘I'm 'opin' it is.’
The next parcel contained a new dress for Nellie.
It was bright pillar-box red with a white lace collar and cuffs.
When her Mum undressed her to try it on I couldn't take my eyes off the lovely white underclothes she wore.
I turned my head away then, because Mum always said it wasn't decent to watch people undress.
Evidently Mrs Smith thought differently.
‘Don't be shy, Katie,’ she said.
‘Yer can turn round now.’
Nellie looked sweet in her new frock.
Then she asked her Mum to find something for me.
She was the same size as me so I knew that her clothes would fit me.
Mrs Smith went to the wardrobe and brought out a yellow dress with pretty flowers and leaves all over it.
‘Take your dress off and try this on.
It should fit.’
I must have looked embarrassed when she handed it over because they both turned their backs while I slipped my old dress off and slipped the new one on.
After fastening all the buttons up the front I said meekly, ‘You can turn round now.’
I felt great when Mrs Smith said I looked pretty and that I could keep the dress.
I was so overwhelmed that I started to cry.
‘What's all this for?’ she asked kindly.
‘Mum will never let me keep it.
I've only got old ones an' this one will go to the pawnshop.’
I wiped the tears with the back of my hand.
‘Never mind that.
Wipe yer eyes and then we'll go upstairs and see what else we can find,’ Mrs Smith soothed me.
Nellie had a pleasant bedroom all to herself.
If I had a room of my own, I thought, I would knit and knit to make it as pretty as this or as Miss Louise's had been.
We girls sat on the bed while Mrs Smith sorted out some underclothes for me.
‘Now, don't be shy.
Yer can undress in front of Nellie and me,’ she said.
‘But if yer like we'll go downstairs.’
‘I'd like Nellie to stay,’ I whispered.
I was shy of undressing in front of adults.
So Mrs Smith left us alone and I stripped off in front of my friend although I made her turn away when I came to my combs.
Then I dressed in the vest, bloomers, camisole with pink ribbon threaded through the top and bottom, a pretty lace underskirt and finally the yellow dress.
I felt like a princess.
‘You look lovely, Katie,’ Nellie said.
‘Let's go an' show Mum.’
They both enthused over my new look and I became weepy and wailed that I couldn't keep them.
‘But they're yours to keep, like I told you,’ Mrs Smith said gently.
‘No, they'll end up in the pawnshop,’ I sobbed.
‘Oh, no they won't.
Nellie, you go upstairs and bring down Katie's clothes,’ she said.
What was she up to, I thought.
She wrapped them up in a parcel and took them out to the dustbin.
She was about to pop them in when we heard the strains of the rag and boneman's cry.
Round the corner he came, pushing his handcart with balloons flying high.
She gave him the bundle and he opened it to examine the contents.
‘What yer want fer these, Mrs?’ he inquired.
‘Oh, just give the kids a balloon each,’ she told him.
‘They're only worth one,’ he grumbled.
‘Right!
I'll put them in the bin then,’ she replied, but before she could get them off the cart he handed us the balloons.
We went in and I stayed a bit longer; then, with many  thanks to Mrs Smith, I left for home, anxious to tell Mum about my good fortune.
When I entered our kitchen Mum stared at me, dumbounded , until she recovered and found her voice.
‘Who's got yow all dressed up?’ she demanded, shaking me.
‘Mrs Smith gave them to me,’ I told her.
‘An' where's yer own?’ she snapped.
I was too scared to admit to her what had happened to them, so I said Mrs Smith would tell her.
Now our houses backed on to each other, with only the party wall between, so she just picked up the poker from the fender and started banging on the wall so that the plaster showered a cloud of dust in the room.
‘Are yow theea, Mrs Smith, cos if yow are I want some words with yow!’ she bellowed.
Mrs Smith came immediately, with Nellie behind her.
Neighbours who had heard the noise were gathering round the door and chattering noisily.
However, Mum had found her mistress in Mrs Smith.
She drew herself up to her full height, hands on hips; quite a figure.
‘An' what's the matter with you?’ she asked sarcastically.
‘Yer trying’ ter knock the 'ouse down?’
‘Where's me daughter's clothes yer've took off 'er?
I want 'em back.’
Mrs Smith was unimpressed by Mum's overbearing manner but simply grinned and replied calmly, ‘Sorry my dear, you'll have to ask the rag an' boneman for them.’
‘WHAT!’ yelled Mum.
‘Yes,’ Mrs Smith nodded.
Mum knew then she had met her match and tried-to retreat indoors, but Mrs Smith left her foot in the door so that she had to listen.
‘They weren't worth keeping so I swapped them for a couple of balloons.’
Mum's face reddened visibly.
‘Oh, I could tell all yow a thing ter shock yer,’ she said wagging her forefinger.
She continued to splutter and threaten.
‘An' don't let me catch yer layin' another finger on 'er,’ she said, pointing at me.
‘I'll 'ave the law on yer.’
‘Let me tell yow if you ever lay a finger on her yerself, I'll 'ave the authorities on yer,’ Mrs Smith was not to be bested.
‘And don't yow take them clothes away from her either,’ she concluded, just as Mum saw her chance and slammed the door shut, leaving me standing there with Mrs Smith, Nellie and the neighbours.
‘Come on you two,’ she said to us.
‘I never 'ave anything to do with trash if I can 'elp it.’
I went round to their place again and we had toast and tea with real cow's milk, not the Handy Brand condensed milk we always had at home.
After tea we went out to play.
I was afraid to go back home for fear of the trouble I'd be in from Mum.
When I left Nellie I hung about waiting for Dad's protection but he didn't appear.
I went to several pubs looking for him but nobody had seen him, so, as it was getting late, I turned to go home to face the music.
As I dragged reluctantly along past Mrs Smith's house who should come out, deep in conversation with Mrs Smith, but my Dad.
They were smiling and when Mrs Smith saw me she called out cheerily.
‘It's all right Katie, I've explained to your Dad.’
I ran up to him and took his hand in mine.
He said ‘goodbye’ to our neighbour and thanked her for 'everything’, and he squeezed her hand.
‘That's all right Sam, any time you're passing,’ she told him.
I was puzzled about what had been going on but was pleased that Dad, at any rate, was in a good mood.
‘Come on Katie,’ he said.
‘Let's face the music.’
Before we'd set foot over the doorstep Mum had started.
‘What yer think about 'er round the back?
Tellin' me what ter do with me own kids.
She wants ter look after 'er own.’
She stopped to draw breath which gave Dad his opportunity.
‘Now yow be quiet, Polly.
Yow don't want all the neighbourhood round yer door do yer?’
‘Oh, she's told yow the tale 'as she?’
Mum didn't miss much.
‘Only the truth, and I admire her for it.
She's one person yow can't push around like the rest of yer cronies.’
Mum could see she was getting nowhere so she tried  shedding a tear or two.
This was an old ploy when she couldn't get her own way.
Dad was having none of this.
‘Yow can turn yer tap off, I'm going up to bed and you, Katie, better get off too,’ he said, handing me a saucer with a stub of candle on it.
I didn't wait to be told twice and I made myself scarce.
After that Nellie and I became close friends and so did her Mum and my Dad.
Mum never said a word when I invited Nellie into our house but I could tell she didn't like her.
We played the harmonium and sang together and Dad sometimes gave us money to go to see a picture at the Queen's Hall.
When Nellie's Mum was very large and the baby was due she wouldn't let Nellie go far in case she needed to fetch the midwife.
All this time I still wondered about the origin of babies, and one night I raised the subject with Nellie.
I began by asking her if she  liked boys.
She said she did ‘a bit’ but she was also afraid of them ‘a bit ’as well .
I asked why and she gave me a reply I hadn't expected.
‘Well, my Mum told me not to let boys fondle me or kiss me now I've started me periods, otherwise, if I did, I'd soon be having a baby.’
I told her that I was surprised at that because my Mum had said the same and I hadn't believed her.
Was that how Nellie's Mum came to be having a baby, I wondered?
‘But I like it when boys whistle at me,’ she continued.
‘Me too,’ I agreed, ‘but my Mum says she don't want me growing up like Sally Buckley.’
‘Do you know er?’ she asked in apparent surprise.
‘Everybody knows 'er,’ I said.
Then I offered to tell her my secret if she didn't tell anyone else.
I told her about the date at the pictures with the two boys and about the disaster with the bleach.
‘How lucky you were,’ Nellie laughed.
‘Yer never know what would 'ave 'appened if it 'adn't rained.’
‘Nellie,’ I said, ‘d'yer know where babies come from?’
‘Course I do, silly.
Don't you?’
‘No.’
I shook my head, a bit shyly.
‘Well you know when mothers get fat and their stomach  sticks out like a balloon?
Well, they carry that for nine months, don't they?
Then when the time comes their belly goes pop with a bang and the baby pops out.’
That seemed to make sense to me.
‘I wondered what the belly button was for,’ I said.
Nellie was always right about things.
‘Tell yer what,’ she offered.
‘When my Mum's about to have her pains I'll call for yer and we'll sit on the stairs and listen.’
Although I was anxious to be there I didn't get the chance because Mrs Smith gave birth to a baby girl in the early hours of the morning later that week.
We were both disappointed but Nellie said we could wait until the next time.
I also wondered about why we never saw Nellie's Dad and eventually I asked her about him.
Nellie rounded on me angrily and asked me why I wanted to know.
Then I told about the tales the neighbours were telling about her Mum and her men friends.
She replied that she knew where he was but she didn't want to discuss it.
‘What my Mum does is her affair.’
She was adamant.
She must have  known what her Mum was up to but I didn't question her any more on the subject.
We were still at school when, later that year, the First World War broke out.
We were in standard seven, the highest class, which meant we could leave school early, when we were thirteen, which would be another eighteen months at least for me.
We were both monitors and I helped the teacher with the younger children, teaching them how to knit socks and balaclavas for the soldiers at the Front.
We put little messages wishing the Tommies ‘good luck’ in them to cheer them up.
I loved knitting and do to this day.
I won first prizes for the best garment and for the most knitted in my class.
The only thing I didn't like was the monotonous khaki wool.
One day I asked the teacher if it wouldn't be more patriotic to knit some items in red, white and blue.
She smiled at this and said if I wanted a change I could knit up navy blue wool for the Royal Navy, which I did.
I won another prize for this as well, and I was presented with a beautiful work basket lined with red satin by the headmistress, Miss Ford.
I had to stand in front of the whole school which gave me ample opportunity to observe the envy on some girls' faces because knitting for the troops was a popular pastime then.
In fact, everybody seemed to be busy finding some job to help with the war effort, except Mum who continued to clean at the Gingold's chip shop.
My two eldest brothers, Charlie and Jack, volunteered for Kitchener's army as most boys of their generation did.
Even Dad tried to enlist.
He told the recruiting officer that he'd been a sergeant in the Boer War and boasted that he knew more about the Army than all these whipper-snappers who were waiting to join with him.
He was told to strip for a medical examination but he wasn't up to scratch and failed, and so never got his chance.
Nevertheless he was determined to do his bit, so he gave up the firewood business and went back to the casting shop to make shell cases.
This was more patriotic than wise because he had to work long hours and came home coughing; you could smell the sulphur on his clothes.
But he said he didn't mind as long as he was helping the war effort, and anyway it would all be over in six months and he could go back to selling firewood.
Little did we imagine then that the war would last until November 1918.
Frankie left school and Dad found him a job with him, fetching and carrying sand for the men.
He was a strong, healthy lad and as pleased as punch to be working with Dad.
He began to put on airs and think he was a grown-up who could boss us around until Dad checked him for it.
Liza left as well and got a job on the munitions with Sally Buckley, which boded no good.
There were rows at night over her staying out late with Sally.
Mum always stood up for Liza, her longtime favourite, telling Dad she had enough sense to know what was right and wrong, but I doubted she did.
Dad wasn't convinced either.
I wanted to help too but I was still too young to leave school.
There was work for everyone.
People were doing all kinds of jobs to earn money; even the married women who could get nothing before were able to take in washing for the posh folk whose maids were earning more in a week in the munitions factories than they could in a month skivvying.
Mum would have none of this: she was not going to do other people's dirty washing and she stayed at the fish shop all the war years.
It was ironic that now everybody in our district had plenty of money for food they couldn't obtain it because everything was rationed.
Still, this left all the more to spend on drink.
The pubs were doing a roaring trade, what with this newfound prosperity and the constant flow of soldiers on leave with money to spend and precious little time to get rid of it.
There was plenty of scandal about the Australian and Canadian troops being out with other men's wives or, worse, being seen in doorways or entries with them while the blackout was on.
Women whose men were away at the war were still having babies.
Several times I was given money to go to the chemist's for bitter aloes or penny royal or a bottle of gin from the outdoor.
Miscarriages procured in this way often led to death or malformed births.
Brother Jack wrote each week while he was in training on Salisbury Plain with the Royal Field Artillery.
Mum always opened the letters but I had to read them for her.
He would write that he was ‘doing fine’ and that the war would be over soon.
He also asked her to keep an eye on his widow because he had heard about the carrying-on with the women-folk.
‘And’, he underlined the ‘and’, ‘keep an eye on our Liza.’
I always wrote the replies and told him the news and reassured him that Mum was watching his widow, which it gave her great pleasure to do.
I knitted him socks as well and slipped packets of Woodbines in with them.
It was through the need to obtain money for this that I took the part-time job with Mrs Morton and her husband, Weary Willy.
They were the school caretakers but my job helping them didn't last long.
Another incident which sticks in my memory from those final years at school concerned a friend of mine, Nelly Mitchell.
I'd discussed the mystery of child birth with her as well and she'd offered, like Nellie Smith, to call me when her mother, who was pregnant, was about to give birth.
I was playing jackstones in the street when Nelly Mitchell ran up with the news that she was going for the midwife.
We ran and  knocked on the midwife's door and Mrs Bullivant seemed to know who it was without looking, for she called out for Nelly to run and get newspapers and hot water ready.
When we got to Nelly's the fire was low, but while she was collecting newspapers I filled the kettle and using the old leather bellows stoked up the heat.
Mrs Mitchell called out for Mrs Bullivant from upstairs and at that moment in she came.
She was the only midwife in our district and if the women couldn't afford her the neighbours helped, a practice which often ended in tragedy.
As Mrs Bullivant, carrying her bag of instruments, mounted the stairs, Nelly's Mum began to cry out in agony.
We looked at each other, scared stiff, but we followed Mrs Bullivant upstairs.
She was a small, round woman with eyes that seemed too small for her face which was flushed red; it was as much she could do to struggle up, rolling from side to side and, I noticed, smelling of drink.
When we followed her into the bedroom she ordered us out, saying it was no place for kids.
We went outside but could still see because the door didn't quite close.
As soon as she thought we were out of sight she reached under her apron and produced a small bottle from which, tipping back her head, she took a swig.
Then she replaced it and went over to see to Mrs Mitchell who lay on the top of the bed dressed only in a calico nightgown groaning as she writhed about.
Then the midwife lifted up the gown and rolled her roughly on to her side.
I almost screamed out but Nelly's hand stifled any sound.
I saw the largest bare belly I'd ever seen in life.
The belly button was protruding and it looked ready to burst.
I'd seen enough.
I didn't want to wait for the baby to appear through the navel.
I tried to back down the stairs but Nelly kept hold of my frock and prevented me.
Just then the mid-wife told Mrs Mitchell to get up and pace the room and simultaneously we crashed against the door and ended in a heap on the floor.
I expected a slap but Mrs Bullivant just stepped over us saying she'd be back later, after she'd attended Mrs Groves who was having her first.
Then she was gone.
Nelly begged me not to leave her, and plucking up courage I stayed.
Nelly held her Mum's hand while I dipped a sponge  into the cold water jug and mopped her brow which was sweaty from the pain she was in.
I became frightened; I thought she was going to die and I felt sick.
It was the first time I'd seen anyone in labour and I made a silent vow that when I was married I wasn't going to have any babies if this was how you had to suffer.
A few minutes later, when Nelly was preoccupied, I'm sorry to say my cowardice got the better of me and I crept out of the room, down the stairs and ran off home.
For hours I couldn't put those dreadful  cries out of my mind and I imagined that with every breath my own stomach was swelling and about to burst.
I had a nightmare that night which ended with me rolling out of bed and landing on the floor where I was sick.
Next morning I cleaned up the vomit and got myself ready for school but I still had a nasty taste in my mouth and I was hot and achey.
When I peered at myself in the mirror I screamed.
My eyes were puffed up and my face was covered with red spots.
My scream brought Mum up to see what was wrong and when she saw my face she ordered me back into bed.
I had measles and had to stay isolated in the darkened room for two weeks.
I was dosed with saffron tea which tasted foul and I couldn't see anybody.
By the time I'd recovered I was skinnier than ever, having been rationed to an orange a day.
After a few days I was allowed downstairs and began to eat proper meals again, and two weeks later I started back at school.
On my way there the first morning I noticed that Nelly's house had a ‘To Let’ sign in the window.
I ran to catch Liza up and when I asked her where they were she hesitated before replying.
‘She's dead,’ she said.
I was dumbstruck.
‘Who?
Nelly?’
I stammered.
Then Liza told me that Mrs Mitchell had died in childbirth and that Nelly herself had been taken to Wolverhampton to live with an aunt and uncle.
I felt miserable and blamed myself even more for not staying that night or fetching a doctor, but I didn't realise and I was so scared.
I was too upset to go to school.
I went and sat in the churchyard and wept for Mrs Mitchell and Nelly and prayed  for myself to be forgiven and for them to be looked after.
I was not missed that day either at school or at home.
I didn't forget Nelly who had been a good little friend to me, and eventually we did meet up again, several years later.