

Scotland and the Meehan Case
I had composed that party political broadcast in a small bedroom at the back of the Buccleuch Arms Hotel at St Boswells, Roxburghshire, the reason being that after ten years at Piers Place, Old Amersham, we had decided to move.
Although Piers Place was the most beautiful house I had owned or ever would own, it always seemed to be in need of structural repairs, there  was a large attic floor which we didn't need ourselves and yet were disinclined to furnish for renting out, and the traffic on the main road outside seemed to increase with every year.
For some time I had wanted to move further from London with its many social distractions, and now with the half million words of notes I had brought back with me from my world tour waiting to be distilled into a book, I felt the need more than ever.
In the fifteen years since making A Story of Three Loves in Hollywood Moira had accomplished much: in films The Man Who Loved Redheads ,Black Tights , and Peeping Tom ; on the stage A Midsummer Night's Dream ,I am a Camera ,Man of Distinction , as well as a season with the Bristol Old Vic.
Offers continued to roll in, some so tempting that I did not see how she could refuse them, but with four children now of whom none was over twelve, she was adamant that she wished to be with them, and this meant that we could move further afield.
When she retired, she was still internationally famous.
With her films The Red Shoes and Tales of Hoffman in addition to ten years at Covent Garden, she had, I think, done as much as anyone to help put British post-war ballet on the map.
Over the years there had been many tributes to her beauty and her dancing, but the one I particularly treasure appeared only recently.
It comes from I, of All People , the autobiography of the poet James Kirkup: ‘No other leading dancer — not even Fonteyn or Markova — demonstrated such intelligence in her dancing and such profound musicality as did Moira Shearer, at least among British dancers…something intensely warm and human in her dancing…a great performer in the style of the classic ballerina assoluta .’
And he adds, ‘I cut a picture of her marriage from a newspaper and carried it with me all my life, through all my moves and all my travels.’
He even reproduces among the illustrations to his book this ancient newspaper cutting of the two of us.
At first we considered moving to Devon, which we had come to know during speaking engagements for Mark Bonham-Carter at Torrington and Jeremy Thorpe at Barnstaple, but not seeing anything to our liking, turned our thoughts to our native Scotland.
But as the venture was something of an experiment, and we might have to move south again before long, we decided to rent a house rather than buy one.
Although this seemed a wise decision at the time, it was anything but wise in the long run, as we had not reckoned on the dramatic rise in house prices.
We  visited a number of unsuitable lettings as far afield as Dumfriesshire and Loch Rannoch, and eventually settled on a charming Georgian manse in the hamlet of Makerstoun, half-way between Kelso and St Boswells in the Border country, half a mile from the Tweed with, at the bottom of an orchard of Victoria plums, a village school suitable for Alastair and Fiona.
Another attraction was knowing from Eton and Oxford days several of the neighbouring landowners, Johnnie Dalkeith at Eildon, Dawyck Haig at Bemersyde, Robin McEwen at Marchmont.
Our congenial landlord, Roger Baird, also lived in the village where his wife Margaret was a tenant farmer; he had bought the manse as a long-term family investment.
Here we lived for the next fifteen years, with the eighteenth-century kirk across the road, and from my study window at the front a clear thirty-mile view across the Tweed valley to the distant Cheviots.
There was fishing for trout (and sometimes salmon) in the river, grouse-shooting in the autumn and pheasant-shooting in the winter, golf at St Boswells and Goswick and Muirfield.
Of our neighbours I saw most of Robin McEwen, a man with a brilliant, mercurial mind, the most generous of hosts and companionable of men yet always hopelessly impractical: sometimes he would blow in unexpectedly to say hello, Kind Dog hat on head, green scarf billowing in the breeze, knees encased in worn plus-fours, always eager to engage in debate while taking a nip of Laphroaig against the cold.
Often staying at Marchmont was his dear wife Brigid's father, James Laver, writer on the history of fashion, one time Keeper of Prints and Drawings at the Victoria and Albert Museum, and a marvellous raconteur.
South of Naples he had once lunched at a restaurant where they had endeavoured to translate the menu into English.
At the bottom he found the three letters CIS and asked what it was.
‘Is what he says,’ replied the waiter.
‘Is ‘chees'’.’
He also spoke of Madame Brillat-Savarin, a great gourmande who, taken queer at a banquet, cried out, ‘Vite, vite!
Je vais mourir.
Passez le dessert!’
Robin McEwen was also behind my making some money on the horses.
I have always found race-meetings very boring, and when we were invited to a box at the Kelso races, I had it in mind to decline.
But, having heard I had been invited, Robin persuaded me to accept, saying he was going to meet a trainer friend there who would know all the winners.
For the first race the trainer friend advised us to back a horse  called, I think, Super Duper.
Super Duper fell at the first fence.
For the next race he suggested a nag called My Delight.
My Delight completed the course but came in ten lengths behind the rest of the field.
Robin was for consulting the trainer friend about the third race, but I felt this was tempting Providence too far.
Glancing down the list of runners, I saw to my astonishment that one of the horses entered was called Soixante-Neuf (sired by Coronation Year out of Bewildered Anne!).
I said to Robin, ‘If its owner has the nerve to call it that, the least we can do is back it.’
Robin laughed and said he'd go along with me.
So we each put a fiver on Soixante-Neuf, the beast romped home at 10 to 1, and we both collected fifty quid.
Dawyck Haig's son Alexander was much the same age as Alastair and when the two were old enough we used to have fathers' and sons' tennis and golf matches.
One afternoon after tennis I was sitting on a drawing-room sofa at Bemersyde when Dawyck's dog, a long black cocker spaniel called Wasp, came and nuzzled up against me in the most friendly manner.
When he jumped down some twenty minutes later, I found he had chewed away a large portion of my cashmere sweater.
Dawyck said he was sure I could claim on my insurance.
A form arrived with the instruction ‘State exactly how loss occurred’, and I wrote ‘Lord Haig's dog Wasp and I were sitting together on a sofa when I discovered he was eating my sweater’ with the gravest doubts that I would be believed.
But the insurance company promptly sent a cheque for £25 replacement value, no doubt reckoning that such a tale was beyond human invention.
Our Borders MP was David Steel (who had beaten Robin McEwen at the by-election which won him the seat) and as a member of his local Liberal party, I was invited to join the Scottish Liberal Party's Council.
Their quarterly meetings were anodyne affairs, chaired by a genial buffer named George Mackie (later Lord Mackie of Benshie), whose deliberations were too often bogged down in the drearier aspects of Liberal Party policy.
Although Home Rule for Scotland in a federated Britain was part of that policy, it rarely got seriously discussed.
And yet, it seemed to me, this was the most important single issue facing Scotland at that time.
All over the world, as I had observed on my travels for Panorama and TRI, countries which had long been administered by others were hoisting their own colours; everywhere the idea of new-born nationhood was in the air.
Was Scotland so very different?
Ever since my mother had explained to me at Culloden Moor long ago that the English and the Scots were different peoples, I had been intensely proud of my Scottish origins and of Scotland's history as an independent nation.
Returning after thirty years I saw the country with a fresh eye.
It was different from England: it had its own systems of law and education, its own church, currency, literature, music.
Like the Jews the Scots were a talented and creative people who had exported themselves all over the world; there was hardly a country anywhere where a quorum of doctors, dentists, teachers, sailors, engineers, could not be assembled for a Burns Night supper or St Andrew's Day dinner.
It was Scots who had invented the steam engine, tarmacadam, the telephone, the Dunlop tyre, chloroform, Listerine, penicillin, television; Scots who had risen to command foreign armies and navies and whose courage as kilted soldiers in the First World War had led the Germans to dub them ‘the ladies from hell’; Scots, of whom one had helped to found the Bank of England, who had made Edinburgh into one of the great financial centres of Europe; Scots who had provided Westminster with more than her share of British Prime Ministers; Scots who with only a tenth of the population of Britain, had yet supplied England with one fifth of her professional classes.
With all this and North Sea (some would say Scottish) oil in the offing, who was to say we were unfit to govern ourselves?
I was told this was a retrograde step: what I was advocating was narrow nationalism in an age of increasing internationalism.
Nationalism, yes, but not narrow: what Burke meant by ‘the little platoon’, and a modern writer in small being beautiful, for the greater the overall unit (and the Common Market was then looming), the greater the necessity for autonomy within that unit, if those being governed were still to feel in touch with those governing.
Scotland's affairs had once been dealt with in her own Parliament in Edinburgh; now much of them were dealt with in London; soon more would be dealt with in Brussels.
A country that had once been central to itself was on the periphery: it needed to become central again.
At the next Scottish Liberal Party Council meeting I put forward a motion that Home Rule should be the principal aim and object of our policy and that in Scottish domestic matters all other issues should be considered in relation to it.
To my utter astonishment the motion was passed unanimously and thereafter, and to my lesser astonishment, completely ignored; at a by-election at Pollok the Liberal candidate devoted just ten out of the 150 lines of his election address to it and came bottom of the Poll.
Now at that time the Scottish National Party was the only other party in Scotland advocating what we were advocating (though obviously going much further) and it seemed to me crazy to be competing with them for devolutionary votes.
So at the SLP's next annual conference I put forward a resolution that talks be opened with them with a view to supporting each other in seats where one or the other of us stood a chance of winning; and to this end arranged a meeting between Jo Grimond and the SNP leader, Billy Wolfe.
To no avail: my resolution was never called for debate and another, that if the SNP were to approach us with a view to talks (an unlikely event after the Pollok by-election) we would not close the door, was passed by a narrow majority.
I realized then that my days with the Scottish Liberal Party were numbered and with much sadness wrote out a letter of resignation.
For four weeks I let it lie on my desk, unwilling to take the final step.
But by now Winnie Ewing was in the throes of her by-election campaign to win Hamilton for the SNP, and aware of how fervently I agreed with everything she was saying (and wished a Liberal had been saying) I felt it would be dishonest to hold back any longer.
To my surprise — for I was a very minor political fish — the news of my resignation was given widespread coverage,The Times calling it ‘startling’ and other papers ‘sensational’.
From Hamilton came a call from Winnie Ewing to join her on the platform at her eve of poll meeting, which (as there was no Liberal standing) I gladly accepted.
Next day she was elected by a handsome majority, and I believed the Scottish Home Rule movement to be on its way.
Because of my long commitment to Liberalism, I never in fact joined the Scottish National Party, but I occasionally appeared on their platforms and continued independently to promote the idea of Scottish autonomy.
In a television programme networked from BBC Scotland called The Disunited Kingdom , I addressed the viewer direct as I had done in my Liberal Party general election broadcast.
‘Friends, enemies, Englishmen,’ I began, ‘hear now the claims of Scotland!’, and for four minutes I spelled out what I thought they were.
It caused something of a stir north of the border and was reprinted as a pamphlet by the  ultranationalist 1320 Club (1320 being the date of the signing of Robert I's Declaration of Arbroath).
I also began a campaign in the press and elsewhere against the lily-livered Scottish Rugby Union.
It was the custom before an international match at Murrayfield for the band to play tunes appropriate to the nationality of the visiting team; for the French The Marseillaise, for the English ‘God Save the Queen’, for the Welsh ‘Land of My Fathers’, for the Irish ‘The Soldier's Song’.
But for their own Scottish team, instead of‘Scotland the Brave’ or some other suitable Scottish air to give a lift to players and spectators alike, they fell back on ‘God Save the Queen’.
There were two objections to this: firstly it was a British tune and secondly (though less important) it was well known that its full version included a line about crushing rebellious Scots; and while the English national anthem may have pleased aggressively Anglophile spectators, it gave immense offence to thousands of ordinary Scots who quite understandably punctuated it with boos and whistles.
This in itself was unedifying, and after I left Scotland the SRU at last summoned up courage to change over to ‘Scotland the Brave’.
But for away matches they still cravenly cling on to ‘God Save the Queen’.
I maintained the theme of Scottish self-awareness in my presidential address to the Edinburgh Sir Walter Scott Club.
Membership of this club entails attending an annual dinner at which some 400 of Edinburgh's most prominent citizens assemble to celebrate Scott's memory, at which an admiral or general and a judge respond to toasts to the Armed Forces and the Law, and the president speaks on some aspect of the author of the Waverley novels.
(The reader may recall that my grandfather, Sir Ludovic Grant, had been president some sixty years before.)
Although I would have been surprised if London's Charles Dickens Society required its members to put on a white tie for its annual dinner, the invitation card demanded it for the Scott dinner.
After the war I vowed I would never wear a white tie again, and never have, I dislike it so much; so, having been informed that most of those below the salt would be wearing black ties anyway, I put on my Kennedy tartan smoking jacket with green velvet facings which I had recently had made and of which I was sure that Sir Walter, who often wore a plaid, would have approved.
In my talk I mentioned a number of specific things that Scott had brought about for Scotland as the result of his friendship with  George IV.
These included the restoration of Scottish peerages forfeited after the rebellion of '45, the continuation of the Scottish currency, and — to me most dramatic and romantic of all — his discovering in a locked box in Edinburgh Castle the ancient regalia of Scotland; the crown and sceptre and sword of state with which the kings of Scotland had always been crowned, and which had last been used at the coronation of Charles II at Scone.
I went on:
Today the Sovereign of the United Kingdom is crowned in Westminster Abbey by the Archbishop of Canterbury in an English Coronation Service ordered by the English Earl Marshal whose authority, like that of the Archbishop, stops at the Scottish border.
Am I alone in this room, I wonder, in hoping that at the next accession there may also be a coronation in Scotland, that the regalia of Scotland be bestowed on the Sovereign by the ministers of the Church of Scotland, according to the usage of the Scottish coronation service, long ratified by Scottish law?
The speech received much applause, and my remarks about the regalia were given prominence in the next day's papers.
But there was a small band of Morningsiders, those ever so genteel Edinburghians who say ‘Bay-bay’ when they mean ‘Bye-bye’and ape the English in all things who, I was told, were offended by my rejection of white tie.
Their hurt found expression in the person of the secretary's wife, sitting opposite.
Fixing me with a beady eye as soon as I had sat down, she leaned over to damn me with faint praise.
‘I enjoyed your peroration as much as I deplore your jacket!’
Did I but know it, it was the writing on the wall.
For although the Home Rule movement did for a time grow apace, with an ever increasing number of SNP candidates being elected to Parliament and, under the Callaghan administration, the old High School building on Calton Hill being refurbished to accommodate a Scottish debating-chamber (the old one had become incorporated in the Law Courts), the idea of Home Rule made many of my countrymen uneasy; less, I think, about financial disadvantages (for oil revenue would have compensated for that) than at the prospect of feuding between east and west, north and south, and, for some, the prospect of a semi-permanent Labour administration; and when in 1979 a referendum of the  whole Scottish nation was held, the votes in favour of Home Rule did not attain the clear 40 per cent majority on which the House of Commons had insisted.
This result was never thereafter challenged: there were no protests or riots in the streets or general mayhem as there would have been, and God knows has been, in that other Celtic country across the water whose struggle for independence has never ceased.
A sigh of relief could be heard all over Scotland.
The whole Home Rule movement, with roots going far back into the past, melted quietly away as if it had never been.
For many of us it was a huge disappointment; a paradox, too, that a people who had proved themselves historically and geographically over and over again, who had shown a rare talent for managing the affairs of other people, should choose to chicken out when it came to managing their own.
But the Scots have always had a deep-rooted sense of inferiority about the English: it was born out of the defeat of the '45 and the surrender of 1707 and, as Boswell and others had observed with chagrin and sometimes rage, the condescension and contempt of the English towards the Scots and their impossible tongue.
I thought of Compton Mackenzie's brave words at a Nomads' Club dinner where I was his guest about the mystical experience of people loving their countrymen through loving their country and, by re-creating themselves, re-creating their nation.
That experience I and thousands of others would now be denied.
Half of us could continue to drown ourselves in usquebaugh and self-pity (‘Here's tae us, /Wha's like us? /Damn few/ All deid’), the other half could relax, relieved that the English would be continuing to do our thinking for us.
Fifteen years later I was asked to speak in a St Andrew's Day debate being put out by BBC Television in Edinburgh.
The motion was ‘That devolution is dead and ought to be laid to rest’.
I chose to speak for the motion rather than against, for as a matter of hard fact devolution was dead.
‘Where,’ I asked, ‘is the evidence otherwise?’
I went on: ‘When I first came back to live here it was a different matter.
As a journalist I had seen many countries overseas, all smaller and poorer than ourselves, being granted self-government; and I had hoped that Scotland would not be denied even the limited self-government that was then being dished out to the Cook Islands and the Faeroe Islands and the Cameroons.’
But the  referendum had killed it.
I quoted Shakespeare: ‘Stands Scotland where it did.
Alas, poor country, almost afraid to know itself.’
True in Macbeth's time and true today.
For in the matter of self-government, Mr Chairman, we have become, and I am sorry to say it, a nation of political eunuchs.
There were cheers and boos, but the cheers were uppermost.
For there's nothing the Scots enjoy more than the scoring of own goals.
Although I was spending most of my time writing the book on Americans abroad, I see from my records of the late 1960s that I was also presenting several television programmes, both in London and in the north.
These included the BBC's Your Witness , a courtroom-style debate in which the producer's assistant was a toothy young lady by the name of Esther Rantzen, and two interviews with Prince Philip, once on my own when he came to Edinburgh as Chancellor of the University, the other in Newcastle for Tyne-Tees' Face the Press .
My last question to him there was what his reaction would be if one of his sons told him he wanted to marry a coloured girl.
He smiled, paused, and said it would be really up to them to decide.
After the recording he said, ‘That was a fast one.
In the autumn of 1969 the book on the Americans was published in London and New York under the title Very Lovely People (from a remark of President Johnson to some White House visitors —‘Mrs Johnson and I are very happy to have you here, and we think you are all very lovely people’).
It did well enough, though might have done better if it had covered less ground; also, in the four years that had elapsed since gathering material for it, public interest in the world role that Americans had taken up in the Kennedy years had largely evaporated.
We visited Edinburgh from time to time and one evening were invited by the Queen to a dance at Holyrood House.
As we came into the ballroom, I thought the figure on the bandstand, wearing immaculate evening tails and waving a baton, was vaguely familiar.
I was right.
It was Cam Robbie, whom I had last seen during the war twenty-five years earlier, when he was drummer of a rather tatty three-piece outfit in a night-club in George Street.
I used to drop in there occasionally on leave, and sometimes Cam would let me take over the drums when the band was resting.
Later, over a dram, Cam would regale me with tales of female  conquests. ‘did I ever tell you about wee Sheila?’ he'd say, licking his lips.
‘Many a romp have I had with her, and boy, could she wriggle.’
Or, ‘You should have met Jeanie, Ludovic.
The most glorious pair of wee titties you ever saw.
And okay down below too.
Grip like a vice.
I'm telling you.’
When Moira and I were passing the bandstand, I touched his arm and said, Hello, Cam.
Remember me?’
A flicker of recognition came and as quickly went.
‘Oh, aye,’ he said, ‘seemingly.
If there's any particular tune you'd care for, my boys will be very pleased to play it for you.’
And he turned his back both on me and on his not-to-be-remembered past.
I also found time to undertake occasional voluntary speaking engagements, one of which in October 1969 was to take part in Lord McLeod of Fuinary's Rectorial debate at Glasgow University.
Among others there was the Scottish advocate (and future QC and Conservative MP) Nicholas Fairbairn, a sartorial dandy with a razor-sharp mind whom I had met once or twice in the Borders.
Nicky had (and for all I know still has) the reputation of being the best criminal defence lawyer at the Scottish bar and had on several occasions persuaded juries to acquit those whom he had every reason to believe were guilty.
But now, as we travelled back to Edinburgh in the last train, he had a different problem.
‘Tomorrow morning,’ he said, ‘I have to make my closing speech in defence of a man who is on a murder charge, and whom I know for certain to be innocent.
His name, said Nicky, was Patrick Meehan, and he was a well-known and rather incompetent safe-blower, but with no record of violence.
The victim was Rachel Ross, who with her husband Abraham, a bingo hall owner, lived in a bungalow in the seaside town of Ayr.
On a Saturday night in July they were woken by two burglars who hit Mr Ross repeatedly on the head and body, tied them both up and demanded the keys of the safe.
In it they found and pocketed several thousand pounds, the takings of the bingo hall, then left.
The Rosses remained tied up over the weekend until discovered by their daily on Monday.
They were taken to hospital where Mrs Ross died.
All Mr Ross could remember of the burglars was that they both had Glasgow voices and called each other Pat and Jim.
He never saw their faces.
How did Meehan come into it, I asked?
The Police, said Nicky, had no idea who was responsible, so made routine inquiries of Glasgow's known villains.
When it was  Meehan's turn and they asked him what he had been doing that night, he said he had driven to Stranraer (to case the motor taxation office, he admitted later) with an Englishman called Jim Griffiths; and they had come back via the outskirts of Ayr in the early hours of the morning.
The police were looking for a Pat and Jim, said Nicky, and here was Pat admitting that he and his friend Jim were in the general area of the crime at roughly the time it was committed.
If they needed further proof of their belief that they were on the right track, they were given it when they went to arrest Griffiths and were met by a hail of bullets; after a chase in which Griffiths killed one man and wounded others, he was shot dead while resisting arrest.
By now certain that Meehan and Griffiths were the murderers of Mrs Ross, the Crown Office in Edinburgh issued a statement that with Griffiths's death and Meehan's arrest, they were not looking for any other suspects in connection with the Ayr murder — thus, said Nicky, prejudging the very issue that was to come to trial.
I said, ‘Even if it was circumstantial, that's quite persuasive evidence.’
‘Wait till I tell you what happened then.
At an identification parade Meehan was asked to say something Mr Ross had heard one of the burglars say, and when Meehan said it, Mr Ross collapsed, shouting, ‘That's the voice, I'd know it anywhere.'’
On this flimsy evidence (for no one else on the Parade was asked to say the words) they charged him.
And the forensic people gave evidence that pieces of brown paper and pieces of white paper they found in Griffiths's overcoat pocket exactly matched pieces of brown and white paper found in Mr Ross's safe.’
‘So?’
‘The identification parade was rigged and the pieces of paper were planted.
And as it was July Griffiths wasn't wearing an overcoat.’
‘You're sure?’
‘I'm certain.
There are many things in Meehan's favour.
Ross said both burglars had Glasgow accents.
Griffiths came from Lancashire and bad an English accent.
And if they really were the murderers, would they have been so foolish, after leaving Ayr and with Ross's money in the car, to have picked up as they did two girls who had been stranded by their boy friends, and taken them to their homes in Kilmarnock?
The girls said it was still dark when they reached Kilmarnock; but Mr Ross said that when  the burglars left it was light.
And finally we impeached a man called Waddell who's been boasting to everyone in Barlinnie Jail that he and another man did it.’
Two or three days later I read in the Scotsman that the jury of fifteen had found Meehan guilty by a majority verdict.
When the judge told him the only sentence he could pass was that of life imprisonment, Meehan said loudly and clearly, ‘I want to say this, sir.
I am innocent of this crime and so is James Griffiths.
You have made a terrible mistake.’
Between the date of Meehan's conviction and his appeal a month later, Nicky told me, he had an astonishing piece of luck in that there had come into his possession a tape-recording of an interview with Griffiths taken some time previously for a programme the BBC had made at Gartree prison.
Not only, said Nicky, was this proof positive of the Englishness — indeed the Lancashireness — of Griffiths's voice, but Griffiths had also said that if cornered in future he would shoot his way out rather than submit to arrest — exactly what he did do.
At Meehan's appeal Nicky asked the presiding judge, Lord Clyde, if he could call Mr Ross to the witness box to have him listen to the recording.
‘If Ross says the man with that voice was not in his house that night, then Meehan was not there either.’
Nicky also wanted to call a witness who had knowledge of Waddell's part in the crime, but on both counts Lord Clyde turned him down.
Some time after this Mrs Meehan wrote to me that her husband was innocent, and asked for assistance in having his case reviewed.
But I was occupied with other things and in any event not then wholly convinced of Meehan's innocence.
However, she continued to write and then Meehan himself sent the first of many letters, beginning, ‘Dear Mr Kennedy, I am serving a Life imprisonment for a horrible murder in which I was never involved.’
A year later Mrs Meehan wrote, ‘As I say again, Paddy or Jim had never heard of Mr Ross until after this crime, and I know if not this week or this year, he will clear himself one day.
Meantime it's a living hell for all of us, and I need all the help we can get to shorten the time he will be in prison.’
Such an appeal was not to be resisted, but first I had to tell Meehan that if I did look into his case, I must feel myself free to come to whatever conclusions my investigations led me, ‘whether in your favour or not’.
His reply was unequivocal.
‘I am certainly willing to give you a free hand…and to express whatever conclusions  you come to as to guilt or innocence.
If there are any questions you wish to put to me, then do not hesitate to do so.’
This persuaded me it was unlikely I was dealing with a guilty man.
When investigating an alleged miscarriage of justice, I have always made it a rule first to talk to the convicted man's trial solicitor as he is likely to be the last man his client would wish to con, or would succeed in conning ii he tried.
Meehan, at the time I took up his case, had had three solicitors, all from Glasgow: Joseph Beltrami for his trial, then Ross Harper and later Leonard Murray.
All three were convinced of his innocence.
From one or other of them I obtained the papers on the case, and these, together with the letters I myself had received from Meehan, were enough to dispel any lingering doubts.
For confirmation I visited him in prison, where in protest against his incarceration he had put himself in solitary confinement, and found him to be sandy-haired, bullet-headed and verbose, yet with a redeeming sense of humour; his passionate denials of having played any part in the Ayr murder were too convincing to have been invented.
Further confirmation came from the governor of Peterhead, Alexander Angus, after his retirement.
‘It would have been a crime completely out of character,’ he told me, ‘and it was the way he spoke about it that convinced me.’
I also visited the scene of the crime at Ayr, and had several lunches and dinners with the diminutive, widowed but friendly Mr Ross; while an interview with the horrible Waddell in a Glasgow pub left me in no doubt that he was his attacker.
The alternative, that he was a brilliant actor, was simply not credible.
Mr Angus had said to me à propos Meehan, ‘Guilty men when they reach prison don't go on insisting on their innocence.’
Yet from time to time law officers, judges and others in high places speak disparagingly of letters that they and others receive from prisoners asserting just that.
‘Oh, we all know about those,’ they say, ‘smart fellows trying to have one on.’
Indeed, as I write this, I have just been watching on television Lord Denning declaring with self-satisfaction that he puts all such letters straight into the wastepaper basket.
My experience, like that of Mr Angus, has been the opposite.
The majority of prison letters that I receive have the ring of truth; the reason being that it is not in human nature (of which the law is profoundly ignorant) for guilty men to go on proclaiming their innocence month after month, year after year, when they do not have the evidence, the impetus, or  the skills to do so, at least with any show of conviction.
As my friend David Jessel has pointed out, even if 99 per cent of all criminal convictions are correct, that still leaves in a prison population of 40,000 some 400 who have no business being there; and I cannot imagine any experience more demoralizing than to be locked up for years for a crime one didn't commit.
It is from some of these 400 that the letters come protesting innocence — and if they often ramble and are poorly expressed, that is indicative of a lack of education which made them vulnerable to manipulation in the first place.
Among the papers sent to me by Mr Beltrami were letters from Meehan, written to him almost daily when he was on remand in Barlinnie Prison, Glasgow, awaiting trial.
He had heard from other prisoners (he told Beltrami) that a man called Ian Waddell had been boasting that he had taken part in the Ayr crime, and then, on a quite different charge, Waddell was sent to Barlinnie himself.
Meehan lost no time in seeking him out and asking him if what he had heard was true.
Waddell did not deny it.
I told him it was important to my defence to know if the old man had been blindfolded.
Waddell is most emphatic that the old man was neither blindfolded nor gagged.
Waddell says a blanket was thrown over the old man and several times the old man knocked it off and it had to be replaced.
Waddell says the old man must have known it was daylight when they left, as the house lights were turned off by Waddell at dawn…
Meehan talked to Waddell on several further occasions.
‘Waddell says that the names Pat and Jimmy were used during the attack…it is no wonder the police were convinced that Griffiths and I were responsible.’
So Nicky Fairbairn, Jo Beltrami and Paddy Meehan travelled to Edinburgh, and to the court where Oscar Slater had been wrongly convicted nearly fifty years before, all of them knowing that when the charge was read and Meehan formally pleaded Not Guilty, he was speaking no less than the truth.
They realized there would be difficulties in discrediting the evidence of Mr Ross's false identification of Meehan's voice and of that of the planted pieces of paper, but nonetheless remained optimistic.
What they had not bargained for was the prejudice of the trial judge, Lord Grant, who, as Nicky relates in his recently published  memoirs, made it plain from the outset that he believed, as the police believed, that Meehan was guilty.
Whenever an opportunity arose for him to spike evidence or arguments favourable to the defence, he did not hesitate to do so, even at one choleric moment telling Nicky not to be stupider than he was; and his summing-up was a summing-up for the prosecution.
Before it, the talk in the High Court corridors was that Meehan would be acquitted for lack of evidence, but it was a view that few held by the time it was finished.
Even so, six of the fifteen jurors resisted Lord Grant's prejudices by voting to acquit.
The story of how Meehan and his advisors tried and failed during the next seven years to obtain justice for him in the light of increasing evidence of his innocence and Waddell's guilt makes sorry reading.
Time and time again petitions, requests for a free pardon, Bills of Criminal Letters were lodged with the Lord Advocate or the Secretary of State for Scotland; time and time again they were rejected.
Early in 1971 Waddell was found guilty of committing perjury at Meehan's trial and in sentencing him to three years' imprisonment Lord Cameron suggested that had he told the truth there, the Meehan jury might well have arrived at a different verdict.
The next year Meehan wrote to Beltrami that he had heard on the prison grapevine that Waddell's accomplice at Ayr was a well-known Glasgow villain named William (‘Tank’) McGuinness, a vicious little man with a long record that included violence.
Later that year, when Beltrami was acting for McGuinness in another matter, McGuinness admitted his involvement at Ayr — information that Mr Beltrami was unable to divulge because of the confidentiality of the client-solicitor relationship.
In 1973 Waddell admitted to two BBC reporters that he had taken part in the Ayr murder, unaware that one of them was carrying a concealed tape-recorder; and a programme that included his confession was subsequently broadcast.
This, and other information, was laid before the Scottish Office.
In 1974 the Secretary of State, Mr Gordon Campbell, announced that after discussions with the Lord Advocate, he proposed to take no further action and a year later, after a change of government, his Labour successor Mr William Ross said he  wasn't going to act either.
It was then that with Nicky Fairbairn, Meehan's solicitors (including the latest, David Burnside) and an MP Frank McElhone, I formed the Patrick Meehan Committee, committed to campaigning on his behalf until justice was done.
Overjoyed by the decision of the Lord Advocate not to take action against him, and thinking himself now immune, Waddell confessed again, and in much greater detail.
Whether his object in doing this was because of guilt in relation to Meehan or a continued desire for notoriety is impossible to say.
But in a two-hour interview with reporters of the Scottish Daily Record he listed some fifteen details of the layout of the Ross bungalow and what was in it, information not mentioned at Meehan's trial or in the newspapers, and which he could only have known if he had been there, all of which Mr Ross confirmed (‘Colour of bedroom quilts was pink’, ‘A light tan suit was in the bedroom wardrobe’, ‘An alarm clock with black face and luminous hands stood in the hatchway to the kitchen’, etc.).
Not even this could persuade Mr Ronald King-Murray, the new Lord Advocate, to move; presumably because the thought of having to admit that Meehan'; wrongful conviction and five years of imprisonment (so far) were due partly to the blunders of his office was too Painful to contemplate.
In September 1974 Meehan brought a Bill of Criminal Letters against the detectives who, he claimed, had rigged the identification Parade.
Inevitably it was rejected.
During the next year I completed my book, and all our hearts rose when I received a request from Mr William Ross's office to see the manuscript.
They fell as quickly four months later.
‘The Secretary of State after discussions with the Lord Advocate, finds there are no grounds, etc., etc., etc.’
Early in 1976 my book was published under the title of A Presumption of Innocence and the reviews were unanimous in calling for action.
The distinguished former judge Lord Devlin sent an unsolicited letter that the case for Meehan's innocence I had put forward was very disturbing and needed to be answered.
In the Financial Times Lord Snow agreed with him.
Louis Blom-Cooper, QC in the Listener , Bernard Levin in the Observer , Leo Abse, MP in the Spectator all called for an immediate inquiry, while Julian Symons in the Sunday Times , C. H. Rolph in the Times Literary Supplement , Mervyn Jones in the New Statesman all declared categorically that Meehan was innocent and should be granted a free pardon under the Royal Prerogative of Mercy.
Always an optimist, I sent copies of these reviews to Mr William Ross and to Mr King-Murray.
I should have known better.
From the Secretary of State's office came a brief acknowledgement, from King-Murray's office nothing.
The longer they had delayed acting, the more difficult it had become for them to act.
To have released Meehan from seven years of wrongful imprisonment, recommended a free pardon for him, and then to have arrested and charged Waddell for the same crime would have required a greater degree of resolution than either of them possessed.
It seemed that so far as they were concerned Meehan, guilty or innocent, could stay in Peterhead for ever.
It was Rillington Place all over again.
And there, as they say, the matter rested, for there was now nothing further we could do; and Meehan might have had to serve many more years in prison had not a further and quite unexpected twist come to this most tangled of cases.
On 12 March that year William McGuinness was found dying of head injuries in a Glasgow street.
His death enabled Mr Beltrami to Apply to the Scottish Law Society for a waiver of the confidentiality he had observed in relation to McGuinness's admissions to the Ayr crime; and he enclosed a statement from Mrs McGuinness that her husband had also admitted the crime and Waddell's Participation in it, to her.
The waiver having been granted, the papers then went to the Crown Office.
Meehan should have been released immediately, but instead the authorities offered him parole, that is release on licence, which he properly and courageously rejected, knowing it could not be long before he was released unconditionally.
Three weeks later his long ordeal came to an end when the new Secretary of State for Scotland, Bruce Millan, announced to the House of Commons that he had decided to exercise the Royal Prerogative of Mercy, i.e. recommend to the Queen the granting of a free Pardon.
It would have been agreeable if Mr William Ross, who was also in the House, could have been generous enough to admit his own past errors and congratulate his successor on his decision.
But all he could manage was, ‘Was this the only action open to you?’
That afternoon Meehan was released from Peterhead and given an interim compensation payment of £2500 with a promise of more to come.
Now attention shifted away from Meehan and on to Waddell, then back in Barlinnie for stabbing a man with a knife and a  saw; and after six months of investigations by two senior police officers, he was arrested, brought to Edinburgh and charged with the murder of Mrs Ross.
The opening day of the trial was to be devoted to legal arguments and Mr Beltrami, Moira, Meehan and myself turned up at the Courts of Justice to hear them.
Although neither prosecution nor defence lodged any objection to our presence, the presiding judge, Lord Robertson, barred us from attending.
As we walked away to a coffee-shop in the Royal Mile, Meehan said, ‘That's the first court in my life I've been turned away from.’
It was, had we but realized it, an omen of things to come.
As Meehan's main defence at his trial had been an impeachment of Waddell, so Waddell's main defence was an impeachment of Meehan.
This meant that despite Meehan's pardon, the proceedings to some extent would be a retrial of Meehan as well as a trial of Waddell; and one of its more lunatic aspects was hearing Mr King-Murray as prosecuting counsel, who for two years had strenuously refused to entertain the notion of Meehan's innocence and Waddell's guilt, now deploying arguments to show that very thing (although unlike Griffith-Jones at Ward's trial, he did not seem to have his heart in it); and conversely to hear Waddell's counsel echoing the arguments of the prosecutor at Meehan's trial to demonstrate Meehan's guilt and Waddell's innocence.
Despite Mr King-Murray's diffident approach, the evidence against Waddell was devastating.
First Mrs Agnes McGuinness: ‘My husband went out on the Saturday and I didn't see him again until the Sunday morning.
He told me he had done a job at Ayr…he said that Ian Waddell was with him.’
Then Waddell's alibi, Donald Carmichael, who had said at Meehan's trial that Waddell had been staying with him on the night of the murder, now admitted this was a lie.
Several women friends of Waddell said that he had given them within days of the murder large sums of money; and a barman to whom Waddell had given £1000 for safe keeping said Waddell had told him he had won a packet on the horses.
And finally two Ayr police officers said that a shelved 1969 report showed they had picked up a man ‘of slight build and a Glasgow accent who said his name was McGuigan or McGuinness’ some 600 yards from the Ross bungalow in the early hours of the morning of the murder and dropped him at the bus station; and they now declared from photographs recently shown to them that the man was William McGuinness.
I do not think it had occurred to anybody in court at this time that Waddell's conviction would be anything but a foregone conclusion.
But they had not reckoned with Lord Robertson.
Lord Robertson is a large man with a Morningside accent and a florid face which in court he used continually to rub with his hand.
He is also a keen golfer and a past captain of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers at Muirfield, to whom he presented a photograph of himself wearing a wig.
But the most important thing about Lord Robertson was that in this particular case he was even more prejudiced than Lord Grant, although in the light of all that had recently occurred, with far less excuse.
It was evident, as the trial went on, that Lord Robertson had held for many years a belief amounting to an article of faith that Meehan and Griffiths had committed the Ayr murder, and that so paltry a matter as overwhelming evidence to show that they hadn't and that Waddell and McGuinness had, was in no way going to sway him.
The first indication of the direction his mind (or what passed for it) was moving had come at the beginning of the trial when he called in two other judges to help determine whether the free pardon that Meehan had been granted quashed his conviction.
This was a peculiar thing to do, because in 1963 in the House of Lords the Lord Chancellor had ruled that a free pardon wiped out a conviction and all its consequences, and the accused was to be regarded as having been acquitted.
Now the three Scottish judges ruled that they could not decide on the matter, a decision, as they must have realized, that was profoundly to affect the trial.
For had they ruled that a free pardon did quash a conviction, then Waddell's defence of impeachment, i.e. that Meehan and not he had committed the crime, would have collapsed; as it was it was greatly strengthened.
Lord Robertson gave a further hand to the defence when the time came for Mr Beltrami to give evidence.
Mr Beltrami would tell the jury that on several occasions during the past four years McGuinness had spoken to him in detail about his part in the Ayr murder; and as he has a commanding presence and deep, authoritative voice, his evidence would have gone far to confirm in the minds of the jury what they had already heard from Mrs McGuinness.
But Lord Robertson disallowed his evidence, firstly because of the confidentiality of the client-solicitor relationship (though Mr Beltrami had already been issued with a waiver for this from the Scottish Law Society), secondly because evidence  against McGuinness could not be competent as evidence against Waddell.
But at Meehan's trial this same argument — that evidence against Griffiths in the matter of the planted bits of paper should not be considered competent as evidence against Meehan — was rejected by Lord Grant (Lord Grant being as keen to see Meehan convicted as Robertson was to see Waddell acquitted).
One ruling at one trial, the opposite at another.
But it was when he came to his summing-up or, as they say in Scotland, charge to the jury, that Lord Robertson abandoned all attempts at judicial impartiality.
A fuller description of this can be found in the paperback edition of A Presumption of Innocence , so here I will confine myself to the main points.
He began by saying that seven years earlier Meehan had been found guilty by a jury ‘on evidence which was amply justified’, and then went on: ‘Some public support was whipped up over the years for reasons which were not entirely clear and for motives which might be imagined.’
I could hardly believe my ears.
What possible reasons and motives could the Patrick Meehan Committee, consisting of a Queen's Counsel, an MP, four solicitors and myself, have had other than a belief in Meehan's innocence and a wish therefore to clear his name?
Lord Robertson lacked the courage to tell us.
For a long time, he continued, the Crown authorities had paid no attention to ‘this clamour’ but then a decision had been taken to recommend a free pardon.
‘The reasons for this decision have not become apparent at this trial’(they had but he had chosen to ignore them) and he then attacked the Secretary of State for what he called ‘usurping the functions of the judiciary’, apparently ignorant that recommendations for free pardons have always been vested in the executive.
Turning to the evidence, he stressed those aspects of it which told against Meehan and in favour of Waddell.
He said there was no evidence of Waddell's fingerprints at Ayr, but didn't add the same was true of Meehan.
He explained away the list of things that Waddell had seen in the Ross's house as having been published at the trial or in the newspapers, which was not the case.
He said that all Waddell's confessions had been made ‘for drink or money’ but didn't add that the clandestine confession given to the two BBC reporters had been made for neither.
He suggested that Abraham Ross might have been mistaken in. thinking both burglars had Scottish accents.
He gave the jury a  list of Meehan's past convictions, knowing that he was prevented by the rules of evidence from telling them that Waddell was at that moment serving a sentence in Barlinnie for wounding or that he had served a previous sentence for perjury at Meehan's trial.
‘There is no legal justification whatever’, he thundered, ‘in saying that Meehan was wrongly convicted, and having heard all the evidence in this case, you might well have come to the clear conclusion that he was in fact rightly convicted.’
At some point during all this nonsense Meehan stormed out of the court, shouting that his free pardon wasn't worth the paper it was printed on.
I too had a strong urge to rise up and say, ‘My lord, this trial has been a farce, and you are the chief clown!’ but, I think wisely, refrained.
And I wasn't at all surprised when the jury took only an hour to find Waddell not guilty.
The rest of the story can be told quite briefly.
Instead of being handed the life sentence he so richly deserved, Waddell was released from Barlinnie the following year and gave yet another confession to the Ayr murder to the Evening News : ‘It was me all right.’
A few months later he was back in court charged with being in possession of a gun with intent to commit a robbery.
And a few years after that his sticky career came to an end when he and a friend called Gentle (who was anything but) murdered a woman called Josephine Chipperfield at her home in Easterhouse and wounded several of her family.
They went into hiding immediately after, but when they heard that a warrant had been issued for their arrest, Waddell told Gentle he was going to give himself up.
To prevent this Gentle strangled him, put his body in the bathroom for a day or two and then was spotted trying to bury it.
At his trial for acting with Waddell in the murder of Mrs Chipperfield, Gentle was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment.
Had Waddell's trial in Edinburgh not been the farce it was, had he been found guilty of the murder of Mrs Ross as he should have been and sentenced by Lord Robertson to life imprisonment, as he should have been, it would seem likely that Mrs Chipperfield would be alive today.
Has Lord Robertson ever had the death of Mrs Chipperfield on his conscience?
Somehow one doubts it.
The Meehan case had caused such lengthy controversy that in March 1977 Bruce Millan invited a Scottish judge, Lord Hunter, to chair an independent inquiry into it.
Its terms were so depressingly restrictive — it was not to consider the guilt or innocence of  Meehan or Waddell — that the Meehan Committee and Meehan himself debated whether to give evidence to it or not.
In the end, and because Lord Hunter was presented to us as a man of independent judgement, we decided to do so, and advised Meehan to do the same.
Until the report was published, the question of the balance of Meehan's compensation for seven years' wrongful imprisonment was to remain in abeyance.
In the end, and to add to the injustices he had already suffered, Meehan was obliged to wait five years, which was the time it took Lord Hunter to complete and publish his report.
It was an enormously thorough and comprehensive review of the case, running to four volumes and more than 1200 pages, yet it would have been better if it had been half the length and taken half the time.
In his preamble to the report Lord Hunter quoted Lord Denning's preamble to the Profumo affair report about the importance of justice to the individual and not condemning on suspicion, and he also promised to avoid what he called wild speculation.
Unfortunately by the time he reached his conclusions he had forgotten both these things.
Stated baldly, and cheerfully ignoring the Secretary of State s admonition not to impute guilt to either Meehan or Waddell, his conclusions were that while Waddell and McGuinness probably carried out what he called the initial assault, ‘it cannot be disproved that Meehan and Griffiths were not a follow-up team with the role of dealing with the safe or safes believed to be in the bungalow’.
Aside from the worthlessness of double negatives, aside from the fact that McGuinness was a far more accomplished safe-breaker than Meehan (he had earned his nickname Tank because it was said he could penetrate even one of those), and aside from the fact that in all the verbiage spilled out by Meehan, Waddell and McGuinness to lawyers, journalists and others for over thirteen years, none of them had so much as hinted at the idea of a quartet, there was not a scrap of worthwhile evidence to support it: it was speculation with a vengeance and extraordinary to find in a report by a judge of his standing.
But it was when I came to ask myself the reason for such a wild suggestion that I received a greater shock.
All British judges in my experience have a completely blind spot when confronted by evidence which indicates police corruption, and Lord Hunter was no exception.
(‘Reliance is rightly placed’, he wrote, ‘on the integrity and competence of police officers.’)
While this attitude  is understandable — for our whole system of criminal justice depends on mutual trust between those who administer the law and those who enforce it — it is nonetheless deplorable.
When Lord Hunter asked those officers who could have planted the incriminating pieces of paper in the pocket of Griffiths's overcoat (which he wasn't wearing that night) and all of them, as one would expect, denied it, he could then delude himself into believing that no planting had taken place.
So an alternative explanation had to be found, hence the idea of Meehan and Griffiths as a follow-up team.
Claiming that although in the end ‘their services had not been required’, he thought that nevertheless ‘they would have expected and received some share of the proceeds’ and it was presumably while Griffiths was being handed his share of the proceeds from Mr Ross's safe that bits of brown paper and bits of white paper could have found their way into his overcoat pocket.
Lord Hunter had been unable to free himself from the idea of Meehan as a participant any more than Sir Daniel Brabin had been able to free himself from the assumption of Timothy Evans's guilt; neither could bring himself to admit, perhaps for the sake of the reputation of their profession, that the miscarriage of justice had been total, that Meehan as much as Evans had played no part whatever in the crime with which he had been charged.
Fortunately Lord Hunter's Alice-in-Wonderland conclusions had no bearing on the question of compensation for Meehan, and after negotiations between Mr Beltrami and an assessor, he was awarded a total of £50,000.
For me personally there was an epilogue to the story which came about when we bought a house in Edinburgh a year or two later.
For twelve years I had greatly enjoyed being a guest of some of the members of the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers on their championship links of Muirfield on the coast of East Lothian, where once or twice as a boy I had played with my grandfather.
The members were a blend of middle-class Edinburgh professional people — lawyers, solicitors, doctors, accountants, etc. — and Anglo-Scottish gentry.
While not having the sea views of nearby Gullane or Kilspindie, the course was a great challenge to one's golf, and I found the lunches the best of any club-house in Britain.
Some time previously and after a wait of five years my name had been proposed and seconded for membership, but when my proposer heard that two members  were of a mind to blackball me in the ballot, he (without telling me) withdrew my candidature.
After a further six years' wait (during which my original proposer and seconder had died and their nominations had been taken up by two ex-captains), my name came up for election again, and this time, I was told, the opposition from members, particularly those in the legal profession who were friends of Lord Robertson, was fiercer.
I was asked if I wished my name to be withdrawn a second time but I declined, feeling it would be wrong to have to continue to rely on the goodwill and hospitality of friends in order to continue playing.
So I told my proposer to let my name stand, and said I would accept whatever the ballot box decided, but would not play there again if the vote went against me.
In the event there were a gratifying number of white balls but too many black ones to see me through (I was told later by a mole the names of some of those who had cast them, and I can't say I was surprised).
I was sad about this because I am a clubbable person by nature, and have never regarded a game of golf as anything but an occasion of pleasurable social exchange; but an end to Muirfield was the price I had to pay for the championing of Meehan's cause.
And not the only price.
For at about the same time I was approached by the secretary of Edinburgh's New Club which as a member of Brooks's Club in London I was entitled to use on a reciprocal basis, and which I did use for lunch perhaps a dozen times a year.
It was felt by some members, the secretary told me, that as I now had a residence in Edinburgh, I ought to become a fully paid-up member.
I can't say I was enamoured of the prospect of paying £150 entrance fee and about the same in annual subscription, but keen to do the right thing, I asked Robert Balfour, then Chairman of the Scottish Arts Council and Dawyck Haig to propose and second me.
I could have saved myself the trouble.
They do not have black balls at the New Club, but they have even more members in the legal profession than Muirfield; and word reached me that the election committee had received objections to my membership too strong to ignore.
On this occasion I was more relieved than sorry, yet couldn't help but smile at the ingenious way they had managed to ease me out.
Sadly, that was not even the last of the clubs to deny me membership.
A few years earlier a friend and fellow member of Brooks's, Cyril Salmon, a former Lord Justice of Appeal, had put my name down for election to the Seniors Golfing Society, an English-based club for golfers over the age of fifty-five who met from time to time at a variety of attractive courses.
Not now belonging to any Particular golf club, joining the Seniors was something I greatly looked forward to.
I thought it right to apprise Cyril of what had happened at Muirfield, but having corresponded with the Seniors secretary, he assured me I was on course for election.
All the more disappointing therefore to learn later that some Seniors members who had blackballed me for Muirfield had now put in an objection to my joining this club too.
As a result Cyril was informed that my application for membership would be turned down.
‘I am very sad,’ he wrote to me, ‘about the disgraceful way you have been treated by the Seniors, and because of it I have informed the captain I am resigning.’
I implored him not to, but he was adamant, thus following Rear Admiral Poland who had resigned from Muirfield in consequence of my being blackballed there (‘it makes no sense at all’, he wrote to the secretary, ‘that he can be accepted as a guest but blackballed as a member’): both were sacrifices for which I felt a personal responsibility and which caused me much distress.
Admiral Dönitz and the German navy
The reader who has survived so far may recall that during my wartime service in the Navy I had nursed a great curiosity about the enemy we rarely saw, and that I had promised myself that at some time in the future I would find out more about them, the ships they had fought in and the sort of people they were.
Thus began a series of documentary films and books about the conflict with the German Navy in the Second World War.
The first project was a film on Scapa Flow made with a director whose talent in obtaining striking images of light on water, cloud formation, or reeds bending in the wind I had greatly admired in his previous work.
I had wanted to return to Scapa for some time, to refresh my memories of that extraordinary and beautiful  place and of the strange life I had lived there for nearly three years.
The director, the crew and I stayed at Stromness on the Orkney mainland, in wartime too far to visit because of being at short notice for steam; and it was an odd feeling crossing over to Hoy in the ferry, then motoring in a taxi down its eastern side to the once familiar anchorage of Gutter Sound.
The oil storage tanks were still there, so was the big, now empty hall which had housed the ENSA concert parties, and a few pre-fabricated administration bungalows, some windowless and with doors creaking in the wind.
But the anchorage where the destroyer headquarters ship with its rear admiral's flag once lay, and where up to a dozen destroyers might be swinging with the tide at their buoys, was now empty water.
Looking at it and the bleak shore of Flotta beyond, the memories came flooding back: pink gins before Sunday lunch at twopence a throw; dressing up as Tartars and Eskimos and Bedouins for Tribal parties; cinema shows where the reels were laced up in the wrong order; darts competitions in the wardroom flat; early winter morning torpedo firings in the Flow, very dark and cold; walks to Longhope for fresh eggs, or fishing for sea-trout in the bay; piping the admiral as we passed the headquarters ship and eased our way down to Switha Gate bound for distant waters, the captain on the compass platform with cap at an angle, elbows on hips and gloved hands turned upwards, Spider beside him puffing smoke through a black holder and advising courses to steer; and then, as the ship adjusted herself to the roll and rhythm of the sea, a last flashing message from the signal station at Hoxa Head (now vandalized and abandoned), as it would be the first on our return, days or weeks later.
Those years had an intensity, a singularity and a sense of joy about them that I have not known before or since.
On Orkney's west coast cliffs we filmed the memorial to Lord Kitchener and the men of the Hampshire which had struck a mine near the shore in 1916 and gone down with all but a handful of survivors; in the Flow we spoke to divers still bringing up steel and copper from the Kaiser's sunken High Seas Fleet; and on the island of Lamb Holm on the eastern side we filmed a sequence of the little Catholic chapel, fashioned out of a Nissen hut by Italian prisoners-of-war who had built a causeway linking the islands after Prien's successful foray in U.47 against the Royal Oak .
Prien himself and most of his crew had been killed later in  the war, but we managed to track down and invite over from Germany his engineer officer on that famous trip.
He had had a long and tiring journey, flights from Frankfurt, Heathrow and Glasgow all having been delayed or cancelled.
When he finally arrived, a long, gangling slice of a man, and we commiserated with him on the waywardness of British Airways, he exploded with laughter, saying, ‘I tell you this, I got here quicker in U.47 !’
Over dinner he gave an enthralling account of the entire mission, their excitement at penetrating the Flow undetected, matched only by their relief at finding the way out, and of how on reaching home waters they had been cheered into Wilhelmshaven by the rest of the German fleet and flown to Berlin for a celebratory banquet with Hitler.
After dinner, it being light at that time until midnight, we took our friend into the hotel garden and, for possible use in the film, recorded him shouting German wheel and engine-room orders such as would have been used by Prien during the mission.
On my way into the hotel, one of the guests said to me, ‘What on earth was going on out there?’
But it was too difficult to explain.
I answered lamely, ‘Oh, just a game.’
I also made a documentary about the U-boat campaign which in two world wars had nearly brought us to our knees; and I have always regretted that after the last war, when we sank so many of them in deep water, we did not keep one as a trophy and bring it up the Thames into the heart of London: it would have been a perennial attraction for every schoolboy in the country.
As far as I know, there are only two still in existence: one, the U.505 , was captured by an American task force towards the end of the war, towed up the St Lawrence and through the Great Lakes to Chicago where a special cradle was built for it to cross the Lake Shore Drive and then set up in a little house of its own in the Museum of Science and Industry.
There it rests today with all its wartime equipment on display, and every year thousands of visitors come to see it and the twenty-minute film that was made of its capture.
The other U-boat, brought from Norway, rests on the sands of Kiel Roads, close to the gloomy German naval museum; and Chicago being rather far, we used it extensively in the making of our film.
Seeing the cramped, coffin-like quarters in which fifty men had to live, eat, sleep and fight, often in appalling weather for up to six weeks at a time and knowing how marginal were  their chances of survival, I couldn't help but admire the resolution that had kept them fighting, their morale undimmed, until the very end.
During the war I had felt the same about those they were attacking, the brave men of the Allied merchant fleets.
In Hamburg and elsewhere I talked to several former U-boat captains and instead of the brash abrasive characters I had expected, I found them on the whole to be men of sensibility and humour.
There was the gentle, bearded Hans Jenisch who told me of his hesitancy before giving the orders to fire torpedoes.
‘I wouldn't know if you could understand it, but it is a strange feeling for a sailor to sink a ship — for a split second you have the idea, should I or shouldn't I?
Then you do it.’
Peter Cremer gave a graphic account of being depth-charged, with the protective glass on the gauges shattering all round them and cables falling from the roof.
‘We have only emergency light and very little air and after two or three hours everybody gets very nervous.
Then the crew look at the commander to see if he is afraid or not afraid.
If I told you I was not afraid, it would be a lie.
But to give the impression I am not afraid, I tell jokey stories to calm them, though I don't feel jokey at all.’
Big, burly Ernest von Witzendorff sat at the foot of the conning-tower and laughed when he remembered how tough it had been in 1944 when Allied planes with radar covered the Atlantic.
‘They found us everywhere so we had to stay under water nearly twenty-three hours a day, and the air was so bad you had to lie down and sleep so you didn't use too much of it.’
And little, twinkly Claus Korth, captain of U.93 with a crew of forty-four, described poetically how he picked up the forty-nine survivors of a Bismarck supply ship, the Belchen , and brought his heavily overloaded boat back to France.
‘We have not bunks enough and we have only two toilets.
So the bunks get very warm all the day, more than a week, more than eight days, and also the seats of the toilets are all the time warm too.’
And then there was the greatest ace of them all, Otto Kretschmer, whose record of having sunk a quarter of a million tons of Allied shipping was never beaten, Kretschmer who had perfected the night tactics, taught him by Dönitz, of letting a convoy pass over him, surfacing between the lines, loosing off torpedoes at ships either side of him, then diving again to get clear.
Kretschmer's end had come in the spring of 1941 at almost the same time as his great rivals Schepke and Prien, when his  U.99 was sunk by a destroyer commanded by Captain Donald Macintyre, and he had spent the rest of the war as a prisoner.
Afterwards, rehabilitated in the German Navy, he had been an admiral in NATO's northern naval command.
Now he had a job in the dockyards at Emden where he lived with his wife.
We arrived at his house and knocked at the door.
A friendly but severe-looking woman answered it.
Before any of us had time to speak, she said, ‘You are from the BBC?’
We said we were.
‘You want Otto?’
We said we did.
‘Come in, come in,’ she said.
‘Welcome.’
We followed her to the foot of the stairs and she bawled up it, ‘Otto?
The BBC are here.
Come on down.
The BBC don't like to be kept waiting.’
She smiled.
‘Otto is sometimes slow.’
Presently a handsome, lean figure with greying hair came down the stairs.
‘This is Otto,’ said his wife, in case we had doubts.
He shook hands all round.
‘Now go in there,’ said his wife, pushing Otto and the rest of us into a front room.
‘I get coffee for everybody, yes?
How many?
Sieben ?
You are many people for Otto!’
She laughed.
‘Gut !’
Otto turned out to have measureless charm and the most courteous manner, and in slow, correct English told us of how he had perfected his tactics in Baltic exercises before the war, how he had put them into practice in the Atlantic, and how, on the night after his capture, he had played bridge in the day-cabin of Captain Macintyre with one of the ship's lieutenants and the captains of two merchant ships he had sunk, and then slept (for Captain Macintyre was in his sea-cabin) in Captain Macintyre's bunk.
After the war captor and captive became friends, and Otto showed us the Zeiss binoculars which Macintyre had taken off him as a trophy of war, but had recently handed back.
As we went away to the sounds of Mrs Otto's profuse good-byes, I reflected on the nature of the relationship between her and Otto, almost the opposite to what one might have expected: the gallant captain going off to sea where his authority was absolute and his orders brooked no delay, and returning to a wife whom he clearly adored but where the roles were reversed.
It was a syndrome I had observed in other service marriages, not least in that of my own parents, and I have sometimes thought what a good subject it might make for a novel or play.
(A week later the director and crew went to Captain Macintyre's house in the country to obtain his side of the story.
The door was opened by a woman wearing a tweed skirt and smoking a pipe.)
And finally we went to see Karl Dönitz, the admiral who throughout the war had epitomized the U-boat service and been its inspired leader, who in 1943 had relieved Admiral Raeder as Germany's naval commander-in-chief, and finally for a very brief period before arrest and ten years' imprisonment in Spandau had succeeded Hitler as Chancellor.
Unlike Raeder, who was a-political, he was and remained a fervent admirer of Hitler.
His crews adored him.
‘He was the greatest military leader I ever met,’ Otto Kretschmer had said, and Jenisch spoke of him as ‘the father of us all’.
At eighty-one now he had outlived his family except for his daughter and her children: his wife had died, so had his son-in-law, and both sons had been killed in the war.
He lived in the ground floor flat of a large ugly villa in Auhmühle, thirty miles south of Hamburg, convenient for naval reunions there and for walks in the adjacent forest.
A brass plate beside the door said ‘Eingang Dönitz’ and an arrow pointed the way.
We rang the bell which made musical chimes, and the admiral answered it.
It was strange to see in the flesh a man whose name and face had since 1939 been almost as familiar to me as those of Churchill or Hitler.
‘So!’ he said, ‘Dönitz!’, and shook hands with us all.
He had always been small but now seemed quite shrunken, though still erect in bearing and in neatly pressed charcoal-grey suit and shining shoes dapper in his dress; but there was no mistaking the ferret-like face, the money-box slit of a mouth and the blue, commanding eyes.
He helped the crew hang up their coats, said, ‘So!’ again, and led us into the living-room, a modest affair with a bookcase of mainly naval books, a desk with photographs of his dead family, a crucifix, and, on a separate table, a model of a U-boat.
Through our interpreter, Christine, he said, ‘I used to have many more mementoes from my naval career, but the British’— he seemed to speak not of us but of some distant tribe —‘looted them.’
as if to show that bygones were bygones, he produced a bottle of Sandeman's sherry from a cupboard and, though it was three in the afternoon, poured out glasses for all.
Christine said, ‘He says he's sorry about his deafness, it's because he's so old.’
To me, he said in a quavering voice, ‘When I was a young man, people lived to be fifty-five or sixty.
Later they lived to be sixty-five or seventy.’
He took my arm in a fatherly way and said, ‘I am eighty-one.
You will live to be ninety or a hundred.’
Christine said, ‘He's  using ‘Du'’ to address us, as though he's known us all a long time.’
Before leaving London I had sent him, as requested, two questions about the U-boat war which I wanted him to answer for the programme.
Seated at his desk, he opened a file, then said in English, ‘There is a figure I need which I do not have.
Five years ago I had it at my fingertips.
I must speak to Rohwer.’
I knew Rohwer was a German naval historian.
He picked up the telephone, spoke, and then said, ‘Rohwer is not there.’
He seemed hugely disappointed.
He muttered to Christine who said, ‘He's very sorry about not having the figure.
If he finds it, he will send it to you.’
Then he said to me in English, ‘I have written answers to the two questions you sent me,’ and opened the file.
I saw it contained fifteen or twenty pages, and thought, my God, this is like the interview I did with Adenauer twenty years ago all over again!
The director said ‘Action’, the sound recordist said ‘Running’, the assistant cameraman said ‘One forty-five take one’, and I put the first question — how did he think the war would have gone if he'd started it with the 300 U-boats he'd asked for in 1938?
Dönitz adjusted his glasses, took the first sheet of paper from the file, opened his mouth and bawled at the microphone as though it was the furthest sailor on the longest parade ground in the Third Reich.
Twice the director stopped him to urge restraint, but television was too new a trick for this old sea-dog and he rampaged on, regardless.
After ten minutes I heard the camera motor stop as the film ran out, but the director, knowing by now we couldn't use a foot of it, let the old boy run on until he had finished.
For the second question and answer we didn't even bother to load the camera, though as a matter of courtesy, we let him carry on bawling.
This took another eight minutes.
Then the two of us were filmed walking round the garden, and back at the BBC to cover these shots I narrated a commentary which was a distillation of what Dönitz had said.
Afterwards he gave me signed copies of two of his books, ‘Write your name clearly on this piece of paper.
So many people in Germany have names that are impossible to read.’
Before I left, he said, ‘I will endeavour to send the figure I mentioned.’
Whatever it was, he never did.
A year later I went back to Auhmühle to conduct an interview with the admiral for the Telegraph colour magazine.
He had aged  noticeably, his voice was higher-pitched and more quavery, but he was still alert mentally and willing to range over the whole of the naval war and his relationship with Hitler.
Before I left Britain one of the best-kept secrets of the war had at last been revealed — the breaking by the Bletchley Park mathematicians of the ciphers encoded by the German Enigma machine: this priceless intelligence had enabled us to sink all the Bismarck's supply ships, monitor the movements of Tirpitz so that attacks could be launched on her (see page 144) and destroy many U-boats at the height of the Battle of the Atlantic.
Captain Stephen Roskill, the official naval historian, had told me that Dönitz had informed him in 1959 that he had no reason to think that the German naval codes had been broken.
Armed with contrary information, I asked the admiral if he would accept my word for it.
He looked uneasy, shifted a little in his chair.
His answer, when it came, was vague: he had heard rumours, but knew nothing for certain; there had been talk of treachery.
I knew then that what I was telling him he was hearing for the first time.
Was he too old, I wondered, to console himself after I had gone, with the knowledge that without our penetration of Enigma, he might still have won the U-boat war?
I also made documentaries on the battleships Bismarck and Tirpitz , with both of which, as the reader may recall, I had had distant brushes, and the battlecruiser or fast battleship Scharnhorst which had sunk my father's Rawalpindi .
The Bismarck film was the most difficult because apart from newsreel sequences of her launching and on exercises in the Baltic, there was no historical material.
However, I was lucky in the quality of eye-witness contributors.
The actor Esmond Knight who was an RNVR officer in the new battleship Prince of Wales gave a dramatic account of the arrival of the Bismarck's salvo that had blinded him (though he continued to act after the war and performed in The Red Shoes with Moira).
On the German side I interviewed Baron von Mullenheim-Rechberg, the Bismarck's fourth gunnery officer and senior surviving officer, a former assistant naval attaché at the German Embassy in London without whose fluent and colloquial English it would have been impossible to give the film the necessary balance.
I also spoke to two other former German naval officers.
One was Herbert Wohlfarth, one-time captain of the U-boat U.556 .
In 1940 U.556 had been fitting out at Hamburg at the same quay  as the Bismarck and in return for borrowing Bismarck's band for her commissioning ceremony, Wohlfarth, who was a skilled cartoonist, prepared a document, charred at the edges to show its age, whereby U.556 would ‘adopt’Bismarck (as towns in Germany and England then were adopting warships) and protect her from harm in all the oceans, seas, lakes, ponds, puddles of the world.
Strangely this pledge was nearly fulfilled, for when the crippled Bismarck was making for the shelter of Brest, the U.556 , returning from patrol, came within torpedo firing range of the aircraft carrier Ark Royal , then hurrying north to intercept the German battleship.
But Wohlfarth had expended all his torpedoes and had to watch in anguish as the huge aircraft carrier, without a protective destroyer screen, slid past him.
It was late that evening that the torpedo from one of Ark Royal's Swordfish planes smashed Bismarck's rudder, thus ensuring her destruction by the British fleet.
The other officer was Gerhard Junack of the Bismarck's engineering staff, who helped dispel a myth which had gained some credence in the Royal Navy that it was British torpedoes and shells exclusively that had sent the allegedly unsinkable Bismarck to the bottom.
Junack told me that he personally had received orders from Commander Lehmann to scuttle the ship by placing explosive charges in the cooling water intakes and to open the seacocks, and that he and others had done this; and this was confirmed by an engine-room rating named Werner Lust who stayed on in England after his release as a prisoner-of-war.
My Tirpitz film also produced some outstanding contributors, among them two Norwegian resistance men and Rear Admiral Godfrey Place, VC.
I interviewed Place in a midget submarine in Portsmouth dockyard similar to the one in which he and two other men had travelled up the long fjord in northern Norway at the head of which Tirpitz lay, cut their way through the nets surrounding her and laid charges beneath her hull which, when they exploded an hour later and Place was a prisoner-of-war on board her, put the ship out of action for six months.
If I had found the cramped interior of the U-boat at Kiel oppressive, it was nothing to the claustrophobia I felt inside the midget submarine, and I marvelled again at the courage and calm that had enabled Place and his crew to live a daily life in such surroundings, far less undertake and brilliantly accomplish their mission.
But the interview about which I was most apprehensive came  in making the film on the Scharnhorst .
The fact that she had been the ship that had sunk the Rawalpindi and killed my father did not seem to me to be a valid reason for omitting her from the series, for apart from the utter impersonality of a modern sea battle, she was by far the most successful of all the major German surface ships as well as being the happiest.
This was due in large measure to the character of her captain, Kurt-Cesar Hoffmann, much admired by the naval high command, much loved by his officers and crew, a sailor of sunny temperament and ready wit.
All the same I felt a twinge of unease as he came to greet me in the bar of the Atlantic Hotel in Hamburg, an admiral now and much older, hobbling a little and holding a stick.
He put out a hand, and I took it.
‘I know you must be thinking very much of your father at this moment,’ he said.
Then he smiled and said, ‘And now I buy you a drink.’
I said, ‘No, the BBC will buy us both drinks,’ and after that it was fine.
There was a curious sequel to the Scharnhorst film.
Years later Moira and I were on board the Queen Elizabeth II as guest lecturers when she sailed from Hong Kong to Acapulco in Mexico as part of that year's world cruise.
Among the films I brought was that of the Scharnhorst and when its showing time was listed in the ship's paper, I was informed that one of the passengers, a Captain Danckwerts, had been the Scharnhorst's wartime assistant navigating officer.
With an interpreter we met for a drink and he told me that because his home was in East Germany he had been forbidden to travel abroad until quite recently when he became an old-age Pensioner; this voyage was his first taste of freedom.
That afternoon in the big, empty cinema, I gave him a private showing of the film, and there were many pictures of Danckwerts's shipmates of thirty years earlier, including an interview I had had with his immediate superior, Captain Helmuth Giessler, the ship's navigating officer, who told me of the secret preparations he had made for the midnight departure from Brest in February 1942 of the Scharnhorst, Gneisenau and Prinz Eugen on the eve of their audacious dash through the English Channel to Germany.
When the lights came up and I turned to ask his reactions, I found him sitting speechless, tears coursing down his cheeks.
‘When I introduce the film this evening you must say a few words too,’ I said, and he agreed.
If only he had!
Like Dönitz, he didn't know when to stop, and in the end I had to prod the interpreter to bring him to a close.
But it was  understandable, and I think the audience appreciated the gesture.
With so much archive material from the Bismarck and Tirpitz researches left over I was able to incorporate much of it in two successful books, Pursuit on the Bismarck , and Menace on the Tirpitz .
In the course of researching extra material for Pursuit in the Public Records Office I made one lucky and quite unexpected find.
In a memo (signature illegible) to the assistant chief of naval staff dated two months after the sinking of the Bismarck , the writer said that it had ‘unofficially’ come to his notice that an Ensign Smith of the U S Navy was in the Catalina aircraft that had resighted the Bismarck , then en route to Brest, two days after British naval forces had lost contact with her; and that an Ensign Rinehart was in another searching Catalina.
‘I am not quite sure,’ the writer said, ‘why these American officers were in the Catalinas’, and he went on to say that if they did play a valuable part in the operation, the Admiralty might care to recognize their services.
He added, in typically British fashion: ‘Perhaps ‘silver salvers'’ suitably inscribed would be a good way of doing this.’
Intrigued, I wrote to the US Navy Department and received in reply a copy of Ensign Smith's report on the operation.
This showed that he had not only been in the Catalina that had sighted the Bismarck but was actually piloting it and had taken avoiding action when the Bismarck opened fire.
Further inquiries revealed that in 1941 President Roosevelt had authorized the secondment of a score of US Navy Catalina pilots to the RAF to gain wartime experience with the pilots of Coastal Command.
But as America and Germany were still at peace, and the leasing of the pilots was a clear breach of the US Neutrality Act which Hitler, had he come to know of it, might have used as an excuse for sinking American ships, the news had to be kept strictly secret.
And it was.
When the British columnist Godfrey Winn travelled to Northern Ireland in June 1941 to interview the crew of Smith's Catalina and found that he had the scoop of a lifetime, he was not able to use it, and based his article instead on Smith's co-pilot, Flight-Lieutenant Briggs of the RAF.
In the summer of 1973 when Pursuit was on its way to the printers, the BBC sent me to Washington to cover the Senate Watergate hearings.
This meant staying in my room in the Georgetown Inn to watch the proceedings on the three networks during the day, and presenting a programme with extracts and interviews at night.
During a lull my thoughts turned to Ensign  Smith and the possibility that he might still be alive, and on an impulse I dialled the Navy Department.
‘Navy Department.’
‘You may think this an impossible request,’ I said, ‘but I'm trying to trace a man called Smith.
All I can tell you about him is that he was an ensign flying a Catalina aircraft in England thirty-two years ago.’
‘One moment, sir.’
Pause; sounds of an extension ringing.
‘Officers’ Locator.’
I repeated the story.
‘Does this Ensign Smith have any initials?’
‘L.B.’
‘One moment, sir.’
Another pause; this time a little longer, but not much.
‘Sir?,
‘Yes.’
‘Do you have a pen or pencil there?’
‘Yes.’
‘Take this down, please.
Captain L. B. Smith, 1709 West 39th Street, Kearney, Nebraska.’
‘Well, thank you very much.’
‘You're welcome, sir.
Have a nice day.’
In London, I thought, a request of that sort would not have produced an answer in under a week, if at all.
I dialled long distance, and within five minutes of my original call to the Navy Department, heard a voice in Kearney saying, ‘Smith speaking.’
So, with a day to spare after Watergate, I flew out to Kearney and over an eggs and hash brown breakfast at Captain Smith's, heard the story of his life and how he came to be piloting the Catalina that sighted the Bismarck .
He gave me a photograph of himself and two other ensigns at their base at Lough Erne in Northern Ireland and other information which I was able to use in my book.
Nothing seemed to have come of the silver salver idea, no doubt because of the continuing need for secrecy.
As we drove back to the airport Smith said that at the end of the war he had been executive officer at a naval air base in California, and that one of the officers there had been a certain Lieutenant Richard Milhous Nixon.
He remembered him as ‘a brown bagger’, that is a man who to save money brought a sandwich lunch in a brown bag rather than waste time and money eating  in the mess.
Smith called him ‘one of the most conscientious and hard-working officers I've ever met’.
Published in 1974,Pursuit was an instant success and was subsequently translated into thirteen foreign languages.
The Tirpitz book,Menace , also did well, and was illustrated with more than a hundred photographs and copies of relevant Ultra signals decrypted from the Enigma machines and now in the Public Records Office at Kew: to my surprise it has brought in more royalties from the Public Lending Right scheme than any other book I have written, including 10 Rillington Place.
Yet the most welcome consequence of the making of those documentaries and books was quite unexpected.
One who had given me invaluable help in tracking down German sources and participants was a sixty-year-old cultural attaché at the German Embassy by the name of Herbert Sulzbach.
He was a member of a well-known Jewish banking family in Frankfurt, and had the unique distinction of having served in the trenches in the Kaiser's uniform in the First World War and then, having sought shelter here from the Nazi persecutions of the 1930s, having served as a British officer in King George's uniform in the Second.
Posted to a large prisoner-of-war camp in Northumberland, his job was to de-Nazify the most fanatical of Hitler's supporters.
He was a dear, lively little man with the bluest of blue eyes who had himself became a fanatical Anglophile, devoting his life until well into his eighties to the furtherance of Anglo-German relations; and I was proud to be asked to give one of the brief tributes to him at his memorial service at the German Embassy.
Herbert told me that his government, saddened by so many post-war feature films in which heroic Allies and horrid Nazis went on refighting old battles (to me no more than the modern equivalent of cowboys and Indians) was much impressed by the non-partisan nature of my films and books, and intended to give public expression of their approval.
Some time later I was informed that I had been awarded the Verdienstkreuz or West German Order of Merit, First Class, which their ambassador pinned on me in a charming family ceremony at the Embassy in Grosvenor Square.
The cross itself, red in colour, is similar in shape to the Iron Cross given to U-boat commanders and is worn, as they wore it, on the left breast.
Most people who notice it at parties are too polite to ask what it is and why I am wearing  it, but to the few who do I say (because I find it embarrassing to explain) that it is concerned with the story of the sinking of the Bismarck ; and then relish the look of puzzlement on their faces.
I have mentioned Captain Stephen Roskill, the official naval historian and the most charming of scholars, who was of great assistance to me in researches for my naval documentaries and books.
A Sephardic Jew, he was a tall, spare man of high moral principles and the most courteous manners and an odd habit when listening of purring like a cat.
I valued his judgement highly, and look back with pleasure to the several visits I made to him-and his equally delightful wife Elizabeth at their cottage in Cambridge where he was a fellow of Churchill College.
When engaged in writing the naval history of the war, he had of course accumulated more material, both British and German, than he was ever able to use; and one day over coffee at Cambridge I asked if he knew of any naval occasion of the Second World War which had not yet been told and which, in his view, ought to be.
He thought for a moment.
‘There's one.’
‘What is it about?
‘A submarine atrocity.’
I knew that on the whole the U-boat commanders had fought the submarine war cleanly, the only major exception being the murders committed by the U.852 and her captain, Lieutenant-Commander Eck.
In March 1944 the U.852 was on patrol off the west coast of Africa: she was the fifth U-boat to have been given this area of patrol, the previous four, commanded by aces such as Wuppisch and Schultz, having all been sunk by aircraft.
On the night of 13 March the U.852 sank a steamer called the Peleus and then cruised round the area shining a searchlight on wreckage and survivors while the ship's first lieutenant, doctor and engineer officer with two ratings picked up guns and grenades and by indiscriminate firing endeavoured to destroy all traces of the sinking before the patrolling aircraft arrived in the morning.
They were not entirely successful.
Twenty-five days later three survivors, all wounded, were picked up from a raft and taken to Capetown.
The U-boat, having itself rounded the Cape, ran aground on the coast of Kenya and the crew were taken prisoner.
They did not have time to destroy the ship's logbook and this, combined with the testimony of the survivors, was evidence enough for Eck and those of the crew who had carried out the  shooting to be arrested and tried by court-martial.
This took Place in Hamburg in October 1945.
Eck's defence was that of ‘operational necessity’, i.e. that if he did not destroy all traces of the sinking, his boat would be in grave danger of itself being sunk by Allied aircraft in the morning, as had happened to his four predecessors.
But this was nonsense.
The Peleus had been sunk at 7.30 p.m.; Eck therefore had a whole night's steaming to put himself a hundred miles from the sinking before submerging at dawn.
And one of the most experienced U-boat commanders, Adalbert Schnee, who had been on sixteen patrols and later became a member of Dönitz's staff, gave evidence that it was contrary to orders to kill survivors and that there could be no excuse for what Eck had done.
As a result Eck, the doctor and the engineer were found guilty, sentenced to death and executed by firing squad on Luneberg Heath.
Intrigued by the story, I had approached the late Mr Justice Melford Stevenson who, as Deputy Judge Advocate, had conducted Eck's trial.
Over some excellent claret at the judge's lodgings in St Albans, he said, ‘What I remember most about the trial — and I hadn't expected it — was the character of Eck.
He impressed all of us.
He had courage, dignity and class, which was more than could be said of some of his judges.
The trouble was, he'd lost his head.’
‘Was yours another Eck?’
I asked Stephen Roskill.
‘It wasn't one of theirs.
It was one of ours.
And it was disgraceful.’
He told me the story.
A British submarine on patrol off Crete had come across several Greek caiques or schooners of around 100 tons and known to be carrying German troops, petrol and ammunition.
The captain of the submarine surfaced and took his craft alongside one of the schooners.
There was a brief battle in which two German soldiers were shot and the remainder, seven men from an Alpine regiment, were forced to get into a rubber dinghy while demolition charges were laid and lit.
As the sub-manne pulled away, the captain ordered one of two soldiers he was carrying on board to open fire with his Lewis gun on the survivors in the dinghy.
The soldier refused and went below.
The first lieutenant also refused and also went below.
The order was then carried out by a seaman, and an seven survivors were killed.
It was, said Stephen, as appalling an atrocity as you could find.
When Stephen told me the name of the submarine captain, I recognized it.
He was a much-decorated officer who had risen to high rank before an honourable retirement.
His courage and  exploits were legendary, and his crews were said to have unbounded faith in him.
‘Whatever scrapes he'd get you into,’ one of them had once said, ‘you always knew he'd get you out.’
I made a few inquiries.
First, at the Public Records Office, I inspected the submarine captain's report of proceedings of the Patrol in question.
It seemed that there were two incidents, and he had made no attempt to gloss over either.
The first, which Stephen had not mentioned, concerned a small ship flying the Nazi flag.
‘Surfaced and sank the enemy with gunfire,using both Lewis guns to destroy the boats and personnel.’
The second, concerning the Alpine soldiers, took place five days later: ‘Submarine cast off and with the Lewis gun accounted for the soldiers in the rubber raft ’[my italics].
I also tracked down the first lieutenant of the submarine and one of the two soldiers carried on board and they confirmed the killings.
Other papers in the Public Records Office showed the misgivings of the naval staff about the two incidents, for by now the Germans had found the dead soldiers, and there were fears of reprisals against any British submarine crews subsequently captured — indeed it may be that these events had some bearing on the subsequent shootings of British commandos captured in that area.
Then I wrote to the captain himself.
Would he care to have lunch with me to discuss certain aspects of the naval war?
He replied guardedly, what aspects?
I came clean: the incidents of the survivors of two schooners sunk by his submarine near Crete in 1941.
‘Is your view about them today the same as it was then or do you now feel you might have acted differently?’
I received a dusty answer.
His work for various public bodies left him little spare time.
‘I would really not find research into events that took place some thirty-five years ago any relaxation whatever.’
I replied that I was sorry to hear it but that I might return to him later, and enclosed a copy of Pursuit .
This time a secretary answered, saying that as her employer ‘has a large backlog of books to read, he found the addition of another one rather an embarrassment…he has passed it to a friend in a London hospital.’
For a long time I had it in mind to write a story contrasting the fates of Eck and his British counterpart.
There had been little enough to choose between the two killings, yet all the difference in the world between the fates of those responsible: the one retired with honours, the other shot by firing squad at the age of twenty-eight.
In the end I decided against it.
The courage the  British captain had shown on numerous dangerous patrols into enemy waters and the havoc he had wrought against shipping there was something I could never match in a hundred years.
What right had I to tarnish the reputation of an acknowledged war hero and needlessly distress his family?
Time enough to think about resuscitating the idea after he was dead.
Today he has been dead for several years, and still I haven't told the story.
And I don't know which has nagged at me most, the lack of courage shown by this brave man in fending me off and declining to discuss what he had done, or my lack of courage in declining to write about it.
Maybe I will write about it one day.
Maybe not.
Cardinal Hume, Albert Speer and the Queen Mother
For most of the 1970s while living in the Borders I was commuting to London by air for three nights a week to present late-night current affairs programmes —24 Hours, Midweek, Tonight, Newsday .
Of the thousand-plus programmes I must have taken part in during those years I remember very little, and those mostly trivial things: Thor Heyerdahl the Norwegian explorer arriving half an hour late from Broadcasting House because the taxi driver sent to fetch him understood he had been told to pick up four airedales (a reasonable enough request, he reckoned, from the BBC); the maverick film director Ken Russell whacking Alexander Walker, the Evening Standard film critic, over the head with a copy of his own paper; Norman St John Stevas, MP (now Lord St John of Fawsley) winking at a cameraman who had had the stars and stripes sewn on to the bottom of his jeans; Enoch Powell's eyes filling with tears when I asked if he was an emotional man; A. J. P. Taylor on his seventy-fifth birthday admitting he had never been offered an honour and when I asked him which he would like if given the choice, his replying, ‘A baronetcy, because it would make my elder son so dreadfully annoyed.’
But there were some characters who, for one reason or another, I have cause to remember.
The novelist Rebecca West, for instance.
We were due to record a longish interview with her one afternoon, and over lunch at her favourite restaurant in Basil Street my producer Anthony Rouse and I both asked if there was any subject in her long life that she did not want touched upon.
She said none: ‘Ask what you like.’
This clearance was important because I did intend to ask one or two questions about a matter which had already been aired in several books and articles, her love affair with H. G. Wells and the child of that union, the writer Anthony West.
There had been conflicting stories as to whether Anthony had been intended, Wells having gone on record as saying he had been conceived in a moment of carelessness, professor Gordon Ray, who edited the West-Wells correspondence, as saying it was a deliberate attempt by Wells to keep Rebecca with him, and Rebecca herself as saying, ‘Wells cheated me of all but one child.’
Was the child intended?
I asked, and she answered firmly, ‘The child was not intended.’
A day or two later Anthony Rouse and I were astonished to hear that her agents were demanding the interview be withdrawn because, as she complained in a letter to the BBC's Director General, Hugh Carleton-Greene,we had given her a solemn undertaking over lunch not to mention the matter of Wells and their son at all .
I suppose she thought that Greene would not ask us to confirm what she had said, but chide us for impropriety on the strength of her word alone.
Whatever her reasoning, I was greatly shocked that a woman of her achievements and reputation should stoop to such shabby fibbing.
A good example of how upset people could be in those days by the questioning of their religious beliefs occurred in my interview with Basil Hume soon after he had received his cardinal's hat.
Before the interview we talked over coffee in his study next door to Westminster Cathedral.
A long, lean man with an ascetic face, he looked the celibate monk he had always been, but in private conversation he was unpompous, outgoing, witty.
When he told me that he had inherited the cardinal's robes of his predecessor, Cardinal Heenan, and I asked if they fitted, he said, ‘No.
But I have a gem of a nun who's a wizard with a needle, and after she'd taken a tuck in the waist and put two inches on the hem, they looked almost tailor-made.’
He also spoke of an occasion when, dressed  in his archbishop's robes after some function, he had hailed a taxi to go home and realized he had no money.
‘I thought, if I tell the driver I'm a real archbishop and I'll pay him the other end he'll just say, ‘Oh, stuff it, mate!'’
Luckily Reggie Bosanquet was standing nearby, so I borrowed a quid off him.’
When it came to the interview he was somewhat nervous and on the defensive (not being an old hand at it), and while I did my best to make him feel at ease, I felt it incumbent to put questions about the Roman Catholic Church's teachings on divorce, homosexuality, abortion, celibacy, etc., the answers to which I believed would be of interest to Catholics and non-Catholics alike.
Being an honest man, he tried to answer honestly,; and there were times when he clearly found it difficult to reconcile the absolutism of his Church's dogma with the dictate of his own conscience.
Noting and regretting his discomfiture, the public subsequently turned on the questioner.
‘By his assurance, condescension, ease of posture and conversational initiative,’ said a Times editorial, ‘Mr Kennedy might just as well have been a bishop testing a candidate for ordination.’
Those looking for a sign of grace or spiritual solace from the Cardinal had to make do with what The Times called ‘exemplary patience and meekness’ and writers to the letters column taxed me with shallowness and poor taste.
But I had my supporters.
Claiming that millions of people had had their lives damaged by the teachings of Roman Catholicism, one correspondent wrote, ‘There should be no restraint in asking the most searching questions of a man…who aspires to bring people and their children into the Catholic fold.’
As with the comments of Heald, Shawcross and others after my documentary on the police, I do not believe that such an interview would attract that sort of attention today.
But then today that kind of interview rarely happens.
I also interviewed two healers.
One was the famous Harry Edwards whom I visited with Anthony Rouse at his home and healing centre in Surrey.
After the interview I mentioned as casually as I could that as a result of blocked sinuses I had lost my sense of smell (with the exceptions of petrol, laundry and excrement) for years, and could he think of any way of restoring it?
He leaned towards me, put the middle finger of each hand on either side of my nose and with a look of intense concentration rubbed each one gently up and down.
Within a few minutes I not only felt but heard the tissue in the sinuses beginning to break  up, and by the time he had finished both were completely clear.
They remained clear, and my sense of smell returned, for two years.
Bruce Macmanaway's achievements were even more remarkable.
I had known Bruce for some years as he often ministered to friends, and on two or three occasions when he had laid his hands on my back, the heat emanating from them was like a blowtorch.
He had discovered his gift for healing quite by chance.
Attending on the battlefield to a wounded soldier who was crying out with pain, he took the soldier's hand in his.
At once the soldier stopped crying, the pain having disappeared; but as soon as Bruce removed his hand, it returned.
Bruce had a simple pendulum of the kind people employ to locate water, and which he used for diagnosis.
To show how it worked, he ran it lightly around my producer while we were discussing the shape of the interview.
When he reached his right thigh, the pendulum became quite agitated.
‘Something not quite right there,’ said Bruce.
The producer looked stunned.
‘I had an operation there last month,’ he said.
Bruce said, ‘I can use the pendulum to do more than that.
If you were to write down on a sheet of paper half a dozen simple statements of fact which were either true or false and then turn the questions face down, the pendulum will come up with which are which.’
I made no comment on this at the time (though privately I thought it a brash boast) but when we met for the interview I asked if he had brought the pendulum with him.
He said he had.
Half-way through the interview I reminded him of his claim, pulled out a sheet of paper on which I had written three true statements and three false ones, and putting it face down on the table, invited him to use the pendulum to indicate the correct answers.
He got the first one right, the second one right, the third one right, the fourth one right, the fifth one wrong, the sixth one right.
I thought it was a tour de force,but he seemed far more concerned about getting one wrong (‘It could have been the studio lights’) than pleased at getting five right.
At this time still a regular smoker, I made one film which made me drastically change my views about it.
This was a documentary on cancer research.
One distressing sequence we filmed in the laboratories portrayed mice with their little noses pushed into holes in a plastic tube along which was passed tobacco smoke equivalent to that inhaled by a human on twenty cigarettes a  day.
I forget now what the simulated time factor was — I think twenty years — but the upshot was that three-quarters of the mice developed lung cancer and died.
More disturbing was this statistic: that while seven out of eight of those who died of lung cancer were heavy smokers, only one heavy smoker in eight died of lung cancer.
This may have brought comfort to some but statistically it was as risky as playing Russian roulette, and I laid off smoking for the next seven years.
One film which, sadly, was never made was a documentary proposed by Alasdair Milne, then Controller of BBC Scotland, to celebrate the seventy-fifth birthday of the Queen Mother.
She had not yet been interviewed on television or radio, but we thought it worthwhile approaching her private secretary to see if she might consider it.
As a result I was bidden to Clarence House for a pre-lunch gin and tonic with her and Princess Margaret.
She asked what I had in mind, and I said an informal conversation about the principal events of her life from her girlhood at Glamis Castle to the present day.
She seemed to consider the proposal favourably and Princess Margaret, who I knew was keen on the idea, was supportive.
Then the Queen Mother said, ‘I'm sure you'll understand there is one subject I couldn't possibly talk about.’
I was pretty certain what it was, but I wanted to hear her say it.
‘The abdication.’
‘Not at all, not even briefly?’
I said.
She was adamant.
‘I'm afraid not.’
She gave me a winning smile.
‘I'm so sorry.’
For the next week I thought long and hard about undertaking an interview with the Queen Mother which would cover every aspect of her life but the great historical event which had changed it for ever; which had propelled her and her husband to the throne, had made happy and glorious a reign which might otherwise have been disastrous, yet which was tragically cut short by illness and death, and which in the long run had made her far and away the most loved of all the members of the Royal Family.
I was not proposing to ask her about her relationship, or lack of it, with Edward VIII and Mrs Simpson, or to what degree she blamed them for the unexpected and, at the time, unwelcome change in her life.
But not to have mentioned the subject at all, to leave a void which demanded to be filled — that, it seemed to me, would have been Hamlet without the prince (or, more accurately, Queen Mother).
And so, with regrets, the project lapsed.
Ten years later however the BBC asked me at very short  notice to compile a programme to celebrate the Queen Mother's eighty-fifth birthday.
This was really no more than a collage of bits and pieces of archive film, intercut with brief interviews, for which I wrote and narrated a restrained but admiring commentary.
I had no idea of course how she had received it, and was therefore pleased to receive a letter a week later from her private secretary, Sir Martin Gilliat.
‘Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother has asked me to tell you how appreciative she is of your splendid BBC TV programme last Friday evening…knows what trouble you went to in the very limited time at your disposal…your wonderfully successful endeavour clear for all to see’, etc., etc.
Reading this, I could have been forgiven for conjuring up a picture of the Queen Mother settling down comfortably by a television set at Sandringham, perhaps a daughter at her side, a corgi at feet and refreshment to hand, basking in the glow of my birthday tribute to her, and making a mental note to instruct the Private secretary in the morning to send a line of thanks to those concerned.
But later, finding myself sharing a sofa with her at a friend's dinner-party, I mentioned the film and that I understood she had approved of it.
‘I'm afraid,’ she said with admirable honesty, ‘I missed it.
It was so disappointing, but we had to go to something in King's Lynn.’
Walking back to the club that night and recalling old Martin's letter, I began to understand some of the qualities that make a successful courtier.
I also made a number of foreign trips.
One was to Germany to film a documentary on the wretched William Joyce, nicknamed Lord Haw-Haw, whose wartime broadcasts from Berlin had led to his trial and execution for treason after the war.
En route to the exquisite fin de siècle Baden-Baden, my producer Chris Olgiati and I stopped our car on a main road short of a T-junction to read the signposts and study the map.
Sitting in the car we heard a distant rumbling sound which slowly grew louder.
We took our eyes off the map to look at each other, at first in surprise and then, as the rumbling grew to a roar, in terror.
When it seemed that the sound and whatever it emanated from was about to overwhelm us, the engine and coaches of an express train appeared in the left-hand window and whizzed past a few feet from the front bumper.
There was no level-crossing gate and we had not seen the rails, which were sunk deep into the tarmac, nor a red light winking on top of a very high pole.
We sat shaking for some minutes before regaining sufficient composure to drive on.
In Tel Aviv I interviewed the Israeli prime Minister, Golda Meir, and in Amman King Hussein of Jordan, one of Harrow's most distinguished sons.
The interview took place on a Friday afternoon in the Royal Palace and was as bad as any I can remember: the king was bad, I was bad, the room was gloomy, nothing went right.
That night over a pretentious dinner (‘delicate strips of milk-fed veal on a bed of herbs and accompanied by a tangy aromatic sauce specially prepared by our chefs’) in a pretentious modern hotel and fortified by a bottle of local plonk, my Producer John Reynolds and I resolved to telephone the Palace Chamberlain in the morning, say that owing to a technical fault the film was not usable, and did the king have a spare hour in which we might shoot the interview again?
Not only did the king have a spare hour for what turned out to be an excellent interview in the palace gardens, but on learning that there was now no plane to take us home until Monday, laid on two helicopters to take us all on a Sunday outing to Petra (the ‘rose red city half as old as time’), then on to Aqaba on the Red Sea for lunch and a swim, and home across the desert and the black tents of the Bedouins in the evening.
It was an extraordinarily considerate gesture.
I returned to Germany, to Heidelberg, to interview Albert Speer, Hitler's architect and later brilliant organizer of the German wartime industrial economy, on the occasion of the publication of his book Spandau: The Secret Diaries .
Written on Pieces of lavatory paper and smuggled out weekly by one of the guards, this was a fascinating account of the prison lives and conversations of those Nazi leaders — Hess, von Schirach, Funk, von Neurath, Raeder, Dönitz — who, like Speer, had escaped the war crimes gallows.
How greatly had the mighty fallen: ‘Monday is washday.
Dönitz and Schirach wash our socks, Hess and I do underclothes and bedding.’
Speer had served every day of his twenty-year sentence — from the age of forty to sixty — and seemed to have emerged unscathed.
Unlike Dönitz, he was a highly cultivated man who had much charm, spoke fluent, conversational English and was quite at home with the microphone.
One of the difficulties in taxing Speer about his Nazi past was that he, alone among his colleagues, freely admitted and was repentant for his share of guilt — though how much this was assumed and how much genuine it was hard to tell.
His wife lunched with us, and I was much struck by her character.
Although allowed to visit her husband only rarely during his twenty years in Spandau, she and her six children had never ceased to support him, and I was not surprised to hear that during their father's absence all six had obtained university degrees.
At Frankfurt Airport I found I had just missed one plane to London and there was not another for three hours.
Wandering round this huge complex, I came to a kind of crossroads where signs pointing in four directions said things like ‘Chaplain's Office’, ‘VIP Lounge’, ‘Flight Information’.
One also said, to my amazement, ‘porno Film’, and having time to kill I made my way there.
There was a bar at the entrance where one paid a few marks for a drink, and behind a curtain an auditorium of perhaps twenty or thirty comfortable seats.
The film in progress when I arrived showed a football match between a team of nuns and a team of soldiers, and every time the referee blew his whistle for a penalty (which was every few seconds) the player concerned had to lose a garment.
Before long football had given way to a different sport, and a surreal Bosch-like survey of the entire field showed all kinds of what my mother called hanky-panky in full swing.
Later, both teams adjourned to the changing rooms to continue their frolics, and there were close-ups in technicolour of all sorts of couplings and triplings.
This was followed by a film of a mediaeval banquet at which the guests, after much lusty eating and drinking, undressed one another at a leisurely pace, then climbed on to the refectory table for a general post, to the accompaniment on the sound track of much wheezing and grunting.
A third film, embellished with live dialogue, showed one couple making friends with another at a restaurant, returning to an apartment and there engaging in a quartet.
I had seen only one other porno film before, a miserable five-minute affair in grainy black and white in Tangiers, and what surprised me about two of the three films was the quality of the finished product.
The women were young and not unattractive, the sets handsome, the costumes (what little we saw of them) pleasing, the camerawork professional and the dialogue or sub-titles not without humour.
All this made me wonder what class of people were involved in the production.
Did the camera and sound and lighting technicians peck their wives on the cheek each morning before dropping the children at school, spend the day recording erections and ejaculations, then return to family  supper and games with the children?
Did the wives say, ‘Had a good day, dear?’ and did the husbands reply, ‘Not bad except that poor Fred couldn't get it up at all.
Said he thought it was something he ate.
And Daphne had to lay off because of her period.
Better luck tomorrow.’
Were the technicians indifferent to what they were recording or did they sometimes become aroused too, and if so, were there rules against them joining in?
And how did the performers feel about performing in semi-public and for posterity?
What sort of relationships did they all have outside performing hours?
What did they talk about at lunch?
When dressed, did they observe the normal courtesies?
Was anybody ever inhibited?
Was no one ever embarrassed ?
Another thing that struck me was the difference in sexual attitudes between Germany and Britain.
I had already observed it in hotel saunas and swimming-pools in Germany, where men and women sat and swam together in the nude and thought nothing of it.
If that was unacceptable in Britain, how much more so would be a proposal to set up a porno cinema at Heathrow or Gatwick?
One could hear the cries of outrage from the likes of Mrs Whitehouse and Mrs Thatcher.
And yet had it ever been suggested that Germany (or France, or any other country which had a more open public attitude to sex) was somehow less moral than us?
Was not the German or French family unit as strong as that of the British?
It was the same with brothels.
In some countries they consider the regulation of prostitution to be pleasanter for the girls, more agreeable for their customers and, with medical checks, safer for public health.
But in Britain we equate acknowledging man's need for instant sex with approving of it, and rather than have that levelled at us, we reject the idea of licensed brothels.
We prefer that prostitutes should stand in the streets to be picked up by passing cars (not the roomiest place for sex), in constant danger of being beaten up and even murdered, and that valuable police and court time be wasted in arresting, convicting and imposing heavy fines on girls who, unable to pay, return to soliciting even harder, that pimps should come into being to batten off the girls, and that women who are not prostitutes should be harassed by cruising motorists who will not take no for an answer.
It is British hypocrisy at its very worst.
At this time, and like most public or semi-public figures, I was receiving a fair amount of mail from strangers.
Most letters asked  for autographs or photographs, some complained of or praised a person interviewed or view expressed, and there was always a sprinkling of old dears short of correspondents who rambled on about the old days.
I destroyed most after answering them, but three I do remember.
One began, chillingly, ‘Did I ever tell you about the day we found the nurse's body in the cellar?’
What a multitude of questions that begged.
What nurse?
How had she got there?
Were the police informed?
And why Did I ever tell you , as though I were an old friend?
The second was a gem:
Dear Mr Kennedy, Please could you give me some information on being an INTELLECTUAL.
I'm nearly twelve and my mind is messy with 0 level results and general problems.
I think I'm an unknown interlectual…
Please, please, send me some information.
The third, from a young man in Birmingham, was altogether more disturbing.
I seem to have lost it now, but it ran something like this:
Dear Father, It is a great pleasure to write to my father as my mother has often told me about him, and I hope to be allowed to get to know him better…
At first I thought this must have been intended for someone else and began grubbing about in the wastepaper basket to find the envelope.
No, there it was, as large as life in capital letters: To MR LUDOVIC KENNEDY, BBC TELEVISION STUDIOS.
Cripes, I thought, and although as certain as I could be that the lad was not mine, who can be totally positive about any putative event of twenty years earlier?
The first thing to discover was the date of his birth.
This took a little time during which I pondered uneasily on the possibility, however remote, of having to recognize the existence of additional progeny, and all that it would entail.
Given the date, it was then a question of working backwards and consulting an old diary; and I found that during the period in question I was in India for Panorama .
But if I was going to have to disillusion the boy, I thought it kinder to do it personally than by letter, and I invited him to come to the studios to see the programme and have a drink.
He was a very nice young man and did bear some small resemblance  to me which I supposed was why his mother, perhaps not knowing who his father was, or knowing but having been abandoned by him, had woven this fantasy about a familiar figure from the television screen.
I hoped, as we said goodbye, that he would suffer no psychological ill-effects from the deception, and that my exposure of it would not impair his relationship with his mother.
Another unexpected and disturbing event, though of quite a different order, occurred one evening in 1973 when I was preparing the late night showing of 24 Hours .
Peter Pagnamenta, the editor, came into my room to say there was a message for me to ring the Hawick police: there had been an accident involving my family but he did not know the details.
The Hawick policeman told me it was a very serious accident in which Moira, Rachel, Fiona and Alastair had all been involved: they had been taken to different hospitals but he did not know the extent of their injuries or any other details.
Peter arranged a taxi to Victoria for me to catch a train to Gatwick and the last flight to Edinburgh.
Halfway between Victoria and Gatwick there was a power failure, the lights went out and the train ground to a halt.
I was alone in the darkness in one of those old-fashioned six seater compartments, and I neither knew nor had any means of knowing whether my family was alive or dead.
I felt as if I was in limbo.
After a few minutes I unexpectedly found myself singing a song which I was sure I had not sung since Eton days forty years before.
I sang it very loudly and (as always) very out of tune.
Abide with me, fast falls the eventide,
The darkness deepens, Lord with me abide.
When other helpers fail and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O, abide with me.
Hold thou thy Cross before my closing eyes.
Shine through the storm and point me to the skies.
Heaven's morning breaks and earth's vain shadows flee,
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.
To my astonishment the words came flooding back, and for some ten minutes, while the train lay cocooned in a web of silence and darkness, I continued my singing, grateful that I had the compartment to myself.
I cannot describe the solace it gave me.
Later, I asked myself whether in my extremity I, the helpless, had been seeking, as the hymn said, the help of God, and that in the act of seeking it, I had been granted it (he who seeks God, said Pascal, has already found him); or whether this spontaneous welling-up of emotion from the depths of my being was no more than the expression of a statement to myself.
Was I, and am I, just juggling with words?
I did not know the answer then, and I do not know it now.
At the barrier at Gatwick, I was met by a friendly policeman who told me that the injuries were not as bad as had at first been thought, and that none of my family was in danger — news which immediately reduced me to tears.
That night in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary I saw Moira, with five cracked ribs and cuts over her eye and on her leg, and she told me what had happened.
A driver going north along the A68 through the village of Earlston had mistaken an access road to his right for the southward lane of a dual carriageway.
Thinking it safe to pull out to pass a lorry he ran head-on into Moira and the children coming south.
Of the children Rachel was the worst injured, with tiny pieces of glass from the windscreen in her eyes, but in time she recovered.
Fiona had a cut and Alastair and the labrador, Glyn, were unharmed; so was the driver of the other car.
My car was a total write-off.
In 1979 I interviewed for the first (and last) time the newly elected Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
The occasion was a documentary film I was making on the life of Airey Neave, the MP who had masterminded her election to the Tory leadership and, as Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, been killed by an IRA car bomb when leaving the Palace of Westminster.
We were informed that the Prime Minister had set aside an hour for us, and she arrived on the dot, nicely accoutred and coiffeured and saying she was ready to go when we were.
It was as satisfactory an interview as I have conducted in that, it being entirely non-controversial, question and answer flowed without interruption or the need for retakes; and in her assessment of Airey Neave both as friend and politician she seemed entirely relaxed.
Indeed so professional was her performance that halfway through the time allotted to us, we found we had finished.
We expected handshakes all round, the departure of the PM to affairs  of state, and an aide leading us to an ante-room for ginger snaps and coffee.
We had not expected the Prime Minister to look at her watch and say, ‘I see it's only eleven, so we have half an hour in hand.
Would you like me to show you round the house?’
It was as thoughtful and generous an invitation as King Hussein sending us down to Petra and Aqaba.
Although the PM had only recently arrived in Downing Street, she had already boned up on its history and as she led us round she spoke of Pitt and Walpole, Disraeli and Gladstone, and of their connection with this tapestry or picture or that room.
Then we came to the state dining-room with its long mahogany table and rows of high-backed chairs.
‘You know I had Giscard d'Estaing here the other day,’ she said.
‘Where do you think I placed him?’
We said we had no idea.
‘Here,’ she said, smacking a chair.
‘And why here?’
We looked puzzled.
‘Look up,’ she said, and we did, to see on the opposite wall full-length portraits of Nelson and the Duke of Wellington.
When we spilled out into the street a few minutes later, it was in a kind of glow.
Looking back on that visit, as I sometimes do, I find it difficult to reconcile the warm, charming and amusing hostess who spared the time to entertain us that day with the latter-day basso profundo screecher of the House of Commons and the earnest, ingratiating gusher of numerous television interviews (performances which make me dream wistfully of the old saw, ‘In the ideal society politics should be as unobtrusive as drains’).
Nor can I forgive her for having blocked Moira's appointment as BBC Governor for the Arts after it had been cleared by the Home Office.
It could not have been for lack of qualifications, for Moira had served seven years on the BBC's General Advisory Council and four years as a director of Border Television; so one can only assume it was because of my Liberal Party connections.
I have heard of other appointments which she has blocked for similar reasons, and in my lifetime can recall no other Prime Minister, Labour or Conservative, who felt the need to exercise such petty partisanship.
When I was in London during the early years of this period I often stayed with my mother in Hampton Court.
The dog Ben and the cat Wolsey had died, but another cat called Mingo had taken his place.
My eldest daughter Ailsa was staying there part of the time, studying art at the Byam Shaw College of Art, and falling in love with her tutor, whom she later married.
One  vacation she was given a holiday job in the palace gardens, pricking out marigolds.
For this task she was required to sign the Official Secrets Act — in case, I was told, confidential papers from the National Physical Laboratory in Bushey Park were borne by the wind on to her marigold patch.
I wrote a letter to The Times about this lunacy, and it was picked up and ridiculed by all the national papers.
Advanced age had by now somewhat mellowed my mother, with the result that I enjoyed my visits to the palace, for when the subject was other than myself she could be stimulating and amusing company.
But she never abandoned her attempts to plumb my innermost emotions, always asking, ‘What do you feel about X, Y, or Z?’, never ‘What do you think?’
Fending off these assaults was always taxing.
When she was eighty and no longer able to cope with running her apartment (it was in fact a house of four storeys) she moved into a nursing home at Sunbury-on-Thames.
I and my sisters visited her there when we could, she was always ready to join one in what she called ‘a dry mart’ before lunch or in the evening, and for a time seemed content enough.
But as time went on, the quality of her life deteriorated.
She suffered severely from arthritis, was unable to read for more than short periods of time, was bored and confused by television, and for long periods lay inert, half dozing, half listening to the radio.
When she had been there a couple of years and I asked her how she was, she said, ‘Pretty mouldy.’
While I was thinking how to respond, she said, ‘Oh, how I long to be gathered’(a Scottish euphemism for death).
During the course of the next year, she expressed the same view each time I saw her.
‘I've had a marvellous life and enjoyed every minute of it, but it's over and now I want to move on.’
She was, I am sure, less motivated by dreams of Elysian fields than a longing to shuffle off her mortal coil and be freed both from the arthritis and the meaninglessness of what her life had become.
She was expressing much the same sentiments as Bob Boothby had expressed in his last letter to me, and which I have heard other old people express too.
But there was nothing that I or anyone else could do about it; she, and we, had to wait another six months before she was finally gathered.
I had long been a believer in voluntary euthanasia, and my mother's experience strengthened it; for to me what matters most is not the length of a person's life but its quality, and that death, when it comes, should have dignity.
I have always been nervous of dying, but not of death.
The poets, mankind's unacknowledged legislators, have shown death to be what Anne Lindbergh, after the murder of her kidnapped child, saw as a little door.
O, Death, where is thy sting?’
(Corinthians).
Death in itself is nothing' (Dryden).
‘Half in love with easeful death’(Keats).
‘After the first death, there is no other’(Dylan Thomas).
But dying is something else.
I have a dread of reaching a state when I lie inert and incontinent in bed, tubes in the nose and a drip-feed in the vein, all love of living gone and yet still forbidden final release.
It is true that my mother was not in that state, but she too had lost the will to live; and she too was denied the balm of curtailment.
It is ironic, I think, that the release which out of the compassion of our hearts we give to old, sick animals, we deny to old, sick human beings.
It is the life force within us that is the cause of that denial, which makes it impossible for the healthy to imagine a time when it will have faded, which makes them tremble at the thought that, were voluntary euthanasia ever legalized, abuse would inevitably follow, and when they became old and ill, they would be at risk of being put away.
This is an understandable fear and must be met by the provision of cast-iron safeguards, such as they have in Holland where, under the beneficent tutelage of Dr Admiraal, voluntary euthanasia has been legalized and practised with considerable success for several years.
In time and with an increasingly ageing population, I foresee the same thing happening here; that when people feel the time has come for release, they will gather the family round them to say farewell and then with those they love most beside them, they will ask for and be handed, as their right, the means of self-deliverance.
If we are not yet ready for such a grave ceremony, sooner or later we will be; and if anyone thinks it macabre or mawkish, let them first read Derek Humphry's moving account in his book Jean's Way of how, when his wife had entered the terminal stage of bone cancer, he and she sat together over coffee and she took the pill which, with her full approval, he had obtained and kept safe for the occasion, and how she died peacefully in his arms.
Such occasions will inevitably involve grief and the shedding of tears, but there is much to be said for that.
Too often now death comes to one alone and unprepared and the news of it is broken to others, perhaps at night, by an  impersonal voice on the telephone.
Better surely to embrace it in the company of those one has loved, and as one slips away, to know from their tears how much they have loved one too.
The Luton Post Office Murder
We stayed at Makerstoun from 1966 to 1978 and then, while keeping Makerstoun for weekends, bought a property in Edinburgh; a neat terraced Regency house in Upper Dean Terrace on the Water of Leith, just around the corner from Raeburn's lovely Ann Street and a few hundred yards downstream from the house in Belgrave Crescent where I was born.
This move had three objects: to complete the education of our two younger children, Fiona at Fettes (where my old Highfield playmate Inky Chenevix-Trench was now headmaster) and Alastair at the Edinburgh Academy; to have Moira's mother who was living alone in an Edinburgh flat and becoming increasingly tottery to live with us; and to own property once again and so benefit from its ever-increasing rise in value.
Our second daughter Rachel had gone off to a finishing school near Florence, while Ailsa and her painter husband had bought a house in the country near Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk.
A regular visitor to Upper Dean Terrace was my grandmother's old cook, Bessie, whose chicken cream and queen of puddings had been such a highlight of Nairn holidays, and who was now living in retirement in nearby Learmonth Terrace.
In 1934 when my grandfather died, my grandmother had given her his silver-handled walking stick, and just fifty years later, in 1984, she gave it to me.
It has been my constant companion ever since.
Looking back to the latter half of our time in Scotland, I seem to have been engaged in a variety of activities: was twice part of a consortium to bid (unsuccessfully) for the franchise for Scottish Television; was appointed chairman of the board of Edinburgh's Royal Lyceum Theatre Company, a post I held for seven years; was persuaded to stand as a candidate for Lord Rector of Edinburgh University and (mercifully) was defeated by its former Roman Catholic chaplain; gave poetry recitals with Moira at Edinburgh Festivals and elsewhere; attacked in a lecture to the Royal Society  of Arts the moronic language of disc jockeys whom I referred to as ‘the Anyway Boys’(the word ‘anyway’ being their standard linking passage)— but singled out for praise a comparative unknown by the name of Terry Wogan; rejoined the Liberal Party; took part in a shoot where in the gloaming I brought down what I thought was a woodcock but turned out to be a parrot, escaped recently from its cage a mile away; fished for salmon in Spain where my guide was called Jesus (and enjoyed bawling for him down the river bank) and on the way home visited the marvellous cave paintings of Altamira and Lascaux; proposed ite health of Prince Philip at a Variety Club luncheon and of London's Lord Mayor at his midsummer banquet (he was also chairman of the London Rubber Company to which I made some fruity references); and for a year was resident British columnist of the American weekly magazine,Newsweek International .
I also kept in touch with the Navy by accepting, every October, invitations from a variety of naval establishments all over the country to propose the toast of the Immortal Memory of Lord Nelson at their Trafalgar Night dinners.
To me the Navy has always been unrivalled for the style in which it clothes ceremonial occasions, and these dinners, from the entry of the President's party heralded by nautical airs from the marine band, to the ritual procession of the baron of beef through to the (sometimes seated) loyal toast, are no exception.
It is style that is the Navy's hallmark, and nowhere in its long history has it been more evident than in those laconic naval signals in which the maximum humorous or dramatic impact is made in the minimum number of words.
A good example of the former occurred during the passage of the British submarine H.50 , which in 1941 was being escorted by the destroyer Worcester off the north Norfolk coast in waters where German E-boats often used to attack.
At dusk the H.50 's captain, Lieutenant-Commander Mervyn Wingfield, signalled the Worcester's captain, Lieutenant-Commander Ian Maitland-Magill-Crichton, ‘In the event of enemy attack I intend to remain on surface.’
Maitland-Magill-Crichton at once replied, ‘So do I.’ Examples of more dramatic moments excel by their simplicity.
Nelson before Trafalgar: ‘The order of sailing is to be the order of battle.’
Beatty on the surrender of the German High Seas Fleet in 1918: ‘The German flag is to be hauled down at sunset and is riot to be hoisted again without permission.’
Cunningham to the  Secretary of the Admiralty on the surrender of the Italian fleet in 1943: ‘Be pleased to inform their Lordships that the Italian battlefleet now lies at anchor under the guns of the fortress of Malta.’
And in 1949 Commander Kerans on bringing the damaged Amethyst , bottled up the Yangtse for two months by the communists, to the safety of the open sea: ‘Have rejoined the fleet south of Woosung.
No damage or casualties.
God Save the King.’
One summer I was invited to chair a Brains Trust at the Scottish Lawyers' annual conference at Aviemore.
I was told before leaving that the chief guest was to be the Lord Chief Justice of England, Lord Lane.
I had met only one other Lord Chief Justice and that was Lord Goddard.
The occasion was a small — dinner-party given by Arthur Bryant and his wife at which Moira and I were the only other guests.
I had greatly looked forward to the meeting, hoping to hear words of wit and wisdom about the law, and perhaps a few good legal anecdotes.
But all Goddard did was to tell a succession of risqué and not at all funny stories more suited to the smoking-room than to a dinner in mixed company.
I was never more disappointed in anyone.
I hoped that Lord Lane would not prove of similar kidney.
I had not met him socially before, but we had once clashed in court when he was counsel representing the police at the Brabin Inquiry into the Timothy Evans case.
The first question he shot at me after the midday adjournment was, ‘Mr Kennedy, have you been discussing the case with your counsel during the luncheon break?’
It was delivered with a grim face and a tone of undisguised hostility.
‘Yes,’ I said, for it had never occurred to me not to.
Later I was told that in criminal trials counsel are not permitted to talk to their witnesses during adjournments.
Yet this was not a criminal trial but a judicial inquiry, and even if Lane wanted to chance his arm by putting the question, Brabin might have come to my rescue by explaining it.
I think Lane was attempting to intimidate me in relation to his further questions, answers to which might otherwise be critical of the police, and in this he partly succeeded.
Here was another example of the capriciousness and artificiality of our adversarial system of justice, geared as much to stifling the truth as to revealing it.
Indeed an inquiry of this sort should not, in my view, have been conducted on adversarial lines at all.
But the Lord Lane I met at Aviemore could hardly have been more different — affable, witty and without a trace of self  awareness of his office; and if I call him Geoffrey here, it is only because after Aviemore we became friends, played the odd round of golf together, exchanged letters and met on several social occasions.
Once I asked him what he thought of the French system of criminal justice and he replied that during his career he had no time left over from practising our own system to study any other (which I think is representative of the Bar as a whole).
On another occasion, and because I felt he was a remote figure of whom the public knew nothing, I asked if he would be guest at an off-the-record private dinner-party to which I would invite half a dozen senior media people such as Robin Day, Perry Worsthorne of the Sunday Telegraph , and Tony Howard of the Observer for an exchange of views.
Sadly he declined, saying in a charmingly self-deprecatory way that he doubted he had any views worth hearing.
On our second day at Aviemore a curious thing happened.
After an admirable talk by Geoffrey in the morning, we were all given the afternoon off before reassembling for a hula-hula party in the evening (when off duty, staid Scottish lawyers are inclined to let their hair down even further than their English counterparts).
Geoffrey and others went off to play golf, while Moira and I paid a visit to Mr Campbell's celebrated tweed shop at Beauly.
At seven we gathered for the party, most of us in summer trousers or Bermuda shorts and garlanded with home-made lei (the Lord Chief Justice no exception).
‘How did you enjoy your golf this afternoon?’ he asked me.
I said I hadn't been playing.
He looked unbelieving and said, ‘But surely you remember when we were going down the eighth, you were coming up the ninth, and I waved and your wife waved back, and then you waved.’
I said, ‘I'm sorry, but we spent the afternoon in Beauly.’
He said, ‘That's extraordinary.
I could have sworn it was you.’
Too late I thought of adding, ‘On oath, my lord?’, for I have never seen a more striking example of the perils of what the law calls ‘fleeting identification’, and this from a witness to whom I was not a total stranger and who himself, both as counsel and judge, had had long experience in assessing the worth of ID witnesses in court.
Oddly enough, in the next murder case I found myself investigating, Geoffrey was to play a small, terminal part, the effects of which were slightly to take the gilt from my findings.
This was the Luton Post Office murder, and although, in view of my long  labours on the Meehan case, I had resolved not to take up any more cases, this was one that I did not see how I could refuse.
One morning a letter arrived from my literary agent, Michael Sissons, enclosing a handwritten manuscript of some 100,000 words written by a prisoner named David Cooper who, ten years earlier, had been sentenced to life imprisonment for his part in the Luton murder.
Michael had been sent this manuscript by another of his clients, the writer and broadcaster Bryan Magee, who also happened to be Cooper's MP.
It was not publishable as it stood, said Michael, but might it be of interest to me?
All I knew then of the Luton case was what I had read in the papers and seen on television.
Its bare outlines were that in a Luton car park a gang of four men had shot dead a sub-postmaster while trying to obtain from him the post office keys.
The gang then fled.
One of them, an ageing villain named Alfred Mathews, was subsequently found and arrested, and in exchange for not being prosecuted, agreed to turn Queen's evidence and name his accomplices: David Cooper, Michael McMahon and Patrick Murphy, all petty thieves from the East End but with no record of violence.
At their trial, in which Mathews was the principal prosecution witness, they were all sentenced to life imprisonment with a recommendation they serve not less than twenty years.
Patrick Murphy was later released when his conviction was quashed on appeal.
That left Michael McMahon, and when I wrote to his solicitors I was astonished to hear that he too had written a 100,000-word manuscript.
It was better written than Cooper's and, thankfully, in typescript, but its theme was the same: a passionate denial of having played any part in the, Luton murder at all.
Having read both manuscripts carefully I had no doubts at all that both men were speaking the truth.
Indeed it was one of the most shocking stories of police corruption and legal incompetence I had ever read, and believing that I had the ability to rectify it, I decided, whatever my other commitments, that I must bring it to public notice as soon as possible.
My initial reasons for believing in the men's innocence were ones of which the law takes no cognisance at all.
Firstly, there was the bare fact that two London East Enders, both of whom had left school at fifteen and were quite untutored in writing, had felt so passionately about their situation that, in different prisons and unknown to each other, they had each set themselves  the daunting task of writing the equivalent of full-length books.
Would they have done this in the knowledge that they were guilty?
I thought it beyond the bounds of credibility.
Secondly, the bitterness and resentment with which the two expressed themselves could not, in my view, have been simulated.
Thirdly, it was not just the bald declarations of innocence that impressed me, but the nature and quality of those declarations: there were passages in both books which, as in Meehan's letters to me, had the sharp ring of truth.
Having been segregated in different prisons after arrest, the three men came together in Brixton prison just before their trial.
Cooper was pleased by the move because he badly wanted to find out where the others stood in the affair.
I did not give much thought to the possibility of their innocence and in fact thought that they were both involved with Mathews in the crime.
This of course was a quite natural reaction, and perhaps subconsciously I was hoping they were guilty, in which case they would vindicate me.
Soon after speaking to McMahon and Murphy, it became clear that they were as bewildered and anxious as I was.
Unless they were very good actors, they sounded very convincing to me when they said they were innocent.
Then McMahon:
If the air needed clearing, then our first conversation did exactly that, for it saw each man strongly protesting his innocence and strenuously denying any involvement in the murder.
Given my own predicament, I was left in no doubt that Cooper and Murphy had also been fitted up.
Cooper was in a state of disbelief, tempered only by his reluctance to believe he could possibly be convicted.
Nine years later both men were completing their books.
Cooper again:
I shall be vindicated.
I am more certain of that than I am of anything in my life, and although it is a slow and at times agonizing road I tread, the time will come when I shall be heard and cleared of the indictment held against me.
And McMahon:
for the past ten years I have been keeping vigil in a nocturnal maze, and will continue to do so until daybreak.
I am  sometimes weary, sometimes depressed, sometimes afraid of being struck down by illness, but throughout even these moments, the driving force created by the injustice never deserts me…
In or out of prison I will relentlessly fight my case until my conviction for the murder of Reginald Stevens is finally quashed.
Were these two men both callous thugs who, as part of a gang, had shot a helpless postmaster in cold blood, and at the same time brilliant actors trying to con the world into believing they hadn't?
I couldn't bring myself to believe it, and after I had visited Cooper in Maidstone Prison and McMahon in Long Lartin Prison and spoken to their two solicitors, Gareth Peirce for Cooper and Wendy Mantle for McMahon, as well as to Tom Sargant, the secretary of JUSTICE, who had also taken up the case, I was convinced that they were as innocent of the Luton murder as I was.
During the course of the next few months I uncovered a tale of wickedness and depravity hard to credit.
Until then I had always held the view that police officers do not fabricate evidence against men they know to be innocent, but rather against those whom they genuinely, if mistakenly, believe to be guilty.
But in the Luton case there was no question of the officer in charge, Commander Kenneth Drury of Scotland Yard's Flying Squad, believing that Cooper, McMahon and Murphy were guilty.
He knew for a fact that they were innocent .
A brilliant officer with more than twenty commendations, he had grown to believe he was omnipotent; and when Mathews refused to tell him the names of his accomplices, saying it was more than his life was worth, Drury, obsessed with clearing up another case, offered him a deal: make a statement that three men whose names I will give you were your accomplices, testify against them in the witness-box, and in return no charges will be brought against you, and we'll come to an arrangement about the reward money offered by the Post Office.
Mathews, who otherwise faced the prospect of life imprisonment, had no option but to accept.
In addition Drury persuaded one witness to amend his evidence so as to incriminate Cooper, arranged for another to be shown a photograph of McMahon so as to pick him out in an identification parade, omitted to tell the defence of two witnesses crucial to their case, cited another as prosecution witness to prevent the  defence from calling him, and bribed two prisoners in Leicester Prison, where McMahon was on remand, to say that McMahon had admitted to them his part in the crime.
In his summing-up to the jury Mr Justice Cusack said that the nub of the case was Mathews's evidence, and suggested that for him to have implicated three quite innocent men, as the defence claimed, would be ‘wicked beyond belief’.
That is what the jury thought too, and after an absence of two and a half hours returned guilty verdicts against all three.
Soon after a list was published of how the Post Office reward money of £5000, authorized by the Postmaster General, Mr John Stonehouse, was, on Drury's recommendations, to be distributed.
Astonishingly Mathews, the only member of the murder gang to be apprehended, was given £1000, half of which he passed to Drury.
The remaining £3000 was distributed among those other witnesses I have mentioned and whom Drury had coerced into bolstering the prosecution's case: there is evidence that Drury took a whack of some of that money too.
If the success of Drury's frame-up was breathtaking in its audacity, the failure of the Appeal Court to expose it during the next ten years was no less so in its crassness.
The Appeal Court heard or reheard aspects of the case an unprecedented five times, three times on referral back by the Home Secretary.
At the first appeal the court rejected vital evidence earlier suppressed by Drury of the two witnesses whose description of the driver of the getaway van, whom Mathews had declared was the 26-year-old Murphy, exactly fitted the 53-year-old Mathews.
At the second appeal Murphy's conviction was quashed, a new witness coming forward to say that at the time of the murder in Luton he had seen Murphy in a London street.
Because this alibi showed Mathews to have lied in identifying Murphy, Roy Jenkins, the Home Secretary, asked the Appeal Court to consider whether this did not raise suspicions about Mathews's identification of McMahon and Cooper.
Incredibly the Appeal Court ruled that Mathews was not necessarily lying in saying that Murphy was the driver of the getaway van but could have been mistaken ; and this third appeal was dismissed.
A ruling so contrary to common sense caused a flurry of critical comment in the press and on television.
Cooper and McMahon, who had imagined they would be walking from the court as free men, were shattered.
When McMahon received a letter from the Archbishop of Canterbury  in answer to one of his to the effect that God Almighty still loved him, he replied that a certain quotation always stayed with him: ‘I rage, I melt, I burn.
The feeble God has stabbed me to the heart.’
After the two men had served more than six years in prison, there came a new twist to the case.
A man called Slade made a statement that he had seen Cooper twice in London on the day of the murder, indeed had had a cup of tea with him in a café.
This was enough for the Home Secretary to send the case back for a fourth hearing to the Court of Appeal, with the recommendation that they summon Mathews as a witness to test his credibility.
This they did.
At times rambling incoherently (one observer in court thought him demented) Mathews repeated all the lies he had told at the original trial and added several more.
But Lord Justice Roskill, Lord Justice Lawton and Mr Justice Wien, who were hearing the appeal, took a different view: ‘Each of us watched him closely while he was giving his evidence.
The conclusion which each of us independently has reached in this court on the vital part of his story is that he was clearly telling the truth…we see no justification for disturbing the verdicts which in our view were entirely correct.’
Bryan Magee, Cooper's MP, was also in court: ‘The judges did not watch Mathews closely while he was giving evidence.
I watched both them and Mathews closely throughout both days while he was giving evidence, and for most of the time all three of the judges had their heads and eyes down on the notes they were keeping.’
Cooper was not in court to hear the judgement, but the effect on McMahon was explosive: ‘One moment I was sitting bent over in the dock in utter despair, the next I was on my feet with arms outstretched, screaming at the judges.
‘I am fucking innocent —innocent .
Can't you understand that?'’…
I was immediately dragged from the dock by the screws and led to the cell downstairs.’
The Times , more restrained, came to the same conclusions: ‘To most sensible, rational people, a verdict which depends on the evidence of a man like Mathews, in the circumstances in which he gave that evidence, cannot be safe.’
In 1977 yet another alibi witness surfaced, one Richard Hurn, who knew nothing of the case or of McMahon's imprisonment but told a friend that he remembered seeing McMahon in London on the afternoon of the murder, a date which for other reasons he had cause to remember.
The Home Secretary again referred  the matter to the Court of Appeal who considered it in private and then rejected it.
McMahon hardly considered it would do anything else: ‘I sit here in my cell writing this, having served almost nine years of a life sentence for a murder I did not commit…
I also know that I sit here, not because of any evidence against me but because of the legal establishment's concerns for its own pretensions to infallibility.
Is this the statement of an embittered, biased man?
I do not think so.’
Throughout 1979 I was busy preparing my book on the case which I decided to call (pace Mr Justice Cusack)Wicked Beyond Belief .
The object of the book being to bring about the release of Cooper and McMahon as soon as possible, I also decided to forgo a hardback publisher, whom I knew could not publish in under ten months, and contracted instead for an original paperback.
I was fortunate to be able to include in addition to my own account a lecture by the former Lord Justice Devlin in which he took the fourth Appeal Court severely to task for the illogicality of its reasoning and for usurping the functions of the jury, and a chapter by Bryan Magee about his efforts over the years to try to persuade the Home Office to reopen Cooper's case.
He had some harsh things to say about Roskill, Lawton and Wien, the judges of the fourth Appeal Court:
Their general demeanour was like that of elderly clubmen determined that it should be clearly understood that they were men of the world, fully alive to all the tricks of your Tom, Dick and Harry; yet their actual questions and comments revealed that they had not the remotest notion what sort of a world it was that these East End people they were listening to actually lived in, or how to evaluate their characters and the plausibility of what they said.
I also included contributions from Tom Sargant of JUSTICE and the men's two solicitors, all three of whom unequivocally asserted their innocence.
From my own experience and that of others, I knew that books about miscarriages of justice were always published in a kind of limbo where they remained for months if not years, totally ignored by those authorities whose business it was to evaluate and act on them.
I had had to wait seven years for Evans's pardon and another seven years for Meehan's, and, knowing the reluctance of the Home Office even to consider whether a mistake  has been made, far less admit it, I had little hopes of any quick remedial action.
But this time, and quite fortuitously, I was in luck — or rather, as will be seen, partly in luck.
Among those to whom I sent a copy of the book on publication was Quintin Hailsham, then Lord Chancellor, with whom, despite our differences of opinion on many matters, I had been friendly over the years.
His Permanent Secretary at that time was my cousin Wilfrid Bourne, and this is what he later wrote to me:
Your book landed up with a pile of others on the desk of Hailsham's private secretary.
He did not know what to do with it, Hailsham being far too busy to read it at the time.
I happened to look in on the Private Office before going home in order to see whether there was anything I ought to take account of.
Your book caught my eye.
I had, for once, no official papers to read and picked it up to read in the tram.
I was so disquieted by it that I finished it that evening.
Next day Wilfrid spoke of his disquiet to an old friend, Dick Thompson, the Registrar of Criminal Appeals, and he, having read the book, felt a similar concern.
Approaches were then made to Brian Cubbon, the Permanent Under Secretary at the Home Office responsible for criminal matters, with the result that within three weeks of publication the Home Secretary Willie Whitelaw announced to the House of Commons that because of continued unease about the case and after discussions with the Lord Chief Justice, he had ordered the release of Cooper and McMahon from prison.
He added that this was not a case for a free pardon because — wait for it —there was no proof that Cooper and McMahon were innocent .
As the reader now knows, and as Willie's advisers should have told him, there was massive proof that Cooper and McMahon were innocent and should never have been put on trial, let alone convicted.
So why was a free pardon not granted?
I did not obtain the answer to this until several years later when, meeting Willie on holiday, I tackled him on it.
‘I was all in favour of a free pardon,’ he said, ‘but Geoffrey Lane objected.’
I had known Willie since childhood days at Nairn, Geoffrey I had come to know later; and while I greatly admired them both, and still do, I found this closing of establishment ranks deeply shocking.
Willie should have ignored Geoffrey's protests, and  Geoffrey (presumably hoping to protect the wretched judges of the Appeal Court from further criticism) should never have made them.
It was not justice these two were dispensing but the semblance of justice.
And so, without a pardon or any monetary compensation for ten years of wrongful imprisonment, Cooper and McMahon were shuffled discreetly out of prison to rejoin society, branded for the rest of their lives as convicted murderers.
What was it Bryan Magee had written in his chapter in the book?
‘We ought none of us to lose sight of the fact that human beings count far more than institutions or procedures or precedents, and we ought always to be willing, given justification, to sacrifice the latter to the former.’
But that is not a view held by those who lack the imagination to enter into the hearts and minds of others, and to do to them as they would be done by; among them the then Home Secretary and the then Lord Chief Justice.
There is a tailpiece to the Luton case.
While Cooper and McMahon were still serving their sentences, the Postmaster General who had announced the £5000 Post Office reward money, John Stonehouse, MP, and the detective who had arranged its distribution, Commander Kenneth Drury, were themselves convicted of criminal charges and also sent to prison.
I have sometimes wondered if they, Cooper and McMahon ever managed to get together for a rubber of whist or bridge.
I now turn to the professional encounters I had in the late 1970s and early 1980s with two senior but very different public figures, Lord Mountbatten and Harold Macmillan (later Earl of Stockton).
Lord Mountbatten first swam into my ken in 1940 when his destroyer, the Kelly and mine, the Tartar , found themselves in company with the fleet the day after the German invasion of Norway; and from then on, throughout the war and after, I viewed his various exploits with admiration.
I interviewed him when he became First Sea Lord and on one or two other occasions, and I always slightly regretted that my commitment to current affairs had prevented me from taking up Associated Rediffusion's offer to spend two years with him, at home and abroad, researching and scripting the thirteen programmes they were planning on his Life and Times — a task subsequently and admirably performed by John Terraine.
I did not meet him socially until 1975 when we were both invited as guest speakers to the annual dinner of the Newcastle-upon-Tyne division of the Royal Naval Reserves.
This was to take place in the headquarters ship, HMS Calliope in the dockyard.
Mountbatten was to propose the toast to the Navy, I to the guests.
The day before the dinner I received word from the admiral's ADC that if I were to present myself at 6.55 p.m. at his suite in the Gosforth Park Hotel, where we were both staying, he would give me a lift to the dockyard.
I turned up a couple of minutes early, found the door into the suite ajar and the sitting-room in darkness.
Had I made a mistake?
Was it the lobby where we were to meet, and were the two of them waiting there now?
I was about to head for the lift when I noticed a chink of light at the end of the corridor.
A new set of questions arose.
Were they still dressing or had the ADC forgotten to switch off the lights?
There was only one way to find out.
I tiptoed along the corridor and put my head gingerly round the semi-open door.
There I saw an unusual sight: the admiral in shirtsleeves and braces sitting astride a very low dressing-table stool and gazing keenly at his reflection in the mirror, the ADC on his knees behind him brushing the curls at the back of his head.
Clearly this was no place for me, and having tiptoed back to the sitting-room, I switched on a light and picked up the evening paper.
Presently the admiral breezed in, his uniform ablaze with orders and medals.
‘Ah, there you are, Kennedy.
All ready?
Shall we go?’
During the twenty-minute drive to the dockyard the admiral chattered away without pause about his naval career and royal relations.
For a time I didn't know quite how to respond.
Remarks like, ‘Good heavens!’ or ‘You don't say!’seemed somehow inadequate.
Then I realized that he didn't want one to respond, that a response of almost any kind would have interrupted his flow, and the politest thing to do was follow the ADC's example and just listen.
This was no hardship, for he was marvellously outspoken and indiscreet about many things.
As every after-dinner speaker knows, a toast to the guests requires a gentle ribbing of the guests.
But how to rib Mountbatten?
In preparing my speech I recalled (as the reader also may) the occasion during my first watch in Tartar when the first lieutenant had shown me the various instruments on the bridge, and that when I asked why one had a canvas cover, he  had said, ‘Oh, that's the Mountbatten station-keeping gear, and we keep it covered because the captain finds it quite useless.’
So I related this tale and, while the audience responded warmly, stole a glance to my left.
Not a flicker of a smile disturbed that noble face, nor even an acknowledgement that he had heard.
Nothing I invent, it seemed to say, is useless; and we are not amused.
But he bore no malice, and on the way back to the hotel gave me quite a run-down on his cousin Ena, who he said had once been Queen of Spain.
A couple of years later I was telephoned by a BBC producer called Ron Webster, who said he wanted to talk to me about Mountbatten's obituary programme.
A cheerful, boozy chain-smoker, who had started his career as a film editor, Ron had a cough that seemed to rise from the soles of his shoes, and a propensity for laughing hugely at his own, often very filthy, jokes.
Ron said that he'd been preparing an obituary of Lord Mountbatten for some time, that Mountbatten had somehow got wind of it and had approached the BBC with a view to taking part.
‘In what way?’
I asked.
‘He'd like to be interviewed about his life, and talk about the kind of funeral he wants to have.
And because of your naval connections, we thought you might do the interviewing.’
So Ron and I went down to Broadlands, the country house on the Test at Romsey which had once belonged to Lord Palmerston and was later left to Edwina Mountbatten, the admiral's wife.
Mountbatten looked much older than when we had last met, still handsome and alert, but with deaf-aids in both ears, wearing a blazer that now hung loosely on him, and in his walk the beginnings of old man's shuffle.
He had kindly invited us to what he called a light lunch, which consisted of an egg dish, lamb cutlets, a pudding, cheese and a dessert of frosted redcurrants, all served by a bearded butler and two footmen in naval battledress.
After lunch we retired to the drawing-room where the camera crew had already set up, and I sat on one sofa and he on another.
After taking us through his life and times, he moved on to the matter of his death which he hoped would be quick and peaceful.
For his funeral he had made a list of people he wanted invited (they did not include any Japanese), the lessons he wanted read, the hymns he wanted sung.
Was all this, I wondered, an act of consideration to pre-empt family arguments, or yet another example of his abiding vanity?
We completed the film during the early summer of 1979 and in August Mountbatten was granted the quick but not peaceful death he had asked for when his boat was blown up by an IRA bomb off the west coast of Ireland.
That night the BBC ran the obituary twice — the first time they had ever done so for anyone, and the first television obituary to consist of a filmed interview with the deceased.
After this I put my name forward as a candidate for the official biography and so informed my editor at Collins, Philip Ziegler.
Some time later Philip wrote to say that, although he had not put his own name forward for consideration, he himself had been invited to be the official biographer and had accepted.
And a wise choice it turned out to be.
The BBC planned to give the film a third airing on what would have been the admiral's eightieth birthday, and when this became known we were approached by Lord Brabourne, Mountbatten's son-in-law, to say that his cousin Prince Charles who, as everyone knew, adored his uncle, wanted to pay him a personal tribute.
Ron and I thought that the best way to arrange this would be for me to interview the Prince about his uncle, and to tack the result on to the end of the obituary programme.
We were summoned to Buckingham Palace to discuss this, and as we approached the gates in my car, I remembered that I had a case of 250 cartridges in the boot.
So, imagining we would have problems with security, I turned round, dumped the cartridges at Brookes's and returned to the Palace.
The policeman, without looking in the boot, waved us through.
It was agreed with the Prince that the interview would take place at Broadlands where he would be staying with the Brabournes in a few weeks' time.
The night before the interview Ron and I motored down to Romsey, and after an excellent dinner punctuated by more of Ron's awful stories and a good night's sleep, set out for Broadlands next day.
In view of the presence of the Prince there, and especially in the light of some critical remarks he had made recently about the IRA, I had expected a posse of police to be guarding the entrance gates.
There were none.
We drove up the drive and came to the back door; there were no police there either.
The door was open, and as there was no reply to our knocking, we walked in and along the corridor which I knew led to the main living quarters.
In a room at a corner of the house a man fiddling with coffee cups looked up briefly, said good morning, and carried on fiddling.
We  continued unimpeded until I saw ahead of me the drawing-room where I had interviewed Mountbatten, and sitting on one of the sofas with his back to us the unmistakable profile and balding head of Prince Charles.
Had I been an IRA man, I could have pulled out my little Luger and shot him dead — a thought so unnerving that the next day I wrote to his private secretary to suggest improved security.
It was strange to see the Prince occupying the same segment of sofa where only the year before I had talked to his uncle.
I found his blend of assurance, diffidence and wit beguiling, and I have often wondered what he might have done had he been born free.
He spoke of the affection he and his uncle had had for each other and what a marvellous counsellor he had been.
He related some good anecdotes about him and told us that although the admiral had been killed in August, he had already chosen and wrapped up the Royal Family's Christmas presents and — even more remarkable — had already chosen and wrapped up Prince Edward's twenty-first birthday present, then six years away.
No vanity there — only an amazing thoughtfulness for others and, who knows?’ a Premonition of death.
The interview was duly shown at the end of the third broadcast of the obituary programme and was very well received.
Before this, however, Ron and I had had an offer from Lord Brabourne of further Mountbatten film.
Film had always played an important part in the admiral's career (he had founded the Royal Naval Film Corporation), and rather than write his autobiography, he had recorded, with John Terraine as questioner, some seven hours of reflection on his life and personal relationships, and had left instructions that none of it was to be shown publicly until after his death.
It took Ron and myself two days to view it, and compulsive viewing most of it was.
A working title for it might have been ‘How I Got my Way, and Was Proved Right in Everything I Did’.
Then I remembered Stephen Roskill telling me not to believe a word Mountbatten said or claimed unless it was corroborated from other sources.
Ron and I came to call it ‘Firm Friends’.
This was because of a minor theme on which the admiral wove several variations which went something like this: ‘I said to So-and-So [often a general, minister or other senior official]: ‘Are you refusing to do what I ask?'’
And he said, ‘Yes, I am.'’
So I said, ‘Well, if that's the case, I'm going straight to the President/Prime Minister/  Foreign Secretary/First Lord, etc., to say So-and-So won't do what I ask, so I'm not prepared to carry on and here's my resignation.'’
‘Oh, '’ said So-and-So, ‘you wouldn't do a thing-like that.’,
So I said, ‘Yes, I damn well would.'’
Then So-and-So had to climb down.
But afterwards, when it was all over,we became firm friends .’
We divided the material into six programmes which we then had to clear with the Cabinet Office under an agreement that had been made with the Broadlands Archives Trust.
Although we did not foresee any difficulties, we were astonished to hear that the Secretary of the Cabinet, Sir Robert Armstrong, had asked for the programme on the Suez operation of 1956, in which Mountbatten had been First Sea Lord, to be deferred ‘possibly for some months’.
He gave two reasons: over-critical remarks of Hailsham and Macmillan and — the main reason —‘It is judged that the showing of the Suez programme could have untoward consequences while the situation in the Arab world is as critical as it is at present.’
Aside from the situation in the Arab world then not being critical, this was an incomprehensible decision.
Had Mountbatten been lambasting the Arabs, there might well have been grounds for constraint.
But the bulk of the programme was Mountbatten's account of how he had done everything in his power, both professionally and privately, to dissuade his old friend, Anthony Eden,from attacking the Arabs.
What ‘untoward’ consequences could derive from that?
And why, after all the other chief participants in the affair had had their say, should Mountbatten be denied his?
I had an uneasy feeling that Sir Robert Armstrong had other reasons for wanting the programme postponed, but would not say what they were.
This feeling was greatly strengthened when, six months later, Sir Robert was again approached about the Suez programme and again asked for it not to be shown.
This time he had shifted his ground; not a word about the criticisms of Hailsham and Macmillan which we had agreed to delete, nor about untoward consequences in the Arab world: this time it was ‘breach of confidential relationships’ contrary to what was laid down in the Report of the Privy Council on Ministerial Memoirs.
With great difficulty I obtained a copy of this document and while it stated that ‘public servants should not reveal the opinions and attitudes of colleagues as to the government business with which they  have been concerned’, another section said quite clearly that a reasonable timescale for a public servant's silence would be ‘fifteen years or for the service life of the adviser, whichever is the longer’.
As Suez had occurred twenty-four years earlier and as both Eden and Mountbatten were dead, it seemed to me that Sir Robert's arguments were nonsensical.
But leaned on in this way, Lord Brabourne and the Broadlands Trust felt they had no option but to accept his advice, and permission to show the Suez film was withheld.
Exasperated with all this pussy-footing, and knowing of Mountbatten's wishes that what he had said should be known, I saw to it that a transcript of the Suez programme reached my friend Bernard Levin at The Times , and he published the core of it in two long articles.
Needless to say there was not a whisper of dissent from the Arab world.
But I was not surprised when, several years later, I read that Sir Robert Armstrong, appearing for the government in the Spycatcher trial in Sydney, had admitted to cross-examining counsel that he had been what he called ‘economical with the truth’.
It seemed to be in his blood.
There are few people who came to know Harold Macmillan who do not have some anecdote about him, and I am fortunate in that having interviewed him at length twice, as well as running into him on a number of other occasions, I have garnered quite a few.
When he was Prime Minister he made little personal impact on television, bared his teeth at the cameras like an old dog, and was generally aloof and buffer-like.
But after his retirement, in interviews with Robert Mackenzie, and on many private occasions, he revealed a quite different side — avuncular, anecdotal, witty, an old trouper who could, when he was in the mood, move you to tears or laughter.
Who will ever forget his touching description of President Kennedy's visit to Birch Grove, his country house in Sussex, and his remark, delivered with a catch in his throat, ‘Before the leaves had turned, he was gone.’
I first met him when, after retirement, he took part in some current affairs programme about Britain and the Common Market.
We had been advised that if we laid on a couple of bottles of champagne he might stay and chat for a while after the show.
This he did, and it was then that I experienced for the first time his unexpected propensity for one-liners, conjured out of thin air.
There were two that evening.
‘Sweden's a poor little  country, don't you think?’ was the first.
Nobody felt they knew enough about Sweden to agree or disagree.
‘No good murders since they did away with capital punishment’ was the second, coming from nowhere and an equally effective conversation-stopper.
Yet it was true: knowing the defendant was to swing concentrated one's own mind, as well as his, wonderfully.
Some time later I found myself next to him at a dining-club.
‘I've had a most interesting day,’ he said, ‘I've been to the Balcombe Street siege.’
This was a house where four IRA men, surrounded by the police, had been holed up for a number of days.
‘Oh?’
I said, somewhat surprised.
‘I used to go everywhere by bus or tube, but my son Maurice — do you know my son Maurice?,
‘We were at Eton together.’
‘He thought the time had come for me to have a car, and very kindly provided me with one.
Well, I had lunch today with Diana Cooper — do you know Diana Cooper?’
‘A little.’
‘And after lunch she said, why don't we take the car and go and look at this siege in Balcombe Street?
And we did.
The first man I saw was a Daily Mirror photographer and he said, ‘I'm surprised to see you here, '’ and I said, ‘I'm quite surprised myself.'’
Then we met the officer in charge, a most interesting man.
Said he remembered me in North Africa.
He told us they'd cut off the water supply to the house, and as no one can carry on long without water, he thinks they'll surrender quite soon.
A most instructive day.’
Another time in the same club he turned to me and said, ‘The fellow on my other side went up the Irrawaddy in 1943 and he's been taking me back there with him.
How do I get downstream?’
A few minutes later he rose and I heard him say, ‘Goodnight and thank you for giving me your interesting reminiscences.’
If I hadn't known otherwise I would have said that he meant every word of it.
One Christmas when Macmillan was in his eighties his grand-son Alexander (Maurice's son and the present Lord Stockton), who looked after the old boy in many ways, asked me if I would read the eighth of nine lessons at a carol service in a London church in aid of dependants of the Publishers Association.
Other people in the public eye would be reading the first seven, and his  grandfather the ninth.
‘Be sure,’ said Alexander before the service started, ‘to turn over the page to my grandfather's lesson when you have finished yours.’
I duly did so, and returned to my seat.
Halfway through the next carol, the old boy rose slowly to his feet and with the help of his stick, made his way to the lectern.
There, equally slowly and, it seemed to me, deliberately, he closed the Bible.
What would happen now?
Had I perhaps misinterpreted Alexander's instructions?
For the remainder of the carol I was on tenterhooks, not daring to take my eyes from the lectern.
The carol ended.
The congregation sat down.
Then, as slowly and deliberately as before, Macmillan drew from an inside pocket of his coat a smallish piece of paper and raised it to within a couple of inches of his right eye.
He paused.
We waited spellbound.
Then he spoke.
‘In the beginning was the word.’
A half glance at the congregation, then back to eyeing the piece of paper.
‘And the word was God.’
Another glance.
‘And God was the word.’
It was like that all the way, the timing impeccable, a theatrical tour de force .
As he tottered back to his seat it was as much as I could do not to applaud.
Both my television interviews with him took place at Birch Grove, the first on the occasion of the publication of a picture book about his life and times, the second on the publication of his Middle East diaries.
On each he was in excellent form.
‘Where did you stay last night?’ he asked while we waited for the cameras to be set up.
‘A place called Gravetye,’ I said, ‘about twenty miles from here.
I don't suppose you know it.’
‘Know it well,’ he said.
‘Used to be owned by a fellow named Robinson who invented the herbaceous border.’
After the first morning's filming we assembled by the front door to go to Alexander's house, half a mile away, for lunch.
‘Which car are we going in?’ he asked Alexander.
‘Are we going in Mrs Thatcher?’
He must have seen my expression, for he said, ‘This car makes a noise if you don't fasten your seat-belt, and a light starts flashing if you haven't closed the door.
It's a very bossy car.’
At first I found him a difficult subject to interview because, to paraphrase Donne, when he had done he had not done, he still had more; and I had to learn to give him at least five seconds, grace before moving on, because his afterthoughts were often gems.
He spoke movingly of his time in the trenches in the First War and of how a whole generation, many of them his friends, had been wiped out, of the effect that the unemployment of the 1930s had on his political thinking, of how being Prime Minister was less demanding than being an ordinary Minister, of (and this with tears in his eyes) his devotion to his late wife, who had fallen dead of a heart attack close to where we were sitting, of his belief in God.
And he had some good two-liners, too.
‘The vocabulary of broadcasters today gets smaller and smaller.
Now it's down to about a hundred words.’
And, ‘When I was a boy it was always considered bad form to talk about food or money.
Now no one talks of anything else.’
The only moment when he seemed ill at ease was when I raised the question of the forced repatriation to Russia at the end of the war of thousands of White Russian and Cossack soldiers from camps in northern Italy and Yugoslavia.
Controversy about this event had been raised by Count Tolstoy in a book in which he — and later many others — said it should never have been permitted to happen, for on their arrival in Russia the soldiers were massacred.
As Macmillan at the time was political adviser to General Alexander whose army occupied that area, many felt that he bore some responsibility.
Indeed he had not tried to disguise in his Middle East diaries what he knew would happen to the soldiers.
They were being sent back, he said, ‘to torture, slavery and death’.
Why had he not excised this passage?
Was it because he hadn't spotted it, or because he felt it would be dishonest to do so, or because he never expected criticism?
As I listened to him fumbling for words of explanation, I wished he could have said boldly that what was thought to be so heinous today was not thought to be so then, but that looking back now, he deeply regretted what had happened.
On one of the last occasions I saw him, I mentioned my dealings with Mountbatten and asked what he thought of him.
‘Very good at his job, but very vain.’
He paused a moment.
‘After Winston had retired, he used to give lunch parties every two weeks or so in the basement of his house in Hyde Park Gate.
One day there were about a dozen of us there, including Dickie and myself; I was Prime Minister at the time.
Winston wasn't in a very good mood.
Dickie bored him all through the first course with stories of the Navy in the First World War, and all through the second course with stories of the Navy in the Second World War, and then he got up and said, ‘I've got to go now to a meeting of the Chiefs of Staff, but the Prime Minister will keep  you amused.'’
Winston was furious.
He waited until Dickie had reached the foot of the stairs and then said in a very loud voice, ‘Who is that fellow?
Ought I to know him ? ''’
My father taught me that there is only one thing more boring in life than listening to other people's dreams and that is listening to stories about their operations; and I only tell mine now because those I had during the early 1980s are as good an example as any of how modern medicine has helped to prolong life; without them it is unlikely that I would be sitting here writing this.
Two were routine, one richly comic, one quite serious; and in none did I experience the slightest pain or discomfort.
Two were also Products of what one might call the orifice revolution, i.e. gaining entry to the inside of the body other than by cutting into it from the outside.
Like getting at the prostate, for instance.
In the old days the surgeon made an incision in the lower portion of the tummy and reached the enlarged gland that way, but before the coming of antibiotics it was quite common for infections to develop or for the prostate to turn cancerous.
That happened, as the reader may remember, in my grandfather's case; for the last two years of his life he was bedridden, often in acute discomfort, before finally succumbing.
But today the prostate operation is routine, as I discovered when I visited the operating theatre a few days after I had had mine.
From a sort of mobile console a thin tube containing a fibre-optic light and a wire-cutter is uncoiled and inserted into the penis.
When it reaches the bladder the surgeon, like a submarine commander, applies his eyes to the other end of the fibre-optic and sees the area of tissue that needs to be cut away.
He then, with a foot pedal, activates the wire-cutter.
It is as simple as that (though I guess the skills required are far from simple).
I asked my own surgeon how many of these prostate operations he did in a year, and he said around four hundred.
I also asked if it affected sexual performance.
He said only to the degree that when you came, you did not come, i.e. there was orgasm without emission; a change which on several grounds has much to recommend it.
Throughout my life my tummy has been, as it were, my Achilles heel; and around this same time the condition of my colon, which for the latter part of my life has had a habit of tying itself in knots, became particularly acute.
So I went to see a man in  Devonshire Place and he sent me down the road for a barium meal X-ray.
When it was over the doctor there said, ‘We've found four polyps in your colon, and I'm happy to tell you that none are cancerous.’
Not knowing then what a polyp was, I still found my eyes welling up with tears of relief.
‘Are they often cancerous?,
I asked.
‘They're apt to grow cancerous,’ he said, ‘if they're not found and taken out.
But we've found yours in time.’
The Devonshire Place man said, ‘The sooner you have them out the better.
I'll arrange for you to go into the London Clinic.
They have a first-class man there.’
I envisaged two or three weeks in hospital, missing several television programmes and having to cancel various writing commitments.
‘How long for?’
I said.
‘Oh, about a couple of hours,’ he said.
‘No anaesthetic, and you'll feel as right as rain afterwards.’
And so I became a beneficiary again of the orifice revolution.
Last time the fibre-optic and wire-cutter had gone in by the front door; this time they were to enter by the back.
Instructions (entitled Having a Colonoscopy and illustrated with a picture of a cheery-looking doctor waving a piece of paper) reached home a few days later.
I was to starve for thirty-six hours beforehand, take a powerful laxative and drink plenty of clear fluids ‘including alcohol if you wish’.
I did wish, and spent a happy preparatory period in a haze of vodka and tonic.
The rest of the instructions were immensely reassuring.
‘When the tube is in place, air will be passed through it to distend the colon and give a clearer view of the lining…you may pass some wind, but although you may find this embarrassing, remember that staff do understand what is causing it.’
All my life I had done my best not to sound off in company.
Yet here was express permission to do so; what might be called a farter's charter.
By nature an exhibitionist, I greatly looked forward to it.
At the agreed hour I reported to the Endoscopy Unit of the London Clinic, was shown into a small room, told to undress and put on a blue shift, then lie down on a mobile bed.
A nurse came in and asked for my X-rays and I remembered I had forgotten them.
‘Not to worry,’ said the nurse, but I did, for how else could they find the polyps?
Presently a man with greying hair and specs came in and said he was the doctor who was going to remove the polyps.
I noticed he said doctor not surgeon , which made me wonder if he was really up to it.
He seemed full of beans though, and after he had given me a rundown on the life  cycle of the polyp, three nurses wheeled me across the corridor and into another room.
In the far corner of this room stood a man in a white coat who looked like President Mubarak.
‘This is a colleague of mine from Cairo,’ said the doctor.
‘You don't mind if he watches, do you?’
I said I'd be delighted.
‘You don't have many polyps in Egypt, do you?’ said the doctor, and the man from Cairo said, ‘Not in the colon,’though without adding where they did have them.
The nurses turned me on my side and the doctor put a needle into a vein behind my knuckle to make me relax.
While doing this he gave a wonderful imitation of his coal merchant and his wife.
I couldn't decide whether he was doing this to make me even more relaxed, like a television warm-up man, or because he was over-excited at the prospect of getting at my polyps.
The nurses meanwhile had put the tube in, and now they blew in some air as well.
One put her hand on my tummy and the doctor said, ‘Try and do a pooper.’
I couldn't: it was terribly disappointing.
‘Never mind,’ said the doctor, ‘now we'll look for the polyps.
You can see what happens if you like.’
He handed me an eyepiece attached to a long lead and there, through a series of prisms, were my lower intestines in glorious technicolour.
We seemed to be travelling down a sort of miniature, pinkish Channel Tunnel.
‘Ah!’ said the doctor gleefully.
‘Here's the first one now.’
There was no mistaking it: bright red, like a little cherry, on the end of a long white stalk and swaying gently in the breeze.
‘Now watch,’ said the doctor, and suddenly the wire came out of the tube in a kind of loop and the doctor lassoed the polyp as if it were a steer.
Then he drew the wire tight, applied some heat and polyp and stalk parted company.
‘Like to see it?’ he asked, and there was the polyp on a tin tray in front of me, looking very battered and sorry for itself.
That was Father polyp,’ said the doctor, and soon afterwards we located Mother polyp and two baby polyps.
One of the baby polyps proved intractable, appearing in the eyepiece one moment, vanishing the next.
‘What a coy little polyp you are, to be sure,’ said the doctor, but he eventually lassoed and dispatched it too.
With only one to go, I asked the doctor from Cairo if he'd like a dekko down the eyepiece, but he declined, which I found surprising in view of the scarcity of polyps in Egypt.
Ten minutes later I was back in the changing-room on my  mobile bed wolfing tea and sandwiches, parts of which would eventually find their way into my now polypless colon.
And an hour after that I was back in the club sipping a whisky and soda and pondering what to have for dinner.
One way and another it had been a thoroughly enjoyable afternoon.
The third and fourth operations were of a rather different order.
For seven or eight years I had been aware of a growing numbness, first in the muscles of my right leg and later in those of my left, for which no doctor or specialist could find any adequate explanation.
Finally I was sent to a neurological specialist who said it would be necessary to examine the top half of my spinal cord, which houses the motor for the body's muscles.
To do this he sent me to another sort of specialist who inserted through my neck a needle containing blue dye, guided it with the help of a television screen into the top of my spinal cord and then watched its progress as it trickled down.
After a bit he said, ‘I think we've located the cause of your trouble.
You have a misplaced disc which is pressing hard on the top of your spinal cord.’
When the distinguished surgeon who had agreed to operate if necessary was told this, he said he doubted if that was the cause, as there was no numbness in my arms, and he would like to see the effect of the blue dye on the lower half of the spinal cord.
So I went along to his hospital, lay down beneath a huge X-ray machine and the process was repeated.
Everything went smoothly so long as I lay on my tummy, but when they turned me on to my back I was assailed with a searing pain there.
The surgeon's face appeared on a level with my own: ‘We've found a tumour in your spinal cord which we think is the cause of your troubles.’
I found the word tumour chilling, and he must have sensed it.
‘There's no reason at the moment to suppose it's not benign, but if we don t take it out, it could turn nasty.
So you won't be going home this afternoon.
We'll give you a room here, do some tests on you over the weekend and take you to the theatre on Tuesday.’
And that's just what they did.
Those three operations then are the measure of modern medical practice: cancers which might have developed from an enlarged prostate, some rogue polyps and a spinal tumour, any one of which could have proved fatal, were all pre-empted by discovery and cure; and I cannot be other than deeply grateful for this additional lease of life.
The end of the story is anti-climactic.
The removal of the tumour made no difference to my legs, so thinking the misplaced disc might after all be the cause, they decided to have a go at that.
‘What exactly are you going to do?’
I asked, and they said, ‘Remove the disc and replace it with a piece of bone which we'll take from your hip.’
They added, almost as an aside, ‘By the way, we go in from the front of your neck, and you may find a tiny scar there afterwards.’
‘The front of my neck?’
I said.
‘But my spine is at the back .’
They said, ‘Yes, we know that, but it's easier to get at from the front.’
I said, ‘But what about all that gunge that's in the way, like the back of my tongue and Adam's apple and so on?’
They said, ‘Oh, we just push it all to one side.’
When I mentioned this to my GP he smiled.
‘It's a routine operation now,’ he said.
For them I'm sure it was.
But for me, soon after the operation, there occurred something so removed from anything I had ever experienced that I have never forgotten it.
The operation took place at midday and I was taken to the recovery room in the course of the afternoon.
I was conscious soon after, and for the next few hours was in a state of half-sleeping, half-waking, yet aware of the presence of a pretty young nurse, perhaps Thai or Korean, who alternated between giving me sips of water and jabbing a needle in my bum.
By nine in the evening I was fully conscious and observed out of the big window at the end of the room the light beginning to drain from a violet sky.
At that moment, and perhaps for an hour afterwards, I was on Cloud Nine — in a state of happiness, contentment, euphoria, joy and utter peace such as I have never experienced before or since: everything is all right, an inner voice said, and everything from now on will always be all right; how wonderful to know that life can be like this.
At the time I thought little more about it, but later I realized that it must have been caused by some powerful pain-killing drug.
But what — heroin? cocaine?
I never dared to ask, but I understand now what it is that drives addicts back to the needle time and time again whatever the cost to their health and sanity; I understand now what the mystics lay claim to when they speak of the peace that passeth all understanding.
Disappointingly, the operation did nothing for my legs.