

INTERLACEMENTS AND THE RING
A problem in corruption
Lothlórien has won many hearts, and even the most censorious of Tolkien's critics have accordingly been ready to grant him the ability to create nice settings.
‘What is outstanding, though, is the scenery’, declared the kindly reviewer for the Bath and West Evening Chronicle (7 December 1974).
However good scenery is not one of the major virtues on the critical scale; many published opinions throw it in as a sop, a makeweight to balance what they see as much more serious flaws deep in the heart of the Tolkienian ‘fable’, in the essential story of The Lord of the Rings .
The characters, it is often alleged, are flat; there is not enough awareness of sexuality; good and evil are presented as absolutes, without a proper sense of inner conflict within individuals; there is something incoherent in the ‘main pattern’ of the story, which prevents one from reading it as ‘a connected allegory with a clear message for the modern world’.
Most of all,The Lord of the Rings is felt not to be true to ‘the fundamental character of reality’, not to mirror ‘an adult experience of the world’, not to portray ‘an emotional truth about humanity’.
Professor Mark Roberts, speaking from the centre of the critical consensus, declared: ‘It doesn't issue from an understanding of reality which is not to be denied, it is not moulded by some controlling vision of things which is at the same time its raison d'être .’
The archaism of the settings, in short, goes along with an escapism of intention, a deliberate turning away from real life and from present-day experience.
Now it is evident that some of these statements have gone beyond compromise.
When people start appealing to ‘truth’, ‘experience’ and ‘reality’, still more to ‘the fundamental character of reality’, they imply very strongly that they know what these things are , an insight not likely to be shaken by argument.
Probably at the bottom of the confrontation between The Lord of the Rings and its critics there lies some total disagreement over the nature of the universe, a disagreement surfacing in strong, instinctive, mutual antipathy.
Nothing will cure this.
However it ought to be possible to bring the reasons for it out into the light, and by doing so to show that whatever may be said of Tolkien's view of reality, it was neither escapist nor thoughtless.
A sensible place to begin this endeavour is with the mainspring of the story's action, the Ring (here capitalised to distinguish it from the relatively insignificant stage-prop or ‘Equalizer’ of The Hobbit ).
The most evident fact to note about the Ring is that it is in conception strikingly anachronistic, totally modern.
In the vital chapter ‘The Shadow of the Past’ Gandalf says a great deal about it, but his information boils down to three basic data:(1) the Ring is immensely powerful, in right or wrong hands;(2) it is dangerous and ultimately fatal to all its possessors — in a sense there are no right hands;(3) it cannot simply be left unused or put aside, but must be destroyed, something which can happen only in the place of its origin, Orodruin, Mount Doom.
‘There is only one way’, he says to Frodo, and it is essential to the story that this should be accepted as true: the Ring cannot be kept, it has power over everybody , it has to be destroyed.
Spread over sixteen pages (I, 56–71) these remarks function as part of a story, but as soon as they are put together it is a dull mind which does not reflect, ‘Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely’.
That maxim, one could say, is the core of The Lord of the Rings , and it is reinforced from the start by all that Gandalf says about the way Ring-bearers fade , regardless of all their ‘strength’ or ‘good purpose’, and further by his violent refusal to take the Ring himself: His renunciation makes sense in an age which has seen many pigs become farmers; no reviewer has ever balked at this basic opening move of Tolkien's.
Yet the opinion that ‘power corrupts’ is a distinctively modern one.
Lord Acton gave it expression for the first time in 1887, in a letter which Tolkien might have been interested enough to read — it is in a strongly anti-Papal context.
William Pitt had said something similar a hundred years before, ‘Unlimited power is apt to corrupt the minds of those who possess it’, but before that the idea does not seem to have been attractive.
It might even have been thought perverse.
Lord Acton's actual words were: ‘Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely.
Great men are almost always bad men…’, and with this latter opinion no medieval chronicler, romancer or hagiographer would have been likely to concur.
There is as it happens an Anglo-Saxon proverb analogous to Lord Acton's, but still significantly different.
What it says is Man deþ swá hé byþ þonne hé mót swá hé wile , ‘Man does as he is when he may do as he wishes’, or more colloquially ‘you show what you're like when you can do what you like’.
This is certainly cynical about the ill-effects of power, but what it implies is ‘power exposes ’, not ‘power corrupts’.
The idea that a person once genuinely good could be made bad merely by the removal of  restraints is not yet present.
Tolkien is certain to have felt the modernity of his primary statement about the Ring.
One has to wonder then why he made it and how he related it to the archaic world of his plot.
Does Lord Acton's Victorian proverb, in Middle-earth, ring true?
There is at least a plausible argument to say that it does not.
Thus Gandalf says at the start that the Ring will ‘possess’ and ‘devour’any creature who uses it, while Elrond later goes further and says ‘The very desire of it corrupts the heart’(I, 281).
As has been said, these are essential data for the story, and some of the time they seem to be confirmed.
Gollum, for instance, is presented throughout as very nearly enslaved to the Ring, with only fleeting traces of free will left, and those dependent on keeping away from it.
Much higher up the moral scale Boromir bears out Elrond's words.
He never touches the Ring, but desire to have it still makes him turn to violence.
Obviously his original motive is patriotism and love of Gondor, but when this leads him to exalt ‘strength to defend ourselves, strength in a just cause’, our modern experience of dictators immediately tells us that matters would not stay there.
Kind as he is, one can imagine Boromir as a Ringwraith; his never-quite-stated opinion that ‘the end justifies the means’ adds a credible perspective to corruption.
The same could be said of his father Denethor, to whom Gandalf again makes the point that even unhandled the Ring can be dangerous: ‘if you had received this thing, it would have overthrown you.
Were it buried beneath the roots of Mindolluin, still it would burn your mind away.’
With examples like these, it is easy to go further and accept, for the purposes of the story, that even Gandalf's good intentions would not resist the Ring, and that Galadriel too does right to refuse it at I, 381.
While the Ring stays a veiled menace, one may conclude, it works perfectly well.
The problem comes from the apparent immunity of so many other characters.
Frodo, after all, is in contact with the Ring nearly all the time, but shows little sign of being corrupted.
He goes through great labours to get rid of it.
Furthermore when he does give way and claim it for his own, he loses it almost immediately to Gollum, who bites off Ring and finger with it.
Gandalf had said much earlier that ‘Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily let it go, nor will to damage it.
And I could not ‘make’ you — except by force, which would break your mind.’
But in the Sammath Naur we have force being used very strongly, in the shape of Gollum's teeth; yet Frodo's mind remains unaffected.
Anyway, what about Sam, who takes the Ring but hands it back with only momentary delay, Pippin and Merry, who show no desire for it at all, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli, who display the same indifference without the excuse of ignorance, and Boromir's brother Faramir, who realises the Ring is in his power but refuses to take it, with no more sign of mental turmoil than a ‘strange smile’ and a glint in the eye?
One sees the beginnings of a serious criticism of the very basis of The Lord of the Rings here: the author appears to have  presented a set of rules and then observed them only partially, reserving as it were the right to exceptions and miracles.
This is what has made some people think that in this work the distinction between good and bad is simply arbitrary, residing not in the nature of the characters but in the needs of the plot.
Actually all the doubts just mentioned can be cleared up by the use of one word, though it is a word never used in The Lord of the Rings .
The Ring is ‘addictive’.
All readers probably assimilate Gollum early on to the now-familiar image of a ‘drug-addict’, craving desperately for a ‘fix’ even though he knows it will kill him.
For the same reason they understand why Gandalf tells Frodo not to use the Ring (use always causes addiction); why Sam, Bilbo and Frodo nevertheless survive their use of it (addiction in early stages is curable); why Boromir succumbs to the Ring without handling it (use has to be preceded by desire); and why Faramir can shrug it off (a wise person is capable of stifling the desire to become addicted, though no wisdom will stifle addiction once contracted).
As for the scene in the Sammath Naur, it is even more providential than it looks.
What Gandalf said to Frodo at the start, we should realise, was that he might be able to give the Ring away or destroy it, though only with a struggle; he could not however be made to want to do so (except by some kind of dangerous thought-control).
In the end Frodo does want to destroy the Ring but has not the strength.
Gollum is accordingly necessary after all — a striking irony.
Extending the parallel with heroin one may say that addicts can be cured by the use of external force, and often they have to be, though their co-operation certainly helps.
To expect them to break their syringes and throw away their drugs by will-power alone, though, is to confuse an addiction, which is physical, with a habit, which is moral.
In this aspect of the Ring as in others Tolkien is totally consistent.
He is, however, once again being distinctively modern.
The phrase ‘drug addict’ is not recorded by the OED till 1920; probably the concept was created by the synthesis of heroin in 1898.
As for the term ‘addictive’, by some oversight the full OED has never recognised its existence at all.
Still, during Tolkien's lifetime the words and the realities behind them became more and more familiar, bringing with them, one should note, entirely new ideas about the nature and limitations of human will.
As with ‘power corrupting’, Tolkien was during the 1930s and 1940s reacting quite evidently to the issues of his time.
These deliberate modernities should clear him of any charge of merely insulated ‘ivory tower’ escapism.
They ought to suggest also that he thought more deeply than his critics have ever recognised about just those issues he is commonly alleged to ignore: the processes of temptation, the complex nature of good and evil, the relationship between reality and our fallible perception of it.
Nothing can prevent people from saying that the answers he gave were not ‘adult or ‘fundamental’, but it should be obvious that such adjectives are as culture  biased as Saruman's ‘real’: by themselves they express only the prejudices of the user.
Tolkien was, in short, trying to make Middle-earth say something, as well as conducting his readers on a tour of it.
Decision on whether the message is right or wrong should at least come after working out what the message is .
But proper understanding of that, as often, depends on comparing ancient things and modern ones, checking old texts against new understandings, and against timeless realities.
Views of evil: Boethian and Manichaean
A good way to understand The Lord of the Rings in its full complexity is to see it as an attempt to reconcile two views of evil, both old, both authoritative, both living, each seemingly contradicted by the other.
One of these is in essence the orthodox Christian one, expounded by St Augustine and then by Catholic and Protestant teaching alike, but finding its clearest expression in a book which does not mention Christ at all: Boethius's De Consolatione Philosophiae , a short tract written c.
AD 522–5 by a Roman senator shortly before his execution by *Thiudoreiks (or Theodoric), king of the Goths.
This says that there is no such thing as evil: ‘evil is nothing’, is the absence of good, is possibly even an unappreciated good —Omnem bonam prorsus esse fortunam , wrote Boethius, ‘all fortune is certainly good’.
Corollaries of this belief are, that evil cannot itself create, that it was not in itself created (but sprang from a voluntary exercise of free will by Satan, Adam and Eve, to separate themselves from God), that it will in the long run be annulled or eliminated, as the Fall of Man was redressed by the Incarnation and Death of Christ.
Views like these are strongly present in The Lord of the Rings .
Even in Mordor Frodo asserts that ‘the Shadow…can only mock, it cannot make: not real new things of its own’(III, 190), and Fangorn has already corroborated him, ‘Trolls are only counterfeits, made by the Enemy in the Great Darkness, in mockery of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves’(II, 89).
What the difference is between a real thing and a ‘counterfeit’, one cannot tell, but anyway the idea of perversion as opposed to creation comes over.
It goes with Elrond's firm statement even earlier that ‘nothing is evil in the beginning.
Even Sauron was not so’(I, 281).
On these ultimate points Tolkien was not prepared to compromise.
Still, there is an alternative tradition in Western thought, one which has never become ‘official’ but which nevertheless arises spontaneously from experience.
This says that while it may be all very well to make philosophical statements about evil, evil nevertheless is real, and not merely an absence; and what's more it can be resisted, and what's more still not resisting it (in the belief that one day Omnipotence will cure all ills) is a dereliction of duty.
The danger of this opinion is that it tends  towards Manichaeanism, the heresy which says that Good and Evil are equal and opposite and the universe is a battlefield; however the Inklings may have had a certain tolerance for that (see C. S. Lewis's Mere Christianity , Book 2, section 2).
Furthermore one can imagine statements about the nature of evil which would go past Boethius but stop short of Manichaeus.
Tolkien perhaps found such opinions in a work he knew well, King Alfred the Great's personal translation of Boethius into Old English.
This is a remarkable book, mainly because while King Alfred showed a decent regard for the philosopher he was translating, he was not too modest to add bits of his own.
He had moreover, unlike Boethius, had the experience of seeing what Viking pirates did to his defenceless subjects; and again unlike Boethius had taken such drastic measures against evil as hanging Viking prisoners, and rebellious monks, and in all probability cutting the throats of any wounded pirates so unlucky as to be left on the battlefield.
All this did not stop Alfred from being a Christian king; indeed some of his recorded behaviour seems almost Quixotically forgiving.
Nevertheless his career reveals the strong point of a ‘heroic’ view of evil, the weak point of a Boethian one: if you regard evil as something internal, to be pitied, more harmful to the malefactor than the victim, you may be philosophically consistent but you may also be exposing others to sacrifices to which they have not consented (like being murdered by Viking ravagers or, as The Lord of the Rings was being written, being herded into gas-chambers).
In the 1930s and 1940s Boethius was especially hard to believe.
Still, his view could not just be set aside.
Tolkien's way of presenting this philosophical duality was through the Ring.
It seems in several ways inconsistent.
For one thing it is notoriously elastic, and not entirely passive.
It ‘betrayed’ Isildur to the arrows of the orcs; it ‘abandoned’Gollum, says Gandalf, in response to the ‘dark thought from Mirkwood’of its master; it all but betrays Frodo in the Prancing Pony when it slips on to his finger and proves his invisibility to the spies for the Nazgûl then present.
‘Perhaps it had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt in the room’, thinks Frodo, and he is clearly right.
For all that it remains an object which cannot move itself or save itself from destruction.
It has to work through the agency of its possessors, and especially by picking out the weak points of their characters — possessiveness in Bilbo, fear in Frodo, patriotism in Boromir, pity in Gandalf.
When Frodo passes it to Gandalf so that its identity can be confirmed, ‘It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it’(I, 58, my italics).
Maybe the Ring is magically conscious of Gandalf's power: maybe, though, Frodo is already afraid that he will lose it.
These two possible views of the Ring are kept up throughout the three volumes: sentient creature, or psychic amplifier.
They correspond respectively to  the ‘heroic’ view of evil as something external to be resisted and the Boethian opinion that evil is essentially internal, psychological, negative.
The point is repeated in several scenes of temptation.
Frodo puts on the Ring six times during The Lord of the Rings : once in the house of Tom Bombadil (which does not seem to count), once by accident in the Prancing Pony , once on Weathertop, twice on Amon Hen, once in the final scene in the Sammath Naur.
On several other occasions he feels an urge to, most strongly in the valley below Minas Morgul, as the Ringwraith leads out his army.
Four of these scenes at least are highly significant.
Thus on Amon Hen Frodo puts on the Ring, contrary to Gandalf's injunction, simply to escape from Boromir, and the narrator ratifies his decision: ‘There was only one thing to do’.
He keeps it on, though, goes to the summit of Amon Hen and sits on the Seat of Seeing.
There the Eye of Sauron becomes aware of him and leaps towards him like a searchlight:
This is a scene which has puzzled and irritated critics.
Dr C. N. Manlove writes ‘the Voice’ off as ‘providential’, and clearly thinks it one more example of the ‘biased fortune’which in his opinion makes it impossible to take the story seriously.
Actually the Voice is Gandalf's, as we might have guessed from its asperity, and as is anyway confirmed at II, 99: it may seem fair enough to let a wizard oppose a necromancer.
More remarkable is the opposition between Never!and I come to you .
Is this a struggle inside Frodo's soul, between his conscious will and his unconscious wickedness (the sort of wickedness which might earlier have made him reluctant to hand over the Ring to Gandalf)?
Or is I come to you just a projection from the voice of the Enemy, saying to Frodo what he wants to hear, putting words in the mouth but not in the heart, creating ugly fictions as he does later with the phantasmal corpses of the Dead Marshes?
Either view is possible.
Both are suggested.
Evil may accordingly be an inner temptation or an external power.
Similar uncertainty dramatises other scenes when Frodo puts on the  Ring, or tries to, or is ordered to.
In the valley of Minas Morgul the Ringwraith sends out a command for him to put it on, but Frodo finds no response to it in his own will, feeling only ‘the beating upon him of a great power from outside’.
The power moves his hand, as if by magnetism, but he forces it back, to touch the phial of Galadriel and be momentarily relieved.
Perhaps the same thing happened to him on Weathertop, where he put the Ring on as the Ringwraiths closed in, but the words used there are ‘temptation’ and ‘desire’—‘his terror was swallowed up in a sudden temptation to put on the Ring.
The desire to do this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else.’
He had felt a similar urge in the Barrow, as the wight's fingers came towards him, and there the temptation offered was to abandon his friends and use the Ring to escape.
On Weathertop we are told he had no such conscious and immoral thought.
Nevertheless it seems that there the external power is abetted by some inner weakness, some potentially wicked impulse towards the wrong side.
In the chambers of Sammath Naur one's judgement must also be suspended.
Frodo makes a clear and active statement of his own evil intention: ‘I will not do this deed.
The Ring is mine!’
But at the same time we have been told that even the phial of Galadriel loses its virtue on Mount Doom, for there Frodo is at ‘the heart of the realm of Sauron…all other powers were here subdued’.
Are Frodo's will, and his virtue, among those powers?
To say so would be Manichaean.
It would deny that men are responsible for their actions, make evil into a positive force.
On the other hand to put the whole blame on Frodo would seem (to use a distinctively English ethical term)‘unfair’; if he had been an entirely wicked person he would never have reached the Sammath Naur in the first place.
There seems to be a mixed judgement on him.
Frodo is saved from his sin by his own earlier repeated acts of forgiveness to Gollum, but in a sense punished by the loss of his finger.
‘If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out…’
As it happens the quotation that ran in Tolkien's mind when he considered this scene very much implies the dual nature of wickedness, but comes from the Lord's Prayer: ‘And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.’
Succumbing to temptation is our business, one might paraphrase, but delivering us from evil is God's.
As for the questions of how far  responsibility is to be allocated between us and our tempters, how much temptation human beings can ‘reasonably’ be expected to stand — these are obviously not to be answered by mere mortals.
Tolkien saw the problem of evil in books as in realities, and he told his story at least in part to dramatise that problem; he did not however claim to know the answer to it.
One can see, then, a philosophical crux in the very nature of the Ring, one that was certainly apparent and deeply interesting to Tolkien, and one which he furthermore expressed with great care and deliberation.
This is not important just for Frodo.
The uncertainty over evil in a way dominates the entire structure of The Lord of the Rings .
All the characters would find decisions much easier if evil were unquestionably either just Boethian or else just Manichaean.
If evil were only the absence of good, for instance, then the Ring could never be anything other than a psychic amplifier; it would not ‘betray’ its possessors, and all they would need do is put it aside and think pure thoughts.
In Middle-earth we are assured that would be fatal.
However if evil were merely a hateful and external power without echo in the hearts of the good, then someone might have to take the Ring to the Cracks of Doom, but it need not be Frodo: Gandalf could be trusted with it, while whoever went would have only to distrust his enemies, not his friends and not himself.
As it is the nature of the Ring is integral to the story.
The story also repeatedly reflects back on the nature of temptation and of the Ring.
When Gandalf says to Frodo of his wound on Weathertop, ‘your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; and that was because you resisted to the last’, he may be making a moral statement (Frodo was rewarded) or a practical one (he dodged, called out, struck back, put off the Ringwraith's aim).
When he says of Bilbo that he gave up the Ring ‘of his own accord: an important point’, he may be saying only that Bilbo can't have become too badly addicted, or more moralistically that Bilbo's good impulse will help his cure.
When Glóin describes the dwarves' urge to revisit Moria we cannot be sure whether this is the prompting of Sauron from outside or dwarvish greed and ambition from inside.
All one need say is that this is how things often are.
Maybe all sins need some combination of external prompting and inner weakness.
At any rate, on the level of narrative one can say that The Lord of the Rings is neither a saint's life, all about temptation, nor a complicated wargame, all about tactics.
It would be a much lesser work if it had swerved towards either extreme.
Elementary conceptions: luck and the shadow
The word which for Tolkien expressed this distinctive image of evil was ‘shadow’.
Do shadows exist or not?
It is an ancient opinion that they do  and they don't.
In the Old English poem Solomon and Saturn II the pagan Saturn asks the Christian Solomon (he is a Christian in this text)‘what things were that were not?’
The answer is oblique, but it contains the word besceadeð , ‘shadows’.
Shadows are the absence of light and so don't exist in themselves, but they are still visible and palpable just as if they did.
That is exactly Tolkien's view of evil.
Accordingly Mordor is ‘Black-Land’, ‘where the shadows lie’, or even more ominously ‘where the shadows are ’(my italics), Aragorn reports that ‘Gandalf the Grey fell into shadow’, Gandalf himself says that if his side loses ‘many lands will pass under the shadow’.
At times ‘the Shadow’ becomes a personification of Sauron, as in Frodo's remark about mocking and making quoted earlier, at times it seems no more than cloud and mirk, as when the Riders' hearts ‘quailed under the shadow’.
At times one does not know what to think: Balin goes off to Moria and disaster after ‘a shadow of disquiet’ fell upon the dwarves, and when Glóin says this it appears only a metaphor for mundane discontent.
It is an ominous metaphor, though.
Maybe the ‘shadow’ was a Mordor-spell, maybe Balin simultaneously fell and was pushed.
In such phrases one sees a characteristic Tolkienian strength: his ideas were often paradoxical and had deep intellectual roots, but they appealed at the same time to simple things and to everyday experience.
Tolkien could be learned and practical at once, a style common enough in Old English but (he probably reflected) less and less so as the Norman Conquest and the Renaissance wore on, seeing to it that ‘education’ meant increasingly ‘education in Latin’and the creation of a distinctive literary caste.
Tolkien's other main source for his image of ‘the shadow’ was probably Beowulf , lines 705–7.
Here Beowulf and his men are waiting (the latter without hope) for the appearance of Grendel the man-eater.
They did not expect to get home, says the poet; still, they went to sleep.
Then he adds with sudden confidence, ‘It was known to men that the demon-enemy could not draw them under shadow (under sceadu bregdan ), as long as God did not wish it.’
This is a tough thought, for all its confidence.
‘Draw them under shadow’ may mean no more than ‘pull them out of the hall and into the dark’, but it implies also ‘going we know not where’, dying and being handed over for ever to the powers of evil.
As for the phrase about God not wishing it, that seems on the whole a benevolent assertion of divine power.
But what if God does wish it?
Notoriously He does sometimes wish things like that, for even in Beowulf they have happened  before.
Tolkien was perhaps attracted by the phrase under sceadu , and also by the tableau of silent, rather sullen Anglo-Saxon courage.
He would not have disagreed either with the implications about the unfairness of Providence; we should note that a recurrent prospect in The Lord of the Rings is for Frodo to be taken by Sauron and tormented till he too goes ‘under the shadow’, becomes a petty ‘wraith’ himself, worn out by addiction and privation and torture and fear to a state of nothingness like that of ‘the haggard king’of Minas Morgul.
This doesn't happen, but no one says it can't.
However having spent so long on Tolkien's powerful and complex image of evil, it is time to turn to his portrayal of the (in appearance) often weaker and much more limited power of good.
Once more Tolkien pulled a hint for this from an ancient Beowulfian mystery.
That poem opens with the funeral of the ancestor of one of its characters — Scyld, the king of the Danes, who according to legend came drifting to land as a baby, naked on a wooden shield.
Now at the end of his life the Danes send him back to the sea in an unmanned funeral barge laden with treasure.
‘by no means did [the Danes]provide him with less gifts, less national treasure’, says the poet with proud understatement, ‘than those did (þonne þá dydon ) who sent him out at his beginning, alone over the waves, being a child.’
Who are ‘those’?
The line is a very odd one, both technically and ideologically.
The Beowulf -poet was a Christian.
There should have been no room in his universe for sub-divine but super-human powers, other than devils or angels; however the senders of Scyld seem supernatural in knowledge and purpose, while showing no interest in the inhabitants of Denmark's souls.
One might put Scyld down to divine Providence, except that the word is þá , ‘those’, not hé , ‘He’.
In Beowulf the matter is then dropped for good, but it leaves behind the implication that there are powers at work in the world, possibly beneficent ones, which human beings are not equipped to understand.
The same is true of The Lord of the Rings , though there as in Beowulf the lurking powers are never allowed to intervene openly.
From The Silmarillion we can infer that Gandalf is a Maia, a spiritual creature in human shape sent for the relief of humanity; much later than he finished the trilogy Tolkien indeed reportedly said ‘Gandalf is an angel’.
During the action of The Lord of the Rings , though, Gandalf never looks very much like an angel, or at least not one of the normal iconographic kind.
He is too short-tempered, for one thing, and also capable of doubt, anxiety, weariness, fear.
Obviously too strong a flurry of angelic wings, too ready recourse to miracles or to Omnipotence, would instantly diminish the stature of the characters, devalue their decisions and their courage.
How then does beneficence operate; and has Gandalf superiors?
‘Naked I was  sent back’, he says at one point (recalling the story of Scyld), but he does not say who sent him.
‘May the Valar turn him aside!’ shout the Gondorians as the ‘oliphaunt’charges.
But the Valar don't.
Or perhaps they do, for the beast does swerve aside, though this could be only chance.
Can ‘chance’ and ‘the Valar’be equated?
Is ‘chance’ the word which people use for their perception of the operations of ‘those’, the mysterious senders of Scyld and of Gandalf too?
Tolkien had, probably, been developing some such thought as this for many years.
He uses the word ‘chance’ quite often in a suggestive way in The Lord of the Rings .
‘Just chance brought me then, if chance you call it’, says Tom Bombadil when he rescues the hobbits from Willow-man; ruin was averted in the Northlands, says Gandalf in Appendix AIII, ‘because I met Thorin Oakenshield one evening on the edge of spring in Bree.
A chance-meeting, as we say in Middle-earth.’
Obviously chance is sometimes meant , as Gandalf says of Bilbo's finding of the Ring, though even Gandalf can only recognise such ‘meanings’ retrospectively.
However ‘chance’ was not the word which for Tolkien best expressed his feelings about randomness and design.
The word that did is probably ‘luck’.
This is, of course, an extremely common English word.
It is also rather odd, in that no etymology of it is known.
The OED suggests, without conviction, that it might come from words like Old English (ge )lingan , ‘to happen’, giving then a basic meaning of ‘happenstance, whatever turns up’.
Tolkien would have liked that, for it would make ‘luck’ a close modern equivalent of the Old English word usually translated ‘fate’and derived in exactly the same way from the verb (ge ) weorþan , ‘to become, to happen’.
The Beowulf -poet often ascribes events to wyrd , and treats it in a way as a supernatural force.
King Alfred brought it into his translation of Boethius too, to explain why divine Providence does not affect free will: ‘What we call God's fore-thought and his Providence’, he wrote, ‘is while it is there in His mind, before it gets done, while it's still being thought; but once it's done, then we call it wyrd .
This way anyone can tell that there are two things and two names, forethought and wyrd .’
A highly important corollary is that people are not under the domination of wyrd , which is why ‘fate’ is not a good translation of it.
People can ‘change their luck’, and can in a way say ‘No’ to divine Providence, though of course if they do they have to stand by the consequences of their decision.
In Middle-earth, one may say, Providence or the Valar sent the dream that took Boromir to Rivendell (I, 259).
But they sent it first and most often to Faramir, who would no doubt have been a better choice.
It was human decision, or human perversity, which led to Boromir claiming the journey, with what chain of ill-effects and casualties no one can tell.
‘Luck’, then, is a continuous interplay of providence and free will, a blending of so many factors that the mind cannot disentangle them, a word encapsulating  ancient philosophical problems over which wars have been fought and men burnt alive.
As important to Tolkien, though, was that it is a word (like ‘shadow’) which people use every day, and with exactly the right shade of uncertainty over whether they mean something completely humdrum and practical or something mysterious and supernatural.
When Farmer Giles of Ham fires his blunderbuss at the giant he hits him ‘by luck’, indeed ‘by chance and no choice of the farmer's’: thoughts of the Valar enter no one 's mind.
On the other hand his advantageous position at the rear of the knightly column which Chrysophlax decimates came about when his grey mare went lame, ‘As luck (or the grey mare herself) would have it’.
It is not providence, but it may have been meant just the same.
The browbeating of the dragon outside its den, however, is something even the grey mare's prudence would not stretch to.
‘Farmer Giles was backing his luck’, as people often do; and it is common knowledge that while this is irrational it works much more often than mere ‘chance’ would dictate.
People in short do in sober reality recognise a strongly patterning force in the world around them, and both in modern and in Old English have a word to express their recognition.
This force, however, does not affect free will and cannot be distinguished from the ordinary operations of nature.
Most of all it does not decrease in the slightest the need for heroic endeavour.
‘God helps those who help themselves’, says the proverb.
‘Luck often spares the man who isn't doomed, as long as his courage holds’, agrees Beowulf.
‘Luck served you there,’ says Gimli to Merry and Pippin (II, 169); ‘but you seized your chance with both hands, one might say.’
If they hadn't, ‘luck’ would no doubt by that time have looked very different.
In Middle-earth, then, both good and evil function as external powers and as inner impulses from the psyche.
It is perhaps fair to say that while the balances are maintained, we are on the whole more conscious of evil as an objective power and of good as a subjective impulse; Mordor and ‘the Shadow’ are nearer and more visible than the Valar or ‘luck’.
This lack of symmetry is moreover part of a basic denial of security throughout The Lord of the Rings .
Repeatedly we are told that if its characters fail to resist the Shadow, they will be taken over, but if they do resist they may get killed; similarly if they reject the vagaries of chance (if Frodo for instance had refused to leave the Shire with the Ring), it's likely something highly unpleasant will happen, but if they accept and obey things could grow even worse.
The benevolent powers offer no guarantees.
The best recommendation Gandalf can make is not to think about such things.
‘But let us not darken our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the Dark Tower.
For the Enemy has failed — so far’(II, 100).
Since it hasn't happened, in other words, it isn't wyrd , and so need not a explained.
Still, it is essential to the story that such thoughts be entertained, as indeed Gandalf also says to Pippin: ‘If you will meddle in the  affairs of Wizards, you must be prepared to think of such things’(11, 199).
Without them the characters' courage would look smaller; and courage is perhaps the strongest element in the Tolkienian synthesis of virtue.
Apparent paradoxes: happy sadness and hopeless cheer
This has been both resented and denied: resented, simply because courage is no longer a very fashionable part of virtue; denied, in that some have said things are too easy for Frodo and his companions all through.
They do escape, after all.
Only Boromir of the Nine dies during the course of the action, and he deserves it.
Gandalf is resurrected.
Pathos is created only by the sacrifice of a few members of the virtuous side, mostly old ones like Théoden or Dáin, or peripheral ones like Háma and Halbarad and the list of mere names in the Rohan dirge after the Pelennor Fields.
In a review in the Observer (27 November 1955)— one which Tolkien very much resented, see Biography , p. 223 — Edwin Muir propounded a thesis that the non-adulthood of the romance was shown by its painlessness: ‘The good boys, having fought a deadly battle, emerge at the end of it well, triumphant and happy, as boys would naturally expect to do.
There are only one or two minor casualties.’
In this there is a kind of truth (for Tolkien was kind-hearted about things like the ‘evacuation’ of Minas Tirith and the survival of Bill the pony), but also an evident falsehood.
When all is over Frodo for one is neither ‘well’, ‘triumphant’ nor even ‘happy’.
And he only exemplifies a much stronger theme in the work as a whole: the failure of the good, one might even say a sense of ‘defeatism’.
In the strict or dictionary sense The Lord of the Rings evades that concept totally, for according to the OED ‘defeatism’ is a straight borrowing from French défaitisme , recorded in English for the first time in 1918 and meaning ‘Conduct tending to bring about acceptance of defeat, esp.
by action on civilian opinion’.
With his best friends dead in Flanders Tolkien had cause to hate that idea like poison, and indeed no one in Middle-earth is allowed to voice it.
Even Denethor's reaction to defeat is to commit ceremonial suicide, not negotiate for some ‘Vichy’ status-though that is what Sauron's mouthpiece offers at III, 166, in a speech full of the Middle-earth analogues of ‘reparations’, ‘demilitarised zones’and ‘puppet governments’.
Gandalf rejects that proposal with particular violence, and at all times discussion of odds or probabilities turns him hard and obstinate: ‘Still,’ he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin, while his beard went stiff and straight like bristling wire, ‘we must keep up our courage.
You will soon be well, if I do not talk you to death.
You are in Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.'’
‘Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof’ seems to be his motto.
Yet Gandalf also on occasion, together with the other wise men  and women of the story, accepts defeat as a long-term prospect, a prospect which The Lord of the Rings as a whole does not deny.
Thus Galadriel says of her life, ‘Through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat’.
Elrond agrees, ‘I have seen three ages in the West of the world, and many defeats and many fruitless victories’.
Later he queries his own adjective ‘fruitless’, but still repeats that the victory long ago in which Sauron was overthrown but not destroyed ‘did not achieve its end’.
The whole history of Middle-earth seems to show that good is attained only at vast expense while evil recuperates almost at will.
Thang-orodrim is broken without evil being at all‘broken for ever ’, as the elves had thought.
Númenor is drowned without getting rid of Sauron.
Sauron is defeated and his Ring taken by Isildur, only to set in motion the crisis at the end of the Third Age.
And even if that crisis is surmounted, it is made extremely clear that this success too will conform to the general pattern of ‘fruitlessness’— or maybe one should say its fruit will be bitter.
Destruction of the Ring, says Galadriel, will mean that her ring and Gandalf's and Elrond's will also lose their power, so that Lothlórien ‘fades’ and the elves ‘dwindle’.
Along with them will go the ents and the dwarves, indeed the whole imagined world of Middle-earth, to be replaced by modernity and the domination of men; all the characters and their story, one might say, will shrink to poetic ‘rigmaroles’ and misunderstood snatches in plays and ballads.
Beauty especially will be a casualty.
‘However the fortunes of war shall go…’, asks Théoden, ‘may it not so end that much that was fair and wonderful shall pass for ever out of Middle-earth?’
‘The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured’, replies Gandalf, ‘nor made as if it had not been.’
Fangorn agrees when he says of his own dying species, ‘songs like trees bear fruit only in their own time and their own way, and sometimes they are withered untimely’.
The collective opinion of Middle-earth is summed up in Gandalf's aphoristic statement: ‘I am Gandalf, Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.’
The implications of that could be alarming.
It sounds Manichaean.
However as has already been seen Tolkien was careful to voice rebuttals of Manichaeanism and assertions of the nonentity of evil many times throughout.
Why then the continuing pessimistic expectations of defeat?
The answer, obviously enough, is that a major goal of The Lord of the Rings was to dramatise that ‘theory of courage’ which Tolkien had said in his British Academy lecture was the ‘great contribution’to humanity of the old literature of the North.
The central pillar of that theory was Ragnarok — the day when gods and men would fight evil and the giants, and inevitably be defeated.
Its great statement was that defeat is no refutation.
The right side remains right even if it has no ultimate hope at all.
In a sense this Northern mythology asks more of men, even makes more of them, than does Christianity, for it offers them no heaven, no salvation, no reward for virtue except the sombre satisfaction of having done what is right.
Tolkien  wanted his characters in The Lord of the Rings to live up to the same high standard.
He was careful therefore to remove easy hope from them, even to make them conscious of long-term defeat and doom.
Nevertheless Tolkien was himself a Christian, and he faced a problem in the ‘theory of courage’ he so much admired: its mainspring is despair, its spirit often heathen ferocity.
One can see him grappling with the difficulty in his poem-cum-essay ‘The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm's Son’, published in 1953, the year before The Fellowship of the Ring .
This is a coda to the Old English poem The Battle of Maldon , which commemorates an English defeat by the Vikings in AD 991, and celebrates especially the unyielding courage of the English bodyguard who refused to retreat when their leader was killed, but fought round his body till all were dead.
The very core of the sentiment is expressed by an old retainer called Beorhtwold: ‘Heart shall be bolder, harder be purpose, /more proud the spirit, as our power lessens…’
These lines, said Tolkien, ‘have been held to be the finest expression of the northern heroic spirit, Norse or English; the clearest statement of the doctrine of uttermost endurance in the service of indomitable will’.
Nevertheless he felt uneasy about them.
He thought they were old already in 991; he saw they could be said as well by a heathen as a Christian; he thought the fierce spirit they expressed was one of the reasons for Beorhtnoth's rash decision to let the Vikings cross the river and fight on level ground; they had led to defeat and the death of the innocent.
In Tolkien's poem, accordingly, the words are not given to Beorhtwold but form part of a dream dreamt by the poet Torhthelm:
Tolkien himself did not think the dark would conquer.
The voices Torhthelm hears are those of his pagan ancestors, no better than the Vikings ‘lying off London in their long vessels, /while they drink to Thor and drown the sorrow/of hell's children’.
They are as wrong as Gandalf, or even more so; Tídwald rebukes Torhthelm for being ‘heathenish’ when he wakes up, and the poem ends with the monks of Ely singing the Dirige or ‘dirge’from the Office of the Dead.
However Tolkien admired the aesthetic impulse towards good beneath the pride and sorrow.
In Middle-earth he wanted a similar ultimate courage undiluted by confidence — but at the same time untainted by rage and despair.
One may say that the wise characters in The Lord of the Rings are often without hope and so near the edge of despair, but they do not succumb.
That is left to Denethor, who will not fight to the last, but turns like a heathen to suicide and the sacrifice of his kin.
Tolkien needed a new image for ultimate bravery, one milder but not weaker than Beorhtwold's.
He centred it, oddly enough, on laughter, cheerfulness, refusal to look into the future at all.
There are hints of this in Middle English — the critical moment in Sir Orfeo comes when the king in his madness sees ladies at falconry, and laughs — while there is a modern analogue in Joseph Conrad's The Shadow-Line (1917), where laughter is an exorcising force.
In The Lord of the Rings it can be expressed by such high-status characters as Faramir, who says at one point that he does not hope to see Frodo ever again, but nevertheless invents a picture of them in an unknown future ‘sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at grief’.
However the true vehicle of the ‘theory of laughter’ is the hobbits; their behaviour is calqued on the traditional English humour in adversity, but has deeper semantic roots.
Thus it is Pippin who looks up at the sun and the banners and offers comfort to Beregond, and Merry who never loses heart when even Théoden appears prey to ‘horror and doubt’.
But Sam on the road to Mordor goes beyond both.
He has less hope even than Faramir.
Indeed, we are told, he had:
Is it possible, one might wonder, to be ‘cheerful’ without any hope at all?
Certainly it seems hardly sensible, but the idea rings true — it is corroborated by several first-hand accounts of the First World War, perhaps especially by Frank Richards's Old Soldiers Never Die (published 1933, and written significantly enough by a ranker, not an officer).
Sam's twist on semantics is repeated by Pippin.
He describes Fangorn and the last march of the Ents: was it ‘fruitless’?
Evidently not, in the short term, but in the long term Fangorn knows his race and story are sterile.
The realisation makes him, according to Pippin, ‘sad but not unhappy’, and to modern English semantics the phrase makes almost no sense, like hopeless cheer.
However an early meaning of ‘sad’ is ‘settled, determined’; ‘cheer’comes from Old French chair , ‘face’.
The paradoxes put forward Tolkien's theses that determination should survive the worst that can happen, that a stout pretence is more valuable than sincere despair.
However the best delineation of Tolkien's new model of courage is perhaps at the end of Book IV chapter 8, ‘The Stairs of Cirith Ungol’.
Here Sam and Frodo, like Faramir, have little hope but still think of others in the future maybe ‘laughing at grief’.
Frodo indeed laughs himself: ‘Such a sound had not been heard in those places since Sauron came to Middle-earth.
To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the stones were listening and the tall rocks leaning over them.’
But then they fall asleep, and Gollum returns, to see and for a moment to love and aspire to the ‘peace’ he sees in their faces.
It is characteristic of a kind of hardness in the fable that on this one occasion when Gollum's heart is stirred and he makes a gesture of penitence, Sam should wake up, misunderstand, and accuse Gollum of ‘pawing’ and ‘sneaking’.
Gollum gets no credit for his minor decency.
But then he gave Frodo no credit earlier for his decency in saving Gollum from Faramir and the archers, preferring to spit, bear malice, and complain about ‘nice Master's little trickses’.
This is no excuse for Sam, but it shows maybe where criticisms like Edwin Muir's break down.
The good side in The Lord of the Rings does win, but its casualties include, besides Théoden and Boromir, beauty, Lothlórien, Middle-earth and even Gollum.
Furthermore the characters are aware of their losses all the time, and bear a burden of regret.
They just have to make the best of things and not confuse ‘sorrow’ with ‘despair’; even the hobbits' schoolboy humour has a point.
Tolkien after all put forward his theses about courage and about laughter fairly clearly.
The critical inability to see them comes partly from mere ideological reluctance; partly, though, from unfamiliarity with the basic structural mode of The Lord of the Rings , the ancient and pre-novelistic device of entrelacement .
The ethics of interlace
There is a minor mystery about this mode, for Tolkien might have been expected not to like it.
Its greatest literary monuments are the sequence of French prose tales from the thirteenth century about King Arthur, known as the Vulgate Cycle and transposed into English only in highly compressed form by Sir Thomas Malory; and the later Italian epics about the knights of Charlemagne, Boiardo's Orlando Innamorato , ‘Roland in Love, and Ariosto's Orlando Furioso , ‘Roland Run Mad’, imitated in English by Spenser's The Faerie Queene .
Hence, no doubt, the early reviewers' comparisons of Tolkien with Malory, Spenser, Ariosto.
However Tolkien disobligingly remarked that he hadn't read Ariosto and wouldn't have liked him if he had (Biography , p. 218), while Spenser  exemplified much that he hated (see pp. 42–3 above).
As for King Arthur, Tolkien might well have seen him as a symptom of English vagueness.
Why should Englishmen take interest in a Welsh hero committed to their destruction, and known anyway via a French rehash?
Still, the fact remains that Tolkien did produce a narrative of entrelacement .
He had read a good deal of French romance for his Sir Gawain edition, and may have reflected further that even Beowulf has a kind of ‘interlace’ technique.
He knew also that the Icelandic word for ‘short story’ is þáttr , ‘a thread’; sagas often consist of several þættir , strands woven together.
The image is in Gandalf's mind when he says to Théoden, ‘There are children in your land who, out of the twisted threads of story, could pick the answer to your question.’
To unravel entrelacement — that is at least one route to wisdom.
The narrative of the great ‘interlaced’ romances is, however, by no means famous for wisdom.
Malory's editor, Eugene Vinaver, comments:
The result was meaningless confusion.
This is very much not the case with Tolkien.
The basic pattern of the centre of The Lord of the Rings is separations and encounters and wanderings, but these are controlled first by a map (something no Arthurian narrative possesses), and second by an extremely tight chronology of days and dates.
Along with this goes a deliberate chronological ‘leapfrogging’.
To particularise: the narrative of The Fellowship of the Ring is single-stranded, following Frodo, with the exceptions of the ‘flashback’ narratives embedded in ‘The Shadow of the Past’and ‘The Council of Elrond’.
The Nine Walkers themselves stick together from the leaving of Rivendell to the end of the volume, apart from losing Gandalf in Moria.
But on Amon Hen, on the 26th February, the fellowship is dispersed.
Boromir is killed.
Frodo and Sam canoe away by themselves.
Pippin and Merry are kidnapped by the Uruk-hai.
Aragorn, left to choose between chasing the latter or following the Ring, decides to pursue the orcs, along with Legolas and Gimli.
The fates of these three parties are then followed separately.
Briefly, what happens is that chapters 1 and 2 of Book III take Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli from the 26th to the 28th February; chapters 3 and 4 lead Pippin and Merry from the 26th February to the 2nd March; chapters 5–7 return to Aragorn and his companions and ‘leapfrog’ them past Merry and Pippin again to the 4th March; while in chapter 8 these two sub-groups of the fellowship meet again on the 5th, for Merry and Pippin to bring their story up-to-date again in recounted narrative.
By chapter 11 they are splitting up again, Gandalf (who had returned from Moria in chapter 5) riding off with Pippin, Merry setting off with Théoden, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli going together once more towards the Paths of the Dead.
They will not gather again till chapter 6 of Book V, ‘The Battle of the Pelennor Fields’.
These, however, are not the only strands.
All the time Frodo and Sam are spinning another, and doing it with the same chronological overlapping.
They too depart on the 26th February, and have reached the 28th by the start of Book IV.
By the end of that book, though, they have got to the 13th March, some eight days later than the last events of which we are told in Book III.
Gandalf and the others do not ‘catch up’ with Frodo and Sam till chapter 5 of Book V, but then they continue once again to the 25th March, which the two hobbits do not reach for another three chapters.
Now this unnatural form of presentation works well for surprise and suspense.
It is a shock to have the battle of Helm's Deep decided by the Ents and Huorns, who were last seen marching on Isengard, but whose powers have never come out in the open before.
It is a good ‘cliffhanger’ scene at the end of Book V, as Pippin falls in the black blood of the troll, to have his fate decided by events of which we have no knowledge.
But Tolkien meant more by entrelacement than that.
One example of a retrospective connection has already been given.
As Frodo feels the pressure of the Eye on Amon Hen, a Voice speaks to him and gives him a moment of freedom to act.
This voice is Gandalf's, though Frodo thinks he is dead and the reader does too.
Gandalf says as much at II, 99, though he is laconic about it —‘I sat in a high place (the great tree in Lothlórien?], and I strove with the Dark Tower’— since Aragorn and the others he is addressing can have no idea what is being referred to.
Gandalf remarks at the same time that he sent Gwaihir the eagle to watch the River; presumably he was the eagle Aragorn saw, but thought nothing of, as he stared out from Amon Hen on the first page of The Two Towers .
Other cross-connections are frequent.
Fangorn looks long at the two hobbits when they tell him Gandalf is dead; he does so because he doesn't believe them, having seen Gandalf himself a couple of days before.
But we do not realise this till Gandalf remarks on their near-meeting some thirty pages later.
Across the whole breadth of the story, meanwhile, fly the Nazgûl.
Frodo and Sam feel their presence three times as they wander across the Emyn Muil and the Dead Marshes, at II, 213, 237, and 242, i.e. on the 29th February, 1st March and 4th March.
Gollum feels sure this is no coincidence.
‘Three times!’ he whimpered.
‘Three times is a threat.
They feel us here, they feel the Precious.
The precious is their master.
We cannot go any further this way, no.
It's no use, no use!'’
What he says sounds plausible enough, but it's wrong.
Three times is a  coincidence, and actually we can guess each time what the Nazgûl are doing.
The first was coming back from a fruitless wait for Gríshnakh the orc, dead and burnt that same day, with the smoke from his burning ‘seen by many watchful eyes’.
The second was probing towards Rohan and Saruman.
The third was heading for Isengard, to alarm Pippin on its way with the thought that it had somehow been despatched for him (11, 204).
Meanwhile the body of Boromir establishes a similar transverse thread as it drifts down the Great River, to be seen by Faramir, to have the workmanship on its belt noted and compared with the brooches of Sam and Frodo eight days later.
These references and allusions tie the story together, we would say, or to use Gandalf's image show one thread twisting over another.
They prove the author has the story under control, and are significant to any reader who has grasped the entire plot.
However that is not how they appear to the characters, or to the reader whose attention has lapsed (as whose does not?).
In this contrast between half- and full-perception lies the point of interlacings.
For to the characters the story appears, to repeat a term used already, as a ‘bewilderment’.
They are lost in the woods and plains of Middle-earth.
They also do not know what is going on or what to do next.
Aragorn has to choose between going to Mordor or to Minas Tirith; delays, and then finds himself choosing between Sam and Frodo or Merry and pippin; picks one quest, and then has to decide whether to rest or pursue by night.
Neither decision nor delay seems to pay off.
‘All that I have done today has gone amiss’, he says (II, 17); ‘Since we passed through the Argonath my choices have gone amiss’(II, 28); ‘And now may I make a right choice, and change the evil fate of this unhappy day!’
(II, 21).
Éomer's intervention does not help him much, for he and his companions cannot decide at the end of chapter 2 whether they have seen Saruman or not.
It appears they did (we learn later, 11, 102), but the next time they think someone is Saruman it is Gandalf.
Furthermore the appearance of Saruman to drive off the borrowed horses is coincidental with the arrival of Shadowfax — the note of joy in their whinnyings puzzles Legolas, though their eventual return with Shadowfax provides an equine equivalent for the unexpected return of Gandalf.
Simultaneously, in Fangorn Forest, Gandalf, Saruman and Treebeard himself are wandering, meeting or not meeting seemingly at random.
The effect as a whole is like that of A Midsummer Night's Dream , where pairs of lovers wander in another enchanted wood, their paths crossed and tangled by puck, Oberon, Titania and the infatuating Bully Bottom.
‘Infatuation’ is indeed a word one might use as well as‘bewilderment’.
It means following the ignis fatuus , the ‘will o’ the wisp' that traditionally leads travellers into bog or quicksand; an analogue to the multiple wanderings of Book 111 is Frodo staring at the corpse-candles in chapter 2 of Book IV, to be warned by Gollum not to heed them, or the dead, rotten, phantasmal faces in the marshes below: ‘Or hobbits go  down to join the Dead ones and light little candles.
Follow Sméagol!
Don't look at lights!’
Even though it comes from Gollum, this is good advice.
For of course Aragorn and the others, including Frodo, are in their feelings of confusion and meaninglessness absolutely wrong —‘infatuated’, ‘bewildered’, drowning in a bog of mere events, caught in a strangler's net of wyrd .
They have good apparent grounds for despair.
But as it turns out (as it happens, as ‘chance’ or ‘luck’would have it) there are things in the web of story to refute those grounds.
As Gandalf points out, all Sauron and Saruman and the orcs have done between them is ‘bring Pippin and Merry with marvellous speed, and in the nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they would never have come at all!’— and so, one might say, though it is beyond Gandalf's knowledge at the time, to rouse the Ents, overthrow Saruman, save Rohan, and free Théoden to make his decisive intervention at Minas Tirith.
There are still several things one can not say: for instance, that Saruman's treachery was accordingly a Good Thing, or that the rescue of Minas Tirith is a reward for Aragorn's persistence.
After all, if Saruman had stayed loyal things might have ended better; if Aragorn had abandoned the chase Merry and Pippin would have stirred up Fangorn just the same.
What one can be absolutely sure about is that giving up does the other side's work for them, and ruins all your own possible futures and other people's as well.
The despair of Denethor killed Théoden, Gandalf surmises at II, 132.
While persistence offers no guarantees, it does give ‘luck’ a chance to operate, through unknown allies or unknown weaknesses in the opposition.
As a working theory this is impregnable, whether considered sceptically or superstitiously.
To it the entrelacements contribute a recognisable attitude towards reality.
Events in the world, they say, appear chaotic and unplanned, appear so all but unmistakably.
But however strong that impression is, it is a subjective one founded on the inevitably limited view of any individual.
If individuals could see more widely — as we can, by virtue of the narrative structure of The Lord of the Rings — they would realise that events have a cause-and-effect logic, though there are so many causes that perhaps no one but God can ever see them all at once.
The world is a Persian carpet, then, and we are ants lumbering from one thread to the other and observing that there is no pattern in the colours.
That is why one of Gandalf's favourite sayings is ‘Even the wise cannot see all ends’, and why he often demonstrates its truth himself.
Thus it is ironic that he more than once offers a cold-hearted appraisal of the junior hobbits' utility.
‘If these hobbits understood the danger’, he says to Elrond, ‘they would not dare to go.’
But they would still want to, he concludes, and their wish should outweigh their ignorance.
He says to Pippin later, ‘Generous deed should not be outweighed by cold counsel’.
In the end he is proved both right and wrong: Merry and pippin between them rouse the Ents, save Faramir, kill the Ringwraith.
The last deed is caused by the sheer chance of finding a dagger ‘bound round with spells for the destruction of Mordor’ in the wight's barrow.
‘Glad would he have been to know its fate who wrought it slowly long ago’, comments the narrator; and his comment shows that the ancient smith was not glad, did not know, was condemned to defeat and death and oblivion in the barrows.
Still, even after thousands of years hope should not be lost: nor relied on.
It is Pippin too who looks in the palantir and so misleads Sauron into thinking Saruman may have the Ring.
This may have helped draw on the Enemy's hasty stroke, thinks Gandalf at III, 88.
More important is the fact that Aragorn has the stone available to him, and that Sauron (having seen a hobbit in the same stone) thinks Aragorn also has the Ring : it is because Aragorn showed himself to Sauron in the palantir that Sauron neglects his guard.
‘The Eye turned inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a bright sword, and a stern and kingly face it saw’(III, 200).
But once more ironically, it is what the Eye does not see that matters.
The bright sword and kingly face turn out not to be critical.
It is the two ants creeping along the Ephel Dúath who are going to change reality.
Indeed Frodo and Sam provide perhaps the strongest effects of the entrelacement .
Their bewilderments, infatuations, sense of being lost and abandoned, are much stronger than those of Aragorn or Gimli or anyone else in the more active half of the story.
But by the time we come to following their strand along we know that these are not true .
‘All my choices have proved ill’, says Frodo within a couple of pages of the start of his quest.
But his words echo unmistakably those of Aragorn nearly two hundred pages earlier; and we know Aragorn was wrong.
What counts, then, is that Frodo should go on choosing.
We perceive his doubt and weariness simultaneously as a natural reaction to circumstances, and as a temptation, even a phantasm or illusion of the Dark Tower.
Evil works, we realise, by sapping the will with over-complication.
Like ‘the Shadow’, this is in fiction an external force with physical effects of which sensitive characters like Legolas can be aware; it appeals to a recognition of truth outside fiction, however, in its buried statements that clouds have silver linings, that fortune favours the brave, that even in reality things are not always as they seem.
There is indeed a corpus of proverbs scattered through The Lord of the Rings , which add weight to the implications of interlace.
‘Oft the unbidden guest proves the best company’, says Éomer, and later ‘Twice blessed is hope unlooked-for’.
‘Where will wants not, a way opens’, says his sister, more solemnly but also more familiarly.
‘Oft hope is born, when all is forlorn’, says Legolas.
He, Aragorn and Théoden also state proverbs about freshness, with respectively ‘Rede oft is found at the rising of the sun’, ‘None knows what the new day shall bring him’, and ‘In the morning counsels are best…’
Legolas adds a spatial metaphor with his ‘Few can foresee whither their road will lead them…’
It should be noted that most  of these are neutral on the optimism/pessimism scale, while some of the characters' proverbs approach the meaningless.
‘Strange are the turns of fortune’, says Gandalf (which could be good or bad depending on context), and ‘Hope oft deceives’, says Éomer (also so true as to be non-predictive).
Still, most of those quoted so far are real proverbs as the place-names of the Shire are real place-names, and they have a similar function: to draw us in, to make connections between experience inside and outside the story.
Within this continuum, however, other proverbs are planted, sounding much the same as the others but more original and so closer to Tolkien's own intention.
‘Often does hatred hurt itself’, says Gandalf; ‘Oft evil will shall evil mar’, says Théoden; ‘The hasty stroke goes oft astray’, says Aragorn; ‘A traitor may betray himself’, Gandalf again.
It takes the action of the whole of The Lord of the Rings to make these ring true and there is a vein of proverbial wisdom (about God being on the side of the big battalions) which would utterly deny them.
These invented sayings show in miniature the ‘contrivance’ of which the trilogy has often been accused.
Only a fool, though, would deny that the contrivances have a point; only a very careless reader would think that the entrelacements of this romance are purely for variety, and have nothing to say about ‘the fundamental character of reality’ at all.
Just allegory and large symbolism
Tolkien's proverbs edge, on the whole, towards the archaic.
So does his use of omens and prophecies — a feature of The Lord of the Rings which may furthermore seem to deny the idea of free will being left intact by the forces of providence.
Galadriel seems to know in advance that Aragorn will take the Paths of the Dead, Aragorn to know that he and Éomer will meet again, ‘though all the hosts of Mordor should stand between’.
Someone (or something) foreknew that the Ringwraith would not fall ‘by the hand of man’.
These cross-temporal flashes suggest, perhaps, that some things are bound to happen regardless of what people do or choose.
Yet that would clearly be a false conclusion.
The words of prophecies could be fulfilled after all in many different ways.
We are left always at liberty to suppose that Aragorn and Éomer could have met once more as prisoners, say, that the Grey Company could have quailed and turned back.
If Merry had failed to stab the Ringwraith, it might have died aeons later at the hands of some other woman, hobbit, elf-hero.
As Galadriel says of her Mirror (I, 378): it ‘shows many things, and not all have yet come to pass.
Some never come to be, unless those that behold the visions turn aside from their path to prevent them.’
She articulates a theory of compromise between fate and free will once more at least a millennium old: in the Solomon and Saturn poem Saturn asks which will be the stronger,wyrd óe  warnung , ‘fated events or foresight’, and Solomon tells him that ‘Fate is hard to alter…
And nevertheless an intelligent man can moderate all the things that fate causes, as long as he is clear in his mind’.
It is important to realise though, that antiquarian as Tolkien's motives often were, and ‘pre-scientific’ as the opinions of Galadriel and Solomon seem, what Tolkien was writing about is still in a way a live issue.
‘Every bullet has his billet’ is a distinctively modern saying, first recorded in that form in 1765, and in use up to the present day to indicate that sometimes no precautions work; yet saying the proverb, and believing it, probably never stopped anyone taking cover.
‘God helps those who help themselves’, to repeat a proverb mentioned earlier.
Tolkien in other words never lost his belief in the reality and continuity, not only of language and of history, but of human nature and of some intellectual problems.
This should be kept in mind when considering the much vexed question of allegory, or symbolism, in The Lord of the Rings .
Tolkien's opinions here are clear only up to a point.
As is well known, he wrote in the ‘Foreword’ to the second edition: ‘I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence.’
He went on, though: ‘I much prefer history, true or feigned, with its varied applicability to the thought and experience of readers.
I think that many confuse ‘applicability’ with ‘allegory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the other in the purposed domination of the author.’
Some relation between fiction and fact might be perceived, then; and ‘The Scouring of the Shire’ had ‘some basis in experience’though no ‘contemporary political reference whatsoever’, not even to Britain's Socialist ‘austerity’government of 1945–50.
As Tolkien wrote of Beowulf , it was important to preserve a balance, to see that the ‘large symbolism is near the surface, but…does not break through, nor become allegory’.
‘Allegory’ would after all imply, to Tolkien (see pp. 33–7 above), that The Lord of the Rings had only one meaning, which would have to remain constant all the way through; he toyed contemptuously with the notion in the ‘Foreword’as he sketched out a plan for his work as a real allegory with the Ring itself as president Truman's atomic bomb.
‘Large symbolism’, however, should not be a matter of one imposed diagram, but of repeated offered hints.
The hints would work only if they were true both in fact and in fiction.
History, thought Tolkien, was varied in its applicability.
But if you understood it properly, you saw it repeating itself.
Some of Tolkien's hints have been glanced at already.
The Riders of Rohan, and the Rangers of Gondor, will not offer the excuse that they were ‘only obeying orders’; one cannot avoid the contrast with the Nazis.
When Gandalf tells Frodo about the Ring, Frodo replies ‘I wish it need not have happened in my time’, but Gandalf reproves him: ‘So do I…and so do all who live to see such times.
But that is not for them to decide’(I, 60).
The rebuke is deserved by Frodo, but also by Neville Chamberlain with his now infamous promise that he brought ‘peace in our time’.
Elrond, at I, 256, has learnt better.
He remembers a moment when ‘the Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever’ but knows that ‘it was not so’.
Tolkien himself fought in ‘the war to end all wars’, but saw his sons fighting in the one after that.
Other ironies are not hard to discover.
As Gandalf and pippin ride from the Anórien towards Minas Tirith, they find their way blocked by men building a wall (III, 20).
It is Denethor's insistence on defending this (III, 89) that nearly kills Faramir, and all it does in practice is to obstruct the arrival of the Rohirrim (III, 111) by which time it is already a ‘ruin', for all the ‘labour’ wasted on it at the start.
Men of Tolkien's generation could hardly avoid thinking of the Maginot line.
Gandalf's advice, ‘But leave your trowels and sharpen your swords!’, has more than an immediate relevance.
The hint is unmistakable, as are others in the trilogy, of Vichyism and quislings, of puppet governments and demilitarised zones.
How well do they hang together, though?
Did Tolkien go on from the exploitation of occasional scenes to the manipulation of plot, the creation of recognisably symbolic characters, the thing the TLS reviewer asked for so plaintively, ‘a clear message for the modern world’?
Of course Tolkien would have scorned ‘message’ as much as ‘modern’.
Still, he created two characters in The Lord of the Rings of particular suggestiveness, both of them originally on the right side but seduced or corroded by evil, and so especially likely to have analogues in the real world: these are Denethor and Saruman, each of them seen faintly satirically, almost politically.
To take the more obvious example first, Saruman shows many signs of being equatable with industrialism, or technology.
His very name means something of the sort.
Searu in Old English (the West Saxon form of Mercian saru ) means ‘Device, design, contrivance, art’.
Bosworth-Toller's Dictionary says cautiously that often you cannot tell ‘whether the word is used with a good or with a bad meaning’.
When Beowulf walks into Hrothgar's hall the poet says appreciatively that ‘on him his armour shone, the cunning net (searo-net ) sewed by the crafts (orþancum ) of the smith’.
Jewellers are searo-cræftig , and wizards snottor searu-þancum , ‘wise in cunning thoughts’.
The word stretches from wisdom to plot and treachery, though.
Beowulf denies he ever sought out searo-niþas , ‘cunning malices’, Grendel's corpse-holding glove is searo-bendum fæst , ‘fixed with cunning bands’.
The word implies cleverness, but is nearly always linked with metal: iron in armour and clasps, but also silver and gold.
The dragon's treasure is a searu-gimma geþræc , ‘a heap of cunning jewels’, in the Riming Poem the poet says obscurely sinc searwade , ‘treasure played the traitor’.
That means ‘left its possessor’, suggest Messrs Bosworth and Toller.
To Tolkien, with his theory of dragonish ‘bewilderment’, it meant more likely ‘stayed with its possessor’, driving him insidiously to greed and cunning.
These cruxes all form part of Saruman's character.
He is learned, but his learning tends to the practical.
‘He has a mind of metal and wheels’, says Fangorn.
His orcs use a kind of gunpowder at Helm's Deep (II, 142); thirty pages later the Ents meet at Isengard, or ‘Irontown’, a kind of napalm — perhaps one should say with closer reference to Tolkien's own experience, a Flammenwerfer .
The implication is that Saruman has been led from ethically neutral researches into the kind of wanton pollution and love of dirt we see in ‘The Scouring of the Shire’ by something corrupting in the love of machines or in the very desire for control over the natural world.
It is interesting, too, that Saruman's Orc-men call him ‘Sharkey’ or ‘Old Man’.
To a medievalist the name might well suggest the ‘Old Man of the Mountains’ or leader of the Assassins as described in Mandeville's Travels .
‘Old Man’ is simply Arabic shaikh (cp.
Orkish sharkú ).
And Mandeville's Old Man ruled, of course, by feeding his followers hashish and dèluding them with dreams of paradise.
So, we might think, ‘cunning man’, or ‘machine man’, or ‘technological man’, keeps a Utopian carrot dangling in front of our noses, of a world of leisure and convenience where each new mill grinds faster than the one before.
But as Ted Sandy-man ought to have realised, ‘you've got to have grist before you can grind’; machine-masters end up machine-minders, and all for nothing, or rather for an insidious logic of expansion.
This may not be a totally convincing critique of modern society, but it has clear modern relevance and is more than mere dislike.
There is something suggestive also in Saruman's notorious ‘voice’, which always seems ‘wise and reasonable’, and wakes desire in others ‘by swift agreement to seem wise themselves’.
Gandalf's harshness represents denial of Utopias and insistence that nothing comes free.
Even Lotho ‘Pimple’, Frodo's relative, has a place in the argument because he is such an obvious Gradgrind — greedy and bossy to begin with, but staying within the law till his manipulators take over, to jail his mother, kill him and eat him too (if we can believe the hints about Gríma Wormtongue).
Jeremy Bentham to Victorian capitalists?
Old Bolshevik to new Stalinist?
The progression is familiar enough, and it adds another modern dimension to Middle-earth-or rather a timeless one, for though in the modern age we give Saruman a modern ‘applicability’, his name, and the evident uncertainty even in Anglo-Saxon times over mechanical cleverness and ‘machinations’, shows that his meaning was ancient too.
Saruman nevertheless does have one distinctively modern trait, which is his association with Socialism.
His men say they are gathering things ‘for fair distribution’, though nobody believes them — a particularly strange compromise of evil with morality, for Middle-earth, where vice rarely troubles to be hypocritical.
It is worth saying accordingly that Denethor, contrasted with Saruman as he is in other ways with Théoden, is an arch-conservative.
In almost his last speech he declares:
‘I will have naught ’ is a particularly ominous expression.
As The Lord of the Rings was coming to the end of its gestation it became possible for the first time for political leaders to say they wanted nothing and make it come true .
Denethor clearly will not submit to the Enemy, as Saruman did, but he also cares nothing in the end for his subjects, while his love even for his sons would take them both to death with him.
‘The West has failed’, he says.
‘It shall all go up in a great fire, and all shall be ended!
Ash!
Ash and smoke blown away on the wind!’
He does not say ‘nuclear fire’, but the thought fits.
Denethor breaks his own staff of office as Saruman does not.
He mingles an excess of heroic temper — the ancient Ragnarok spirit, one might say, which Tolkien with significant anachronism twice calls ‘heathen’— with a mean concern for his own sovereignty and his own boundaries: a combination that unusually and in this one particular case makes no sense at all before 1945 and the invention of the ‘great deterrent’.
It is a risky business finally to draw a Tolkienian ‘inner meaning’ from these various ‘applicabilities’.
Tolkien himself insisted that he had not intended one; and finding one need not be the ultimate necessity for the critic, since after all political messages add nothing to Tom Bombadil, or the Ents, or the Riders of Rohan, or the entrelacements , or most of the things discussed in this chapter and the ones around it.
The real point is that Tolkien's theories about nature, evil, luck and our perception of the world generated as a sort of by-product modern applications and political ones.
His attachment to the ‘theory of courage’ made him believe that the Western world in his lifetime had been short not of wit or of strength, but of will.
His readings of heroic poems made him especially scornful of the notion that to say ‘evil must be fought’ is the same as saying ‘might is right’.
He thought that England, in forgetting her early literature, had fallen into liberal self-delusions.
Naturally all these ‘morals’ or ‘meanings’can in themselves be accepted or rejected, depending very much on the varied experience of readers.
What cannot be denied is that they emerge from much experience in the author, and much original thought, that they are moreover integrated in a fiction which has a power independent of them.
Tolkien was not writing to a thesis.
A good deal of what he wrote may be taken as a rejection of the ‘liberal interpretation of history’, and indeed of the ‘liberal humanist tradition’ in literature; nevertheless the centre of his story is the Ring and the maxim that ‘power corrupts’, a concept unimpeachably modern, democratic, anti-though not un-heroic.
Eucatastrophe, realism, and romance
It should be clear by this time that if there is one critical statement entirely and absolutely wrong, it is the one quoted at the start of this chapter, about The Lord of the Rings not being ‘moulded by some controlling vision of things which is at the same time its raison d'être' .
The ‘vision of things’ is there in the Ring, in the scenes of conflict and temptation, in the characters' words and attitudes, in proverbs and in prophecies and in the very narrative mode itself.
Naturally this ‘understanding of reality’ can be ‘denied’: so can they all.
But not to see that it exists shows a surprising (and therefore interesting) blindness.
It is matched only by the insistence of the anonymous reviewer of the TLS that in The Lord of the Rings all the good and bad sides do is try to kill each other, so that they cannot be told apart: ‘Morally there seems nothing to choose between them.’
The difference is at the very heart of the plot.
As W. H. Auden saw, in his piece for The New York Review of Books (22 January 1956), it is vital that Sauron does not guard the Cracks of Doom and discover Frodo because he is sure Aragorn will take the Ring:
Not to see points like that (and there are more obvious ones) is in a way shameful.
The repeated blindnesses of critics can only be explained by a deep dissatisfaction in them with the very data of ‘fairy-story’, an inhibition against accepting the conventions of romance.
Of these the greatest must be the ‘happy ending’(one brought about, more often than not, by ‘hap’ or ‘chance’or ‘luck’).
Tolkien, of course, being a Christian, did in absolute fact believe that in the end all things would end happily, that in a sense they already had — a belief he shared with Dante, and a matter of faith beyond argument.
It needs to be said though that he was capable of envisaging a different belief and even bringing it into his story.
Frodo and Sam debate it after they have destroyed the Ring and are caught in the fall of the Dark Tower.:
He does not change his mind, nor his perception of how ‘things are in the  world’.
They are changed for him by the eagles who come and take him in his sleep to a new world — which Sam, with a resurrected Gandalf in front of him, very nearly perceives as Heaven.
The difference between Earth and Middle-earth, one might say, is that in the latter faith can, just sometimes, be perceived as fact.
And while this is an enormous difference, it is not the same as that between the adult and the child.
It cannot be denied that there is a streak of ‘wish-fulfilment’ in The Lord of the Rings .
Tolkien would have liked to hear the horns of Rohan blow, and watch the Black Breath of inertia dissolve from his own country.
If his work has an image inside itself, it is I think the horn that Éomer gives to Merry, only a small one, but one from the hoard of Scatha the Worm and brought from the North by Eorl the Young.
It is a magic one, though only modestly so: ‘He that blows it at need shall set fear in the hearts of his enemies and joy in the hearts of his friends, and they shall hear him and come to him.’
When Merry blows it in the Shire the revolution against sloth and shabbiness and Saruman- ‘Sharkey’ is on: no doubt Tolkien would have liked to be able in his own person to do the same.
He got closer to his goal than many, however, at least when it came to bringing ‘joy’.
At the same time his portrayal of Frodo quietly sliding down to sleep, dismissal and an oblivion which would include ents, elves, dwarves and the whole of Middle-earth, shows that he recognised the limits of his own wishes and their non-correspondence with reality.
The last word on the relationship between his literary mode and that of realism may perhaps go to Professor Frank Kermode, who wrote:
Professor Kermode made those remarks however à propos of Shakespeare's Tempest .
And one has to say that while both Prospero and Gandalf are old men with staffs, Prospero brushes aside the oppositions of reality with an ease which Gandalf is never allowed to aspire to.
‘WHEN ALL OUR FATHERS WORSHIPPED STOCKS AND STONES’
Stylistic theories: Tolkien and Shakespeare
Mentioning Tolkien in the same breath with Shakespeare will seem to many rash, even perverse.
If there is one image which biographical criticism has projected powerfully, it is that of Tolkien the philistine, hater of literary mainstreams.
He read little modern poetry and little modern fiction, taking ‘no serious notice’ even of what he read.
He liked as much as anything the works of John Buchan.
In 1931 he succeeded in eliminating Shakespeare from his part of the Oxford English syllabus.
In childhood he found that he ‘disliked cordially’ Shakespeare's plays, remembering especially an early ‘bitter disappointment and disgust…with the shabby use made in Shakespeare of the coming of ‘Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane hill'’.
Many critics have felt that these strongly anti-literary or anti-poetic attitudes have found suitable reflection in Tolkien's own style, described variously as ‘Brewer's Biblical’, ‘Boy's Own’, irresistibly reminiscent of ‘the work of Mr Frank Richards’(the creator of Billy Bunter).
It is a common critical stance to praise Tolkien's conception, often somewhat vaguely, or with even more vagueness his ‘mythological’ or ‘mythopoeic’powers; but then to declare that the words do not live up to the things, the style ‘is quite inadequate to the theme’.
There are however immediate reasons for thinking that this stance is imperceptive.
Tolkien said that he ‘disliked’ Shakespeare ‘cordially’, but he used exactly the same phrase of allegory too, where it concealed an opinion of some subtlety.
On a larger scale one might observe that his lifelong preoccupation with words gave him a kind of sensitivity to them, even if it was an unorthodox one; and further that it is strange that a myth should so make its way if enshrined and embodied in words as inappropriate as critics have made out.
‘Style’ and ‘mythology’are in fact not to be separated, though they may be disentangled.
A concept which helps one to see Tolkien's view of both is that of ‘loose’ or ‘tight’semantic and dramatic ‘fit’.
The beginnings of this idea emerge well from a passage in The Lord of the Rings which has been singled out for especially ferocious criticism: the parting of Treebeard from Celeborn and Galadriel in The Return of the King , p. 259:
These two paragraphs are quoted in his book Modern Fantasy by Dr C. N. Manlove, who then goes straight on as usual to spearhead the critical assault and declare: and Dr Manlove goes on to cite a well-known Ubi sunt passage from the Old English poem and to observe that ‘This is real elegy, for it has something to be elegiac about’.
Considered as criticism, much of this is mere rudeness, but it does have the merit of introducing medieval comparisons: not on the whole good ground for a Manlove to fight a Tolkien on.
Exactly that passage from The Wanderer , for instance, is paraphrased by Aragorn in chapter 6 of The Two Towers : a candid mind might have looked to see what Tolkien could make of it.
As for Ector's lament, it was in fact over Lancelot, not Arthur.
If one reads even more attentively, one cannot help noting a curious stylistic feature not entirely dissociated from Treebeard.
What Malory actually wrote was:
The kindest man that ever struck with sword?, modern readers reflect.
The truest lover that ever bestrode a horse?
In modern contexts phrases like this could only be funny.
Strong belief in the virtues of stylistic and semantic consistency urge us to keep kindness and sword-strokes, loved  women and bestridden horses, in separate mental compartments.
But clearly Malory did not feel this urge towards exactness at all.
Did Tolkien?
Tolkien furthermore no doubt noted that Malory's insensitivity in this respect (a common thing in medieval writers) had not led necessarily to failure.
His emulation of ‘loose semantic fit’ does however puzzle many modern readers — those especially who have been sophisticated by modern literary practice.
To go back to Dr Manlove and Treebeard: it is actually hard to make out what bits of the text have caused the irritation.
It could be the boldly untranslated fragment of Quenya, or the triple repetition of ‘feel…feel…smell’, or the sudden change to less plain language in Galadriel's speech, with its elvish place-name (and also its typical echo of wartime English popular song).
However all these are easily defensible.
If the paragraphs quoted do contain anything to gripe at seriously, it must be Treebeard's opening sentence, with its oddly redundant phrase, ‘by stock or by stone’.
What have stocks and stones got to do with the matter?
Isn't the phrase just meaningless, flung in for the rhythm, meaning no more than ‘by pillar or by post’, ‘by night or by day’, ‘by hook or by crook’?
So one might feel.
But it is exactly in phrases like this that one sees Tolkien playing with medieval notions of style, with ‘loose semantic fit’, with a personal view of poetry.
‘By stock or by stone’ is certainly a deliberate echo of the fourteenth century poem Pearl , written by the author of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , and probably the most powerful of all medieval elegies.
Under its image of the jeweller who has lost his pearl in an orchard, this describes a father lamenting his dead infant daughter in the graveyard where she is buried.
He falls asleep with his head on her grave mound, to be taken away in spirit to a strange land where all his grief suddenly fades — and where to his utter delight he sees his lost child facing him, on the other side of a river.
But she has grown up strangely, and she treats him with a cold formality, calling him ‘Sir’ but correcting him almost every time he speaks.
How sad he has been, he says; he had no need to be, she replies.
Quite right, he agrees, for (praise God) he has found her and will live with her in joy from now on; no, she says, she is not there, he cannot join her, he cannot cross the river.
Don't send me away again, he pleads, to ‘durande doel’.
Why are you always talking about sorrow? she asks fiercely.
At that the father gives up his attempt to take an active role, humbles himself, but repeats his grief in his apology:
The quotation here is based on the edition of Pearl by E. V. Gordon (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953), originally meant to be a co-operative venture with Tolkien; and I would translate it as follows:
In his version of Pearl published in 1975 Tolkien translated that last line as ‘We meet on our roads by chance so rare’, but probably ‘We meet so seldom by stock or by stone’ is better.
The pathos lies in the characteristic early English understatement —‘so seldom’ means ‘never’or worse still ‘just this once’— and also in the last phrase's suspense between precision and vagueness.
‘Stok other ston’ could mean nothing, be just a line-filler, like ‘erly and late’a few lines afterwards.
On the other hand it implies very strongly ‘on earth’, ‘in reality’, ‘in flesh and blood’.
Where is the dreamer-father?
At the end of the poem he will realise that the water was Death, his daughter in Heaven, the strange land a premonition of Paradise.
If at the moment he speaks he thinks he is meeting his child in a land of real stones and tree-stumps, he is sadly mistaken; if he realises he is not, then already a touch of grief is creeping back into consolation.
‘By stok other ston’ is great poetry, one should see; not a great phrase , but great poetry, in its context.
Could the same effect be reached in modern English, with its much fiercer attitude towards phrasal looseness?
Tolkien tried the experiment in Treebeard's farewell, and maybe he failed; though one might say that the image behind the phrase works well for Fangorn, whose sense of ultimate loss naturally centres on felled trees and barren ground.
However the real point is that Tolkien was trying continually to extend the frontiers of style beyond the barbed wire of modern opinion.
In this endeavour he thought he had the backing of the great poets and romancers, like Sir Thomas Malory or the anonymous authors of Pearl and Beowulf and The Wanderer .
It was true that they had mostly been forgotten, left unappreciated.
The tradition they stood for, though, had not.
You could see it, thought Tolkien, even in Shakespeare, here and there.
It is thus quite clear that whatever he said about Shakespeare's plays, Tolkien read some of them with keen attention: most of all,Macbeth .
Motifs from this play are repeated prominently in The Lord of the Rings .
The march of the Ents to Isengard makes true the report of the frightened messenger to the incredulous Macbeth in Act V Scene 5: ‘As I did stand my watch upon the hill/I looked toward Birnam and anon methought/The wood began to move.’
The prophecy that the chief Ringwraith will not fall ‘by the hand of man’, and his check when he realises Dernhelm is a woman, similarly parallels the Witches' assurance to Macbeth and his disconcertment when told ‘Macduff was from his mother's womb/Untimely ripped.’
There is a more complicated echo of Shakespeare in the scene when Aragorn, as the true king, revives the sick in the Houses of Healing with his touch and the herb athelas .
In Macbeth too there is a healing king, but offstage — it is Edward the Confessor, the last legitimate Anglo-Saxon king, who sends Siward Earl of Northumbria to assist the rebels.
This seems to be a deliberate compliment by Shakespeare to James the First (of England) and Sixth (of Scotland), who had begun to touch for the ‘king's evil’ or scrofula by 1606.
Tolkien probably did not approve, thinking this mere flattery.
After all James was of the Stewart dynasty, so called because his ancestor Robert had been High Steward of Scotland, and had succeeded to the throne on the death of David II in 1371.
When Denethor says that stewards do not come to be kings by the lapse of a few centuries in Gondor, but only ‘in other places of less royalty’, the remark is true of Scotland, and of Britain — though not of Anglo-Saxon England, ruled from the legendary past of King Cerdic to 1065 by kings descended in paternal line from one ancestor.
The Return of the king is in a way a parallel, in another a reproach, to Macbeth .
Tolkien however used the play for both more and less than motifs.
There is a flash of minute observation in chapter 6 of The Two Towers .
What shall we do about Saruman, asks Théoden.
‘Do the deed at hand’, replies Gandalf, send every man against him at once.
‘If we fail, we fall.
If we succeed — then we will face the next task.’
The jingle of ‘fail-fall’ echoes a famous crux in Macbeth , where the hero falters in front of his wife.
‘If we should fail?’, he asks.
‘We fail?’ replies she — in the Folio punctuation.
Actresses have tried the line different ways: as a sarcastic question, a flat dismissal, a verbal slap.
They were all wrong, implies Tolkien; it was a misprint, the word was ‘fall’ meaning ‘die’and is a straight answer to a straight question.
The reading might not seem very good, except for one thing.
‘Alliterative assonances’ such as‘fail’and ‘fall’are very common in Old English poetry, and indeed in Middle English in the tradition which includes Pearl.
Macbeth is the only one of Shakespeare's plays to include Anglo-Saxon characters; and by some odd stylistic response it too is full of this ancient (but still popular) rhetorical device.
‘My way of life/Is fallen into the sere, the yellow leaf' , says Macbeth; ‘why do you start, and seem to fear/Things that do sound so fair ?’ asks Banquo; ‘I see thee still’, says Macbeth to the imaginary dagger, ‘And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, /Which was not so before.’
‘Fail’ and ‘fall’would then be one in a set of nearly forty — a part of the play's poetic texture.
How strange that critics should not have remarked the possibility!
Or how typical, thought Tolkien.
Modern critics were not good at Anglo-Saxon echoes, especially at ones which hung on into modern times in phrases like ‘mock’ and ‘make’, ‘chance’and ‘choice’, ‘bullet’and ‘billet’, all mentioned already in this study.
Gandalf's adaptation of Macbeth also, of course, restates the idea of aggressive courage, a quality very strong in the play and expressed very much in Tolkienian style by Old Siward, ‘Why then, God's soldier be he…
And so his knell is knolled’; by Malcolm, ‘The night is long that never finds the day’; by Macbeth himself, ‘Send out more horses, slurr the country round, /Hang those that talk of fear.’
To this Tolkien could not remain immune.
However the final and strongest influence of Macbeth on The Lord of the Rings is quite obviously in theme.
If there is one moral in the interlacements of the latter it is that you must do your duty regardless of what you think is going to happen.
This is exactly what Macbeth does not realise.
He believes the Witches' prophecy about his own king-ship, and tries to fulfil it; he believes their warning about Macduff and tries to cancel it.
If he had not tried to cancel it (and so murdered Macduff's family), Macduff might not have killed him; if he had not killed Duncan, he might conceivably have become king some other way.
Macbeth is a classic case of a man who does not understand about the co-operation between free will and luck.
Galadriel's warning about the events in her mirror, ‘Some never come to be, unless those that behold the visions turn aside from their path to prevent them’, would have been well said to him.
But he had no Galadriel.
The only mirror he sees is controlled (Act IV Scene 1) by the Witches.
Tolkien was trying, then, to make Shakespeare more positive — a bold venture, but based on a clear insight itself based on very minute reading.
If he disliked Shakespeare, other than in joke, it was because he thought Shakespeare (a true poet with a deep tap-root into old English stories and traditions) had too often neglected that root for later and sillier interests.
King Lear stems from the gaudy fictions of Geoffrey of Monmouth, laughed at in Farmer Giles , and yet it contains one ancient and resonant line in the mad scene of ‘poor Tom’:
The line obviously comes from some lost ballad telling the story of how Child Roland went to Elfland to rescue his sister from the wicked King, a monster-legend, a Theodoric-story.
Now why couldn't Shakespeare have told that , Tolkien must have reflected, instead of bothering with King Lear !
As things were, Tolkien had to tell the ‘Dark Tower’ story himself.
Still, there was no doubt that Shakespeare knew something.
Besides Macbeth and Lear Tolkien was probably struck by The Tempest and A Midsummer Night's Dream (the two ‘fairy’ plays and the two whose plots were not borrowed but made up by Shakespeare).
But he remembered less likely plays too.
As the Fellowship leaves Rivendell Bilbo says:
In rhythm and theme he echoes the magnificent coda to Love's Labour's Lost :
Shakespeare's piece is better, but Bilbo's is good enough.
Remarkably, every single word in both is ordinary if colloquial English; every single word is also (with the doubtful exceptions of ‘logs’ and ‘nipped’) rooted in Old English.
Both poems would require little change to make sense at any time between AD 600 and now.
Yet they are representatives of a tradition Tolkien thought, if not too short, very much too scanty.
The poetry of the Shire
One can see Tolkien's attempt to extend that tradition in the hobbit-poems scattered through The Lord of the Rings — or to be more accurate, in the new hobbit-poems.
Near the start there are a couple of pieces which Tolkien had written up to thirty years before, both rewritten a little for their new context: Frodo's ‘Man in the Moon’ song in the Prancing Pony , Sam's ‘Rhyme of the Troll’near Weathertop.
Take these away and one is left with a little body of poems from the Shire, mostly in quatrains with alternate lines rhyming, in plain language and metre and with for the most part a gently proverbial quality.
They look unambitious.
They were all written for The Lord of the Rings alone.
It is tempting to say that they have no function besides advancing the story or embellishing the characters, no value outside their immediate context.
However one check to this theory should be that, although the poems all do fit their settings in the story very tightly, there is a strong sense even so that the same words can  mean different things in different places.
As in Pearl , a stock phrase or cliché can at any moment be given new point.
Bilbo's ‘Old Walking Song’, for instance, is repeated three times in different versions.
The first or basic text is this, sung by Bilbo as he leaves Bag End for the last time:
Many years later, as The Return of the King draws to an end, Bilbo gives a markedly different version sitting in Rivendell, having heard Frodo tell the story of the destruction of the Ring and, in his advanced old age, having failed to understand most of it:
And with these words, we are told, ‘his head dropped on his chest and he slept soundly’.
This seems to be an obvious case of context determining words.
The first time he sang the poem Bilbo had just handed over the Ring and was off to Rivendell; the words accordingly express a sense of abdication, of having been left behind, along with determination to accept this and make a new life somewhere as yet unknown.
‘I must subordinate my own wishes to the larger world’ would be a fair summary, highly appropriate to Bilbo at that time.
By contrast the second version — almost a mirror-image of the first — expresses only justified weariness.
Bilbo is no longer even interested in the Ring.
He thinks the ‘lighted inn’ is Rivendell, as indeed it is in immediate context.
All readers however perceive that it could as easily mean death.
In between these two variants Frodo has sung the song (I, 82–3).
His version is identical with Bilbo's first one, except that it makes the significant change, in line 5, of ‘weary feet’ for ‘eager feet’.
‘That sounds like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming’, says pippin.
‘Or is it one of your imitations?
It  does not sound altogether encouraging.’
Frodo says he doesn't know.
He thinks he was ‘making it up’, but ‘may have heard it long ago’.
This uncertainty (over an issue to which the reader knows the answer) points to the great difference between Bilbo's position and Frodo's.
Both are leaving Bag End, but the former cheerfully, without the Ring, without responsibility, for Rivendell, the latter with a growing sense of unwished involvement, carrying the Ring and heading in the end for Mordor.
Naturally the poem does not mean the same thing for him as for Bilbo.
But can the same words carry different meanings?
It depends on how one sees ‘the Road’.
The most obvious thought is that if the ‘lighted inn’ means death, then ‘the Road’must mean life.
It need not be individual life, since in Bilbo's second version others can take it up and follow it in their turn; however in Frodo's and Bilbo's first version the image of the traveller pursuing the Road looks very like a symbol of the individual pursuing his moment of consciousness down the unknown road which is everyone's future life, to an end which no one can predict.
There is a further point to add, made by Frodo but repeating Bilbo:
In context this is just a reply to Pippin's remark that the song ‘does not sound altogether encouraging’.
Frodo does not know he is going to Mordor yet, and Pippin shrugs the whole thing off.
However, looking back, and especially looking back after all the interlacements of Volumes Two and Three, one might well think that besides an image of life ‘the Road’ has crept up to being an image of Providence.
After all Bilbo is right about the road outside Bag End leading all the way to Mordor.
On the other hand there are on that road, which Frodo takes, thousands of intersections, as also thousands of choices to be made or rejected.
The traveller can always stop or turn aside.
Only will-power makes the road seem straight.
Accordingly when Bilbo and Frodo say they will pursue it, eagerly or wearily, till it is intersected by other roads, lives, wishes,and will then continue into the unknown, if they can , they are expressing a mixture of doubt and determination — exactly the qualities Gandalf so often recommends.
This has become much stronger and clearer with Frodo.
Indeed it is net too much to say that the traveller walking down the branching road becomes  in the end an image of ‘the Good’ in Tolkien, and one opposed to the endless self-regarding circuits of the Ring.
By the time one comes to that opinion the immediate dramatic contexts of the poem — leaving Bag End, leaving the Shire — have not been dropped, any more than ‘the Road’ has lost its obvious literal quality, but they have come to seem only particular instances of a much more general truth.
The ‘tight fit’ of poems to characters and situations is accordingly illusory.
There is a sense that the lines mean more than their composers know, may indeed not be their personal compositions at all; they may also be brooded upon, to be repeated with new understanding much later.
Thus at the very end of Volume Three Frodo sings again ‘the old walking-song, but the words were not quite the same’; he says not ‘we may…take the hidden paths that run, /Towards the Moon or to the Sun’, but ‘I shall’.
And he does, leaving Middle-earth the next day.
The song he is refashioning is another of Bilbo's, though it is ‘to a tune that was as old as the hills’.
Even in its innocent context near the start of Volume One, when the hobbits are using it only to help themselves along, it has an odd ring.
‘Upon the hearth the fire is red,’ they sing, ‘But not yet weary are our feet’.
If one goes by the ‘inn and weariness’ symbolism of Bilbo's Rivendell song, that means they still have a zest for life.
Still, what the song celebrates are ‘hidden paths’, ‘sudden tree[s]’, ‘A new road on a secret gate’— things which seem to be or to lead out of this world.
The refrain of each stanza addresses the familiar sights of the landscape, the little homely trees of English hedgerows, but bids farewell to them:
Are the hobbits, even in their good humour, half in love with easeful death'?
A better answer perhaps is that in some inherited way they carry the ‘tune’ of an ancient grief, lulled by earthly beauty but capable of being woken in Frodo in the end, as in Legolas by the cry of the gulls.
The elvish song which follows immediately on the ‘Walking Song’ indeed says just that, though probably few readers make the connection straight away.
All it contains, apart from its invocations to ‘Elbereth’, are the two opposed images of the stars, seen as the flowers of the Queen beyond the Western Seas', and the wood in which the elves ‘wander’.
Of course the elves are in a wood at that moment, and they are looking at the early evening stars, but that is not what they mean.
Their song is of regret and exile, its core the oxymoron of ‘this far land’—‘this’ land is the real land, Middle-earth, ‘far land’ought to be the one Elbereth is in beyond the Seas.
But the elves refuse to accept the fact, seeing themselves as strangers whose highest function is memory:
As for the wood, its beauty is a net and a barrier; starlight and memory alone pierce through ‘to us that wander here/Amid the world of woven trees’.
The myth behind the song remains obscure in The Lord of the Rings , just as the Sindarin song of Rivendell remains untranslated, merging only with the Quenya one just quoted in the story's last few pages (III, 308).
However the image of the Wood of Life breaks through to hobbit-consciousness with increasing clarity.
Frodo uses it in the Old Forest:
As usual we take the immediate point — Frodo and the others want to get out of the forest — while reading through to a kind of universality: the ‘shadowed land’ is life, life's delusions of despair are the ‘woods’, despair will end in some vision of cosmic order which can only be hinted at in stars or ‘sun’.
What does Frodo mean by the repeated contrasts of setting/ rising, west/east, day's end/day begun?
They can hardly avoid suggesting death and life; in that case his song says there can be no defeat — even if the wanderers die in the dark wood, the real Old Forest, they will in death break through to sunlight and out of a hampering shade.
‘East or west all woods must fail’ is then a statement of exactly the same class as ‘The Road goes ever on and on’: literally true, literally unhelpful or even banal, but in its literal truth making a symbolic promise.
Sam Gamgee hits on the same thought when he takes up the ‘Blondin' role of faithful minstrel in Minas Morgul, and sings ‘words of his own’ fitted to another old Shire tune:
‘Day is done’ is of course another Shakespearean echo, like the Dark Tower: ‘The bright day is done’, says Iras to Cleopatra, ‘and we are for the dark’.
But Tolkien would no doubt instantly have felt that Shakespeare had no copyright on the phrase, which must be of immemorial antiquity in English, ‘as old as the hills’.
Sam's song is simple and obvious, coming from ‘the voice of a forlorn and weary hobbit that no listening orc could possibly have mistaken for the clear song of an Elven-lord’.
Still, it has the characteristic qualities of the Shire's ‘high style’: plain language, proverbial sentiment, a closeness to immediate context reaching out simultaneously to myth, a brave suggestiveness at once hopeful and sad.
As has been said, the Shire is a calque on England.
Where then is the source in English poetry for the poetry of the Shire?
One might point to Spenser, whose Faerie Queene (regarded by Tolkien with disapproving interest) often uses the image of the wandering knight lost in trackless woods, and whose Merlin-vision of Britain reviving underlies Bilbo's ‘Riddle of Strider’.
An even closer parallel is John Milton's masque of Comus , which Tolkien must have admired partly for its theme — it is an analogue of ‘Childe Rowland’, a tale of a maiden lost in a dark wood and imprisoned by a wizard, till her brothers and her guardian angel come to the rescue — but even more for its hovering between fact and symbol.
A herb will protect them, says the disguised angel to the brothers; a shepherd gave it to him:
Ugly, prickly, much-trampled, flowering only in ‘another country’: it sounds like Virtue.
Maybe the shepherd lad was the Good Shepherd himself.
As for the wood, the Younger Brother wishes he could hear something from outside it, bleat or whistle or cockcrow:
His Elder Brother would prefer a glimmer from moon or lamp or candle, to ‘visit us/With thy long levelled rule of streaming light’.
Again the wood sounds like life, the ‘levelled rule’ from the world outside like Conscience.
But as Tolkien said of Beowulf , the ‘large symbolism…does not break through, nor become allegory’.
The plain, even rustic language appeals to everyday experience.
Everyone has been lost and found again, everyone is lost,will be found again.
The maiden who is the soul will be taken in the end from ‘the perplexed paths of this drear wood…the blind mazes of  this tangled wood…this close dungeon of innumerous boughs’, or as the elves would say galadhremmin ennorath , ‘the world of woven trees’.
The elvish tradition
Shakespeare, Spenser, Milton: the list could be spun out, to include for instance Yeats, whose poem ‘The Man Who Dreamed of Faeryland’ could stand as a Tolkienian epigraph.
However the point should be clear.
Tolkien was not by any means cut off from the mainstream of English poetry, though the qualities he valued were not surprise, the mot juste , verbal complexity, but rather a slow probing of the familiar.
That was not, however, the end of his ambition or of his thoughts on style: there is an elvish streak too in the poetry of The Lord of the Rings , signalled in complete contrast by barely-precedented intricacies of line and stanza.
The best example of this is the ‘Song of Eärendil’ composed and sung in Rivendell by Bilbo (I, 246–9).
What the song means and what story lies behind it are typically not explained in The Lord of the Rings , but remain in suggestiveness till The Silmarillion .
That suggestiveness, though, is much aided by devices not of sense but of sound.
Bilbo uses some five of these: one is rhyme, which everyone recognises, but the others are less familiar — internal half-rhyme, alliteration (i.e. beginning words with the same sound or letter), alliterative assonance (the Macbeth device), and a frequent if irregular variation of syntax.
All appear in the first eight lines:
The rhymes are obvious, on lines 2 and 4, 6 and 8 —‘-nien/-ney in’, ‘made/ laid’.
The internal rhymes however operate not between even lines but between odd and even, 1 and 2, 3 and 4, and so on.
They are furthermore not on the ends of words but in the middle: ‘mariner/tarried in’, ‘timber felled/Nimbrethil’, ‘silver fair/silver were’, ‘like a swan/light upon ’.
Nor are they always complete.
One might note that the full rhymes are similarly not always exact, some of them being ‘masculine’, i.e. on one syllable only, but some ‘feminine’, on more than one syllable, and tending towards similarity rather than identity, as in ‘Arvernien/journey in’, ‘armoured him/harm from him’, ‘helmet tall/emerald’, etc.
These are too common to be the result of incapacity, and they are furthermore reinforced by the  unpredictable but frequent use of the other devices of sound: alliteration in ‘light laid’, ‘shining shield’, ‘ward all wounds’, etc., alliterative assonance in ‘sails of silver’, ‘Night of Naught’, ‘sight …he sought ’ and ‘boat it bore with biting breath’.
Typically, in between there are such doubtful cases as ‘built a boat’— just alliteration, or assonance as well?— while over the whole poem there lies a web of grammatical repetitions and variations, also never quite exact —‘her sails (he wove) of silver fair, /of silver (were)her lanterns (made), or later ‘his sword (of steel) was valiant, /(of adamant)his helmet tall ’.
Describing the technique is difficult, but its result is obvious: rich and continuous uncertainty, a pattern forever being glimpsed but never quite grasped.
In this way sound very clearly echoes or perhaps rather gives the lead to sense.
Just as the rhymes, assonances and phrasal structures hover at the edge of identification, so the poem as a whole offers romantic glimpses of ‘old unhappy far-off things’(to cite Wordsworth), or ‘magic casements opening on the foam/Of perilous seas, in faer y lan ds for l orn ’(to remember Keats).
Frodo indeed finds himself listening in highly Keatsian style:
Romanticism, multitudinousness, imperfect comprehension: these are the poem's goals, achieved stylistically much more than semantically.
Yet the ‘Song of Eärendil’ does of course tell a story as well: how Eärendil tried to sail out of this world to a kind of Paradise, how he succeeded in the end by virtue of the ‘Silmaril’, how this in turn led to his becoming a star, or rather the helmsman of a celestial boat in which the burning Silmaril appears to Middle-earth as a star.
Still, more questions are raised than answered.
Why did Eärendil go, why was he kept, what is a Silmaril?
More acutely, what is the relationship in the story between success and failure?
Eärendil's star appears to be a victory-emblem, ‘the Flammifer of Westernesse’, and yet is associated with loss and homelessness, with the weeping of women on the ‘Hither Shore’.
The ‘paths that seldom mortal goes’ may recall fleetingly the ‘hidden paths’of the hobbits' walking-song, and its similar oscillation between adventure and homesickness; in this sense the two stylistically quite different poems relate to each other like elvish assonances, hinting at a pattern but stressing change as much as identity.
The overall effect of the song in Rivendell is perhaps  to show Bilbo approaching a body of lore and of poetry higher than the normal hobbitic vein, higher indeed than mortals can normally comprehend.
Aragorn sings his song of Beren and Lúthien some fifty pages earlier with a certain reluctance, explaining that it is ‘in the mode that is called ann-thennath among the Elves, but is hard to render in our Common Speech, and this is but a rough echo of it’.
‘Echo’ is a useful word, for that in a way is what the poem's metric is based on; there is no immediate similarity of stanza-form to Bilbo's song, but once again the ‘elvish’idea of poetry comes through in an unexpected subtlety.
Briefly, one can say that each stanza is in eight lines, rhyming abac/babc; and that the fourth and eighth lines at once interrupt the flow of each stanza and hold the two halves together by their strong ‘feminine’ three-syllable rhymes, on ‘glimmering/shimmering’, ‘sorrowing/following’, etc.
More significant is the fact that the actual rhyming words in each first half are repeated once or more in each second half, as for instance ‘seen’ in the first stanza, ‘leaves’in the second, ‘feet’and ‘roam’in the third, and so on.
The device is somehow congruous with the repeated images of hair like a shadow, beauty flying, leaves and years falling, through it all the hemlock-leaves of death.
But the last stanza of nine breaks the pattern.
Its rhyme words are all different: ‘bare/grey/door/morrowless//lay/more/away/sorrow-less’.
What does this fact mean?
All one can say is that the story being told (or hinted at) is also one of gloom, death and parting, like that between Eärendil and Elwing, the mariner and the weeping women of Middle-earth.
The last words of the song, ‘singing sorrowless’, stand out against this current, but still wherever the lovers go it is ‘away’, ‘in the forest’, maybe the forest of mortality and final death.
Aragorn indeed confirms this thought with his gloss that not only has Lúthien died (as many elves do), but ‘died indeed and left the world’.
Further explanation has to wait till The Silmarillion , but in a sense is not needed.
A point has been made by a sudden (if barely perceptible) breaking of pattern, an absence of echoes.
Perhaps that is the essence of ann-thennath .
Further stylistic and thematic variations could easily be listed.
Gimli's ‘Song of Durin' at I 329–30 is dwarvishly plain and active, but still carries on the sense of decay in Middle-earth opposed to ultimate hope; Legolas's ‘Song of Nimrodel’ a little later makes similar oppositions but ends on an opposite note, of faltering and ultimate defeat on the ‘Hither Shore’.
Frodo's elegy for Gandalf ends on the word ‘died’; but Sam's coda prefers ‘flowers’, and turns out to be truer in the end.
Galadriel's song in the Common Speech ends with regret and a question, ‘What ship would ever bear me back across so wide a Sea?’, but her Quenya one on hope and an assertion, ‘Maybe thou shalt find Valinor.
Maybe even thou shalt find it.’
As with the hobbit-songs, behind all these there lies some story of a Sentence and a Great Escape, but an escape forever hindered by loving involvement with Middle-earth itself; that is the root of the disagreement  between Fangorn, Celeborn and Galadriel when the Ent half-voices his lament for the stocks and the stones.
However the surprise in this ‘elvish tradition’ of mythic poetry is how much of its stories is conveyed by purely formal devices, by verbal patterns with meaning as apparently inherent in them as elsewhere in place-names, in untranslated fragments, or in Bombadil.
Tolkien's idea of poetry mirrored his ideas on language; in neither did he think sound should be divorced from sense.
In reality this ‘elvish tradition’ was an English tradition too.
The ultimate source for much that has been discussed must certainly be Pearl , with its story of the (failed) escape from mortality, its heavily traditional phrasing, and its fantastically complex metrical scheme, of twelve-line cross-rhymed stanzas with alliteration, assonance, syntax-variation and (even Tolkien did not attempt this) stanza-linking and refrains.ii However the Pearl tradition did not last till Shakespeare and Milton and the Romantics, who are accordingly and to that extent impoverished.
Tolkien obviously hoped in one way to recreate it.
More generally, the link between the last three sections of this book is Tolkien's perception, from Pearl and from poems like it, that poetry does not reduce to plain sense (so far most critics would agree with him), but furthermore that this is because words have over the centuries acquired meanings not easily traced in dictionaries, available however to many native speakers, and (this is where many critics part company) at times breaking through the immediate intentions of even poetic users.
‘Loose fit’, in a word, works better in poetry than ‘tight fit’; there are roads to wisdom besides the painstaking perverse originality of twentieth-century writers.
Middle-earth and Limbo: mythic analogues
What has been said about Tolkien's poetry has an immediate bearing on that most attractive but least tractable subject, ‘Tolkien's mythology’.
In a sense the problems and intentions were the same.
Tolkien wanted his poems to make good sense in their dramatic context, as part of the story of The Lord of the Rings ; he also wanted them to suggest a truth independent of their context.
‘East or west all woods must fail’ therefore applies both to the Old Forest and to the symbolic woods of Life and Error.
In the same way his legends of Eärendil and Lúthien, his central fable of Frodo and the Ring, must firstly and continually work as fiction, but also reach out towards non-fictional truths about humanity — and perhaps about salvation.
Yet in this latter ambition there lies a danger.
If The Lord of the Rings should approach too close to ‘Gospel-truth’, to the Christian myth in which Tolkien himself believed, it might forfeit its status as a story and become at worst a blasphemy, an ‘Apocryphal gospel’, at best a dull allegory rehearsing in admittedly novel form what everyone  ought to know already.
In that case The Lord of the Rings would look like one of Bilbo's poems removed from context and put without explanation in The Oxford Book of English Verse — fictionless and unhappy.
Tolkien had to take a rather strict line over ‘myth’.
One reason, no doubt, was that he had little tolerance for real pagan myths or for naïve  mythicizers .
In his YWES chapter for 1924 (p. 58), he remarked that ‘it will be a grievous shock to many an innocent sentimentalist, accustomed to see the one-eyed and red-bearded deities everywhere, to learn that Pórr and Oó3in cannot be found in any Scandinavian place-name in England’.
Tolkien did not believe in ‘old religions’ or ‘witch-cults’; C. S. Lewis wrote a paper called ‘The Anthropological Approach’which damned the learned variety of that error beyond redemption.
Probably a major cause for their intolerance was that both, but especially Tolkien, had some idea of what genuine old paganism was like.
The earliest account of the English (Tacitus's Germania , AD 97–8) remarks on their habit of drowning sacrificial victims in bogs.
Many such have been recovered from the preserving peat of Denmark and of ‘the Angle’.
It would be surprising if Tolkien had not looked at the calm face of Tollund Man, or the hideously frightened one of ‘Queen Gunhild’(all too obviously still struggling as she was pinned down alive), and reflected that these were the true lineaments of his pagan ancestors.
‘There, but for the grace of God, go I.’ No statement could be more apposite.
Tolkien had grounds to suspect simple views of ‘the noble pagan’.
Virtuous pagans, however, were quite another matter.
Indeed it is not too much to say that the Inklings were preoccupied with them.
C. S. Lewis offered the most daring statement in the final volume of the ‘Narnia’ series,The Last Battle (1956), in which we come across a young (dead) virtuous pagan, Emeth, who explains that all his life he has served Tash and scorned Aslan the Lion — earlier on it has been made clear that Tash is a bloody demon, Aslan, one might as well say, the ‘Narnian’Christ.
But once he is dead Emeth meets Aslan and falls at his feet in instinctive adoration, as in terror, ‘for the Lion…will know that I have served Tash all my days and not him’.
But Emeth is saved, for good deeds done for Tash belong to Aslan, and bad deeds for Aslan to Tash; as if to say that God and Allah are different, but yet that virtuous Mohammedans will be saved rather than murderous Christians.
Later on each of the souls pouring out of Narnia on Doomsday looks at Aslan as it comes through the Door-way of Death — to be saved if it loves, destroyed if it hates.
Lewis here repeats the belief of the fourteenth-century friar Uhtred of Boldon, that  each dying person has a ‘clear vision’ or clara visio of God, on his reaction to which depends his ultimate fate.
Uhtred's opinion was denounced as heretical at Oxford in 1367 — it tends to suggest no man needs the Christian Church to be saved.
But Lewis, a Protestant, might have agreed with that.
Tolkien, a determined Catholic, would not.
Still, he was doubtless interested.
Uhtred after all was an Englishman, only one of a list of would-be savers of righteous pagans from the British Isles.
Pelagius, the great opponent of St Augustine, was a Welshman, his real name probably ‘Morgan’.
The story of the salvation of Trajan, the virtuous pagan Emperor, was first told by an Anglo-Saxon from Whitby about the year 710.
The poem St Erkenwald is a variant of that tale; some people have argued it is by the author of Sir Gawain and Pearl .
Above all, to Tolkien's mind, there must have been present the problem of Beowulf .
This is certainly the work of a Christian writing after the conversion of England.
However the author got through 3182 lines without mentioning Christ, or salvation, and yet without saying specifically that his heroes, including the kind and honest figure of Beowulf himself, were damned — though he must have known that historically and in reality they were all pagans, ignorant even of the name of Christ.
Could the Christian author have thought his pagan heroes were saved?
He had the opinion of the Church against him if he did.
Could he on the other hand have borne to consign them all to Hell for ever, like Alcuin, the deacon of York, in a now notorious letter to the abbot of Lindisfarne, written about AD 797: ‘What has Ingeld to do with Christ?’ he asked scornfully — Ingeld being a minor character in Beowulf .
‘The King of Heaven wishes to have no fellowship with lost and pagan so-called Kings; for the eternal King reigns in Heaven, the lost pagan laments in Hell’.
The Beowulf -poet's dilemma was also Tolkien's.
His whole professional life brought him into contact with the stories of pagan heroes, Englishmen or Norsemen or Goths; more than anyone he could appreciate their sterling qualities.
At the same time he had no doubt that paganism itself was weak and cruel.
Uhtred's and Lewis's individualistic beliefs did not appeal to him, any more than Alcuin's smugly intolerant one.
If there was anyone in the twentieth century to resolve the dilemma, repeat the Beowulf -poet's masterpiece of compromise, and preserve ‘the permanent value of that pietas which treasures the memory of man's struggles in the dark past, man fallen and not yet saved, disgraced but not dethroned’(‘Monsters’, p. 266), Tolkien must have thought it should be himself.
Such activity was for one thing ‘part of the English temper’.
The Lord of the Rings is quite clearly, then, a story of virtuous pagans in the darkest of dark pasts, before all but the faintest premonitions of dawn and revelation.
Yet there is at least one moment at which Revelation seems very close and allegory does all but break through — naturally enough, a moment of ‘eucatastrophe’, to use Tolkien's term for sudden moments of fairy-tale  salvation.
This appears to different characters in different ways.
As has been said, Sam and Frodo experience it as thinking for a moment they have died and gone to Heaven, when they wake up on the field of Cormallen.
Faramir, however, in the next chapter feels it more physically.
He and Éowyn sense the earthquake that is the fall of Barad-dûr, and for a moment Faramir thinks of Nûmenor drowning.
But then like the father in Pearl an irrational joy comes over him, to be explained by the eagle-messenger in a song:
There is no doubt here about Tolkien's stylistic model, which is the Bible and particularly the Psalms.
The use of ‘ye’ and ‘hath’is enough to indicate that to most English readers, familiar with those words only from the Authorised Version.
But ‘Sing and rejoice’ echoes Psalm 33, ‘Rejoice in the Lord’, while the whole of the poem is strongly reminiscent of Psalm 24, ‘Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye ever-lasting doors, for the King of glory shall come in.’
‘Who is the King of glory?’ asks the Psalm, and one traditional answer is Christ, crucified but not yet ascended, come to the city of Hell to rescue from it those especially virtuous pre-Christians, Moses and Isaiah and the patriarchs and prophets.
Of course the eagle's song is not about that .
When it says ‘the Black Gate is broken’ it means the Morannon, a place in Middle-earth described at II, 244–5; when it says ‘your King shall come again', it means Aragorn.
Yet the first statement could very easily apply to Death and Hell (Matthew xvi, 18, ‘and the gates of hell shall not prevail’), the second to Christ and the Second Coming.
This is a layer of double meaning beyond that even of ‘East or west all woods must fail’ or ‘The Road goes ever on and on’.
Approach to the edge of Christian reference was here deliberate, as one can tell from the date Gandalf so carefully gives for the fall of Sauron (111, 230), ‘the twenty-fifth of March’.
In Anglo-Saxon belief, and in European popular tradition both before and after that, 25 March is the  date of the Crucifixion; also of the Annunciation (nine months before Christmas); also of the last day of Creation.
By mentioning the date Tolkien was presenting his ‘eucatastrophe’ as a forerunner or ‘type’of the greater one of Christian myth.
It is possible to doubt whether this was a good idea.
Almost no one notices the significance of 25 March; the high style of the eagle's song has not had much appeal; though Tolkien himself wept over the grandeur of the Field of Cormallen (Letters , p. 321), many other readers have found the delight, tears and laughter (of Sam especially) unconvincing.
Tolkien did right normally to avoid such allusions, to keep like the author of Beowulf to a middle path between Ingeld and Christ, between the Bible and pagan myth.
The care with which he maintained this position (highly artificial, though usually passed over without mention) is evident, with hindsight, on practically every page of The Lord of the Rings .
Consider for instance the Riders.
As has been said, they resemble the ancient English down to minute detail — with the admitted partial exception of their devotion to horses.
However the real ancient English had some belief in divine beings, the ósas or ‘gods’ analogous to the Norse æsir , Gothic ansós , whose names survive in our days of the week (Tíw's day, Wóden's day, Thunor's day, Fríge day).
To this the Riders have no counterpart, or almost none.
Their place-names sometimes suggest ancient belief in something or other : thus ‘Dunharrow’ in Common Speech presumably represents Rohirric dún-harg , ‘the dark sanctuary’, just as ‘Halifirien’on the borders of Gondor must be hálig-fyrgen , ‘the holy mountain’.
In ‘Drúadan Forest’ the second element is Gondorian -adan , ‘man’, the first probably drú- , ‘magic’.
In the same way the Anglo-Saxons borrowed the Celtic element of ‘Druid’ to create the term drý-cræft , ‘magic art’.
The Riders, one may say, have a sense of awe or of the supernatural; but they do nothing about it.
No religious rites are performed at Théoden's burial.
His followers sing a dirge and ride round his barrow, as indeed do Beowulf's.
The only real-life burial where this combination of song and cavalcade is reported is that of Attila the Hun, in Jordanes' Gothic History .
But there the mourners also gash their faces so their king will be lamented properly in human blood, and when he is in his tomb they murder (or sacrifice) the slaves who dug it.
That kind of thing seems very out of place in Middle-earth.
The Riders, like most of the characters of Beowulf but unlike all we can guess of the real pre-Christian English, do not worship pagan gods; they also do not hold slaves, commit incest, practise polygamy.
Their society has in a word been bowdlerised.
They are so virtuous that one can hardly call them pagans at all.
Certainly Tolkien never does.
As has been noted before, he followed the Beowulf -poet in being very loath to use the word ‘heathen’, reserving it twice for Denethor and by implication the Black Númenoreans.
Nevertheless his characters are heathens, strictly speaking, and Tolkien, having  pondered for so long on the Beowulf -poet's careful balances, was as aware of this fact as he was aware of the opposing images of open Christianity poised at many moments to take over his story.
The pagan counterpart of the eagle's song may be the death of Aragorn, relegated as it is to an Appendix.
Aragorn is a remarkably virtuous character, without even the faults of Théoden, and he foreknows his death like a saint.
Nevertheless he is not a Christian and nor is Arwen.
He has to say then to her, ‘I speak no comfort to you, for there is no comfort for such pain within the circles of the world’(111, 343).
When she still laments her fate he can only add ‘We are not bound for ever to the circles of the world, and beyond them is more than memory.
Farewell!’
Arwen is not comforted.
She dies under the ‘fading trees’ of a Lórien gone ‘silent’, and the end of her tale is oblivion, ‘and elanor and niphredil bloom no more east of the Sea’.
Aragorn, then, has some hope of the future and of something outside the ‘circles of the world’ that may come to heal their sorrow, but he does not know what it is.
This is a deathbed strikingly devoid of the sacraments, of Extreme Unction, of ‘the consolations of religion’.
It is impossible to think of Aragorn as irretrievably damned for his ignorance of Christianity (though it is a view some have tried to foist on Beowulf).
Still, he has not fulfilled the requirements for salvation either.
Perhaps the best one can say is that when such heroes die they go, in Tolkien's opinion, neither to Hell nor Heaven, but to Limbo: ‘to my fathers’, as Théoden says, ‘to sit beside my fathers, until the world is renewed’, to quote Thorin Oakenshield from The Hobbit , perhaps at worst to wait with the barrow-wight ‘Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended’.
The whole of Middle-earth, in a sense, is Limbo: there the innocent unbaptised wait for Doomsday (when, we may hope, they will join their saved and baptised descendants).
Tolkien took different views of his own work's religious content at different times.
In 1953 he wrote to a Jesuit friend:
Tolkien perhaps found difficulty in explaining to a Jesuit why a ‘fundamentally’ Catholic work should cut out references to religion, but the reason is clear: he thought, or hoped, that God had a plan for pre-Catholics too.
Later in life Tolkien may have become more uncertain about his own originality, and wrote that the elvish song of Rivendell was a ‘hymn’, that ‘these [invocations of Elbereth]and other references to religion in The Lord of the Rings are frequently overlooked’(Road , p. 65).
On the whole  the earlier statement that references have been cut out seems truer than the later one that they are in but ‘overlooked’.
The elvish song is only analogous to a hymn as Gandalf is analogous to an angel; Elbereth too is unlike (say) the Holy Ghost in remaining visible, to elves, and rememberable as a being by those elves like Galadriel who have been across the Sea and met her.
Tolkien did best when he kept mythic invention on the borderline between literal story and a wider suggestiveness (Fangorn, Bombadil, Lúthien, Roads and Rings); too conscious an approach to ‘mythopoeia’ would have ended only in allegory.
To repeat a philological point made already in this study, the Old English translation of Greek euangelion was gód spell , modern ‘Gospel’, the ‘good news’ of salvation.
Besides ‘news’, however,spell meant ‘spell’ and also ‘story’.
The foundation of Gospel lies then in ‘good story’, though ‘good story’ ought to generate a spell (or glamour) of its own.
Fróda and Froda: a myth reconstructed
If one thinks that a ‘myth’ is an ‘old story containing within itself vestiges of some earlier state of religious belief’— like the Grail-legend with its hints of sacrificed kings and vegetation-rituals — then The Lord of the Rings definitely is not one.
Tolkien was alert to all such echoes and did his best to eradicate them.
If one thinks that a ‘myth’ should be a ‘story repeating in veiled form the truth of Christ Crucified’, then The Lord of the Rings does not qualify either.
There is an evil Power in both stories, and a glorious Tree, but Frodo, to make only three of the most obvious points, is not sacrificed, is not the Son of God, and buys for his people only a limited, worldly and temporary happiness.
Nevertheless there is at least one sense in which The Lord of the Rings can claim ‘mythic’ status, which is as ‘a story embodying the deepest feelings of a particular society at a particular time’.
If one can speak of Robinson Crusoe as a ‘myth of capitalism’ and of Frankenstein or Dr Faustus as ‘myths of scientific man’, then The Lord of the Rings could be claimed as a ‘myth against discouragement’, a ‘myth of the Deconversion’.
In 1936 Tolkien had warned the British Academy that the Ragnarok spirit had survived Thórr and Óthinn, could revive ‘even in our own times…martial heroism as its own end’.
He was quite literally correct in this, as he was also in his further prophecy that it would not succeed, since ‘the wages of heroism is death’.
Still, he wanted to keep something of that spirit, if only its dauntlessness in what looked like a hopeless future; for similarly contemporary reasons he wanted to offer his readers a model of elementary virtue existing without the support of religion.
Perhaps most of all he wanted to answer Alcuin's scornful question, relevant again after 1150 years: ‘What has Ingeld to do with Christ?’
To his intentions here Tolkien left two very strong clues.
One is the name of the ‘hero’ of The Lord of the Rings , Frodo.
The other is the note in Appendix F, which says that some hobbit-names have been retained by Tolkien without translation, ‘though I have usually anglicized them by altering their endings, since in Hobbit-names a was a masculine ending, and o and e were feminine.’
(III, 413).
‘Frodo’, in other words, is an English form of original ‘Froda’.
But what kind of a name is that?
Most readers probably take it as explained by Tolkien's preceding remark, ‘To their man-children [hobbits]usually gave names that had no meaning at all in their daily language…
Of this kind are Bilbo, Bungo, Polo, Lotho…and so on.
There are many inevitable but accidental resemblances to names that we now have or know…’
If ‘Frodo’ strikes any chords, then, it could be accident.
On the other hand ‘Frodo’, surprisingly, is never mentioned in the name-discussion of that Appendix.
Maybe his name is not a Bilbo-type, but a Meriadoc-Peregrin-Fredegar-type.
As Tolkien goes on to say:
‘Frodo’ could be one of these, like ‘Peregrin'.
It could still and at the same time be an anglicisation of ‘Froda’, a name ‘meaningless’ to hobbits by the time of the War of the Ring, and accepted by them as just another chance disyllable like ‘Bilba, Bunga, Pola’, but actually preserving in oblivion the name of an ancient hero from the Dale or the Mark.
That would make Frodo's name something of a freak in hobbit-nomenclature.
However this seems only appropriate for the central figure, especially since his name is so strikingly left uncategorised.
‘Froda’ actually is a name from the dimmest reaches of Northern legend.
It is mentioned once in Beowulf (not in the main story), when the hero, discussing politics, says that the king of the Danes means to marry his daughter glædum suna Fródan , ‘to the fortunate son of Fróda’.
By this means he hopes to heal the feud between the Danes and the ‘Bards’ over whom Fróda once ruled.
His idea won't work, says Beowulf, for the pressure on heroes to take blood-revenge is too strong — it seems, though this is speculation from other sources, that Ingeld's father Fróda was killed by the Danish king who now wants to make alliance with his son.
The likelihood is that in this as in other matters Beowulf is meant to appear a good prophet, since the unsuccessful, possibly treacherous, but  in heroic terms entirely praiseworthy attack which Ingeld made on his father-in-law is repeatedly mentioned in Northern story.
Probably it was the subject of the Northumbrian songs which so scandalised Aleuin.
When he asked, then, ‘What has Ingeld to do with Christ?’, he was using Ingeld as an example of the most extreme gap between good ‘heroic’ behaviour and good Christian behaviour; Ingeld took unforgivingness as far as it could go.
There is no need, however, to think the son was exactly like the father.
Nothing else is ever heard of Fróda in Old English, but the Norse form of the word — it means literally ‘the wise one’— is Fróthi, and round this there are several stories.
The most persistent is that Fróthi was a contemporary of Christ, alleged by both Saxo Grammaticus (c .
AD 1200) and Snorri Sturluson (c. 1230).
During his reign there were no murders, no wars, no robberies, and gold rings lay untouched in the open, so that everyone referred to his age as the Frótha-frith , the ‘peace of Fróthi’.
But it came to an end because of greed, or maybe over-altruism.
The peace really came from Fróthi's magic mill, turned eternally by two giantesses to grind out gold and peace and prosperity.
Fróthi (perhaps fearing for his subjects' security) would never let them rest — and so one day they ground out an army to kill Fróthi and take his gold.
The viking army also would not let the giantesses rest, but sailed away with them and set them to grinding salt; they ground so much that the boat sank and the mill with it, though still (adds folk-tradition) in the Maelstrom the giantesses grind their magic quern.
And that is why the sea is salt.
This is a story, one can see, about the incurability of evil.
Has it anything to do with Beowulf ?
There is no overt connection, but Tolkien was used to ‘reconstructing’ stories.
The point that seems to have struck him is the total opposition between son and father, Ingeld/Ingjaldr and Fróda/ Fróthi.
The one is an example of the Ragnarok-spirit undiluted, of heroic conventionality at its worst; in the Beowulf lecture Tolkien called Ingeld ‘thrice faithless and easily persuaded’.
The other has about him a ring of nostalgic failure; in his time everything was good, but it ended in failure both personally (for Fróthi was killed) and ideologically (for Fróda's son returned to the bad old ways of revenge and hatred, scorning peace-initiatives and even apparently his own desires).
Of course the Frótha-frith could have been just an accident, a result of the Incarnation which not even virtuous pagans knew about.
For all these reasons the composite figure of Fróda/Fróthi became to Tolkien an image of the sad truth behind heroic illusions, a kind of ember glowing in the dark sorrow of heathen ages.
In ‘The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth’ Tídwald says reprovingly to Torhthelm — who has just discovered his master's headless body:
There is something grimly appropriate, further, in the fact that ‘Ingjaldr, remained a common Norse name for centuries.
‘Fróthi’ however was quickly forgotten.
All this sounds very much like Tolkien's ‘Frodo’.
He is a peacemaker, indeed in the end a pacifist.
One can trace his progress from I, 339, when he stabs the Moria troll, to II, 221, when he threatens to but does not stab Gollum.
At II, 294–6 he saves Gollum's life from the archers, against Sam's strong inclination to keep quiet and let him die.
He gives Sting away at III, 204, keeping an orc-blade but saying ‘I do not think it will be my part to strike any blow again.’
He throws even that away ten pages later, saying ‘I'll bear no weapon, fair or foul’.
In ‘The Scouring of the Shire’ his role is to forbid killing (III, 285 and 289), and later, after a battle in which he has not ‘drawn sword’, to protect prisoners.
He will not kill Saruman even after his mithril -coat has turned a treacherous stab.
His self-control has been learnt, of course, while carrying the Ring; but there is a touch of witheredness about it.
‘All the same,’ said Frodo to all those who stood near, ‘I wish for no killing…’'' ‘Those who stood near’?
One might have hoped Frodo would get up on a block and speak to everybody, impose his will.
But Wit is the opposite of Will, and as a figure of increasing wisdom, Frodo (‘the wise one’) seems to lose all desire, even for good.
Merry puts forward his plans for dealing with the ruffians by force.
‘Very good,’ said Frodo.
‘You make the arrangements.'’
This sense of age perhaps motivates the general unconcern for Frodo shown by the Shire, his unfair though unintended supplanting by the large and ‘lordly’ hobbits Merry and pippin, the rudeness or much-qualified respect shown to him by Sharkey's men and Gaffer Gamgee too.
Saruman knows better, and so do some others, but ‘Sam was pained to notice how little honour [Frodo]had in his own country’.
It is prophets who proverbially have no honour in their own country, and Frodo is increasingly a prophet or a seer.
However even in other countries the honour he gets is the wrong sort.
One may remember Ioreth repeating to her cousin in Gondor that Frodo ‘went with only his esquire into the Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire to his Tower, if you can believe it.
At least that is the tale in the City.’
A wrong tale, naturally, but a heroic tale.
In Gondor as in the Shire one sees how all achievement is assimilated to essentially active, violent, military patterns —‘the better fortitude’, as Milton said in Paradise Lost , ‘Of patience and heroic martyrdom/Unsung’.
The end of Frodo's quest, in the memory of Middle-earth, is nothing.
Bilbo turns into a figure of folklore (‘mad Baggins’), the elves and dwarves percolate through to our world as time  shifters and ring-makers, even ‘the Dark Tower’ remains as an image for ‘poor Tom’in King Lear .
Of Frodo, though, not a trace: except hints of an unlucky, well-meaning king eclipsed on the one hand by the fame of his vengeful son, on the other by the Coming of the true hero Christ.
What has Ingeld to do with Christ?
Nothing.
But Fróda had something to do with both.
He was a hinge, a mediation, like The Lord of the Rings in its suspension between pagan myth and Christian truth.
He stood, in Tolkien's view, for all that was good in the Dark Ages — for the heroic awareness of heroic fallibility which Tolkien thought he could detect in Beowulf and in Maldon , for the spark of virtue which had made Anglo-Saxon England ripe for conversion (a process carried out without a single martyrdom).
Maybe his story had been, in God's plan, an evangelica praeparatio : a clearing of the ground for the good seed of the Gospel.
It is possible that Tolkien thought of The Lord of the Rings in the same way.
He knew his own country was falling back to heathenism again (if only on the model of Saruman, not Sauron), and while mere professorial preaching would make no difference, a story might.
Frodo presents then an image of natural man in native decency, trying to find his way from inertia (the Shire) past mere furious dauntlessness (Boromir) to some limited success, and doing so without the inherited resources of the heroes and longaevi like Aragorn, Gandalf, Legolas, Gimli.
He has to do so furthermore by destroying the Ring, which is merely-secular power and ambition, and with no certain faith in rescue from outside the géara hwyrftum , ‘the circles of the world’.
‘Myth is alive at once and in all its parts, and dies before it can be dissected’, declared Tolkien, and his statement is more than usually true of The Lord of the Rings , as I have said on p. 100 above.
Something like the last few sentences must however have been at least a part of Tolkien's intention.
The styles of romance
One can see that ancient story is used very differently in The Lord of the Rings from the way it is in, say, James Joyce's Ulysses .
Not only is the relation in the latter between Homeric ‘myth’ and modern novel one of irony and transformation; in it the ‘myth’, oddly enough, is given a higher and more assured status as something less sophisticated, more archetypal, closer to the holy and the divine.
Tolkien by contrast was pre-eminently aware of his source-texts, like Beowulf , or Snorri's Edda , or La3amon's Brut , as the works of individuals like himself, who used old stories for contemporary purposes just as he did.
In his view The Lord of the Rings was not a derivative or a metamorphosis of them and Pearl and Comus and Macbeth and all the other works I have mentioned of ‘mythic’ or near- ‘mythic’status: instead all of them, including The Lord of the Rings , were  splinters of a truth, transformations on the same level of something never clearly expressed, not even (in entirety) in the Gospels.
Human awareness of this truth, he may have concluded, was passed on with just the same loose and haunting persistence as the rhythms and phrases of English poetry, surviving from Anglo-Saxon times to Middle English and ‘The Man in the Moon’, and on again to Shakespeare and Milton and Yeats and nursery-rhyme, without intention as without a break.
Middle-earth itself survived in song even after people had forgotten what it meant: ‘0 cocks are crowing a merry midd-larf, /A wat the wilde foule boded day.’
Should that ballad of 1776 be classified as a ‘myth’?
It has old roots and is about a supra-rational world; but it was also sung for immediate pleasure without claims to any specially transmitted truth.
In all these ways ‘Sweet William's Ghost’ is analogous to The Lord of the Rings , and even more so to its embedded songs and verses.
There is another way of approaching the question of the trilogy's literary status, which has the further merit of concentrating attention on its prose style as well as on poetry.
This is via Northrop Frye's now-famous book, the Anatomy of Criticism (1957), a work which never mentions The Lord of the Rings , but nevertheless creates a literary place for it with Sibylline accuracy.
Mr Frye's theory, in essence, is that there are five ‘modes’ of literature, all defined by the relationship between heroes, environments, and humanity.
‘If superior in kind both to other men and to the environment of other men’, declares Mr Frye, ‘the hero is a divine being and the story about him will be a myth .’
One sees immediately that this does not apply to Gandalf or Aragorn, still less to Frodo: Gandalf can feel fear and cold, Aragorn age and discouragement, Frodo pain and weakness.
Two steps down from ‘myth’, according to the Anatomy , we find ‘high mimesis,, the level of most epic and tragedy, in which heroes are ‘superior in degree to other men but not to [their]natural environment’.
This looks more like The Lord of the Rings , where many of the characters — Éomer, Faramir, Aragorn again — are very much of the stamp of old Siward or Coriolanus or other Shakespearean heroes.
But are they on a par with their natural environment?
Aragorn can run 135 miles in three days; he lives in full vigour for 210 years, dying on his birthday.
Around him cluster characters who are immortal, like Elrond or Legolas, who can make fire or ride on eagles, while he himself can summon the dead.
Clearly the mode intended is the one below ‘myth’ but above ‘high mimesis’, the world of ‘romance, whose heroes are characteristically ‘superior in degree [not kind ]to other men and to [their]environments’.
The main points of this mode are then displayed by Mr Frye in ways immediately applicable to The Lord of the Rings .
In it, we are told, ‘the hero's death or isolation has the effect of a spirit passing out of nature, and evokes a mood best described as elegiac’; ‘passing out of nature’ is of course the main theme of hobbit-poetry.
Elegy is further accompanied  ‘by a diffused, resigned, melancholy sense of the passing of time, of the old order changing and yielding to a new one’; while true of Beowulf and The Idylls of the King this is conspicuously truer of The Return of the King and its dissolution of the Third Age.
However the main merit of Mr Frye's analysis, at this moment, is that besides describing Tolkien's literary category so well it further indicates, first, an inevitable problem associated with that category, and then, more indirectly, the terms in which to express a solution.
To take the problem first: it is caused by the fact that there are literary modes beneath romance and beneath epic or tragedy, i.e. ‘low mimesis’ -this being the mode of most novels, in which the hero is much on a level with us — and lower still ‘irony’, where heroes turn into anti-heroes like Sancho Panza or Good Soldier Schweik or Leopold Bloom.
‘Looking over this table’, Mr Frye observes, ‘we can see that European fiction, during the last fifteen centuries, has steadily moved its center of gravity down the list’— so much so that, as has been remarked of The Hobbit , the co-existence of ‘romance’ characters like Thorin Oakenshield with ‘ironic heroes’like Bilbo Baggins is immediately comic and only after many adventures rises to gravity.
Tolkien's problem all through his career lay in his readership's ‘low mimetic’ or ‘ironic’expectations.
How could he present heroes to an audience trained to reject their very style?
His immediate solution was to present in The Lord of the Rings a whole hierarchy of styles.
In this the hobbits are, orcs apart, at the bottom.
Their very pronouns are against them, for the Shire version of Common Speech, like English but unlike all other major European languages, fails to distinguish polite from familiar forms of ‘you’; Pippin, Merry and the others accordingly talk in a style which appears to Gondorians as unnaturally assured (though it is in fact almost ‘democratic’, see III, 411).
In a more obvious way they are prone to compulsive banter.
Merry, in the Houses of Healing, asks immediately after his recall from death by the sacral king for ‘supper first, and after that a pipe’.
The resultant memory of Théoden is dissolved by jokes about tobacco, about his pack, and by friendly abuse from Pippin.
‘It is the way of my people to use light words at such times’, says Merry apologetically, but just the same he cannot stop.
One sees what causes the unkind critical remarks about Boy's Own and Billy Bunter.
However the emergence of anti-heroes like Billy Bunter, the demotion of romance to children's literature, are obvious consequences of the Western world's fifteen-hundred-year long climb down the ladder of literary modes.
All the hobbitic jokes are doing, then, is to reflect and by intention deflect the modern inhibition over high styles which we and they share; if we were not embarrassed by the hobbits, in other words, we would be by the heroes.
Many people indeed manage to be embarrassed by both, and for the latter reaction there is more excuse.
As he climbed to the top of his stylistic  hierarchy Tolkien on occasion wrote in the responses he wanted instead of evoking them.
High style is accompanied by characters stepping back, swelling, shining.
Aragorn puts down Andúril at the gate of the Golden Hall, and declares its name: ‘The guard stepped back and looked with amazement’.
A few lines earlier ‘wonder’ has come into his eyes at the mention of Lothlórien.
In the same way the guards at the Great Gate of Gondor ‘fell back before the command of [Gandalf's]voice’, while at the last embassy near the Morannon ‘before his upraised hand the foul Messenger recoiled’.
At that moment ‘a white light shone forth like a sword’ from Gandalf, as many people see ‘the light that shone’round Éowyn and Faramir as they come down to the Houses of Healing.
Galadriel is ‘illumined’ by ‘a great light’when Frodo offers her the Ring, and seems ‘tall beyond measurement’.
All these images together are used when Aragorn draws Andúril and declares himself to Éomer (II, 36):
Obviously his reaction is meant to be ours.
Equally obviously that reaction cannot be counted on, because of the surly distrust engendered in us (as in Éomer) by generations of realistic fiction.
Nevertheless it is a mistake to think that the only literary modes which exist are those one period is familiar with.
By his continual switching from one level of style to another, and his equally continual use of characters as ‘internal reflectors’ of embarrassment or suspicion, Tolkien showed at least that he was aware of that very predictable mistake, and ready to do what he could to help his readers round it.
The worst one can fairly say is that in some scenes — the Andúril ones, the Field of Cormallen, the eagle's song — Tolkien under-estimated his audience's resistance and reached too hastily for the sublime or the impressive.
The real difficulty, though, is not his but ours: in ordinary modern ‘low mimetic’ novels such qualities are simply not allowed.
In fact one can often feel Tolkien, between these ‘low’ and ‘high’stylistic poles, breaking with complete success out of all the categories into which he should have been put, rising again from the edge of romance to what almost anyone might call ‘myth’.
perhaps the best example occurs at the end of Volume V, chapter 4, ‘The Siege of Gondor’.
Here many of the story's threads are about to intersect.
Faramir lies critically ill within the walls.
Pippin is rushing to fetch Gandalf to save him, while Merry  and Théoden are simultaneously approaching from Anórien; but at the Great Gate the chief Nazgûl, the ‘haggard king’ himself to whom Frodo had almost surrendered in the vale of Minas Morgul, leads the assault.
All this is presented simply as story, even as history, but supra-realistic suggestions keep crowding in.
The battering-ram of Mordor has a ‘hideous head, founded of black steel…shaped in the likeness of a ravening wolf; on it spells of ruin lay.
Grond they called it, in memory of the Hammer of the Underworld of old’— as if to recreate some earlier unstated triumph of the chthonic powers.
Meanwhile the Nazgûl himself goes even more than usual beyond the boundaries of even ‘romantic’ humanity: he looks like a man, and carries a sword, but it is a ‘pale’or insubstantial one; he bursts the Gate not only by Grond but by a projection of fear and dread, ‘words of power and terror to rend both heart and stone’, which work like ‘searing lightning’.
On the one hand he turns almost to abstraction, ‘a vast menace of despair’, as also to an image of the un-existence of evil, a ‘huge shadow’ which Gandalf tries to send back to ‘nothingness’.
But though the Nazgûl ironically proves Boethius right by throwing back his hood —‘and behold! he had a kingly crown; and yet upon no head visible was it set’ -his deadly laughter shows that ‘nothingness’can still have power and control.
At this moment he calls himself Death:
IN this passage the key words are perhaps ‘as if ’.
within the world of romance everything that happens here is literally ‘co-incidence’.
The cock means nothing by crowing, that he crows at this moment is mere happenstance.
Nor are the horns replying — they only seem to.
Nevertheless no reader takes the passage like that.
The cockcrow itself is too laden with old significance to be just a motif.
In a Christian society one cannot avoid the memory of the cock that crowed to Simon Peter just as he denied Christ the third time.
What did that cockcrow mean?
Surely, that there was a Resurrection, that from now on Simon's despair and fear of death would be overcome.
But then again, what of Comus and the cockcrow the Younger Brother wishes for?‘'TWOULD be some solace yet, some little cheering/In this close dungeon of innumerous boughs.’
It would show there is a world  elsewhere.
Tolkien too might think of the Norse legend of the ‘Undying Lands’, the Odáinsakr : when King Hadding reached its boundary the witch who guided him killed a cock and threw it over the wall — a moment later he heard the cock crow before he himself had to turn away and go back to mortality.
Cockcrow means dawn, means day after night, life after death; it asserts a greater cycle above a lesser one.
And what of the horns?
They too are just the horns the Riders happen to be blowing, but they carry meaning in a more complicated way as well.
Their meaning is bravado and recklessness.
When he sets out from Rivendell Boromir blows his horn, the family heirloom, and is rebuked by Elrond for doing so; but he takes no notice.
‘Always I have let my horn cry at setting forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, 1 will not go forth as a thief in the night.’
He means that good is stronger than evil, and even if it is not, that makes no difference to him.
Challenging horns echo through Northern stories, from the trumpets of Hygelác, Beowulf's uncle, coming to rescue his dispirited compatriots from death by torture, to the war-horns of the ‘Forest Cantons’, the ‘Bull’ of Uri and the ‘Cow’of Unterwalden, lowing to each other across the field of Marignano, as the Swiss pikemen rallied in the night for a second suicidal assault on overwhelming numbers of French cavalry and cannon.
Horns go back to an older world where surrenders were not accepted, to the dead defiant Roland rather than the brave, polite, compromise-creating Sir Gawain, whose dinner is served to ‘nwe nakryn noyse’— the sound of chivalric kettledrums.
Nor are these the ‘horns of Elfland dimly blowing’ of late Romanticism; their echoes may be ‘dim’, but they themselves are ‘wild’, uncontrolled, immune to the fear and calculation on which the Nazgúl is counting.
The combination of horncall and cockcrow means, if one listens, that he who fears for his life shall lose it, but that dying undaunted is no defeat; furthermore that this was true before the Christian myth that came to explain why.
The implications of that scene are more than realistic, and more than romantic.
Nevertheless the style of the passage is deliberately neutral.
There are touches of alliteration in ‘wizardry’ and ‘war’, ‘death’and ‘dawn’, ‘dark’and ‘dim’, while the verb ‘recking’is old-fashioned.
However the vocabulary as a whole could hardly be simpler, largely mono-syllabic, mostly words from Old English or Old Norse, but with an admixture of French words taken into the language many centuries ago, and even one Classical one in ‘echoed’.
Like Bilbo's and Shakespeare's winter songs, the ‘breaking of the Gate’ would take little rewriting to seem comprehensible and even colloquial at any time over the last half-millennium.
The power of the passage lies not in mots justes but in the evocation of ideas at once old and new, familiar in outline but strongly redefined in context: like ‘stocks and stones’.
The way this works has been once more illuminated by Mr Frye, who  notes that though the line from Charles Kingsley's ballad about the ‘cruel, crawling foam’(which swallows a girl drowned by accident) could be censured by rationalistic critics as the ‘pathetic fallacy’— thinking nature is alive — what the phrase actually does is to let realism aspire for a second to higher modes, to give to the drowned Mary ‘a faint coloring of the myth of Andromeda’.
That aspiration is true of Tolkien in many places.
It seems only apposite that he should hover so often on the edge of the ‘pathetic fallacy’, as for instance in the assault on Caradhras, where Aragorn and Boromir insist the wind has ‘fell voices’ and that stone-slips are aimed, or on the bridge at Khazad-dûm, where Gandalf is ‘like a wizened tree’, but the Balrog a mixture of fire and shadow, a ‘flame of Udûn’— checked only for a moment by Boromir's horn.
A good example of open discussion of such ambiguities within the trilogy is Frodo's passage of the Dead Marshes in II, 233–6.
It is Sam who falls with his face to the mud and cries out ‘There are dead things, dead faces in the water’.
Gollum explains them as materialistically as possible.
The dead are from the great battle long ago; the marsh-lights are exhalations from rotting corpses; he dug down once to eat them, though he found them beyond reach.
Frodo sees more in them than that, though he cannot explain what:
He does not say that ‘fair is foul’, like the witches in Macbeth .
But the fear of the vision comes from the way that all, elves and orcs, evil and noble, are reduced to weeds and foulness in the end.
The image picks up Merry's awakening from the barrow pages earlier, with its unexplained juxtaposition of the noble dead in the barrow with the wight itself.
Does all glory decompose?
That is what makes Frodo stand ‘lost in thought’.
Later on Faramir is to dismiss the whole thing as a sending of the Enemy.
But there remains a feeling that the Enemy is not telling absolute untruth, even so.
The landscape itself reinforces that belief.
‘Far above the rot and vapours of the world the sun was riding high and golden’, but all the hobbits can see and hear is ‘the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken grass-blades trembling in small air-movements that they could not feel’.
The discharged seed, the breathless air, are images of the discouragement and sterility the Enemy projects.
Mordor-flies have red eyes on them; all Mordor-bushes have thorns.
Both characters and readers become aware of the extent and nature of Tolkien's moralisations from landscape in such passages.
In the thematic opposite to Mordor and the Marshes, however, in and around Lothlórien, old poems, old beliefs, and fictional geography are much more closely intertwined, with the combination much less readily identified as fallacious.
The word associated with Lórien most often is ‘stain' — an odd word, both French and Norse in origin, with an early meaning of ‘to lose lustre’ as well as‘to discolour’.
Frodo perceives the colours of Cerin Amroth accordingly as at once‘fresh’ and familiar, with a light on them he cannot identify: ‘On the land of Lórien there was no stain.’
A few pages earlier he had felt that ‘on the land of Lórien no shadow lay’.
Much later Gandalf in the ‘Song of Lórien’ confirms, ‘Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land’.
With this mysterious absence of ‘stain' goes a forgetting of grief; though the Fellowship has just lost Gandalf in Moria, the fact is not mentioned for some twenty pages (I, 350–70), and indeed we are told that ‘In winter here no heart could mourn for summer or for spring’.
This is very like Pearl , where the visionary landscape he wakes in makes the dreamer-father forget even his bereavement, ‘Garten my goste al greffe for3ete’.
It should be noteá though that he crosses one boundary, from graveyard to dream, but not the next; when he tries to swim the river to Heaven at the end of the poem he is halted and woken before he reaches the water.
Frodo and the Fellowship, however, cross two rivers, deliberately described and distinguished.
One is the Nimrodel, which consoles their grief and promises them partial security; as Frodo wades it ‘he felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs’.
The next is Celebrant, the Silverlode which they cannot ford but have to cross on ropes.
Here they are totally secure, for though the orcs can splash across the Nimrodel —‘curse their foul feet in its clean water!’ says Haldir — it seems they cannot wade or swim the Silverlode.
Even Gollum, though seen by the elves, vanishes ‘down the Silverlode southward’, i.e. on the far bank, and according to Aragorn has followed the Fellowship only ‘right down to Nimrodel’.
With Pearl in mind, one might easily conclude that the stretch between the two rivers is a sort of ‘earthly paradise’ for Frodo and the others, though one still capable of violation and invasion from the outside world.
The ‘Naith’ of Lórien, though, across the second river, is Heaven; the company undergoes a kind of death in getting there, while there is a feeling of significance in the fact that they may not touch the water, not even to have their ‘stains’washed away.
A determined allegorist (or mythiciser) might go on to identify the Nimrodel with baptism, the Silverlode with death.
A force which holds one powerfully back from such opinions is however Sam Gamgee, who counterpoints the most solemn moments of crossing with banalities like ‘Live and learn!’ and chatter about his uncle Andy (who used to have a rope-walk at Tighfield).
He, and Gimli and Gollum and Haldir, keep even Lórien tied down to the level of story, in which rivers are tactical obstacles and not symbols for something else.
Nevertheless, even though the Pearl analogue may occur  to few, the references to absence of ‘stain' and grief and blemish, the assertion that Lórien is a place apart, have their effect and keep one finally uncertain about the section's proper mode.
The best one can say is that in those chapters, as in The Lord of the Rings more generally, a work essentially of ‘romance’ manages to rise at times towards ‘myth’, and also to sink towards ‘high’or even ‘low mimesis,.
Even ‘irony’ is not always out of place, though it is beneficent.
As Sam and Frodo struggle on in Mordor, they come on a streamlet, ‘the last remains, maybe, of some sweet rain gathered from sunlit seas, but ill-fated to fall at last upon the walls of the Black Land and wander fruitless down into the dust’.
‘Fruitless’(a significant adjective elsewhere)?
The water seemed so, but turns out not to be.
By refreshing the Ringbearer it does the best that any water could.
The ‘streamlet’, in its apparent failure and eventual success, becomes a kind of analogue to Frodo's pity for Gollum, say, to all appearances useless, in the end decisive.
It is hard to say what mode such scenes are in.
They could be (by themselves) anywhere in Northrop Frye's stylistic hierarchy.
This resonance of passages which can be read with different levels of suggestion at once, with ‘myth’ and ‘low mimesis’and ‘irony’all embedded deeply in ‘romance’, is perhaps the major and least-considered cause for the appeal of The Lord of the Rings .
Some contradictions mediated
If the three volumes had a thematic heart (in fact their whole method defies centralisation) one might like to see it in the dialogue of Legolas and Gimli, walking through Minas Tirith at III, 149, and looking at the masonry.
Gimli is critical:
The exchange makes a point about Gondorian history.
It also brings out further one character's idée fixe (stonework), and develops the theme of racial tension/personal harmony which has been a feature of this relationship in the story for some time.
Yet the characters' speech here reaches out from its immediate context to timelessness and universality.
Their sentences sound like proverbs.
The idea of seed lying in the dust is further  more likely to arouse memory of the parable (Matthew xiii, 18–23) of the seed that fell on stony ground.
With a shock one may wonder whether these proverbially soulless creatures, Elf and Dwarf, are here —all unwittingly — talking about the Son of Man.
It would be like the elves to know a Saviour would come to men, without having the slightest or remotest idea of the mingled horror and beauty with which that event would come about.
We get a glimpse of how history might seem to the most virtuous, and most pagan, of virtuous pagans — an odd effect in, but not at all a contradiction to ‘a fundamentally religious and Catholic work’.
In this way The Lord of the Rings can be seen mediating between Christian and pagan, Christ and Ingeld and Frodo, as between myth and romance, large pattern and immediate context.
It is at the same time hovering between styles.
There is no archaic word in the passage, except perhaps ‘naught’.
Nevertheless a strong archaic effect is produced, by inversion of nouns and adjectives, careful selection of adverbs of time like ‘yet’ and ‘seldom’, and other less obvious linguistic features.
Tolkien could have given a lecture about all these at any time.
It would have been no trouble to him to write the exchange in modern English: ‘It's always like that with the things men start off on…
But they don't often fail to propagate…
They'll still come to nothing in the end…
The elves don't know the answer to that one…’
The Lord of the Rings would have offered fewer hostages to criticism if it had been written like that.
But would it have been better?
It seems very unlikely.
The discrepancy between modern usage and archaic thought would simply have sounded bogus, leading to a deep ‘disunion of word and meaning’(as Tolkien showed by rewriting a similar passage, see Letters , pp. 225–6).
His prose style was carefully calculated, and had its proper effect, in the long run, and for those not too provoked to read carefully.
One might say, in Aristotelian terms, that the trilogy succeeded in harmonising its ethos , its mythos , and its lexis — the subjects, roughly speaking, of the last three chapters respectively.
By those three words Aristotle would have meant ‘setting’, ‘plot’ and ‘style’, all meanings intended in the sentence above.
However semantic change often gives an unexpected bonus, which one should accept in this case as in others.
The sentence above would still be true if the Greek words meant ‘ethics’, ‘myth’ and ‘lexis’(the technical term for what one gets from dictionaries or lexicons).
Tolkien thought there was a truth in the vagaries of words independent of their users.
He probably did not, for instance, personally admire either Milton or Wordsworth: the one was a Protestant, a divorcer, and a spokesman for regicides, the other a tinkerer with medievalism and a linguistic critic of the most ignorant type.
But both were English poets, and the language spoke through them.
How nearly Wordsworth echoed Pearl in his famous elegy on ‘Lucy’:
He should have written ‘stocks’, not ‘rocks’.
But he preferred the r alliteration (and the tautology).
Milton meanwhile got the phrase right in his sonnet ‘On the Late Massacre in Piedmont’:
However in Tolkien's view everything else in the poem would be wrong: its ferocity, its equation of God's truth with protestantism, most especially its contempt for ‘our fathers’ before they were converted, for the Anglo-Saxons indeed.
Milton knew very little about them, and his contempt was based on ignorance.
Yet poetry which uses old phrases is not always bound down to its creator's intention.
Reading that line, and adding to it his memories of Finn and Fróda, of Beowulf and Hróthgár and the other pagan heroes from the darkness before the English dawn, Tolkien may have felt that Milton was more accurate than he knew.
Perhaps ‘our fathers’did worship ‘stocks and stones’.
But perhaps they were not so very bad in doing so.
After all if they had not Christ to worship, there were worse things, many worse things for them to reverence than ‘stocks and stones’, rocks and trees, ‘merry Middle-earth’ itself.
VISIONS AND REVISIONS
The dangers of going on
Both The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings can be seen as primarily works of mediation.
In the former Bilbo acts as the link between modern times and the archaic world of dwarves and dragons.
In the latter Frodo and his Shire companions play a similar part, though the world they move in has also and in more complex ways been ‘mediated’, turned into a Limbo.
Outside these works, though, hobbits are not to be met with.
And in the books published after Tolkien's death,The Silmarillion and the Unfinished Tales , mediation is very much less apparent.
That is the main reason for deciding to treat them here, instead of where (some would say) they belong, before The Hobbit and along with the ‘Philological Inquiries’ of Chapter 2.
For The Silmarillion at least, though not published till 1977, four years after its author's death, was in existence as a ‘narrative structure’ not long after the First World War, while a version of it was submitted to George Allen & Unwin for publication forty years before it eventually came out.
A ‘very high proportion’ even of the detailed wording of this 1937 text remains in the published version.i Much of The Silmarillion , then, could be seen as chronologically pre- Hobbit , while the Unfinished Tales (though much more varied in date and nature) at least contain a good deal of material whose composition preceded the appearance of The Lord of the Rings .
That, though, is not how most readers experience them.
Probably ninety-nine people out of a hundred come to The Silmarillion and the Unfinished Tales only after reading The Lord of the Rings .
Furthermore, because of the uncompromising nature of the posthumously-published works, it will probably always be hard for most readers to understand them except after reading The Lord of the Rings .
In that work Tolkien had set himself to write a romance for an audience brought up on novels.
In the others, whether we consider them as earlier or later, we are left with far less guidance.
It is accordingly the main aim of this chapter to indicate as far as possible how The Silmarillion in particular should be read.
Subsidiary to that, though still important, are the issues of what it has to say and how it came to be: ‘sources’ and ‘designs’once more, both things Tolkien disliked, but useful if not essential to a proper reading.
Before considering even those issues, however, there is one more very  obvious question to ask: which is why Tolkien never saw The Silmarillion into print himself, and why the Unfinished Tales remained unfinished.
There were, after all, nearly eighteen years between the appearance of The Return of the King and Tolkien's death on 2 September 1973 — as long an interval as that between The Hobbit and The Fellowship of the Ring .
During most of that period Tolkien was furthermore relieved of distracting academic duties, while he was not putting his energies into other creative work: almost all the sixteen poems in The Adventures of Tom Bombadil had seen print before, his contribution to The Road Goes Ever On consisted mostly of explanation and footnote, and Smith of Wootton Major is of no higher a degree of importance than ‘Leaf by Niggle’.
Besides, to repeat the point,The Silmarillion was very largely in existence from 1937 on; was also known to be in existence, and very much in demand!
Why, then, could Tolkien not finish his legends of the First Age off?
An answer to this, of a personal kind, has been given by Humphrey Carpenter on pp. 239–41 of his Biography .
There was in Tolkien's later life, he notes, ‘a perpetual discontinuity, a breaking of threads which delayed achievement and frustrated him more and more’.
partly the causes were external — loss of friends, hosts of visitors — but partly temperamental: Tolkien could not ‘discipline himself into adopting regular working methods’(a fault of which he had been aware since the time of ‘Leaf by Niggle’).
The Silmarillion was accordingly held up to a great extent, in Mr Carpenter's view, by procrastination and bother over inessentials, by crosswords and games of Patience, by drawing heraldic doodles and answering readers' letters — all compounded, one might add, by the failing energies of age (see Letters , p. 228).
This is a convincing picture, and no doubt partly true.
Yet it is not a picture of someone taking things easy: rather of continual, if misdirected, intellectual effort.
One may remark that it is common experience to find that conscientious people who have a job to do that is too much for them (like writing a book) turn in their uncertainty to doing a succession of easier jobs instead (like answering their mail, drawing up syllabuses, or rationalising office organisation).
Something like this seems to have been the case with Tolkien.
He may have frittered his time away in constructing etymologies and writing kindly letters to strangers.
But these activities occupied him, one may well think, because he could see he had painted himself into a corner: the purely literary reason for not finishing The Silmarillion is deducible not only from that work itself, but from almost the whole of Tolkien's professional career.
To go back to ‘Beowulf : the Monsters and the Critics’: if this makes one thing clear it is that the literary quality Tolkien valued above all was the ‘impression of depth…effect of antiquity…illusion of historical truth and perspective’ which he found in Beowulf , in the Aeneid , or for that matter in Macbeth, Sir Orfeo , or the Grimms' Fairy Tales .
In all these  works there was a sense that the author knew more than he was telling, that behind his immediate story there was a coherent, consistent, deeply fascinating world about which he had no time (then) to speak.
Of course this sense, as Tolkien kept repeating, was largely an illusion, even a provocation to which a wise man should not respond.
The ‘heroic lays, which the Beowulf -poet knew and alluded to sound very fine from his allusions, but if we had them we might discover that the fascination came from his art, not theirs.
‘Alas for the lost lore, the annals and old poets that Virgil knew, and only used in the making of a new thing!’, wrote Tolkien, and he meant it.
However he also meant everyone to realise that the ‘new thing’ was worth more than the ‘lost lore’.
The application of this to his own career must (once The Lord of the Rings was published) have seemed all too obvious.
One quality which that work has in abundance is the Beowulfian ‘impression of depth’, created just as in the old epic by songs and digressions like Aragorn's lay of Tinúviel, Sam Gamgee's allusions to the Silmaril and the Iron Crown, Elrond's account of Celebrimbor, and dozens more.
This, however, is a quality of The Lord of the Rings , not of the inset stories.
To tell these in their own right and expect them to retain the charm they got from their larger setting would be a terrible error, an error to which Tolkien would be more sensitive than any man alive.
As he wrote in a revealing letter dated 20 September 1963:
To go there is to destroy the magic .
As for the revealing of ‘new unattainable vistas’, the problem there — as Tolkien must have thought many times-was that in The Lord of the Rings Middle-earth was already old, with a vast weight of history behind it.
The Silmarillion , though, in its longer form, was bound to begin at the beginning.
How could ‘depth’ be created when you had nothing to reach further back to?
The problem was not absolutely insoluble: Milton, after all, had managed to begin his epic very near the beginnings of time, in Paradise Lost .
Furthermore one can perhaps see the solution to which Tolkien, in his philological way, was drawn, namely to present the First Age as ‘a complex of divergent texts interlinked by commentary’(UT , p. 1), the texts themselves being supposedly written by Men, of different periods, looking back across the ages to vast rumours of whose truth they knew only part.
The Silmarillion might then have come to look like (for example)The Saga of King Heidrek the Wise , written late but preserving intensely moving fragments of verse from some much older time now lost; even the editorial matter would then reinforce the effect of age and darkness (a device Tolkien used on a much smaller scale for The Adventures of Tom Bombadil ).
However that avenue was never explored to its end; and if it had been, one may doubt whether many readers would have grasped the total effect.
A Silmarillion on that plan could have ended as merely a pastime for scholars.
It is better, no doubt, to see it as it is now, ‘a completed and cohesive entity’(UT , p. 1 again).
But in any case The Lord of the Rings had created other problems for its author besides the issue of ‘depth’: these affected The Silmarillion , but show up more strongly in the Unfinished Tales .
One was the strong temptation towards explicitness and over-clarity.
In Letters , p. 348, Tolkien noted the comic case of a Mr Shorthouse, who produced by accident a strange, queer, debatable book called John Inglesant .
Slowly it caught on, became a best-seller, ‘the subject of public discussion from the Prime Minister downwards’.
Success, however, ruined its author, who took to strange clothes and beliefs and ‘never wrote any more, but wasted the rest of his time trying to explain what he had and what he had not meant in John Inglesant' .
‘I have always tried to take him as a melancholy warning’(wrote Tolkien in 1964), so the danger was seen.
Still, it was there.
It emerges, for instance, if one considers water.
No scene, perhaps, in The Lord of the Rings is more moving or more suggestive than the one in which Sam and Frodo, in Mordor, see the wind changing and the darkness driven back, and then as if in answer to prayer come upon a trickle of water: ‘ill-fated’ and ‘fruitless’in appearance, but at that moment seemingly a message from the world outside, beyond the Shadow.
In The Silmarillion we learn that water is the province of the Vala Ulmo, and that from it (sea or river) there often comes assistance; the incident with Sam and Frodo begins to seem less and less like chance, more and more of a ‘sending’.
If this went too far, of course, the sense of supernatural assistance would destroy one's awareness of the companions' courage, as also the deeply-felt implicit moral that this is the way to behave.
None of us can expect assistance from a Vala; nevertheless in any kind of Mordor it is one's duty to go on.
By the time The Lord of the Rings was finished, Tolkien was beginning to think of taking matters further.
He had shown inspiration coming from Ulmo to Tuor, as the hero sat by a trickling stream, both in The Silmarillion (p. 238), and in ‘Of Tuor and his Coming to Gondolin' (written c .
1951), in the Unfinished Tales , p. 20.
Clearly the idea of water as a sanctity and an unfailing refuge from the Dark Lord had started to appeal to him; and in ‘The Hunt for the Ring’, accordingly, a sort of coda to The Lord of the Rings written c .
1955, he wrote that all the Nazgûl save their chief ‘feared water, and were unwilling, except in dire need, to enter  it or to cross streams unless dryshod by a bridge’(UT , p. 343).
How then had they crossed Wilderland to the Shire?
Christopher Tolkien notes that his father saw ‘the idea was difficult to sustain'.
Besides that, it would have brought the Valar too far forward; at many points it would have destroyed the hobbits’ highly realistic sense of loneliness and confusion.
One may think that Tolkien was rightly pushing towards a clarification of his ‘mythology’.
Yet at the same time he was edging back from his long concern with heroic valour, or hobbitic moral courage.
It has been remarked already (p. 116 above) that he was in minor matters soft-hearted.
As The Lord of the Rings came to an end this temptation, too, grew upon him.
Bill the pony is saved in The Return of the King .
In the unpublished ‘Epilogue’ to that work, we learn that Shadowfax will be saved too, to be taken on the last ship from the Havens to Aman, simply because Gandalf could not bear the parting.
This would be a failure of nerve in a work which had sacrificed Lórien, and Tolkien, having written it, wisely decided to leave it out.
Still, the second edition of The Lord of the Rings cuts out some minor, but convincing, asperity on the part of a strained Aragorn; it seemed too tough.
More seriously, in the ‘late’ narrative of ‘The Disaster of the Gladden Fields’(UT , pp. 271–87), one can see Tolkien reconsidering Isildur.
His use of the ominous word ‘precious’ in The Fellowship of the Ring (p. 266) had been quite enough to suggest that he was already becoming ‘addicted’, that his death was in a way a mercy.
In the later narrative, though, Isildur uses the Ring painfully and reluctantly, with much excuse and apology.
The Ring seems to find no answer in him to its call.
But this again is running against a crucial point in The Lord of the Rings , namely that no one can be trusted, not even ‘the Keepers of the Three’.
Tolkien, no doubt, would have seen this point and dealt with it somehow if he had published a full account.
Still, one can see him becoming more loath to accept the evil in the good: and while this is charitable, it does not make for powerful story.
A final straw in the wind may be Tolkien's increasing desire to pull strands together.
The Middle-earth of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings is full of chaotic half-glimpsed independent lives, ears in the forest, fell voices on the wind, enemy powers older than Sauron and unconnected with him.
In a letter of 1955 Tolkien had rather laughed at the idea that Willow-man and the wights were agents of the Dark Lord: ‘Cannot people imagine things hostile to men and hobbits who prey on them without being in league with the Devil!’
(Letters , p. 278).
But in manuscript B of ‘The Hunt for the Ring’(written at much the same time) just this idea is being entertained.
The Chief Ringwraith stays on the Barrow-downs for some while before Frodo sets out, ‘and the Barrow-wights were roused, and all things of evil spirit, hostile to Elves and Men, were on the watch with malice in the Old Forest and on the Barrow-downs’(UT , p. 348).
None of the points just mentioned is of any great significance in itself.
As a whole, though, they do suggest an author looking back over his own work and trying to reduce it to order .
The menace in that, as everyone knows, is that with system comes rationalisation and loss of vitality.
There are moments when one fears that Tolkien, in the Unfinished Tales — and in fairness one must repeat that they are unfinished, were never finally ‘passed’ by their author — was turning against the sources of his inspiration.
He tried to realign retrospectively things he had written many years before, for what at the time had been entirely adequate reasons.
The point of making Bilbo both ‘bourgeois’ and ‘burglar’has been explained above, see pp. 55–6; and the scene in Bag End in chapter 1 of The Hobbit is completely successful as comedy.
But by the time he wrote ‘The Quest of Erebor’(perhaps around 1950), Tolkien had come to think it undignified.
In repeated versions he explains laboriously that Gandalf forced Bilbo on Thorin out of some Valinorean ‘foresight’; or because he knew hobbits were stealthy; or because he thought Bilbo had the right ‘mix’ of Took and Baggins; while as for the word ‘burglar’, it was all a dwarvish misunderstanding.
The very multiplicity of reasons suggests doubt; and in romance it is a good rule that not everything should be explained.
In any case one may well think that the sheer effort of dotting ‘i's and crossing ‘t's was draining.
On one issue — the nature of the orcs — Tolkien seems very nearly to have arrived at a solution without quite being able to grasp it, a sign, perhaps, of exhaustion.
There can be little doubt that the orcs entered Middle-earth originally just because the story needed a continual supply of enemies over whom one need feel no compunction- ‘the infantry of the old war’, to use Tolkien's phrase from ‘Monsters’(p. 264).
But several readers had pointed out that if evil could not create, was only good perverted, then presumably the orcs had been by nature good and might in some way be saved; Tolkien certainly balked at calling them ‘irredeemable’, see Letters , pp. 195, 355.
The Silmarillion accordingly expresses more than once the theory that orcs were in fact captured elves ‘by slow acts of cruelty…corrupted and enslaved’(S , p. 50).
One can only say that in that case there are an awful lot of them —‘the pits of Angband seemed to hold store inexhaustible and ever-renewed’(S, p. 157).
They must have been bred, one thinks, and indeed we are told they multiplied ‘after the manner of the children of llúvatar’, i.e. sexually.
But in that case one wonders (a) why what we would call ‘brainwashed’ creatures should breed true, and (b) why we never come upon female orcs.
Tolkien shrank from that last, and recorded (UT , p. 385) a rival theory that the orcs were bred from something like the Drúedain, the pûkel-men.
I suspect that at the back of his mind there lurked a phrase from Beowulf , about those very similar monsters Grendel and his mother:no hie faeder cunnon , ‘men know of no father for them’.
It would be a good solution to  see the orcs as multiplying ‘like flies’, i.e. non-sexually, in hatcheries in Barad-dûr or Moria or the pits of Angband.
Such beings would be ‘creatures’ of evil in a special sense, made and animated by their master in a way which falls just short of the heresy that evil can itself create.
As Ilúvatar says of Aulë's dwarves, they would have no being of their own, ‘moving when [he thinks]to move them, and if [his]thought is elsewhere, standing idle’.
Tolkien saw the problem, and collected the parts of a solution.
He did not however assemble the parts — perhaps because it would have involved, to be consistent, a complete revision of all his earlier work.
The word underlying these last few pages is ‘thrift’.
All minds possess a drive towards consistency, towards reducing data, events, characters to some smaller set of principles or categories.
Much of Tolkien's writing in Silmarillion and Unfinished Tales shows that urge, a strong and honourable one.
It is fair to say, though, that against this basic drive all minds also possess a wish to ignore principles and concentrate instead on single entities regardless of their place in larger systems, to appreciate them simply for themselves.
For most of his career Tolkien was a most extreme example of a man with this second urge strongly developed: he was fascinated by names, to give only one example, part of whose nature is that they are for one thing and one thing alone, very hard to reduce to system!
Hence the supreme lavishness of Middle-earth in The Lord of the Rings , with its vast store of plants and races, names and languages and individuals and landscapes.
As he turned towards thrift, consistency, classification, Tolkien forfeited much of what he had valued before; he was contracting, not expanding.
In a way the very success of The Lord of the Rings , founded on its immense solidity and scope, made life difficult for him afterwards.
Not only would The Silmarillion have to achieve the ‘depth’ it had already been used to create, it would have to do so without contradicting, and while if possible reinforcing, all the millions of details Tolkien had handed over to his readership already.
For these two reasons it is hardly any wonder that Tolkien balked, and that the Unfinished Tales in particular show a mind searching in different directions.
After 1955 many ways forward were blocked.
The question was, whether the vitality of his original conceptions and compositions of the period before The Lord of the Rings , indeed from 1914 on, could survive.
Here one must concentrate, not on those explanations of the Second and Third Ages which Tolkien wrote as background for The Lord of the Rings , but on his labour and preoccupation for nearly sixty years, the legends of the First Age: Tuor and Tûrin in the Unfinished Tales , but beyond and around them the whole ‘narrative structure’ of The Silmarillion .
To repeat questions posed earlier: what have these to say, and how did they come to be?
Philosophical Inquiries
The most obvious fact about the design of The Silmarillion is that, like the Shire, it is a ‘calque’, though on the history of Genesis rather than the history of England.
In chapter X of A Preface to Paradise Lost (London: Oxford University Press, 1942), C. S. Lewis gave a summary list of doctrines of the Fall of Man common to Milton, to St Augustine, and to ‘the Church as a whole’.
Most of them reappear with little change in the ‘Ainulindalé’ or ‘Valaquenta’.
Thus Lewis asserts that ‘God created all things without exception good’; in Tolkien even Melkor begins with good intentions (p. 18).
‘What we call bad things are good things perverted…
This perversion arises when a conscious creature becomes more interested in itself than in God…the sin of pride’; compare Melkor in the music of the Ainur seeking ‘to increase the power and glory of the part assigned to himself’.
Lewis again, ‘whoever tries to rebel against God produces the result opposite to his intention…
Those who will not be God's sons become his tools’; and Ilúvatar to Melkor, ‘no theme may be played that hath not its uttermost source in me…he that attempteth this shall prove but mine instrument in the devising of things more wonderful, which he himself hath not imagined’(my italics).
It seems very likely that Lewis and Tolkien collaborated in their analysis of Christian essentials;The Silmarillion , with its exile from paradise, its ages of misery, and its Intercessor, is a calque on Christian story, an answer to Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained .
Is it a rival to Christian story?
The thought clearly occurred to Tolkien, if only to be repudiated.
Significantly he left a gap in The Silmarillion , or designed a dovetail, for the Fall of Man as described in the Old Testament.
In his work the human race does not originate ‘on stage’ in Beleriand, but drifts into it, already sundered in speech, from the East.
There something terrible has happened to them of which they will not speak: ‘A darkness lies behind us…and we have turned our backs on it’(p. 141).
Furthermore they have met ‘the Lord of the Dark’ before they meet the Elves; Morgoth went to them as soon as they were created, to ‘corrupt or destroy’.
Clearly one can, if one wishes, assume that the exploit of Morgoth of which the Eldar never learnt was the traditional seduction of Adam and Eve by the serpent, while the incoming Édain and Easterlings are all sons of Adam flying from Eden and subject to the curse of Babel.
The Silmarillion , then, tells the story of the fall and partial redemption of the elves, without contradicting the story of the Fall and Redemption of Man.
There is no point, though, in merely repeating a known pattern.
Tolkien, in his history of the elves, would not wish to go against what he accepted as doctrine universally true.
He did however want to say something different: as with a linguistic ‘calque’, familiar structure has to join with strange or novel material.
The alienness of Tolkien's elves, the thing  which makes their whole history different from that of humanity, is obviously that (in the natural course of things) they do not die .
Accordingly they do not have to be rescued from death by a Saviour; nor from Hell, for they are not judged at death to Hell or Heaven, but sent to ‘the halls of Mandos’, from which they may in time return.
Orthodox correspondents of Tolkien worried about this, and thought he was overstepping the mark (see especially Letters no. 153).
To their doubts Tolkien could only reply that he was writing fiction, he had a right to use his imagination, and that after all his elves were only ‘certain aspects of Men and their talents and desires, incarnated in my little world’.
Romance, as Professor Kermode said (see p. 132 above), is a stripped-down form which enables one to concentrate.
What Tolkien wanted to concentrate on, obviously, was death: more precisely perhaps on why people love this world and want so strongly to stay in it when it is an inescapable part of their nature ‘to die and go we know not where’.
His imagination centred again on a kind of calque, a diagrammatic reversal.
Since we die, he invented a race which did not.
Since our ‘fairy-stories’ are full of the escape from death (as he remarked near the end of ‘On Fairy-Stories’,TL , p. 59), ‘the Human-stories of the elves are doubtless full of the Escape from Deathlessness’.
Certainly one was, his own tale of Beren and Lûthien as embodied in his ‘Lay of Leithian, Release from Bondage’, in which Lúthien alone of the elves is allowed as a favour to ‘die indeed’ and leave the world like a mortal.
Paradise Lost , one might say, exists to tell us that death is a just punishment, and anyway (see Paradise Regained ) not final.
The Silmarillion by contrast seems to be trying to persuade us to see death potentially as a gift or reward — an attitude to which other authors in this sceptical age have felt drawn.
B While the legends of the First Age are a ‘calque’, then, their resemblance to a known pattern directs us primarily to difference from that pattern; the elvishness of the elves is meant to reflect back on the humanity of man.
That seems, anyway, to be what Tolkien came to think.
There must however be at least a suspicion that — as with the languages of Middle-earth — he created a structure of thought to justify a more primary urge, delight in language, delight in ancient story.
Elves, like dragons, are embedded deeply in several different traditions of North-West Europe, and the inconsistencies of those traditions may only have made Tolkien itch to create a Zusammenhang .
Did elves have souls, for instance?
Could they be saved?
Anyone who had read Hans Christian Andersen's ‘The Little Mermaid’ would know that they did not and could not — not unless they married a mortal, as with Lúthien.
Tolkien did know ‘The Little Mermaid’, though he did not like it (Letters , p. 311), probably because he thought it too sentimental.
Older and tougher belief on the same issue is embodied in another tale Tolkien had probably read, the Scottish story of ‘The Woman of Peace and the Bible Reader’: in this an elf-woman approaches an old man reading his Bible and asks ‘if there was any hope  given in holy Scripture for such as she’.
The old man replies kindly, but says there is no mention of salvation in the Good Book ‘for any but the sinful sons of Adam’— at which the lady gives a cry of despair and hurls herself into the sea.
The old man's answer is strict and orthodox but (as with the view that pre-conversion heroes like Beowulf or Aragorn could not be saved) hardly seems fair.
Why should only the ‘sinful’ be saved?
However it was not Tolkien's way to deny orthodoxy: nor to abjure equally old and traditional belief in the allure of elves and their separation from evil.
He looked for a middle path.
And in this activity he had at least one model.
This is not, for once, the Beowulf -poet, who took a strong line on ylfe or elves, putting them into a list with ‘ettens’ and indeed with ‘orcs’— a very stern view of all non-human and un-Christian species.
But at least one other English poet preceded Tolkien in being less sure, the author of the legend of St Michael in The Early South English Legendary , written about 1250.
Tolkien never mentions reading this, but it is unlikely that as a medievalist he did not.
What the Middle English poet has to say, in essence, is that in the war between God and Satan for men's souls, there may perhaps be neutrals .
In the War in Heaven not all the angels were whole-heartedly for God or for Lucifer.
The ones who inclined toward the devils without actually joining them are accordingly confined in tempests till Doomsday, when they will go to Hell.
Correspondingly, those who wavered towards God have been sent from Heaven to Earth, where ‘they will be in a certain pain up to the end of the world, but at Doomsday they shall return to Heaven.
Others are still in the Earthly Paradise, and in other places on Earth, doing their penance.’
Both good and evil spirits come to Earth to protect or corrupt men, but these neutrals can be seen too:
It is surprising how much of these few lines finds an echo in The Silmarillion .
Of course Tolkien could not accept the basic postulate that elves were angels; like the story of the fairy and the Bible-reader, that is the product of a strict Christianity with very little space for outsiders.
However, his elves are very like fallen angels, quite similar enough for confusion in the minds of fallible men.
They seem part of a hierarchy which goes from Valar (good and bad) to Maiar (good and bad) to Eldar; they are ‘like in nature to the Ainur, though less in might and stature’, close enough in one case (Melian and Elwé Thingol) to intermarry.
For a man to say that Galadriel was an angel, for instance, might then seem natural enough.s Would she be a fallen angel?
In a way the answer is ‘No’, for certainly the elves play no part in Tolkien's War in Heaven, when Melkor is shut out.
On the other hand Galadriel has been expelled from a kind of Heaven, the Deathless land of Valinor, and has been forbidden to return.
One can imagine the expulsion to Earth (of Melkor) and the expulsion to Middle-earth (of Galadriel) coming, in a mind like Éomer's, to seem much the same thing.
Furthermore one notes the South English Legendary's interesting conviction that some ‘neutrals’, or elves, are still on Earth, and others in the ‘Earthly Paradise’.
In a way this too is made true by The Silmarillion and The Lord of the Rings combined; for the latter predicts that some elves will refuse to leave Middle-earth, however much they may ‘dwindle’, while the former shows that others remain in Valinor, once part of the Earth, though now in some mysterious way sundered from it.
What Tolkien took from that passage (and others) was, in short, the ideas that elves were like angels; that they had however been involved in a ‘Fall’; that their fate at Doomsday is not clear (for men ‘shall join in the Second Music of the Ainur’, elves perhaps not,S , p. 42), that they are associated with the Earthly Paradise, and cannot die till the end of the world.
No earlier source puts forward the idea of the Halls of Mandos, but that half-way house, like Limbo, seems almost to be demanded by the terms of the problem.
Have elves souls?
No, in that they are not free to leave the world; so far the Ross-shire Bible reader was right.
Yes, in that they do not go out like a candle on death; so far natural justice is satisfied.
One sees that, as well as Genesis , Northern folk-tradition has helped to frame The Silmarillion .
Its story has a root in the puzzles of ancient texts.
Pride and Possessiveness: another view
None of the foregoing says anything about the ‘Silmarils’ themselves, the jewels which give their name to The Silmarillion , and whose fate determines its plot.
However they do in a way fit the scheme already outlined.
The Silmarillion was based on the Christian story of Fall and Redemption, whether one took it from Genesis or Paradise Lost .
It was different from the Christian story in being about a race which had not been punished by death, rather by weariness of life (see especially Letters , p. 236).
A natural question is, what was their sin?
To keep the pattern consistent, it ought not to be the same as that of Adam and Eve, by tradition Pride, the  moment when, as Lewis said, ‘a conscious creature’ became ‘more interested in itself than in God’.
In fact the elves seem much more susceptible to a specialised variety of pride not at all present in Paradise Lost , not quite Avarice or ‘possessiveness’ or wanting to own things (as has been suggested), but rather a restless desire to make things which will forever reflect or incarnate their own personality.
So Melkor has the desire ‘to bring into Being things of his own’; Aulé, though subjecting himself to Ilúvatar, creates the dwarves without authority; Féanor forges the Silmarils.
One might rewrite Lewis's phrase to say that in Valinor, as opposed to Eden, the Fall came when conscious creatures became ‘more interested in their own creations than in God's’.
The aspect of humanity which the elves represent most fully — both for good and ill — is the creative one.
There could be several reasons why Tolkien chose to write about fascination with the artefact (a theme present in his work since chapter 1 of The Hobbit ).
The most obvious is that he felt it himself: to him his fictions were what the Silmarils were to Fëanor or their ships to the Teleri, ‘the work of our hearts, whose like we shall not make again'.
Significantly Fëanor learns not from Manwë, nor Ulmo, but from Aulé, the smith of the Valar and the most similar of them to Melkor; Aulé too is responsible for the despatch of Saruman to Middle-earth, see UT , p. 393; Aulë is the patron of all craftsmen, including ‘those that make not, but seek only for the understanding of what is’— the philologists, one might say, but also the scopas , the ‘makars’, the fabbri , the poets.
Tolkien could not help seeing a part of himself in Fëanor and Saruman, sharing their perhaps licit, perhaps illicit desire to ‘sub-create’.
He wrote about his own temptations, and came close to presenting the revolt of the Noldor as a felix culpa , a ‘fortunate sin’, when Manwë accepts that their deeds will live in song, so that‘beauty not before conceived [shall]be brought into Eä’; fiction, poetry, craftsmanship are seen as carrying their own justification and as all being much the same thing.
Rightly, Tolkien must have thought, did the poet of Pearl call himself a ‘jeweller’.
A more wide-ranging reason is that love of things, especially artificial things, could be seen as the besetting sin of modern civilisation, and in a way a new one, not quite Avarice and not quite pride, but somehow attached to both (see pp. 68, 128 above).
In that view The Silmarillion would have something like the distinctively modern ‘applicability’ of The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit , for all its archaic setting.
Yet Tolkien believed, to repeat a point made already, that modern sins had ancient origins.
The fall of the Noldor (S , p. 69) repeats a phrase from the Old English poem Maxims I about ‘inventing and tempering wounding swords’: the Anglo-Saxon poet seems to have looked back to Cain and Abel for the origin of evil, rather than Adam and Eve, and to have seen evil's symptom in metallurgy.
More deeply the Silmarils themselves seem to stem from yet one more philological crux, this time from Finnish.
The influence of that language and literature on The Silmarillion is undoubted.
Finnish was ‘the original germ of The Silmarillion' , Tolkien wrote in 1944 (Letters , p. 87), and he repeated the assertion twenty years later (Letters , p. 345).
Quenya itself is similar to Finnish in linguistic ‘style’; names like Ilúvatar and Ulmo recall the Ilmatar and Ilmo of the Kalevala ; the Valar are the powers who have agreed to be ‘bounded in the world’, and vala in Finnish means ‘bond’; many more connections can be made.
It is therefore almost inevitable that the great mystery of the epic of Finland, the Kalevala , should irresistibly recall the Silmarils: it is the riddle of the sampo , or tsampo .
This object is described repeatedly in the Kalevala as the work of the master-smith Ilmarinen, handed over as payment for a bride, but then stolen back, broken in the pursuit, surviving only in fragments; yet no one knows what it is — or rather, what it was, for its loss is irrevocable.
The singers themselves are uncertain, often replacing sampo (a word without a referent) by some other nonsense-word like sammas .
Meanwhile the philologists, putting together the various clues inside the Kalevala — it is bright, it was forged, it is a kind of mill, it brings luck, it made the sea salt — have come up with innumerable solutions, at once vague and pedantic: the sampo was the Golden Fleece, some fertility-cult object, a Lappish pillar-idol, an allegory of the sky.
In recent years, despondently, they have concluded ‘that questions about what the sampo was can never be satisfactorily answered and that even if they could, an answer would probably make little contribution to the understanding of the poems’.
Nothing could be more provocative to Tolkien than a word without a referent (emnet, wodwos, Gandálfr, ent ), except perhaps an ancient poem written off by modern scholars as hopelessly irrational.
In this case he clearly decided that the sampo was at once a thing and an allegory, like the Silmarils: a jewel, bright, hypnotic, intrinsically valuable, but also the quintessence of the creative powers, provoking both good and evil, the maker's personality itself.
Some Finnish singers thought the sampo was their own poetry; all agreed that its fragments were the true prosperity of Suomi.
If only the Silmarils could inspire a true prosperity for England!
As is well known, Tolkien's grand design, or desire, was to give back to his own country the legends that had been taken from it in the Dark Ages after the Conquest, when elves and woodwoses and sigelhearwan too had all been forced into oblivion.
For that to be possible, the Silmarils and their chain  of stories would have to be multi-faceted indeed, leaving scope for ‘other minds and hands’ to add their own significances.
Certainly Tolkien's own efforts to say what The Silmarillion was ‘about’ were never completely illuminating.
Still, his borrowings and his changes do at least define his area of interest.
In The Silmarillion Tolkien played through once more the drama of ‘paradise lost’; but he added to it a hint of ‘paradise well lost’(for many of the elves preferred Middle-earth even to immortal life, like Arwen); and through the story there runs a delight in mutability, as languages change and treasures pass from hand to hand; the deepest fable is of beauty forged, stolen, and lost forever in recovery.
Though springing from Genesis , this is at once more ambiguous, more heroic, and more humane.
Eärendil: a Lyric Core
The preceding section (as Tolkien would have been the first to declare) probably falls into the perennial academic vice of neatness, over-valuing system and ‘invention’ instead of‘inspiration’.
To redress the balance, it is worth noting that Tolkien was capable of working in quite a different way.
He said repeatedly and consistently (Letters , pp. 221, 345, 420) that the ‘kernel’ of his mythology in the story of Beren and Lúthien was not a thought, not a principle, not a calque, but the vision of ‘a small woodland glade filled with hemlocks at Rocs in Yorkshire’, where he saw his wife dancing.
Everything else might be changed by the demands of story and of ratiocination — there are clear differences, for instance, between the accounts of that scene in the 1925 poem ‘Light as Leaf on Lindentree’ and in Aragorn's song on Weathertop — but to the vision itself he remained true, working out from it as from the detailed paintings of Lake Mithrim, Nargothrond, Gondolin, etc., which he made in the 1920s (see Pictures 32–6).
Probably Tolkien would have accepted the thesis (not unfamiliar to medievalists) that all great works of fiction should contain a kernel scene or a ‘lyric core’: to use the terminology of Marie de France, whose ‘Breton lays’ Tolkien imitated in ‘Aotrou and Itroun’, 1945, every conte or story comes from a lai or song.
There is one very striking example in the Unfinished Tales , namely the tale of ‘Aldarion and Erendis: the Mariner's Wife’.
This may have some root in Tolkien's own experience, for it stresses the unwisdom of fathers leaving their children — Tolkien hardly knew his own father — and seems to be groping towards a statement about the incompatibility of men and women, users and providers, wasters and winners.
However as a story it reaches no conclusion.
What it does is to create an image of total separation expressed in understatement.
Having been left by her husband in his urge for voyages abroad, Erendis retreats to the centre of Númenor, away from the sea, where she hears only the bleating of sheep.
‘Sweeter it is to my ears than the mewing of gulls’, she said.’
Tolkien must have been thinking of Njorthr the sea-god and Skathi, daughter of the mountain-giant, in Snorri Sturluson's Prose Edda .
Obliged to marry, these two tried taking turns to live in each other 's homes.
But the marriage was a failure, marked in Snorri's account by sudden quotation from yet one more lost poem:
So Njorthr; his wife replies with a complaint about the noise of the sea-mews.
Wolves and swans, gulls and sheep: the contrasts generate the Norse poem and Tolkien's story by themselves.
Other tales in The Silmarillion are better worked up into narrative, and yet seem to spring likewise from single scenes, single outcries.
An obvious case is that of Eärendil, the first character to take shape in Tolkien's mythology.
His ‘invention’, like that of hobbits, has been well-chronicled by Humphrey Carpenter (Biography , pp. 64 and 172); the two cases are in several ways similar.
With Eärendil, what happened is that Tolkien was initially struck by several lines from an Old English poem in the Exeter Book , now known as Christ I or The Advent Lyrics :
These form the start of a speech by the prophets and  patriarchs in Hell, who appeal for an Ambassador — this is before Christ's Advent — to bring them rescue from the deorc déabes sceadu , the ‘dark shadow of death’.
But the word earendel is strange, not ordinary Old English, and evidently pre-dating its context; Tolkien was caught by a difference of texture, prompting his own verses on ‘The Voyage of Earendel’, in 1914, and the reply to G. B. Smith's question as to what they were about, ‘I don't know.
I'll try to find out.’
But actually Tolkien had no doubt already started finding out, taking the two obvious courses of looking up ‘Earendel’ in A. S. Cook's 1900 edition of Christ and in the index of Jacob Grimm's Teutonic Mythology .
From the latter he would have learnt that Earendel-references appear in several Germanic languages.
In the Prose Edda , for instance, Aurvandill is a companion of the god Thórr, who loses a toe to frostbite only to have it thrown into the sky to become a star; as one might have guessed from  Christ , ‘Earendel’ is the old name of a star or planet.
Grimm also referred though to the German poem of Orendel , written about 1200.
In this Orendel is a king's son shipwrecked in the Holy Land, but rescued naked by a fisherman.
He retrieves a grey robe from a whale they catch, and in it returns to his own land to convert his heathen countrymen.
The gráwe roc he wears is the seamless robe Christ wore to the Crucifixion; in the end Orendel becomes der Graurock , ‘Greycloak’, is identified with his garment.
What this may have suggested to Tolkien is that if the Old English and Old Norse sources agreed that ‘Earendel’ was a star, the Old English and medieval German ones agreed he was a messenger of hope to the heathens.
Perhaps the hope-association was as old as the star one; perhaps ‘Earendel’ had contained a presentiment of salvation even for the old heroes (like Beowulf) who lived before Christianity was brought to them.
The notes in Cook's edition would meanwhile have told Tolkien that the Old English lanes were based on a Latin antiphon, ‘O oriens…’(‘0 Rising Light, splendour of eternal light and sun of justice: come and shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death’).
In a Christian context this appeal is to Christ; in a pre-Christian context they could be a pagan's appeal, to a forerunner of Christ, to a Saviour whose nature he did not know.
These thoughts frame both the poem of 1914 and the Silmarillion account written many years later.
In the latter Eärendil is, not a Redeemer, but an Intercessor, unlike the true Messiah in that it is not his own sacrifice which persuades the Valar to change the sad history of Middle-earth, but still ‘a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief’, hailed by Eönwë with eagle-like ambiguity (see p. 151 above) as ‘the looked for that cometh at unawares, the longed for that cometh beyond hope’.
In the former, it is perhaps the inadequacy of Earendel that is more prominent than his partial success; at the end of the poem his light is blotted out by the greater light of dawn.
However one image is common to all Tolkien's versions and to the Old English poem too.
This, one might say, is the ‘lyric core’, the flashpoint of the imagination.
It is the vision of people looking up from the depths,de profundis , from the ‘dark shadow of death’ and of despair, and seeing a new light: ‘unlooked for, glittering and bright; and the people of Middle-earth beheld it from afar and wondered, and they took it for a sign, and called it Gil-Estel, the Star of High Hope’.
What the star was, how it was connected to Eärendil, how the name could cover both star and man, from what danger it signalled deliverance, whether that deliverance was final for the soulless elves…all these questions, and others, could find answers in the inventions of later narrative, in the different viewpoints of The Silmarillion or Bilbo's song in The Fellowship of the Ring .
However the image and the emotions associated with it did not change.
They were central; part of Tolkien's ‘data’; of the same order of importance as those other early captured  scenes of Tinúviel dancing in the woods, Túrin answered by the ‘cold voice’ of his own sword, Valinor beyond the ‘sunless lands’and ‘dangerous seas’.
If ‘philosophical inquiries’ provided material for Tolkien to brood on, these ‘lyric cores’gave him the stimulus to go on brooding, to keep philosophy from aridness.