

Introduction
They say that it's easy to denigrate but when you hate as much as JOHN BITUMEN the problem is one of selection.
In this his second publication of poetry, or as he calls it ‘making the bastards suffer’, Bitumen has produced a well rounded collection of spite, venom and malicious slander.
John Bitumen (or Raging Bullshit as he's known amongst his colleagues), is never one to sit on the fence (vandalising it is more to his nature).
Incisive but never grotesque, like the Dennis Hopper of the cabaret circuit, Bitumen's issue of hate mail is reproduced here in open letters to Ford Capri drivers, gameshow contestants, students, hippies, masons and anyone else unlucky enough to get in his way.
My only reservation for new readers is that if you've not seen John Bitumen's wall of hate live, looking every bit like Mussolini with a hangover, the sincerity of the sarcasm and the heartfelt cynicism of the material may not be fully appreciated.
The poems are of course cleverly written but that is only to be expected of a writer of John Bitumen's calibre.
What seems more difficult to find nowadays is genuine passion and thankfully no-one with the will to survive could ever describe Bitumen as wishy-washy.
But then again as the title states, this is personal…
HENRY NORMAL 
Game Show Contestants
Game show contestants
are all hair-do's and hospitality lounge
all handshake for  fuck's sake
all false pearls
and smiles of perfect teeth
made-up, manicured, and moulded
into Mr and Mrs Upwardly-Mobile
into Mr and Mrs Middle-Of-The-Road
Game show contestants are NOT carriers of AIDS
game show contestants
are all anecdote and antidote
all nose-pickin' average
all arse-lickin' aspiration
and perspiration on perfect skin
dim-eyed, patronised, fall guys, wide mouthed
wound up potential winners
Game show contestants are NOT members of hippy convoys
Game show contestants are
computer programmers, laughing policemen
loud publicans, part-time hairdressers (who want to be air-hostesses)
air-hostesses who want to work for Oxfam (but don't — perhaps it's the pay
They're trainee wages clerks who wear Marlbrough sports jackets.
and listen to Dire Straits' greatest hits
on the in-car hi-fi
in the Ford Capri
Wonder why…
Game show contestants are NOT single mothers?


Game show contestants
are all greengrocers from Grimsby
morons from Milton Keynes
tackily dressed tax inspectors from Tottenham
or they're landladies from Llandudno
laundry attendants and lighthouse keepers
weekend roundheads in English Civil war re-enactments
and restaurant owners from Reigate
but why mate…
Are game show contestants NOT students?
(They couldn't answer the questions — Ed)
Game show contestants are
peroxide blonde personal assistants
secret Scunthorpe United supporters
retired lion-tamers
teachers (throwing away the remains of their credibility)
They're the trendy vicars who run the central heating off chicken shit
and they're Sun readers from Sidcup
they're ship's cooks from Sidcup
game show contestants are all from bloody Sidcup…or Bletchley
Game show contestants do NOT have spots
Game show contestants
are all  women's institutors or village cricketers
craft  show contributors, collectors of horse brasses
home brewers, self made men
and thirty-four year old mini-skirted grandmothers
(looking absolutely  marvellous for their age)
But finally, why is it that game show contestants are never UNEMPLOYED?
On July 10th the Guardian reported the death of 80 sheep (no not Tories) in an Army mortar attack…they claimed it was an accident.
On July 12th the Observer reported that a sheep in Hereford had wrecked a china shop…the fightback begins…
The Rambusters' March
They've always pushed sheep around
treated them as easy meat
turned into mince by a mortar attack
but they're not so easily beat
This unprovoked, vile incident
that filled the air with flying lamb chops
has caused the formation of LAMB LIBERATION
and they've started by trashing shops
Now lamb lib isn't for trendies
or the guilt ridden middle-classes
It's a revolutionary organisation
leading the flock and the masses
They're freedom fighters or terrorists
It depends on your point of view
but lamb lib isn't for liberals
there's no car stickers for EWE!
Their motto is clear and simple
that sheep must stand and fight
these sheep are fuckin' ruthless
they're driven venom and spite
They're mindless and indiscriminate
they blew up a plane from Iran
they're ovine fundamentalists
like the BAAAder MeinHOOF gang 
These sheep are suicidal
like lemmings with a cause
their nickname is the PSYCHO-SHEEP
like a woolly jumpered JAWS
Their eventual aim is genocide
not one human being left
these sheep are scared of no-one
the meanest mutton in the valley of death
They've knee-capped all the sheep-dogs
the wolves, they've ripped to shreds
they've glued the locks at the abattoir
and bitten off the butchers' heads
These sheep have killer instincts
and a sadistic sense of fun
they'll fill your shoes with sheep shit
and leave teeth marks in your bum
They've taken revenge on the weavers
they've nuked the Shetland Isles
and they've executed the guilty
at the  witch hunt , sheep-dog trials
These sheep are crazed fanatics
and masters of disguise
revenge is their only motive
they live off human eyes
These sheep are bloody dangerous
they don't know wrong from right
so beware of lamb lib and the psycho-sheep
their BAAA! is as bad as their BITE.
It is a well known fact that sheep in their ruthless determination for world domination are disguising themselves in an effort to infiltrate positions of power.
They are everywhere…
Short, Sharp Sheep
I
They are everywhere…working under cover
we should keep a close eye on one another 
are you sure that's your mother?
are you sure that's your brother?
over there 
eating the grass
II
They are everywhere…be warned…beware
they are hiding behind facial hair
are you sure that's James Anderton there?
look out for the disguises they wear
like
red…stick-on…noses
III
They are everywhere…they are full of hate
they make the trains run late
they entered ITV in a crate
and appear each week on Blind Date
and isn't it
obvious?
IV
They are everywhere…not even Little Bo-Peep
can catch the millions of sheep
who are jumping the fence in a single leap
so many, so clever
it you try to count them
you fall asleep
ZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZZ
Ode to The Drivers of Ford Capris
You never see women in Ford Capris
those mucho, macho, mean machines
the answer to every boy racer's dreams
a go faster fantasy on four wheels
a rubber burning roadster that certainly feels
like free-fall speed without a  'chute 
a supersonic splat in a penis substitute
Driven by the psyched out, wound up wazzocks
pretending to be extras in ‘The Dukes Of Hazzard’
a microwave mentality and a copy of ‘Fast Car’
which they buy for the pictures with the Daily Star
they're all air-horns and tinted glass
a lack of taste beyond tacky flash
they're the baby boom babies who weren't breast fed
deranged by petrol fumes — a head full of lead
they see Murray Walker as their Holy Pope
they drink the lager of Lamot and they don't smoke dope
they dangle their keys from designer jeans
and Wayne's right foot says what he means
he sees Sharon, who's sat in the passenger seat
as his in-car ornament, his made-up meat
he models himself on Dirty Den
the speed limit's for boys not real men
and with the smell of Denim and a U2 tape
‘the lads’ put him up to Blind Date
where, with his footballer's perm neatly slicked
the no fun failure wasn't picked
because a bloody long bonnet doesn't impress
a short hand typist in a lurex dress 
A Blind Date reject — the lowest of the low
he got back in his car, it was go-man-go
upped the horsepower and changed the oil
even bought a matt-black aero-foil
but he couldn't hide his sexual inadequacy
'cos only dickheads try to do it in a Ford Capri
Why is it that students can cope with doing a degree but can't handle the simplest everyday tasks?
Students and Simplicity
Puzzled by the paradox of a parallel universe
Pondering the perplexities of  Pythagoras 
NO PROBLEM
But send them to the bar for a lager shandy and two halves
a bottle of Pils and a bag of crisps
and they can't remember the flavour
or what Mandy was drinking
but you can tell what the bar man was thinking
A gormless student lost in thought
the bastard's always 5p short
and he still has the nerve to complain
about the size of the head on his Guinness
Describe in detail D.H.
Lawrence's diametrical deviation
from the ideas of Dostoyevski
A DODDLE…
But, send them unaccompanied to Tescos
a fiasco
Confused by the subtle differences
between Corn Flakes, Bran Flakes and economy packs of Lux soap flakes
Baffled and bewildered by the baked beans
when there isn't a colour picture of their staple diet on the tin
No wonder the cat's so thin
Been feeding it Fairy Liquid for two months
because Gavin called it Bubbles
instead of Cuddles 
A simple mistake
like Algernon's attempts to clear up his acne with Colgate instead of Clearasil
While back in Tescos they drive the  trolleys 
as if they were going the wrong way up the M1
And why is it
they can read French, German, Serbo-bloody-Croatian
but they can't read the sign that says, –NO CHEQUES AT THIS TILL’
in two feet high day-glo letters?
Conduct experiments in chemical reactions
bugger about with algebra and abstract fractions
write essays on a thousand-and-one unpronounceable 'ologies
SIMPLE…
But, who let them loose in the launderette
with an inadequate supply of 10p's?
And why do they look for an ALTERNATIVE interpretation
of the simplest, most idiot-proof instructions?
A trail of suds as long as a  day's walk
an inferno in the dryer turned bri-nylon shirts into string-vests
and the track-suit won't even fit his action man now
BUT HOW?
Nuclear Physics?
Genetics?
Robotics?
even the words are hypnotic to you and me
‘The English novel as a cause of World War Three’?
These bozos have got a degree
They could become your GP
They could become your MP
These apprentice adults almost fully grown
you can't safely send them to the toilet alone.
Rumour has it that episodes of Coronation St. are to be shown in Russia…
Coronation Prospekt
Soviet culture is slipping down the drain
Percy Sugden's been at the vodka and he's complaining yet again
Dostoyevski's been  overthrown by devious Dirty Den
And Mavis is selling Pravda to the tractor factory men
Down at the Rovers there's folk dancing in the snug
And even in Moscow Brian Tilsley looks a mug
Kev and Sally are causing chaos and murmurs in Murmansk
And boring Ken Barlow takes his holidays in Gdansk
Gail's selling cabbage soup at ten kopecks a bowl
While the street now has subtitles to explain the meaning of the dole
The theme tune's been changed to the Red Army Choir's greatest hits
And Curly has the Kremlin rolling round in fits
Alf Roberts Plays the Commissar in an empty corner shop
While Emmerdale Farm gets the blame for another failed crop
Rita Fairclough the model citizen, who tows the party line
But is Len really dead…or in a Siberian mine?
Annie Walker and Ena Sharples were Stalinists to the core
Albert Tatlock and Elsie Tanner made up the old guard gang of four
Ivy Tilsley is a Trotskyist destined for a fall
Bett Turpin the Bolshevik has Lenin's picture on the wall
It's all become a sinister tale of a simple English city
when you realise Jack Duckworth sits on the central committee
Hilda Ogden was taking notes — but she wasn't the real key
The one to watch is Emily Bishop — she runs the KGB.
A report by the Church Of England has stated that membership of the masons may not be  conducive with Christianity.
Among the reasons quoted are the masonic punishments for revealing the ‘secrets of the craft’.
These punishments include having ‘the throat cut across, the tongue torn out by the root’ and being ‘buried in the sand of the sea at low water…’— this explains why you tend to find heads sticking out of the beach who refuse to tell you that they're up to.
Another punishment…
I don't know whether this is optional…is ‘being severed in two, bowels turned to ashes and these ashes scattered over the face of the earth.’
This may be why most masons are pretty tight lipped…but it may also explain a few other things…
Masons on Elm Street
You know how it is
when you keep finding bodies under Blackfriars Bridge?
when you find a jar of eyeballs at the back of your fridge?
when you feel something wet and wake up in bed
with a bag of giblets and a horse's head?
when you find concrete boots on your feet?
It was the masons…of Elm St…
Find your cupboards full of headless bats?
tied up in a room full of ravenous rats?
impaled, and genitals nailed to the wall?
given a lobotomy…with a twelve-bore?
wondered what was in that minced-meat?
It was the masons…of Elm St…
Had nitric acid poured in your pockets?
eyes gouged out and maggots in the sockets?
nipples ripped off by a doberman on acid?
intestines torn out by a guinea pig that's rabid?
ever been garrotted just for a treat?
It was the masons…of Elm St…


Do you keep finding bodies stuck on stakes?
mutilated torsos floating in lakes?
ever looked in the attic of the masonic hall?
seen the chief of police…with a chain saw?
found a nine-inch spike under your seat?
It was the masons…of Elm St…
Seen a high court judge with a  butcher's slab?
ever let a dentist give you a jab?
had a funny handshake from a bloke with an axe?
ever had a letter from the income tax?
ever had to listen to Barry Manilow?
Yes, only the masons could sink that low…
When men get to around forty they all seem to want to have affairs with younger women…but…they have usually forgotten how to go about ‘chatting up’ women and so they revert to pubescent memories and do incredibly stupid things like writing letters, or, even worse, poems to the unfortunate woman.
She is usually just trying to be friendly and helpful and supportive when the love crazed imbecile is trying to explain that his wife doesn't understand him…(yawn).
Going for the Sympathy Vote
One cup of coffee and a casual chat
and the letters started coming thick and fast
all from the car-park's fourteenth floor
all started ‘I can't take any more…
I'm up here and I'm perched on the ledge
and if you don't care I'm over the edge
it's cold up here but I can see for miles
and you're the one who makes life worthwhile’
Indecent declarations of undying lust
he can't spell dignity and lost her trust
as he tried to explain in rhyming verse
his life of woe and the curse
of sadness that lies over him
and how the future looks so bleak and grim
how she is like a ‘ray of hope’—
‘the sunshine’ that helps him cope
four sides of fine print foolscap
filled with embarrassing crap
written like a letter to Points Of View
a cliche, a sickbag, I want to spew


‘So charming, delightful, the one for me
please write back if you agree
you're the only one who understands
and you'll feel guilty when I land
Send your letter to the fourteenth floor
my love, I can't wait any more’
My friend wrote a short reply
‘I'm sorry to hear you have to die
but if you write letters as bad as that
a happy end is, sadly…
SPLAT!’
There should be more to alternative comedy than saying FILOFAX.
This is a designer poem aimed at getting cheap laughs at an alternative cabaret based loosely on Mutabaruka's ‘Dis Poem’(apologies).
This Joke
This joke…
this joke is not about laughing at your own jokes
this is a serious joke
this joke is not about laughter at all 
this joke however, is funnier than Jim Davidson
this joke is NOT about the Irish, mothers-in-law,
the size of breasts or limp wrists
this joke is not about the colour of skin, the fat and the thin
medallion man and his fake tan
oh no
this is a new joke
this joke is alternative
this joke is middle-class angst
and justifications for watching Dallas
this joke is half-sharp students
who can laugh at themselves (why not? everyone else does)
this joke is acne, muesli and a Citroen 2cv
this joke is wee-wee, VD, MSC, and PMT
this joke is the BBC, 18 to 30
the morning after a curry
the voice of God and the CID
this joke is social workers and Star Wars
creches, cruise missiles, Cliff Richard, and gerbils
this joke is breaking wind
this joke is Leon Brittan, Roy Hattersley, Dr Death
and the squeaky little Liberals
this joke points the finger at anarchy 
this joke is peanut-brained presidents
Picking noses, catching doses, aerobic classes
more social workers and Sellafield
this joke is flatulence and hippies
this Joke is alternative comedians in advertisements
this joke is canned laughter for Catflap
this Joke is  Alexei Sayle columns in the Daily Mirror
this joke is Barclays Bank, the Oblivion Boys presenting Blankety Blank
this joke is a foot in the mouth Duke, the carrots in a bowl of puke
the day trips to Sainsburys and belly laughs at bottoms
this joke is alternative rattling inside your head
this joke is as radical as farting in bed…
This Is for those people who think they aren't properly dressed unless they've got the right badge on — and are guilty about their middle class backgrounds and so dress to look poor.
Dedicated Follower of Fission — The Nuclear Age Hippy
And it came to pass
that the middle class
would pass through the eye of a needle
neurotic wrecks in military kecks
doing good deeds and the needful
Once into Zen
but that was when
they listened to Carly Simon tapes
deny it now
they don't know how
they once wore flares and capes
Now earns a packet
wears an Oxfam jacket
Hair shirt with a heart on the sleeve
sociology degree
badge — CND
goes to night school to learn how to weave
Labrador on a leash
a freezer full of quiche
only ever watches Channel Four
Arts Council grants
to grow rubber plants
dressed down and trying to look poor


Pink dungarees
with holes in the knees
keeps the bike in the back of the car
non-sexist male
wouldn't touch real ale
drinks Pils when he's out at the wine bar
A pair of kickers
Stop The Whaling stickers
in a Renault 5 with a rusty bumper
stripped pine doors
and stripped pine floors
wears a rainbow, mohair jumper
Roger Dean posters
wholemeal toasters
nothing but natural birth
'cause this the age
when it's all the rage
for the right-on to inherit the earth
On the all-round awfulness of late 80's pop…
Bad
This is all about love
from acned teenagers
this is slick-style syncopated cirrhosis
of the play-with-yourself-in-a-day
synthetic, plug-in, turnover, pure art pack
spoon fed Simply Red syrup
smooth as silk mix
Simple Minds' cool as ice licks
and a coca-cola promo selling life-style
oral fantasies and dental decay
This is floral wallpaper pattern musak
dripping out of stack-systems
with weedy, CD crystal clarity
in clear skin, setting-gel City
where even bedsit heroes come shrink wrapped
and decked in special offer stickers
for cut-price, look-nice designer tee-shirts
a 100% cotton fabrication
to cover Union Carbide lies
This is non-stop, hip-hop slap happy crap
in a market square nightmare
with white soul-sound surround
played against a neon lit, white wood and pastel shade
corporate background
caught in a plastic wine bar
with imitation, model Radio 1 consumers
listening to imitation Level 42 over mass market lager 
while Miami Vice sound-tracks
play over disaster newsreels
and share disasters take place over TV meals
This is small boys' ideas of sex
this is the cat that survived curiosity
but died of boredom
on no more than a Terence Trent D'Arby morning
called it a day
after two sides of an unparalleled lack of imagination
and a cardiac stagnation gripped the strung out sister
of Mr Middle-Of-The-Road
hyping hygiene fixations
whilst white-lining through spaghetti westerns in toytown
on track one, side one
of over produced, over simplified talk show material
all image and emperor's clothing
holding subliminal sales messages
and Sade sang the blues
and the whole world
and its daughter
went mediocre mad
and bought something self-titled — BAD 
The Last Train from Liverpool to the Lubyanka
A'right there ace?
Know the face, but can't quite put it in  its place
just recognise the laugh lines
on a victim of a thousand jokes and petty crimes
got round to old times
to find all the old mates
are smackheads now, wheeling and dealing on the estates
done in and dizzy
winks at the glass-eyed bizzies
scratching a living…or a life at least…
out of small time thieving
believing the big break is round every corner
but in the meantime selling Seiko watches
from inside, outsize overcoats
could arrange a fitted kitchen
(with extension) for a few more notes
It's the sort of thing you'll find
no danger of damaged health
but they'd rob you blind
while smiling and stringing you the line
about their big brother who knew The Beatles…personally
and every  scally's mother once saw  Jerry 
(of Pacemakers fame) on a Mersey ferry
still a very real memory
like my  mate's dad
who remembers having a proper job
he's sound as a pound, but a bit of a slob
he's doing alright, he's a playwright now
like everyone else in Liverpool 
they're all playwrights and poets
or they're in bands
and training on the YTS with the Half Man
for a golden opportunity
that knocks for all on TV addicts
a stage at last for your favourite Pier Head story
or is yours the one about the Dock Road?
pie and peas on the way home
and here's a funny fact
no-one ever called me ‘Wack’
though 8 of 10. when asked
would do anything for the crack
ha ha, well hard, ugh a knife in the back
as some soft lad
hangs a giant fig leaf on Moby Dick
while a crowd of Saturday afternoon shoppers laugh themselves sick
with the football fanatics
waiting for the Stanley Park convoy
ha ha, you have to laugh
don't you?
don't you?
you do
'cause we're all comedians, see
we have to be
when councillors in Katherine Hammett shirts
hand made shoes
and Armani suits
say ‘man the barricades, boys’
driving through the carefree joys 
of Toxteth
where the comedians had the world in fits
when the grannies wheeled the 24 inch colour sets
out of the broken windows onto the front page
made a good sale over a bottle of stout down the lodge
or did it mean a few more ‘Hail Marys’
depends on your persuasion
mine's a dock of Australian sherry
that special brand of Yates' conversation
and interpretation of every rumour
of every problem and it's special place
for those who caught the last train
from Liverpool to the Lubyanka