

Two
Bamford on a Friday morning before Christmas was everything Mrs Brissett had warned it would be.
Meredith counted herself lucky to catch a space in the car park behind the supermarket as some other shopper pulled out.
A glance through the plate glass doors of the supermarket itself sent her heart plummeting to her boots.
A solid struggling mass of shoppers pushing unwieldy trolleys stacked high with goods, dragging along wailing children, bad-tempered, hot and tired, milled about in a frenzy.
Meredith turned her back on it.
She'd go there last, when she had done all her other errands.
With luck, the press might have thinned out.
She walked down to the open market itself.
But here the crowd was almost as bad.
Stalls brandished stacks of holly and decorations of the kind beloved of Mrs Brissett.
Unwholesome pink and yellow candies were sold from trays.
Cut-price toys in boxes and cellophane wrapping spilled out of cardboard boxes.
Vegetables seemed to have reached a record price.
Meredith bought two pounds of satsumas and retired defeated.
But she couldn't live on satsumas and the last of the bacon rashers until after Christmas.
She pushed her way down the High Street, swinging her shopping bag against the legs of others and being clobbered in return.
A young woman ran a pushchair into the back of her legs painfully and, when Meredith turned round, treated her to a furious glare which clearly said she had no business to be in the way.
The High Street was bedecked with strings of  coloured light bulbs and skeletal Christmas trees which would spring to life at dusk.
Christmas carols blared tinnily from a loudspeaker system overhead and from every shop window, or so it seemed, the public was reminded that only four more shopping days remained until Christmas.
Meredith came to a halt by the florists and stared mistrustfully into the window.
It was likely, more than likely, that Alan Markby might buy her some kind of Christmas present.
He might even hand it over tonight when he called to take her out for a meal.
It would be embarrassing to be given a gift if one hadn't bought one in return.
Buying aftershave or deodorant seemed much too intimate.
A plant, however?
He was a very keen gardener.
Meredith pushed open the door and went in.
Inside resembled an untidy greenhouse.
In anticipation of bumper Christmas sales, new stock had been crowded on to every available surface and spilled across the floor.
The atmosphere was damp and suggested decay.
There was a smell of wet peat compost and commercial plantfoods.
A young woman in a pink overall emerged from the back, looking harassed.
‘I want a potted plant,’ Meredith explained.
‘Something which blooms at Christmas.
Perhaps something a bit unusual?’
Her eye fell on a group of poinsettias.
They seemed a bit obvious with their red leaves.
‘How much do you want to pay?’ asked the girl in practical tones.
‘I don't know.
How much are they?’
Some of them, it turned out, were very expensive.
In fact, most of them were.
She came out with a Christmas cactus.
As she forced her way back along the pavement, laden with shopping bag and plant wrapped in paper, Meredith suddenly realised she was being hailed.
‘Excuse me!’ called a voice determinedly.
‘Have you got a minute?’
A tall spindly youth in a grubby ex-army greatcoat, blue jeans and a woolly hat, pushed his way in front of her.
He was unshaven, not particularly well washed and appeared severely under-nourished, but the voice was educated.
‘Would you like to sign our petition?’ he demanded aggressively.
She saw now that he held a clipboard.
‘What's it about?’ she asked with suspicion.
‘To ban hunting on council-owned land.’
He held out the clipboard impatiently as if she quibbled over a minor detail.
The crowd swirled round them and she found herself struggling to make sense of what he said.
‘Hunting what?’
‘Foxes.
Or anything else.
But foxes mostly.
Because of the local hunt.’
‘I didn't know they had one.’
Someone cannoned into her shoulder and she nearly dropped the cactus.
‘Look,’ she said.
‘I haven't got a hand free and I don't know what it's about…’
‘The Bamford Hunt,’ he said truculently.
‘All you've got to do is sign here!’
He pushed the clipboard at her.
It had a stub of pencil attached to it by a string and the paper list was grubby, most signatures illegible.
‘If we can keep them off council land it will make it nearly impossible for them.
They're wrong, bloodsports are wrong.
It's immoral.
Everyone ought to be up in arms about it.’
He thrust his whiskery countenance impatiently at her.
Clearly he felt time wasted explaining his cause was time lost gathering signatures.
‘I don't know anything about the Bamford Hunt,’ Meredith said, suddenly finding him unattractive and pushy, his manner hectoring, and disliking both the way he assumed she would agree with him and the arrogance he displayed in failing to give any reason why she should do as he asked.
‘Here, take a pamphlet!’
He shoved one at her, ill-printed.
‘Sign the petition, every signature helps.
It's wrong.
Fox-hunting is wrong.’
‘You may be right or not, she said crossly.
‘I've never thought about it.
And I certainly don't mean to sign anything before I have.
So I won't if you don't mind.
I'll read your pamphlet,’ she added in a spirit of Christmas goodwill.
‘Don't you care about wildlife?’ he demanded furiously.
‘Don't you care how barbaric it is?
Don't you think animals matter?
You ought to.
You should.
Everyone ought to sign!’
He fixed her with a glittering eye.
In it judgement was writ large.
Nothing now would have induced Meredith to sign his petition, whatever it had been for.
She didn't like him.
It was as simple as that.
‘Yes, I like animals but I don't like being told what to think before I've had a chance to make up my own mind!’
Meredith thrust her way unceremoniously past him.
He scowled at her and then lurched away to trap some other person with his clipboard and pamphlets.
As luck would have it, a strapping young woman was coming towards them.
She had a head of flowing auburn hair and carried herself in a self-possessed manner touching on the arrogant.
She wore no make-up but had classic features, a straight nose, full lips and fine eyes.
She wore a well-used wax jacket over tight breeches and riding top boots.
In jargon she would have understood, she was a thoroughbred.
Bloodstock with sire and dam in the Form Book.
‘He wouldn't…’ thought Meredith dismayed at his temerity.
‘He couldn't…’
But he did.
The anti-bloodsports campaigner threw himself in the Amazon's path, brandishing his clipboard.
Meredith could not hear what was being said but she could more or less guess at it.
The stable yard fraternity is seldom short of the picturesque word.
The auburn-haired equestrienne delivered herself of a pithy speech, gave the young man, now scarlet beneath his whiskers, no chance to reply, put out a hand and thrust  him physically aside with such force that he staggered back and bounced off the door of Woolworth's behind him, and strode on.
‘I could have told you that would happen,’ said Meredith unsympathetically to him.
He gave her a dirty look and then threw an even dirtier one after the young woman.
‘Toffy-nosed bitch!’ he said.
Then added in a mumble as if to himself, ‘Just wait…just wait till you try it on Boxing Day…’
He shambled off.
As for Meredith, she forgot about him once she had ventured at last into the supermarket.
From now on, it was every man for himself.
She began by saying ‘excuse me’ politely and trying to manoeuvre her trolley round people.
But it quickly became apparent she was wasting her time.
The trolley also had a mind of its own and a tendency to advance crablike, sideways.
The sheer volume of goods offered for sale added to her sense of disorientation and frustration.
She had, after all, just spent some years in a country where shortages were common and varieties of goods few.
Diplomatic staff such as herself depended heavily on goods brought in specially by their embassies for their use or on block orders from firms which existed to supply the needs of expatriates.
Now to see three or four brands of tinned meat and half a dozen of coffee, all stacked up in profusion, was bewildering.
She found it vaguely shocking to hear mothers ask small children what they wanted and casually add the often quite arbitrary choice of the child to the pile of goods already in the trolley.
Within five minutes, Meredith was not only as hot, bothered and bad-tempered as the rest, she was angry too at people who did not seem to appreciate what they had.
She stood fuming in the check-out queue in a cloud of righteous indignation, fuelled by the discovery that she had forgotten the washing-up liquid.
‘Drat it!’ she said aloud.
‘Forgotten something?’ asked a male voice behind her.
She glanced round guiltily.
The voice was that of a bespectacled man of indeterminate age and appearance wearing a parka coat and standing behind her in the queue.
He held a wire basket with a modest stack of provisions.
He smiled pleasantly at her.
‘I'll hold your spot in the queue if you want to go back and get it.’
Meredith looked back at the heaving throng on the shop floor.
‘No, thanks.
I don't think I could face it.
Thank you all the same.’
On impulse she added, ‘There's so much to buy — they don't realise how lucky they are!’
He smiled.
‘Some are.
Some can't afford it.
To see a shop window full of goods when you haven't the money to buy isn't much fun.’
Meredith frowned, considering this.
For some reason she felt she owed him a serious answer.
He was only a man in a queue but something in his voice suggested that what she had said struck a chord in him.
He cared about this.
‘People aren't as poor now as they were years ago,’ she said.
‘I know some aren't well off, but a hundred years ago they starved on the streets.’
‘Some still live on the streets.
Not here in Bamford admittedly.
But in big cities…
Been up to London recently?’
‘No, not yet,’ said Meredith gloomily, thinking of the FO desk which awaited her.
‘After Christmas I shall be travelling up every day.’
‘Take a look in shop doorways early in the mornings.
Count the sleeping bags.’
The queue shuffled forward a little.
‘Perhaps they aren't starving,’ the man went on, ‘but they feel failures.’
He pushed his spectacles up the bridge of his nose.
They seemed to have a tendency to slide down it.
‘There's so much, as you say, and everyone else seems to them to be doing well enough to enjoy it all.
Fifty years ago it wasn't a disgrace  to be poor — it was a shared misfortune with thousands of others.
Now the poor are made to feel ashamed, that it's their own fault, some shortcoming which they have.
Many of the youngsters feel resentful that society is kicking them out.
You can't blame them.’
‘No, I suppose not,’ Meredith said slowly.
He gave an embarrassed smile.
‘I didn't mean to lecture you.
The subject is by way of a special interest of mine.’
‘That's all right.’
She was moved to offer, ‘You've only a basket of a few items, you might as well go in front of me.
I've got a trolley-full.’
‘Oh, that's all right.
I'm not in a hurry.
You carry on.’
‘Next person please!’ requested the check-out girl snappily and Meredith was forced to move up and hastily unload her goods on to the conveyor belt.
Her shopping paid for, Meredith pushed the grumbling trolley out to her car.
There were ominous dark clouds gathering overhead now and a chill wind.
She packed everything away and returned her wire chariot to the ‘trolley park’ shivering in the air which struck so cold after the oppressive warmth of the supermarket.
Meredith backed out slowly to avoid other shoppers making for their cars with their overladen squeaky trolleys and set off out of town.
She was surprised at how relieved she felt when she reached Pook's Common.
It felt like quite a haven of peace in comparison to Bamford.
Rose Cottage did not have a garage, but it had a parking space formed by sacrificing most of the front garden.
She got out and shivered in an icy blast which struck right through her anorak.
The dark clouds had become more compact and although it was still only late morning, it was as dark as a gathering twilight.
Meredith rubbed reddened fingers together and went round to the boot to unload her wares.
As she did there was a screech of brakes  and another car drew up outside the cottage opposite, causing her to glance up.
The driver's door slammed and to her surprise a figure she recognised got out.
It was the red-head she'd seen in town.
She looked across the road, saw Meredith, smiled and came striding athletically towards her.
‘Hullo,’ she said.
‘I'm Harriet Needham.
I live over there in Ivy Cottage.’
‘Meredith Mitchell,’ Meredith said, disentangling herself from a welter of plastic carrier bags.
‘Been into Bamford, have you?’ asked Miss Needham sympathetically.
‘Bloody awful, isn't it?’
‘Pretty dreadful.
I had to stock up for the holiday break.’
‘You've taken the cottage on from the Russells, haven't you?’
Harriet tossed back her mane of red hair.
‘Come over and have a drink sometime.’
‘Thanks, that's kind of you.
I will.’
‘Why don't you come over now and have coffee?
It's going to bucket down with rain later.’
Harriet squinted up at the dark sky with businesslike appraisal.
‘Mud!’ she muttered, Meredith realised not to her but in response to a thought triggered by the weather and important to the speaker.
‘Thanks, I will.
I've to unload all this first of all.’
‘Sure, fine.
I've got my lot to unpack as well.
I'll leave the front door open.
Just come in when you're ready and yell.’
Harriet strode back to her own side of the road.
Meredith went into the cottage, arms full of bags.
A faint clatter from the kitchen indicated Mrs Brissett was just finishing up.
There was a smell of wax polish in the air mixed with lavender from the downstairs cloakroom.
The living room door stood ajar and Meredith, staggering past on her way to the kitchen, stopped abruptly, transfixed.
‘Oh, dear…’ she said faintly, unable for the moment to come up with any stronger remark although Miss Needham could probably have  obliged.
‘Oh my goodness, whatever am I going to do about this?’
Mrs Brissett popped out of the kitchen door.
‘You leave them groceries, Miss Mitchell.
I'll put them all away.’
‘Thank you…and thank you for…for…’
Meredith faltered.
‘Knew you'd like it!’ said Mrs Brissett.
Harriet's door stood open as she had promised.
An inviting smell of coffee wafted into Meredith's nostrils.
She called, ‘I'm here!’
‘In the kitchen!’
She followed Harriet's voice.
Ivy Cottage had originally had much the same ground plan as Rose Cottage.
But someone had built on a large extension to the rear and this housed the kitchen, which as Meredith was to discover, was large, modern and furbished it seemed with every kind of modern gadget.
The former kitchen had been made into a small dining room almost entirely filled with an early Victorian table and set of six chairs which were undeniably the real thing.
There was a buffet across the top of which was ranged a set of blue and white plates of equally antique origin and in the middle of the table stood a Georgian silver chafing dish.
It looked as though Harriet liked to entertain.
This thought was reinforced by the sight of Harriet's groceries, strewn across a worktop in the kitchen extension — French bread and a large packet of chicken breasts, two bottles of good wine and several unusual cheeses, plenty of fresh, out-of-season and expensive salads and all the trimmings of a dinner party.
But for how many? wondered Meredith, remembering the departing car of the previous evening.
Harriet noticed her looking at the groceries and said cheerfully, ‘I took one of those cordon bleu cookery courses.
Useful.
I couldn't boil an egg before.’
A little embarrassed because it looked as though she  had been prying, Meredith murmured, ‘I'm not much of a cook.’
‘It's fun, I like doing it.
And there's time enough here at Pook's Common for things like cooking.
You need time and not to be rushed.’
‘Yes, it's certainly quiet enough here,’ Meredith observed a little ruefully.
‘Away from it all.’
‘That's what I thought when I first came.’
Harriet set the cups and cream jug on a tray with brisk efficiency.
‘But funnily enough, it's not.
It's surprising what's around in Pook's Common!’
She did not elaborate on this tantalising hint but picked up the tray.
‘We'll go in the drawing room.
More comfortable.’
Harriet's drawing room, the equivalent of Rose Cottage's humbler living room situated in the front of the building, was furnished with a mixture of modern comfortable easy chairs and several nice old pieces, a Victorian roll-top desk and a little Regency card table among them.
Had they come together with the antiques in the dining room from a larger house, a family home?
Meredith wondered.
On a purely practical note, all this added up to quite a bit in value and Ivy Cottage did not appear to have any extra locks or catches at the windows.
Yet the thing which struck her most of all here in the drawing room was that Harriet seemed to have a passion for photographs.
In every kind of frame and occasionally jammed, a smaller snapshot in front of a larger, in the same frame, they spilled across the mantelshelf and over tabletops, shelves and cupboards.
Several of them pictured Harriet or others with horses.
‘Do you keep a horse yourself?’
Meredith asked.
‘Old Blazer.’
Harriet picked up a newish picture.
‘This one.
Tom Fearon keeps him for me at the livery stables.
He's a nice old chap.’
Meredith wasn't sure whether Harriet meant the horse or Mr Fearon so she murmured politely.
Harriet poured out the coffee.
‘You certainly need  something to buck you up after dealing with that scrum in Bamford.
I loathe shopping.
But none of the shops delivers and there's no village store around here.’
‘Do you live in Pook's Common all the time?’
Meredith asked as she took the cup.
It was pretty bone china sprigged with rosebuds.
‘Some of the cottages look like weekend homes.’
Harriet had returned to the kitchen.
Her voice came muffled.
‘Some are.
There are only eight of them all told, four on each side, as you've probably observed.’
She came back, this time carrying a plate with home-made biscuits on it which she held out to Meredith.
‘Help yourself, ‘Viennese whirls’ they're called.
My problem is that I like to make the things but can't possibly eat them all myself.
Well, if I did, I'd need to sell old Blazer and buy a shire horse to carry me!
Hang on, I'll get you a napkin.’
The napkin was damask and perfectly laundered.
Harriet did everything right.
Efficiency about the house on the part of others always inspired wistful envy in Meredith who was efficient about the office and rather at sea about the home.
I, she thought disconsolately, offer people packet biscuits if I've remembered to buy any and generally only have paper napkins.
But Harriet had returned to Meredith's query about the cottages.
‘The semi-detached pair on the right of yours, looking at them from the road, belong to one of the Oxford colleges.
One of those gets used by various people, no idea who any of 'em are.
But the other is used by Dr Krasny.
He comes down when he has a lot of writing to do because it's quiet.
One doesn't see much of him even when he's here.
He's a pleasant enough chap, though, and generally looks in to say hullo and have a glass of sherry on his way out to tramp over the common looking for flowers.
I believe his subject is rare wild orchids.’
‘There is an actual common, then?’
‘Oh yes.
Although it's not strictly grazing land any  more.
More like open moorland.
The cottagers of Pook's Common used to have grazing rights but I'm the only one to keep an animal now and I keep mine in a paddock belonging to Tom.
Turning out a valuable beast on the common today would be asking for trouble.
We had rustlers round a year or two back.
Sounds like the Wild West, doesn't it?
It still goes on, quite a bit.
The poor brutes go for slaughter, horsemeat steaks for the continent.’
Harriet sipped at her coffee.
‘The one on the left of yours is Mrs Sowerby's.
She's elderly and hardly ever puts her nose out of the front door.
Her daughter drives out from Bamford once a week but around this time of year she goes to stay with some other relative, I'm not sure where, so I dare say she isn't there at the moment and you haven't got any immediate neighbours resident.
This is a pretty lonely spot, As regards this side of the road, looking towards mine.
The cottage next door to this on the right, it's got a ghastly fake wishing well in the front garden, belongs to the chap who runs the garage up on the main road, Joe Fenniwick and his wife.
They're permanent residents, like me.
Joe's a good mechanic incidentally and you can take your car to him with confidence.
The cottage on the left here was bought by some business type who was going to weekend here with his girlfriend.
He spent a fortune doing it up and then his girlfriend bolted and now he wants to sell.
Bottom's fallen out of the market, though, just now.
That only leaves the one at the far end, which belongs to a couple who plan to retire here in the spring.
Hope they like things quiet.
In the meantime it's empty, although they generally turn up at weekends and mess around the place, painting bits and pieces and knocking in nails.
So it is rather deserted.
I like it that way myself.’
‘I'm going to have to travel up to London every day of the week,’ Meredith said with some regret.
‘I don't start until after New Year.
I'm beginning to wonder if  I've bitten off more than I can chew.’
‘Rather you than me,’ Harriet said frankly.
She paused.
‘What do you do?’
Meredith explained.
Harriet gazed at her thoughtfully.
‘I admire anyone who can hold down a job,’ she said suddenly.
‘I worked for a bit when I was about eighteen.
It was in Liverpool, because I lived in the Wirral then and I used to travel over there every day to put in my hours.
I say I worked, but I mean it was for a charity which ran one of these centres where they try and help the socially deprived.
They had an old people's day room and a young mothers' club and a crèche and all kinds of projects for youngsters.
I'll be honest, I couldn't stick it out.
I only did mornings but even the mornings were too much for me.’
She pulled a slight grimace.
‘I have independent means.
You haven't to say that these days.
People look at you as if you'd said you had plague.
I have turned my hand to trying a bit of writing and I keep meaning to take it up again.
I prefer being out of doors, though, that's my trouble, and writing takes up so much time.
Wish I could say I did do something organised and worthwhile on a regular basis.’
‘You could!’
Meredith said promptly.
‘You just haven't found the right job for you.’
Harriet looked thoughtful again.
‘Perhaps I will one day.
And perhaps I've found the thing for me already.
I don't mean a job, but something which needs doing, all the same.’
Her gaze had drifted as she spoke and seemed to rest on one of the photographs displayed nearby.
Meredith followed her line of sight and saw that it rested on an oldish-looking photo.
It showed three little girls in sandals and sundresses grouped together with a spaniel dog.
One little girl had familiar red curls.
Harriet glanced at Meredith and saw that she was looking at the picture.
‘That's me,’ she said pointing at it.
‘You can always tell by the  carroty hair.’
She  got up and picked up the frame and brought it over to Meredith.
‘That's my cousin Fran next to me.
We were much the same age and more like sisters than cousins, really.’
‘And who is that?’
Meredith pointed at the third child, a pretty little girl with dark hair and an engaging, impish grin.
‘She looks a happy child.’
‘Oh, that's Caro, Caroline Henderson, a friend of ours.’
Harriet's voice was still casual but it struck Meredith its carelessness was now a little forced.
‘She was a happy child.
We all were.
It was a good childhood.
I'm glad Caro was happy then because she sure as hell wasn't later on!’
She withdrew the photo abruptly and returned it to its place on a table.
‘I'm sorry,’ Meredith said awkwardly.
Harriet looked slightly abashed.
‘I didn't mean to snap.
Sorry.
It was just that we were all so fond of her.
Caro was a diabetic.’
She seemed to be making an effort to speak in a dispassionate practical tone.
‘And just to make things more difficult, an heiress.
Her father died when she was a kid, as did her uncle, which meant that her grandfather who was as rich as Croesus had no one else to leave his ill-gotten gains to.
It wasn't a blessing!’
Harriet's voice had grown bleaker as she spoke and finally broke off on a clipped note of finality.
‘I can imagine that.
Diabetes is quite a burden to carry through life.’
‘The money was a worse one.
But she didn't carry it for long,’ Harriet drained her cup and set it down noisily on the tray.
‘She was only twenty-three when she died from an overdose.’
‘I'm sorry,’ Meredith said awkwardly.
‘Was it to do with the diabetes?’
‘Not really.
They said it was depression.
She had been treated for depression.
The doctors prescribed all kinds of pills.
I told her to throw the lot away.
I wish she had done.
You know, once a woman's got a name as a neurotic no one takes her seriously any more.
No matter what 's wrong, they prescribe more pills and tell her to take it easy.
Nobody listens to her.
No one believes her any more but they're ready to believe anything anyone else says about her!’
‘It's a tricky problem,’ Meredith said cautiously.
‘Dealing with a neurotic person is well-nigh impossible.
They do go off the deep-end and tell you extraordinary tales.
I've had to deal with a few.’
‘Oh, I know it's like crying wolf,’ Harriet nodded.
‘But if you know that person, you can generally disentangle what's really happening from the rest.
I'm not a fanciful person.
I suppose I'm quite hard-headed in a way.
But I don't lack sympathy.
The reason I packed in the charity job wasn't because I didn't sympathise.
It was because I got so frustrated.
I'd slave my guts out on a case and think I'd got it settled and a week later the woman would turn up in my office with the same dreary tale.
Working for an outfit like that helps you tell the real from the fraud.’
She paused.
‘But you still get it wrong, sometimes.
I don't like being made a fool of!’
Outside in the little hallway, the telephone rang.
Harriet said ‘Excuse me!’, got to her feet and went out to answer it.
She closed the door behind her and the conversation came to Meredith as the muffled indistinguishable sound of Harriet's voice.
Meredith was relieved to be spared the embarrassment of unavoidable eavesdropping.
Harriet's voice rose aggressively and then the receiver was slammed down.
She returned, flushed, and walked to the drinks cabinet.
‘Would you like a glass of sherry?
Or something stronger?
Wish each other Merry Christmas and all that!’
She was reaching for the glasses already.
Clearly, she meant to have a drink.
‘All right, a sherry would be fine,’ said Meredith who really didn't like drinking in the middle of the day.
Harriet pushed back the whisky bottle and poured  out two sherries.
They toasted one another in Croft Original.
‘Absent friends,’ Harriet added before drinking hers.
‘May they never be forgotten.’
As foreseen by the dark clouds, it began to rain during the afternoon and by the time the headlights of Markby's car illuminated the front windows of Rose Cottage, it was fairly tipping down.
He dashed up the short front path at a run and shot through the door Meredith held open for him.
Squashed against her in the tiny hall, he dripped water and spluttered apologies.
She thought that he hadn't changed a bit.
It was the same thin, intelligent slightly wary face and as far as she could tell the same old Barbour jacket.
He was the sort of man who loathed new clothes.
His hair fell over his forehead in a damp straight lock and his blue eyes were screwed up as if in concern or alarm.
‘Have you got a mac?’ he asked anxiously.
‘We have to get from the pub car park into the pub.
It's bucketing down.’
‘I've got my anorak and it has a hood.
I was afraid it might rain for Christmas.’
Why was it when English people met again after an absence, they talked so determinedly about the weather?
But he had spotted the wreath, hung up in the hall.
‘That's a bit— bright.’
He stooped over it, peering down.
It hung at the level of his chest.
‘It's Mrs Brissett's.
She threatened to bring a plastic Father Christmas too.
As it is, look in here.’
Meredith threw open the door to the living room.
‘Good grief,’ he said faintly.
Paper chains, turquoise, acid yellow and flaming scarlet, were draped about the room from corner to corner and back and forth.
A large puce Chinese lantern dangled from the ceiling and a silver tinsel Christmas tree stood on the coffee table.
‘She did it all while I was in Bamford shopping this morning.
It's so kind of her and she must have worked so hard…
I can't possibly take any of it down.
She said she was sure I must have missed an English Christmas abroad all these years.
I don't know how she got up to fix the ceiling chains.’
‘It's, ah, cheerful…and talking of Christmas-’ He broke off and looked embarrassed, then said, ‘I'll explain later.
Shall we go and get that steak?’
He took them by a tortuous route to a pub called The Black Dog, which made a change from horses and pookas, until she recollected uneasily that a black dog was one of the devil's traditional earthly disguises.
Meredith, trying to use her bump of direction thought they had gone in a circle and as far as she could tell through teeming rain and darkness, were in the middle of the open moor or common.
For all its slightly sinister name and the murk and the remoteness of its location, The Black Dog presented a brightly lit oasis suggesting welcome and hospitality.
A string of multi-coloured lights gleamed beneath the overhanging thatch and bright yellow light was streaming from its tiny windows.
Several cars were already parked in the yard at its side.
‘Christmas,’ said Markby gloomily.
‘Mind you, I think we're getting the ‘don't drink and drive’ message across.
Not so much by getting them to understand as frightening them with a Breathalyser test and losing their licence.
Everyone needs to drive these days.’
A blast of warm smoky air struck Meredith's face as she preceded him into the one large room inside.
The Black Dog had abandoned the old distinction between saloon and public bars.
The ‘public’ which frequented it had become an amorphous mass.
Very few true locals could be distinguished here: a car-borne young-ish, free-spending town-based clientele supplied the bulk of the trade.
They were sharp-faced and casually clad.
The older people there looked well-dressed and prosperous.
All mingled together and jostled for their drinks or huddled round tables over plates of food.
Food was obviously as important a commodity as drink in The Black Dog.
It would be interesting, thought Meredith, to know at what point exactly a ‘pub’ became a ‘restaurant’.
But in the latter establishment customers would have demanded more space and comfort.
Here they accepted others cannoning into their backs as they ate and occasionally dripping overflowing beer glasses on to their tables or even down their necks.
The bar was against the far wall, plentifully stocked and presided over by a bleached blonde in a white beaded sweater.
A slim youth with curly hair pushed his way round, collecting used glasses, and a young girl with a notebook was taking orders for food at the bar.
The place was fairly crowded and noisy with chatter.
There was the inevitable piped Muzak but it was mercifully unobtrusive.
The building itself was obviously very old.
Its walls were of thick stone blocks and bulged and its low ceiling criss-crossed with smoke-blackened oak beams.
A fire blazed in a huge hearth beneath an oak lintel which, to judge by its thickness, must have come from a tree already at least a hundred years old when it was felled to help build this ancient building.
Horse brasses had been tacked along the length of the oaken lintel and gleamed in the firelight.
There was a framed poster above it, advertising a livestock sale of the 1860s.
Meredith craned her neck and saw behind her an even older notice announcing a trio of public hangings, two of them for offences which in some circumstances would not even have warranted a custodial sentence today.
She wondered if it was an original or a reproduction.
It was brownish-yellow and very tattered and looked as if it might be the real thing.
An unpleasant thing, too.
Meredith wrenched her gaze from the sad little scrap of paper and looked about her.
Despite the noise and  the modern dress of the customers, it was not difficult to imagine men with clay pipes sitting around the hearth of The Black Dog on windy, wet nights.
But modern marketing had laid its hand on the old tap-room.
The chairs were upholstered in crimson dralon ‘velvet’ and a newer, brighter, and considerably less literate notice on the wall advertised the coming attractions of regular Saturday ‘gigs’.
The menu, judging from plates already on tables, was surprisingly sophisticated for such an out-of-the-way establishment.
‘It's getting popular,’ said Markby as they squeezed into a corner settle near the fire.
‘You all right there?
Not going to be too hot?
Give me your coat, there's a place to hang them over there.
What would you like to drink?’
‘I'm sorry, I was gaping at all the knick-knacks!’ she smiled up at him.
‘I'll have a glass of white wine if I may.’
‘I was hoping you'd like this place.’
He gave a rueful grimace.
‘Just sorry it's so crowded.
Hang on, I'll be back in a jiff.’
She watched him fight his way across the room to hang up the coats and then to the bar.
He did it without pushing and shoving but with competent authority.
People moved out of his way and didn't seem to mind doing so.
He always thanked anyone who did, she noticed, and felt a return of the respect he had inspired in her at their first meeting.
Not, she recalled, that he couldn't be awkward.
But then, she admitted honestly, so could she!
Meredith sat back, feeling the heat of the flames play on her face and relaxing.
It was noisy and crowded but it was nice to have it so and Alan needn't have worried that she'd dislike that.
A large black cat with tattered ears appeared and strolled unconcernedly through the maze of feet to rub itself against her legs.
Not a dog, devilish or otherwise, she thought with some amusement but then remembered tales of witches and their  black feline familiars.
All this superstitious nonsense was getting to her.
‘Hullo,’ said Meredith, stooping to scratch one battle-torn ear.
The cat mewed up at her, displaying a fearsome and off-putting set of teeth.
A voice from a nearby table floated towards her.
‘Keep them out of the hands of the police, that's the thing.
What we need are proper assessment centres.
They need help, not locking up.
Once they've served any kind of custodial sentence so much damage is done…’
A fresh burst of noise cut off the end of the sentence.
Meredith lifted her head from her feline acquaintance, pushed back the curtain of dark brown hair which obscured her vision and looked curiously in the general direction of the voice.
But it was impossible to tell now who had been speaking or even to be sure at which of the small crowded tables the speaker sat.
Of the two tables nearby, one was occupied by a mixed group of men and women, all young and casually clad, the other by two men, one with a beard and guernsey sweater in which, in this warm room, he must be sweltering and the other with thinning hair, bespectacled and somehow familiar.
I know him! she thought.
He was the chap behind me in the supermarket.
‘Sorry to take so long!’
Markby was back, holding a pint in one hand and her glass of wine in the other.
He also had a plastic-covered book under his arm.
‘Menu,’ he said.
‘Take it, can you?’
Meredith pulled it free and opened it up.
Goodness, this wasn't a menu, it was a volume.
She supposed that she wrongly still thought of pub meals in terms of bread and cheese or pasties.
As in so many other things, she decided with a sigh, being out of one's own country for such long stretches of time, left one behind the times.
She remembered her experience in the supermarket.
It made one critical, too.
Markby said helpfully, ‘The steaks here are generally all right, which is one reason I come here.
Or the salad and cold meat is okay.’
‘I'll settle for the rump steak, then.’
Markby battled his way back to the bar to place their order and when he came back they sat and looked shiftily at one another.
Food ordered, the obvious subject of conversation gone, neither was quite sure what to say now.
‘How was your drive back across Europe?’ he asked.
‘Pretty uneventful.
I'd rather drive at this time of the year than in summer when there's so much tourist traffic.’
‘Settled in all right at Rose Cottage, Christmas decorations apart?’
‘Oh yes.
Mrs Brissett's a treasure, as they say.
I'm very lucky.’
Two avenues of conversation neatly blocked off, silence fell.
My fault, thought Meredith despondently.
She ought to expand but how?
‘Dirty night,’ said Markby determinedly, falling back on the British standby, the weather.
‘Yes.
Nice and warm in here and I like to see so many people.
They're busier than usual, I suppose.’
‘Oh yes, Christmas…’
He fiddled with a beermat.
‘I was going to ask you about that.
Are you staying around here?
I mean for the actual Christmas period, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and so on.’
‘I imagine so.
I haven't anywhere else to go.’
That sounded wistful so she added robustly, ‘I know I said I liked seeing the crowd in here but that doesn't mean I can't manage on my own.
I don't mind it being quiet!’
The last words came out defiantly.
She hoped he didn't interpret them as telling him to mind his own business.
She didn't mean to sound brusque.
Perhaps he just made her nervous.
She saw with some dismay that his expression had grown sombre.
‘Oh,’ he said, ‘Quiet.’
Whatever else  Christmas Day at Laura's might be, it couldn't be guaranteed to be quiet, he thought.
‘Pook's Common is virtually a ghost settlement, did you know?’
Meredith burst into a relentless rattle of meaningless information, determined to keep the conversation going.
‘Hardly anyone lives there full time.
It's a bit like coming back to Britain and finding you've committed yourself to living in Brigadoon.’
‘A bit creepy?’ he asked sympathetically.
‘Not so far.’
She didn't want to give the impression she was in need of company at the cottage.
Then, thinking she sounded brusque again, added, ‘But I imagine it could be, in the right circumstances.’
Markby nodded sagely, raised his beer glass and then, in a surprised voice, said, ‘Hullo!’
She glanced up.
He was staring at the two men at the nearby table.
‘Who are they?’
Meredith asked curiously in a low voice.
‘I met one of them earlier today.’
‘Did you?’ he sounded startled.
‘Which one?
Where?’
‘Only casually in a supermarket.
He was behind me in the queue.
The one with the spectacles.’
‘That's Colin Deanes.
I don't know the other chap, the bearded one.
But I'd happily put a quid on his being a social worker.
Deanes writes and lectures about teenage delinquents.’
Markby was beginning to sound animated.
‘He's got a bee in his bonnet about keeping them out of remand homes and prison.
I'm not against that, but you can't leave young thugs loose to go round terrorising honest folk.
As far as I can make out, Deanes doesn't believe that young people should be expected to know the difference between right and wrong.
Expecting people to know it's wrong to mug old ladies doesn't seem unreasonable to me, but I'm just a copper.
Deanes says it's a cry for help.’
Chief Inspector was slightly more than just a copper, Meredith thought wryly, amused at his apparent self  abasement.
From her experience of him he certainly wasn't unaware of his own competence!
‘Such modesty!’ she teased him gently.
‘A public servant, that's me.
So are you.
You should know as well as I do the public can be a very difficult master!’
He took a purposeful swig of his beer and set it down.
‘Hum, yes.
I take it you've had dealings with Mr Deanes?’
‘He's rented an old farmhouse right out in the middle of nowhere on the common, beyond your place and even more isolated, believe it or not.
He's been writing his latest book there.
He shows up in Bamford from time to time at the station.
He likes to take up my time, looking for copy.
He'd call it doing research.
It's impossible to discuss anything with him.
His view is entirely blinkered.
I'd say his heart was in the right place if I didn't doubt that, since he has so little sympathy for the victims of his young tearaways.
I'm not against anyone trying to help put youngsters straight, but people like Deanes never want to hear any point of view but their own.
He seems to assume I'm about as liberal-minded as Genghis Khan and the annoying thing is, when he talks to me, I start sounding like the worst sort of reactionary.
He provokes it.
I take up points of view I don't actually support strongly and start defending them to the hilt.
Even when I do agree with him, he makes it extraordinarily difficult for me to say so.’
Meredith smiled to herself at his mounting vehemence.
This was the Alan Markby she remembered!
She almost commented on the irony of the last charge he laid against Deanes.
It was a bit like the pot calling the kettle black.
At the time of the Westerfield poisonings he had sometimes been a difficult man to agree with, and he'd more than once annoyed her by his attitude.
Perhaps, she reflected ruefully, she was just easily irritated.
She recalled the young man she  had met campaigning in the street that morning.
He hadn't meant any harm but his few words had set her against him.
On reflection, she had been too quick to judge him and she regretted it now.
‘I met someone today,’ she said, ‘who affected me a little as you describe Deanes affecting you.’
She told him about the anti-blood-sports campaigner.
‘He was a harmless sort of youth really, just trying to do what he thought was right.
But he was so ham-fisted about it.
He annoyed me and I'm afraid I didn't sign his petition.’
‘Oh yes,’ Markby said.
‘The Boxing Day Meet.’
He sounded glad to get on to another subject.
‘The Bamford Hunt always gathers in the Market Square on Boxing Day and after downing a glass or two of something sustaining, moves off for a day's sport, watched by the local populace.
It is possible that this year we'll have hunt saboteurs to contend with.
They try and throw the hounds off the scent and generally disrupt things.
They may turn up in a show of force in the Market Square.’
The return to a seasonal topic seemed to have prompted him to tackle something obviously on his mind.
‘About Christmas.
The reason I asked you just now what you planned to do was that Laura, my sister — you remember her, don't you?
She's a partner in a firm of solicitors in the High Street — well, she thought you might like to join us for a family Christmas dinner.
The food will be all right,’ he added hastily, ‘because Paul, my brother-in-law, always cooks it.
That's his line, cooking.
He writes about it.’
‘It's very kind of Laura,’ Meredith said doubtfully.
He seized on the doubt.
‘You don't have to.
I mean, it's up to you.
Of course, she'd be delighted and so would I, since I've got to be there.
She's got youngsters…’
‘Yes, I seem to recall you told me about your sister and her kids, three of them, right?’
‘Four-there's been an increase.
The littlest one leaks at both ends incessantly.
Matthew, the eldest, is quite a bright chap and Emma, the next one age-wise, is all right but learning the recorder.
She's practising ‘Jingle Bells’ for a Christmas solo.
Vicky doesn't do much except break things.
A sort of potential lady-wrestler.
They're all right, really, but if you'd prefer peace and quiet, you might find them a bit exhausting.’
He looked so comically apologetic that she had to burst out laughing.
‘I should love to come.
Tell Laura, and I'll give her a call myself.’
‘Fine, that's okay, then.’
He looked relieved.
‘I'm glad you're coming.’
Hastily he added, ‘Because it means Laura keeps the kids in better order if there's a visitor.
I don't count.’
‘Oh, I see.’
The girl arrived then with their steaks and there was a welcome break in conversation, during which they observed Deanes and his companion departing from their nearby table.
They began to squeeze their way towards the door and in doing so, passed by Markby.
‘Ah — hullo, Chief Inspector!’
Deanes said.
He stopped and pushed his spectacles further up his nose with a forefinger in the gesture Meredith recalled.
Now that she took another look at it, it was a rather insignificant sort of nose on which any pair of spectacles might be expected to slip.
He had pulled on his fur-lined parka ready to brave the elements.
‘Policeman's night out?’ he asked humorously.
‘We do get some time off!’
Markby said brusquely.
‘Hope you enjoy your meal.’
Deanes looked towards Meredith and a surprised expression crossed his face.
‘Small world!
We met briefly in the supermarket in Bamford.
Perhaps you don't recall me?’
‘Yes, I do.’
Meredith smiled.
‘Glad to see you got out of there in one piece, Mrs Markby.‘
‘Oh, but I'm not!’ began Meredith and Markby at the  same time exclaimed, ‘She isn't!’so that their denials chimed in unison.
Deanes chuckled.
‘Oh, I see.
Well, enjoy yourselves.
Happy Christmas.’
He followed his guernsey-sweatered companion out, leaving the two diners in unhappy silence, avoiding one another 's eye.
‘We didn't handle that very well,’ Meredith said at last.
‘He is a silly blighter,’ Markby said irritably, taking a gulp from his pint.
Meredith, recalling her brief conversation with Deanes in the queue, felt compelled to defend him.
He had shown, or so it had seemed to her at the time, genuine concern for others.
Such a man earned a good word on his behalf.
‘Are you sure you're fair to him?’ she ventured disastrously.
‘Or are you predisposed by your calling to see him as interfering — trespassing on your patch?’
A warlike gleam entered Markby's blue eyes.
He jabbed a forefinger at her.
‘Listen here, Miss Smart-Alec, you haven't seen him in full flight!
Put him on the telly, give him a bit of limelight and away goes our Colin!
No one else can get a word in edgeways.
And he's not always entirely fair to the poor foot-slogging copper, either.’
Meredith drew herself up.
‘People are entitled to their opinions, I suppose.
And anyway —’ Meredith was aware of her own tone growing argumentative.
‘Take a look at that!’
She pointed at the poster announcing the public hangings.
‘Penal reform has certainly been needed in the past and probably still is.
Ideas of how society should treat its criminals change just as ideas of justice change.
Once upon a time a man could hang for setting fire to a hayrick!
Thank goodness for people prepared to stand up to authority and tackle the system they believe is wrong.’
‘Even if they stop you on a busy shopping morning  and ask you to sign petitions?’
Markby countered craftily.
‘That's unfair!’
Meredith said indignantly.
‘All right, yes!
Even if it means you've got to inconvenience the uncommitted.
Although fox-hunting on council land isn't quite what Deanes campaigns about, is it?’
‘Deanes campaigns for causes which have a high profile,’ said Markby drily.
‘That may be pure coincidence, of course, and I may be a sceptic.’
He glared at her over his beer, daring her to agree with his last assertion.
Meredith was not to be led away from the point at issue.
‘The causes may have a high profile because Deanes campaigns for them!
Good for him, he's doing his job.’
He was gazing at her with an infuriating world-weariness suggesting he'd heard her argument a hundred times before.
‘This is turning into one of those mediaeval disputes which split hairs endlessly,’ he said.
‘Are you playing devil's advocate, by any chance?’
‘No, I'm not!’ exclaimed a heated Meredith, bouncing about in her chair.
Her hair fell over her face and she glowered at him.
‘I'm not saying the man should be considered as a candidate for sainthood.
Just that perhaps he ought to be respected!’
Her companion gave a muffled grunt and attacked his steak vigorously.
After a mouthful he seemed to relent.
‘All right, then, I'll admit to a degree of prejudice against people who seem to make a living out of being agin the establishment.
But I'm certainly not against anyone taking up arms against an injustice.
It's when people are opinionated, as opposed to having a properly argued opinion that I lose patience with them.
Or when they refuse to face unpleasant truths, like good and evil.
They try to blend them together when they're really opposites!’
Danger of choking stopped him at that point.
After a moment or two when he had swallowed his steak and could speak safely, he went  on, ‘Modern theology doesn't help, I dare say.
To say nothing of modern educational notions.
But sometimes a chap is a wrong'un, pure and simple.’
He gave a decided nod as if to approve his own argument.
‘You believe in evil, then?’
Meredith asked curiously.
She had often wondered whether policemen did believe in something it was now so fashionable to doubt.
‘Oh, yes.’
Markby put down his knife and fork and regarded her seriously.
‘Oh, yes, indeed.
Very much so.
Hoofs, horns, forked tail and all,’ he added with a grin.
Meredith didn't respond to his attempt to lighten the conversation but merely sat staring at him thoughtfully.
Serious again, he went on, ‘A real presence sometimes, at any rate, even if not quite like the folk image.
I've had occasion to talk to men who have committed appalling crimes and sometimes I swear I've felt it there in the room with us, wickedness.’
‘And good?
Does that exist as a real force?’
‘Oh, certainly.
Good too.
There are more good people about than the world gives credit for.’
‘So where does that place Deanes?
On the side of the angels or the other lot?’
Markby chuckled, his customary air of self-deprecation returning.
‘I can't say, ‘somewhere in the middle’, can I?
Not after the other things, I've said.
I didn't mean to divide the world into black and white, you know.
Of course there's a grey area.
I was talking of extremes.
As for Deanes, there's an old and venerable tradition of the holy fool.
But Christmas is upon us and I shall be charitable.
The fellow means well.
Just keep him out of my hair.
Would you like another drink?’
‘Only if you're having one.’
‘Can't.
Driving.
Have to set a good example.
Never do if I was ordered to pull over and blow into a bag.’
‘We can go back to Rose Cottage, always supposing Pook s Common is still where we left it, and I'll make  coffee,’ she offered, aware that she should contribute to the peace that had broken out between them.
He smiled at her.
‘That sounds nice.’
They sat over the coffee, talking more easily in the cosy intimacy of the cottage than in the crowded bar of The Black Dog.
Meredith told him what she had been doing since they last met and Markby gave a summary of his own activities.
‘Sadly routine, I'm afraid,’ was his verdict.
‘Not as interesting as yours.’
Meredith demurred.
‘Mine aren't always all that interesting.
People think my job's full of excitement.
But mostly I'm pushing bits of paper around.
Some of the exciting things I could do without.
And then there's the gruesome.
They turn up from time to time.’
‘Yes, they do, don't they?’
Markby smiled.
‘Or at least they do in my job.’
Their eyes met and they looked away from one another.
Both knew the other was thinking of their first meeting and the case of murder in which Meredith had found herself so painfully entangled.
Absence from the scene, thought Meredith, and being involved in other countries in other people's affairs had made it all seem rather long ago.
But it wasn't: only eighteen months.
The relaxed air which had reigned in the warm little living room of Rose Cottage seemed suddenly to have evaporated.
Markby stirred and made signs of being about to take farewell.
‘I really must go.
It's been…it's been very pleasant.
Nice to see you again.’
Suddenly they were formal.
‘Yes, likewise.
Thanks for the meal.’
It had stopped raining but the night was dark and damp.
‘Don't stand about on the doorstep,’ he said.
‘You'll catch cold.’
Nodding obediently — slightly idiotically — she  thought, Meredith went back indoors and watched through the window as he drove away.
Across the lane, the windows of Ivy Cottage were dark.
Not tonight, Harriet's dinner party, Meredith thought.
She remembered the muffled telephone conversation in Ivy Cottage that morning.
Or did he ring to cancel? she asked herself and for some reason, felt uneasy.
Three
The following morning the overnight rain had cleared away.
Meredith peeped out of the dormer window at the sun sparkling on the wet slates and road.
As she watched, a small car drove slowly past and made for a cottage at the far end and on the other side of the narrow track.
A middle-aged couple got out and began to unload a motley collection of boxes and bags.
They must be the pair who proposed to retire here one day, Meredith deduced, come to check on the property or possibly even to spend Christmas here.
They obviously didn't mind the isolation.
She also noticed Harriet's upstairs windows were all open.
A curtain flapped wildly out of one of them.
Meredith showered, dressed and breakfasted and turned her attention to the washing machine in the corner of the kitchen.
She had a pile of laundry but was unused to having a machine at her disposal.
She peered at its various buttons and dials and wondered if it were possible to wreck it by unintentional mis-setting.
A hunt in a drawer produced a handbook.
She sat and sipped her tea and read it.
It all seemed fairly simple.
She loaded it up.
First attempt to get it to go failed because she hadn't plugged it in to the electricity supply.
A second attempt did better.
It began to chug away, her underwear rotating past the little window in the door.
Meredith, feeling quite pleased with herself, put on her anorak and set out to explore a little more of Pook's Common.
The road continued past the cottages so there must be something down there and it  ought to be the common itself.
She walked past Ivy Cottage and down the narrow roadway.
Before the last cottage she paused as a woman appeared in the doorway.
‘Good morning,’ she called.
The woman peered at her short-sightedly and looked bewildered.
‘I'm living at Rose Cottage!’
Meredith shouted.
‘Oh, the Russells’ cottage!’
The other scurried down the garden path towards Meredith.
‘Have they sold?
I didn't know.’
‘No, just gone away temporarily.’
Meredith explained.
‘Oh, I see.’
The woman looked relieved.
‘I'm so pleased they haven't put the cottage on the market because that would leave it empty.
Yet another empty cottage here would be just dreadful!
How nice that you're going to be here.
Pook's Common could do with a few more people, don't you think?
Such a lonely spot.‘
‘Have you come to spend Christmas?’
Meredith asked, puzzled.
‘Oh, no!’
The woman looked horrified.
‘We're going to my daughter's for Christmas!
We've only come today to make sure everything is all right.
We're going to retire here as soon as we've sold our house.’
She sighed.
‘My husband likes the…the quiet of Pook's Common.
Forgive me, I ought to have introduced myself.
I'm Lucy Haynes.
Geoffrey!’ she called out suddenly.
‘What do you want?’ came an irascible voice from inside the cottage in return.
‘I want you to meet someone, Geoffrey!’
There was a further irascible grunt and a short, stocky red-faced man appeared.
‘My husband,’ said Lucy Haynes with a touch of resignation in her voice.
‘This lady, Geoffrey, is renting Rose Cottage.’
Mr Haynes approached mistrustfully.
‘I thought the  Russells had taken off.
Where have they gone?’
‘Dubai,’ Meredith informed him.
Mr Haynes gave another snort of disgust.
‘I've no desire to go running round the world.
I can't wait to settle down here permanently.
Peace and quiet, that's the thing!
We're just down for the weekend to air the place out and run the heating.
Got to watch out for damp in these old places.’
He stamped his feet like a restless pony, obviously anxious to get back to whatever he had been doing.
‘Nice to have met you,’ said Meredith tactfully and moved off.
‘I hope we'll see a bit more of you, Miss Mitchell,’ said Lucy Haynes, it seemed to Meredith a trifle wistfully.
She walked on, wondering whose decision it had been to buy a retirement home in such an isolated spot.
Geoffrey's, she suspected.
Lucy Haynes was going to find it lonely.
Geoffrey was probably a ranting misanthrope so it didn't matter.
Not a good idea to shut yourself away like this once you got a bit older, thought Meredith.
You depended on your car unless you fancied walking two miles to Westerfield to catch the bus.
No shops.
No doctor's surgery.
Lots of fresh air and not much else.
After a few minutes' walk it seemed she had truly left the hamlet of Pook's Common behind.
Hedgerows grew straggling on either side, bare now in mid-winter, black, grey and brown instead of green.
But here was something.
An acrid odour mingled with the unmistakable smell of farmyard manure struck Meredith's nose.
She had reached a five-barred gate and a notice board nailed on a tree trunk proclaimed ‘Pook's Stables’.
That seemed fitting.
Meredith leaned curiously on the gate and looked over.
It was a stable yard all right.
The loose-boxes were set around three sides of a square and away to the right, half-hidden, was a neglected-looking dwelling.
There was a small horse-box parked in one corner of the yard and just on the other side of the gate a large Mercedes.
Its wheels and the lower half of the body-work were splattered with mud.
It looked pretty impressive, even so, in these rural surroundings.
‘Hi!’ said a voice behind her.
Meredith turned.
Harriet stood there in breeches and waxed jacket, holding a rope halter and a plastic bucket.
She smiled at Meredith's surprised expression.
‘I followed you down.
I would have caught up with you earlier but I saw you talking to that poor downtrodden mouse of a Haynes woman and waited till she'd gone.
I can't stick Geoffrey.’
‘He seems a bit brusque.’
‘He's a real old misery.
She really ought to stand up to him.
I'd give him the order of the boot.
But she hasn't got the gumption.
And I know what's going to happen as soon as they really move in.
He'll want to change everything.
He'll want the road made up and start pestering the council.
He'll want proper street lighting instead of our present hit or miss lamps.
He'll complain that the horses deposit muck outside his gate.
He'll want a bus service and a pavement.’
Harriet glanced past Meredith and raised the hand holding the rope halter in salute to someone unseen behind her.
Turning, Meredith was just in time to glimpse a man standing by one of the loose-boxes.
She had a brief impression of a swarthy, handsome face and strong build, a quilted body-warmer and well-worn sweater, the inevitable riding breeches and boots.
Then he ducked into the loose-box out of sight.
‘Tom's in one of his funny moods,’ said Harriet with a shrug.
‘Come and meet Blazer.’
They walked on past Pook's stables and reached open fields.
From behind a hedge a sudden whinny made Meredith jump.
‘He's heard us,’ said Harriet.
‘He knows I'm on my way for him.’
She opened a gate and held it for Meredith.
Fastening it behind her she started out across wet turf.
Meredith whose walking shoes, though practical enough for most surfaces, were not really adequate for squelching through boggy terrain, made her way along behind her as best she could, seeking out the firmer spots.
Rushes grew here and there in clumps across the pasture.
It must be very low-lying.
She asked if there were a river nearby.
‘Just down the road a little way.
There's a bridge.’
Harriet stopped and whistled.
Two horses came plodding into view, one a handsome chestnut with a startling blaze down its face and the other a grey, following behind.
As they came up, Meredith was surprised at the amount of body-heat coming from them in the low outside temperature.
They seemed to steam slightly.
‘Here he is!’
Harriet stretched up to pat the chestnut neck.
Blazer put down his head and nuzzled at her coat pocket.
‘All right, you greedy brute.
Hang on.’
She delved in her pocket and produced a wrapped boiled sweet.
She managed to unwrap it with difficulty, Blazer trying to scoop it neatly out of her hand with his flexible upper lip.
The grey stood back a little, watching.
‘I've got one for you, too.’
Harriet said.
She pushed Blazer away from her.
‘Get out of the way!
It's not your turn!’
The grey was more cautious.
It approached sideways on and flung up its head, eye rolling.
‘He can,’ warned Harriet, ‘whirl round and give you a kick, this fellow.
Here, come on…’
She clicked her tongue.
The grey sidled up and took the proffered titbit and then suddenly bucked and danced away.
‘Tom's horse,’ Harriet said.
‘He's a bit like old Tom in character.
You can get round him if you go the right way about it.
But he can cut up rough and turn a bit nasty if he's got a mind to.
I'm fond of him, though.’
This time Meredith asked, ‘Tom or the horse?’
Harriet glanced at her and laughed.
‘I'm fond of Tom and the horse.
But you haven't to let either of  them get the better of you!
They'll play on it.’
Blazer had come ambling up again.
Harriet threw the rope halter over his head.
‘You and I, old chap,’ she said softly.
‘We get along just fine, don't we?’
They returned to the gate, Harriet leading the horse.
‘I keep my tack up at Tom's place.
I'll see you later, perhaps?’
Meredith waved goodbye and watched her set off back the way they had come in the direction of Pook's stables.
She continued her own walk down the lane.
She came to the river after about five minutes and stood on the bridge, leaning over the parapet to watch the water race by.
The level looked quite high.
Further down the lane the fields came to an abrupt end and an expanse of open ground stretched in front of her.
The grass was coarse and tufted, crossed here and there by narrow, half-obliterated footpaths.
Isolated trees struggled, windswept, for survival.
A large bird, a crow as far as she could tell, flapped up from picking at something on the ground and wheeled away high above her.
The prospect did not encourage one to wander further.
The common seemed somehow unfriendly.
If the pookas were out there, they were welcome to it.
Meredith was not sorry to turn back.
As she re-passed the stable yard, she heard the sound of voices, a man's and a woman's, raised in some altercation from inside the buildings.
Suddenly Harriet's clear tones rang out.
‘I'll do as I damn well please!’
‘You owe me at least-’ the man's voice began angrily.
‘I don't owe you a thing!
And I'm not going to discuss it with you while you're in this foul mood.
You can call by later if you've got over it — and not if you haven't!‘
‘Attagirl!’ thought Meredith with a grin.
Mr Fearon wasn't getting the better of Harriet, certainly.
As she passed the Haynes' cottage, it seemed something was amiss there, too.
But this time it was  Geoffrey's voice which rumbled on aggressively, with occasional mild squeaks of protest from his wife.
They had probably been married for some thirty-odd years, perhaps longer.
Difficult now, Meredith thought, to change habits established over the best part of a life-time.
Perhaps after all there was much to be said for remaining independent, carving out your own orbit.
Lucy Haynes was as tied to her bad-tempered spouse as a satellite moon to its planet.
Geoffrey led and Lucy followed.
Harriet, by way of contrast, wasn't a follower but a leader.
How did one stop a person like Harriet, headstrong, independent, beholden to no one?
Short of tripping her up and hitting her over the head, goodness only knew.
Independence.
It was easy to surrender your independence in ways which you hardly realised until too late.
Even by accepting Laura Danby's kind invitation, Meredith's own fiercely maintained independence could be said to have been undermined.
It was different for Alan, the Danbys were his family.
Although once he'd had a wife of his own.
Meredith allowed herself a moment's speculation about this never-discussed time in Markby's life.
Or at least never discussed with her.
Did he ever speak of it with anyone?
His wife's name had been Rachel, that much Meredith knew, and it was all.
He'd tell her about it one day, she thought.
But he clearly wasn't ready to yet.
She returned her thoughts to the Danbys.
What would they make of her?
How did they view her?
As Alan's girlfriend?
God forbid.
That wouldn't suit either Alan or herself!
Perhaps she had already compromised herself beyond recall by accepting the invitation.
The thought sent an uneasy shiver down her spine.
Back at Rose Cottage, Meredith consulted the calendar, frowning.
It was Saturday, half over already, and that meant only three more entire days remained before Christmas Day, the coming Wednesday, when she had committed  herself, she now feared rashly, to festivities with the Danbys.
It was generous of them to ask her along, she didn't deny.
Or perhaps it was kind of Alan.
He may well have asked his sister to invite Meredith.
That thought made Meredith even more uneasy.
She hoped that she did not appear to others like a worthy cause.
Poor old Meredith, all on her own.
Can't leave her to spend a solitary Christmas…
It was possible they thought nothing of the sort, but she still felt she had to do something to show she was not entirely alone and friendless.
Going away for just a day before Christmas to visit a friend or relative, just to let Alan Markby and Laura Danby know that she did have someone else, would bolster her morale.
The trouble was that now, after so many years abroad, most of her friends were Foreign Service personnel like herself and nearly all abroad on postings at the moment.
As for family, she had few of them.
No one close unless, of course, one counted Aunt Lou.
Dear old Aunt Lou!
Meredith's finger, running down the calendar, retraced its path and lingered over Sunday.
She must be, what, over eighty?
She wasn't a real aunt but a courtesy one, the widow of a former colonial service administrator and a friend of Meredith's late parents.
But it would be nice to go and see the old lady.
She lived an easy drive away, near Newbury.
Meredith had brought her back some embroidered handkerchiefs, as it happened.
She could take them along.
Indomitable Aunt Lou, whom nothing could shake.
Meredith hunted down Aunt Lou's telephone number and dialled it.
The old lady had been deaf for years and had what she called a ‘thing-gummyjig’ on her telephone receiver which was intended to help her hear her callers more clearly.
Aunt Lou was inclined to mistrust the device and confuse it with what she had read of ‘bugged’ telephones in the newspapers.
It certainly didn't appear to be much help to her.
If  people visited the house and the old lady answered the telephone while they were there, the visitors in their armchairs five yards away could hear the caller distantly but clearly, but Aunt Lou on the phone still yelled, ‘Speak up!’
‘Who?’ screeched Aunt Lou down the telephone now.
‘Meredith, Aunt Lou!
Meredith Mitchell!’
‘Oh, Merry!
How are you, my dear?
And why are you calling from so far away?
Think of the expense!’
‘I'm not far away, Aunt Lou.
I've just got back to England.
I thought I'd come and see you tomorrow, if that suits you.’
‘Right you are, dear.
If you come about twelve, I shall be back from church.’
With that she abruptly rang off before the thing-gummyjig wrought any mischief.
Aunt Lou's house looked exactly as it had always done.
Meredith, looking up at it in the sunshine, felt five years old again.
It was a large, rambling, gracious Edwardian building.
It had been a wonderful place for exploring.
It had had its own peculiar smell, compounded of wax polish and the pot-pourri Aunt Lou made and put out in little dishes in every room.
There had been a brass dinner gong in the hall and oh, the delight when allowed to strike it, just once, with its little hammer.
Necessity had led to changes since those days.
The house had become far too large and expensive to maintain for Aunt Lou and so it had been altered, the top half being made into a separate flat on the first floor and a studio apartment created in the former attics.
Both had been sold off and Aunt Lou remained in residence on the ground floor which she'd had converted into a suitable flat for herself.
The arrangement had not proved perfect.
Aunt Lou seldom approved of the people who lived above her, but it worked after a fashion.
The house next door, similar in style, did not seem to have suffered the same mutilation.
It had the quiet secluded air of a gentleman's private residence about it.
In its drive stood a Japanese four-wheel-drive vehicle and as Meredith looked across the laburnum hedge at it, a woman of about her own age came out of the house, slamming the door crossly, got into the vehicle and reversed out into the road, driving off at speed.
Meredith had only time to see that she was expensively dressed, sharp-featured and bad-tempered in looks.
She dismissed her from her mind and rang Aunt Lou's bell.
‘Come in, my dear,’ said Aunt Lou, dragging open the door.
Aunt Lou had never looked young, at least not to the child Meredith.
She had always had grey hair, scraped back into a no-nonsense knot and wore baggy knitted suits.
The hair now was white, but the baggy suits hadn't altered in style a jot and she had changed remarkably little except that, as Meredith was distressed to see, the old lady now had a walking stick which accompanied her everywhere.
With her stick Aunt Lou moved quite briskly, however.
‘I have,’ said Aunt Lou fortissimo as she led the way into her ground floor flat, ‘made us bean casserole.’
‘Oh, still vegetarian, Aunt Lou?’
‘Naturally!’ snapped Aunt Lou testily.
‘What else should I be?
Do you think I should have lived as long as I have on meat?’
The living room hadn't changed much.
The same antique plates gleamed behind the glass doors of a walnut cabinet.
The muffled tick of the grandfather clock echoed in one corner.
Crocheted antimacassars graced the backs of all the chairs although it was many years since a gentleman with pomade on his hair had sat in one of them.
‘Those,’ said Aunt Lou, lowering herself stiffly into  a chair and pointing with her stick at the walnut cabinet, ‘are yours’.
‘Oh, the plates?’
‘Yes, they're in my will.
I was intending to give them to you when you married.
But you haven't married and I dare say you won't do so now.’
Aunt Lou scrutinised her visitor.
‘You're not a bad-looking girl.
Aren't there any young single fellows about where you are?
When I was young and Roger was in the colonial service, young single European women were much in demand.
Girls who couldn't get themselves a husband in this country were sent out to find one in the colonies and it seldom failed.’
‘Yes, Aunt Lou.
But I'm not thinking of marriage.’
‘Aren't you?’ said Aunt Lou unkindly.
‘Chance would be a fine thing, I dare say.
It's not what you think, my girl, it's what the man thinks.
Or don't girls wait to be asked these days?’
‘Not always, I believe, Aunt Lou.
I think it's quite common now for them to do the asking.’
Aunt Lou looked mildly taken aback but not for long.
‘Yes, well, common is probably the word to describe that sort of behaviour.
Your trouble, my girl, is that you're too independent by half.
It don't do.
Of course a woman should know her own mind and few men really relish a life with a clinging vine, but it can be taken too far.’
‘Good job I'm able to earn my living, wouldn't you say?’
Meredith pointed out.
Aunt Lou looked glum.
‘It was different in my day.
Mind you, I'm not saying everything's for the worse.
Lots of girls married in haste and repented at leisure then because they were afraid of being left on the shelf.
But now it's all divorce and even the married ones carry on in a very odd way.
I read about it in my newspaper.
That woman upstairs,’ Aunt Lou's walking stick made an aggressive stab at the ceiling.
‘Men coming and going.
Lost count of ‘em.
And take Mr  Ballantyne next door — he's a very nice, well-mannered old gentleman, must be oh, seventy something.’
‘He's got women coming and going?’
Meredith asked innocently.
‘Behave yourself!’ ordered Aunt Lou.
‘Of course he doesn't.’
‘I saw a young woman leaving as I arrived, rather narrow face, nice clothes, looking cross.’
‘That will be his daughter, Felicity, I was about to tell you about her, don't keep interrupting,’ said Aunt Lou sternly.
‘Mr Ballantyne comes in here sometimes for a glass of wine.’
Meredith knew Aunt Lou meant by this thick sweet sherry.
‘He's a widower.
Quite a wealthy man, I believe.
He lives in that big house all on his own with a woman coming daily to clean and cook his lunch.
He hasn't done as I did and chopped his house in half.
I wish I hadn't.
Such odd people upstairs and one has no control over who lives there.
I was ill-advised.’
‘You couldn't manage the whole house, Aunt Lou.’
‘Well, I could have made some other arrangement.
However, I was telling you of Mr Ballantyne.
He has just the one daughter and that girl has given him great cause for concern.
He tells me about it.
He likes someone to confide in.
She married a very unsuitable fellow.
I've seen him a few times and he's never made a favourable impression on me!
But he doesn't come often, only when he wants Mr Ballantyne to put up the money for one of his schemes or projects, which Mr Ballantyne usually does for the sake of his daughter.
It's all wrong.
Generally Felicity visits her father alone.
No children.
Poor Mr Ballantyne can't make it out.
He says that they more or less go their separate ways, Felicity and this green fellow she's married to.
He says it's entirely the fault of the green man and he doesn't approve of his ideas at all really and only backs them because of a natural wish to support his daughter.
I've told him, he shouldn't do it.’
‘I would have thought,’ Meredith murmured, that as a life-long vegetarian, you'd approve of green ideas.’
What's that?’
Aunt Lou hadn't caught the words.
Mr Ballantyne is most unhappy.
He's thought of changing his will and his investments — but she is his only daughter.
One understands that.
The wine is in that sideboard, Meredith.
Pour it out.’
They sipped at the sherry and Meredith presented the hand-embroidered handkerchiefs which were well-received.
Wine disposed of, they proceeded to the kitchen where the bean casserole was making its presence known by a savoury odour.
‘I'll take it out of the oven!’
Meredith said hastily, seeing Aunt Lou wrestling with walking stick, oven gloves and oven door.
Privately she wondered how much longer the old lady could continue to live alone, even in this flat.
But to wrench Aunt Lou from the home which had been hers for such a long time would be to kill her.
They ate in the kitchen.
The bean casserole really wasn't bad and was followed by a savoury because Aunt Lou did not believe in sweet puddings.
They sat gossiping in the afternoon.
Meredith described Rose Cottage.
Aunt Lou said it sounded very nice but to make sure the bed was aired because old places were often damp.
She hoped Meredith would look after herself.
She supposed Meredith still ate meat, which couldn't be helped, ‘but according to the newspapers so many cows are going mad.
Roger, I remember, had to deal with the tsetse fly and I suppose it's something similar.
It caused endless trouble because of all the bride-prices being paid in cattle.
Meat-eating causes so many problems.’
They parted with expressions of mutual affection.
So nice of you to come and see me, dear.
Do drive carefully,’ were Aunt Lou's parting words.
Meredith stooped and kissed a faded cheek and smelled the sweet perfume of rose pot-pourri.
Sadness  swept over her.
This might be her last visit.
Even if she saw Aunt Lou again, the circumstances were likely to be much altered.
Behind the old lady in the hall stood the little brass dinner gong, but even that looked much smaller than in memory.
It was still brightly polished.
Meredith drove home to Pook's Common.
The visit intended to boost her morale had had a very different effect.
It had reinforced her awareness of time racing by, running like grains of sand through your fingers.
Monday before Christmas and the sense of urgency had even reached Pook's Common.
Meredith supposed Harriet would be fully committed socially over the Christmas period but she wanted to offer some token of hospitality, so she went across the road after breakfast and asked if Harriet would like to come over to lunch.
‘Not that I'm a great cook, I'm not like you.
It will be make-shift.’
‘That's fine.’
Harriet smiled.
‘I'd like to.’
From the kitchen behind them came the sound of Mrs Brissett cleaning up vigorously and singing ‘The Holly and the Ivy’.
‘Mrs B. has got the Christmas spirit,’ said Harriet.
Meredith knew herself no cook but, inspired by the thought that even Aunt Lou at eighty-three could produce a bean casserole, she managed to produce leeks rolled in thin slices of ham, topped with a slightly lumpy cheese sauce.
It was a dish which was one of her standbys if faced with a guest.
Harriet arrived with a bottle of wine.
Away from her home ground she seemed surprisingly ill at ease at first, almost shy.
She was polite about the leeks and lumpy cheese and said a similar thing could be done with endives and it looked at first as if the lunch was going to prove a slightly awkward affair.
But then Meredith discovered that the way to get Harriet  relaxed and talking was to introduce the topic of animals.
Harriet tossed back her luxuriant mane of auburn hair, drank deeply of her wine and launched into tales of the ponies she had learned to ride on and grown up with, and of Blazer, her current horse.
She did not talk much about people, once mentioning her cousin Fran in connection with a horsy narrative, but otherwise saying nothing about family or friends.
Beneath that assured exterior, thought Meredith, she's vulnerable.
Perhaps that was why she acted so aggressively sometimes.
What had gone wrong? she wondered.
A love affair which didn't work out?
A personal loss?
A family quarrel?
It would be interesting to know, but Harriet would never tell, that was clear.
They turned to the subject of Christmas and the festivities nearly upon them.
‘I'm not religious,’ Harriet said.
‘And I don't go for the fancy decorations and general hoo-hah.
I'm a sad disappointment to Mrs Brissett in that respect.
She insists on tacking up a bit of tinsel and so on and I see she's done the same for you.
I just like the food and the booze and turning out on Boxing Day for the hunt.
You must come along and see us move out.’
‘I might,’ Meredith said.
Harriet glanced at her watch.
‘Hell's teeth…
I promised Tom I'd be at the stables at two.
I must dash.
He'll dive into a prolonged fit of the sulks again.
Thanks for the lunch.’
As in the ballad, Tuesday was the night before Christmas.
Christmas Eve, when the Victorians sat round and told ghost stories.
When Meredith had been a child, her father always read A Christmas Carol aloud to his family on Christmas Eve.
As a youngster she had always been truly terrified at the point in the narrative when Marley's ghost clanked in.
She supposed she was feeling a bit down in the dumps, apprehensive too about celebrating Christmas  Day at the Danbys.
She peered at the Christmas cactus she had bought for Alan and decided it looked distinctly sorry for itself.
It had looked all right in the shop.
But it hadn't flowered and as far as she could tell, had no intention of doing so.
She also felt the tiniest bit muzzy and hoped that she hadn't a cold coming on.
In the end, she made herself a drink of hot milk with a dash of brandy and took it up to bed, taking along the hot water bottle for good measure.
Either it was the brandy or it was the heat, but she went out like a light.
As sometimes happened she awoke equally suddenly.
It was dark, chilly, her hot water bottle was now a clammy unwelcome intruder in her bed, and it was quiet.
Meredith pushed out the cold bottle and lay listening.
Slowly she became aware that it wasn't quiet at all.
There were a dozen different kinds of squeaks, creaks, groans, clunks and rattlings.
Mice?
She hoped not.
Old wood settling in changing temperature?
Much more likely.
Or the pookas, emerged on this Christmas Eve to make mischief?
Horse-like pookas, thought Meredith.
Their symbolism must be ancient.
Horses were a sacred beast once.
All those carved white horses on chalk hillsides.
Fertility symbols, also.
Did the pooka bring good or bad luck?
It was while she was trying to decide this one that she heard, or thought she heard, a faint clop of a hoof.
Meredith sat up in bed and listened.
She had just decided it was imagination when there it went again.
Clip-clop.
Outside.
In the night, in the darkness.
She rolled over to see what time it was by the luminous numbers on the clock-radio.
Just a little before two in the morning.
Clip-clop.
And now, faintly, a whinny.
A sudden chill rippled the length of her body from head to toes.
She slid out of bed, reluctant but inexorably drawn to the window.
Outside the moon shone down brightly, casting a  weird pale light over the cottages and the trees and fields beyond.
The fields shimmered, unearthly silvered, the trees raised bare tormented arms to the sky.
No lights showed at any windows.
But half these cottages were empty anyway.
So few people.
Herself, Harriet, Joe Fenniwick and his wife and possibly the Haynes also, staying over.
Six souls.
All alone.
The total population of Pook's Common.
Human population, anyway.
Meredith's breath had fogged the window and she rubbed a clear circle.
That wasn't good enough.
She opened the window altogether and leaned out, shivering as the night air struck icy through her thin nightgown.
She looked to the right, towards the junction with the B road.
Nothing.
She looked left, down towards Pook's stables.
Nothing.
Right again…my God, there it was!
Scudding clouds had temporarily obscured the moon, but now they flitted aside and revealed against the horizon the black outline of a horse.
It stood, head high, tail flowing, ears pricked, silhouetted against the silvery grey backdrop at the junction with the B road.
As she watched, holding her breath, it reared up, threshed at the air with its forelegs, and then leapt away and was lost to her sight beyond a rise.
Meredith closed the window and sat down on the edge of the bed.
Her knees felt weak and she was shaking.
It was all very well to laugh at ancient superstitions by light of day and in company.
All alone at dead of night was another matter.
Pook's Common.
The place wasn't called that for nothing.
Meredith went downstairs and made a cup of tea.
She felt better afterwards.
But she wouldn't tell anyone what she thought she'd seen, least of all Alan.
He'd think she was crazy.
Or dreaming.
But it hadn't been a dream.
Christmas Day fell on the Wednesday.
Meredith had told Markby she would rather like to attend  Westerfield church on Christmas Day morning before going to Laura's if he didn't mind, so Markby drove out from Bamford after breakfast to accompany her.
They walked there from Pook's Common across frost-crisped fields.
It was too late to be worrying over any implications inherent in spending Christmas with the Danbys and now the day had dawned Meredith was rather pleased she was going to be with company, especially after her sighting of the whatever-it-was during the night.
But the lingering memory of the ghostly horse and a nervousness which couldn't be denied at the thought of meeting the Danbys made her feel more than a little awkward.
Markby asked twice if she were cold and she knew he'd noticed and was politely trying to find out what was wrong.
She assured him she was quite warm and felt fine, and silently hoped he didn't think she was regretting her promise to spend Christmas with him and the Danbys.
He probably did, but it couldn't be helped.
She was glad when Westerfield church hove into view and sensed that he was just as relieved.
The church was not in permanent use and had no resident vicar but it held occasional services and now at Christmas an elderly cleric in retirement had volunteered to conduct a sung Eucharist at nine-thirty with the help of a volunteer choir assembled from the Women's Institute.
A large number of people had turned out for it.
Cars were parked all along the grass verge outside the church.
People's voices, exchanging Christmas greetings echoed on the clear air.
Markby nodded towards the line of people ahead of them on the flagged pathway to the church door.
‘Good turn-out.‘
Glad it's not raining.’
Should hold off.’
The weather to the rescue again.
The elderly cleric was standing in the doorway in his surplice to welcome them.
He was indeed very old, white-haired, pink-cheeked and frail in appearance.
‘He ought not to be standing about in that cold church porch!’ muttered Meredith as they strode towards him.
They had reached him and he grasped their hands in turn and beaming, chirped, ‘Welcome, welcome!’
‘I think he's enjoying himself,’ whispered Markby.
He sat back in his pew and looked around the church which the indefatigable ladies of the WI had transformed with flowers and holly sprays.
There was even a Christmas tree set up by the altar.
‘Nice mixture of the Christian and the pagan,’ he observed casually.
‘I haven't been in this church for years.’
Meredith was suddenly struck by the thought that a local man by origin, he might have married Rachel here in this very church.
The possibility filled her with horror.
Supposing in innocently requesting him to escort her today, she'd unwittingly committed a crass blunder?
She peered cautiously at him.
He was now studying the crayoned pictures of the nativity by local children which were taped up on the pillars.
From the nearest one Mary and Joseph stared out with large round eyes.
The ox was very small in proportion to the adult figures, rather like a large dog with stubby horns.
It was smiling.
The donkey was as big as the ox and its ears were short like a pony's.
Its hooves were crayoned jet black and it looked oddly mischievous, slightly malicious.
Pooka-like.
Of the baby all that could be seen were two stiff arms poking up out of a manger well supplied with bright yellow straw.
‘What,’ asked Meredith hoarsely, ‘are you thinking about?’
‘To tell you the truth, I'm uttering a private prayer that Laura's children will be on their best behaviour for you.
Let's hope Matthew hasn't been given any of those battery-operated toys which make irritating  noises and Vicky doesn't mangle everything.’
‘Oh, is that all?’ exclaimed Meredith in relief.
‘Why, what did you think I might be thinking about?’
‘Nothing.
Well, I thought you might, you might know this church well and have personal, um, memories of it.’
‘Yes, I've got some of those.
But all childhood ones.
I haven't been to a service here for years.’
Meredith experienced an absurd sense of relief.
Not married here then.
She was glad when someone, after a false start, struck up the organ.
The WI choir plunged shrilly into voice.
Markby hurriedly opened his hymn-book and burst into a stentorian ‘Hark the Herald Angels Sing’, considerably disconcerting the old lady in front of him.
Next to him, Meredith made a feeble stab at joining in.
She had warned him beforehand that she couldn't sing, he recalled.
She was right, he thought, as she got underway.
She wandered all over the stave and produced a curious counterpoint to the tune.
It wasn't a question of singing flat, he decided, but of simply singing the wrong notes.
He felt a new bond between them.
He liked some music but generally wasn't musical and was always slightly put off to find himself in the company of those who were.
As the sopranos of the WI soared off into the upper atmosphere he began to feel for the first time that this Christmas had meaning.
And it was nice to be here with her, of course.
Festivities at Laura's house were already well underway by the time they arrived there.
The lounge floor was a sea of discarded, brightly coloured wrapping paper.
Matthew had acquired a tank which trundled over the carpet emitting small but sharp percussive explosions accompanied by a shower of sparks.
Emma was experimenting with atonal motifs on a xylophone and Vicky had been given a doll but had pulled the arm off.
She presented it trustfully to her Uncle Alan  as he came in, to be mended.
He tried to introduce Meredith, holding the broken doll and shouting above xylophone clamour and a relentless pop-pop from the toy tank.
‘Happy Christmas!’ yelled Laura happily.
‘Like a glass of sherry?’
She was wearing a jade green velour ‘leisure suit’ and her blonde hair was twisted up in a knot on top of her head.
Long strands escaped and hung fetchingly round her flushed face.
‘Paul's in the kitchen.
He was up at the crack of dawn doing something unspeakable to the turkey, but the kids were up anyway.
I made the brandy sauce for the pud but I think I've put too much brandy in it and now Paul won't let me back in the kitchen.
I'll go and get the sherry.
Make yourselves at home!’
She disappeared towards the dining room.
Markby hastily jammed dolly's arm back into its socket.
‘There you go, Vicky, don't bust it up again; there's a good girl.
Give me your coat, Meredith.
And, um, do you want to put down your bag?’
They had both of them brought mysterious plastic carrier bags about which they ostentatiously avoided asking one another.
‘It's my presents,’ said Meredith.
‘Not much of interest, I'm afraid.’
She stared at him with defiant hazel eyes.
‘Oh, yes, well I…’
‘Sherry!’ announced Laura reappearing with a tray.
‘Paul will join us in a minute.’
Meredith delved in her plastic bag and produced a bottle of wine and — because she had not been sure whether her hostess drank — a box of chocolates.
‘Oh, lovely!’ said her hostess who showed every indication of drinking like a fish, grabbing the wine.
‘And chocolates, super.’
‘And I brought a tin of biscuits for the children, I didn't know what else…
Alan told me how old they were but I'm a bit vague about kids, I'm afraid.’
‘Absolutely marvellous.
They'll love them.
I've got you a present but I have to find it — and yours, Alan.
Just a sec.’
She vanished again.
There was still a bulge in the bottom of Meredith's plastic bag.
She gave him a hunted look and began to burrow in its depths to extract what was obviously going to be his present.
Markby summoned courage and delved in his own sack.
They came up together, clasping their offerings.
‘It's a Christmas cactus,’ he said, getting in first.
‘So's this one, mine — I mean — my present for you.’
‘I see.
Well, um…’
Solemnly they exchanged cactus plants.
‘I've always wanted one of these,’ said Meredith.
‘So have I.’
They smiled uncertainly at one another and he wondered whether he could kiss her, just on the cheek in a Christmas sort of way.
In front of all the kids no one would be misled into thinking it romantic.
He drew breath and leaned forward and he thought she actually knew what he meant to do and wasn't going to object.
Then Vicky tugged at his pullover.
‘Dolly's head come off.’
After that, things looked up a bit.
Paul's dinner was excellent.
Matthew ran out of percussion caps for the tank.
Emma played ‘Jingle Bells’ on the recorder quite nicely, or perhaps a mixture of wine and the brandy sauce mellowed the ear.
They all sat down in front of the television to listen to the Queen's Speech, feeling at peace with one another and the world.
Dolly's limbs lay strewn about the carpet but Dolly's assailant had gone to take a nap and slept.
Baby Emily had arrived but sat peaceably chewing the head of a blue rubber rabbit.
The two older children were playing some board game and arguing in a fairly friendly manner.
That was when the telephone rang.
Laura hauled herself up from the sofa and went to answer it.
‘It will be for me…’ said Markby resignedly.
‘I'm on call.’
Laura appeared in the doorway.
‘It's Tom Fearon at the livery stables for you, Alan.
He sounds pretty cross.’
‘So am I, pretty cross.
He'd better have a good reason for ringing me up on Christmas Day!
Excuse me, everyone…’
‘Bad luck,’ said Meredith with sincerity, having suffered similar inconveniences in the course of consular duty.
Markby snatched up the telephone receiver lying on the table in the hall.
‘Tom?
Happy Christmas!’ he growled down it.
‘Not so bloody happy here!’ retorted Tom's furious voice at the other end.
‘Some joker got in here last night.
Let all the damn horses out — I've spent all morning going round the lanes rounding the brutes up again!‘
‘Bad luck.
Sure someone didn't forget to close a gate?’
‘Come off it.
This time of year they're all stabled at night and with a good lock on the door.
Especially after that rash of rustling last year — you remember?
I tell all the owners who keep animals here to get them freeze-branded.
The slaughter houses are chary of taking freeze-branded animals.
They check them out first and the thieves know it and generally leave branded animals alone.
So it wasn't rustlers.
It was down-right malicious!
Someone smashed the lock with a tool of some kind and let the horses out deliberately.
They must have chased them out of the yard and made sure they took off in all directions.
I found two of them in some old dear's garden at Cherton!
And I know who did it!
Those blasted hunt saboteurs!’
‘Tom,’ Markby said, carefully controlling his voice.
‘Whilst I appreciate the trouble it's caused you, you could have reported it to Bamford station and not rung  me up, you know.
As for whether it was hunt saboteurs or home-going Christmas drunks, the station will make all possible enquiries.
But it's hardly CID…’
‘There's a letter, too, shoved through my door.
Threatening God knows what.
If I could get my hand on the dirty little tyke who wrote it —‘
‘It was signed?’
Markby interrupted sharply.
‘Like hell it was!
Of course it wasn't.
The writer didn't have the guts to put a name to it!
Look here Alan, I'm ringing you because I want your personal assurance that the local nick will have people on hand tomorrow in the Market Square when the meet assembles.‘
‘You've kept the letter, I hope?’
‘Yes.
Listen!
I know disturbing you on Christmas Day is a bind but it's more than that for me!
And I've got to go now.
I promised to spend Christmas Day with — with someone.
I had to ring up and explain about chasing horses and that I'd be late.
It didn't go down well.
Christmas dinner ruined and so on— she's hopping mad.
So I must get over there now.
I want someone in the square tomorrow, Alan!’
‘I'll see what can be done,’ he promised.
‘Though it's not my department.
I'm fairly sure that there will be someone on duty there as a matter of course but I'll check.’
He hung up.
Blast Tom and blast all his nags.
To perdition with the Bamford Hunt and every one of its hounds.
Good job Tom had got all the horses in, though.
There could have been a serious road accident with a dozen or so frightened animals careering about country lanes.
The irresponsibility of the people in question!
Then he gave a little smile.
Tom Fearon, an odd moody person at times, nevertheless had a considerable reputation as a lady's man.
The morning's adventure had apparently left him in hot water with the lady of the moment.
Tom would have to turn on all the charm to talk her round but if rumour were true, his success rate was high.
Markby went back to the living room where the Queen's Speech was finished, Matthew and Emma were watching a film and Emily had been sick.
She was cleaned up and the four adults sat round the table and played Scrabble.
Then Paul produced mince pies and in due course there was ham salad and Christmas cake.
But the earlier glow Markby had gained in the church had been dispersed by Tom's call.
Something had gone wrong with this Christmas and whatever it was, it affected him.
But he didn't know what it was, that was the trouble.
Just a feeling.
A feeling of something unpleasant, waiting.
And real, very real.
‘You're a bit quiet,’ said Meredith as he drove her back to Rose Cottage that evening.
He'd been quiet since the phone call.
She hoped it hadn't been anything serious but if it wasn't then he ought not to have brooded over it for the rest of the day.
She was annoyed, slightly, and she knew her remark sounded a little resentful.
‘Sorry!’ he apologised.
‘It was just something on my mind.’
‘Indigestion?’ she enquired crisply.
‘Don't let Paul hear you suggest such a thing!
No, not indigestion.’
‘Didn't think so.
He is a good cook, isn't he?
Wish I was as good.
Was it the phone call?’ she added after a moment, more sympathetically.
‘In a way.’
He drove on for a few minutes, the headlights cleaving a way through the darkness.
‘Drat it,’ he said after a bit.
‘Why?’
‘Because I looked forward to this Christmas, knowing you'd be here.
Did you enjoy today?’
Hope entered his voice.
Meredith's resentment was replaced by a warming sense of friendliness.
It was nice to think he had looked forward to her company.
Also that he thought highly  enough of her to want to present her to his family.
Her earlier haverings now struck her as selfish.
She'd been so obsessed with viewing today's arrangements from her own position.
He'd taken her to church, he'd taken her to lunch and she hadn't been particularly gracious about any of it.
She hoped she hadn't let him down in any way.
‘Yes, I did enjoy it!’ she said enthusiastically.
‘Thanks.
Laura gave me a box of some very nice soap.
That was kind of her.’
‘She's a good sort.
I'm glad you enjoyed it.’
He cheered up visibly.
They turned off the B road at the junction and drove down the narrow track to the cottages.
Outside Harriet's the big car was parked again.
Meredith couldn't see it properly in the absence of proper street-lights and wondered if it was Tom Fearon's Mercedes.
The other night she had fancied the car.
which drew away was a Granada.
Beside her, however, Alan seemed suddenly to have sunk back into grim-faced absorption.
‘Is it still the phone call?’ she asked gently.
‘Yes, in a way,’ he confessed.
‘Tom's a good fellow, if unpredictable and inclined not to give a damn for anyone else.
Ringing me up on Christmas Day, I ask you!
But that's Tom for you.
I've known him most of my life, since we were boys.
His family was by way of being a bit notorious locally.
I don't mean in a bad way, just different.
Other kids called Tom a gipsy, but only when they were out of his reach!
There's certainly gipsy blood there but it's way back.
Sometimes though it has a way of surfacing.’
Markby smiled.
‘Tom always had a couple of lurcher dogs tagging along at his heels when he was a kid.
He was always one for the girls and as soon as he was a bit older, instead of the dogs he always seemed to have besotted females hanging round him.
I think he treated the dogs better than he treated the women, actually-’ Markby broke off embarrassed.
‘I shouldn't have said that.
But I do think  Tom's animals have always meant more to him than people.
Last night someone let all the horses out of his livery stable so you can imagine the state he was in when he rang.’
‘What?’ she shouted, jumping in her seat.
He stared at her in astonishment.
‘Yes, stupid trick.’
‘You've no idea!’
Meredith caught her breath.
‘I haven't gone bananas.
It's just that last night…’
She explained about the moonlit vision of the rearing horse.
‘And it was a real one, after all!
I knew it was in my heart.
Well, seventy-five per cent of me knew it was real and the rest of me, well, silly though it sounds, I almost believed in the horsy hobgoblins.’
‘I don't blame you for getting jittery.
Christmas Eve and so on.
Spooky.
Tom had to go racing round all morning rounding them up again.
Luckily none of them was hurt and none caused any accidents.’
‘Accidents…’
Meredith said ruefully.
‘I should have rung the police and reported a horse on the loose on a public highway in the middle of the night.’
‘Doubt anyone would have found it — them — before daylight.
We don't know about damage.
I understand a couple got into a garden.
Tom's a chap with a temper on a short fuse anyway.
Bet the air was blue.
It led to an upset with a girlfriend, too, I gather.
It all made him late for her Christmas lunch.
He was just going off to make amends.
Hope that didn't end with Tom slinging the turkey out of the window!’
He didn't mention it to Meredith but he was more worried about the anonymous letter in fact.
Preventing a repeat of the episode letting the horses loose meant tighter security at the stables and Tom could, if necessary, hire himself a private security guard.
The letter though…anonymous letters had a habit of turning very nasty.
Only one so far — or this was the first he had heard of, but the affair could snowball and sometimes this kind of thing took an unforeseen twist.
He realised he was in danger of appearing rude and  dragged his attention back to present matters.
‘You wouldn't, I suppose, like to go and see the Bamford Hunt meet in the Market Square tomorrow morning, would you?’ he asked.
‘The Boxing Day Meet is a tradition, and worth seeing.
I won't pretend there isn't an element of duty in it.
Tom wants someone on hand but I don't want to ask for extra men on Boxing Day in case of trouble which might well not happen.
There will already be a couple of chaps in a patrol car down a side street as a matter of course.
And if I'm there myself…just as an observer, you understand.
But you might like to see it.
Provided it doesn't rain, of course.‘
‘Yes, I'd like to see it.
Harriet suggested I go along.’
‘I'll pick you up then.’
‘Can't I drive myself in and meet you somewhere-in the square?’
‘Fair enough.
They foregather about eleven.’
He smiled awkwardly.
‘Well, I look forward to it.
Good-night, then.
‘Goodnight and thanks.
It was a nice day.
See you in the morning.’
‘Yes.’
He was going to kiss me at his sister's, Meredith thought.
When he handed over his present.
He would have done if that kid hadn't interfered.
She wondered if he would now?
It didn't look like it.
She was relieved but paradoxically slightly annoyed, too.
She opened the car door determinedly and got out.
‘See you tomorrow!’
‘I'll wait here and see you safely inside.
In case of any more mischievous pookas around!’
He grinned at her.
‘Don't make me feel sillier than I already do.’
She walked quickly up to the front door, opened it, turned and waved.
He couldn't turn in the narrow road here because of the car parked opposite.
He drove a little way further on and turned using the grass verge after  the last cottage.
She waved again as he drove past towards the junction, and went indoors.
She was restless, still feeling she had made a bit of a fool of herself.
She boiled some milk for a cup of cocoa, resolving to steer clear of the brandy and hot milk: all that talk of pookas in the car had made her sound neurotic!
Meredith took the cocoa upstairs by the hall light and into the bedroom without putting on the light switch there.
In the half-light shining in from the hallway, she went to the dormer window to pull the curtains and found herself looking out directly at Harriet's cottage opposite.
Someone was in Harriet's bedroom.
Two people.
They were outlined clearly against the blinds, locked in an embrace so abandoned that it was obvious neither suffered from the hang-ups she and Alan did.
Meredith, with a surge of embarrassment, jerked her curtains across cutting off the sight.
She undressed and got into bed and sat up with her cocoa mug, sipping at it.
She supposed most normal people in a situation like the one she and Alan had been in all day, would have ended up in bed together, here in this comfortable bed at Rose Cottage.
Perhaps he'd even hoped so, poor chap.
And had he been almost anyone else, that's how the day might have ended because anyone else wouldn't have mattered.
It would just have been having a good time.
But with Alan there was the dreadful yawning pit of caring in the way.
It was the sort of pit once set for tigers, with stakes on the floor on which you got impaled if ever you fell in.
And she was never going to get impaled on those stakes again.
‘I'm never going to let him matter!’ she muttered.
‘I m better off on my own and that's how I'm going to stay!
He's better off on his own, too, and he knows it.
Nature's singletons, that's us.’
Outside a car engine revved up and purred away into the night.
Harriet Needham wasn't one of Nature's singletons.
‘Wonder who the bloke is?’ thought  Meredith sleepily, pulling the duvet up round her ears.
‘Wonder if it was the same one as the other day?
Looked like the same car…
Tom's Mercedes?
Not sure.
Couldn't really make it out.
None of my business…
Wish I hadn't messed up every relationship I ever had.’
And then, quite suddenly and unwished, the thought: ‘Wish I hadn't come back.’
Four
Boxing Day morning was grey and overcast but the rain promised to hold off at least until the evening.
Good news for the Bamford Meet, thought Meredith, scooping her boiled egg out of the pan.
It might be chilly, though, standing about in the.
Market Square and she had put on a thick pullover.
She had overslept which was not surprising given the amount of rich food and drink consumed the previous day at the Danbys so it was as well the meet did not assemble until eleven-ish.
She glanced at her wristwatch.
Twenty past ten.
Time enough, just.
She arrived in Bamford a little after eleven and parked in the almost empty car park to the rear of the supermarket.
It seemed desolate now.
Inside appeared a dark labyrinth of ravaged shelves behind plate glass still festooned with the posters advertising special Christmas bargains.
She put her hands in her pockets and briskly walked the short distance to the square.
It was already full.
The riders, about a dozen so far, had gathered together in the middle.
The horses all looked spruced up for the occasion with plaited manes, even the two disgruntled piebald ponies on which perched two identical solemn-faced small girls.
The crowd was about fifty in number and stood about chatting and watching the riders.
In and out of their feet and the horses' hooves scurried the hounds in cheerful disorder.
Occasionally one would disappear in the direction of the High Street, casting about for an interesting sniff, hoping perhaps to  discover a fox in the vicinity of the cut-price chemist.
The kennelman, a small dour wiry figure, would bawl orders after it and when it came loping back within reach, seize it and drag it, claws scraping on the flagstones, back to rejoin the main pack.
It would then escape again, almost at once.
One such came lolloping up to Meredith, a silly grin on its face.
It was distinctly smelly, kennel-kept as opposed to a household pet dog.
She heard her name called and saw Alan Markby in his green weatherproof on the far side of the square beckoning to her.
He was standing beside a burly man in a duffel coat whom he introduced to her as ‘Jack Pringle, a local doctor.’
‘Hullo, Miss Mitchell,’ Pringle said.
‘You've taken Peter Russell's cottage out at Pook's Common, I understand.
We used to be in the same practice, Peter and I. Now he's doing his stuff under the desert sun.
Nice little cottage that, but Pook's Common is really the back of beyond.
Far too cut-off to suit me.
You don't mind the isolation?’
‘Not really,’ Meredith said, shaking a hand like a shovel which was extended towards her.
‘I think I'm going to like it there.
And of course, after New Year I shall be commuting up to London every day.’
Pringle grimaced sympathetically and nodding towards the riders, asked, ‘What do you think of our local hunt?’
‘Not quite as I imagined.
More relaxed and informal.’
‘We ain't the Quorn, you know.
Bamford Hunt just about keeps going, nearly broke.
Costs a fortune to feed all those hounds and keeping a horse isn't cheap these days.
I used to follow a bit but I had to give it up.
Mind you, I think they've had a bit of luck lately with a couple of wealthy chaps coming to live in the area and showing signs of interest.’
‘Rupert Green, you mean?’
Markby said non-committally.
Pringle chuckled.
‘Oh, yes him, the playboy.
Bright chap, mind you.
And he's got guts, I'll say that for him.
He's far from the best rider around but he sticks to it, or to the horse which is more important I suppose!
I suspect he's happier in sports cars, but he's determined to be a country gent!’
‘Which is he?’ asked Meredith, looking around.
‘Over there.’
Markby touched her elbow and pointed.
Beyond the crowd, almost out of the Market Square altogether, two male riders waited as if they mistrusted the milling crowd.
They were both immaculately turned out, top-hatted, gleaming-booted.
‘Green is the chap on the left,’ Markby said.
‘He's a big financial fish in the city.
He bought the old Cherton Manor about a year ago and has set about turning himself into the local squire.’
Meredith turned her attention from Green and his companion to the rest of the assembly.
Goodness, that was a familiar face!
Geoffrey Haynes, his red features as furious as ever, stood on the opposite side of the square with his hands in his raincoat pockets and glowering at anyone who had the temerity to walk in front of him.
Christmas with their daughter had lasted just the one day, it seemed.
Was that because Geoffrey wanted to return to the hermit-like seclusion of Pook's Common, or because the daughter and her family couldn't stand more than one day of Geoffrey?
There was no sign of poor Lucy.
Perhaps she'd stayed behind to enjoy her grandchildren.
But Geoffrey wasn't the sort to tolerate independent action on the part of his wife.
He would have dragged the unfortunate woman back here with him.
Meredith was beginning to share Harriet's feelings towards Geoffrey Haynes.
Her attention was distracted by a clatter of hoofs as a rider on a grey came up to them.
The rider bent down and reached out a hand to shake that of Markby and of Pringle.
‘Morning, Tom,’ Markby called up to him.
‘No more alarms?’
‘All quiet, but we kept a round-the-clock watch on the stables last night, just in case.
Took shifts.
If I'd caught the buggers I tell you, there would have been murder done.’
‘Tom Fearon,’ Markby said to Meredith, introducing her.
‘Who keeps Pook's stables.’
She had already recognised him and the grey.
The horse was immaculate, mane braided, tack buffed to perfection.
He complemented his rider who, viewed nearer to hand, was indeed a strikingly handsome man in a slightly foreign, gipsy fashion, black curls bunching round the rim of his hard hat, his skin tanned walnut by an outdoor life.
Meredith felt, rather than saw, his dark eyes run appraisingly over her.
Instinct would have told her even if Markby hadn't that this was one who liked the girls.
She felt defensive hackles rise on the back of her neck.
Fearon leaned smiling from the saddle and reached out his hand.
‘Nice to see you here.
You're Meredith Mitchell, aren't you?
Harriet was telling me you'd taken the cottage opposite hers.
Settled in all right?’
‘Yes, thanks.’
‘Come down to the stables some time.
I'll show you round.
And if you're interested in riding, we can certainly find you a suitable mount.’
‘That's very kind.’
She knew she sounded rather sniffy but she couldn't help it.
If Fearon fancied she could be lured into a loose-box for a quick romp in the hay, he was wrong.
Beside her, Alan Markby was grinning to himself as if he knew what she was thinking.
Pringle interrupted the conversation, perhaps fortunately, exclaiming, ‘There's Harriet!’
Fearon twisted abruptly in the saddle and the grey stamped a nervous hoof.
Meredith, bearing in mind Harriet's warning that this horse might kick, prudently moved away a little.
The crowd had parted to let Harriet through to the centre of the square.
She looked magnificent, her athletic figure showing to its best in the tightly fitting black jacket and her red hair confined in a velvet snood beneath her hard hat.
But she also looked, Meredith noticed, very pale and rather subdued.
Fearon turned his horse's head and rode towards her.
He leaned across and spoke to her, his face and gestures urgent, but she shook her head.
‘Harriet looks a bit ropey,’ said Pringle thoughtfully.
‘Must have sunk a bit of booze yesterday.’
He sounded deeply concerned and Meredith glanced curiously at him.
Pringle raised his arm and beckoned, calling, ‘Harriet!
Over here!’
Harriet rode slowly towards them.
When she saw Meredith she said, ‘Oh, hi!’ slurring the two syllables together and smiling uncertainly.
‘Good morning,’ Meredith returned.
Harriet really did look far from well.
‘Take it from me as a medico,’ called Pringle up to her, ‘no stirrup-cups today!
Sure you will be able to keep up?’
‘I'm all right, Jack.
Don't make a fuss!’ said Harriet brusquely, making an obvious effort to pull herself together.
‘You look distinctly hung-over, my lovely.’
‘Then fresh air and exercise is the best thing for it.
I'll know when I can't sit in the blasted saddle.’
‘I'll follow behind with the stretcher!’ said Pringle drily.
‘Happy New Year!’ said Miss Needham tartly by way of response and rode away.
It was at that moment Meredith caught a glimpse of another familiar figure.
From somewhere the anti-bloodsports protesters had arrived.
They must have assembled in a side street and now they were here, mostly young and apparently in fairly good mood.
Two of them carried a banner proclaiming their cause and  on the outer ring of the group stood Meredith's whiskery acquaintance, minus his clipboard today, but defiantly carrying a placard of his own, declaring the hunt to be a bastion of class privilege.
His grubby ex-army greatcoat flapped around his spindly legs in the shabby jeans, underlining the contrast between him and his fellow-protesters, most of whom were clean and reasonably dressed in country wear.
It was as if he had mounted the wrong protest in the wrong place, or was simply the wrong person to do it.
It struck her that he seemed to have tacked himself on to the others.
None of them talked to him though they chatted otherwise amongst themselves.
Occasionally one of them would glance the youth's way as if expressing some general unease about him.
Meredith caught hold of Markby's sleeve.
‘That's him!
The one I told you about.
He stopped me last Friday in the High Street and wanted me to sign his protest.
He looks just as unhinged today as he did then, poor lad.’
He looks as though he could do with a decent meal,’ Markby observed.
The police had arrived now in the shape of a wpc who was talking amiably to the protesters who moved back a little apparently in response to her request.
‘Wpc Jones, that one,’ murmured Markby as if to himself, ‘and doing her job very well.’
But Meredith noticed that the movement of the group backwards had served further to isolate her adversary with the placard and the beard.
He now stood alone, grim-faced.
You know,’ Pringle said in worried tones.
‘Harriet must have had a real skinful yesterday.
She does look less than secure aboard.’
Both Meredith and Markby looked towards Harriet.
Whilst they had been watching the protesters, a waitress had come out of The Crossed Keys hotel on the corner of the square carrying a tray of interesting-looking glasses.
She took it from rider to rider.
Harriet  had picked up one and tilting back her head, drained it at a single gulp.
‘Told her not to have any of that, didn't I?’ growled Pringle.
‘She's the most difficult, awkward, obstinate woman I ever came across, even if she is one of the best-looking.’
Fearon was watching her too and looking concerned.
as if aware of his scrutiny and annoyed by it, she jerked Blazer's head round and turned the horse's tail towards Tom.
This led her to stare straight towards Rupert Green and his companion who still waited on the outskirts of the throng.
Then she turned her head deliberately aside from them, touched her heels against the chestnut's gleaming flanks and moved away.
‘I just hope,’ Meredith said, ‘that she doesn't see the chap with the placard.
He asked her to sign his wretched petition on Friday after he asked me, and got sent away with a flea in his ear.
If she sees him today she might go over there and tell him his name for nothing again.’
‘Had a bit of a set-to, did they?’
Markby sounded interested.
‘Oh, I don't know about that.
But she did give him a hefty shove and he nearly fell.
The silly chap ought to have expected it.
I mean, she was all kitted out in breeches and boots and he surely didn't think he had a likely candidate for a signature?’
She fixed a doubtful gaze on the whiskery young protester, willing him by some telepathy to keep back out of the way.
That he had quite the opposite intention was obvious.
The placard was swaying in the air, his lean face was twisted in excitement.
Thrill of the chase, she thought.
What motivates him is the same thing as motivates the riders.
He's got a quarry and he means to run it down.
Out of the corner of her eye she was aware of the group of horses and riders.
One horse had detached itself and ambled towards the line of protesters but it  was not for a moment that Meredith realised, with a pang of dismay, that it was Blazer carrying Harriet.
Miss Needham was now slumped slightly in the saddle.
At first, just for a second, Meredith thought she had seen the placard and was going over to argue the point.
But one look at the lacklustre picture presented by the normally spirited Harriet convinced Meredith that she was not even aware the protesters were there, let alone that she had approached so close.
Meredith found herself involuntarily raising an arm to attract attention.
She wanted to shout out, ‘No, Harriet — not over there!’
But even if she had, it was unlikely Harriet would have heard her.
The protesters themselves seemed surprised and, as a group, moved back out of her way by some joint instinct.
Blazer was a large animal.
The one person amongst them who didn't move back was the young man with the whiskers and the private placard of his own.
He was already standing apart and when he saw Harriet coming, he alone moved forward as if to challenge her.
It all seemed to happen at once.
Meredith thought, he's recognised her!
The silly idiot is going to shout some sort of stupid abuse at her and she'll bite his head off!
Pringle exclaimed, ‘Who's the silly sod with the placard!
Harriet!’ he yelled.
At the same time, Markby muttered, ‘She's going too close!
Where's Wpc Jones and her partner?’
Wpc Jones was in fact several yards away and for the moment unaware of any change in the situation.
But her partner, a young constable with a fresh complexion, spotted a potential flashpoint and began to walk briskly towards the group.
They were all too slow.
The whiskery young man gave a sudden outlandish yell, causing everyone to look that way, several horses to dance skittishly and their riders to curse.
Perhaps Harriet had been roused by  Pringle's stentorian cry.
Whatever the case, it seemed she only then became aware of the protester as he flourished the placard.
She hauled on the reins and tried to back Blazer, his eyes rolling white, out of trouble.
But the protester hurled himself forward, brandishing his placard under the startled chestnut's nose.
Blazer snorted wildly and reared.
As Harriet fought for control, the Master rode forward shouting, ‘Stand clear!
Get back there!’ and from the constable came a shout of, ‘Oy, you, stop that!’
But the youth seemed possessed by his own particular demon.
He darted forward, heedless of the flailing hooves and cursing rider and struck out towards her with his placard.
Time froze and events unrolled before Meredith's horror-struck gaze as if in a slow-motion and silent film.
All noise was muffled and cut out.
Blazer's forelegs cut through the air almost with grace as if he were swimming.
Vaguely Meredith was aware that the protesters and the other surrounding crowd members had parted like the waves of the Red Sea, falling back on either side leaving Harriet, Blazer and the protester isolated.
Then Harriet fell…toppling slowly sideways, losing reins and stirrup, flinging out her hands, her hat falling off, the snood loosening so that a lock of flaming auburn hair fluttered like an oriflamme above her collapsing body.
Then she landed on the Market Square flagstones with a sickening crash to lie motionless.
Noise, after a moment's horror-filled hush, returned.
Now everything seemed to happen at top speed.
Faces frozen in the crowd became animated.
Limbs caught and held stiffly in awkward attitudes jerked into life as if an electric current had been applied to them.
They surged forward around the prostrate figure on the ground and then shrank back.
Pringle bellowed the classic formula, ‘Let me through, I'm a doctor!’ and hurtled across the square, scattering dogs and horses, his duffel coat flapping to either side like great brown wings.
Blazer had bucked away riderless, empty stirrups flailing, reins trailing loose.
Someone, Meredith saw it was Fearon, grabbed at the bridle.
It must have been an automatic reaction because he was looking down at the motionless figure and shouting, ‘Harriet!’
The protesters looked appalled, suddenly all very young and frightened, huddling together pathetically beneath their joint banner.
The bearded youth stood alone over his victim, seeming swept up in a euphoria of victory.
He turned, like a winning boxer, and raised up both arms, still brandishing the placard.
The constable grabbed it from him and grabbed his arm at the same time.
Wpc Jones ran up, the Master dismounted and hurried towards the huddled figure on the ground.
Markby started forward and the rest of the crowd fell back, silent.
Even the hounds sensed something was amiss and became still, tails pressed between hind legs, watching.
Pringle had reached her first and dropped on to his knees beside her.
Markby had come up behind him.
Wpc Jones was keeping back the crowd and he called to her, ‘Send for the ambulance!’
‘Get up, Harriet,’ Meredith whispered uselessly.
‘Move…please move…just move a hand…’
But it was obvious Harriet was not going to get up and remount.
‘Has she broken something?’ asked an anxious voice in the crowd.
Pringle looked up at Alan Markby stooping down beside him.
He spoke quietly but in the silence which had fallen his words were all too clearly heard.
‘She's dead!’ he said.
As he spoke a dark pool of blood began to gather under the luxuriant mane of Harriet's auburn hair which had escaped from the loosened snood and spread slowly over the ground.
The clip-clop of a hoof came almost like a gunshot in the quiet which followed.
Rupert Green had ridden  forward from his position to the rear of the crowd.
He looked down at Harriet's motionless body and took off his top hat.
The traditional, yet so unexpected, sign of respect in the presence of death shocked Meredith almost more than anything else that had happened.
The other male riders, all of whom looked stunned, seemed jolted by Green's gesture and there was a scramble to imitate it.
Fearon, his swarthy face as white as a ghost beneath the tan, removed his hard hat slowly, the last to do so, and with an angry look at Green as if he felt the financier had somehow insulted rather than honoured the lifeless form sprawled on the flagstones.
Holding his top hat to his chest, Green leaned from the saddle towards the bearded young man, securely grasped between the two constables.
‘You killed her!’ he said in cold accusing tones.
‘You killed her and you meant to!’
Markby began, ‘Just a moment —‘
But before he could finish a clang of metal and a shattering crash of glass caused them all to spin round.
The waitress from The Crossed Keys, unsuspecting, had come out with a fresh supply of punch.
Harriet's body lay directly in her line of sight.
She had promptly dropped her tin tray and her shrill shrieks began to split the crisp winter air.
Geoffrey Haynes, forgotten by Meredith and unseen by her for some time, strode out of the crowd, up to the waitress and slapped her face.
‘Stop that, you stupid woman!’ he ordered.
‘All right, sir, all right , I'll take care of her!’
Wpc Jones shouldered him brusquely aside.
Faintly, in the distance and coming nearer, growing louder, the two-tone cry of a siren announced the imminent arrival of the ambulance.
It really need not have hurried.
‘I tell you, I didn't know she was going to fall off, did  I?’
Simon Pardy mumbled for the third or fourth time in the aggressive undertone which seemed to be his preferred manner of replying to any remark.
He accompanied his words with a defiant glare from beneath his brows and chewed at the corner of his lip.
‘What did you think might happen?’
Markby returned, increasingly irritated.
Everything about this sullen youth annoyed him and it was hard not to show it.
But a rational discussion with the young Pardy was not something easily achieved.
He understood now what Meredith had meant.
Simon naturally put people's backs up.
He had entered the police station in a storm of self-righteous protest and had been by turn hectoring, belligerent and spiteful.
As the reality of his situation dawned on him, he turned whingeingly self-defensive.
Underneath it all, Markby suspected, Simon was badly frightened at the result of his action — but that did not mean he had not intended to do it.
A deed planned in cold blood may appear very different to the perpetrator if he ever gets round to carrying it out.
Young Pardy could be terrified at his own success.
Markby had seen such things before.
Simon, for all his shambling manner and muttered speech was a highly articulate young man and Markby had learned upon enquiry that he was the product of a minor public school — although it was doubtful whether the school would have cared to broadcast his presence amongst its alumni.
In appearance he was singularly unprepossessing.
His age, Markby now knew, was twenty.
His clothing was grimy.
His nails were bitten to the quicks.
His face was gaunt and unshaven.
He had a nervous twitch which jerked at a muscle at the corner of his thin-lipped mouth and a malevolent stare.
The nervous twitch might well be newly acquired and the result of present circumstances.
‘I didn't know she'd fall off like that!’
Simon repeated again.
‘Those people are supposed to be good riders, aren't they?
Anyway, they're always falling off  riding across country and they know how to fall.
You know, like acrobats do, head tucked in and roll over.
But she went down like a sack of spuds and cracked her head open.
I didn't expect that, did I?’
Markby hissed and frowned.
The annoying thing was that the revolting youth had put his finger on a significant point.
Harriet had indeed gone down ‘like a sack of spuds’.
He had seen her fall with his own eyes but he doubted any other witness would have disagreed with the description.
Even Tom Fearon, who ought to know how good a rider Harriet had been if anyone did, had said wonderingly and without the slightest intention of double-entendre , ‘Harriet had a first-class seat.
I didn't expect to see her coming out the side door like that.’
So why had she?
Just bad luck?
Or was it in some way connected with her pallor and unsteadiness remarked upon by Dr Pringle?
‘Did you,’ Markby asked patiently for about the third or fourth time, ‘intend to make her fall?’
‘No, of course not!’
‘Was your action pure stupidity-’ He saw Simon's eyes gleam with hatred at him.
'— stupidity, as I say, or did you act hoping to make her fall off?’
‘Oh great,’ said Simon sarcastically.
‘Either I agree with you that I'm thick — which I'm not, incidentally.
Or I say, yes, Chief Inspector-’ His voice took on a mincing mimicking tone.
Markby hoped it wasn't intended to imitate him.
‘I intended her to fall, and if I said that, where would it leave me?
Facing a murder charge, I suppose.’
Markby tapped his fingers on the table top and hissed with exasperation.
It was impossible to tell whether this youth was very shrewd or rather simple.
The law recognises degrees of homicide other than murder and is observed with some nicety on the matter of recklessness or assault with intent to cause bodily harm.
The element of ‘mens rea’— that is to say, what  was actually in the accused's mind at the time of the assault — is of utmost importance.
Pardy had certainly behaved recklessly as the law understood that term.
If Pardy had stood in the middle of an empty field shouting and waving his placard, he would have committed no offence.
If he had done so because he genuinely believed himself to be alone and was unaware that a mounted rider was behind a clump of trees nearby, though the horse as a result took fright, he might still plead that his action was not reckless.
But Pardy had known he was in a crowded place and that animals were involved which might very well react with panic at his action.
Yet he had gone ahead.
Reckless, certainly.
But had he intended to make Harriet fall?
Had he been bearing a grudge against her since the previous Friday when she had pushed him against the door of Woolworth's?
Had he singled her out or had she simply been the unfortunate rider nearest to him?
Had Pardy, in a nutshell, just been carried away and thoughtless — which might result in a lesser charge — or had he set out to harm Harriet with such deadly results that this might even finish up as a trial for manslaughter?
I'm not a barrister, Markby thought, nor judge nor jury.
But he was the first step on the path to those persons and he had to get this right!
If he didn't, some clever lawyer would get the boy off on a technicality.
On the other hand, perhaps the youth was just plain stupid and hadn't realised what would happen when he started waving that placard about.
People could be amazingly stupid.
Further enquiry into Pardy's activities might well hold the clue to the truth.
Markby set out on a different line of approach.
‘Ever send any letters to members of the hunting fraternity?’
‘Send them letters?
Valentines, I suppose?’
Simon jibed in his sarcastic way.
But he looked startled for the moment.
He had not been expecting the change in  subject.
He had his answer to questions about the events of that morning but he had not prepared an answer to any others.
He gave Markby a look of pure dislike, rooted, the chief inspector suspected, in anger at having been out-manoeuvred.
‘Don't try and be clever,’ Markby told him, hanging determinedly on to his patience.
‘It's not a laughing matter and no time to make jokes.
Nor are you in any position to make them.
Have you, at any time, sent threatening letters to members of the Bamford Hunt or people connected with it?
To Mr Fearon who runs the livery stables at Pook's Common, for example?‘
‘No, I didn't!’ said Simon defiantly.
‘And you can't say I did or prove anything.’
Out of the corner of his eye, Markby saw Pearce, taking notes in the background, shift in his chair.
‘Fearon kept his letter and we have it here,’ Markby said.
‘So?
Going to compare handwriting, are you?’
Pardy sneered insolently.
‘Supposing I said, yes?
What would you say?’
‘I'd say you couldn't do it!’
Pardy returned triumphantly.
‘Oh?’
Markby's voice was deceptively pleasant.
‘Why?’
But Simon had belatedly realised the trap into which he had already put a toe — and drew back.
‘I dunno.
What I meant was, you couldn't prove it was my writing because I didn't write it.’
‘Indeed?’
Pardy was right and he couldn't prove handwriting, because the letter had been formed of scraps of newsprint in the classic way.
A tabloid paper.
Pardy had almost admitted that he knew that — but had stopped just short and wouldn't be fooled into such a damning admission now.
‘Where did you spend Christmas Eve?’
Markby asked.
‘At home mostly.
Went down the pub first for a drink.’
‘Anyone see you there?
Which pub?’
‘Bunch of Grapes.
Several people saw me there.
My mates — Micky was there and Trace and Cheryl — I share the house with them.
And the landlord will remember me.
Miserable old bastard that he is.’
‘What time did you leave?’
‘Dunno, half ten-ish.’
‘And went —?’
‘Home!’
‘Alone?’
‘Yes!’
‘Any one at home to witness your return?’
‘No!
I told you, Trace and Cheryl and Micky were all down the pub.
I left them there.
Cheryl was pissed.’
‘Were you — drunk?’
‘No, I was not drunk!’
Markby abandoned this tack.
It would lead nowhere.
If Simon had gone to the stables and let out the horses, it would be difficult to prove it.
Christmas Eve is a time of flux, like New Year's Eve.
The youthful population ebbed and surged like a floodtide in and out of public houses and discos.
Invariably some of them were drunk, others high on some weed, some too randy to notice anything but the opposite sex, and the remainder were too self-absorbed to notice anything.
‘All right, let's go back to the events in the Market Square.
Or rather, let's go back to the Friday before that.
Last Friday.
You were in Bamford, collecting signatures for a petition.’
‘Yes, I was!’
Simon looked surprised, displeased and wary by turn.
‘Who told you?’
‘Police foot patrol saw you and half of Bamford.
You approached Miss Harriet Needham, the deceased lady.’
‘Did I?
I don't remember.
I asked a lot of people.
Is that her name?’
‘You approached Miss Needham, repeated Markby evenly, ‘whether or not you knew at the time that was her name, and you asked her to sign.
She spoke brusquely to you and pushed you back against the door of Woolworth's.’
‘Oy!’ burst out Simon, aggrieved.
‘Who says that?
Load of cobblers!’
Markby kept his gaze steady.
‘A very reliable witness.’
‘Yeah?
Well your reliable witness can —‘
‘Did you speak to Miss Needham?’
Markby almost shouted before Simon could finish.
‘And as she walked away from you, did you utter the words, ‘Wait until Boxing Day’ or any words similar to that?’
‘I don't remember.’
‘Yes, you do.
You were angry.
You had some cause to be.
She pushed you.
She made you look a bit of a fool in front of anyone else who was watching.
Didn't it make you angry?
Wouldn't you have liked to get your own back?’
Simon ran a tongue across his dry lips.
‘I want a solicitor.‘
‘Oh, why?’
‘Because it's my right, that's why.
I want my solicitor.
I'm not saying another word until he gets here and you lot can certainly forget any idea that I'll sign anything.‘
‘So, what's his name?’
Markby asked, nodding at Pearce.
A gleam of malice shone in the detainee's eye.
‘Colin Deanes,’ said Simon and had the satisfaction of seeing the chief inspector momentarily struck dumb.
It was later that evening that Simon Pardy, released from custody for the time being with a stern warning not to leave the town, went home.
This was a terraced house in Jubilee Road, a street of run-down Edwardian villas.
Number forty-three where he lived with three  other youngsters was more dilapidated than most.
It had no inside lavatory.
No matter the weather, one had to go out to a privy next to a coalshed in the backyard.
The stonework around the bay windows was crumbling and the upper front bay had developed a distinct list.
All the brickwork needed repointing and the paintwork was faded and peeled.
In the state it was, the landlord would have had difficulty in finding respectable tenants and was happy to let it out — at a fairly stiff rent — to youngsters.
Simon lived here as a result of a chance meeting with Mick Leary in a pub.
He had been looking for a place to live.
Micky and the two girls were looking for a fourth person — someone having just moved out and on.
They needed four to make the rent affordable.
Simon had moved in at once.
Micky worked locally as a storeman; the two girls, Tracy and Cheryl, as supermarket assistants.
When not working the girls dressed alike in black tight pants, black leather jackets and black suede boots.
They had spiky black-dyed hair and ears drilled full of holes to take a forest of earrings.
Both were short, dumpy and energetic and, seeing them scurry together down the street in their black garb, they looked like a pair of hunting spiders.
Simon was not interested in them or in girls generally.
Nor was he interested in young men.
He was not, basically, interested in people at all.
He had always been a loner, even at school.
He had early become addicted to radical causes but latterly had settled on those related to animals.
Yet curiously enough, he was not particularly interested in animals for their own sake, either.
A couple of cats hung around number forty-three, but they avoided Simon-who in any case never fed them.
Mick made a fuss of them and the girls brought home tins of catfood from the supermarket for them.
On the whole, the cats did quite well out of number forty-three.
But they did so without Simon, the animal champion.
One cat, a sinewy black and white, crouched on the crumbling brick wall in the lee of next door's straggly privet hedge as Simon strode, greatcoat flapping, through the gap where a gate should have been.
The other, a tabby of more enterprising character, lurked in the porch hopefully.
Simon let himself in and shut the door before the cat by his feet could squeeze in after him.
Voices could be heard from the kitchen — the only room in the house which had any heating and so the one where they all assembled.
Simon made his way over the cracked linoleum on the hall floor and pushed the door open.
The other three were seated round the rickety kitchen table, its surface covered with empty coffee mugs, lager and Coca-Cola cans and an overflowing ashtray.
Their heads were close together and as he appeared they all looked up in unison with startled faces and fell silent.
It was obvious they had been talking about him.
Simon didn't care whether they had or not.
Recently he had begun to suspect they would like him to leave and, if they could have been sure of finding a substitute fourth, would have asked him to do so.
But he was used to people not liking him or his company and so took their attitude as expected.
He had not the slightest intention of going.
He went over to the kettle and filled it.
‘How did you get on with the filth?’
Micky asked.
‘We heard all about it down the pub.’
‘All right.’
‘She's dead, that's right?’
Cheryl asked, her mouth remaining half-open when she finished speaking.
‘Everyone was saying she was dead.’
‘Yes.’
‘What, an’ they let you go?’demanded Tracy, the more aggressive of the two.
She shook her crest of rusty-black spikes and blinked eyes rimmed with thick  black circles like a nautch dancer's.
‘You bet they did,’ snarled Simon.
‘I got Colin on to them.’
‘What, Deanes?’
Tracy sounded sceptical.
‘Yes, Deanes!’
Simon turned to glower at her.
‘He sorted them out quick enough!’
‘Him?’
Her scepticism increased.
‘He couldn't sort himself out of a paper bag!’
They were all startled by his reaction.
Simon launched himself towards the table and crashed both clenched fists down on its surface, making it rock dangerously and all the mugs and cans rattle.
‘Don't you say anything against Colin!
He knows what he's doing!
He tells the sodding establishment where to get off!
He's the best bloke I know and if there were a few more like him, we'd have a decent society in this country — instead of the crap we've got!’
There was a silence, then Micky said peaceably, ‘All right, keep your hair on.
Good job you could call him up.’
Simon looked from one to the other of them.
Cheryl ran the tip of her tongue round her parted lips.
Tracy blinked her kohl-rimmed eyes rapidly.
‘All right?’ he demanded truculently.
‘All right!’ they chorused obediently in reply.
Simon pushed himself away from the table and went back to the hissing kettle to make his coffee.
They could not see the glow of triumph in his eyes.
His heart danced with pleasure in his chest and all the fear he had experienced at the station turned to joy.
They were afraid of him.
They were afraid he'd turn violent and do one of them some actual physical harm.
They had never feared him before.
They had despised him, tolerating him for his share of the rent.
But now the Needham woman had died and they were afraid of him.
There would be no more hinting now that they would like him to leave.
They'd like him to go, all right, but were too scared now to ask it of him.
From now on he  could do and say what he liked — they wouldn't raise a squeak.
Simon poured hot water into his mug, his lean face creasing into an unattractive, self-congratulating smile as he began to consider the perks of power.
Five
Markby drew up before Rose Cottage and switched off his engine.
He got out but before going to knock at the door, crossed the road and stood for a moment contemplating Ivy Cottage.
It was Friday morning, following the accident.
They had traced a relative of Miss Needham's already, a Miss Frances Needham-Burrell.
Bit of a mouthful, that, thought Markby.
She was also, it appeared, Harriet's executor in the matter of her will and was making arrangements to come to Bamford immediately.
He had not spoken to Miss Needham-Burrell himself and had no idea how old she was.
Probably a stringy old battleaxe in tweeds.
Harriet's solicitors were Duckett & Simpson, one of Bamford's three legal firms.
Mr Theo Simpson, the senior partner, personally handled Miss Needham's affairs.
Mr Simpson it was who, hearing of the accident in the Market Square, had telephoned Markby to confirm what had happened and to inform him that he, Mr Simpson, would be getting in touch with Miss Needham-Burrell.
Markby thanked him for his prompt intervention and help.
He had dealt with Mr Simpson on several occasions.
The solicitor was a scrupulously correct elderly man with no sense of humour and a dislike of being hurried, although he'd moved quickly enough this time.
His devotion to his clients' interests was outstanding.
So much so that on several occasions when obliged to contact him on police matters, Markby had found him positively obstructive.
This time poor old Simpson had been caught off-balance by events  and had sounded distinctly agitated on the telephone.
‘Old Theo?’
Laura had said once, when he grumbled to her about Mr Simpson.
‘He's a bit stuffy, I suppose, but he's very sound on his law.
Wish I knew a tenth as much.’
Markby found himself wondering now of what, apart from Ivy Cottage, Miss Needham's estate consisted.
As for Ivy Cottage, it was attractive, old-world, in a good state of repair and with a nice little garden behind it.
It was guaranteed to make any estate agent's eye light up, even with the current slump in the property market.
He realised that asking Mr Simpson about the will without a court order would be a waste of time.
He'd tried, in a roundabout fashion, on the telephone to get some information as to Harriet's means of support, pointing out that there might be others who should be informed of the tragic event.
The most Mr Simpson would concede — with the greatest reluctance and sounding scandalised at the impropriety of the question — was that his late client had been in receipt of a private income from a family trust.
What level of income this had been, he did not feel he could reveal.
It was, he said testily, sufficient.
Which same meant, thought Markby, that he was saying Harriet wasn't a kept woman.
So Harriet hadn't worked at a regular job.
She had done a little freelance journalism for such magazines as Horse and Hound ,The Field and Country Life .
For this information he was indebted to Jack Pringle.
Harriet was also, he had been surprised to learn this time from Laura, the author of a saga entitled Briony Rides at the Horse of the Year Show .
It was aimed at a readership of little girls at Pony Club age but also attracted those who didn't own a pony but just felt passionately about horses — a stage little English girls are prone to go through and some never grow out of.
His niece, Emma, was apparently entering such a stage  and owned a signed copy of Briony Rides at the Horse of the Year Show .
‘It was jolly nice of Harriet,’ Laura said.
‘Emma saw her in Bamford and asked her if she could send her the book to sign and Harriet said yes, of course.
So Emma sent it over to Pook's Common and Harriet sent it back with a very nice inscription and a signed photo of herself on her horse.
Emma's got it framed in her bedroom.
This accident is a rotten business.’
However, this remarkable literary work — even given an army of fans as keen as his niece — would not have brought in very much income, nor would the journalism, and it was to be assumed the trust provided the rest.
What he was also wondering was whether Harriet had received any letters of the kind received by Tom Fearon and if so, whether she had kept them?
But he had little reason yet to ask for a search warrant and Mr Simpson would go purple in the face and throw every legal book in his considerable library at him if he so much as tried.
But it would be worth making contact with Miss Frances Needham-Burrell when she arrived and asking her — when sorting out her cousin's effects — to keep an eye open for letters with a threatening or abusive content.
Markby retraced his steps to Rose Cottage and Meredith opened the door as he came up.
She seemed pleased to see him.
‘I was watching you through the net curtains — how's that for snooping?
Would you like a cup of tea or coffee?’
‘Tea would be fine.’
He sat down in the living room into which she ushered him and observed, ‘You've taken down the decorations.’
‘Yes, it hardly seemed right to leave them there in the circumstances.
Mrs Brissett's very upset about Harriet's death.
She's been crying and I sent her home.
She was very fond of Harriet.
It seems that a few years  ago Mrs Brissett's daughter's husband left her and she had trouble finding a job and had no money…and Harriet helped her find a job somewhere.
The Brissetts are eternally grateful.
It sounds kind of Harriet.’
‘I think she was kind…’
Markby said, remembering the signed copy of Briony Rides at the Horse of the Year Show .
Meredith went out to fetch the tea and when she returned he went on, ‘This is an official visit, actually.’
Meredith smiled quickly.
‘I guessed as much.
What's happening about that boy?’
‘You mean the wretched Pardy — that's his name, Simon Pardy.
I've let him go pending further enquiries — he set his solicitor on me.
Your friend, Colin Deanes, no less.
He arrived in record time and accused me of bullying tactics.
I wasn't going to get anything else out of Pardy anyway so I had a statement typed up and after Deanes had put a magnifying glass over it, the lad signed and was ushered out by Deanes doing a mother-hen act over him.’
‘Is Deanes a solicitor?
I thought he was a writer and a sociologist?’
Meredith asked, surprised.
‘Also, it seems, a qualified solicitor who used to be in partnership up North somewhere, but quit to make a fulltime career of saving wayward youngsters.
I didn't know, either.’
‘Is Pardy wayward?
I mean, has he been in trouble before?
Markby grunted.
‘Not around here.
Minor things elsewhere.’
Pardy's previous convictions were of a relatively trivial nature, being ordered out of several county towns by magistrates for persistently collecting without a licence in the street — rattling his tin in support of a variety of causes but only very recently turning his attention to those connected with animals.
That Markby found curious.
One might claim Simon's heart was in the right place, but his head — so it appeared to  Markby — was all over the place.
An irrational young man.
The causes he pursued so vigorously no doubt satisfied some deep, emotional void.
Estranged from family, probably, and with few real friends.
Even the local hunt saboteurs were vague about him.
‘He just turned up one day,’ said their leader.
‘None of us knows anything about him.’
On the other hand, warned a little voice at the back of Markby's brain, the lad's manner and appearance could be a sham.
He may be just naive and well meaning.
Or he may know exactly what he's doing — and be doing it for reasons his companions know nothing of, his meaning anything but benevolent.
It might be worth enquiring of other departments whether Simon had ever been known to associate with anarchist groups.
Just a thought.
‘Listen, Meredith,’ Markby leaned forward now.
‘You were a witness of the incident in which Harriet died and the previous one when she and Pardy met.
Tell me how you remember the incident in the Market Square first.’
Meredith poured out the tea carefully, gathering her thoughts.
She pursed her lips and rubbed a hand over her thick brown hair.
She was wearing a knitted pullover in some kind of fluffy yarn and jeans.
‘Well,’ she pushed the sleeves of the pullover up to her elbows.
‘It's a funny thing.
Although I can see the whole thing unrolling in my mind's eye like a silent film, I can't really be precise about where everyone was and that sort of thing.’
‘I don't expect you to be.
People never can be.
At least you admit it.
The worst kind of witness is the one who swears to a fact about which he is quite wrong though quite sincere, and absolutely refuses to be shaken.
It's extremely difficult to remember something which takes place suddenly, unexpectedly and in distracting circumstances.
Try your best.’
‘Let's see.
Harriet rode close by the demonstrators, which surprised me.
It was as if she didn't see them.
They went back — except for Pardy who came forward — or was it that the others went back and he was left alone in a forward position?
I couldn't swear quite to which.
He waved the placard in a wild and thoroughly stupid manner.
The horse reared up.
Harriet came off…
Pardy just stood there, looking pleased with himself — he waved his arms in a kind of salute.
Fearon caught Harriet's horse, didn't he?
He was holding it by the bridle a minute or two later.
Then Green rode up.
He must have ridden through the crowd but I didn't see him do it.
Suddenly he was there, taking off his top hat and looking down at her.’
‘What did you think of Green's gesture?’
Markby asked her.
‘To tell you the truth, it gave me the creeps.
It made me think of that voodoo thing which hangs round graveyards and wears a top hat.’
An image of Green's bared head as he looked down at Harriet's body came into her mind and of his face and expression.
Shocked?
No, she thought, he looked relieved, that's it!
But now she was imagining things, she decided immediately and kept this impression to herself.
‘What did you think?’ she temporised.
‘Me?
Strictly between us I thought his action grotesque.
Although it was correct, I dare say, and he no doubt intended it as a mark of respect.
I don't think Tom Fearon liked it much.’
‘No, I noticed he looked angry.
Perhaps it's Green himself he doesn't much like.’
‘What makes you say that?’
Markby looked at her curiously.
She flushed.
‘Just a thought.
It's very warm in here.
Do you mind if I turn down the gas fire?’
She got up and stooped to reach the tap.
‘That's how I recall it.
Sorry I can't do any better.’
‘Did it strike you just before the accident that Harriet looked woozy or unsteady in the saddle?’
‘Yes, it did, very much so, and quite unlike her normal self I would have thought.
Although of course I didn't know her very well or for very long.
I'm no Judge.’
‘Just using your powers of observation, how would you have described her?
Hung-over?
Still tiddly?’
‘I don't know, Alan!’
Meredith burst out crossly.
‘I'm not qualified to make a guess.
And you shouldn't ask me — it's a leading question and if you asked me that in court the judge would intervene and tell the recorder to strike it out!
Why don't you ask Dr Pringle — he knew her better than I did and he can give a medical opinion!’
‘Oh, Jack…’ said Markby vaguely.
‘He's gone a bit quiet.
I don't know what he's thinking.
All right, I won't ask leading questions.
But you said you saw her in Bamford the previous Friday.
How did she look then?’
‘In fine fettle.
And she was all right because when I got back here, she drove up and asked me over for coffee.
She had bought all kinds of food for a dinner party.
She'd taken a cordon bleu cookery course, she told me.
Perhaps I should take one of those…’ added Meredith, going momentarily off at a tangent.
‘I'm not much of a cook at all.
Pretty rotten, really.’
She pulled herself together and back to the subject.
‘She probably entertained a lot.
She had a visitor on Christmas Day evening, anyway.’
She fell into a sudden awkward silence.
‘How do you know?’
‘I — saw them.
On the blind, their silhouettes.’
Meredith's face flushed and her jaw set aggressively.
‘It sounds dreadful, real voyeurism.
I wasn't snooping from behind the curtains though, I assure you.
I was going to draw the curtains, upstairs in the bedroom about ten minutes after you dropped me off here.
He — it was a man — could tell you what sort of a state she was in — oh lord, that sounds like something I don't  mean.
I meant, if she felt ill.
She wasn't acting as if she felt ill.’
‘as if she were drunk?’
‘I really couldn't say!’
The words came out sharply.
More mildly, she added.
‘But I would have guessed she had a good head for holding her drink.
I saw her twice between that Friday in Bamford and seeing her silhouetted on the blind on Christmas Day.’
‘Oh?’ he raised his eyebrows.
‘On the Saturday morning I saw her outside Pook's stables.
I'd gone for a walk.
She caught up with me and took me along to a paddock to see her horse.
Then we parted, I went on and she went back with Blazer to the stable yard.
And on Monday she came over here and had a quick lunch with me because Mrs Brissett was cleaning over at Ivy Cottage.
We just sat and nattered, about various Christmas holidays we recalled from our individual childhoods.
Actually, I talked mostly about that.
Harriet didn't say much about family.
She had the measles one Christmas and put the entire household in quarantine — that was about the only purely family story she told.
She asked what I did abroad.
Then I got her talking about horses.
She'd always owned a horse or pony since a kid.
She'd saved Blazer from slaughter.
Saw him at a sale being knocked down to a known horsemeat dealer and stepped in and outbid him at the last moment.
She felt very strongly about animals being exported live to the continent for slaughter, horses or cattle.
She explained Common Market regulations to me.
It seems they aren't as strict as British ones and people here are worried the rules governing transport of livestock may be relaxed to put us in line with Europe.
Harriet was concerned it would mean suffering for the wretched animals and it does seem wrong that, for example, under EEC rules the poor beasts don't even have to be fed and watered so frequently during transport as under our rules.
The really stupid thing is that Pardy got everything so  wrong.
I mean, she did care about animals.
She cared a lot and she did things to help, practical things like buying Blazer and writing to MPs and others about this animal transport business.’
Markby sat glowering at the gas fire which had dulled its bright flames and hissed in a soft insistent way.
‘I suppose,’ he asked without any real hope, ‘she didn't mention to you anything about anonymous letters?’
‘No, nothing.’
Meredith looked and sounded surprised.
‘Did she receive any?
What about?’
‘I don't know.
Tom did and other subscribers to the hunt may have.
I'll have to wait for Miss Needham-Burrell.’
‘Who?’
‘The deceased's cousin and her executor.
Probably an old biddy with a moustache and a shooting-stick.’
‘Oh no,’ said Meredith, remembering the photograph of the three little girls, ‘She's-’She broke off and finished meekly, ‘She's probably very nice.’
‘Nice and, I hope, cooperative.’
Markby got up.
‘Thanks for the tea.
I hope this isn't going to cast too much of a blight over seasonal festivities.
Will you be able to come out for a drink on New Year's Eve, next Tuesday evening?’
He wanted to see her again.
She ought to be wary but despite this she felt pleased.
‘Yes, thanks, if you're not still busy with this.’
‘Oh, we'll have it cleared up by then,’ said Markby, cheerfully.
Meredith waved him goodbye from the gate, watching as he turned outside the Haynes' cottage and until he had driven off out of sight towards Fenniwick's garage and the B road turn.
As the sound of his car died away she found herself staring at the blank windows of Ivy Cottage across the lane.
Yesterday morning Harriet had got out of bed and made herself ready to go hunting behind those upstairs windows.
Today Harriet lay  dead.
And on Christmas Day night Harriet and a man had been locked in passionate embrace behind those windows and she, Meredith, had glimpsed them.
Where was he now, Harriet's lover?
What was he thinking?
And did he know the reason or could he offer any explanation for her unusual demeanour at the meet?
If there's an inquest, Meredith thought, he ought to come forward and give evidence.
There would be an inquest, wouldn't there?
A sharp breeze blew around her and brought on it a faint but unmistakable odour of horses.
Meredith looked thoughtfully down the lane.
Pook's stables were invisible from here but were making their presence known by other means.
She reprimanded herself sharply.
She shouldn't interfere.
But why not?
She'd liked Harriet.
She wanted to know the truth.
Tom was Harriet's friend.
So he should want to know the truth too.
Or did he know it already?
She returned indoors to fetch stout shoes and anorak, tied a headscarf over her bobbed brown hair to stop it flying about in the wind, and set off down the lane.
At Pook's stables the yard was empty although she could hear the horses in their stalls.
Meredith pushed open the five-barred gate and refastened it carefully behind her.
Fearon's Mercedes was parked under the roof of a hay-barn to her left.
He was around somewhere unless he had ridden out on the common.
That was more than possible.
Meredith peered into a couple of loose-boxes and called ‘Mr Fearon?’ but only found herself staring into surprised equine faces.
She hesitated, thought ‘In for a penny, In for a pound!’ and began to walk towards the ramshackle bungalow behind the stables.
There was a field just behind it containing red and white poles and some painted oil drums.
They lay about higgledy-piggledy but were obviously intended to be set up as practice jumps.
The whole place seemed  to be organised chaos.
Horses mattered here, horses first and foremost.
The humans and their needs had to be squeezed in when time and space permitted.
The front door of the bungalow was ajar.
Meredith hesitated again in the porch and then rapped loudly on it.
‘Mr Fearon!’
There was no reply.
She could imagine that Tom would go out and leave his door open if he was working about the place but not if he had quitted it, and in winter it seemed foolhardy to say the least to leave it and let the cold air invade the house.
She stepped into the narrow hall and called again, ‘Mr Fearon, are you here?’
A faint moan from the door to her immediate right answered her.
Alarm seized her.
Was he hurt or ill or even, given recent events, overcome by grief and distress?
He had been closely involved with Harriet over the horses.
Poor man! thought Meredith in a sudden burst of commiseration.
She tapped on the door and receiving no further reply, pushed it open.
She found herself on the threshold of Fearon's bedroom: that was a bit tricky and she knew she ought to retreat there and then.
The curtains were drawn still and on this winter day it was almost as dark as night in here.
But then she heard another faint groan and saw that a figure was sprawled immobile across the double bed in the centre of the room.
Meredith edged cautiously towards it.
‘Mr Fearon?’
She came to an abrupt halt, stooped and sniffed, wrinkling her nose at the odour of whisky.
Hurt or ill?
Distressed?
Nothing of the sort.
He was drunk!
Meredith uttered an exclamation of disgust.
She turned on her heel and strode to the windows, jerked back the curtains to allow the grey daylight to flood the room and surveyed her surroundings.
What a mess.
Tom's riding hat hung on the brass bedknob at the foot of his bed.
One pair of riding boots, presumably his  best ones, lay propped against one another by the dressing table looking as inebriated as their owner.
His white shirt from the previous day had been discarded on the floor.
Tom Fearon, fully dressed, lay across the unmade bed, his feet in muddy boots on the coverlet, unshaven, eyes closed.
Meredith marched across, grasped his pullover in both hands and dragged him off the pillows to shake him violently.
‘Wake up!’ she ordered sharply.
Tom's eyes opened blearily.
She released him and he fell back on the crumpled bedclothes to stare up at her at first blankly.
Then after a moment his gaze cleared and a puzzled look entered his eyes.
‘Who the hell are you?’ he muttered hoarsely from the pillow.
‘Meredith Mitchell from Rose Cottage!’
‘Oh, sure, yes,’ Fearon blinked.
‘Remember you.
In the square, yesterday…’
‘Get up, Mr Fearon!
This is disgusting!
You have livestock to care for!’
Meredith said furiously.
That struck home.
Fearon's eyes opened fully and he sat up with a jerk, swore, rubbed his hand over his black curls and squinted at her.
‘I was out there at six this morning seeing to the horses.
Don't bloody lecture me!’
‘There's no need to swear!’
Meredith said crisply.
Fearon swung his legs to the floor, put his hands on the edge of the bed and grimaced up at her.
‘What are you doing in here, anyway?’
‘I came to see you but you weren't in the yard.
The front door is open.
This place is icy cold.
Haven't you any heating?’
‘Don't need any, I'm outdoors all day!’
Fearon lurched to his feet.
She was tall but Tom was an awful lot taller, he must be six-two in his socks, Meredith calculated.
She tried to visualise the silhouetted figures on Harriet's blind.
The man had been tall, but as tall as this?
Difficult to say.
Her gaze fell on the mud-stained coverlet.
‘Tchah!’ she said crossly.
Fearon glanced in that direction to see what had upset her, looked vaguely surprised, slapped half-heartedly at the mud with his hand and mumbled, ‘It'll brush off…’
He walked past her, scratching his ribs absently, and disappeared into another room.
Tap water splashed into a basin.
Meredith walked out into the hall and waited.
Fearon reappeared holding a towel, his black hair glistening wet and rivulets running down his swarthy skin.
He rubbed at his jaw and the back of his neck with the towel and said, ‘I'm not drunk, I was dog-tired, not that I owe you any explanation.
I only had a couple of hours sleep last night.’
‘I smelled the whisky.’
‘One drink, I had one drink!
And it's no damn business of yours!
Who the hell gave you the right to breeze in here and order me about?’
He suddenly exploded into anger, jaw thrust out pugnaciously, dark eyes gleaming.
‘You invited me yesterday.
You said I should come down and see the stables.’
Fearon looked temporarily nonplussed, then shrugged, tossed the towel back into the bathroom behind him where it presumably landed on the floor and growled, ‘All right, I'll show you around.
Let me get my jacket!’
The jacket was a well-worn Harris tweed with leather patches on the elbows.
Fearon dragged it on over his sweater, tugged a disreputable flat cap over his wet hair and set off briskly towards the yard.
Meredith found herself scurrying along to keep up with him.
‘Tack room!’ said Fearon laconically, throwing open the door as they reached it.
Meredith looked in.
Saddles, gleaming immaculately and stirrup irons polished, hung neatly on pegs.
Bridles hung above.
Compared to the bungalow the tack room  was a miracle of neatness.
‘I've only five horses here at the moment,’ Tom said moving on to the first loose-box.
‘The old mare here should do you all right.’
He said this suspiciously blandly and Meredith glowered at him.
He had opened the loose-box door and disappeared inside, returning leading a bay horse of about fifteen hands by the halter.
‘She's twelve years old, nice old girl, good mouth and nice manners which puts her ahead of some women — and she won't set you down in the dirt.
Let me know if you're interested and I'll throw a saddle over her for you.‘
‘Thank you,’ said Meredith, patting the mare's nose.
‘Got a side-saddle back there in the tack room if you prefer,’ said Tom in that bland way.
‘All right!’ said Meredith crossly.
‘I'm not simple!
You can pack in the jibes.’
Fearon's tanned cheeks stretched into a grin.
He returned the mare to her loose-box and, coming out again, leaned against the closed door with his arm folded and regarded her steadily from beneath the dragged-down brim of his flat cap.
‘All right, Miss Mitchell, what do you want to know?’
To her annoyance, Meredith felt the blood surge into her face.
She drew a deep breath and said quickly, ‘I came to talk about Harriet.’
‘I rather thought that was it.’
Fearon pushed himself away from the door.
‘It's warmer in the tack room.
There's an oil stove in there.’
She followed him back into the little harness store and sat down on a bench while he lit the paraffin stove which soon filled the room with its smell and heat.
‘Isn't that thing dangerous?
I mean, I would have thought you'd worry about fire.’
‘I'm careful.’
Fearon gave her a dry glance.
‘And you try cleaning tack with frozen fingers.’
He sat down on a bench against the opposite wall and rested his  arms on his knees, hands loosely clasped.
He had surprisingly fine hands, long, slender and strong, but there were tell-tale scars across the knuckles, pale against the tanned skin.
He'd been in his share of fistfights had Mr Fearon.
But how long ago?
Were the scars just mementos of boyhood?
‘I'm sorry about Harriet,’ said Meredith slowly.
‘I was looking forward to knowing her better.’
‘Were you now?’
His tone was almost insulting, not quite.
Meredith kept her temper.
‘Yes, I liked her very much.’
Fearon grunted.
‘Shook me up a bit, that yesterday,’ he said unexpectedly.
‘Yes, I'm sure it did.
It was horrifying to see her fall.’
Meredith paused and added, ‘I'm not surprised you had a drink and I'm sorry if I was critical just now.’
‘Keeps the cold out.’
‘It doesn't, actually.
It's a misconception.
You just get an illusion of warmth and afterwards you're colder.
The veins expand or something and you lose body-heat.
‘What are you, for chrissake?’ he asked.
‘A ruddy Mother Superior?’
‘No, I was just wondering about Harriet.
She seemed ill at the meet just before the accident.
Didn't you think so?’
He grew cautious.
‘I never knew her ill.
She was pretty fit.’
‘But she wasn't fit at the meet, was she?’
Meredith persisted.
‘She was slumped in the saddle and slurring her words.
Would she have been drinking before she arrived there, do you think?’
‘Now you listen to me, Meredith, or whatever your name is!’
Fearon said fiercely.
‘Harriet might have had a glass or two that morning but she wasn't drunk!
In five years I never saw Harriet the worse for drink.
I saw her knock back a few glasses but never saw her  tight!
Have you got that through your head?
I don't know why she was the way she was just before that young blighter with the placard made Blazer rear up, but she wasn't ill and she wasn't drunk, got that?’
He was really angry now and in the close proximity of the tiny over-filled tack room he loomed distinctly dangerous.
‘All right,’ said Meredith meekly.
Fearon relaxed marginally but was terminating the interview.
‘I've got work to do.
Phone if you want me to saddle up the mare and I'll have her ready for you by the time you get down here.’
‘Thanks.’
They had both risen to their feet.
‘See you around, I dare say,’ said Fearon with heavy politeness.
‘Yes, good bye!’
Meredith escaped through the door he held open and walked quickly home feeling both discomfited and dissatisfied.
Silly idiot! she chided herself.
Barging in there!
She sighed.
And I still don't know if he was the man I saw outlined on Harriet's blind.
She frowned.
If Harriet wasn't ill and she wasn't drunk, then what was wrong with her?
At that moment, back in Bamford, Chief Inspector Markby was about to be given the answer to that question.
‘The post-mortem report is in on the Needham business!’
Pearce greeted him.
Markby, taking off his overcoat and sticking it haphazardly over a peg, grunted.
He paused by the windowsill on the way to his desk to peer at an African violet in a pot.
A row of smaller pots alongside it contained leaves from this parent plant from which he was hoping to strike new plants, so far without result.
He sat down and picked up the sheaf of papers neatly set out on the top of his desk.
After a moment he whistled softly under his breath, then called sharply, ‘Pearce!‘
‘Yes, sir?’
‘The deceased lady was brim full of tranquillisers.’
‘They wouldn't have mixed well with booze,’ said Pearce.
‘They were all drinking some stirrup cup or other, you said.’
‘Yes, they were.
Tranquillisers…’
Markby leaned back.
‘No wonder she fell off.
She certainly looked and acted odd beforehand.
It lets young Pardy off the hook, I suppose.
We can still charge him with reckless behaviour.
But the reason she fell so easily and so heavily would seem to be that she was light-headed from a mixture of drink and pills.
Funny…’
He screwed up his eyes and stared unseeingly at the calendar on the further wall.
‘I wouldn't have thought she was the type to take tranquillisers.
Very self-possessed, confident — not nervy or depressed.’
‘Never can tell,’ said Pearce wisely.
‘True.
If it results in young Pardy being charged with a lesser offence, Deanes will be highly satisfied.
Or disappointed, perhaps.
That book of his has been finished some time, by the way, and is about to appear in the bookshops.
It's called Revolutionary Youth .’
‘I'll look out for it,’ said Pearce expressionlessly.
‘It deals with kids who take up causes and get drawn into violent activities as a result.
They raid research labs and let out the animals, that sort of thing.
Or demonstrate…like Pardy.
I'm being uncharitable possibly, but I wonder if Deanes wasn't looking forward to a little publicity over Pardy's case to promote his book?
He may well be disappointed that the whole thing seems likely to fizzle out as death by misadventure.’
Markby turned his eyes back to the report.
‘She'd had a dickens of a lot to drink.
Not just the one stirrup cup I saw her take.
She must have had several tots before she started out.
If she'd been stopped in a car with this level of alcohol in her, she would have lost her licence for a year at least and got a hefty fine.
In view of this, I can't see the coroner bringing in any verdict of unlawful killing.
Pardy was stupid and the results were tragic.
But she would have fallen off anyway once the hunt started out in earnest.
At the first hedge she tried to clear.’
‘What about the letter Mr Fearon got, sir?’
‘Ah, that's another matter and I want to follow it up.
I'm pretty sure Pardy sent it but so far can't prove it.
I'll put my last dollar on it there were others.
I've arranged to drive out and have a word with the Master tomorrow morning.
So much for my Saturday.
He might have received some — or know who has.
You'd better go round and ask some of the other hunt subscribers.
The letter Fearon got was a very nasty piece of threatening mail.
Pardy, if it was Pardy, may have slipped up and written one by hand.
Although if they use newspapers to do it, they generally stick to the one method.
We'll see.’
‘Come in, my dear chap, come in,’ invited Colonel Stanley.
‘Excuse me if I don't get up.
Ruddy sciatica has got me today.
Can't move off this confounded sofa.
I feel like a damn old woman.
Have a drink?’
‘Normally, I'd say, not on duty,’ Markby said with a smile, shaking the Master of the Hunt's hand.
‘Of course you would.
But this isn't normal.
I was at school with your father, you know.
Of course, he was senior to me.
I was just a squib and he was a six-former, very fine chap and took no notice of grubby little oicks.
Quite right too.
So you'll have a whisky?
You'll have to do the honours.
Pour me one too, dash of soda, don't drown it.’
Markby ‘did the honours’ and settled down in a vast, chintz-covered, feather-cushioned armchair.
The walls of the room were hung with sporting prints and photographs of men and women in riding garb.
A dull grey winter Saturday morning was kept out by tall windows hung with faded velvet drapes.
There was a distinct  lingering odour of tobacco and dogs.
A log fire roared in the open hearth, spitting out sparks.
It was untidy, comfortable and very English.
‘Don't need to ask what's brought you!’ said Stanley abruptly.
‘Yes, I'm sorry about it.’
Markby cupped his hands round the tumbler of tawny liquid.
‘No need to tell you how I feel.
Or other folk.
She was a fine girl, fine girl!’
‘She'll be much missed.’
‘My dear chap —’ the Master paused.
‘Indeed, yes, indeed.
What are you going to do about it?’
‘Well, you've heard about the traces of tranquillisers found in the deceased's blood?’
‘I have.
I don't mind telling you, I find that a bit rum.
Harriet wasn't the nervy type.
I've seen that girl ride straight at an obstacle would make many a man blanch.’
‘It does confuse the issue.
Would she have fallen off, but for the mixture of drink and pills?’
‘I would have said,’ the Master observed grimly, ‘that with a bloody great placard waving under the horse's nose, there was every likelihood she'd fall off!’
‘Good horsewoman, though, would you say?
You spoke of her riding straight at difficult obstacles.’
‘Excellent.
I take the point you're trying to make.
But I certainly hope that odious little twerp with the placard isn't going to get away with it!’
‘Oh, he'll be charged with something, but quite with what, we're not yet sure.’
‘Personally, I'd call it murder!’
‘Yes, sir.’
Markby paused tactfully.
‘In a court of law, however…’
‘Yes, yes,’ Colonel Stanley interrupted testily.
‘I understand.
The law's an ass.
Dickens wrote that.
He was right.’
He shifted awkwardly on his sofa and his face contorted in pain.
‘Her cousin Frances telephoned me last night.
She's abroad but is getting the first  available flight back.
Naturally the news came as a terrible shock to her.
She heard it from that dry old stick, Simpson.
She's shocked and she's unhappy, Alan, about the post-mortem report.
She swears Harriet never took those fool pills and she wants to know if anyone has found any in the cottage.
No chance of a mistake, I suppose?’
‘By the pathologist?
No, none.
It's not that uncommon.
People get careless about mixing drink and pills.
Especially at Christmas.’
‘We were discussing it, my wife and I. She must have taken the things that morning before she set out.
Seems very odd.
What for?’
‘I am looking into that, sir.’
The Master glanced at him.
‘I've every confidence in you, dear chap.
I'm not criticising.
I know you won't let it go until you're satisfied.’
Markby put down his tumbler on a small table, laden with copies of The Field .
‘There's another matter I'd like to discuss, if I may?’
‘Go ahead.’
‘You heard that someone let the horses out of Tom Fearon's stables on Christmas Eve?’
‘Yes, I did!
Damn fool thing to do!’
‘A letter of sorts was also pushed through Tom's letterbox.
Very abusive.
I was wondering, would you know if any other subscriber to the hunt had received similar hate mail?
It's an offence to send such stuff and we'd certainly try and put a stop to it.’
It seemed to him that his host looked even more uncomfortable and it wasn't, thought Markby to himself, because of the sciatica.
He knew something about other letters.
‘I did receive one myself,’ he said at last.
‘About a month ago.
Threw it into the fire.
Lot of half-baked nonsense.
I didn't want my wife to come across it, though — you understand.
That's why I destroyed it straight off.’
‘If you should receive another, could I ask you to pass it to us?’
Markby asked.
‘Well, I suppose I could.
But one gets those things from time to time.
One doesn't have to worry about them.’
‘Would you know if anyone else got any?’
‘Can't say I do.’
‘I see.
Yours, was it written or typed or what?’
‘Neither.
Lots of newsprint cut out and stuck on.
Rather messily, incidentally.’
‘That sounds similar to Tom's.
Well, we'll see if any more turn up.’
Stanley sighed.
‘I'll be frank with you.
I'd rather it were kept quiet if any more do.
The hunt can do without a report like that in the local press.
It would inspire the cranks and a shoal of other letters.’
‘I promise you we'll be discreet.’
‘Discretion,’ said the Master slowly.
‘Not much of that about these days.
Things one reads in the press!
People seem to have some urge to tell everyone else all the things which in my day we kept quiet about!
Dirty linen washing in public isn't in it!
Things change and not for the better, to my mind.
But I'm getting on and who cares what I think?
Different sort of people turn out on the hunting field these days, too.
Some of them hardly seem to know one end of a horse from another.
No hunt manners.
Not their fault, they just don't know the drill.
They barge around upsetting other, nervous horses and young riders.
The language too, in front of ladies and children, I mean…and some of the behaviour at hunt balls.
Not that in my young days there were never some wild moments.
But it was a different sort of wildness, if you take my meaning.’
‘I think I do.
Still, it's a good thing from the hunt's point of view that new blood is coming along, surely?
The sheer expense of keeping hounds and so on.
The  more people contributing, the merrier, I'd have thought.’
‘Oh, I don't deny it.
And some of the newcomers have money to throw around, so I'm not going to prevent them throwing some of it towards the hunt.
That fellow Green's been very generous.
Know him?’
‘I've met him, only once.’
‘Big financial wizard in the City, I understand.’
‘So I've heard.’
Markby drained his tumbler and stood up.
‘I'm obliged to you for giving me your time, especially in the circumstances.
Hope the sciatica improves.’
‘I'm happy to help if it means the right thing is done by poor Harriet.
My wife is very upset about it.
Ah, well…’
The Master turned a shrewd pale blue eye on Markby.
‘How's that pretty sister of yours?
Family well?’
‘All very well, thanks.’
‘That husband of hers, still doing the cooking?
Saw him on telly the other day, local station, after the news.
He had an apron on.
Seems a rum sort of go.
In my day we left cooking to the women unless, of course, it was a fancy French chef.
Can't he do any other job?’
‘He likes doing the one he's got.
He writes about it, too.’
‘I know.
My wife's got one of his books.
Takes all sorts, I suppose.
Give little Laura my love.’
‘Tomorrow, Sunday,’ Markby said to Pearce on his return, ‘I am going to have free.
Let no one mention horses to me or they will get very short shrift.’
By Sunday morning the grey skies had cleared away.
The wind had dropped and air was fresh and crisp.
Markby telephoned Meredith and asked her if she was interested in a country walk that morning.
‘Yes,’ she said, adding rashly, ‘you can come back here to lunch afterward.’
That was a pretty daft offer, she thought as soon as she had put down the phone.
She was a rotten cook.
There were pubs all over the place which served perfectly acceptable Sunday lunches.
Why couldn't she have let him take her to one of those?
She resisted the thought that she liked the idea of him sitting at her kitchen table.
Instead she told herself that it was only fair to offer hospitality.
He'd taken her to dinner at The Black Dog and through him she'd spent Christmas at Laura's.
Besides, she ought to be able to manage a lunch.
Hadn't she cooked for herself and Harriet last Monday?
That was only a few short days ago but now seemed light years away.
To produce the same lumpy cheese sauce dish would be morbid, to say the least, and not exactly a Sunday-lunch menu.
Meredith was suddenly swept up in an insane desire to impress, well, produce something decent.
A hunt through larder and freezer turned up frozen chicken Kiev.
No one could go wrong with frozen ready-prepared Kievs.
Just stick them in a hot oven.
A packet of savoury rice.
Meredith read the instructions.
That didn't seem to present any problems.
You just put it in the pan with water and let it boil itself dry.
‘Until all liquid is absorbed’ the packet said.
She had tomatoes and half a head of expensive out-of-season lettuce.
She could make a side salad.
Pudding?
Meredith dived back into the freezer and rooted about.
A cheesecake lurked at the bottom.
It looked good in the picture.
That would do.
He turned up shortly after ten in gumboots, corduroys, pullover and the trusty green weatherproof.
They climbed the stile into fields beyond the Haynes' cottage and set off.
‘Do you know where we're going?’
‘More or less.
Mind the barbed wire!
’ Markby warned, pointing at the fencing to either side of the stile.
Meredith, stranded inelegantly with a foot on the wooden step and the other leg half over the topmost  bar, said crossly, ‘I can see it.’
‘Not unless you've got eyes in your — in the back of your head.’
She negotiated the rest of her descent with dignity and without the unpleasant sensation of wire tearing a hole in the seat of her pants.
‘You don't mind cattle, do you?’
‘I don't like 'em very much.’
‘I mean, you're not scared of them?
There are some cows in this field.’
Meredith peered into the distance.
‘That's all right, they're far enough away.
It seems strange to me to see cattle out in a field in mid-winter.
In central or Eastern Europe they're all under cover.’
‘Winter's been mild.’
They trudged over long, wet grass, Meredith glad she was wearing wellington boots.
The hedgerows were dank and dark, here and there still white-rimed with the morning frost.
Her breath and his rose into the air in clouds and there was that peaty smell which she had last smelt at the florist's.
She wished that it didn't now make her think of graveyards.
‘The post-mortem report is in on Harriet,’ Markby said without warning and without looking at her.
‘I'm not meaning to talk shop but I thought you might be interested.’
‘I am!’
He didn't answer at once so she prompted impatiently, ‘Well?’
‘Her manner was due to a mixture of drink and tranquilliser pills.
She'd had a cocktail of them at some point that morning.’
‘What!’
Meredith stopped short and stared at him in disbelief.
‘I don't believe it!’
‘Why not?
Think we haven't got competent doctors at police disposal?’
‘Yes, I know — I mean, I'm shocked.
It's not what I would have expected.’
‘One would have thought she'd have more sense  certainly.
The Master and next of kin have expressed similar surprise so you're not alone.’
‘I'm surprised she took such pills at all.
Harriet?
She seemed so — cheerful and positive, although I suppose…’
Meredith cast her mind back over her last conversation with Harriet, ‘One can't know what's in a person's mind.’
Another thought occurred to her.
‘I wonder how Tom Fearon will take this?’
‘Tom?’
Markby glanced at her.
‘I — had a word with him the other day.
He was adamant she wasn't ill or drunk and keen to defend her reputation as having a cast-iron head where whisky was concerned.’
‘Tom knew her as well as most, I dare say,’ he returned ambiguously.
‘Do you know if a date is set for Harriet's funeral?
Will it be local?’
‘I don't know.’
Markby swished at a trailing bramble with a piece of stick.
‘I would like to know more about those tranquillisers.
What if she had had a threatening letter which worried her enough to make her turn to pills?’
‘She didn't strike me as worried.’
Meredith paused.
‘If you could find out who the man was, the one who was there on Christmas Day evening…he might have a few answers.’
‘Not that easy, unless he comes forward.
And why should he?
You will keep an eye out, won't you, Meredith?
I mean on the cottage.
I want to know when Miss Needham-Burrell arrives.’
‘Oh yes, cousin Fran.
I want to see her too.
She can tell me if the funeral is local or private.
I would like to attend.’
‘Why do you call her ‘cousin Fran’?’ he asked curiously.
‘What?’
Meredith gave a guilty start.
‘Oh, Harriet mentioned her.
She called her Fran.’
She felt impelled to add, ‘I don't think she's that old.’
‘Oh well, hope for the best.
I mean — some of these old ladies can be sticky about protocol.
I'd like to snoop in Harriet's personal papers — to see if she received any hate mail, like Tom.’
He turned a speculative gaze on Meredith.
‘If you should see Miss Needham-Burrell…’
‘Yes?’
‘You could nip across and introduce yourself — chat her up a bit and try and mention the possibility of anonymous letters.
It might come better from you-not official.
And of course, if you could actually get into that cottage —‘
She looked at him coolly, unsure if she wanted to be used in this way.
‘Isn't this all very irregular?’
‘I've got so little to go on.’
He struck out again with the stick, knocking back a bunch of frost-blackened nettles.
‘It's just that I have a particular dislike of anonymous letters.
They really are nasty things.
They upset people terribly.
A lot of victims who've received them have told me what an eerie feeling it is.
As though someone out there is watching and waiting.
They really felt threatened.
The one Tom received was a pretty foul-worded composition.
I shouldn't like to think many of them were floating around.
And it's surprising how reluctant people are to go to the police.
They feel guilty — quite wrongly.
as if the police, or anyone else, will think there must be something wrong with them for them to have got such letters in the first place.’
‘No smoke without fire,’ she said thoughtfully.
‘That's it.
We don't think any such thing, of course.
Such letters are the product of twisted minds.
The most innocent people can receive them.’
‘All right then, I'll watch out for Frances Needham-Burrell.
I'll drop hints if I can.
It's a bit tricky, though, Alan.
I can't go clod-hopping through a bereavement.’
‘You'll do it tactfully.
You're a consul, aren't you?
You've had delicate situations to deal with.’
‘Such confidence.
I'll do my best.
Those beasts are coming this way!’
Markby stopped and stared across the field.
The cows were approaching in a long, strung-out line, plodding purposefully along beneath clouds of steam rising from their muddy flanks.
‘They probably think we've come to call them in for milking.’
‘I don't fancy them up close, if you don't mind.
Can we walk a bit faster.
The gate is over there.’
They quickened their pace.
The following cows obligingly quickened theirs.
‘You know what,’ Markby said mildly.
‘They think we want them to hurry so they're pacing themselves to keep up with us.
Slow down and they will.’
‘Nice theory.’
‘I've got an even better one — told me by a cowman years ago — when charged by a bull, stand your ground and when it gets close enough, grab it by the nose.
Cattle have very sensitive muzzles.
Grab it by its nostrils and you can lead even the most awkward blighter around, meek as anything.’
‘If you think I'm standing waiting for a charging animal the size of a tank to reach me…how on earth do you grab its nose before it tramples you into the turf?
That cowman was having you on.
The brute has got to be right up to you before you can reach its nose.’
They had reached the further side of the field during this animated discussion and Meredith hopped nimbly over the gate with twice the speed and dexterity with which she had negotiated the stile.
Markby joined her on the further side and they both stopped to watch as their bovine companions lumbered up and stood in a row staring at them expectantly, tossing muddy heads.
‘You see?
They're waiting for us to open the gate.’
‘Let 'em wait.’
‘Marning!’ piped a voice.
They both jumped round.
A small grubby child in a woolly pullover dotted with holes, faded jeans and  gumboots had emerged from nowhere.
‘Good morning to you,’ said Markby.
‘What are you out looking for?’
‘I come to let them cows out — take 'em back fer milking.’
The infant threw back the rope securing the gate and wrenched it open competently.
‘Come on, you daft buggers!’ he encouraged the cows which had begun to plod forward.
Meredith and Markby stood by the hedge as the parade ambled past, the child at the rear, a minute figure compared to his charges, whistling, shouting insults and slapping the laggards on their muddy behinds.
‘I feel embarrassed,’ said Meredith as the group disappeared down the lane.
‘If it gives you any satisfaction to know that.’
‘You see?
You should have believed me.
I'm delighted you're embarrassed.
You deserve to be.’
‘Do you or do you not, want my help in dealing with Miss Needham-Burrell?’
‘Point taken.
Pub's open — a quarter of a mile down this lane.
I'll buy you a pint.’
Meredith followed him down the lane.
Whatever happened to champagne in your slipper or even cocktails for two?
Gumboots, muck, I'll buy you a pint…that was clearly her level.
She squelched along in the muddy ruts left by the cattle, avoiding other more unpleasant tokens of their passage.
He had it right, anyway.
It was about her mark.
She was no Harriet-Meredith wouldn't have minded betting a few men bought her champagne.
Poor Harriet, laid out in a drawer in the morgue or being worked on even now by the undertaker to repair the more obvious signs of post-mortem investigation before friends and relatives viewed the body.
Meredith speculated whether or not her dinner guest would go to her funeral.
What was he thinking now, she wondered?
It was half past one before they got back to Rose  Cottage and there was no denying a brisk long country walk built up the appetite.
The pub at which they had finally arrived and had their pints had been serving up bar meals.
The smell of the plates of food as they were borne past had been tantalising and caused pangs of hunger to strike Meredith's stomach as though she hadn't eaten anything for a week.
‘Sure you wouldn't rather we ate here?’
Alan Markby asked her.
‘Or have you left something cooking?’
‘No — but it won't take long to prepare.
If you don't mind waiting till we get back.’
‘No, fine by me.’
So, thought Meredith grimly when she had arrived back in the kitchen of Rose Cottage, do we rush on madly to our doom.
The first discovery she had made on return was that she had forgotten to take the cheesecake out of the freezer.
She put it on the kitchen table now but suspected it would still be lumps of ice when they came to eat it.
According to the packet, the chicken Kievs only took about twenty minutes in a hot oven.
She turned it up as hot as it would go and put them in on a tray.
They looked rather nice.
She tipped the rice into a pan and put it on the top on a low number and retreated to the living room where Alan was sprawled on the sofa reading the copy of a Sunday newspaper they had collected from a garage shop next to the pub.
‘Won't be long!’ she said brightly.
‘Would you like to open the wine?’
‘Sure, where is it?’
The paper rustled.
‘Don't move.’
Fat chance.
‘I'll bring it in here.’
She gave him the wine and corkscrew and returned to the kitchen to make the salad.
A pungent smell of garlic filled the air.
Kievs were doing all right.
She went back to the living room to share a pre-prandial glass of wine with her guest.
‘Cheers,’ he said.
‘This is a nice little cottage.
I really hadn't taken much notice of it before, in detail, I mean.’
‘It's a super cottage.
I can understand why the Russells didn't want to sell when they went to Dubai.’
‘They were lucky to have you to let it to.
I've heard some pretty grim tales from people who've let property complete with furnishings to strangers.
Holes knocked in the walls, furniture ruined.
Place has been a wreck when they've got it back.’
‘Mrs Brissett will make sure I don't do anything like that.
I'm very fortunate.
I have all mod cons and Mrs B. All I have to do is relax.
Well, till Monday after New Year and then I start my daily London trek.’
‘Bamford railway station at seven in the morning is no place for weaklings, let me warn you.’
‘Thanks for the encouragement.’
‘I don't,’ Markby said tentatively, ‘like to interfere with the chef's methods, but ought there to be that burning smell?’
Meredith raced out into the kitchen.
It was filled with smoke.
She flung open the window, grabbed a tea-towel and hooked the red-hot rice pan off the burner.
The Kievs were shrivelled up like lumps of coke, burst open, and all the garlic, herby butter filling had run out on the tray and burned.
The savoury rice was bone dry, half cooked and stuck to the pan.
The only thing all right was the salad.
Meredith howled in despair and rage.
‘Oh no!’ she moaned, staring at the burnt offerings before her.
‘Oh, what the hell am I going to do?’
Hands gripped her shoulders and moved her gently to one side.
‘Hullo?’ said Alan's amused voice in her ear.
‘Or as policemen are supposed to say, Hullo, hullo, hullo…’
‘Shut up!’ she said fiercely.
‘I can't cook.
I cannot cook.
Other people can, most people can, I can't.
Harriet was a cordon bleu cook.’
‘No reason why you should be because she was.’
Her shoulders sagged and her voice deflated.
She supposed he was right.
It didn't make her feel any better.
‘Sorry, that was your lunch.
We should have eaten at the pub.
My fault.
I can make you a sandwich.’
‘Come on,’ he turned her neatly and propelled her back into the living room.
‘I suggest you have another glass of wine and sit there and I'll sort it out.
Not for nothing have I a brother-in-law who cooks professionally.
The main thing I've learned from him was how to deal with disaster.
Professionals have disasters, too.
Just wait.
No!
No arguments.’
Meredith closed her mouth and accepted the new glass of wine.
She watched him go back to the kitchen and when he had shut the living room door firmly, she sank down on the rug in front of the gas fire with her back propped against the armchair and sipped gloomily at the wine.
He came back after a while with a tray bearing two plates.
‘That's yours, that's mine.’
He handed her a plate, a napkin, a knife and a fork.
Then he settled down on the rug opposite her with his.
Meredith poked mistrustfully at the colourful heap on her plate with the fork.
‘What did you do?’
‘I stripped off the breadcrumb coats from the chicken things and threw that away.
I chopped up the chicken itself and I put it and what I could rescue of the rice and a bit more rice which was in the cupboard into a frying pan with a stock cube and some water and I sort of poached it all together.’
He paused as she tasted it gingerly.
‘And I took your tomatoes out of the salad and put them in as well.’
She swallowed appreciatively.
‘It's not bad.
Different.’
‘You see?’
He waved a fork at her.
‘All was not lost.’
‘It was for me.
I'm hopeless in the kitchen.
Never was any good.’
He studied her thoughtfully.
‘Look here, you hold down a difficult and sensitive job.
You deal with difficult foreign authorities, desperate stranded tourists, all manner of accident and disaster, reams of paper work, issue passports, invade foreign gaols with help and succour for Brits behind bars, all in a day's work.
Why on earth should you be able to cook as well?’
‘Most women can.
Harriet could.’
‘She didn't do a great deal else, did she?
Except ride round on a horse and pen a few articles when the mood took her.
I think,’ he went on quietly, ‘you are upset about her.
You liked her, didn't you?
Got along well with her?
Seeing her die like that, it's hit you badly.
Delayed shock.’
‘I did like her.
We didn't have time to get to know one another well.
But we did get along all right.
I think we would have been friends.
Funny —’ Meredith paused.
‘She knew a lot of people, probably had quite a few lovers, but I think she was short on real friends.
People you can relax with, talk to about anything or nothing, even argue with and it — doesn't matter.
Friends, you know.’
She paused.
‘Like you and me.’
‘Oh, yes…’ he said in a flat voice, turning his attention to his plate, ‘like you and me.
As you say, friends.’