

Paris was grey and brooding.
D'Arcy's aircraft had nosed cautiously down through the dense, sluggish cloudcover which had kept the lid firmly on the sultry atmosphere of the city for the past week.
Passengers at Charles de Gaulle Airport were hot, uncomfortable and irritable.
Carrying just a handgrip, D'Arcy was able to leave them waiting for their luggage and took a taxi direct to the Champs Elysées.
Every driver seemed as ill-tempered as the airline passengers he'd left behind, his own complaining that his migraine wouldn't stop until the threatened storm broke.
It was prematurely dark for the early summer evening, and many vehicles already had their lights on.
The pavements were overflowing with the crowds, many of them tourists in shorts and summer shirts.
He was thankful that the lightweight suit and polo shirt had been on the first hanger to hand.
With humidity soaring he was already perspiring.
The anxiety didn't help.
He'd been increasingly anxious ever since Roy Bliss's unwelcome visit that morning.
Anxious about the veiled threats from Bliss's boss at SIS.
Anxious that his client might be mixed up with a terrorist organisation.
And anxious that his relationship with Chantal might not be all he thought it had been.
Then there was the silence on Clarion Call from Nadirpur's shipping line office in Monaco.
For the umpteenth time he checked the rear window.
He scolded himself.
He'd become almost paranoid since he'd talked to Bliss.
He hadn't phoned Nadirpur in case Century House had a tap on the line.
And he had deliberately caught his flight with just minutes to spare.
He paid the cab off on the east side of Etoile in the towering shadow of the Arc de Triomphe and took the pedestrian subway across to the west.
He used the long passageways to reassure himself that no one followed, before emerging at the start of avenue Foch.
The 16th arrondissement is one of the most exclusive residential districts of Paris and avenue Foch is its crowning glory.
A millionaires' row for the aristocracy, film stars and the kings of international business empires.
After a short walk the road widened out into an elegant, sweeping avenue with tree-shaded sliproads on either side.
The windows of the five-storey buildings, with ornate wrought-iron balconies, peered down condescendingly at the passers-by, smug in their classic mantles of ivy and flowering creepers.
High railings guarded the small courtyard  gardens, the gates of which were usually protected by push-button security-code entry locks.
The smell of wealth was as strong in the air as the fragrance of flowers from the garden borders.
Nadirpur's residence was halfway along the avenue.
D'Arcy punched the intercom button and introduced himself to the disembodied Oriental voice at the other end.
After a considerable delay and some confusion, he was told to wait.
Eventually one of the studded oak double doors opened and Nadirpur's Vietnamese manservant trotted down the crumbling stone steps.
The youthful face was inscrutable and unsmiling with a flawless pale bronze complexion.
The suit was as unpretentious as it was expensive, carefully cut around a body that had spent a lot of time in a gymnasium.
‘Mr Nadirpur invites you to meet him.’
Stiffly polite.
‘Ahn, isn't it?
We met once before.’
D'Arcy's smile was not reciprocated.
‘I believe so.
Follow me, please.’
Inside was in total contrast to the pockmarked exterior.
A gleaming chequered-tile floor, satin-sheen walls, a chandelier of dripping crystals and a carved mahogany staircase that was carpeted all the way to Nadirpur's apartment on the fifth floor.
D'Arcy was shown into the massive hallway and through one of five adjoining doors into the living room.
Nader Nadirpur stood by the balcony window looking out over the avenue.
It provided a much needed patch of light in an otherwise sombre room lit only by two silk-shaded sidelamps.
That was not enough to compensate for the oppressive opulence of the dark panelling and heavy antique furniture.
Only the gentle green illumination of the large tropical fishtank added serenity and prevented the room from having the atmosphere of a funeral parlour.
A cat was cradled in the arms of Nadirpur's silk Cardin dressing gown.
The animal stared at the newcomer with obvious hostility.
It was in marked contrast to its owner's shy smile of welcome.
‘Mr D'Arcy, what a welcome surprise!’
As he stepped forward the chocolate hackles rose on the cat, its mouth drawn back in a snarl.
D'Arcy looked at it warily.
‘I'm sorry I couldn't telephone first.’
Nadirpur appeared not to hear.
Long, manicured fingers smoothed the cat's coat.
‘Forgive Czarina, Mr D'Arcy.
She's terribly spoiled and doesn't take easily to strangers.
Russian Blues are very jealous, you know.’
He turned to his manservant.
‘Please take Czarina for me, Ahn.
Give her some of her favourite grilled kidneys, it may put her in better humour.’
Ahn stepped forward.
The cat didn't protest, circling happily between the huge biceps, trusting them not to crush her.
‘And I am sure Mr D'Arcy would like a little refreshment.
I am afraid I don't keep brandy.’
‘You have a good memory, Mr Nadirpur.
We've only met the once.’
The Iranian smiled graciously.
His face was unlined, belying his fifty years by at least a decade.
‘I only drink champagne.
Maybe a glass of Krug as an excuse to celebrate?’
He laughed daintily.
‘Or maybe, in your line of business, a Taittinger might be more appropriate — I believe it was a favourite of James Bond.’
D'Arcy couldn't resist a smile.
‘I am only a humble security adviser, Mr Nadirpur.
Very routine.’
‘Then we'll compromise.
Bring a bottle of that Bruno Paillard, Ahn.
The '79 has a delightful flavour reminiscent of almonds.
Yes?’
‘Fine,’ D'Arcy said and waited until Ahn had retreated behind the door with Czarina.
Nadirpur settled himself comfortably opposite D'Arcy on a leather padded chaise longue.
‘I don't imagine you make a habit of calling on your clients unannounced, however delightful it is to be in your company.’
No doubt such perception had contributed to the man's wealth, D'Arcy considered, as he sought the most diplomatic way to accuse his client of dealing with a terrorist organisation.
‘You're right, of course, Mr Nadirpur, my visit isn't strictly social.
It concerns the shipment aboard Clarion Call .
Supposedly spare parts for agricultural machinery.’
Nadirpur smiled blandly.
‘Quite correct.’
‘May I ask how you became involved in the deal?’
‘A little outside your remit, isn't it, Mr D'Arcy?’
‘Not necessarily.
Please bear with me.’
The Iranian sighed resignedly.
‘I was approached here in Paris by a member of the commercial section of the Iranian Embassy and asked to arrange shipment from Brazil, that's all.
I expect because they trust a fellow countryman — the Iranians have had bad experiences with supplies from abroad.
Payment made, but no goods delivered.
That sort of thing.’
D'Arcy chose his words carefully.
‘But, if I understand correctly, you are not a particularly keen supporter of the Khomeini regime?’
The laugh was light.
‘I most certainly am not, Mr D'Arcy.
But then I don't wear my heart on my sleeve.
That is bad for business, particularly when Iran is desperate to import so many goods because of the war.
Besides, even if I don't support the Islamic Revolution, it is still my country.’
‘And who supplied these goods?’
‘An international trading company.
Spidex International Trading.
They have an office here in Paris…’
He hesitated, a frown fracturing the porcelain brow.
‘But I would think you know that, they were introduced to me by your partner, General Roquelaure.’
Thankfully the distraction of the door opening gave D'Arcy the opportunity to hide his surprise as Ahn carried in a silver salver and two tulip crystals filled with Bruno Paillard.
‘Most kind, Ahn.’
Nadirpur touched the man's wrist, a small gesture of thanks.
D'Arcy saw the eyes engage, the fond look momentarily brighten the manservant's emotionless face.
As Ahn withdrew, D'Arcy said: ‘Our company isn't usually concerned with the background to commercial deals, Mr Nadirpur.
There'd be no need for General Roquelaure to mention it to us in London.’
He sipped at the expensive champagne and wished it had been brandy.
‘And the problem — if it is a problem — is on the customer side.
You said the man was from the Iranian Embassy's commercial section?’
‘That's what he said and I have no reason to doubt him.
A Mr Azadi, I believe.’
‘Did you know that Mr Azadi may have connections with an Iranian terrorist organisation?’
The ticking of the carriage clock was suddenly magnified in the acute silence that followed.
A small pink tongue darted over Nadirpur's lips.
‘What exactly do you mean by terrorist ?
That is something that is rather difficult to define in present-day Iran.
Do you mean he represents a Lebanese faction like Islamic Jihad or that he is of the Hezbollah , the Party of God?’
Another shy smile.
‘Hezbollah are zealots, Mr D'Arcy, but no one in Teheran would call them terrorists, even if acts of terrorism have been attributed to them.
I suppose Mr Azadi might belong to the Hezbollah .’
‘How about the Pessarane Behesht ?’
This time the arrow struck home.
Nadirpur swallowed hard.
‘Oh.
Excuse me, Mr D'Arcy.’
‘Obviously you've heard of them.’
‘Who hasn't?
Certainly every Iranian exile knows the name.
Several murders of Shah supporters in exile have been attributed to them…
It is so difficult, you see, to know who in Iran you are dealing with nowadays.’
D'Arcy sympathised.
‘You can't have been expected to know.
With state-sponsored terrorism anyone from an ambassador to an embassy chauffeur could be one of them.’
‘It is a sobering thought.’
‘Are you aware that the consignment contains weapons, not machinery parts?’
‘No, but I am not surprised.
I am only the carrier.
Iran is fighting a war for its survival.
It is entirely within its rights to buy arms legally.’
He replaced his glass on the table.
‘Now, you must tell me how you've heard about all this?’
D'Arcy gave a potted version, not mentioning that Bliss had instructed  him not to warn his client.
‘British security contacted my London office.
They fear the weapons may be used to arm terrorist cells in Europe, and not just Iranian.’
‘That is a terrible thought.
I must be more careful in future.’
D'Arcy shook his head.
‘There could be a reason why you should be more careful now.
For your own personal safety.’
‘And that is?’
‘Until I left London there'd been no signal from Clarion Call for four days.’
Nadirpur sat upright.
‘I beg your pardon?
I have not been informed of this.’
‘Should you have been?’
The Iranian shrugged.
‘Perhaps not.
Communication breakdown in ships is not unknown.
Either electronic, or more usually human breakdown.
Besides, my office in Monaco is not the most efficient.
It is what happens when the boss is not breathing down their necks.’
‘Can you call the office?
Check if the ship has already arrived in Bandar Abbas, or if there's any news from Djibouti, the last port of call?’
‘Not until tomorrow morning, I'm afraid.
But I'm sure there will be a simple explanation —’ Concern clouded his eyes ‘— Mr D'Arcy, do you seriously think that I could be in any danger from these people?’
D'Arcy contemplated the glass in his hand, turning it so that the light caught the cut crystal edges.
‘I'm in the prevention and protection business, so I'd be failing in my duty not to warn you of the possibilities.
While you co-operate with them, the Iranian government will no doubt overlook your political leanings — and I've little doubt they'll be aware of them.
But if they suspected you of double-crossing them, that could be a different story.
I would urge particular caution, at least until Clarion Call 's whereabouts are confirmed.
If there is still no news in the morning, I recommend that you let me supply a professional bodyguard and review your personal security.’
Nadirpur looked pained.
‘I don't really think that would be necessary.
I doubt anything has happened to Clarion Call .
Not only has it been sailing in calm coastal waters, but it also has one of your sea-marshals on board.
Besides, I have Ahn to look after me.’
‘He really should be armed, you know, just in case.’
Another pained expression.
‘I do not care for firearms, Mr D'Arcy.
Ahn is a trained Thai boxer, and is handy with the rice-flail.’
‘I'm afraid prevention is more important than physical heroics.
Is he properly trained in bodyguard duties and evasive driving, for instance?’
Nadirpur shifted uncomfortably.
Avoiding a direct answer, he said: ‘I really do not cherish the idea of some — heavy, I think you call it — moving in.
Privacy is important to me.’
A gentle smile.
‘And I think Ahn may be more than a little put out by the idea.’
D'Arcy rose to his feet; there was no more he could do.
‘Very well, Mr Nadirpur.
We'll speak tomorrow.
I'll give you a number where I can be reached in any emergency.’
He scrawled it quickly on the back of his card.
‘I hope I haven't alarmed you unnecessarily, but it is better to be safe than sorry.’
The Iranian offered a cool, loose handshake.
‘I promise I will not open the door to any strange men.’
Large drops of rain began to fall as D'Arcy stepped out into avenue Foch.
Pedestrians scurried for cover.
Umbrellas were produced as though by magic as thunder threatened close by.
Taxis vanished as the rain gathered momentum, and he was obliged to take the Métro from Etoile to Concorde station.
In the commonplace crush of damp and steaming humanity returning home after a day's work in the city, worries over Nadirpur and Clarion Call seemed grossly exaggerated.
On reflection he was sure that it had been his own personal brush with the Sabbah organisation two years earlier that had caused him to overreact.
No doubt the morning would find Clarion Call in Bandar Abbas and all would be right with the world.
Even Roquelaure's omission to tell him that he'd been involved in setting up the deal with Iran seemed less mysterious as the Métro train cruised beneath the Paris streets.
The générale had always had many irons in the fire long before their partnership had been formed.
As he emerged from the station at place de la Concorde, the rain was hissing down, sluicing the pavements and overflowing the drains.
Traffic was at an angry crawl, a dazzling confusion of lights and wet reflections in the premature darkness.
He was soaked before he reached Chantal's place off the affluent rue du Faubourg-St-Honoré, the home of a dozen haute couture fashion and perfume shops.
Her apartment house was an imposing Napoleonic block which presented solid, unwelcoming doors to the street.
Chantal's mouth dropped as she opened her apartment door and registered the sodden, bedraggled figure on the landing.
‘Rober'!— what are you doing here?
You are wet to the skin!’
As she stepped back to allow him in, he thought he detected a slight reluctance in the gesture.
‘I'm sorry I didn't phone first…’ he began defensively.
‘Nonsense,chéri .’
She reached up to kiss him, and as he held her to him he was aware of her slender nakedness beneath the ivory silk robe.
She pulled back and smiled nervously.
‘It is a lovely surprise.
Come, you must get dry.’
She led him into the semicircular hall with its high vaulted ceiling from which a chandelier threw its bright light over the pale lemon and  white walls.
‘I have a guest with me, Rober'.
An old friend.
He will be leaving shortly.’
Before he could respond, she threw open the door.
The man sitting on the chintz sofa rose awkwardly to his feet.
D'Arcy guessed he was Chantal's age, perhaps a year or two older.
Neat black hair, with dark intense eyes set in a handsome sunburnt face.
His shirtsleeves were rolled, his tie askew at the open collar of his shirt.
‘Rober', this is Jean-Paul.
A very old friend of the family,’ Chantal introduced.
‘Jean-Paul, this is Rober' D'Arcy, my English friend.’
‘Bonsoir, monsieur .’
An offered hand.
D'Arcy saw the two wine goblets on the table; the empty bottle of Haut-Brion.
The words of Roy Bliss rushed in his ears.
‘Don't be too trusting.
Maybe her infatuation with you is genuine, but maybe — just maybe — she's Roquelaure's insurance policy in case you ever step out of line .’
D'Arcy said darkly: ‘I don't want to interrupt your cosy get-together.’
Chantal's expression froze.
‘Er — Rober' — what do you mean?’
He was aware of her hand draping her robe, covering the length of tanned bare calf where it gaped.
‘Is Jean-Paul the reason you left England in such a hurry?’
Her green eyes blazed at him.
‘Don't be so stupid.’
Then she followed his gaze to the wine glasses, suddenly understanding what he was thinking.
Angrily she added: ‘I tell you, Jean-Paul is an old family friend.
I know him since we are both children.’
‘That doesn't make it any better.’
‘It is not what you are thinking.’
The skin pulsed in D'Arcy's scar, but his voice was calm and steady.
‘Isn't this the time of day Frenchmen meet their mistresses?
A quick detour on the way home to their wives?’
‘How dare you!’
Chantal spat with the look of a wounded animal.
‘How do you think such a thing!’
His face stung as the room resounded to the sharp slap across his cheek.
She stared at him, wide-eyed.
D'Arcy's reaction was instinctive, his arm a rapid blur of movement as the back of his hand whipped out in retaliation.
With a gasp Chantal staggered backwards, reaching for the chair back to steady herself.
Her robe fell open to the waist, her small jutting breasts exposed, heaving with indignation.
But she seemed unaware of it as her green eyes glared back at the man who had struck her.
Gingerly she felt her mouth with her fingertips; they came away with a splattering of blood where she had bitten her own lip.
Jean-Paul was on his feet.
‘Monsieur!
I protest —’
D'Arcy's eyes didn't move from the girl.
‘Don't even think about it!
Chantal will come to no harm.
Just pick up your jacket, Jean-Paul, and get out.’
‘You bastard!’
Chantal hissed, her eyes locked on his in a battle of wills.
‘I — I will not go —’ Jean-Paul began.
D'Arcy was losing patience.
Out of the side of his mouth he grated: ‘For God's sake, man, get out of here.
Go now.’
Chantal was regaining her composure.
She dragged her eyes away from D'Arcy, pulling her robe closed.
She swallowed hard, sniffing back her tears, before she said: ‘It's all right, Jean-Paul.
Do as he says, please.’
The Frenchman stood his ground.
Another sniff, a nervous pat to put her hair in place, and a meek smile.
‘Please, Jean-Paul.
Thank you, but it is all right now.’
Uncertainly Jean-Paul picked up his jacket and moved towards the door.
He paused, glowering at D'Arcy's back.
‘I will phone later.
To see that you are all right.’
She nodded dumbly, her eyes shut.
Footsteps receded, the front door opened and closed.
Chantal's shoulders dropped with relief and her eyes opened.
D'Arcy thought how clear and green and beautiful they were.
She said slowly, accusingly: ‘What a jealous bastard you are.’
D'Arcy hadn't moved.
His lips were compressed into a thin line as he awaited some explanation.
She pulled a tight smile.
‘I need a cigarette.’
Moving to the sideboard, she picked up a pack of Chesterfields and lit one with trembling hands.
She inhaled deeply, savouring the smoke, then turned.
‘Jean-Paul and I were lovers, it is true.
But years ago in our teens.
He was the first boy in my life.
To him I lost my virginity.’
D'Arcy's scar flickered; he said nothing.
‘But it is also true that he is an old family friend.’
She spoke rapidly but with her eyes averted, as though she didn't want to witness his reaction.
‘We have become great friends.
You know, platonic —‘'A brittle laugh, ‘good chums, as you English say.
We talk of many things, have no secrets from each other.
That is why I do not bother to change when he calls.
I am just out of the bath.
It does not seem to matter.’
‘Perhaps it should.’
She was more relaxed now and looked straight at him.
‘No, especially tonight it did not matter.
Not what he had to tell me.
It was why I had to leave you this morning.’
D'Arcy's eyes narrowed.
‘You said it was business.’
A tight smile.
‘Let me pour you a brandy.’
‘No need.’
‘I could do with one myself.’
She poured two balloons and took them across to him.
‘Sit down because I need to tell you something.’
They sat together and she reached out for his hand.
‘You must understand.
Today should be one of the happiest of my life.
Yet somehow it is not.’
D'Arcy waited.
She moistened her lips with the tip of her tongue.
‘When we first meet, all that time ago at La Clusaz.
You remember that I am sad.
My fiancé had died in Beirut.’
‘I remember you were very quiet.
We were strangers.’
‘I was sad.’
Her eyes were very close now.
Luminous and green.
‘You never ask much about him.’
‘Sometimes it's best not.’
A shy smile.
‘Because you are a jealous man?’
‘What happened?’
‘He was a junior diplomat serving at our embassy in Beirut.
He was kidnapped by terrorists.’
She spoke a little faster, eager to get it off her chest.
‘We had no word since.
It is common practice for diplomats to be tortured for information.
Not so civilians, but diplomats have been tortured to death.’
She looked into his eyes, watching his reaction.
‘To save my suffering Papa tells me he is dead for sure.
And now…’,
D'Arcy saw her tears begin to well.
‘This morning, the telephone call.
With news he is alive.
He is to come home.
That is why I meet with Jean-Paul to tell me about Philippe.’
‘Philippe?’
‘His name is Philippe Chaumont.’
He awoke early after a disturbed sleep.
Beside him Chantal tossed restlessly, the tangled sheet half off her naked body.
Perspiration glittered on her skin in the steely pre-dawn light from the balcony window.
He wouldn't get back to sleep now, he knew that.
Slipping quietly from the bed, he moved into the living room.
The light had been left on, forgotten.
As though the moment of passion had been frozen in time.
Her robe lay discarded on the floor; beside it his own sodden pile of clothes had spread a wet stain of rainwater onto the carpet.
There were now two dead bottles of Haut-Brion on the table.
Even in the stale electric light he could visualise the scene like an old, blurred snapshot.
Chantal's strange reaction after she had told him about Philippe Chaumont.
Her passion had almost been a celebration, an unburdening.
He examined the yellow bruises on his biceps, the scratch marks across his chest.
She had been almost in delirium, consumed with an animal desire.
Her nails had dug into his flesh while he had tasted the blood of her cut lip as they kissed.
And as she hurt him, he had hurt her back and she seemed driven to frenzy.
Outside the rain had continued to torrent, the urgent rattling of the shutters interspersed by drumrolls of thunder and forked lightning.
Then, suddenly, it was as though she were making love to another man.
He couldn't get the idea out of his head.
There, on the deep-piled carpet of the elegant apartment on rue du Faubourg-St-Honoré, she had been making love to a man incarcerated in the slums of Beirut.
From the handgrip he found lying by the door, he pulled out his lightweight kimono and put in on.
It took a few minutes in the kitchen to make the mug of strong chicory coffee to which he added a liberal lacing of brandy.
Returning to the living room he killed the light and the images of the previous night, drew the curtains, and threw open the windows and shutters.
Sweet, cool morning air swept in as he settled in a chair by the balcony to watch a new day begin on the Paris street below.
By seven, after more coffee and a cigar, he had still not been able to bring any order to his confusion of thoughts.
One thing was certain.
He could not afford to lose her.
She had filled an emptiness in his life and he knew that he would be devastated if she left now.
It had happened before with other women.
He did not want that to happen again; perhaps, he reasoned, it was why he had never asked her to move in with him.
Keep a small distance between them.
That way you didn't get hurt.
But it was too late for that now.
Somehow she'd crept through his defences without him realising.
It was probably inevitable.
No man could resist such charm, such beauty and good humour.
Even her fiercely independent streak appealed to him, excited him, challenged him to tame her.
They had come to share so much, and not just in bed.
And now all that was threatened.
Chantal had not said how she now felt about Philippe Chaumont, and he felt unable to ask.
Mostly he feared the answer he did not want to hear.
He deemed it unwise to push the matter while she was clearly still in a state of emotional shock.
He tried to imagine how she might be thinking: the sudden joy that the impossible had happened, that a man had returned from the dead.
The sudden rekindling of past memories and passion for the man she had been about to marry.
Followed by the utter devastation of the guilt of her own betrayal.
No, D'Arcy decided, it was going to be a difficult time for her.
However much he wanted the answer to his unasked question, he was going to have to wait for it.
The decision made, he showered and dressed quickly, then went out to buy a freshly baked baguette for breakfast.
The air was much clearer after the night's storm and his spirits lifted.
He returned to the sound of Europe Numéro One radio news chattering from the living room and the rushing of the shower.
Chantal emerged, towelling her hair, as he finished slicing and buttering the baguette .
‘Did you sleep well,chéri ?’
‘Fine,’ D'Arcy lied.
‘And you?’
She sat at the table with a shrug, the green eyes troubled.
‘I dream a lot.
I cannot remember exactly.
It was not very nice.’
She forced a smile.
‘And you, Rober', what do you do today?’
‘That depends on a phone call.’
He sampled the doughy texture of the bread.
‘A ship's overdue with one of my men on board.
I'll get a phone call this morning after nine.
If it's been located I'll have to get back to London.
If not I'll be obliged to stay on in Paris a while.’
‘That would be nice.’
He wasn't sure that it would.
‘Yes.
But under the circumstances I'd prefer to have news of the ship.’
‘Of course.’
‘What about you?
Business?’
‘No, I cannot concentrate until I know about Philippe for sure.
Unfortunately these things can take much time.
So I think I go to Carita's to have my hair done and a manicure.’
She laughed lightly.
‘That does not take too much concentration.
Maybe we can meet for lunch?’
‘That would be nice.’
‘The Espace Cardin?’ she suggested.
‘Or maybe the Tsé Yang?’
‘I don't mind.’
‘The Tsé Yang, then.
It's on rue Pierre-Premier-de-Serbie.
Say one o'clock.’
‘Fine.’
She reached across for his hand, gripping it tightly.
‘I want to thank you, Rober', for being so understanding about all of this with Philippe.’
A smile hesitated at his lips.
‘And for hitting you yesterday?
I'm sorry I did that.’
Her eyes were clear and bright.
‘I do not love you for being gentle,chéi .
When you struck me last night I — I felt only that I wanted you.
That is fou , mad, isn't it?
I think our relationship is very special.’
‘And your relationship with Philippe?’
He didn't mean to say it; the words were nut before he could stop himself.
He felt her fingers stiffen on his fist.
‘He is not at all like you.
Very kind, very gentle.’
D'Arcy's laugh was harsh.
‘You make me sound like an ogre.’
‘Don't be silly.
I just mean that he is so different from you…’
Her voice faded as her words rekindled memories.
The trimphone extension warbled urgently from the wall.
Chantal reached for it and spoke briefly before handing the receiver to him.
‘It is for you.
A Monsieur Nadirpur.
He sounds very agitated.’
D'Arcy glanced at his watch.
It was only just turned eight.
‘Mr D'Arcy, thank God you are in!
Something terrible has happened.’
‘The ship?’
‘What?
Oh, no, well not directly.
Can you come over here right away?’
‘No problem.
I'll be there as soon as I can.’
He hung the receiver back on its cradle.
‘That's one very upset client.’
‘What is it about?’
‘He wouldn't say.
Just that I've got to get over there fast.’
‘It is rush hour.
Traffic may not be good.’
‘I'll take the Métro.’
‘No, I will take you.
It takes just a second to put on my leathers.’
He grinned.
‘Am I ready for this?’
A few minutes later Chantal gunned the monstrous Harley Davidson out of the apartment block courtyard, with D'Arcy astride the pillion.
It was a hard, fast drive through the congested streets, the girl picking her way expertly through the back streets to avoid the worst of the jams.
It took only fifteen minutes before she was removing her bulbous black space helmet outside the house on avenue Foch.
To D'Arcy's surprise it was Nadirpur who answered the entry phone, and again the man himself who came down to let them in.
He looked anxiously left and right along the avenue before hastily fumbling to open the gate.
‘This is Chantal, a friend of mine,’ D'Arcy introduced, but Nadirpur was so distraught he hardly noticed her.
‘I am so glad you are here,’ he kept repeating as he led the way briskly up the staircase.
Everything in the apartment appeared normal until the door of the drawing room was opened.
Gone was the atmosphere of sombre calm.
It had been shattered along with the glass tank, the debris of which lay scattered on the carpet.
Dead fish formed glittering patches of colour against the dark water stain.
Some had floundered right across the room before they had expired.
The chocolate-coloured Russian Blue was sniffing and pawing experimentally at one of the corpses.
As they entered, the cat leapt clear of the tangle of antique furniture which lay at crazy angles, fractured arms and legs like a grotesque mockery of a holocaust scene.
The chaise longue had been the only piece to survive unscathed.
On it lay the Vietnamese manservant, moaning quietly and holding a surgical dressing to his thigh.
A steady drip of blood was forming a pool on the floor.
Please see Ahn,’ Nadirpur begged, rushing over.
‘They beat him badly and I don't know what to do.’
His voice was cracked with emotion.
‘Good God, what happened?’
‘He is shot in the leg,’ the Iranian replied as D'Arcy crossed the room.
‘Dear Ahn, he put up such a brave fight for me.’
‘I can see that,’ D'Arcy murmured as he knelt and gently prised Ahn's hand away from the wound.
Beneath the pad he found the small entry wound; the larger exit hole had gone unnoticed beneath the man's leg and was draining the lifeblood from him.
‘When did you call the ambulance?’
Nadirpur peered worriedly over D'Arcy's shoulder.
‘Ahn asks me not to.
He does not like hospitals.’
D'Arcy turned in anger.
‘Don't be so bloody stupid.
He's been happily dying here since you phoned me.’
The Iranian shifted uneasily.
‘Ahn has no carte de séjour .
No papers.’
Realisation dawned.
‘An illegal.
I see.’
Deftly he covered the lower wound with a clean handkerchief and raised the limb on some cushions to discourage the flow of blood.
Chantal said: ‘Let me telephone a friend of my father.
He will be able to arrange for a private clinic, so there will be no problems with the police.’
D'Arcy nodded his agreement.
Sometimes it paid to have friends in a country's security services.
‘Mr Nadirpur, please hold this firmly in place.
If it continues to bleed, I'll have to apply a tourniquet.’
‘That is bad?’
‘A last resort.
I need more dressings and bandages.’
‘I have only a small medical kit.
But you will find linen in my bedroom.’
His eyes were filled with tears.
‘Please hurry, Mr D'Arcy, Ahn is very precious to me.’
Five minutes later, using strips of cut bedlinen, D'Arcy had virtually stopped the bleeding.
A feather duvet warmed the patient and helped to check the effect of shock.
His condition appeared to have stabilised.
Chantal announced that a paramedic team was on its way.
Nadirpur said: ‘I thank you so much for saving Ahn's life.
I do not know what I would have done if you had not come.’
D'Arcy stood back from the patient and lit himself a small cigar.
He could think of better ways to start the day.
‘Tell me, Mr Nadirpur, is this anything to do with what we were discussing yesterday?’
‘Please, call me Nader, it is only right.’
A benevolent smile.
‘I am afraid it was.
Mr Azadi from the Iranian Embassy.
He called with another gentleman.
I say gentleman, but I suppose he is just an official thug.’
‘And you let them in, despite my warning yesterday?’
Nadirpur blushed.
‘They looked so respectable.
They both wore good suits and spoke in a very reasonable tone.
I could hardly refuse to speak to such a good customer on the basis of your suspicions — however correct  they turned out to be.
At least, I made sure that poor Ahn stays in the room with us.’
‘As well you did,’ D'Arcy said, wondering what the hell might have happened had the manservant not been present.
‘But as soon as Mr Azadi is inside, his attitude changes.
He becomes quite angry.
He says that the Iranians had planned to have one of their frigates intercept Clarion Call on the approaches of the Strait of Hormuz, to provide safe escort.
He says that the ship is now forty-eight hours overdue and he wants explanations.’
‘What did you say to that?’
‘I explain that there could be many reasons.
Engine or steerage problems, bad weather and so on.
But like you, he has been talking to my shipping office in Monaco and learns that there has been no communication for four days.
He accuses me of a double-cross.
To make it look as though the ship is lost at sea.
I said it was preposterous, but that made him even angrier.
He said that when he tried to contact the Spidex company in Paris — who supplied the cargo — it has disappeared.
He says that I am in collaboration with them in a swindle against Iran.
That he has evidence that I am a pro-monarchy subversive.
That I work against the Imam Khomeini —’
Nadirpur broke off, his body trembling with delayed shock, his forehead beaded in perspiration.
Chantal brought coffee from the kitchen and, after several lung draughts, Nadirpur had regained his composure sufficiently to continue.
‘Azadi said that I had just twenty-four hours to provide him with the exact location of the ship — or else I would be executed.
He said his thug would stay with me during that time.’
His eyes closed as he recalled the confrontation.
‘I told them both to get out.
That I will tell them everything I can find out.
But they refuse to go.
It is then that Ahn stepped forward to protect me.
Dear, sweet Ahn —’ His eyes shifted to the prone body on the couch.
‘The thug drew out a gun.
But he did not expect the rice-flail, you know, the sticks joined by a chain.
Ahn snaps it across the man's wrist — breaking the bone, I think.
The gun flies and there is a terrible fight.
Azadi reaches the fallen gun, aims at Ahn and fires.
I throw myself at this Azadi and we wrestle like children in the mud.
It seems it is for hours, but neither of us are fighters.
At last I manage to throw the gun out of the window.
‘Azadi takes fright and then calls off his dog.
Despite his wound Ahn still fights like a tiger, but is badly beaten and reeling.
The thug obeys but he is reluctant.
Already he has smashed poor Ahn's body to a pulp and is disgusted that his master will not allow him to finish.’
Nadirpur's hand delicately traced a line across Ahn's perspiring brow.
‘I am devoted to this boy, Mr D'Arcy.
He has given me nothing but total loyalty and respect at a time when I needed it most.
France is not  the most hospitable country to foreigners; it is easy to be lonely here.
Isolated in an ivory tower, as you English say.
He is my friend.’
His eves were moist as he turned to D'Arcy.
A small smile of affection curled the delicate lips.
‘Unless you count my treacherous Czarina, he is my only friend.
I do not expect you to understand.’
D'Arcy nodded sympathetically, felt uncomfortable.
‘I think I do, Nader.’
A slow look of horror showed in the Iranian's eyes.
‘Do not think that we are lovers, Mr D'Arcy.
Understand that.
His loyalty and our mutual affection are far deeper than such things.’
He cleared his throat.
‘Do you know that he also saved my life at the very time we met?’
‘You hadn't told me.’
Nadirpur looked at Chantal, almost for the first time.
‘Sweet and very beautiful lady, forgive me what I am going to confide.
It is not for your ears.’
He turned to D'Arcy.
‘When I first come to Paris in 1979 I am desperately lonely.
I have French business contacts, but socially I am a leper.
Some will come to my home for drinks, but never is the invitation returned.
I feel I am wanted only for what business I can bring their way.
One night — a Friday — I drove down to the Bois de Boulogne.
There are some very beautiful young men there.
I leave my car to talk with them, and suddenly I am attacked, my wallet taken.
They would have stolen my car, too, but for Ahn.
He was standing there, also, under the trees.
Waiting to earn some francs to pay for some soup and some bread.
Waiting to sell his young body.
He saw what was happening and comes to my rescue.
In doing so he lost the only friends he had here in Paris, such as they were.
He has been with me ever since.’
It was then that the private ambulance arrived from the clinic on the outskirts of the city, and Ahn was stretchered out to the waiting vehicle.
‘Allah be praised,’ Nadirpur said.
‘Now I know Ahn will live.
I owe you a very great personal debt.’
D'Arcy came to a decision.
‘Listen to me, Nader.
You were very lucky that Ahn was with you when Azadi called.
But they're likely to be back at any time.
You are going to be in great danger until you have positive news of Clarion Call .
Will you let me take the necessary precautions?’
‘I do not want to put anyone else at risk — including you.’
‘It's my business, Nader.
It's what I'm paid for, and my services don't come cheap.’
A gentle smile.
‘That is supposed to ease my conscience?
Very well, what do you suggest?’
‘If we are dealing with the Pessarane Behesht then we're up against some very dangerous and unpredictable people.
So it's imperative we get you away from here.
I have a friend who may be able to provide accommodation, someone they would not associate with you.’
Nadirpur looked at his watch.
‘The office will be open now.
Let me telephone Monaco.
Maybe none of this will be necessary.
But when he made his call there was still no news.
He gave vent to his anger and lambasted the shipping manager for not having alerted him that Clarion Call was overdue.
After that, D'Arcy called Dave Forbes in London to put him briefly in the picture and to tell him to liaise with the ship and cargo insurers at Lloyd's.
He added: ‘You'd better phone Pauline Wilmot, too, and tell her the ship's overdue.
But don't be alarmist, because I'm sure there's a perfectly rational explanation.’
When he hung up, Nadirpur said: ‘I think I must call on the offices of Spidex myself.
As that man Azadi said, the people who answer the phone say the company has gone.
I have tried myself.
If that is so, I can at least understand his anxiety — if not his way of showing it.’
D'Arcy agreed.
‘But I don't want you going near those offices — Azadi's people could have it staked out.
I'll take care of that.
But first I think we should phone Azadi himself and tell him in no uncertain terms that we are as unhappy about this as he is.
We must convince him that we are doing everything we can to trace the ship and the people running Spidex.’
However, the call to the Iranian Embassy did not produce much in the way of satisfaction.
Firstly the telephonist denied the existence of anyone of the name of Azadi.
Then, on D'Arcy's insistence, he was passed from extension to extension.
Finally one unnamed diplomat, whilst claiming that the name meant nothing to him, showed an unnatural willingness to make a note of D'Arcy's message ‘should he be able to trace such a man.’
‘May I inquire as to your rôle in this affair, Mr D'Arcy?’ the voice asked.
It was pitched reasonably enough.
‘I am simply Mr Nadirpur's security adviser, which is one reason why any threat against him will be counterproductive.
One of my staff is also aboard the Clarion Call , advising on maritime protection.
So you can see that I, too, have a vested interest in locating the whereabouts of the ship and crew.’
‘And cargo?’
‘Of course,’ D'Arcy replied.
He had not mentioned the nature of the cargo.
‘I fear I cannot help you,’ the voice concluded smoothly.
‘But I shall nevertheless pass your message on to the appropriate departments in case this Mr Azadi becomes known to us.’
‘You do that,’ D'Arcy replied and hung up.
Nadirpur put down the extension.
‘What do we do now?’
‘Show them we mean what we say.
I'll visit the Spidex office.
But first I must call on an old friend.’
Victor's was a smart brasserie and bar sandwiched between two elegant boutiques in a narrow back street off the rue Pierre-Charron.
The faded opulence of its belle époque styling, with gleaming brass, mirrored walls and ceiling murals, suggested that it had seen better times in the long distant days of Renoir and Toulouse-Lautrec.
While the pavement tables attracted some passing trade from those who could find no restaurant seats on the Champs-Elysées at suppertime, the inner bar remained a more-or-less private sanctum for Victor's regulars.
It was here the patron , an ex-sergeant of the Légion Étrangère , held court whilst providing both drinks and homespun philosophy in equally generous measures.
D'Arcy parked Nadirpur's BMW outside and left Chantal with her motorcycle to keep watch for any unwelcome followers.
He led the Iranian through the elaborately etched glass doors.
They were greeted by the solid smell of furniture polish, blending with the mouth-watering aroma of melting cheese as a croque monsieur sizzled under the grill.
At the bar Victor was busily dispensing kick-start coffees and hair-of-the-dog cognacs to a huddle of regulars taking late breakfast or early lunch.
He looked up at the newcomers outlined against the bright light of the street.
The small dark eyes crinkled in their walnut bags; the magnificent profusion of handlebar moustache, grown long ago to compensate for a balding pate, bristled with the start of a smile.
‘Monsieur D'Arcy?’
The voice was rich and fruity, oiled perpetually with calvados and coarsened with Disque Bleu.
Heads turned in curiosity.
‘Hello, Victor.’
‘It is Monsieur D'Arcy!
I do not believe it!’
Big hairy hands wiped grease over the wide belly of his apron, before reaching out in greeting.
The grip was warm and fierce, suggesting that he retained much of the strength of his youth.
D'Arcy grinned.
‘How d'you French barmen do it?
I haven't see you for almost a year, Victor, and you recognise me the instant I step through the door.’
Victor roared with good humour.
‘With you,mon ami , it is always the walk.
Unmistakable.
Like John Wayne!’
I wish I hadn't asked,’ D'Arcy replied, trusting that Victor's observation really was just a joke.
As lavish as always with his hospitality Victor began dispensing free cognac and coffee in celebration of what might have been a prodigal son's return, introducing his regulars to D'Arcy and he to them.
‘And your friend?’
Victor asked, eyes squinting as he made one of his instant character assessments which were rarely wide of the mark.
‘This is Nader,’ D'Arcy said.
‘A client of mine.
In fact I am here on his behalf — to ask a favour.’
Victor's joviality was a mask.
‘And I think it is my fine menu that lures you back.’
D'Arcy smiled.
‘A word in private?’
The patron moved to the corner of the bar, clear of everyone's earshot, and began drying glasses.
‘Anything, Rober', you know that.
We go back a long way.’
That was true enough.
They had first met fifteen years earlier when a small cadre of SAS men, led by D'Arcy, had visited the Mont Louis Commando Training School close to Andorra for an exchange visit.
Ever since Victor had saved his life on the deadly ravine-wire crossing they had become firm friends.
‘I wouldn't put on you if it wasn't very necessary,’ D'Arcy said.
Furrows creased the heavy brow.
He read the tone.
‘I know that, Rober'.
What is it you want?’
‘Two things.
First a room for my client here.
Somewhere that is secure and that has a telephone.’
Victor breathed on the glass in his hand, and buffed it until it gleamed.
‘Your client is wanted?’
‘You could say that.’
‘By les flics ?’
‘No, not the police.
By a business contact who has made serious threats.’,
Victor looked pained.
‘So what is your client?
An embezzler?
Or a man who cannot meet his bills?
Since when are you involved with such people?
Do not treat me like an idiot.’
D'Arcy savoured his brandy and studied Victor for a moment, before deciding exactly how much to tell the Frenchman.
‘I have reason to believe that Nader's business contact could be involved with a terrorist organisation.
They suspect — wrongly — that they've been double-crossed.’
Victor's facial expression didn't change.
He continued blowing on the glass, and D'Arcy smelled the aftermath of yesterday's garlic.
‘Do I assume your friend is innocently involved?’
‘If he wasn't, I wouldn't be working for him.
And I certainly wouldn't be asking you for favours.’
‘You cannot go to the police?’
‘This needs careful handling, Victor.
If I can just get my client out of harm's way for a day or two this whole problem should resolve itself.
But if the police handle things badly it could ruin my client's reputation and start a lot of unwelcome investigation.
You've met my partner, Roquelaure?’
‘Le générale de brigade ?
Yes, I remember him.’
‘Well, he has the right sort of contacts in the government.
As soon as he's back from abroad, he can handle this.
In the meantime —’
‘A roof for your friend's head?’
A gentle smile.
‘And the other favour?’
‘I need extra manpower until I can get spare staff over from London.
Someone who can act as bodyguard and chauffeur for the next two days.
I thought you might have an idea.’
Victor placed the glass carefully on the bar top.
Since he had left the French Foreign Legion his bar had become the Paris watering hole for old comrades-in-arms.
A place of recreation and reminiscence, as well as a discreet job centre that worked the ‘old boys’ network.
‘Go and speak to Saint Julien — the big bastard in the corner who looks as though he would kill his own grandmother for a couple of francs.
Ignore his rude behaviour, looks can be deceptive.
He is a good man beneath that façade.
While you talk to him, I will think about where your friend can stay.’
D'Arcy left Nadirpur perched on a bar stool with a glass of Victor's best vintage champagne and made his way across the room to where a large figure in black suit and shirt was seated, almost invisible in the dark alcove.
He sat broodily, staring at his untouched coffee.
It appeared to hold a mesmeric fascination for him as his dark, red-veined eyes watched the rising curlicue of steam.
His elbows were on the table edge, his heavily ringed fingers idly scratching at a thick black beard as though it aided his concentration.
Only the eyes moved, suspiciously, as D'Arcy's shadow fell across the table.
‘Saint Julien?’
A pause, an appraisal.
‘Who wants him?’
He spoke in English, the accent was unmistakably Corsican.
‘My name's D'Arcy.
Victor says you might be interested in a couple of days’ work.’
At last the head moved, following the malevolent gaze of his eyes, and D'Arcy could see the hair swept back off the sallow forehead, gathered in a ponytail at the back.
He didn't look effeminate, even when you considered the plain gold ring that pierced his left earlobe.
The man just looked plain unsavoury, D'Arcy decided.
Another pause and the Corsican said: ‘Victor should learn to keep his mouth shut.’
‘Victor and I go back a long way.
We met in the Legion.’
A raised brow and an almost imperceptible softening of tone.
‘You were in the Legion?
I don't remember you.’
‘I met Victor during joint training.
I was with the British SAS.’
A longer pause this time as the words were absorbed, the meaning registered.
The lips parted; it could have been a smile.
‘The hooligans from Hereford.’
‘Can I buy you a cognac?’
The eyes softened.
‘It'll be my privilege to let you buy me a cognac.
I was beginning to think I'd have to drink this coffee.’
‘A hard night?’
A flash of anger in the eyes.
‘Perhaps.’
D'Arcy ordered, then took the seat opposite.
‘I need a good man, reliable, for a couple of days’ bodyguard duty.
It could be dangerous.
There's a real threat.
But the money will be good.’
The eyes glanced in the direction of Nadirpur sitting demurely at the bar.
‘The fairy?’
‘My client's in serious trouble.’
‘Boyfriend problems?’
A sarcastic laugh.
‘I said serious.
And if you work for me you'll take it seriously.
Very seriously.’
Saint Julien pursed his lips, mouthed something but didn't speak.
He turned his head away and picked up the newly arrived cognac.
He sniffed appreciatively.
At last he said: ‘You want someone who doesn't have a drink problem.’
‘Do you have a drink problem?’
The Corsican lowered the cognac, unsampled, and pushed the glass away.
Reaching for the coffee, he said: ‘Not any more.’
‘When can you start?’
He downed the coffee in one.
‘I've started.
Will I need a firearm?’
‘Have you got one?’
‘It will cost you.’
‘Illegal?’
‘What do you think?’
D'Arcy wasn't convinced that Saint Julien was suitable.
Certainly the man wouldn't have been his usual choice, but under the circumstances he was obliged to take Victor's recommendation at face value.
‘Do you have a criminal record?’
The eyes smouldered for a moment at the impertinence, then he seemed to see the funny side and chuckled hoarsely.
‘Nothing recent.
As a kid I knocked about with la pègra .
I know my way around.
Sometimes I've done the odd job for la parallèle ,’ he said simply, as though it  explained everything.
It was the name given to the rumoured private army which was reputed to have run dirty tricks campaigns for successive Interior ministers.
One man's secret service with an awesome notoriety.
‘It would be advisable to be armed,’ D'Arcy decided.
‘If you do hit trouble it will be from an Iranian terrorist organisation.
You should know that.’
Saint Julien shrugged; it was nothing.
‘And you.
Do you want a weapon?’
D'Arcy shook his head.
‘That shouldn't be necessary.
Besides which I don't want any shooting unless it's an absolute life or death situation.’
The Corsican rose to his feet.
‘I'll be back in fifteen minutes with everything I need.’
As the man left Victor beckoned D'Arcy to the bar.
Besides Nadirpur only one person now remained.
A stunningly attractive woman in her late thirties, she sat on a corner stool nursing a Campari on ice.
Beneath an open beige silk trenchcoat she wore a red Louis Féraud dress; her legs were long and sheathed in fine black nylon.
D'Arcy recalled the exquisitely made-up face beneath the tumble-cut red hair.
The name escaped him.
‘You remember Claudette,’ Victor said.
D'Arcy smiled.
‘How could I ever forget?
Enchanté, madame .’
The offered hand was long and slender, her scarlet nail polish exactly matching the painted lips.
‘It is mademoiselle , Monsieur D'Arcy,’ she corrected gently.
‘How nice to see you again.
And how flattering that you remember me.’
‘Claudette has an apartment upstairs,’ Victor explained.
‘It has two rooms and she is willing to let your client move into one of them for a short period.
There is a telephone, a bathroom and a kitchenette.’
D'Arcy smiled.
‘You're a genius, Victor.’
‘If what you say is true, we cannot take chances.
I will have the rear exit barred and bolted.
So the only access will be through the bar here.
Again I shall keep that door locked.
Anyone will have to come past me to get in.
And — tell me, Saint Julien will work for you–’
‘He's agreed, yes.’
Victor smiled with satisfaction.
‘Then he can sit in his favourite alcove and keep constant vigil, while everything appears as normal as usual.’
D'Arcy turned to Nadirpur.
‘How does that sound, Nader?’
‘You are all too kind.
I have not known such kindness since I am in Paris.’
Victor reached over the bar, taking Nadirpur's slim white hand in his great hamlike fists and shaking it vigorously until D'Arcy seriously wondered if the fragile bones might break.
‘You are safe amongst friends.
And any friend of Rober's is a friend of ours.’
‘I am most grateful,’ the Iranian replied, anxiously withdrawing his  hand from the Frenchman's grip.
‘And the lady, it is especially kind of her to allow me to stay.’
Claudette smiled, clearly flattered by such unaccustomed graciousness.
‘It will be a pleasure to share my home with such a gentleman.’
Victor whispered loudly in D'Arcy's ear.
‘Till yesterday she lives in with Saint Julien, but they have another of their rows.
Now he leaves again — like he leaves her every few months.
Always he gets angry when she takes customers home.’
‘I heard that, Victor!’
Claudette said sharply.
‘Please do not discuss my private affairs in public.’
She tilted her nose imperiously.
‘Actually I have a new job as a hostess at le Chat Noir , so there will be no disturbance to Monsieur Nadirpur.’
She turned to D'Arcy.
‘Nor to Rober'.
You will stay, too, I hope —’ a tinkling laugh, ‘— to chaperone us?’
D'Arcy felt the perspiration gather round his collar.
The look in her eyes filled in the unspoken words in her sentence.
‘Er, no mademoiselle, I do not imagine so.’
As Victor shook his head in despair at the incorrigible woman a slim black-leathered silhouette came through the door.
Chantal carried her bulbous crash hat under one arm.
The patron let out the long slow whistle of a kettle coming to the boil.
‘I think we are invaded by Martians…
They are not little green men after all — thank God.’
‘I think you forget me,’ Chantal chided.
‘I'm sorry.
I didn't think we would be so long.’
D'Arcy cast a glance at the door.
‘No sign of anyone following?’
‘Nobody that I could see.’
‘Good, because Victor and Claudette have agreed to let Nader stay here.
You remember Victor?’
‘Of course she does!’ the Frenchman gushed before she could answer.
He hugged her to him and insisted that she had a drink on the house.
‘She is a personal friend, Rober'?’
Claudette asked D'Arcy absently.
‘Very personal.’
She didn't attempt to hide the look of disappointment in her eyes.
The midday sun glinted against the bronze bas-reliefs of famous battle scenes on Napoleon's column as Chantal steered the Harley-Davidson through the place de l'Opéra and turned down the busy rue de la Paix.
On the pillion D'Arcy counted the street numbers on the succession of shop fronts — mostly expensive jewellers, furriers and goldsmiths — until he found the one he wanted.
He tapped Chantal's shoulder and she slowed into the kerb.
D'Arcy looked at the bland doorway sandwiched tightly between two  fashion boutiques.
An array of brass plaques were mounted on each side of the entrance.
‘It doesn't look a big enough building to house this lot,’ D'Arcy observed.
‘No, Rober', the rents around l'Opéra are astronomique , a very prestige area, and the offices are so small.
Companies pay many hundred francs just for a nameplate.
These will mostly be box numbers.
The companies themselves will be in the modern la Défense development in the west suburbs, or maybe Montparnasse.’
She ran her finger down the row of names.
‘Ah,voilà !
Here is the company.
Spidex International Trading.’
A narrow stairway led up to the third floor where an unmarked door opened onto a plush modern office reception area with a deep-pile fawn carpet dotted with pot plants.
D'Arcy sensed Chantal's critical eye roving over the décor.
‘It is so tasteless,’ she hissed in his ear.
‘So — so, nothing.’
At the black ash reception desk a thin, middle-aged woman, with a bright gash of a mouth and hair in a severe French coupe , looked up sharply from her word processor.
‘Monsieur — Madame — May I be of assistance?’
Her voice was stiffly polite, the eyes wary.
D'Arcy smiled with as much charm as he could muster.
‘I have business with Spidex International Trading and I wonder if there is someone here I can talk to?’
The expression on the heavily powdered face softened and she managed a sympathetic smile.
‘Monsieur, I am so sorry.
You are at least the third person today who calls to inquire.
Some people were here yesterday, too, and became quite angry.
So much so that I had to threaten to call the police.’
She shrugged.
‘You see, we are just an accommodation address.
We either hold or pass on letters for clients.
We also have a small selection of offices for daily hire and a conference room.
Out-of-town businessmen use our facilities, especially when they wish to impress important clients.’
‘And Spidex?’
D'Arcy pressed.
‘They had a small office suite in la Défense.’
‘You have the address, madame?’
‘I can save you a trip.
The office was on weekly rental.
Three days ago they vanish.
A cheque for the amount outstanding for our services arrived yesterday.
It is most embarrassing for us, but we have no idea where they have gone.’
At that moment the door to one of the partitioned offices opened and a stout, smartly suited figure emerged.
It took D'Arcy a few seconds to connect the familiar face in the unfamiliar surroundings.
Not unnaturally Chantal got there first.
‘Papa!’
Roquelaure registered surprise, and the grim expression on the broad  tanned face transformed instantly.
‘Chantal!
Rober'!
What a surprise to see you both here.’
D'Arcy was suspicious.
‘Is it, Pierre?
It shouldn't be a surprise at all.
I gather you introduced these Spidex people to Nadirpur.
Are you going to tell me what the hell is going on?’
Roquelaure waved him to silence.
‘Not here, Rober', please.’
He turned to his daughter.
‘What marvellous news about Philippe, eh?
You get all the news from Jean-Paul?’
Chantal's face lit up with such obvious joy that D'Arcy felt decidedly uncomfortable.
‘Oh, Papa, yes.
It is so wonderful.
I couldn't wait to speak to you about it.’
‘I wanted to tell you myself, but I was out of the country.’
He looked up at D'Arcy, trying to gauge the Englishman's mood.
‘Listen, I am about to go to lunch.
Why don't the two of you join me.
A little celebration of Philippe's good fortune — and not before time.’
The Vaudeville on rue Vivienne had always been a favourite of Roquelaure's.
The art deco style brasserie attracts discerning customers from the Bourse stock exchange at lunchtime and theatregoers in the evening who ensure that it keeps its standards high.
It was loud with business chatter and general bustle as they entered.
Roquelaure was recognised instantly by the head waiter who took them straight to a reserved corner table.
With neighbouring diners sitting too close to have a conversation without being overheard, D'Arcy contented himself with the family small talk whilst he made the most of the lobster fricassée .
When the crowds later began thinning and the adjacent table cleared, Roquelaure leaned forward over his port glass.
He spoke earnestly: ‘I am very sorry about this Spidex business, Rober'.
More sorry than you might imagine.
When you and Chantal arrived at that accommodation agency I had just been talking to the proprietor.
As no doubt you have gathered, the company was just a front for some people of dubious nature.’
‘What sort of people?’
D'Arcy asked.
‘Arabs,’ Roquelaure replied shortly.
‘The so-called chairman was a Jordanian.
He used the name Abdullah Hayira.
But he had co-directors of several Middle Eastern nationalities.’
‘How the hell did you get involved with them, Pierre?’
Roquelaure toyed with his napkin.
‘Quite simple.
Hayira approached our Ministère de la Défense .
He had a contract to supply arms to Iran and wanted our help in setting up the deal.
Exocet missiles et cetera.
Not unnaturally it was handed to me, now being officially outside the Ministère and a recognised arms dealer.
I liaised with the DGSE to organise everything — to fix Commission approval to export.
French items on the list were shipped to Brazil which supplied other wanted items.’
‘Weren't you suspicious that Arabs wanted to supply arms to Iran?’
The générale looked pained.
‘I'm sure you did not mean to sound so naive, Rober'.
Businessmen are businessmen the world over — regardless of their nationality.
And oil prices are slumping badly at present.
There is an urgent need for Arab states to boost their income.
Besides, do not imagine that every Arab state hates Iran.
Some despise Iraq just as much, even more.
Some feel it better to support the moderates in Teheran in order to achieve better relations in the future.
Others would prefer just to fuel the war — and make a quick buck at the same time.
They reason that while Iran and Iraq are fighting each other they have no time to look for adventures elsewhere in the region.’
D'Arcy couldn't disagree with Roquelaure's assessment.
‘Presumably you checked out this Abdullah Hayira character before you did business with him?’
‘We are not fools in France, Rober'.
Everything checked; it was very professional.
But remember this, in our own secret service every man who joins undergoes an identity and name change as a matter of course.
To find out who one of our own DGSE agents really is —’ He waved his hand dismissively ‘— is a near impossibility without inside information.
No, all the directors of Spidex and the company itself, had bona fides and apparently legitimate histories.’
‘And all of them false,’ D'Arcy observed scathingly.
Chantal shook her head in disbelief.
‘And poor Monsieur Nadirpur.
All the trouble he has because of this.
It is so sad.’
‘Trouble?’ the general queried.
‘He had a visit from some Iranian heavies this morning,’ D'Arcy said.
‘Put his minder in hospital, and now I've got Nadirpur in hiding.’
Roquelaure registered no surprise.
‘I suppose it was about the overdue ship.’
D'Arcy was stunned.
‘You know about that?’
‘Of course.
I was the first person the Iranians contacted.
After all it was I who recommended them to use Nadirpur.’
‘Why for God's sake?’
D'Arcy demanded.
Then pulled himself up short before he inadvertently mentioned Bliss's warning that the shipment was destined for an Iranian terrorist faction.
Roquelaure shrugged.
‘Why not?
I knew Nadirpur.
I knew he was a good client of ours.
I knew he was reliable and himself an Iranian.
It made good sense.’,
For the first time Chantal became angry with her father.
‘And did it not make good sense to tell Rober' what is going on?’
‘I am your partner,’ D'Arcy added pointedly.
Roquelaure took a Gitane from a slim gold case and lit it.
‘I was not in the position to discuss Secret Service matters with you, Rober'.
It is Ministère and DGSE business.
Your involvement and Nadirpur's was  pure expediency — plus a little profit for IAP.
I did not know that this is going to happen.’
D'Arcy said: ‘And what exactly do you think has happened, because I haven't a clue?’
‘That makes two of us.’
‘So who is behind it?’
‘Because it is so carefully planned — with all that fake background setup — I think it has resources from some government.
It is someone's secret service operation, of that I am sure.
That means it is essentially political in motivation.
Profit is not the reason.’
‘Where does that leave Nadirpur?’
D'Arcy pressed angrily.
‘Not to mention one of our staff members, Tom Wilmot, gone missing with that bloody ship.’
Chantal flashed D'Arcy a reproving glance, but Roquelaure continued as though he had not heard: ‘We must think where it leaves the French Government, Rober'.
We are now suspected along with these Spidex people of double-crossing the Iranians.’
D'Arcy was scathing.
‘So what?’
Roquelaure was taken aback.
Not so much at his partner's tone, but at his apparent lack of understanding.
‘Because, Rober', the French Government is anxious to do business with Iran.
Between you and me the Gulf War may soon be over, and there are vast contracts to be won.
To rebuild after the devastation, will require huge construction projects.
Not to mention re-equipping their armed forces.
All through this war we support Iraq.
We have only one Frenchman staying on in Teheran.
But Iraq has exhausted its treasury reserves.
Iran is where the money lies now.’
D'Arcy was exasperated.
‘And any such deals are off if the Iranians suspect the DGSE of a double-cross?’
‘Precisely, Rober'.’
Thankful that he had finally got through.
‘It is time, Pierre, for you to get your priorities right,’ D'Arcy replied evenly.
‘While you work with me the interests of IAP and its clients come first.
Nothing else.’
Roquelaure glared.
Then slowly the expression of resentment melted, and he smiled.
‘Forgive me, Rober'.
Sometimes the perceptions of us French are different from you English.’
‘I understand all about French perceptions,’ D'Arcy retorted.
He had long appreciated and respected the historical and cultural differences between the two nations.
France had survived over the centuries by its sheer pragmatism.
It was an entire nation of pragmatists, each individual swaying with the prevailing wind to ensure his or her own future.
It was the one reason why France was unlikely ever to be truly subjugated by mere force of arms.
Its society would simply absorb, reshape and adapt to ensure the fate and prosperity of the individual.
It was sometimes  mistaken for moral weakness.
That was a concept that never had, and never would, be understood by the British.
‘In this case,’ Roquelaure reasoned, ‘the interests of France and IAP coincide completely.
The DGSE want to trace the people behind Spidex as much as Monsieur Nadirpur does.
And especially they want to find that ship.’
A slow smile crossed his lips.
‘Why don't you start now?
I can give you all the information I have.
It will be a worthwhile contract for IAP.’
‘We're not bloody private detectives,’ D'Arcy snapped, aware that the scar was pulsing on his cheek.
‘This is a job for the DGSE, or some other security agency.’
Roquelaure stubbed out his cigarette.
‘I think not, Rober'.
You are well aware of the interdepartmental and political rivalry in France.
It will be in someone's best interest to leak it all to the press.
No, this is exactly a job for IAP.
It is why you have been so successful for us abroad.
You are British — one big step removed.’
Sensing the mounting friction between the two men, Chantal rose to her feet.
She couldn't bear to witness her father and D'Arcy falling out.
This meal was meant to celebrate Philippe Chaumont's imminent homecoming.
‘Forgive me, I must go and powder my nose.
And then I have to leave.
I have a hair appointment at Carita's.
Maybe I can give one of you a lift?’
As she moved away Roquelaure seized his opportunity.
‘Listen, Rober', while Chantal is gone.
Everything I have told you is the absolute truth.
But there is something more.’
‘Yes?’
‘When we were approached on this deal we used it to tie in with the release of one of our hostages held in Lebanon.’
‘I thought you didn't negotiate with terrorists.’
The pale eyes narrowed, the pupils near pinpricks.
‘That is our public posture, as well you know.
On mainland France, we follow that policy strictly, in line with our European allies.
Abroad we are sometimes able to be more flexible.
This is one such occasion.
But this business of the missing ship and what lies behind it puts the whole negotiation in jeopardy.
And that negotiation affects every one of us at this table.
Me, Chantal — and you.’
‘How so?’
But even as he asked the question, D'Arcy already knew the answer.
‘The hostage in question is Philippe Chaumont.’
Azadi was trembling as he replaced the handset of the telephone.
This was not the sort of situation he liked at all.
Like most Iranians he was by nature a gentle, courteous man.
He had originally been appointed as a junior cultural attaché, and saw his rôle as influencing  the Western view of the Islamic Revolution through the promotion of traditional Persian arts and crafts, the country's rich historical treasures.
Silverware, woven carpets, calligraphy and architecture.
They were his chosen weapons to achieve an understanding with the enemies of Allah.
An intensely private man, he was never happier than when sitting quietly at home with his family reading aloud the works of Iran's many respected poets.
He had even attempted to write verse himself.
No, he did not like this at all.
He had not asked to be made ‘controller’ of the Pessarane Behesht cell in Paris.
He had been called on to take the job in the name of the Imam and the survival of the Islamic Republic.
It was a directive from the Department for the Export of Revolution.
It would not have been wise for his health, or that of his wife and three children, to have turned it down.
In consequence he was a man in battle with his own conscience.
He survived by being efficient at his work, if not deliberately unimaginative at times.
When occasionally he read in the newspapers of atrocities attributed to the Pessarane Behesht he persuaded himself that they were lies manipulated by the Great Satan.
In his mind the CIA had become an evil, many-tentacled monster that was trying to strangle his young nation by every means possible.
When he knew for certain that a particular shooting or explosion was due to the very cell that he controlled, he consoled himself that it was the will of Allah.
After all, closeted anonymously in the Iranian Embassy on avenue d'léna, it was easy to distance himself from events beyond its railings.
Today though had been different.
Today he had seen violence at first hand.
His suit was still stained with the blood of the Vietnamese manservant of Nader Nadirpur.
It had been his baptism in the struggle for survival of the Islamic Revolution.
Now he was in the front line.
And it frightened him.
Yet, at the same time, he felt a strange exhilaration at being part of the movement.
No longer need he consider himself a charlatan, an impostor.
When he had received news that morning from Teheran via Geneva that the ship he had chartered had gone missing, he indulged himself in genuine anger.
It was fuelled by intelligence information that Nadirpur was a suspected sympathiser of the late Reza Shah.
He was consumed by indignation that there had been so many attempts to swindle his country in its attempts to gain arms to protect itself from the aggression of Iraq.
Once he and his henchman had been obliged to leave the wrecked apartment on the avenue Foch, he had been filled with apprehension at having to report his failure direct to Teheran.
He had only twice before ever spoken to the man they called Sabbah.
On both occasions, after he  had finished talking, he had been a perspiring, gibbering wreck.
His leader's menace and awe was able to transmit itself thousands of miles over a telephone line, such was his presence.
Perhaps, Azadi ruminated, there was some truth in the popular rumour that Sabbah was indeed a sorcerer of immense supernatural powers.
This time had been the worst of all.
Yet, thankfully, his leader's rage was not directed at him, but at the conspiracy of Nadirpur and the French and British Governments to steal the arms shipment that was rightfully the property of Iran.
His leader did not believe for one moment the protestations of innocence.
It was all a smokescreen to make them believe that the Clarion Call had been lost at sea.
Vengeance must be exacted.
Pressure must be exerted.
The shipowner must be forced to reveal the whereabouts of the ship.
Sabbah gave his directive, and Azadi dutifully noted down the orders in his neat, precise script.
It had seemed so straightforward then.
But looking down at the words now, it did not appear so simple.
How did you apply pressure to a man you could not even find?
After the incident on avenue Foch, Azadi had left a man to watch in a surveillance car.
But the man was a fool, a low-grade Pessarane Behesht attachment who had been foisted on him by some egocentric mullah operating from Geneva.
The man had attempted to follow Nadirpur's BMW car and the girl motorcyclist when they left later in the morning.
But he had been easily outwitted in the tangled back streets of Paris.
Once again Azadi thumbed through the intelligence report for some inspiration.
The shipowner had no relatives remaining in Iran, and none in France of whom they were aware.
Some in the United States had changed their names after they had fled Teheran and had successfully disappeared.
He had no friends, except the Vietnamese manservant.
His business contacts were being checked, but it seemed unlikely to Azadi that any of them would have been in a position to spirit the shipowner away at a moment's notice.
The only clue had come in the late morning.
A telephone call from a man claiming to be Nadirpur's security adviser.
A man called D'Arcy.
Not an uncommon name in Paris.
Idly he turned to the London addendum that had been recently updated while the shipping contract had been under negotiation.
He read the personal notes again, and this time he raised an eyebrow.
It had meant nothing to him at the time, but now…
Very slowly an idea began to form at the back of his mind.
He leafed over another page.
Attached to the inventory of Clarion Call's true cargo was the photocopy of a letter from a company called IAP in  London.
It confirmed that it would supply a sea-marshal and all necessary protective equipment and training to satisfy the ship's insurers for safe passage in the Gulf war zone.
One of the directors on the letterhead was Pierre Roquelaure, the man who had arranged Azadi's deal.
Another was Robert D'Arcy.
Carefully he wrote out the letters on his pad.
D'-A-R-C-Y.
His suspicions were confirmed.
Angrily he underscored the name with his pen.
The point tore through the paper.
He reached again for the telephone, this time excitement replacing his fear.
‘Get me this Teheran number,’ he demanded.
The hot and humid weather that had been suffocating Paris continued the next two days.
It contributed to D'Arcy's increasingly bad mood as he scoured the city in his search for the directors of Spidex International Trading.
Roquelaure arranged for him to visit DGSE headquarters on the boulevard Berthier ring road.
Colloquially known as la piscine , so named after the nearby disused les Tourelles swimming pool, the complex of modern and antiquated buildings was hidden behind an eighteen-foot high wall.
There D'Arcy met an affable, mild-mannered man whom Roquelaure introduced simply as Hubert.
In his early forties with thinning curly hair and a ready smile, his dress was in marked contrast to the usually sober attire of British security service personnel.
A colourful seersucker summer jacket covered a yellow polo shirt and a gold bracelet clung to his wrist.
‘Sheikh Abdullah Hayira was definitely Jordanian,’ Hubert pronounced, tapping the file with a certain theatrical air.
‘His banking and legal references all checked out.
They still do, except that the bank officials will no longer tell us anything.
Decidedly unhelpful.
That makes me think he must have connections with the Jordanian Government — he probably works for the Jordanian Secret Service, either full time or in some ad hoc capacity.
I doubt that it is his real name.’
‘Where does he live?’
D'Arcy asked.
Hubert waved his hand with a flourish.
‘That's a good question.
He claims to have several houses — in Switzerland, London, Rome and a rented apartment in New York.
He was always on the move, he said.
But they weren't checked because at the time he was renting a suite at the Crillon.’
That figured, D'Arcy thought.
The fabulous Crillon, with its marble columns, crystal chandeliers and tapestries, was probably the most exclusive hotel in Paris.
One wouldn't normally suspect the credentials of anyone who could afford to stay at such a place.
‘He said he was planning to buy an apartment in the city,’ Hubert added with a sly smile, ‘as soon as he found somewhere suitable.’
‘How did he pay his bill?’
‘I spoke to the hotel yesterday.
It was settled by charge card, and that was always debited from his bank in Jordan.
The same bank that no longer wishes to speak to us.’
‘What about his fellow directors?’
‘Alas I only met them once.
They were apparently all jet-setters like Sheikh Havira.
Always flying from one business deal to another.
At least that was the story.
However, we insisted that all board members should attend the initial meeting to agree the deal.
Anyway there are details of each in the file.’
‘Was there anything at all about them that struck you as odd?’
‘Not odd as such.
It later occurred to me that almost every one of the board members was of a different nationality.
That I thought a little strange.
I mean, as the company had its origins in Jordan, you might expect a preponderance of Jordanians on the board.
But no.
There was just one, then an Iraqi, a Saudi, a Kuwaiti — and an Englishman.’
D'Arcy sat up.
‘English?’
‘Yes, a quiet man.
Did not say anything during the meeting.’
Hubert squinted as though at some object in the middle distance as he tried to recall.
‘In fact I remember he nearly didn't make the meeting.
Said that urgent business had cropped up and tried to cancel his appearance at the last minute.’
Roquelaure, who had been silent until now, said: ‘I insisted that he attend.
That, or else no deal.
He came.’
D'Arcy glanced at Hubert's dossier.
‘Cupplewaite.
George Cupplewaite, is that him?’
‘Yes, that's him.
Gave the name of his solicitors in London as his contact address.
If anything he was more secretive than the others.
Said he was nearly always travelling.’
‘Did he mention any countries in particular?’
Roquelaure said: ‘I remember Kenya, Hong Kong and the Sultanate of Oman.’
A bell rang somewhere in D'Arcy's subconscious.
‘Oman?’
Hubert was surprised.
‘Is that significant?’
D'Arcy shrugged.
‘Just that it's the region where Clarion Call appears to have vanished.
Tell me, do you have a photograph of these people?’
‘Only Sheikh Hayira, and that's in the file,’ Hubert replied.
‘They insisted that they held the meeting at a place of their choosing and only told us at the last minute.
It wasn't practical to take photographs.
We thought we'd have an opportunity at subsequent meetings but, as I've said, it was to be the only time that we all met together.’
‘George Cupplewaite,’ D'Arcy said.
‘What did he look like?’
‘He was in his late fifties, I think.
But very slim and of average height.
And a moustache, I remember a moustache.’
‘And very tanned,’ Roquelaure added.
‘But he said very little,’ Hubert recalled.
‘However, he had very alert eyes.
I don't think he missed much.
He looked very —’ he searched for the word, ‘I think, furtive.
He looked furtive.’
Roquelaure studied his fingertips.
‘And now we know why.’
‘Sit near my tomb, and bring wine and music — Feeling thy presence, I shall come out of my sepulchre — Rise, slowly moving creature, and let me contemplate thy beauty.’
Jalal Shamlou woke with a start.
Her sweet words were still echoing in his ears as he came slowly back to reality.
The Iran Airjet must be nearing Paris because there was an undercurrent of activity as passengers sorted out their belongings and talked excitedly to one another.
To his embarrassment he realised he had an erection and moved quickly to place a copy of the Teheran Times on his lap before the stewardess reached his row.
She offered him the tray of boiled sweets.
There was a hint of a smile on the pale, unmade-up face that was surrounded by a black maghnéeh hood.
He shook his head, blushing.
She reminded him vaguely of the woman in his dream, and he felt sure she had noticed the tent the newspaper on his lap had formed.
‘But you did not eat earlier,’ she said kindly.
Again he shook his head.
It was true he had had no stomach for the pallid lamb chops that he had been offered for lunch.
‘The sweets will help your ears when we land,’ she insisted.
Reluctantly he took one.
‘And your friend?’
He glanced sideways at Ahmad.
He was asleep now, his unlined face peaceful like a baby's, except that his mouth hung loosely open as he snored lightly.
At the Pessarane Behesht camp the young man had been known as Matchsticks because he was very tall and thin, with long monkey arms which he moved in an uncoordinated fashion that amused his comrades.
He was almost without shoulders, reminding Shamlou of a tenpin skittle.
He took another sweet from the stewardess.
‘How long now?’
‘About half-an-hour before Paris,’ she answered, and he was relieved when she moved on down the aisle.
Just half-an-hour to Paris.
Just half-an-hour until he began the mission.
The type of mission for which he had trained so long at the camp, for which he had endured so many indignities.
A mission for which he had been chosen personally by Sabbah.
It had all happened so quickly that he could still not believe it.
Only that morning he had been summoned to the tent of the bearded one.
He had been told very little, and even that he had difficulty in remembering because he was so filled with excitement and anticipation.
It did not occur to him that he might also have been frightened.
Pack a small bag, he had been told, you are going to Paris.
There is  a job to be done.
Our members there have need of someone very special.
To wreak vengeance on those who would betray the Islamic Revolution.
You, Jalal Shamlou, are that very special someone.
And you have had the dream.
He noticed the change of pitch in the engine noise and the slight tilt of the aircraft as it began its descent.
Shutting his eyes, he pressed his head back against the seat, recalling the words he had been told.
Getting it clear in his mind.
Making sure he understood what had happened, what was expected of him.
A consignment of vital arms for the war with the accursed President Sadeq of Iraq had been paid for by Teheran, to be delivered by ship.
That ship had suddenly disappeared in placid waters without trace.
A modern ship with the most modern communications.
While in Paris the Arab arms dealers who had arranged the deal had also vanished with half-a-billion dollars of Iranian money.
The shipowner had protested his innocence, claiming that the loss of his ship was genuine.
The bearded one did not believe his treacherous words, but gave him the benefit of the doubt and twenty-four hours to reveal the whereabouts of the vessel.
When that time was up an envoy from the Iranian Embassy in Paris had been violently beaten up when he called at the shipowner's apartment.
Then the shipowner had gone into hiding.
Attempts to find him by a local Hezbollah cell had failed.
Jalal Shamlou was to change all that.
This called for the expertise of the Pessarane Behesht .
And he had to admit that it was a clever plan to winkle Nader Nadirpur out of his hiding place and force him to tell the truth.
It had been made possible by the officers of the Vezarat-e Ettelaat Va Amniyat-e Kishvar , the Ministry of Intelligence and Internal Security, who kept detailed files on all Iranian exiles throughout the world, whether or not they supported the new Islamic order.
Shamlou's assignment would be coordinated from the Iranian mission to the United Nations in Geneva.
They would direct his ‘controller’ whom he would shortly meet in Paris.
He had felt so proud when he had said goodbye to the veteran Hamman.
His new-found friend and ally had looked at him strangely, questioningly, but had asked nothing of young Shamlou's mission.
No doubt he was aware of the vow of silence.
He had taken the boy in his arms like a father saying farewell to his son.
He had hugged him closely and Shamlou had felt the warm rough texture of the bearded cheek against the smooth skin of his own.
He'd felt the tightening in his throat and tasted the salt of his own tears in his mouth.
Hamman had stood back then, and held up the tattoo above his right wrist.
Shamlou read the words again.
To God and Yourself be True.
‘Do what you have to do, Jalal.
But whatever you do, do it for Allah and for Islam.
Not for anyone who uses His holy name for their own ends.
Do you hear me, Jalal?’
In tears Shamlou had croaked: ‘I hear you, Darvish Hamman.’
Then the old veteran had gone.
Shamlou was in no doubt that this would be a dangerous operation.
Dangerous, that was, to himself and to the snoring Matchsticks beside him.
It would require animal cunning, zeal and the utter ruthlessness demanded in defence of Islam.
At least danger meant nothing to Shamlou now.
He knew a place awaited him in paradise.
By the side of the woman who had read him poetry.
The woman who had loved him.
The only woman who had ever loved him.
It was a cruel trick that she had been a dream, that he could not join her yet.
Matchsticks stirred, his snore becoming a sudden snort that woke him up.
It took several moments for him to orientate himself and wipe the sleep from his eyes.
Protruding teeth showed as he smiled.
‘Hello, Jalal, surely we must be nearly there.’
Shamlou found himself irritated by his comrade's gormless manner and unkempt hair.
Matchsticks would have been the last one at the Pessarane Behesht camp he would have chosen to accompany him on this mission.
‘If you hadn't been asleep all this time, you'd know that we are nearly there.’
The young man scratched his head and looked around the cabin.
He appeared unaware of the rebuke.
‘I hate Paris.
It's full of blasphemy and decadence.
The streets are full of harlots, there are live sex shows around Pigalle…’
‘Shut up,’ Shamlou snapped.
He wasn't in the mood to hear of such things.
‘Just look at them,’ Matchsticks muttered in disgust as he watched his fellow passengers.
‘Treacherous taghouti , every one of them.’
Shamlou turned his head.
It wasn't exactly true; they weren't all rich and middle-class Iranians who had learned to survive the Revolution by paying lip service to it — then bending the rules to suit themselves.
There was also a group of male students; three soldiers on their way to have some specialist medical treatment, and a number of older couples of  peasant stock who were probably visiting their well-to-do offspring in Paris.
But he knew what Matchsticks meant.
Most of the men who earlier had transformed the small areas of carpet beside the emergency exits into makeshift mosques now sported neckties — the most blatant symbol of Westernism.
As though by magic virtually every chador cloak and hejab headdress had disappeared, the women having changed into smart dresses and tailored suits in the privacy of  the toilets.
Everywhere mascara was being rolled and lipstick carefully drawn.
‘We are not even off the plane and they are playing into the hands of the Great Satan,’ Matchsticks sneered.
Shamlou hissed: ‘I will not tell you again to keep quiet.
Do not draw attention to yourself.
Say another word and I will not have you on this mission.’
The other man shrugged and fell silent.
To be deprived of his place on the mission was one thing that he was not prepared to let happen.
Shamlou experienced a glow of satisfaction.
This was the first time he had exercised his authority and it had worked.
The tiresome Matchsticks shut up like a clam.
He knew his place, Shamlou mused contentedly.
After all, he was ‘chosen’; his comrade was not.
Jalal Shamlou was seething.
He felt shamed and humiliated by the officious treatment he received at the hands of the pompous men at Immigration.
Standing with their noses in the air.
As though he had something bad-smelling on his shoes.
For an hour and a half they had kept him standing.
Clearly amused at his discomfort and his mounting anger.
Questions and more questions.
Poring over the sparse details lie had been obliged to enter on his landing card.
It had been with supreme effort that he had controlled his temper.
That temper was raised higher still when he was finally allowed through and found Matchsticks already waiting, idly smoking and flicking through a copy of Lui .
He snatched the girlie magazine from his comrade's hands and tossed it on the seat.
Matchsticks looked shocked.
‘You didn't have to do that.
I just wanted to see what filth they were up to now.’
‘Come on,’ Shamlou snapped, and led the way towards the exit.
‘Our boys should have finished the bombing back in ‘86.
Blown the lot of these French bastards up.
Who do they think they are?’
‘Friends of Satan,’ Matchsticks agreed.
‘I told you so.
Do we catch a taxi?’
Shamlou stopped dead.
‘In the name of the Imam, use what little brains you've got.
We've trained together, you know the routine.’
‘This case is heavy.’
‘Then you should have packed a smaller one — as you were told to do!’
He stalked off to find the airport bus to take them to the SNCF railway station at Roissy, leaving Matchsticks to struggle after him as best he could.
At the station they fought their way through the crush of travellers to join the ticket queue which already numbered some three hundred people.
Finally, hot and irritable, they squeezed onto the train for the  rapid journey to the capital.
Shamlou was gratified to find themselves jostled by so many foreign students, many loaded down with rucksacks, clearly in Paris for cheap hostel holidays.
He and Matchsticks blended in perfectly as had been predicted back in Teheran.
Rather than alight at the Gare du Nord railway terminal, they stayed on for another stop, leaving at Châtelet in the centre of the city.
There they transferred to the Métro, taking the rubber-wheeled underground train on the Neuilly line to the west of the city.
Following instructions they left at Clemenceau station, emerging after a short climb of steps in the bustle and noise of the Champs Elysées.
Shamlou was immediately struck by the difference with Teheran.
Here everything was bright with colour, the walkers on the tree-shaded boulevards relaxed, content to stroll against the frenetic background of racing hooting traffic.
The elegant shops were filled with every type of produce, from unimaginable foodstuffs to high fashion and jewellery; the seats of the pavement cafés were filled with people happily eating and drinking and watching the world pass by; queues waited expectantly outside cinemas offering the very latest movies from around the world.
It was a far cry from the city of Teheran which Shamlou had last seen when paying a visit to his mother before going to the Sabbah camp.
Always dirty and drab under the Shah, the streets now showed signs of actual decay and neglect.
Many shops were boarded up, their owners having perished in the war or at the hands of the Komitehs, or been bankrupted by the collapsed economy.
Every available wall space was covered with graffiti and fervent slogans, or the accumulated remnants of countless religious posters.
The pavements were cracked and uneven.
There was little colour to be seen in people's clothing now.
Dull greys and browns predominated and black was much in evidence.
But worst of all was the atmosphere.
Not the choking fumes from the traditional traffic jams.
It was a pervading atmosphere of sullen oppression that.
cocooned the place; few smiles and friendly words were exchanged.
Everyone got on with the business at hand, preoccupied with the problems of food shortages, lack of funds and compliance with the rules of the Islamic order.
Shamlou put it down to war weariness.
Surely the citizens of any country at war would be the same?
No family, he knew, had not suffered the bereavement or tragic maiming of someone near and dear.
His own family had been no exception.
He and Matchsticks found the Elysées Roundpoint on the north side of the avenue.
It was a glitzy split-level shopping centre with brightly lit window displays of expensive fashions.
They took the escalator down to the lower level and the Grillapolis café.
The décor was all polished glass tiles and gleaming brass.
They sat at one of the marble-topped tables and ordered coffee from  a bored waitress who scarcely spared them a glance.
Five minutes passed before contact was made.
‘Is this chair free?’ the stranger asked.
He was a quietly spoken middle-aged man whom anyone would find difficult to remember.
A grey man, thought Shamlou.
Grey suit, grey hair and a greyish complexion.
The only dab of colour was a dark blue pocket handkerchief.
Otherwise, Shamlou mused, he resembled a photographic negative.
When the waitress had served their orders and moved away, the grey man said softly: ‘I am Azadi.
I am your controller for this mission.’
He opened his briefcase and pushed a large buff envelope across the table.
‘These are your new identities.
Passports, permits, identity cards, student passes. ',
Shamlou looked at them dubiously.
‘Are they genuine?
The British authorities are very thorough.’
Azadi did not let his irritation show.
‘They belong to two genuine Iranian students here in Paris.
Your photographs have been substituted by our experts.’
‘What of the real students?’
Matchsticks asked.
‘They are not your concern.’
A hard edge crept into Shamlou's voice.
‘Tell us.’
Azadi sighed.
‘They were supporters of Reza Shah,’ he said, as though that explained everything.
Shamlou caught the nuance.
‘Were ?’
‘They have disappeared today.
They will not be found.’
‘How can you be sure?’
‘Bodies fed to pigs are not found.’
Inwardly Shamlou shuddered, but Matchsticks thought it was a huge joke and laughed loudly.
Azadi looked at him scathingly, then turned to Shamlou.
‘A note has been left at the flat where they lived, advising friends that they have gone to London for a vacation.
There will be no queries, and if anyone from Britain were to check back here then everything will tally.’
Shamlou nodded his understanding.
‘Now let me have your own passports and anything that might give a clue to your true identities.’
Both men placed their wallets on the table; in accordance with their instructions, all documents and tickets had been kept together.
The grey man scooped them into his briefcase and snapped it shut.
Shamlou picked up the buff envelope and stuffed it in the pocket of his windcheater.
‘In there you will find two tickets for a coach trip to London,’ Azadi explained.
‘Go to the Eurolines station at Porte de la Villette.
The journey takes about eight-and-a-half hours.
Try to get some sleep.
You will arrive at the Victoria Coach Station in London at dawn.’
‘Do we go to the embassy?’
Matchsticks asked.
Azadi tried not to show his despair.
‘Of course not.
That is the last place you must go.
Make your way to the Pizzaland restaurant in Gloucester Road by twelve noon.
There you will meet a man who will brief you on the details of when and where the operation will take place.
You will recognise him because he will be sitting alone reading a paperback edition of the Holy Koran.’
Shamlou's eyes narrowed.
‘Who is this man?
Is he Pessarane Behesht ?’
‘Certainly not.
He is merely a student from Imperial College in Exhibition Road.
It is he who has been instructed by our intelligence people in London how to conduct the operation with three friends.’
‘How do we know they can be trusted?’
The grey man smiled and Shamlou noted how white and perfect his teeth were.
‘They have families in Teheran.
Families who have now been taken into Evin prison.
If the students fail, or disobey in any way, they know their families will not come out again.
Besides, they are just impoverished students.
They will welcome the money we will pay.’
Shamlou exchanged a glance with Matchsticks.
All seemed satisfactory.
‘Do these people know the whereabouts of the safe house?’
Shamlou asked.
‘They know nothing of your part of the operation.
Only our London intelligence people know of the safe house.
The address they have selected is in that envelope.
The owners have not been approached.
That will be entirely up to you.’
‘Tell me about them.’
‘He is a wealthy Iranian, an art dealer, who is now a naturalised Briton.
He is married to an American woman.
They have a son who is at boarding school.
As you might imagine, the family is at pains to have no contact with our embassy whatsoever.
In fact he has had no contact with our officials since the Shah fled Iran in 1979.
He is selected for that reason, because he will not be suspected by the police.’
‘He will not be co-operative,’ Shamlou thought aloud.
‘It is up to you to make him co-operative,’ Azadi replied softly.
‘He still has an elderly mother living in Yazd.
The point is that he has a suitable house in north London.
It is detached in an acre of ground with high walls.
There is an integral garage from which you can gain direct access to the cellar.
You will not be overlooked by anyone.’
‘If he has no contact with the embassy, how do we know all this about him?’
Matchsticks asked suspiciously.
Azadi was becoming exasperated by all the questions.
He was used to being obeyed without demur.
He trusted the curiosity of these young men was an indication of their special training for the task.
‘Our people have met him in the social life of the arts world.
Nothing to do with official embassy business.’
Anxious to conclude the meeting, he added: ‘Everything else you need to know is in that envelope — that includes any funds that you may require.
They'll be available to you through a special bank account in London.
There is one more thing.
A Pessarane Behesht sleeper cell has been activated in London to assist you.
Originally it was planned for them to eliminate enemies of the Islamic Republic, but this mission was deemed more important.
They will have the weapons you will need.
They know Britain well, and will be of great help to you.
But, remember, you are in command.
You are responsible.’
Shamlou's dark eyes held him in a contemptuous gaze.
‘I shall not fail.
I am chosen.’
Roughly he pushed back his chair and stood.
‘Allah akbar .’
Without another word he turned and strode towards the escalator, leaving Matchsticks to struggle after him with his heavy case.
‘Answer that, will you, Beth!’
Ali Christie called out.
He was in the dressing room adjoining the master bedroom, wearing just his socks and silk boxer shorts, when the doorbell rang.
The wearing of boxer shorts was just one of the many American ways he'd adopted over the years.
Like his new name, changed by deed poll nine years before.
Otis Christie — very American.
And a wise precaution in 1979 when conducting business in the USA.
At that time — even now — a Persian name like Ali Tabrizi was a positive liability.
Especially when American hostages were being held in Teheran.
Only his American wife and close friends still called him Ali, pointing out that while Otis might be a great name for a black jazz singer, it was hardly suitable for an art dealer.
‘Can you hear me, Beth?’ he called again as he hurriedly extracted his golfing slacks from the rack.
He liked to get a few holes in before work.
‘Will you answer the door?’
‘Okay, okay!’ came the voice from downstairs.
It was followed by a stifled yawn.
Christie shook his head in despair.
Dearly though he loved his wife, her early morning lethargy never failed to rankle.
He would be up with the morning chorus, while Beth was happy to mooch around for hours in her nightdress, drinking black coffee, smoking cigarettes and watching breakfast television.
He had never yet seen her washed and dressed before he left for his game of golf on the way to the small art gallery that he owned in Brook Street.
However, this morning Beth Christie was brighter than usual; she planned to shop for the dinner party she was holding later in the week.
She peered through the security peephole in the solid Edwardian oak door.
As Harrow-on-the-Hill had one of the highest burglary rates in London, it was understandable that residents of the numerous private roads should be cautious.
Half-expecting it to be the milkman, she was mildly irritated to see two young men standing on the steps outside.
They were both smartly dressed in casual clothes, although the taller one had rather untidy hair.
‘I hope they're not bloody Jehovah's Witnesses,’ she muttered to herself as she bent to release the chain, a cigarette clamped between her teeth.
She swung the door open.
‘Yes?’
‘Good morning,’ the shorter of the two said with a charming smile.
‘Is it Mrs Christie?’
Beth was surprised he knew her name.
Instinctively she ran a hand through her dishevelled hair, smoothing it into some kind of order.
He was quite handsome with an olive-skinned, boyish face.
But it was the eyes that drew her attention, dark and smouldering with lovely long lashes.
She wished she'd already applied her make-up; she was still good-looking without it, she knew, but at thirty-eight you had to expect a few flaws.
She hid her cigarette behind the door.
She didn't want him thinking she was a slag.
‘Yes, I'm Mrs Christie.
What did you want?’
The young man continued to smile.
‘We are business acquaintances of your husband.
We wanted to have an urgent word with him on an important matter.’
She laughed lightly, sensing his interest in her.
‘Ah, so you are Iranian.
I thought so.
Such nice manners.
I'm sure Ali will be pleased to have a quick word before he leaves.’
She opened the door wider and noticed the mustard-coloured van parked on the drive; there were two other men sitting in the back.
‘Do step inside — and please excuse my dress.
It is rather early.’
They followed her in, closing the door behind them.
‘Ali!’
Beth called up the stairs.
‘Two gentlemen to see you.’
She gave their names.
‘Who?’ he shouted back.
‘Never mind, I'll be down.’
The young man smiled sheepishly.
‘I expect he forgets our names.
He must know many people.’
Beth shuffled her feet in the awkward silence and found herself looking at the second man more closely.
He was tall and gangling with a slack mouth and appeared to be holding something behind his back.
She guessed it was a briefcase.
Ali Christie was straightening his tie as he reached the bottom of the stairs.
He viewed the two men with curiosity.
‘I'm afraid, gentlemen, you have me at a disadvantage.
I don't seem to recall —’
Shamlou smiled.
‘perhaps, sir, this will remind you.’
He reached inside his windcheater while Christie watched, expecting a wallet and business card to be produced.
He certainly was not anticipating  the snub-nosed automatic pistol that was suddenly pointed at his forehead.
‘God!’
Beth gasped, stepping back.
‘Is this some kind of joke?’
Christie demanded, not believing his own eyes.
Shamlou looked at the man with disgust.
‘Joke?
I'll show you what sort of joke!’
He turned to Matchsticks.
‘Do it NOW!’
Matchsticks nodded and stepped towards the woman.
In panic she stumbled backwards, twisted round and tried to run into the living room.
Matchsticks gave chase, catching her in mid-stride.
She fell heavily, landing on the marble hearth of the fireplace and shattering the display vase of flowers.
Her legs splayed inelegantly and with her mouth wide and dry with fear, she stared up at the stranger.
For the first time she saw the red tin container he had been hiding behind his back.
Realised what it was.
‘NO!’ she screamed as the stench of petrol reached her nostrils.
Christie stepped forward to intervene.
He was stopped by the snout of Shamlou's pistol, jammed hard under his chin.
‘SHUT UP!’
Matchsticks bawled at the hysterical woman and began slopping contents from the petrol can over the front of her dressing gown.
‘The business!’
Shamlou snapped.
‘Tell them!’
Matchsticks grinned malevolently as the room began to stink.
‘Pavilion Gallery!’ he shouted his well-rehearsed reply.
‘Brook Street.’
‘And the boy!’
Shamlou hissed, his eyes fixed on Christie's blood-drained face.
‘Greenhill Private School, Hampshire!’
Matchsticks answered sharply.
‘Gregory Christie!
Fifth form!’
Beth shut her eyes and opened her lungs, the scream reverberating round the house like the cry of a soul in torment.
Then the fumes caught in her throat and her yell petered into a racking cough.
Her body started to tremble, totally beyond her control, as she felt the astringent liquid soak into her skin.
And she began to sob.
Joyously Matchsticks pulled a lighter from his pocket, rolled the flint with his thumb and watched the flame leap into life.
‘Don't!’
Christie croaked, his Adam's apple crushed painfully against the thrusting automatic.
‘P-please d-don't!’
Shamlou smiled gently.
‘No more,’ he warned.
He did not trust his comrade not to kill them all in a fireball.
He lowered the weapon and pushed the man roughly back against the living room door.
Listen to me, Mr Christie, and listen very carefully.
You have betrayed your country and your religion.
You have turned your back on your people and consorted with the Great Satan, America.
You have even married this whore of a woman, and consorted with other traitors.’
Christie's eyes widened.
‘I have not —’
‘Shut up!’
Shamlou snarled, clearly controlling his anger with difficulty.
‘Now, all this will be forgiven, we are not barbarians.
Allah forgives those who repent.
But first you must pay penance.
The art dealer opened his mouth, uncomprehending.
‘You will do what we say, and that is very simple.
For the next few days — for as long as it takes — you just continue your life as though nothing has happened.
That is all.
Nothing else.’
He seemed calmer now, and smiled widely so that Christie noticed how white his teeth were.
‘See, simple, yes?
And when it is over, we will just disappear from your lives and Allah will wash His hands of you for ever.’
Momentarily the pounding eased in Christie's chest and he struggled to find the courage to speak.
‘When what is over?’
Shamlou's smile vanished as fast as it had come.
‘No questions!
There are four of us.
Always at least one person will be with you at all times.
If anyone asks who we are, you say you are having your house decorated.
Meanwhile you go to work as usual.’
Christie's mouth was now quite dry, and he had to gather saliva before he could speak.
‘What about Beth?’ he asked in a hoarse whisper.
Shamlou looked down at the cowering woman in the hearth, the petrol-sodden gown clinging to her body.
‘Your dear wife stays with us.
If you tell anyone of what goes on, or call the police — anything — she goes up in flames.’
‘WHOOF!’
Matchsticks said suddenly.
He began to chuckle.
Shamlou lowered the automatic.
‘And after that it will be the turn of your gallery and your boy to be destroyed at any time of our choosing.’
His gently mocking smile returned.
‘Not to mention your mother who still lives in Yazd.’
Christie fell back against the door, his eyes closed.
This just wasn't happening.
Wasn't, wasn't, wasn't!
It was a nightmare from which he would awaken at any moment.
Shamlou turned to his comrade.
‘Go and fetch the others.
Have everything brought in and taken down to the cellar.
And I want the explosives set as soon as possible.
We haven't much time.’
Matchsticks sneered down at the shaking woman, then turned nonchalantly towards the front door.
Shamlou said: ‘Now you go to work, Mr Christie.’
‘The nightmare had not passed, and the art dealer forced himself to open has eyes, to face the bleak reality.
‘H-how can I?’ he whispered.
‘I am shaking.
Look, I can hardly stand.’
Shamlou stepped back, and when he spoke all the anger and passion was gone from his voice.
Again he was the charming young man who had knocked at the door just ten minutes earlier.
‘Oh, I think you can, Mr Christie.
You are assured no harm need befall you or your wife.
You  are safe.
There is no threat — as long as you do exactly as you are told.’
His voice was the texture of syrup, his tone consoling.
‘And that starts with going to work, perfectly normally.’
Christie swallowed hard and nodded.
He let go of the door he was clutching for support and tested the muscles in his legs.
Ignoring the fluttering sensation of his calves, he walked slowly and stiffly towards the sofa where his briefcase lay.
‘See, it is not so difficult,’ Shamlou mocked.
‘Now leave and get in your car.’
A voice wailed from the hearth.
‘Don't go, Ali!
Don't leave me!’
Christie couldn't bear to look at his wife; he only half-turned.
‘I have to, Beth, for both our sakes.
Be brave.
I'll be back tonight.
Usual time.’
Shamlou smirked with satisfaction.
‘You get the idea.
That is nice.’
‘P-p-please!’
The door slammed shut, and Shamlou felt himself relax.
It had gone remarkably well; his intensive training had paid off handsomely.
The application of shock tactics to bend the will of the unwilling.
To instil such fear that total domination and obedience is guaranteed.
He looked down at the woman.
She was a pitiful sight, still lying where she had fallen, too terrified to move an inch.
Ashen-faced, she was gibbering quietly to herself, her petrol-sodden hair plastered to her head and her dripping gown showing her legs almost to the crotch.
Shamlou began feeling an immense sense of power, and was aware of his loins stirring.
Momentarily he had a vision of the woman in the garden.
Beth caught sight of the strange light in his eyes, and was frightened.
In a tremulous voice she whispered: ‘Who are you people?’
He looked down at her contemptuously.
‘Allah's chosen.
We are the Pessarane Behesht .’
‘What?’
She didn't understand.
‘My Persian isn't very good.’
He looked around the room absently.
‘We are the Sons of Heaven.’
My name is Philippe Chaumont.
Just a few days ago I was foolish enough to allow my hopes to rise.
For the first time in nearly three years someone spoke my name.
Spoke my name and told me that I was about to be released.
I was taken from the cellar in Beirut and enjoyed the warmth of the sun on my skin for the first time in a thousand days.
It was a short-lived experience before I was nailed into a coffin and transported by car across the rubble-strewn streets of  this war-torn city.
On the journey I heard sporadic gunfire and by listening to snatches of conversation between my guards, gathered that Amal guerrillas were fighting yet again with Shia militia, the Hezbollah.
Only the day before I might have prayed for a stray round to puncture the car and my coffin and put me out of my endless misery.
But with my release so close I think the angels themselves might have wept if had perished.
When the car stopped I knew exactly where we were.
Don't ash me how.
When one is blind the other senses conspire to compensate.
My hearing is painfully acute, and my sense of touch and smell quite profound.
I have even developed another faculty not normally considered as one of the five senses.
That is a sense of direction.
No matter how many twists and turns that vehicle made, I was able to keep track.
I had come to know Beirut well before my incarceration and various clues of sound and smell enabled me to pinpoint our destination.
It was logical really that I should be brought from my anonymous safe house to the Hezbollah's Hay Madi barracks.
This was confirmed when I heard a Syrian soldier talking at a roadblock we encountered.
I think my guards bribed him to let us pass.
I knew the single-storey building from memory, standing as it did close to the dividing line with the Amal-controlled suburb of Chiyah in southern Beirut.
No doubt the flat roof of the shattered and shell-pocked building was still guarded by Shia militia, ever watchful behind their sandbag emplacements.
No doubt, too, the tattered flag of Iran still fluttered from its mast.
In the surrounding debris of apartment blocks more militia would be crouched, forming the outer defence ring of the beleaguered stronghold.
Although encircled by its enemies, I knew just how impregnable it was.
The location had often been discussed at my embassy.
In those days it was estimated to be guarded by some three hundred Hezbollah fanatics and, despite being a single-storey construction, it was known to have several basement levels.
It would have taken a battalion to root the fanatics out, and the casualties would have been horrendous.
On my arrival my coffin was carried to one of those lower levels before I was allowed out.
I was kept in a small, square concrete room which had rat-droppings on the floor.
Although I was shackled to a radiator, my blindfold was removed and I was given a cup of water and a sweetmeat.
I could only attribute my captors' sudden change of attitude to the fact that they were pleased to be getting rid of me.
That they were pleased with whatever deal they'd made for my release.
The door was left slightly ajar, and there was much coming and going; much excited chatter.
My brain became a sponge, suddenly spurred into action.
After three dormant years it began humming like a computer, sucking in information of which it had been starved, until my head began to hurt physically with the effort.
I gleaned several things.
The Hay Madi barracks appeared to be divided into three sections.
The first was the sleeping and messing quarters of the Hezbollah streetfighters.
The second, where I was held, was filled with Amal prisoners taken in the fighting and with local Lebanese hostages.
But the third, deep in the bowels of the earth, was kept mysteriously locked at all  times.
It was protected by special guards of the Pessarane Behesht, recognised by their blue headbands inscribed with Farsi script.
Even the Hezbollah militia and the Revolutionary Guards were clearly, wary of them.
It was simply guesswork that it was in that place that some of the Western hostages were kept.
Such detail might prove invaluable to French Intelligence at any debrief after my release.
And during all this time I kept getting flashing pictures in my mind of Chantal, like a magic lantern slide.
It was as though someone had turned on a current of electricity, and with every second that passed the image became brighter and stronger.
The flickering individual images came closer and closer together until it was one continuous picture.
It was so close that I felt I could reach out and touch her.
So close I could see the pores of her skin, the delicate green threads in the irises of her eyes, the moist velvet warmth of her mouth.
Smell the fragrance of her hair.
She was smiling, pouting, pulling faces, striking poses like someone not knowing what to do in front of a family cine camera…
And then the door fell open.
I knew it was bad news.
The image of Chantal vanished instantly as though someone had thrown a switch.
My two guards stood in the doorway.
Behind them was a tall, bearded man I did not know.
The first guard said.: ‘Your release is cancelled.’
That was all.
No hint of apology.
Of regret.
No explanation.
I was manhandled to my feet, unchained, then led down a flight of steps, lit by bare bulbs, to the inner section.
A single steel door was opened.
Beyond there ran a damp, crumbling brick passageway with a low ceiling.
Several doors ran off it, two now open as prisoners were being moved from one to the other.
No doubt to make room for me.
My heart and spirits sank like a stone in a lake.
I was filled with dread, and with paralysing fear.
Then, in that mean, ill-lit corridor I collided with another prisoner being pushed the other way.
We were jammed together, shoulder-to-shoulder, in the narrow confines.
He was a tall, heavily built man, and I had to look up to see the bearded face.
Momentarily our eyes met.
His were dark, fluid and compassionate.
In that brief fragment of time he smiled down at me.
And then he was pushed roughly on, and suddenly, inexplicably my mind was filled with a vivid picture of Christ looking down at me as I stood at the foot of the cross.
I felt the spiritual strength that had deserted me flowing back as a warm glow that welled up inside, filling my being.
Lifting my heart with a strange.
ecstatic joy.
I said to myself, my name is Philippe Chaumont.
Ashi Nadirpur laid out the clothes that she was going to wear that day on the bed.
This might be summer, but it was also London.
Sometimes she thought her Persian blood would never acclimatise to the damp, cool climate.
She settled on a plain pleated skirt in burgundy wool, a cream blouse and a lightweight cashmere sweater.
Lastly she made her selection of lingerie: fragile, feathery lace with thin straps.
That was her style.
It suited her diminutive stature and delicate features.
Had it not been for the honey pigment of her skin, any one of her small circle of friends might have described her as a porcelain doll.
‘Mummy, are you ready yet?’
The impatient voice of her seven-year-old daughter.
‘I mustn't be late again.’
Ashi glanced at the carriage clock on the dressing table.
A present from Nader, it was never slow.
Eight thirty.
‘Don't worry, darling,’ she called back.
‘There's plenty of time.’
‘If you're sure,’ returned Sousan's voice from downstairs.
Bless her, she was such a little worrier.
Late just once because the car wouldn't start and Sousan was in a panic.
No doubt that was due to the ticking off she had received from that strict harridan of a teacher at the small private school in Kensington.
It had been clear from the start that the spinster had taken an instant dislike to both Ashi and her daughter.
Single-parent families were to be treated with suspicion; it was a status she believed lowered the tone and moral values of the school.
As Ashi dressed swiftly her eyes were drawn back to the carriage clock.
Every morning, and each night before switching off the light, she would look at it.
And each time it reminded her of her husband.
Still the sadness weighed heavily in her heart; she wondered if those precious dreams of what might have been would ever leave her alone.
That teacher would have had a different attitude if Nader had been around.
Ashi had no doubt the woman would have been as rapt at his polite charm and elegance as she herself had once been.
And the teacher, too, might have made the same terrible mistake that she had made back in Teheran all those years before.
Ashi had met him during the height of the oil boom, when the late Shah was pouring the country's new-found wealth into creating an entire  new infrastructure for a land that had hardly changed since biblical times.
Even now she vividly recalled the first time she saw Nader at the exclusive Royal Club, a dining, gambling and sports centre.
It was a magical, velvet-warm night at the open-air poolside restaurant.
Candles flickered and flower arrangements floated on the lacquered surface of the water, and the music from a string quartet filled the scented air.
It had been a special eighteenth birthday treat for Ashi.
Although her father was a well-to-do market trader, his wealth was modest by comparison with that of the new jet-set.
Descended from a devoutly religious family, he was mildly disapproving of Iran's high society pleasure-seekers.
By nature a man of moderation and thrift, he would limit visits to places like the Royal Club to occasions of celebration.
Yet, although he drank only fruit juice himself, he would say nothing if his family chose to indulge in a bottle of wine.
He was tolerant, too, of his daughter's passion for the latest Western fashions.
Only if the dresses became too tight or too short would he make a gently reproving comment.
That night had been particularly joyous, because Ashi felt that at last her family was allowing her to blossom fully into womanhood.
The jokes between her father, mother and older brother had been adult, almost risqué ; she had been allowed several glasses of champagne without a reproachful look, and her rather revealing décolletage had passed without comment.
Then, while the waiters in their black ties and white gloves were serving the meal, she noticed the man at the adjoining table watching her.
He was petite like herself, but strikingly handsome.
Almost pretty, she thought.
With the blackest hair she had ever seen, swept straight back off the forehead.
And a neat moustache which gave him a slightly rakish, debonair look.
As their eyes met he raised his glass to her, and smiled.
Ashi had blushed deeply.
Later she had been surprised to learn that he wasn't in his late twenties as she had guessed, but almost a decade older, thirty-seven.
Not that his age mattered to Ashi; in Iran a tradition of arranged marriages meant that maturity in a man was something to be respected.
Nowadays it was almost fashionable, not least because an older man was more likely to be wealthy and successful.
The problem was finding such a man who wasn't already married.
And Nader Nadirpur, Ashi discovered to her delight, was not.
Once, on a rare occasion before their marriage when they were left without a chaperone, she had asked him why he hadn't married before?
Nader Nadirpur had smiled in his usual disarming way.
‘I had just not met the right woman before I met you that night.
You looked so  happy, sweet and gentle.
I thought you might be the one who was right for me.’
She had sighed contentedly at his answer.
But it was not to be like that.
Although Nader Nadirpur was a considerate and attentive husband, one aspect of their otherwise perfect marriage was far from right.
Behind closed doors it was a disaster.
Only once or twice did he ever become aroused enough for them to make love.
More usually it left him ashamed and angry, despite his wife's kind words of consolation, and Ashi herself in an agitated state of dissatisfaction and unhappiness.
As the months passed he spent more and more time away on his growing shipping business.
Their attempts at lovemaking dwindled to the point of non-existence, until there was an unspoken agreement not to try any more.
He buried himself in work, while she filled every hour of the day playing tennis or golf at the Royal Club, or discoing at the Key or the Cheminée with a group of friends.
Despite numerous opportunities, she loved her husband too much ever to betray him.
The momentous events that led to Ayatollah Khomeini's triumphal return to Teheran in 1979 had long overtaken the problems of Ashi's private life.
With many connections in high places, Nader had seen the writing on the wall.
Two years before the final fall of the Shah, he had begun transferring his wealth and business interests to Paris.
On the day Khomeini flew in to Mehrabad Airport, she and Nader Nadirpur flew out of Teheran for the last time.
They were never to return.
But their new life in Paris was not to prove the dream they had both hoped it would be.
They had few friends in France, and without them the dazzling night life meant nothing.
Evening after evening Ashi found herself alone in their avenue Foch apartment while Nader was out on business.
She took to drinking more than she should, and most nights she would cry herself to sleep, thinking of what might have been.
Her husband, too, became more withdrawn.
His business was in some difficulties and, while in no danger of collapse, his fleet of ships had shrunk from eight to three against competition from the Far East.
Then, a year to the day after their arrival in Paris, came the night she would remember always.
Nader Nadirpur came home late having been for a drive along the Bois de Boulogne to calm his nerves after a particularly bad day.
She remembered how different, how happy he had been when he returned after midnight.
A man transformed.
He had joked and they had laughed together.
He opened a bottle of champagne and before she had a chance to realise what was happening they had been making love.
Ashi was in ecstasy.
The next morning she had awoken happily and full of hope.
Sure that, at last, their marriage was coming right.
But it was to be a cruel illusion.
Just two weeks later Nader Nadirpur broke down in tears.
He confessed that he had finally come to terms with the fact that he was a homosexual, after a lifetime of denying it to himself.
She learned with sadness in her heart that their recent one night of love had been after he had met a young Vietnamese man.
Together they sat by the balcony overlooking avenue Foch and cried in each other 's arms until the early hours.
Yet fate was to play a strange card.
On that one night of their lovemaking since moving to Paris, Ashi had conceived.
Baby Sousan had been a gift from Allah, a blessing, a reward for the affection of two people for each other who were never meant to be together.
‘MUMMY!’
Ashi Nadirpur jumped as her daughter appeared at the bedroom door.
‘Mummy, you said you wouldn't be long.’
She was a beautiful child with her mother's fine bone structure and her father's black silken hair.
‘I'm ready now, darling, I'll just put my scarf on.’
Sousan looked pained.
‘No one wears headscarves in London, Mummy.
It's very old-fashioned.’
Ashi smiled as she knotted it at her throat.
She knew she wore the scarf through a sense of guilt, a gesture to her family to say that she hadn't forgotten her religious upbringing.
Silly really, because her family had no way of knowing that she still covered her head.
That she still believed in Allah and prayed regularly at the nearby mosque.
After all, if it hadn't been for Him, she wouldn't have a lovely daughter.
Nor a sweet and tragic husband who, despite everything, still loved them both dearly.
Indeed, if anything, spiritually they had become closer over the past seven years.
Although Nader's visits to London were infrequent, h. is allowance was more than generous.
It enabled Ashi to run a very pleasant Knightsbridge apartment, to pay for Sousan's education, and was sufficient for her not to have to work.
‘Don't forget your satchel!’ she reminded as she started down the stairs with Sousan skipping at her heels.
‘Of course not, Mummy.’
Patronising.
‘Did you pick up your lunchbox from the kitchen?’
‘Yes!’
Exasperated.
The front door opened onto a residential street.
It was a beautiful cloudless morning and the canopies of the plane trees were lush and transparently golden with sunlight.
Only the air was tainted by the fumes from the slow-moving cars that used the street as a short cut.
Ashi cursed silently as she crossed the Pavement to the bumper-to-bumper row of parked residents' vehicles.
It would take her ages to manoeuvre back and forth and force her way into the relentless stream of traffic.
Then her anger was roused again as she saw that a van had double parked alongside her yellow Metro City.
It totally boxed her in.
Sousan recognised the problem.
‘I knew we'd be late, Mummy!’
‘We shall see!’
Ashi replied testily, and marched round to the driver of the van.
He was reading a newspaper, apparently oblivious to the contribution he was making to the traffic chaos.
Angrily she rapped on his window.
He looked up and she was mildly surprised to see that he had a youthful Middle Eastern complexion.
She thought he appeared nervous as he wound down the window.
As well he might, she thought, if he suspected the dressing down she was about to give him.
‘What do you mean by parking like this?’ she began.
‘Please would you move so I can get my car out.’
He didn't seem to hear; his eyes were darting about, looking anxiously around.
‘Will you please look at me when I'm talking to you,’ Ashi fumed.
Then she was aware of the coolness of a shadow falling across her back, the presence of two men behind her.
She turned, suddenly alarmed.
Two faces grotesquely disfigured in nylon stocking-masks.
The shock of it choked the scream that tried to form in her throat.
For a split second the two men hesitated.
Ashi's eyes were averted to the pavement where little Sousan stood, open-mouthed.
Even as her mother watched, a fourth man swooped from nowhere like a bird of prey and snatched the girl into his arms.
It was like some scratched old movie running at half-speed, a bizarre dream sequence.
Ashi found herself rooted to the spot in disbelief as she watched the threshing legs of her daughter.
While in her head the urgent sounds of the traffic had become a strangely muted cacophony, shutting her into a world of sudden deafness.
Then the hands of the stocking-masked men were on her, their fingers digging into the tender flesh of her arms.
She was propelled roughly along the side of the van, squeezed between its side and the traffic.
The questioning face of a passenger in a passing car stared up at her.
Puzzled eyes and gawping mouth behind a window like a goldfish.
Helpless to assist.
And then it was gone.
Frogmarched to the open rear doors, she met the fourth man coming the other way, his arms struggling to restrain the squirming, yelling child.
Abruptly the dream finished and she was plunged back into reality.
The street sounds rushed at her, filling her head with the roar of engines and angry hooters.
People were shouting.
Everything was moving, fast, bright and glittering in the sunlight.
At last she found her voice, and her  lungs exploded in a scream that could be heard even above the noise of the London street.
Someone brusquely pulled the headscarf down over her face, stifling her cry, cutting off her vision.
She was launched into the back of the van, wincing as her knees cracked against metal.
Powerful arms thrust her forward.
The skin of her legs flayed along the hard ribbed floor.
She felt the suspension sink as the men followed her in.
The doors slammed, locking out the world.
The floor trembled beneath her as the engine was brutally gunned into life.
She slid helplessly when the vehicle lurched forward, punching its way into the line of traffic.
Brakes squealed and car horns blasted indignantly.
‘Mummy…’
Sousan whimpered from somewhere close by.
Ashi tried to reach her daughter in the darkness.
But someone had his weight firmly pressed into the small of her back, pinning her like a butterfly in a case.
She wriggled one hand free and stretched it out, searching.
It found the small cold fingers of the child.
They closed around Ashi's hand for comfort.
‘It's all right, darling,’ she mumbled through the material of her scarf.
‘QUIET!’ a voice shouted.
The van screeched round a bend at speed.
Ashi smelt something strange.
A clinical smell like solvent that reminded her instantly of the time in hospital when she gave birth to Sousan.
With dear Nader waiting anxiously outside…
The stink of chloroform overwhelmed her as the wad was jammed hard under her nose.
She tried to resist, to hold her breath.
But the fumes seeped in until she was forced to gulp for air and she plunged into a deep and haunted sleep.
By the time the van had reached Hyde Park Corner and began heading north up the Park Lane carriageway, Ashi Nadirpur and her daughter had both lost consciousness.
For the first time the three students in the back began to relax and pull off their nylon masks.
It appeared as though they had got away with it.
And that was really all they were concerned with.
Not one took any delight or pride in what he had done.
Just shared relief that their relatives in Iran would be left in peace and that they would be allowed to resume their studies.
The van sped into the Marble Arch roundabout with tyres whining.
One of the students banged his fist loudly on the partition separating them from the driver.
Their friend understood the message and slowed at once.
He was shaking with nerves, anxious to put as many miles as he could between them and the scene of the abduction.
Now he took a deep breath and forced himself to keep calm.
Hadn't they all agreed to keep to a nice, steady speed after the immediate getaway?
To attract no unwanted attention.
He smiled grimly to himself.
Already they were  making good stop-go progress through the traffic lights of the Edgware Road.
And all the time the line of northward-bound traffic was becoming lighter and faster.
Now the Brent Cross Shopping Centre was approaching, and the start of the M1 motorway to the north of England.
Soon it would all be over for them, with no trace of a clue for the police to follow.
The van had been stolen the day before, resprayed a nondescript grey overnight and fitted with false numberplates obtained from two separate sources.
No, if only their courage held, they would be back in time for the lecture at twelve noon, each with a solid alibi.
Nevertheless nerves were still frayed half-an-hour later when they pulled into the Scratchwood service area.
The driver sought out the agreed parking space which was as far away as possible from the canteen and shop complex.
He pulled up, climbed out, and removed the plastic cone that had kept the space free.
Returning to his cab, he reversed in until he was backed up to a smaller, mustard-coloured van in the adjoining space behind.
Both sets of rear doors were thrown open to form a screen between the two vehicles.
It took just ten seconds to transfer the limp bodies.
The doors slammed shut and the grey van drove off towards the exit, rejoining the northward rush of motorway traffic.
At the next junction it turned off and rejoined the Edgware Road running back south.
Finally it was abandoned in a back street in Kingsbury, and the four students thankfully made their way on foot to Wembley Tube Station.
Each was two thousand pounds richer for his troubles.
Having left Scratchwood a few moments after the other vehicle, the mustard-coloured van, its roof rack carrying a decorator's ladder, also turned off at Junction 4, but then picked up the Uxbridge road before turning south towards Harrow-on-the-Hill and the home of Beth and Ali Christie.
Meanwhile Ali Christie was sitting in the Pavilion Gallery in Brook Street staring morosely at the gilt-framed picture of his wife on the desk.
Next to it was the faded print of a wizened old lady almost totally obscured by a black chador — his mother standing proudly in her rose garden in Yazd.
He looked up as someone rattled at the front door of the shop; irritably he waved them away.
He had tried to do as he had been told by the Pessarane Behesht .
As normal he had opened the gallery, but when the first customer came in, he just could not concentrate.
In the end the customer walked away, obviously considering Christie to be a gibbering idiot.
So he had put the ‘Closed’ sign up.
Now he looked across at the telephone.
How easy it would be to dial 999.
He ruminated on the idea and nervously plucked a cigarette from the  green onyx box beside the telephone.
He lifted his lighter and paused.
A hand-engraved, gold Dunhill — a gift from Beth many years before.
Again he looked at the telephone and lit the flame of the lighter.
He smelt the trace of petrol in his nostrils.
At once his mind was filled with the awful picture of his wife lying in the hearth, the petrol-sodden nightclothes clinging to her body.
He didn't look at the telephone again.
D'Arcy had been watched throughout the meal.
The silver-framed photograph of Philippe Chaumont had appeared for the first time since he had known Chantal.
Now it sat behind her on the sideboard.
It was as though he had joined them at the table, and it wasn't doing D'Arcy's appetite any good at all.
Chantal, too, was picking at her plate without enthusiasm.
Hardly a word had been spoken between them.
He knew what was on her mind, but there was nothing he could say to ease the uncertainty she must be feeling.
His own mood was blackening with each day that passed.
It was a week now since Clarion Call had vanished and, despite backup from Roquelaure, he had failed to make any progress in tracing the whereabouts of the directors of Spidex International Trading.
Every vague lead had drawn a blank.
Until he had a breakthrough, Nadirpur would have to remain in hiding — and Tom Wilmot's wife would have sleepless nights not knowing whether her husband were alive or dead.
Not only that, but only the same breakthrough could bring about Philippe Chaumont's release now.
The burden of sharing Roquelaure's secret was proving a hard one to bear.
The incident at Nadirpur's apartment had clearly brought home to Chantal the sort of people who were holding her fiancé in Beirut.
She had never before been exposed to the ruthless face of terrorism.
And now she knew that those responsible were Shi'ite terrorists from Iran, while Philippe Chaumont was held by Shi'ite terrorists in Lebanon.
Perhaps he should have been expecting her question.
Perhaps he was, she was nobody's fool.
But it still came as a surprise when she angrily pushed away the unfinished lasagne and stared at him directly.
‘Rober', tell me something.
Is there any connection between this trouble with Monsieur Nadirpur and the release of my Philippe?’
D'Arcy was momentarily fazed.
‘Has someone been talking to you?
Your father?’
She peered at him curiously from beneath her fringe of blonde hair.
‘Papa?
Do you suggest that he knows something?
Something he will not tell me?’
He could see no way out of it.
‘Your father's been trying to keep it from you.
He didn't want you to worry.’
‘Worry about what?’
He took a deep breath; perhaps it was better this way.
‘That this deal he set up with the Iranians through Nadirpur — part of the arrangement was that Philippe be released — in return for French arms.’
Her green eyes fixed him accusingly.
‘And now that the ship has disappeared?’
‘The Iranians suspect a double-cross, as you know.’
She shook her head slowly in disbelief.
‘So no ship, no deal.
Is that it?
And Philippe is left to rot?’
He reached across the table and took her hand in his.
‘Don't fret.
We will find that ship, I promise you.
Once we do that, the deal's back on.
That's why your father didn't want to dash your hopes unnecessarily.
There are a lot of people anxious to find out what's happened to it — not least your father.
And you know the resources he has at his disposal.
The entire French Secret Service.’
She gave a snort of derision, and snatched her hand away.
‘And you, Rober', how hard do you try to find this ship?
If there is no ship there is no Philippe for you to worry about, is there?’
The scar on D'Arcy's cheek flared.
‘Don't talk nonsense, Chantal.
I've got one of my staff on that ship.
And, as for Philippe, I don't like the thought of the poor sod held captive in Beirut.
Him or anyone else.’
He saw the hurt and anger in her eyes.
‘But he is not just anyone else, is he?
He was — is — my fiancé.
Would it not be convenient for you if he was never seen again?’
D'Arcy didn't trust himself to speak.
He pushed back his chair and stood, turning away to the drawing room.
In a sullen silence he lit a cigar and helped himself to a stiff measure of brandy.
Stupid bitch, he swore beneath his breath.
Did she really think he would stint his efforts just because his success would mean competition for her affections?
Didn't she realise how painful an accusation of that magnitude was?
Sometimes she was still a stranger to him.
He stared out of the window at the lights of the cars streaming along rue du Faubourg-St-Honoré at the end of the street.
He drained the brandy in three hard gulps and felt calmer for it.
Who was he kidding?
Oh yes, he had done everything possible to find out just what was going on.
But it sure as hell wasn't for Philippe Chaumont's benefit.
The Frenchman's release was going to be a bitter pill to swallow if it was the price to pay for finding Clarion Call .
He wasn't blind.
He'd seen the change that had come over Chantal since the news that Philippe was still alive.
He knew that the embers of whatever she had once felt for her fiancé still glowed.
Almost forgotten once, perhaps, but now suddenly rekindled.
And he was under no illusions as to what might happen to their relationship if Philippe Chaumont returned.
The one relationship that had ever grown to mean  anything in D'Arcy's life would be in dire peril.
On the line the only affair that hadn't been ruined by his previous, all-consuming life in the SAS, or destroyed by his own turbulent and possessive nature.
At last he had mellowed, or so he liked to think.
With Chantal there had never been any need for pretence.
Despite being so many years his junior, she had instinctively known how to handle him.
Giving as good as she got, in bed as well as out.
Yet all the time gently showing him that there was another way.
Christ, how he wished he'd had the courage to ask her to marry him before all this.
Wished he hadn't been so damn scared that she'd turn him down.
If only he had listened to what his friend Dave Forbes had been telling him…
‘I'm sorry, Rober'.
That was a stupid thing for me to say.’
He turned away from the window.
She looked so young and vulnerable, her head tilted to one side, waiting for forgiveness.
He said: ‘Not so stupid, kitten.
I want Philippe out of Beirut.
But I don't want him back into your life.’
She smiled sadly.
‘I know that.
It is understandable of any man.’
She hesitated.
‘You know, sometimes I am very flattered by your jealousy.
Back there, I thought you were going to strike me.’
D'Arcy's laugh was bitter.
‘I'm trying to give it up.’
She moved towards him, looked up into his eyes.
‘Sometimes our relationship frightens me a little.
Our feelings seem almost too powerful, the sort that burn themselves out.
I wonder what sort of future we have together.’
He gripped her arms.
‘Do we have one, a future?’
Her eyes clouded.
‘You mean if Philippe is released?’
She looked away as though reluctant to think about it.
‘I don't know, Rober'.
How can I say?
Truly I don't know what to think about anything any more.’
His grip tightened.
‘Look at me, Chantal.’
Reluctantly she obeyed.
He could see that her lower lip was trembling and that her eyes were moist.
He said: ‘Think about marrying me.’
‘You are crazy!’ she said, astonished, half-laughing, half in shock.
‘All this time I know you and you never once suggest it.
Now — because you know Philippe is alive — you ask me to be your wife.’
She pulled away and returned to the dining room to find her cigarettes.
She came back slowly, thoughtfully, and stood a few paces in front of him as she lit up.
‘You are still the same jealous man, Rober'.
You ask me to marry you because you think, if Philippe is released, we will continue with our wedding plans.’
‘And am I right?’
Chantal looked uncomfortable, as though forced to consider the matter for the first time.
‘I don't know, Rober'.
I am very confused, yes?
You understand?
When you are very much in love with someone, and then  believe that they are dead…
That love does not die.
It burns like a candle in a church.’
She drew heavily on her cigarette, searching for the words.
‘Then suddenly you are told he is alive.
You ask yourself if you are not just in love with a ghost.’
A silence fell between them.
Then D'Arcy said: ‘I'm sorry, I shouldn't have asked you.
I know how difficult it must be.
Believe me, I've been wanting to ask you how you felt about us, trying not to…’
She smiled, understanding.
‘Dear Rober'.
It is hard for you too.
But until Philippe is standing in this room again, there is no way of knowing how I will feel.’
‘Of course.’
Regaining her composure, she sat on the sofa and patted the seat beside her.
‘Forget about Papa and trying to protect me from the truth.
I want to know.
Do we stand any chance of finding that accursed ship?’
D'Arcy poured two glasses of brandy and joined her.
In truth he was relieved to change the topic; he hated heavy emotional arguments.
‘I'm afraid at the moment it doesn't look good,’ he said.
‘I thought we had a good chance of tracing the Spidex people through London.
You remember there was one English board member, calling himself Cupplewaite?
Well, Dave Forbes has made repeated phonecalls to his solicitors in the City.’
‘And?’
‘It was a waste of time.
Dave got promises of return calls, all that sort of thing.
Nothing.
They're stone-walling.’
‘Didn't Davey visit the solicitors’ office?’
‘He did that yesterday morning.
Some dragon of a receptionist refused to let him see her boss without an appointment.
And clearly such an appointment wasn't going to be given.’
‘Surely Davey can make them say —‘'
He shook his head.
‘If the elusive Mr Cupplewaite's solicitors won't play ball, there's nothing we can do to make them.’
She stared glumly down at her brandy glass.
‘Then we have no progress at all.
The ship is lost — and so is Philippe.’
D'Arcy tried to sound encouraging.
‘Not necessarily.
We've been able to alert people in the area where the ship was last seen.
Dave's old SAS commander — a Major Hawksby — is now serving with the Sultan's forces in Oman.’
Indeed the legendary ‘Hawk’ had led Dave Forbes on the never revealed mission to Iran in 1980 to rescue a British hostage.
That mission had cost Forbes his leg and his Army career.
‘Dave was given an assurance that both the Sultan's navy and air force will be alerted to keep a lookout for Clarion Call or any ship that might resemble her.’
‘That at least sounds promising.’
‘We couldn't hope for more.
Both use expat British officers and they have a mean reputation in the area, despite their small size.’
But Chantal was aware of the enormity of the problem.
‘There are many miles of coast and empty sea involved, no?
It is still what you call a long shot?’
‘I can't deny that.’
He glanced at his watch.
It was almost midnight.
‘I'd better turn in.
Want to make an early start tomorrow.’
‘Still trying to find someone from Spidex?’
‘It's our best hope — we just need a lucky break.
If we find them, we can start putting on the pressure to locate the ship.
Or confirm it is a genuine loss at sea.’
She reached out and took his hand in hers.
She studied it carefully as though it were some unfamiliar object she was seeing for the first time.
When she spoke her words clearly weren't coming easily.
‘Forgive what I said earlier, Rober'.
I know you are doing everything you can…’
Her voice trailed.
‘And forgive me if I ask that we do not sleep together tonight — and maybe for a while — until Philippe is home…
You understand?’
She was thankful that he said nothing to express the inner rage he must be feeling.
As he hugged her brusquely to him, she was aware of the tense muscles of his jawline against her cheek, and knew what an effort he was making to hold himself in check.
Desperately she wanted to reassure him, but could find no words.
It was suddenly as though the passion had been drained from her, her juices drying up like a desert stream in summer.
It was guilt, she recognised that.
However irrational, she knew that her love for him had somehow betrayed Philippe.
Blindly she had accepted her father's word that he was dead.
Where was the intuitive faith of the wives and lovers of those other hostages in Beirut?
You saw them on the television — they never gave up hope, campaigning and running lonely vigils in the long nights.
Yet she had abandoned Philippe — not just physically, within months of meeting D'Arcy.
But more importantly she had buried him in her heart.
She could not even claim the innocence and impetuosity of youth.
D'Arcy's grip tightened round her shoulders as he felt her hot tears against his skin.
And to think that once she had accused him of having a shard of ice in his heart — some wound from previous love affairs that prevented him from ever revealing his real feelings to any woman.
How she regretted those words now, however true they might have seemed at the time.
The surprised way he had looked at her when she said it suggested that it had not occurred to him before.
After that she had detected an almost imperceptible but important change in him, and their love had ignited with a power of body chemistry  that sometimes disturbed her.
D'Arcy had opened her up, exposing her raw emotions, giving no quarter and taking none.
It was a far cry from her naïve and youthful engagement to Philippe — two constrained and formal lovers from the same highly respectable social background.
Looking back now they might have been playing out the rôle of characters from some nineteenth-century romantic novel.
She the heroine entrapped by family expectations; he a faithful and stoic, if unimaginative hero.
For all that, had she been right just to abandon him pitilessly for the first dashing knight to Pass her way?
She took a deep breath to stop the tears and opened her eyes.
Above her, she saw that D'Arcy was staring towards the open dining room door and the silver-framed photograph on the sideboard.
A handsome, well-groomed young man with a boyish, carefree face smiled back at them.
The telephone purred on the coffee table.
Chantal prised herself from D'Arcy's grasp and found herself eagerly reaching for the receiver.
‘It's Davey for you.’
She sounded disappointed as she passed the handset to him.
Forbes dispensed with niceties.
‘Have you heard, boss, we've got problems?’
‘What?’
‘Obviously you haven't.
Mrs Nadirpur was kidnapped in London this morning.’
The words stunned D'Arcy; he was tired and drained.
His friend was talking rubbish.
‘Kidnap?
What Mrs Nadirpur?’
‘Apparently it's been splashed all over the Standard this evening.
I didn't see it, I've been working at the office.
The first I knew was a call from your old chum Roy Bliss not ten minutes ago.’
Still Forbes wasn't making sense.
‘Which Mrs Nadirpur, Dave?
For Christ's sake, you're talking in riddles.
Do you mean his mother — or what — a sister-in-law?’
‘No, boss, I mean the bastard's got a wife — lives over here.
Didn't you know?’
The blood drained from D'Arcy's face.
‘Oh my God.
I had no idea.
He never mentioned a wife, and I just assumed…
Never mind, give me the full sitrep,’ he demanded, slipping instinctively into Army jargon.
For the next ten minutes the line hummed as Forbes recounted how the Iranian exile and her daughter had been seized in the middle of the morning rush hour.
A van had been used, and the only clue to the identity of the stocking-masked kidnappers was an eyewitness's vague description that the driver, whose face was not covered, was of Middle Eastern appearance.
D'Arcy was now fully awake.
‘Dave, I want you to stay at the office.
Pull in any of our available teams for full manning.
Make sure everyone's fully aware of kidnap drill.
Call up Brandy and interrupt her beauty sleep.’
‘Police?’
Forbes asked.
‘Not till I've spoken to Nadirpur.
This isn't even part of our remit — yet.’
Thinking aloud, he said: ‘You realise who's behind this?’
‘It's got to be, boss.
You've taken Nadirpur out of circulation.
You left them thrashin' at thin air.
They had to find a way of drawing Nadirpur out.
Well, they've found the one weakness in our armour all right.
I tell you what though, boss, with those sort of resources, we're not just dealing with some terrorist splinter group.
This is a mainstream mob with powerful government backing.
Our Mr Nadirpur has gone and upset some very undesirable people.’
After another brief exchange, D'Arcy hung up.
Chantal had managed to follow most of the conversation, her expression one of horror.
‘The poor woman.’
‘And her daughter, just seven years old,’ D'Arcy added, thumping his fist on the coffee table.
‘The bastards!’
‘What do they want with an innocent woman and child?’
‘To force Nader to come clean about the ship.’
She stared at him in disbelief.
‘But he doesn't know anything.’
‘Obviously they don't believe that.’
‘So what will happen next?’
D'Arcy lit a fresh cigar.
‘With most criminal kidnaps you could expect a long wait.
Time for the trail to go cold and the victim's family to get desperate.
But in this case, my guess is they'll move fast because they need answers quickly themselves.’
‘You will want to inform Papa?’
‘Yes, but first I need to see Nadirpur.’
‘If you can face the thought of my driving, Rober', I shall take you.’
D'Arcy looked at her closely.
‘Are you sure you want to get involved in this.
Your father —’
Chantal was defiant.
‘Papa still thinks I am six years old.
This poor woman and her child are in exactly the same position as Philippe.
They may even be held by the same people.
I could not sleep knowing that I have done nothing.’
Only when the mustard-coloured decorator's van pulled up outside the wrought-iron gates of Ali Christie's house in Harrow-on-the-Hill had Shamlou's heart slowed its thudding beat.
Driving through unfamiliar London streets had been nerve-racking enough — vehicles and flashing lights seemed to be coming at him from  all angles — but with two kidnap victims in the back, his brain refused to function rationally.
He stepped out onto the private road and threw open the gates.
A gravel drive swept between manicured lawns to the portico of the imposing Edwardian house.
There was no sign of activity except the slight movement of a curtain on the first floor.
Shamlou gave a thumbs up sign, then returned to the van.
By the time he had driven through, the door of the integral garage had been swung up and open by those waiting anxiously in the house.
It was with immense relief that he drove in and killed the engine.
As he alighted the garage door came down again, snuffing out the daylight like a guillotine.
The place stank of oil, solvent and the sweetish smell of garden chemicals.
‘How is the American woman?’
Shamlou demanded.
The man he knew only as Hamid was one of the two-man London cell.
He was in his late twenties with pale skin, prematurely thinning hair and wore a pair of steel-rimmed spectacles which made him look studious.
Shamlou gathered he had aspirations to be a cleric.
‘She is calmer now,’ Hamid answered quietly.
His manner was self-assured, but wary of this stranger sent from Teheran.
‘She's been crying all the time.
Kamal is with her now.’
Kamal was the second half of the London cell.
Of similar age to Hamid he was distinguished by a thick black beard.
Likewise he appeared quiet and unassuming; the quiet and unassuming character of both men would never lead anyone to suspect their rôle in the Sabbah network.
Indeed they had cultivated many English friends.
Shamlou guessed that was the reason they had been chosen as ‘sleepers’.
A sudden scuffling sound came from the back of the van.
Instantly Shamlou recognised the cry of anguish from Matchsticks, and he winced as he opened the doors to hear the soft thud of flesh against flesh.
Matchsticks almost fell out, stepping back awkwardly like a badly constructed puppet.
‘Bitch!’ he snarled into the van.
He turned to Shamlou for sympathy.
‘The chloroform has worn off.
She's started fighting like a cat.’
Shamlou turned to Hamid.
‘Help get them to the cellar.’
‘KEEP BACK!’
Ashi Nadirpur screamed, an animal protecting her offspring in the shadow of a steel cave.
‘BASTARDS!’
They dragged her by her arms as she shouted, twisting and turning in their grasp.
A livid bruise welled on her cheek where Matchsticks had struck her.
The burgundy skirt was smeared with grime and buttons were missing from her gaping blouse.
Shamlou stood before her, and for the first time looked properly at his victim.
At the woman who showed all the signs of Western decadence, of betrayal of her faith.
His eyes flickered to the small heaving breasts in the decadent lacy brassière as she resisted.
Then he noticed the dark eyes, smouldering with hate at him from beneath tangled strands of black hair.
Her spittle caught him full in the face, caught him offguard.
He was incensed, stunned, at her action, and stood rigid with anger as he felt the slime roll down his cheek.
Without warning his right hand swiped in retaliation at her mouth, splitting her lip.
Instantly she recoiled, and coughed and spat again.
This time to clear the blood and the chip of white tooth that landed on the concrete floor.
‘Bend her over!’
Shamlou snapped.
‘So I can tie her hands.’
But it didn't prevent her struggling, and he noticed how tiny her wrists were as he tightened the cord until it bit deep into her thin flesh.
‘Take her down!’ he ordered, and watched as she floundered and kicked at the man on each side of her.
When she was gone he looked around.
In the darkness of the van the whites of Sousan's eyes were wide with fright and incomprehension.
A small, terrified child clutching a satchel with both arms as though it were her most prized possession.
Shamlou smiled.
‘Come, little one,’ he coaxed.
‘YEOW!’
His hand shot back, the ring of tiny teeth marks red and bright.
‘Get out!’
He hauled her bodily from the van in his rage and hurled her in front of him, through the kitchen to the hall, and down the steps that fell away sharply to the brick-built cellar.
The low vaulted roof stretched for some forty feet until it met the blank wall at the far end.
The acrid smell of coal lingered, seeping through the heavy partition of railway sleepers along one wall which separated the coke store.
During the morning the accumulated household junk had been stacked in piles beside the steps.
The wine racks had been systematically emptied, the contents poured down the sink and the bottles thrown into dustbins by the front door.
A wooden cage frame had been hastily constructed by Hamid and Kamal to split the area in half.
To it had been hammered rolls of heavy-gauge chicken wire.
A rough hinged wire door had been fashioned in cheap soft wood, only eighteen inches square.
It was just big enough for an adult to pass through on all fours.
It was not, however, so easy to persuade an angry, kicking woman even as tiny as Ashi to go through without a desperate struggle.
Finally Matchsticks ducked through first and pulled the woman in, screaming, by her hair.
Sousan looked on in terror and scampered quickly through after her mother, anxious to be at her side.
The turmoil continued until Ashi's mouth was taped firmly with wide plastic parcel-tape and her feet tied with cord like her hands, leaving her on the floor propped against the wall.
‘Get out now,’ Shamlou ordered the other two terrorists and waited for them before he entered the makeshift cage.
Now that it had been draped by thick blankets stripped from the beds upstairs it was very dark.
He took a flashlight from his pocket to shine it down on the face of the petrified child who clung to the side of her mother.
He then played the beam on Ashi's head.
Her sullen, long-lashed eyes squinted against the brightness.
‘Listen to me, woman,’ Shamlou said.
‘You and your daughter are being held because your husband has betrayed his country.
He has taken things that belong to us.
That debt must be repaid.
When he has met our demands both of you will be released.
Do you understand me, woman?’
Ashi stared dumbly at the misty figure behind the blinding aureole.
‘Answer me, woman!’
A stifled mumble and a weary nod of the head.
‘I will require your co-operation.
If I do not get it, your daughter will be beaten to death before your eyes.
Do you understand?’
Another slow nod.
Shamlou smiled.
He could see the fight had drained out of her.
‘I am going to take the tape from your mouth.
If you don't want your daughter to suffer then you will remain silent.
You talk to me only when I ask a question.’
He leaned forward.
Instinctively she drew back against the damp cellar wall, willing herself to fuse into the crumbling, whitewashed brickwork.
His breath was grunting in her ear as he stooped to find the edge of the tape, and she could smell the sweat and youth of his body as he worked.
Without consideration he ripped the tape from her skin so that she winced with the searing pain.
She gulped for breath, her eyes only inches from his.
She noticed that his eyes were very dark and intense, with long black lashes.
There was an immature moustache above lips that were pretty enough to belong to a girl.
Those pretty lips filled her vision, and as he spoke she could see the pink membrane of his mouth and tongue, the very whiteness of his teeth.
‘I want something from you that your husband will recognise.
Something that there will be no doubt belongs to only you.’
She blinked, unable to think, her mind paralysed.
‘I don't know…’
‘A scarf?
A purse?’ he snapped.
‘Jewellery?’
‘My ring,’ she gasped, and immediately wished that she hadn't.
Of all things most precious to her, it was the wedding ring she had received  from Nader.
Especially now.
That ring was the most important thing in her life.
‘Which ring?’
‘I don't know,’ she hedged.
‘I have several, as you see…’
A slow smile crossed Shamlou's face.
‘Ah, yes.
A wedding ring.
That is something your husband will remember, yes?’
He arched her roughly forward so that her head was crushed against his stomach, her face just inches from his groin as he reached for the hands bound behind her back.
She felt her finger being bent against the joint, the vicious twist as he wrenched the ring free.
She fell back hard against the wall and shut her eyes, her head full of the young man's odour.
When she opened them, the wedding ring was held before her as Shamlou shone the torchlight on it.
‘Your husband must be a very rich man to give you such a ring,’ he said, turning it between his thumb and forefinger.
‘It even has a stone inset.
A diamond.’
‘A sapphire,’ she breathed.
‘My birthstone.’
‘And an inscription.
That is good.
It can only be yours.’
Carefully he dropped it into his pocket.
There was an expression of curiosity on his face.
‘Is that why you married him?’
‘What?’
‘Is that why you married him?
Because he is rich?
Is that why you married a supporter of the Shah?’
She looked away.
‘Is it?’
‘I don't know.’
Her voice was scarcely audible.
Shamlou grunted.
‘Now I want a name.
The name of someone who knows you here in London.
Someone you can trust?’
‘I have relatives —’
‘No, no relatives.
No close friends.
No one the police may now be in close contact with since you are missing.
Someone responsible who you feel you could trust.’
For no particular reason she suddenly thought of Sousan's severe-faced school teacher.
She told him.
‘The name of the school?’ he demanded.
She gave him that too.
He appeared satisfied and pulled away from her, climbing to his feet.
The beam of the torch wavered as he did so, and she cringed, praying that he would not notice.
But he did, as he played the beam over her prone body.
He could hardly fail to see that the delicate shoulder strap of her brassière had snapped during her earlier struggles.
Now her left breast hung free.
A tender fruit.
Brazen, humiliating.
She closed her eyes in dread.
A pink tongue darted uncertainly over his lips and he swallowed hard.
He glanced behind him, afraid the others could see.
But the thick blanket over the wire cage hid him from view.
Her eyes still closed she waited, expectant and drained of all emotion.
Waiting, and then it came.
She felt his fingertips, cold and clammy with perspiration.
Felt her nipple brush against his palm, harden involuntarily as a pebble.
She turned her head away.
Then surprise.
Surprise at the gentle way he lifted her breast as though it were not part of her.
Cradled it in his palm like a small injured dove, and let it fall softly back into the silk cup.
She breathed relief and opened her eyes just in time to see him disappear through the wire gate.
The blanket fell back into place.
On the other side of it Shamlou found himself alone.
He stared down at his palms.
They were trembling.
He thought of the woman in the garden, heard her voice, listened to the words of her poem, felt the powerful stirring of his loins.
The lights were still on in Victor's when Chantal screeched her motorcycle to a standstill outside.
She and D'Arcy had scarcely dismounted before the door swung open.
Saint Julien was taking no chances, his acquired Smith & Wesson discreetly out of sight as he allowed them in.
He then checked up and down the street before closing and bolting the door.
‘On the telephone you sound like there is big trouble,’ the Corsican said.
‘There's trouble all right, Saint Julien, but on the other side of the Channel.’
Victor was sitting on the wrong side of the bar with Claudette, nursing a calvados nightcap.
‘So what sort of trouble do you bring me now?’ he called over laughingly.
‘It's no joke, Victor.’
D'Arcy glanced around at the deserted tables.
‘Where's Nader?’
‘Upstairs, as always.
Watching television.’
‘He keeps himself to himself, that one,’ Claudette added.
D'Arcy said: ‘You'd best all be in the picture.
I am afraid Nader's wife and child have been kidnapped in England.’
Claudette stared in amazement.
‘His wife ?’
The others shared her incredulity.
‘Yes, I'm afraid Nader has been a bit of a dark horse in that respect.’
Saint Julien said: ‘I guess there is no doubt it is the Iranians?’
‘It's a certainty — they're trying to flush Nader out of hiding.’
‘What animals would do this?’
Claudette murmured in disgust.
Victor shook his head.
‘Those bastards do not give up so easily, eh?
Listen, Rober', if there is anything we can do — I think we are now the nearest thing your friend Nader has to a family here in Paris.’
‘That's good to hear, because right now he's going to need all the friendship and support he can get.’
Chantal touched his arm.
‘Let me come up too, Rober'.
You are hardly the one to share Nader's tears.
I know just how he will be feeling.’
It was to prove a wise decision.
D'Arcy had never been comfortable in the presence of a crying man.
It ran contrary both to his upbringing and personal code of behaviour that men should show emotion.
So he was thankful that Chantal was on hand to comfort Nadirpur when he broke the news.
Victor, sensing that there would be little sleep but much talking and soul-searching that night, thoughtfully brought up a tray of coffee and a bottle of cognac.
Finally the Iranian's tears began to subside.
He blew his nose vigorously, straightened his dressing gown and made a determined effort to regain a measure of composure.
He looked up at D'Arcy, embarrassed.
‘I am sorry, Robert, please forgive me.
I am behaving like a stupid child.’
D'Arcy poured him a brandy — under the circumstances champagne hardly seemed appropriate.
‘Forget about me, Nader.
I've seen the toughest soldiers break down and weep.
It's best to let it out,’ he said kindly, aware that he had rarely followed his own advice.
Nadirpur took the glass in both hands, as though his life depended on it.
He took a deep swallow and closed his eyes as the liquid burned its way down.
Quietly D'Arcy said: ‘Why did you never mention that you had a wife and child when I was asking about relatives or friends who might be in danger from these Iranians?’
Nadirpur looked sheepish.
‘To be honest I wanted to keep them out of all this.
Somehow I never dreamed that they might get involved, especially as they are in London.
And I think that if I don't tell you about them, well, I guess that no one would ever know.
You see, in truth, they are hardly part of my life now.
Usually I only see them every three months or so.
And then it is to satisfy myself that Ashi and Sousan have everything they need.
My wife is a very undemanding woman, Robert, she would never ask me for anything.’
He looked up with moist eyes.
‘It is perhaps difficult for a man like you to understand.
But I ruined my own life — and more importantly I ruined Ashi's too — because I refused to admit that I was what I was.’
He found the words difficult to say.
‘That I was not heterosexual.
And all that time poor Ashi suffered in uncomplaining silence, whilst the best years of her youth slipped by.’
‘You had Sousan,’ Chantal reminded softly.
Nadirpur nodded, a small smile of pride lightening his face.
‘That was very ironic, because she was — er — conceived just before we separated.
So even though we are apart, poor Ashi is always reminded of me.’
He turned to D'Arcy, an expression of hopelessness in his eyes.
‘Tell me, is there anything at all that we can do?’
‘There might be quite a lot we can do, Nader.
But not yet.
The ball is in the Iranians’ court.
It is up to them to make the first move.’
‘But if they kill dear Ashi —’ His eyes were wide with dread ‘— or little Sousan?’
D'Arcy smiled with grim reassurance.
‘They won't do that.
Well, certainly that won't be their immediate plan.’
‘How can you know that?’
Chantal asked.
‘Because the whole point of kidnap is to put on pressure to get your way.
Usually it's for money, or sometimes for political advantage.
It might be to get a criminal or terrorist prisoners released,’ he explained patiently.
‘In this case it's because they believe you've tricked them over the supposed disappearance of Clarion Call .
It is the threat to the hostage that provides that pressure, not the killing.
Once a hostage is dead, the pressure's off.
They no longer have a hold over the victim's family.
Then the kidnappers have lost as well.’
‘So there will be a threat against Ashi and Sousan?’
Nader asked slowly, his mind clearly imagining the unthinkable.
‘Almost certainly — unless, of course, by some remarkable chance this is nothing to do with the Iranians.
But frankly I think you can discount that.’
‘When?’
Nadirpur pleaded.
‘When will we hear?’
D'Arcy said: ‘Normally it could be months.
In this case I think it will be soon.
Probably a telephone call to your office in Monaco.
That is why we must work out our strategy.
I am sorry, because you're shocked and upset, but it must be done.
A mistake now and all could be lost.’
‘Strategy?’
Nadirpur was bewildered.
‘What strategy?
We must give them whatever they want.’
‘That's our problem,’ D'Arcy pointed out quietly.
‘The ship is not ours to give.’
‘But they must know that by now!’
D'Arcy shook his head.
They know nothing of the sort.
Look at it from their point of view.
The Arabs from Spidex, who set up the deal, have vanished with the Iranians' money and, they suspect, their arms shipment.
As Roquelaure was involved, they think the French Government was in on the business, perhaps with revenge as their motive.
Who knows?
A punishment for holding several French hostages in Beirut perhaps?
That leaves you and your protests of innocence.
In their shoes, I'd have doubts about your involvement.’
‘So what can we do?’
It was almost a wail of anguish.
‘For a start I think we must move to London.
That is where your wife and child are being held, so it will shorten the lines of communication.
I have a secure office where you can stay and, besides, I'll have more staff resources available to me.’
Nadirpur saw the wisdom of that and nodded sagely.
‘But that does not help what we can say to the Iranians.
What do we say to them?’
‘We persuade them that we are acting in good faith.
And that we are making progress in locating the ship — whether it be sunk or pirated.’
‘But we are not making progress, Robert, are we!’
His voice had an hysterical edge to it.
‘We can't afford to let them know that, because now they've changed the rules.
Once they believe you really are an innocent party — or cannot  be useful to them in finding the ship — then they've no reason to keep your wife and daughter alive.
And I've no doubt they'd kill them without a second's thought if they no longer served a purpose.
If only because they could be witnesses.
I'm sorry, but there it is.’
Chantal suddenly said: ‘Money, Rober', couldn't we offer them money?
You know, to the value of the lost shipment?’
Nadirpur's eyes widened.
He was grasping at straws.
‘That is a wonderful idea!’
D'Arcy hated to bring him down to earth, but it had to be done.
‘That cargo was valued at half-a-billion dollars, Nader, and you know the insurance company isn't going to pay out.
So what liquid assets do you have available?’
The expression of optimism on Nadirpur's face died.
‘I do not have half-a-billion dollars in assets.
Liquid or otherwise.’
He stared morosely at the carpet.
‘So these damnable people hold all the cards?’
‘Not quite.’
D'Arcy unravelled the cellophane from one of his small cigars as he marshalled his thoughts.
‘You see, now that they've got your wife and daughter they have, as I said, changed the rules.’
‘So what do we do?’
Nadirpur repeated in despair.
‘We negotiate.’
Nadirpur stared in disbelief.
‘Negotiate?
How in the name of Allah do we negotiate with nothing?’
‘Because now we have demands — just like them.’
Chantal frowned, as uncomprehending as the Iranian.
D'Arcy lit his cigar and aimed a lone stream of blue smoke at the ceiling.
‘You see, from now on our demands are that your wife and child remain unharmed and are eventually released unharmed.
That is our demand.
Curiously enough — and tragic as it is — your negotiating position, Nader, is actually better than before the kidnap.
Then they did hold all the cards.’
Nadirpur gradually began to grasp what the Englishman meant.
‘But that is hardly consolation!’
‘You make it sound like a game,’ Chantal said angrily, ‘with your talk of rules and negotiation.’
D'Arcy was unmoved.
‘That's exactly what it is.
And if they're professionals they'll know it, too.
But with any luck it will take them some time to realise that we know how to play it better than they do.’
‘Do you have to sound as though you're enjoying it?’
Chantal protested.
That earned her a withering glance from D'Arcy before he continued: ‘Our first job will be to seize the initiative from them.
Make them understand that they're not going to have it all their own way.
And we'll do that by constantly demanding to know that Ashi and Sousan are  alive.
Proof on our terms, not theirs.
If we keep our nerve long enough it may give the police time to find out where they are being held.’
Nadirpur almost had apoplexy.
‘Police!
I don't want police involved in this!
Sweet Allah, all I want is my Ashi and baby Sousan safe.
No police!’
D'Arcy decided to let that one ride.
Whether Nadirpur liked it or not, it would be impossible to keep either the British or the French police out of the affair.
Not when the kidnap had taken place in broad daylight and the story had already been splashed across the front page of London's evening newspaper.
He said: ‘We can cross that bridge when we come to it.
All we can do for now is wait for the kidnappers to make contact.
In the meantime, we have to step up our efforts to find this damn ship.
That's important so we can feed bits of information to the kidnappers — even if we have to invent some.’
‘But we are already doing everything,’ Nadirpur said.
‘Do you have any other ideas?’
D'Arcy didn't want to raise false hopes.
Cautiously he said: ‘It's worth considering getting one of our own men out to the Gulf to investigate — hire a ship if necessary to search…’
The idea appealed to the Iranian and he was dismissive of the cost involved.
‘Is there anything else I should be doing?’
‘As a precaution I suggest you look at what assets you can liquidise quickly.
If we can't give them what they want, a cash offer might have its uses.
Do you have an accountant you can trust?’
Nadirpur nodded slowly, as though coming out of a trance.
‘Yes, my company secretary is a good man.
I shall telephone him at home before he leaves for work in the morning.
Tell him to be discreet, to see what amount we could raise and how long it would take.’
D'Arcy smiled encouragingly.
‘That's excellent, Nader.
Don't worry, we'll get your wife and child back unharmed.
Trust me.’
The responding smile was well-meant but understandably limp.
‘I am sure you will do everything you can, Robert.
You have already shown how efficient you can be.
I do not know how I could have coped without you and your friends here.’
He sipped delicately at his brandy, felt it giving him strength.
‘Believe me, I love Ashi and my dear Sousan as much as any husband or father.
I don't know if you can understand that?’
D'Arcy felt a sudden insane anger at the Pessarane Behesht and all it stood for.
Nadirpur had explained in simple, uncomplicated words his confused feelings and emotions.
The feelings and emotions of any human being, however bizarre the relationship with his own wife and daughter had been.
A sad, tragic man trapped by an accident of birth.
Somehow that made the kidnap all the more obscene: as if the little family, broken  yet strangely bound together by the same tragedy, had not suffered enough.
‘I understand more than you think,’ D'Arcy said.
‘You must get some rest now.
It'll be a busy day tomorrow.’
Chantal was still clutching Nadirpur's arm.
‘Would you like me to stay for company?’
He shook his head.
‘No, thank you, dear lady.
I need to be alone.
To come to terms with everything.’
D'Arcy and the girl left then.
Nadirpur climbed wearily to his feet and walked to the window.
He drew the curtains and peered into the night.
Outside it was raining gently, the Paris streets wet and shiny.
He pressed his brow against the coolness of the pane, and shut his eyes.
‘Why?’ he murmured.
‘In the name of Allah, why?’
Dawn came all too quickly.
It seemed to D'Arcy that his head had only just hit the cushion on the settee in Victor's flat when he was shaken awake.
‘Hey, you've got a visitor,’ the patron whispered hoarsely.
His breath was thick with stale Disque Bleu and garlic.
D'Arcy swung his feet to the floor and rubbed his hands over his face.
‘Who, for God's sake, victor?’
A familiar voice came from the door.
‘I see we have some developments,mon ami .’
Roquelaure looked fresh and newly shaven, his suit as immaculate as ever with razor sharp creases.
‘Hell, Pierre, you didn't waste much time,’ D'Arcy observed.
The Frenchman sniffed disdainfully at the fug of stale smoke and sweat.’
I came as soon as I received your message.
Shall I open a window?’
Without waiting for a reply he crossed the room.
Bright sunlight and the din of early, morning traffic rushed in.
‘I couldn't afford to wait — not with the story of the London kidnap splashed all over the early editions of Figaro .
It won't be long before the DST starts sniffing around.’
‘You're not going to be able to keep them out of this.
It's too public.’
Roquelaure raised his hands defensively.
‘Believe me, Rober', I am all too aware of that!
But I would prefer not to alert our Ministry of the Interior — given that this has been purely a secret service matter of the DGSE until now.
It could lead to many awkward questions being asked.’
D'Arcy felt instinctively irritated that the générale seemed more worried about scandal than their client's predicament.
‘What sort of questions?’
‘Oh, just the small matter of the DGSE turning a blind eye to arms sales to Iranian terrorists in return for the release of our French hostages  in Beirut.’,
He raised an eyebrow.
‘As you said yourself, hardly in line with official government policy.’
‘And someone in the Interior Ministry might blow the whistle on you?’
‘La guerre des flics is alive and well,’ Roquelaure confirmed, referring to the notorious rivalry between the police and the security organisations, including the gendarmerie , which came under the Ministry of Defence.
‘And there are many politicians with scores to settle.’
‘And, of course, there's the question of your future son-in-law's life being in the balance,’ D'Arcy pointed out unkindly.
Roquelaure looked at him steadily before replying slowly.
‘Indeed, Philippe Chaumont's life is in the balance.
Whether or not he will ever be my son-in-law is a matter for Chantal.
She is here?’
‘Next door, in the spare room of Claudette's apartment.’
‘And Nadirpur?’
‘Sleeping, I hope.
Though I doubt it.
This business has broken him up badly.’
Roquelaure stared out of the window and absently lit his fifth Gitane of the day.
‘So what are you going to do?’
D'Arcy said: ‘Well, you can rest easy on one score, Pierre.
We're catching a midday flight to London.
I'd prefer to be on my own patch to handle this one.’
A smile of satisfaction creased the Frenchman's face.
‘That is very wise.’
D'Arcy's eyes narrowed.
‘I'm not doing it for you, Pierre.
And I've told you once before — you either work for our company or for France.’
Roquelaure shrugged.
‘There is usually a middle road.’
‘One day there might not be, What then?’
‘We shall see.
But just now it works for all of us that these Pessarane Behesht have taken it into their heads to seize the woman and child.’
‘The hell it does.’
‘Because it gives us time to stall them,’ Roquelaure came back sharply, ‘until we track down that Arab cartel or locate the missing arms shipment.’
His eyes were fierce.
‘Time, Rober', time.’
‘And Nadirpur's wife and daughter?’
D'Arcy demanded.
‘Are they of no consequence to you?’
‘It was not I,mon ami , who kidnapped them.’
D'Arcy spent the first hour of the morning arranging for a private aircraft to fly them from le Bourget.
There was just a risk, however minimal, that the Iranian Embassy had people watching at the main passenger termini.
Unfortunately the Docklands Airport did not accept private flights, so Biggin Hill in Kent was the nearest alternative.
Nadirpur spoke to his office in Monaco and left instructions for contacting him at the IAP offices in London.
The shipping office was the only line of communication with Nadirpur available to the Iranians, but no call had yet been received from the kidnappers.
That silence left Nadirpur's nerves frayed despite reassurances from D'Arcy and Chantal, and endless coffee and bonhomie from Victor.
An attempt to play cards was abandoned; no one could concentrate.
All eyes were on the clock as the hands dragged themselves, with agonising slowness towards noon and time to leave for the airfield.
D'Arcy had invited Saint Julien to join them; the Corsican had struck up a strangely abrasive relationship with Nadirpur, who appeared comforted by his mildly sarcastic wit and no-nonsense approach to the situation in which they found themselves.
Perhaps he just had confidence in the man's obvious abilities as a bodyguard.
At least in London Saint Julien would be a familiar, if not overfriendly face.
It came as a surprise when Chantal volunteered to return to London, too.
But it was a surprise that D'Arcy welcomed.
‘I would prefer to be of help to you and Nader,’ she explained, ‘rather than wait around for news of Philippe that may never come.’
The blurting ring of the telephone caught them all unexpectedly.
Nadirpur stared at it as though it were a rattlesnake, his face quite drained.
Chantal ran the tip of her tongue over her lips and exchanged a glance with D'Arcy as he picked up the receiver.
It was Forbes.
He didn't mince words.
‘It's a contact, boss.
Through our office here.’
‘Our office, how the…?’
His voice trailed as he recalled giving his name to the anonymous diplomat during his earlier call to the Iranian Embassy in Paris.
Forbes spoke rapidly: ‘It was a woman calling on instructions from the kidnappers.
I gave her your number and told her to give me five minutes to warn you first.
I'll hang up now and clear the line.’
‘Thanks, Dave.’
D'Arcy replaced the receiver and turned towards the expectant faces.
‘It's a contact.
We'll get a call in the next few minutes.’
Nadirpur breathed again.
‘It is the kidnappers themselves?’
‘An intermediary, I think.’
Again the telephone rang.
D'Arcy pointed to it.
‘Take the call, Nader.
I'll use the extension.’
The Iranian's hand was trembling as he lifted the handset from its cradle.
The line was bad, the strident female voice crackling with static on the long-distance line.
‘I want to speak to Mr Nadirpur, please.’
‘You are speaking to him.’
‘It is Miss Dalrymple here.’
‘I am sorry —‘'
The voice was impatient.
‘I don t believe we've met.
I am your daughter's teacher.
At school here in London.’
‘Oh yes, of course.
I have heard of you.’
He recalled Ashi bemoaning the strict attitude of little Sousan's spinster teacher at the Kensington private school.
‘Well, look, Mr Nadirpur, first I apologise.
I had no idea that Sousan's mother was — er — was still married.
And secondly I am so sorry about the terrible thing that happened yesterday morning.
You have heard?’
‘Yes, I have heard,’ he replied flatly.
‘Well, something else has happened, and frankly I am worried sick.
I really don't know what to do.’
‘What is it, Miss Dalrymple.’
She hesitated.
‘I suppose it is all right to talk?’
‘Please.’
‘It's a package for you.’
‘What?
A package?’
‘In class this morning there was a telephone call for me.
I took it in the headmistress's office.
It was most strange.
A — er — foreign sounding gentleman.
Very polite but — well — sort of quietly menacing.
He said there was a package in the school yard for you — from your wife.
He gave me a number to ring in London.
He told me to use a call box.’
Her voice gathered speed and, listening on the extension, D'Arcy heard her veneer of calm begin to crack.
‘And he said if I told the police — or anyone else — there would be a bomb thrown into our playground.
Godfathers, Mr Nadirpur, I really don't know what to do.’
D'Arcy left the extension, crossed the room and took the receiver from the bewildered Nadirpur.
‘Listen, Miss Dalrymple, I'm Mr Nadirpur's security adviser.
Let me first thank you for your help, and assure you that you need have no fear.’
‘But this package is from little Sousan's kidnappers, surely?’
‘There's no doubt of that.
It's their first contact.
But don't worry, just do what they say and tell no one.’
‘Not even my headmistress?’
‘Not anybody.
If you do it could result in little Sousan's murder.
Trust me.
It is not in anyone's interest for you to contact the police yourself.
Leave that to us.’
‘But I must get this package to you.
This is a Paris number, isn't it?
Do I fly over?’
‘No.
Do you have a home telephone number?’
‘Yes.’
‘Will you be there this evening?’
‘Y-yes.’
Guarded.
‘I'll arrange for someone to collect it and take it to my London office.
I'll be in touch later.’
‘Oh, thank you.’
The relief in her voice was evident.
She gave her number.
‘Thank you, Miss Dalrymple.’
He replaced the receiver.
Nadirpur looked perplexed.
‘What does all this mean?’
D'Arcy smiled primly.
‘It means we're in business.’
It was early evening when the French registered, twin-engined Piper Aztec dipped low over the softly lit Surrey meadows on its final approach to Biggin Hill.
To D'Arcy it came as a relief to be back in England where he would have tighter control over the situation and the full backup of his headquarters team.
Nadirpur, too, he suspected would feel happier knowing that he was closer to his wife and child; somehow it helped.
As soon as the propellers came to a standstill the passengers disembarked onto the parking bay in front of a small terminal building.
D'Arcy knew Dave Forbes had been in contact with New Scotland Yard as he had instructed, but he was surprised to see the shabby, raincoated figure of Roy Bliss standing behind the Immigration officer.
‘We meet again, Rob,’ the SIS officer said.
He smiled uncertainly, remembering the acrimony of their previous meeting.
D'Arcy handed his passport to the Immigration officer.
‘You don't miss a trick, Roy, I'll give you that’
Bliss said: ‘Get through Customs and I'll take you to the reception committee.
I can tell you the boys in blue are pleased you've turned up.
With Nadirpur in France and the press here baying at their heels, there was precious little they could do.
At least now they can get their act together.
See you.’
The immigration procedures, even for Nadirpur, were a mere formality, and in under ten minutes all four passengers were through to the arrivals lounge.
Dave Forbes was waiting and swiftly intercepted D'Arcy before he could meet up again with Roy Bliss.
‘I've got the first demand from the schoolteacher, boss.
I haven't mentioned the contact to Bliss.
Thought you'd like to keep a step ahead.’
‘Good man,’ D'Arcy replied.
‘We'll keep it to ourselves until we see how the land lies.
I gather there's a meeting laid on.’
It was a six-mile drive to the country hotel where D'Arcy pulled the company's silver Jaguar XJS in alongside Bliss's road-weary Sierra.
After an envious glance, the SIS man led the way straight through reception to a small, windowless conference room.
It was overfilled with a huge walnut and chrome table and ranks of black leatherette chairs.
Two used coffee cups and an ashtray full of cigarette ends suggested that the two men who awaited their arrival had been in long and deep discussion.
Bliss made the introductions, beginning with the taller of the men, both of whom wore the nondescript dark suits traditionally favoured by high-ranking police officers.
‘Rob, I don't believe you've met Commander Bob Tanner,’ Bliss began conversationally, as though he and D'Arcy were the oldest and best of friends.
‘Bob, this is Major D'Arcy.’
As the man rose from behind the conference table, D'Arcy realised just how tall he was.
A good six foot six, with broad coathanger shoulders and a massive hand that completely covered D'Arcy's when lie shook it.
‘Bob is Head of SO13 Anti-Terrorist Branch,’ Bliss advised.
D'Arcy's surprise showed in his smile.
‘We are honoured.’
Bob Tanner's dark eyes were stern beneath the thick beetle brows that complemented the precisely cut head of black hair that was starting to silver at the temples.
‘It's not a matter of honour, Major.
I'm afraid it's a matter of necessity.’
There was a trace of a Dorset accent in the voice, which had sufficient gravity in its tone to let D'Arcy know that he took himself and his position with the utmost seriousness.
And expected everyone else to do the same.
‘And his deputy, Detective Chief Superintendent Reg Roman,’ Bliss continued, introducing a mild-mannered, lightly built man.
He was about D'Arcy's age although, with his fair hair and ready smile, he could have been much younger.
‘We've spoken before,’ D'Arcy said, ‘but not met.
Over a previous kidnap case.’
‘Good to put the face to the voice,’ Roman replied.
As they took their seats Tanner began: ‘I'm afraid, Major, that this case isn't at all like the one you worked on before with Reg Roman.’
Instantly D'Arcy read the message.
Tanner, as Commander of the Anti-Terrorist Branch, was stamping his authority on the meeting from the outset.
‘Let me explain to all of you why this case is so different,’ Tanner continued, hunching his huge shoulders, his big hands spread before him on the table.
His sombre eyes seemed to address each individual personally, in the way that a schoolmaster delivers a final warning to wayward pupils.
‘This case is different because it appears not to involve the usual criminal fraternity.
The kidnap has apparently been perpetrated by a cell of international terrorists, and that automatically makes it a matter for state security.
Whilst Reg Roman here is responsible for the day-to-day running of our investigation, he reports to me.
In turn  I answer to the Assistant Commissioner of Specialist Operations who has a seat on a specially convened COBRA sub-group.
That, for those of you not familiar with such things, is Cabinet Office level.
It is being treated that seriously.
And, as such, any actions taken require the sanction of that sub-group.
In short any action that we or you take will have to be in accordance with current government policy.’
D'Arcy sensed trouble.
‘What specifically are you saying that might affect the handling of this case?’
The beetle brows knitted together in foreboding.
‘That in any case involving a terrorist-inspired kidnap, it is British Government policy not to negotiate.
Certainly not in terms of granting kidnappers political or financial reward.
Nor, of course, immunity from prosecution.’
At the far end of the table Nadirpur almost yelped in anguish.
‘But it is my wife and child's lives at stake!’
‘Quite so,’ Tanner replied.
‘I can see from where you are sitting that is difficult to appreciate.’
Reg Roman stepped in quickly.
‘It's not quite as black as it seems, Mr Nadirpur.
We have a very experienced police organisation at our disposal.
Every attempt will be made to open up dialogue with the kidnappers and to stall them long enough to trace where your wife and daughter are being held.
Then appropriate action will be taken.’
‘And if the kidnappers lose patience?’
Nadirpur asked gloomily.
Roman attempted to be reassuring.
‘I'm sure we can keep them optimistic enough.’
D'Arcy said: ‘As you are no doubt aware, the purpose of this kidnap is to put pressure on my client to reveal the whereabouts of a missing ship.
For a while, at least, I think we can offer them assurances that we are taking steps to locate it.
Enough to buy some time.’
Roy Bliss shifted in his seat and studied the tip of his cigarette grimly.
Roman said: ‘That's a sound idea, Major.
We have to establish contact with the kidnappers and try to exchange something, even if it is just information.
Because — you must all understand — it is only when an exchange is made that we can narrow down the area of search to concentrate our resources.
Otherwise they could be hiding out at any one of the millions of properties in Britain.
But an exchange puts both them and us into a geographical funnel towards the meeting point.’
D'Arcy decided to take a new tack to loosen the straitjacket he could foresee Tanner placing on his options to negotiate.
Turning to the Anti-Terrorist Branch commander, he said: ‘We're not even sure terrorists are involved in this.
After all it was a legitimate weapons cargo, however much Britain might disapprove.
Maybe just some Iranian hotheads getting upset because they think they've been subjected to a  con trick by the arms dealers.
It's happened before.’
He turned pointedly to Bliss.
‘What do you think, Roy?’
D'Arcy watched with interest.
After all it had been Bliss who had warned him that Nadirpur was embroiled with the Pessarane Behesht , Bliss who had informed him that the real cargo was arms.
What else did he know?
To his credit the SIS man took the hot coal landing on his lap without flinching.
Perhaps he knew D'Arcy well enough to have been expecting it.
‘I'm afraid we have to assume the worst.’
Bliss turned to Tanner.
‘The problem dealing with Iranian or Lebanese Shi'ite terrorists is that we know comparatively little about them.
And what we do know is often second-hand, usually from Israeli sources.
Not only are these terrorist groupings highly fragmented, it is not always clear either who controls them or what their motives are on specific occasions.
Unlike many terrorists, Iranian or Iranian-linked groups often do not claim responsibility for atrocities they commit.
It's all part of their game to keep us guessing.
Helps build up their mystique.’
Tanner nodded gravely.
Roman looked at D'Arcy.
‘What about this ship?
If it's been lost at sea, then why shouldn't the Iranians believe it?’
He smiled gently.
‘Accept the will of Allah, so to speak.’
‘They don't believe it any more than we do,’ D'Arcy replied, ‘because, given the size of the ship and prevailing weather, hijacking is the most likely explanation.
There have been over a thousand acts of piracy in the past ten years.
Usually the cargo is broken down and sold off, then the ship reappears with false papers reregistered under a Honduran or Panamanian flag of convenience.
Add to that the fact that the Paris-based company that supplied the cargo has vanished into thin air, and it starts to look very suspicious.’
As he spoke he could almost feel the dagger looks from Bliss piercing his back.
Tanner appeared to come to a decision.
‘Well, gentlemen —‘'He nodded recognition at Chantal ‘— and lady, we cannot yet know the ins and outs of this business.
Clearly there is some chicanery going on and perhaps in due course we will find out the truth.
Meanwhile we will have to treat this at its face value.
A kidnap for purposes not entirely known.
But Mr Bliss is right that we have to assume that the abductors are politically motivated terrorists —‘'
‘I don't agree,’ D'Arcy interrupted.
‘As you have said yourself, that will restrict the options open to my client to negotiate.
I propose that it should be treated as a case of criminal kidnap until we have evidence to the contrary.’
Bliss's cheeks reddened.
D'Arcy was throwing down a direct challenge for him to come clean, and he knew it.
Roman looked sympathetic.
He understood that D'Arcy was after the best opportunity to get his client's wife and child back alive.
But if he knew his Commander as well as he thought he did, there would be little chance of that.
Tanner disapproved of kidnap insurance and companies like D'Arcy's which negotiated for hostage release.
In the eyes of the conservative-minded Dorset policeman, it just encouraged kidnappers — criminal or terrorists — to try it again.
As it was, Tanner opted for neutral ground.
‘I tell you what, Major, we will keep that aspect under review.
See exactly what they want first.
I take it that you have not yet received a demand?’
‘I've seen nothing,’ D'Arcy answered truthfully.
‘And you'll co-operate fully with Reg here?’
Tanner asked, knitting his brows together in stern warning.
‘We contacted you,’ D'Arcy reminded.
‘Of course we'll co-operate.’
Roman nodded and smiled at D'Arcy.
‘It'll be a pleasure working with you again, Major.’
Tanner rose to his feet, and all eyes upturned.
‘Right.
I'll leave you in Reg Roman's capable hands.
He'll keep me informed.
We'll meet again in due course.’
Picking up his heavy hide briefcase, he swept out of the conference room.
It did not escape Roman's notice that his Commander had neglected to offer a word of comfort to Nadirpur and he acted swiftly to compensate.
‘Don't think we're uncaring, sir.
Far from it.
Things seem hopeless at the moment, but it's not our policy to let kidnappers get away with their crimes.’
Nadirpur looked straight into Roman's eyes.
‘I do not care about the kidnappers.
I just want my wife and child back safe.’
‘Of course.’
Chastened, the officer turned to D'Arcy.
‘Here's my card.
You'll phone me as soon as they make contact?’
‘You'll be the first to know.’
As the group made its way into the reception area, Bliss tugged at D'Arcy's sleeve.
‘What is it, Roy?’
Bliss lit a cigarette, cupping it in nicotine-stained fingers.
‘About your idea.
Trading off information about the ship to keep Nadirpur's family alive.’
‘What about it?’
Bliss inhaled deeply.
‘You won't find it, pal.’
‘We can try.’
Bliss shook his head.
‘Not a good idea.’
D'Arcy was suspicious.
‘There's Tanner saying no money, and now you're saying no ship.
We've got to offer the bastards something.’
‘Sure,’ Bliss said.
‘Go through the motions of searching for the ship.
But don't look too hard, pal, eh?’
The scar on D'Arcy's cheek pulsed.
‘What do you know about the ship, Roy?’
Bliss tapped the side of his nose.
‘Just remember — you want to stay in business.’
‘I've got a man on board that ship.’
Bliss shrugged.
‘He'll come to no harm.’
‘Is Century House involved in this setup, Roy?’
‘I've said too much already.
Just take it from me that it's not in your best interests to go hunting around for the ship.’
‘And Nadirpur's wife and kid?’
‘That wasn't anticipated,’ Bliss conceded.
His grey eyes fixed closely on D'Arcy.
‘But this can be a dirty game, pal, as you well know.
Don't worry though, the cops will sort out that side of things.
Just know who your friends are.
 Ciao  .’
Bliss turned on his heel and, pausing only to toss his cigarette end into one of the fire buckets, sauntered out of the hotel lobby.
D'Arcy drove his passengers back to London in a mood of suppressed fury.
Just who the hell did Bliss think he was?
Lying to him, lying to the police running the kidnap inquiry.
Concocting any half-truth that suited some harebrained plan dreamed up by the spooks in Century House.
They lived in a world of their own, that lot.
He knew well enough, because once that had been his world too.
Well, in part.
Standing on the sidelines, carrying out orders.
Up the sharp end when all their clever ideas came unstuck and they needed some poor mug to stick them back together again.
But that was then.
This was now.
He was no longer part of their treacherous, scheming world with its labyrinthine plots and counterplots.
This was his world now, helping poor bastards like Nadirpur who had become ensnared by accident.
He swept up to the gates of the converted Flax Wharf warehouse and sounded the horn.
Someone checked the car through the closed-circuit monitor and the gates opened, allowing him to drive into the courtyard.
After the crumbling Victorian brickwork of the exterior, IAP's ultra-modern nerve centre came as a shock to both Nadirpur and Saint Julien.
They gazed in awe at the hive of activity against the muted background clack of typewriter and word processor keyboards.
D'Arcy recognised the faces of several ex-special forces personnel whom he had not seen for some time.
Most were writing up reports between assignments, or busy making arrangements by telephone.
A number of hands waved in his direction.
On Forbes's ‘throne’ by the VDUs sat the queen bee of admin, weaving order out of the potential chaos of paperwork.
Brandy Slade looked up, tossing her curly mane of chestnut hair and showing a perfectly white New York secretary's smile.
‘Hi, boss!’
Her gaiety and enthusiasm for work was infectious; nothing seemed to get her down.
And she was always turned out with the meticulous make-up and clothes of a Barbie doll, an arch exponent of power dressing with padded shoulders to her grey suit and a tight pencil skirt that drew attention to her long, shapely legs.
D'Arcy felt better already.
Once Nadirpur and Saint Julien had been introduced, everyone settled down around the large ‘Ops Room’ table while Brandy organised coffee and biscuits.
D'Arcy said: ‘Right, Dave, let's have a look at the kidnappers’ demand.’
With a suitable sense of occasion Forbes pulled on a pair of rubber gloves and lifted a sealed plastic bag from his briefcase.
He opened it carefully and extracted a padded brown Jiffy bag.
Tilting it to one side he allowed the object to clatter onto the table.
Nadirpur gasped.
‘You recognise it?’
D'Arcy asked.
The Iranian nodded.
‘It is Ashi's wedding ring.’
Gingerly he reached out to touch it; it might as well have been a physical part of his wife's anatomy, like an ear or a finger.
‘See, the sapphire.
Her birthstone.
And the inscription.’
Forbes tugged at the thin wad of paper protruding from the bag.
It was a single sheet that had been folded neatly into four.
The big hands spread it out.
‘Typewritten,’ he observed.
‘In capitals.’
D'Arcy said: ‘They're in a hurry.
That's a good sign.’
‘How do you know, Rober'?’
Chantal asked.
‘Because typewriters can be traceable.
If they had the time they'd have cut words or letters out of magazines.
Or maybe used a plastic stencil.’
Nadirpur stared at the paper as though it were contaminated.
‘Why didn't they make Ashi write it?
To prove she's alive?’
He looked at D'Arcy wide-eyed.
‘It doesn't mean —?’
‘No, it doesn't,’ D'Arcy replied more sharply than he intended.
‘If a victim is asked to write, then he or she will know what s going on.
That can be dangerous for the kidnappers.
Ashi might be able to interfere with the negotiations at her end.
Or even write some sort of clue into the message.’
‘You are sure?’
‘A typewriter is normal,’ D'Arcy assured.
‘I'll read it,’ Forbes said.
‘NADIRPUR — YOUR WIFE AND CHILD IS HELD IN THE NAME OF ISLAM.
OUR SHIPMENT MUST BE RETURNED OR  THEY WILL DIE BOTH.
SMITTEN BY THE SWORD OF ALLAH.
IF YOU DO NOT FULLY CO-OPERATE YOUR DAUGHTER WILL BE MUTILATED…’