

Background
In examining my own background it seems logical to refer to the findings of Selvini Palazzoli and Minuchin on the families of anorexics, but whereas Minuchin especially confines himself to the family ambience at the time of the onset of the disease, I should like to say a little more about the genesis of that family ambience.
Although I agree that ‘it is always dangerous to assume that the causes of emotional disturbances lie more in the past than the present,’ I also know that families, like individuals, in Western societies have histories, and that no two families, happy or unhappy, develop in exactly the same way.
In the course of my own childhood and adolescence my immediate family went through several changes, mostly involving separation and loss, but at the same time certain factors remained constant.
In fact, it seems to me now that what remained constant did so, and all the more so, because of the changes with which the family was faced.
And because the particular form of constancy adopted by my family seems at least as important in the aetiology of my own disease as the changes which accompanied it, I shall start with an anecdote which illustrates, in little, the fixed but complex family structure of which I was a part.
I was about 13 years old, and my aunt (my father's sister) and uncle had come to stay with us — namely, my father, my mother, my four younger sisters and myself.
There was nothing unusual in this, visits to and from relatives having been a common feature of my childhood.
After lunch one day we went for a walk in the  nearby woods, my mother remaining at home with the two younger children and the rest of us accompanying my father and my aunt.
It was one of those crisp, clear autumnal days with the leaves vivid and squishy underfoot and the sky above one perfect, if chilling, blue.
When the path narrowed, we had to proceed in single file, and I found myself leading the way, with my aunt following closely behind and my father behind her.
I was enjoying it all in a mildly responsive sort of way.
Then I heard my aunt remark of me to my father, without making any attempt to lower her voice, ‘She's going to be stout — just like Dolly’(Dolly was my mother).
At once all the light and colour seemed to be drained from my surroundings.
I was blazingly angry with her, and wanted to shout, ‘No, I'm not!
Why the hell should I be?
And who are you to say so?’
But of course I said nothing — to retaliate would have been considered insufferably rude — and walked on, pretending not to have heard, while my aunt proceeded to pass similar, though less unflattering remarks on the physical appearance of my sisters.
I am not suggesting that my aunt's remark served as some sort of trigger for my disease, because I did not in fact become anorexic until three or four years later.
Nor am I suggesting that one thoughtless remark can prompt a neurosis.
What I am suggesting is that both my aunt's remark and her attitude stemmed from assumptions already prevalent within the family as to what was appropriate behaviour.
That this particular remark referred to my body illustrates in a pertinent and heightened form the treatment to which I and my sisters were subject as children.
Some further analysis of the incident is needed.
The first thing that strikes me is that my aunt — an almost complete stranger as far as I was concerned — should have been there at all, within the family circle where no friend or neighbour was allowed, and thus in a privileged position to make personal remarks of the type which would not have been tolerated from any other quarter.
Her remark was indicative not only of the close and exclusive family structure, but also of the petty rivalries and jealousies (in this case directed at my mother) within it.
In the second place, it is clear that she had no idea what effect her remark would or could have had on me.
She was following the family pattern of talking about children in their own presence in the third person instead of addressing them directly.
This pattern implies that children have no thoughts or feelings of their own and are incapable of understanding the wider meanings of the simplest observations.
But, as Morton Schatzman points out, this is far from the case:
Certain words, especially if heard often and in childhood, may be encoded or transformed, stored, and later, in disguise, retrieved and re-experienced.
I think everyone, some of the time, and some people nearly all the time, recurrently experience in and with their bodies literal meanings of certain oft-repeated speech they heard in childhood.
That is, they translate words back into the same modality of bodily experience from which those who spoke the words derived them from within their own bodies.
I consider this to be substantially true, and particularly true of my own childhood, although in this case there was scarcely any need for translation.
The implications were that I had no physical characteristics of my own, but that in the same way as I ‘had’ my father's nose, or my grandmother's eyes, I somehow inhabited a body which was not mine but a replica of my mother's, and over which, therefore, I had no control.
So the remark was a climax to a series of similar remarks which I had previously received with only mild resentment or embarrassment.
Schatzman again brings this point into focus: ‘Some, possibly all, people's bodies resonate to others' spoken words…
I think people called hypochondriacs are either talented at it (and unaware that they are) or have heard more ‘physicalistic’ speech in childhood than most people, or both.’
In my childhood I certainly heard a great deal of ‘physicalistic’ speech, such as‘Isn't she sweet?
I could eat her up’, or ‘I'm not going to take that from him; it sticks in my throat’.
But most of it was concerned with family resemblances, which were sometimes not purely physical but characterological as well, and often to dead or very distant relatives.
If we substitute the phrase ‘sufferers from a psychosomatic condition’ for the word ‘hypochondriacs’in the Schatzman quotation, I think we have one of the ingredients in a recipe for anorexia nervosa.
But Schatzman's point, like my own, is concerned with more than the ‘physicalistic’ character of speech heard or overheard in childhood.
To me, the third striking aspect of my aunt's remark is her ability or right to predict the future for me.
This, too, was part of the family pattern.
Just as I had been told repeatedly that I was  destined to ‘do well’, so then I was being told that I was destined to be ‘stout’.
It would seem that I had no choice in either matter, but whereas the former flattered me as well as frightened me, the latter insulted and enraged me.
‘The family’, says Minuchin, ‘is the matrix of identity.’
True enough, and, despite the dissimilarities among families, the impressions taken from each matrix are likely to be of similar depth and importance.
For an orphan or a child taken into care, the institution involved constitutes the family.
For a child a hundred years ago, the family was likely to be an extended one, including aunts, uncles, cousins and grandparents as well as parents and siblings.
Some time between then and now the unit commonly referred to as the family gradually shrank to a membership of two parents and their own children only — the nuclear family.
Today an adolescent is probably as likely as not to belong to a family which is an uneasy mixture of the nuclear set-up and the institution known as serial marriage (marriage, divorce, remarriage).
Of all these set-ups the most favourable breeding-ground for anorexia nervosa is the nuclear family — tight, self-enclosed and a world unto itself.
Contrary to the popular image of the disturbed teenager, the anorexic is not typically a product of a ‘broken home’, however unhappy that home may be.
On the contrary, her home is a cohesive force, perhaps the only cohesive force she can experience in the generally fragmenting world of adolescence.
Until recently it has tended to be a middle-class, if not an upper-class, home where the father prides himself on being able to provide well for his family, and the mother prides herself on being a good ‘homemaker’ who runs the establishment with precise efficiency, giving careful consideration to the basic (i.e. material) needs of all the occupants.
However, recent studies in comprehensive schools have shown that this picture is changing, and that anorexia nervosa is beginning to lose its class basis.
This is a subject to which I shall return, but for the moment I prefer to confine myself to the typical picture and to show where my own circumstances coincided with it or diverged from it.
My own family was at once strongly nuclear and part of what can only be called a clan.
It was at first, through proximity, an extended family whose members were as strongly bound together  as those who live within the nuclear structure.
Later, when distance made such bonds unrealistic in everyday terms, the nuclear family became isolated, friendless, and therefore all the more determined to maintain the former sustaining links by whatever means were available.
I was born, as were both my parents and their parents before them (and so on) on the Isle of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides.
The Minch, which separates the island from the mainland of Scotland, is wider than the English Channel and much rougher.
In winter the island is inevitably lashed by gales and snow-storms, boats don't sail, planes don't land, and communications with the outside world are often severed altogether.
The result is a certain insularity which tends to be pervasive throughout the year, expressing itself in a fear and mistrust of strangers coupled with a fierce pride in the uniqueness of one's origins.
In my childhood anyone who did not come from Lewis was scathingly described as a ‘forrinter’.
In extreme cases, the same description was applied to someone who came from a distant village.
Because of the nature of the terrain — the land rocky and barren, the coastline highly indented — villages which appear to be close on the map can often be as far as 30 miles apart by winding road.
In winter, these routes may become impassable, and so the village, like the island itself, may be cut off from outside communications.
Life may be easier there today, but when I was a child few people had cars and buses were infrequent.
Cromore, the village where I was born, lies in the southern shore of Loch Erisort, looking across to a similar settlement on the northern side.
At that time the houses were scattered and there was no village shop (the mobile shop called once a week), although there was a church and a school.
My father was the village schoolmaster and I, like my sisters, Helen and Pat, was born in the schoolhouse, a solid, stone-built structure incorporating two large classrooms as well as the usual living quarters.
It was built to last, and the vaulted classrooms now serve as tearooms for any tourists intrepid enough to reach them.
When I revisited the place in 1974, I found it at once grim and beautiful, at once an irrelevance to my present life and a painfully inevitable part of what I was, what I am, and what I always shall be.
The grimness was not only a matter of the appalling weather conditions, nor of the remoteness from all comforts and advantages of city life.
It was  also the grimness of Presbyterianism.
In small communities with a strong religious nucleus there is always an element of censure — sometimes unspoken, sometimes whispered, more rarely shouted aloud and face to face — of those who are thought to have transgressed against the faith.
I think my father must have suffered some of this, if only because he refused to have us children christened.
I remember someone — the school cleaner, I think — telling me how dreadful this omission was, and how I recognised the mixture of shock and pity in her voice without being able to separate the two, or understand to whom they were being allocated and why.
In other words, the place was a place where everyone knew everyone else's business.
Then, as now, people had nicknames as they do in Wales, and I have always suspected that this type of labelling has causes other than the lack of variety in local surnames.
Jones-the-milk is all very well, but to be dubbed Murdo-foolish for the rest of your life is a different matter.
I see the latter as symbolic of a process which has been described variously as ‘attribution’ or ‘definition’.
In Sanity, Madness, and the Family , R.D. Laing and Aaron Esterson point up, with a clarity which I at once recognised and was astonished by, the importance of attributions within the family.
Briefly, an attribution is a description of one person given to her/him by another person and which she/he has difficulty in reconciling with her/his own self-image.
The describer is usually an adult, the described a child.
The attribution itself can either be total, e.g., ‘Claire is such a good girl’, or partial, e.g., ‘Henry has a vicious streak’.
So far this is normal and to be expected, but if Claire is told often enough how good she is when she feels herself to be bad, or if Henry is constantly reminded of his vicious streak when he is aware of other, ignored qualities in himself, then both Claire and Henry are likely to become confused as to their own self-images.
Again, I think such feelings are commonplace, especially in adolescence, and that they can become diffused and thus manageable with a wider context than that of the rigidly nuclear family or the rigidly nuclear community, a context where attributions from outsiders can modify the original ones and lead the individual towards a re-assessment of her/himself.
But it is also clear that within tight-knit units attributions can become  destructive: you are given your role and you must play it out, the same role for the rest of your life.
This is what Thomas S. Szasz is implying when he writes about ‘definition’: ‘In the animal kingdom, the rule is eat or be eaten; in the human kingdom, define or be defined.
’ He sees the struggle for definition as ‘veritably the struggle for life itself’, and that to perceive oneself for oneself is a matter of life and death: ‘In short, he who first seizes the word imposes reality on the other: he who defines thus dominates and lives; and he who is defined is subjugated and may be killed.’
Szasz is putting the position at its most extreme, but I recognise the truth in what he is saying and, apart from his implication that the definers are acting with conscious deliberation, I think he is right.
On my last visit to Lewis I found myself repelled by the use of derogatory nicknames, and couldn't understand why I was reacting so violently.
It was only on re-reading Szasz that I realised I had been touched on a sensitive spot — the struggle for individual identity — and that that spot was central to the problem of anorexia nervosa.
It seemed to me that ‘eat or be eaten’, a phrase with literal meaning in the animal kingdom and metaphorical in the human, is in anorexia re-interpreted and used through the symptoms of the disease with literal force.
But all this is hindsight: it is a series of thoughts and feelings which sprang from a visit on a painful occasion (my mother's funeral), and not from my childhood experience of childhood itself.
Until recently I should have rejected the premise that my earliest years represented some sort of attack upon my individuality and insisted that, on the contrary, I was surrounded with kindness and loving care — as indeed I was.
In fact, my childhood on Lewis can be described as a happy one.
In many ways it could even be described as idyllic.
In the conventional sense of the word, which conveys some sort of harmony with the natural world, it certainly was.
There was the shore of the loch where we children could paddle, catch tiny sea-creatures (but always put them back in the water again) and collect all sorts of treasures.
There was the school garden where the pupils learned to grow vegetables and I (being under school age) pottered around with them and after them, eager to help.
There were the hens to be fed, their eggs to be collected.
I was especially fond of my maternal grandparents' dog, Luath, an exquisitely patient collie with whom I would sit  for hours, pretending or half-pretending that we could read one another 's thoughts.
Inside our house there were stone floors, coal fires, oil lamps, but I don't remember ever feeling any sense of cold or discomfort, except when I got chilblains — a seasonal  occurrence (and one which Dally cites, along with other circulatory disorders, as common among anorexics and perhaps indicative of a certain proneness).
Nor can I remember any sense of restraint: the landscape belonged to me and I to it, and I was free to explore it and be nurtured by it in a subconscious Wordsworthian sort of way.
Of course there must have been prohibitions and limits set, but I don't remember rebelling against any of them.
I suppose I must have accepted that whatever my parents told me was good and right because I had no reason to think otherwise.
They seemed to have a good relationship, agree about most things, and never, never row — at least, not in front of the children.
When I was a teenager there were rows of a sort — mainly about the behaviour of my sisters — but during the whole of my childhood I can only remember one.
I don't know what it was about, but I know that it shocked me into the sort of terror that I didn't know I was capable of.
And it is only fairly recently — probably since my mother's death — that I have been able to abandon the naive belief that such an apparently ‘perfect’ relationship is indicative of a good marriage.
Then, however, all was seemingly well.
In order to arrive at the truth behind the idyll, I must return to the matter of attributions.
As I remember, the three adjectives applied to me most consistently throughout my early childhood were ‘clever’, ‘good’, and ‘healthy’.
Cleverness was by far the most important of the three.
Just as Mr Micawber can be characterised by his belief that something will turn up, so I was characterised by my cleverness.
This would seem to imply a super-intelligence, but it was nothing of the sort.
My cleverness consisted of verbal fluency and, more importantly, the concomitant skill of literacy.
My father taught me to read at a very early age.
According to him, I was able to read aloud to him passages from the Stornoway Gazette when I was three years old.
This was generally considered to be brilliant, although it seems to me that it was as much my father's achievement as my own, and probably perceived unconsciously by him as such.
Achievement, especially academic achievement, was what being clever was all about.
I was destined for great things — Oxford or Cambridge, a string of letters after my name, a successful academic career, and would no doubt end up being the first woman Prime Minister.
This sort of thing was impressed upon me, not only by my parents, but by the whole network of the extended family.
I should have been pleased, I should have been flattered, and indeed I was.
I thrived on the praise and admiration, loved to show off, and secretly (or not so secretly) thought myself superior to older children who had not yet acquired my special skills.
But even more secret, so secret that I could scarcely even admit it to myself, was my sense of inadequacy.
I read and read, but increasingly, as I grew older, understood very little of what I read.
As far as I was concerned, reading was an automatic skill rather than an indication of superior intelligence or understanding, and no one but myself seemed to have noticed the difference, or even realised that there was one.
I have often wondered if this obsession with formal education and the high value put on academic achievement is a peculiarly Scottish thing, but it is clear from Bruch's studies that the pressure to achieve — not necessarily but often academically — is an important factor in the aetiology of anorexia nervosa.
However, not all girls under such pressure become anorexic.
The distinguishing feature in my case, as in those of Bruch's patients, was that I, the eldest, was the only one in the family to be put under such pressure.
I remember discussing with my parents, years later when I was a student, some recently published findings on the question of innate intelligence.
When I postulated that the environmentalists might have a case, they were horrified that I of all people should express such a view, when it had been clear to them from the start that I was different from the others (my sisters).
So they had decided, and so — in their terms — it turned out.
Apart from the youngest, all my sisters left school at sixteen or so and got married shortly afterwards, whereas I went on to university.
In promoting my education and neglecting that of my sisters, my parents proved themselves right.
I had cleverness thrust upon me, and up to a point I learned my lesson well: the most important thing in life was to achieve.
And not only that.
It was equally important to outshine everyone else around me — in other words, to achieve at the expense of others.
But by my late teens I had come to find this attitude repellent, and knew that I was never going to fulfil my parents' expectations.
Cleverness, like goodness and to a lesser extent, healthiness, was a feature of my status within the family — that of the eldest child.
Bruch suggests that a significantly large proportion of anorexics are eldest or elder daughters.
And, in view of her theory that anorexics have a poor sense of their own size, weight and proportions in general, it may be interesting to examine more closely the status of the eldest child and more specifically the eldest daughter.
The eldest child is a pioneer: it is she/he who first undertakes to make contact with the outside world, to go to school, and to make friends not only for her/himself but sometimes on behalf of younger siblings as well.
She/he is the first child to have friends and thus set an example to younger children of what constitutes relationships outside the family.
Although the parents are primarily responsible for establishing the norms in such relationships, the eldest child can find that it is she/he who bears most or all of the responsibility because the parents themselves are, like those of many anorexics, either relatively or completely isolated.
Such a responsibility can prove onerous because a child who comes from an introverted home is likely to be introverted her/himself.
If she/he does not or cannot succeed in forming friendships, she/he will become very lonely indeed, no longer belonging entirely to the family, and unable to belong in any real sense to the school and the peer groups within it.
This must lead to some confusion in the perception of self for both girls and boys.
For girls the problem is compounded by the concept of mothering.
The eldest daughter, even if she is not the eldest child, is much more likely to be asked by her mother to help in the care of younger children than is an eldest son.
She will be asked to feed, change, pacify or amuse a baby brother or sister, and later to supervise journeys to and from school, or to take charge at home when both parents are out.
Of course some boys may be asked to perform some or all of these tasks, but I think that (for historical rather than biological reasons) the task of substitute-mothering is more likely to devolve upon a girl than upon a boy who is in a similar position within the family.
Such a girl is being asked to behave in many ways like an adult (mother) in that she is being  asked to carry out the nurturing and supervisory procedures which properly belong to adulthood and, traditionally, to motherhood in particular.
She is being asked to bear adult responsibilities but, because she is a child she is not, at the same time, granted any of the privileges of adulthood.
Of course not: she is biologically unequipped for most of them.
Again, there must be some confusion in the perception of self, but this time it relates directly to the perception of size.
An adult is a woman, is a mother, is large and has power.
A child is a girl, is small, incapable of motherhood and comparatively powerless.
This dichotomy must surely give rise to resentment, however firmly repressed.
Popular mythology among mothers has it that the first child is always the most ‘difficult’, and it is easy to see why this should be so.
It is given to the first child, through no fault of its own, to disrupt what has been an exclusive, reciprocal relationship as no subsequent child has power to do.
And I have been told that as a baby I conformed to this pattern, in contrast to my first sister who was ‘delicate’ and my second sister who was ‘placid’.
As a baby I was fractious and for most of my childhood I was exuberant, passionate and hyperactive.
But at the same time I was learning the lesson that such behaviour is not acceptable to adults, to whom I presented a different personality.
I stress the exuberance because most of the literature on anorexia nervosa stresses that anorexics tend to be ‘good’ little girls.
A good girl is, generally speaking, one who knows how to please adults and not to bother them too much.
A good girl is obedient.
A good girl helps her mother around the house and with the younger children, being especially good if she does so without being asked.
Somehow or other I managed to learn these lessons, becoming anxious to please and to be praised for having pleased.
My behaviour was based partially on hypocrisy and partially on a fear of rejection.
My especial goodness lay in my consideration for my parents (‘Mummy is tired’; ‘Daddy has a migraine’), whose approval I was in fact terrified of forfeiting, and, perhaps as a consequence, in my attentiveness to my two younger sisters, of whom I was in fact bitterly jealous.
Most writers agree that childhood jealousy is common in the history of anorexics.
Dally goes as far as to state that it indicates  a bad prognosis for the disease, but I am glad to be able to report that although my jealousy continued into my adolescence, including the anorexic period, it did not deter my recovery, and that my sisters and I are now the best of friends.
However, they have told me recently that, when I was about nine or ten, they thought me a bully because I would surreptitiously pinch them or pull their hair in order to keep them in line — that is, in order to make them behave as my parents would have wished them to.
But outwardly I was all sweetness and patient understanding, continually being congratulated on my competence in the role of ‘little mother’.
As Menninger puts it, ‘Like all unacknowledged, unconscious aggression, excessive forbearance is self-destructive.’
My aggressiveness towards the adults around me for putting me in such an invidious position was certainly unacknowledged and unconscious, and had my sisters not told me of my bullying tactics — which I had conveniently forgotten — it is likely that I should not be able to acknowledge it even now.
My healthiness, or sturdiness, as it was more commonly called, was another important aspect of my being the eldest child.
I was two years old when my younger sister was born.
She had a weak chest and needed a lot of attention, whereas I was robust and could be left to my own devices.
I think I learned the lesson even then that the frail receive more love and attention than the healthy.
I was desolated by the emotional separation from my mother, whom I thought the most wonderful person in the world.
The story goes that, when she was nursing my sister, I said to her, ‘Put that thing in the pram and come play with me.’
I would follow her around the house, clinging on to her skirt, unwilling to let her out of my sight, and demanding to be fed with some small token such as an apple or a piece of bread.
‘A mother’, says Elias Canetti, ‘is one who gives her own body to be eaten.
She first nourishes the child in her womb and then gives it her milk…
’ What better revenge can there be on an unfaithful mother who gives her body to another than to reject her, and with her the principle of nourishment, in becoming anorexic?
I could see my sister being nourished as I had been nourished, and I was demanding some sort of parity.
But I don't think I got it.
I had and have the distinct impression that my mother found me a nuisance.
Perhaps that was  one of the reasons which prompted my father to teach me to read, and so divert me from my inexorable pursuit of my mother.
As the mother of two sons myself, I now find my childhood reaction extreme, and am led to suspect that my separation anxiety originated some time before the birth of my sister.
And because the anorexic girl's relationship with her mother is of prime importance, I think the suspicion is worth investigating, although what follows is necessarily conjectural.
When my elder son was born and I was having difficulty in breast-feeding him, my mother sympathised with me and told me that, just after I was born, she had had an  abscess on one of her breasts and found feeding me something of an ordeal.
My own reaction at the time — a guilty feeling of my own inadequacy as both feeder and fed, mingled with a wish that she had not told me — indicates that this is an important piece of information.
Feeding me must have been painful, and perhaps therefore an unpleasant emotional experience.
It is possible that her attitude towards me could have been coloured, even determined, by her own suffering.
And although this is conjecture, I feel it should be mentioned, if only because the primal mother-child relationship so highly emphasised in post-Freudian psychoanalytic literature has been largely ignored by those who have written about anorexia nervosa.
Because I cannot rely on my conscious memory of my own earliest moments, I can do little to remedy this omission.
But D.W. Winnicott may be helpful in this context in suggesting what sort of process might have been taking place.
He describes a ‘good-enough mother’(i.e., a mother as good at being a mother as any of us can expect either to have or to be) as someone who ‘starts off with an almost complete adaptation to her infant's needs, and as time proceeds she adapts less and less completely, gradually according to the infant's growing ability to deal with her failure.’
In other words, being a ‘good-enough mother’ depends largely on appropriateness of response.
In a striking image, Winnicott describes the mother's face as a mirror in which the baby perceives the image not only of her/himself, but of the whole world into which she/he has been born.
When a mother's face does not reflect a meaningful world of which the baby is a part — as it seems to me the face of a woman in pain cannot — then what results is ‘a threat of chaos and the baby  will organise withdrawal, or will not look except to perceive as a defence.
A baby so treated will grow up puzzled about mirrors and what the mirror has to offer.
If the mother's face is unresponsive, then the mirror is a thing to be looked at but not looked into.’
In my own case, none of this is verifiable, and may seem far-fetched, but it is interesting to compare Winnicott's concepts of both good-enough mothering and the mirror-image with what Bruch has to say specifically about the mothering of anorexics.
Emphasising that the early histories of anorexics rarely give evidence of gross neglect, and that terms like ‘rejection’ or ‘lack of proper love’are unhelpful, she concludes that ‘the details one learns are usually quite subtle; the important aspect is whether the response to the child's needs was appropriate or was superimposed, according to what the mother felt he needed , often mistakenly.’
We are back with appropriateness of response: a mother who has difficulty in feeding her baby may persist, because she is anxious that the baby should be properly fed, in prolonging a painful experience beyond her own and the baby's endurance.
If Winnicott's image of the mirror-image is a valid one and what the baby needs at a certain stage is a reflection of a meaningful world in which she/he has some place, we are also back with perception and self-perception.
Mirrors, being the most readily available and most literal source of self-perception — a faculty which is always weak in anorexics — also play an important role in the symbology or symbolism of the disease.
To return from conjecture to fact: the nuclear family left Lewis in 1944 when I was five years old.
I don't know why this decision was taken, especially as it doesn't seem to have been a well-planned one.
My father had a teaching job in Leytonstone in East London, while my mother, my sisters and myself stayed with a series of relatives in both Scotland and England.
Eventually we moved to Dorset where my father taught at the local grammar school.
We lived for a year in a cottage attached to a remote farm — so remote that I have never been able to find it again.
The conditions were primitive — no electricity or running water — and in a way it was a continuation of the life we had led on Lewis, except that the extended family had now shrunk to a nuclear and very isolated one.
I sometimes think that this, the year of my sixth birthday was the happiest of my life.
It was also the year in which  I discovered both sex and death, so I must have learned something, in spite of not going to school.
Otherwise, it was a sort of limbo, and it wasn't until we moved to a council house in Southall in the outer suburbs of London that the shades of the prison-house began to close.
That phrase has never been a cliché to me, but an exact description of what I experienced in 1946.
When I read, later, Edwin Muir's description in his Autobiography of his transition from Orkney to a Glasgow glue-factory, I read also a description of my own (less conscious, more childish) emotional state at the age of seven.
Everything was noisy, dirty, speedy, and everywhere one was hemmed in by houses, traffic, and people, people, people.
I learned for the first time what it was to be a stranger, an immigrant from primitive parts who spoke with a funny accent and called things by their wrong names.
I soon learned to say as little as possible, meanwhile doing my best to cultivate a London or ‘Cockney’ accent, which my parents took great pains both to prevent and to correct.
They wanted me to talk ‘posh’, and so, after a series of elocution lessons, I did.
It was then that I went to school for the first time, to a Roman Catholic convent in Ealing, not because of my parents' religious beliefs but because it was thought to be educationally superior to any of the state-run schools in the locality.
There I was always effortlessly top of the class and almost totally friendless.
That my parents were continually making anti-Catholic remarks and pouring scorn on some of the more devotional pronouncements of the nuns did not help matters.
At school the importance of baptism was stressed and, once, all those who had not been baptised were asked to put up their hands.
I was much too frightened to do so, having been told that the unbaptised would be consigned to hell, and — what was even worse — that in the eyes of God we did not exist.
It was less the fear of hell (which seemed a long time away) than the fear of being a non-person which prompted me to ask my parents if I could be baptised.
I remember this fear quite distinctly as that of being swallowed up into some great emptiness: the struggle for individual identity, central to phenomenon of anorexia nervosa, had already begun, and already I was using the appropriate metaphor.
My request was dismissed with some amusement by my parents who added that I should have more sense than to believe in all that mumbo-jumbo.
I was  eight years old at the time and completely confused by their attitude.
The early death of a sibling is an event which Dally cites as being common in the histories of anorexics, and a year or so later my baby sister died of bronchial pneumonia.
She was, of course, unbaptised, and I was terrified at the thought of her burning in hell.
One of the girls at school assured me that unbaptised infants were sent not to hell, but to limbo.
However, being ignorant of either place, I didn't know whether the latter was better or worse.
The nuns, trying to comfort me, said, ‘Think of her running around in heaven with all the little angels.’
In a desperate attempt to comfort my mother, I repeated this message to her.
At once she burst into tears and hugging me for the first time in years (it seemed), cried, ‘If only I had their faith!’
The loss of my sister was not entirely beyond my comprehension as it was beyond that of my other sisters.
What I could not understand was the absence of consensus among adults as to what constituted death, and as to its meaning.
My grief was exacerbated because I was now hopelessly confused, not knowing whom to believe, and needing to believe in someone or something.
Soon afterwards I became openly rebellious at school and, after some final misdemeanour which I cannot recall but suspect to have been trivial, I was asked to leave.
I don't think those years were particularly happy ones for any of us.
Whether or not my father was happy, I could not and cannot tell because that has always been difficult, but I suspect from his outbursts of temper and the frequency of his migraines that he was not.
My mother was more obviously unhappy; she missed ‘home’, as she never ceased to call Lewis, and her own family, and having someone to talk to in Gaelic, which was her first language but not my father's.
The weekly arrival of the Stornoway Gazette was something to be looked forward to, and the paper (some of which was in Gaelic) read from cover to cover.
Neither of my parents seemed to have any friends, and tended to talk disparagingly of neighbours or colleagues.
Invitations were turned down on the grounds that ‘we would only have to ask them back’.
But my diaries for 1949–50 record visits to and from relatives, frequent correspondence with them, and frequent discussion of their affairs, especially their health.
The family was  still what mattered.
After all, we were no ordinary family, but a clan: I was told by my mother always to hold my head up high, and remember that I was not only a MacLeod, but a double MacLeod — MacLeod being also her maiden name.
How far all this was homesickness or a defensive strategy against (anticipated?) rejection by the surrounding community, or just sheer stubbornness, I now can't tell, but I knew even then that it had nothing to do with the world in which I was trying to live.
What I have described is, I suppose, a typical picture of exile.
Minuchin's description of an Italian immigrant family in America parallels my picture, although it describes a more extreme situation.
The anorexic in this family suffered from confusions similar to mine.
Because of this, and because she, too, was rebellious, she is the only one of Minuchin's patients with whom I can identify.
For me by this time the Eleven-plus was looming up, and in the conventional manner, I was promised a bike if I passed.
It was impressed upon me how terribly important the ‘Scholarship’ was, and how its result would determine the whole of my future life.
Naturally, I was terrified.
Because I was not attending school, my father undertook to coach me.
I could do the English and the intelligence tests, but I was hopeless at mental arithmetic: for some reason my mind would go blank whenever I tried to visualise numbers instead of seeing them written down.
This, I think now, was due less to innate innumeracy than to my father's teaching method.
He would fire questions rapidly at me, sigh with impatience at my slowness, and urge me, ‘Come on, come on!’
If I got a question wrong, which I did more often than not, he would repeat it in what seemed to me a contemptuous tone until I got it right.
If I failed to do so, he would become exasperated and start shouting at me, telling me how stupid I was; whereupon I would dissolve into tears and rush out of the room.
After all I was supposed to be clever.
A diary entry of the period reads, ‘Daddy won't let me go out to play or listen to Children's Hour or read stories.
All I'm allowed to do is study while the others do what they like.
Not fair!’
After this a short sentence has been rubbed out (I wrote in pencil) so that there is a hole in the page.
I suspect it was ‘I hate him’, and that I couldn't actually bring myself to face such a sentiment.
However, the word ‘Daddy’ has been crossed out in ink and ‘my father’substituted.
This, I  suppose, was as far as I could allow myself to go.
I certainly thought of him as a tyrant: my diaries are full of complaints about unfair treatment, undeserved punishments (including the corporal variety) and arbitrary deprivations.
Whether or not those complaints were justified is another matter; enough that at the time I felt they were.
I resented my mother too.
It seemed to me that she should have taken my part, should somehow have defended me from my father.
After I had fled the room, I could hear him say to her, ‘She's not even trying.
I despair of her!’
My mother would answer inaudibly, but it would be evident from my father's all-too-audible answering tirade that she had been gently remonstrating.
Always, though, whether immediately or eventually, she would acquiesce, and I resented her acquiescence, not only because of its consequences for myself, but because I didn't understand why she, an adult, would not or could not stand up to him.
Erikson sums up the situation well:
The polarity adult-child is the first in the inventory of existential oppositions (male-female being the second) which makes man exploitable and induces him to exploit.
The child's inborn proclivity for feeling powerless, deserted, ashamed and guilty in relation to those on whom he depends is systematically utilised for his training, often to the point of exploitation.
The Eleven-plus, like all crises, threatened the pattern of family relationships, and all the family could do in order to maintain equilibrium was to ensure that each member remain entrenched in or return to his or her habitual role.
And I should perhaps add that to this day I am practically innumerate.
But, much to my surprise, I passed the ‘Scholarship’, got my bike, and went to grammar school.
I was relieved, rather pleased with myself, and genuinely looking forward to entering a new, more grown-up phase of my life.
But I was to be disappointed.
There was something drab and uninspiring about the place: lessons were boring, teachers were boring, the other girls were boring.
I had ceased to be good at the convent, and now I also ceased to be either healthy or clever.
I was always being ill with minor ailments such as earache or  tonsillitis , and often spent as much as three consecutive weeks away from school as a result.
During those times I read a great deal— mostly books chosen for  me by my father and which I thought more suitable for boys than for girls — Jack London, Rider Haggard, Talbot Baines Reed, Arthur Ransome.
I fell behind in my schoolwork and in some classes, especially maths, I simply had no idea what was going on.
It was at this point, when I was twelve years old, that I took to reading junk books the way some people take to eating junk food.
I read long-forgotten authors of books about girls' schools in Switzerland or Paris, as well as Angela Brazil, Noel Streatfield, Pamela Brown and, above all, Enid Blyton.
How I envied the schoolgirls of St Clare's or Malory Towers: they belonged to a safe, structured world where rules were rules, good was good, and bad was bad.
And in spite of, or perhaps because of , this framework, they all seemed to have such fun, such carefree, girlish fun.
My rebellion was only half-consciously directed at my father's choice of reading matter for me, although his disapproving and often angry comments made it clear that he took my behaviour as a personal affront.
I wanted to choose for myself, yes, but I also wanted to escape into a world of certainties, which I knew to be unreal while desperately wanting to believe that it might have some reality.
I wanted to escape from being at home, from being at school and, quite consciously and openly, from being myself.
In a way I had given up.
My life lacked the clarity, form and order of simple fiction, and I had no idea who, where or what I was or should be.
But in another way some stubbornness was at work in me, some determination never to give up, and to cling in secret to whatever reality I could find for myself.
With hindsight I can see that I was already predisposed, given the right circumstances, to become anorexic.
But those circumstances did not arise until four years later, when I was not with my immediate family all the time, but away at boarding-school, the Malory Towers of my dreams.
Onset
In 1952 I received a county grant, enabling me to attend a girls' public school in the Home Counties.
When my father suggested I apply, I was pleased and very excited at the prospect of going to boarding-school, which seemed to me to be an adventure, an escape from boredom.
There were no examinations, only two short interviews, one with myself and one with my parents.
One of the questions I was asked was, which historical figure did I admire most?
Naming the first person I could think of, I answered St Francis — because he could have chosen to live a life of luxury and ease, but had in fact followed the principles of Christ in giving away all he owned and living a life of poverty.
It seemed like the right sort of thing to say.
And it was righter than I knew, the school chapel being dedicated to St Francis, of whom the headmistress was a particular devotee.
I often wished later that I had named Trotsky instead, because his principles were more in accord with the way I felt about the place by the time I left, but at that time I had never even heard of him.
My parents were asked about conditions at home.
We lived in a three-bedroomed council house, one of the bedrooms being little more than a boxroom, and by this time there were seven of us in the family.
Such overcrowded conditions, together with my father's low salary as a teacher, were probably as important factors as my own abilities in my being considered a suitable case for rescue.
Although I had wanted to go away and agreed to go away, when the time came I also felt that I was being pushed out of the nest, and that my parents were glad to be rid of me, in that there would be one fewer person to cater for.
This was quite conscious on my part, but I was too proud to mention it to anyone or even to hint at any such thing.
When I went home in the school holidays I had to sleep on the bed-settee in the ‘front room’.
My initial homesickness at school soon gave way to a dread of going home, home to a place where no one understood me, no one spoke the same language as I did, and no one showed the slightest interest in what I had been doing, thinking or feeling during my absence.
My parents both showed interest in my academic work, and my mother some minimal interest in the personalities of my teachers or friends, but that was as far as it went.
On the contrary, I was mocked within the family for my ‘posh’ accent, and for what was considered to be my general childishness, especially as far as my sense of humour was concerned.
I was also repeatedly chided for my exuberance, my feverish need to communicate with others and to have friends outside the family circle.
Home seemed drab, centred as it was around domestic duties and financial worries, and affording no opportunities for entertainment or emotional release.
I was no longer a part of it, but this was something I could not, in my insecurity and because of my ingrained family loyalty, admit even to myself.
Although I remember the hurt vividly, none of the sentiments I have just expressed appear in my diary: again, it was a matter of pride.
And, besides, I had always been told that self-pity was despicable.
So a process of self-deception began instead.
All I could admit to was boredom, and the belief that school was more fun.
It seems strange at first that this should have been so.
After all, I was more of an outsider there than at home, being out of my milieu and having none of the social graces or advantages of my fellow-pupils.
Another ‘scholarship girl’ was shamefully treated by the rest of us because of her (very slight) Cockney accent, her generally ‘non-U’turns of phrase, and her inability to deal with the simpler points of etiquette, whether at table or in the classroom.
But I wasn't fool enough to give myself away.
I listened and learned, watched and learned, and soon became adept at striking the first blow: if there was any teasing and tormenting going on (and there was plenty) I made sure that I was an active and not a passive participant.
I lived by my wits.
No doubt my  verbal articulacy, being greater than that of my unfortunate companion, helped me in this form of self-defence, as it did in my ability to lie.
I lied about everything: the size, style and location of my home; the possessions and social pursuits of my parents; and I even omitted to mention that I had sisters who went to ‘inferior’ schools.
The inevitable question, ‘What did you do in the hols?’ would be greeted with a list of the films I had seen, and the dances and point-to-points I had been to, whereas in fact I was not allowed to go to the cinema (perhaps for financial reasons), had never been to a dance in my life, and didn't even know what a point-to-point was.
No one, as far as I know, disbelieved me.
Because I was cunning enough to keep my lying within plausible bounds, I was able to deflect too-close questioning and avoid ostracism.
Lying about my family's social status came easily enough, but there was nothing I could do about the more visible signs of poverty.
The chief of these, which I carried around with me, were my clothes.
My grant covered the school fees only, and no provision was made for other necessities.
The uniform, which we wore most of the time, was in my case obviously secondhand, being of an earlier model than the current one.
I remember removing the name-tapes of the former wearers (who had left the school) with a savage feeling that these people had to be got rid of, otherwise they would possess me as a living person is possessed by a ghost.
My shabby uniform soon became dirty and then dirtier, and once I was sent out of class to the matron by a teacher who complained of my general ‘filthiness’.
It had not occurred to her that my parents simply could not afford the dry-cleaning bills.
My non-uniform clothes, which were worn in the evenings and at weekends, were also secondhand, bought in a secrecy which my mother insisted on, from a shop in Notting Hill.
It was a perpetual anxiety with me that I should turn up at school wearing a dress that had been sold to that same shop by one of my fellow-pupils.
The clothes were obviously not new.
This fact could not be concealed any more than I could conceal, when a friend invited me to stay with her during the holidays in Yorkshire, that my parents couldn't afford the train fare.
Neither could I conceal that although I wrote to my parents once a week (a school rule) they scarcely ever wrote to me, and failed to send me the necessary  supplies of toothpaste, stockings, etc., so that I was always having to borrow from other girls (strictly against the rules) and getting into trouble as a result.
For this I consciously blamed my parents: it seemed to me that instead of writing to me, as other parents wrote to their daughters, they had written me off.
My early years at the school were, then, a mixture of deception (on my part) and the fear of humiliation.
The situation should have made me totally miserable, but at first it did not — at least, not in any overt or lasting fashion.
Because there were compensations, I was able to transcend it.
For the first time in my life I found myself surrounded by friends — friends whom I found interesting, and friends who appeared to find me interesting, bright and witty, despite my all-too-evident disadvantages.
It was a gratifying experience to find myself liked and accepted by my peers to an extent that I had never expected.
I became famous (or notorious) for my diary, which I kept up assiduously, and which was generally believed to be full of scandal of the sort the school authorities would not like to see appear in the newspapers.
The scandal in question was, of course, the implication of female homosexuality.
It seemed to us pupils that the authorities (teachers, but perhaps more especially matrons) were obsessed with preventing any such thing from occurring.
Girls were not allowed to share wash-cubicles, hold hands or walk along arm-in-arm, and the washing of one another 's hair — a fairly frequent happening — was severely punished.
Close friendships with girls a few years older or younger than oneself were actively discouraged, and it seemed to us that to be seen in earnest conversation with a girl who belonged neither to one's own year or one's own house was tantamount to admitting that one was engaged in a lesbian liaison.
How far any homosexuality in the physical sense went on I cannot say, mainly because I was rather naive about such matters, but rumours and counter-rumours abounded.
No, what we were interested in, at the age of thirteen or fourteen, were ‘pashes’.
(For the benefit of those who are unfamiliar with the word, a ‘pash’ is a schoolgirl crush based largely on admiration, usually from afar, and a sub-sexual affection which is less in search of requitement than of acknowledgement, however minimal.)
In fact, during my first two years  at the school, this was almost the sole topic of conversation.
Here again I was able to prove myself useful and to gain a little kudos: I could compose with what seemed to others an astonishing facility an ode or sonnet on behalf of some lovesick junior and addressed to some beefy, lacrosse-playing heroine in whom I myself had no emotional interest whatsoever.
My services were much in demand, not only for sentimental verses, but for expressions of anger and rather cruel satire.
Some of these efforts appear in my diaries of the period, along with detailed accounts of the amatory dispositions and sub-amatory activities of what seems to be the whole of the lower school.
Anyone who has ever been to a similar school will know exactly what I mean.
It is impossible to convey to an outsider in a few short words the hothouse emotional atmosphere of such an establishment, with its all-too-conscientiously suppressed sexuality, and the consequent hysteria, or just plain silliness.
Anyway, it was an atmosphere in which I thrived.
I delighted in the intrigue, in the drama, and in writing it all down.
I had control over my material, which was life at school, and which was now my life to the exclusion of life at home.
And I therefore had some control — just enough to keep me going — over myself.
For those first two years I was able to enjoy behaving childishly — a pleasure which I felt had been denied to me — and being relatively free from responsibility.
In short, I could enjoy, rather belatedly, being a silly little girl.
But puberty, or rather the onset of menstruation, changed all that.
It should be noted at this point that the small number of boys who become anorexic (14 per cent as compared to 86 per cent girls of the patients studied by Bruch) do so before they reach puberty and do not develop sexually until after they have recovered.
Girls, on the contrary, have almost invariably developed sexually before the onset of the disease.
To me menstruation happened rather late, when I was nearly fifteen, and during term-time.
It took me by complete surprise.
That it should have done so was irrational, because I had ‘known’ about menstruation since my grammar school days when girls used to boast about how they had just ‘started’.
I suppose the problem was that I had never been told about it officially — that is, by an adult — and so I had somehow blocked off the information, not connecting it with myself, with my own body.
With sex, or what are known as ‘the facts of life’, it was different.
When my mother, in a state of total embarrassment, attempted to enlighten me, I had to help her out by telling her what I knew already.
I was about ten or eleven at the time, but I had ‘known’ since I was about six.
The cottage we had rented in Dorset was attached to a farm, and the farmer had four sons, the youngest of whom was about my age.
We were great friends, to the exclusion of my sisters whom we considered too young and soppy to take part in our adventurous games.
Often, in the course of these, which involved a lot of wandering about among the surrounding woods and fields, we had occasion to urinate together (it would have taken too long to go home) and the opportunity to examine one another 's bodies.
At about this time my third sister was born.
I had seen my mother pregnant, and had been told that she was carrying a baby inside her, a little brother or sister for us all.
I also knew that somehow my parents had got together to produce this baby.
When she was pronounced to be the image of my father, I suspected that something belonging to my father must have got inside my mother to the place where the baby was being carried.
And so it was in the light of this suspicion that I examined my friend's body and my own.
It was clear not only where the differences lay, but also that those differing parts were somehow complementary, intended to be fitted together.
And I suspected that the long-term intention was to produce babies.
The boy himself confirmed my suspicions, but although we were ‘in love’, as boys and girls of that age so often are, we never attempted to put our theory into practice.
It was tacitly assumed that such activities were for grown-ups only.
I'm sorry to disappoint orthodox Freudians, but I felt no penis envy, and didn't think myself to be maimed in any way.
On the contrary, the differences between us seemed to strengthen the bond I had with the boy: when we grew up, we were going to get married and have babies.
I'm also sorry to disappoint all those writers on anorexia nervosa who insist that the disease stems from a long standing aversion to sexuality and childbirth.
To me, it all seemed quite natural and even rather exciting — if a bit strange, but then no stranger than any other activities or preoccupations belonging to the grown-up world.
And so I could help my mother out of her embarrassment.
All she had to do was to confirm what 
I thought I knew already, and to give this knowledge an official seal of approval.
‘Now,’ she said with some relief, ‘you can tell the others when you think they're old enough to understand.’
This I did at once with a feeling of self-importance which blinded me to the now obvious fact that she was abrogating her responsibilities and allowing them to devolve, once more, upon her eldest daughter.
Menstruation was not mentioned then, or at any other time, so it is hardly surprising, if rather bizarre, that I never made any conscious connection between it and normal sexual functioning.
Unlike the uninformed virgins described by Selvini Palazzoli (and who were, after all, Roman Catholics who traditionally place a high value upon virginity), I was horrified and disgusted by menstruation rather than by sexuality.
I felt that some dreadful punishment had been visited upon me, punishment for a crime which I had never committed.
But I think I knew unconsciously that the supposed crime was twofold: I was being punished for being female and for having grown up.
At the same time I didn't feel female, in the sexual sense.
Neither did I feel male, but rather neuter, as a child might feel itself to be neuter.
And I certainly didn't feel grown-up.
The crimes in question had been committed by my body, not by me.
Such a split in self-perception is, I think, more likely to occur in girls than in boys at the time of puberty because the physiological changes which a boy undergoes are likely to be treated as marks of manhood, whereas what happens to a girl is more likely not to be mentioned, although in many ways the signs of her having reached puberty are more obviously visible.
Ruth Benedict, writing of puberty ceremonies in various societies, sheds some light on this seemingly paradoxical cultural attitude.
If cultural emphasis followed the physiological emphasis, girls' ceremonies would be more marked than boys'; but it is not so.
The ceremonies emphasise a social fact: the adult prerogatives of men are more far-reaching in every culture than women's, and consequently…it is more common for societies to take note of this period in boys than in girls.
The secrecy which, in my adolescence, surrounded menstruation was an indication of the inferior status of women in that society.
Perhaps I sensed something of this.
What I felt consciously was anxiety, accompanied by shame, and at school the procedure for dealing with menstruation did nothing to diffuse either emotion.
When a girl's period was due, she would sign a little red book hanging by string in the medicine cupboard, and the under-matron would discreetly place an unwieldy packet of sanitary towels in her underwear drawer.
Tampons were not allowed, being considered unsuitable for unmarried girls.
Old-fashioned or external sanitary towels, as anyone who has had the misfortune to make use of them will know, are dreadfully uncomfortable: they will not stay in place, they leak, and they chafe.
Perhaps because my mother refused to send me a sanitary belt, saying that such things were unnecessary, I leaked and was chafed more than most.
My underwear was invariably returned from the laundry with the comment, ‘v. badly stained’.
I felt myself to be a source of pollution, and grew to dread my period, especially as I never knew exactly when it was going to come.
All these circumstances were barely mentionable, even among the girls themselves.
I remember the humiliation of being told, in a shocked tone, that I had a big, red patch on the back of my summer dress.
Everyone else seemed to have the thing under control.
I had no idea whether anyone else felt as I did, suffered the same pre-menstrual depression or the same cramping pains.
Needless to say, no one had ever told me about the pain, and I became convinced that something was wrong with me, but I was too embarrassed to confess as much to anyone.
If menstruation was hidden — in theory, at least— the bodily changes which accompany it were clearly observable and indeed the outward signs of its invisible presence.
Perhaps it was for this reason that I hated them as much as I resented menstruation itself.
But I think I resented them both for the same reason, that is, that something was happening to me, or rather to my body, which was completely outside of my own control.
Given my background, as described in the previous chapter, it is not surprising that I should have felt particularly sensitive on this point.
Being a late developer, I had been small and slim in comparison to most of my peers, and my appearance had been a large part of my character.
It had implied a certain agility, both physical and mental, a general quickness or brightness.
It also seemed to inspire a sort of  motherly affection in others, so that I was more likely to get away with carelessness or naughtiness than were my more physically mature contemporaries.
Although I was still ‘tiny’(a word used by one of them at the time) by any normal standards, when I looked in the mirror, I saw someone who appeared to me to be ‘gross’— a favourite word with anorexics, as Minuchin shows.
I had been a thing of firm, clear outlines; now I seemed to splay out in all directions and to have assumed a shape, thanks to undue accretions of flesh, which bore no relation to the person I believed to exist within it.
‘That’, I told myself, ‘can't be me.’
Years later I was at first comforted to read that an adult man could express similar sentiments about himself: ‘When I consider others I can easily believe that their bodies express their personalities and that the two are inseparable.
But it is impossible for me not to feel that my body is other than I, that I inhabit it like a house, and that my face is a mask which, with or without my consent, conceals my real nature from others.’
But then it occurred to me that Auden's self-perception could have sprung partially from the necessity to conceal his homosexuality from his public.
In my case there was no homosexuality — or heterosexuality, for that matter — to conceal, but I think there was a certain amount of gender confusion, nurtured by circumstances both at home and at school, which contributed to my sense of loss, the loss of self.
I had lost so many selves before.
Then I had rebelled, to the best of my ability, but this latest loss seemed insurmountable.
There were three factors which saved me from becoming anorexic at this dangerous juncture.
The first and most obvious was the tactic of withdrawal into what little self I still possessed.
Since there was nothing I could do about what was happening to my body, I decided — not altogether consciously — to ignore it and to interest myself in other, more spiritual matters.
As a result of the ‘crisis of wholeness’, which Erikson sees as marking the end of childhood, I was attempting to achieve a ‘sense of inner identity’.
As he explains, ‘where the resulting self-definition, for personal or collective reasons, becomes too difficult, a sense of role confusion results: the young person counterpoints rather than synthesises his sexual, ethnic, occupational and typological alternatives and is often driven to decide definitely and totally for  one side or the other.’
I decided, definitely and totally, to become a poet, and to devote my life to the pursuit of Literature.
Science, history, politics, music — all these were insignificant compared to the magnificent calling I had chosen for myself.
I read a great deal of poetry, especially the Romantics, learning long passages by heart, and found some solace there to lift me above the sordid realities of everyday life.
More importantly, I began to write poetry myself, for myself, poetry which I showed to no one and kept hidden in an exercise book reserved explicitly for that purpose.
This exercise book was, along with my diary, the only thing I could call my own.
I still have it today, and I must admit that the ‘poems’ indicate the desperation of a lonely adolescent rather than the promise of any talent.
The second factor was at first O-levels.
At the school the examinations were spread out over three separate sessions for each girl, so as to make the whole procedure as painless as possible, academic standards among pupils being generally low.
For me, this system meant the weeding out of subjects which bored me, and the opportunity to concentrate and read around those which really interested me.
The school had an excellent library, especially in the English section, and I would find myself immersed in the literary essays of T. S. Eliot, I. A. Richards, W. K. Wimsatt, Bradley or Dover Wilson, Maud Bodkin on archetypal patterns or Caroline Spurgeon on Shakespeare's imagery.
At the same time I got some pleasure out of learning Kennedy's Latin Primer off by heart.
In other words, I had something to aim for, an immediate goal.
And these aims were ones I could share with others.
So the third factor was friendship or, if there is such a word, colleagueship.
It now became interesting and profitable to work with others, both in the classroom and in more leisurely periods of revision.
Consequently, I began to develop different sorts of friendships, no longer based on silliness or naughtiness, but on joint and genuine attempts at co-operation and to understand not only the syllabus but ourselves and life in general.
Superficially, I was coping, but I can see now that this period was a kind of moratorium.
It was not until the spring holidays before my summer and middle O-levels that what can really be described as the onset of my anorexia began.
At home the family pattern had changed.
We  (or they, as I would probably have said at the time) now lived in a detached, fairly large house in a village in Berkshire; my father taught at a primary school in a nearby village, and my mother had a job at the Harwell Atomic Research Establishment.
My sister Helen, now fourteen, was attending the local grammar school, and during her holidays (which were shorter than mine) she was still in contact with her friends, both girls and boys.
My sister Pat, aged thirteen was in theory being educated at home according to a syllabus devised by the Parents' National Educational Union, and which worked on a postal basis in much the same way as the Open University does today.
This was quite legal because my father was a teacher and therefore considered capable of supervising her studies.
In practice, she was taking my mother's place in the home and spent most of her time fulfilling the role of unpaid housekeeper.
She also became anorexic later — a state from which she was rescued by an early marriage at the age of sixteen.
My two younger sisters (who scarcely figure in this story) were at a local private school run by nuns.
I was more of an outsider than ever, but something in me must still have wanted to belong to the family because I was still making deliberate attempts to communicate with the other members.
However, all of these failed.
There was no real communication between me and my father, who was also on holiday from school for much of this time.
He commanded and I obeyed, or, rather, pretended to.
My task, apart from the usual household chores, was to get on with the work for my three summer O-levels and to get ahead by starting to work towards my A-levels — English, Latin and Greek.
Although I was still interested in English, I found both Latin and Greek increasingly tedious: they were my father's choice for me, not mine.
I remember it was a beautiful spring and I longed to travel, longed for company.
My diary records the frequent wish for ‘interesting people and interesting places’.
But whereas its termtime pages are crammed with events and comments, the pages belonging to these holidays are either blank or contain such comments as ‘Forgot what did’, or ‘Read, went for walk, did washing-up’.
In fact, practically all I did was to go for solitary walks or pretend to read Virgil or Sophocles, whose two dead languages were now as meaningless to me as mental arithmetic, and as incapable of claiming my concentration.
And yet I  persevered.
The following comment from Schatzman may perhaps show why:
Parents and teachers, like writers of computer programmes, build certain sorts of information more deeply and irreversibly than others into their systems (children); in the idiom of computer engineers they hard-programme them.
What is hard-programmed cannot easily be changed; to do so would mean a drastic re-ordering of the system.
I did not know then what I was to find out later-that I myself was capable of a drastic re-ordering of the system.
Then I resembled in some small way the unfortunate Daniel Paul Schreber, a German judge whose case was analysed by both Freud and Schatzman, and whose father's ‘view of a good parent-child relationship was like the relationship between a hypnotist and a subject in his power: a child who experiences a glance, a word, a gesture of the parent as a command resembles a person in a trance.’
I was in just such a trance, going through the motions of doing what I was told, but without being able to do so in reality.
By the end of the holidays I was only capable of reading such publications as Woman's Own or Valentine without my mind wandering.
At the time I ascribed my inability to an acute sense of boredom (which, in part, it was), but I can see now that it was also a form of rebellion, this time an unconscious one.
I simply didn't know how to rebel openly.
As Erich Fromm suggests,
Perhaps the most important factor which leads to a weakening of self-assertion is an authoritarian atmosphere in family and society, where self-assertion is equated with disobedience, attack, sin.
For all irrational and exploitative forms of authority, self-assertion — the pursuit by another of his own goals — is the arch sin because it is a threat to the power of the authority; the person subject to it is indoctrinated to believe that the aims of the authority are also his, and that obedience offers the optimal chance for fulfilling oneself.
I think my father's authority was irrational because he expected me to have no other interests outside my schoolwork.
And I think I believed, or tried to believe, him when he repeatedly told me that the restrictions he placed upon me were for my own good.
In all this, including the boredom, there is nothing new in the annals of adolescence.
My relationship with my father had not changed, although I should have welcomed some change, since the days of my early childhood: it is difficult for most parents to  admit that their children are growing up and therefore in need of a more flexible parental attitude.
And my relationship with my mother was not much better.
During the week I hardly saw her.
What had happened, because his holidays coincided with mine, was that my father had become my mother as well as my father, in the sense that it was he and not she who was always at home.
He spent a lot of time in his study engaged in the writing of some mysterious work.
But his labours were interrupted by frequent migraines, which sometimes lasted as long as three days, during which he would lie in darkness on the floor of his room, eat nothing, and demand silence from the rest of us.
When he was up and about, he also spent some time in the kitchen, having become what was then called a ‘health-food fanatic’.
He used wholemeal flour to make bread, scones, pies and cakes, concocted elaborate salads and dosed himself with vitamins.
I saw nothing strange in his behaviour, but it is evident from the literature that the families of anorexics often include a member who either suffers from a psychosomatic complaint or shows an obsessive interest in food and its health-giving properties.
The person concerned is, generally speaking, the mother, but, given the role reversal which I experienced during the school holidays, it seems reasonable to point to my father's behaviour as a possible contributory factor to my becoming anorexic.
It certainly contributed in a more direct manner in that most of the food we ate had a high carbohydrate content and, although I was unaware of it at the time, I put on a lot of weight.
All I can remember is that I didn't much like the food, but I ate obediently and probably out of fear of giving offence.
Every evening my mother would come home from work, tired, and it seemed to me that she was only interested in her job or, more specifically, the personal affairs of her colleagues.
But during the weekends I did my best to claim her attention, following her about from room to room as I had done as a small child, and chattering endlessly about life, literature and the events of the previous school-term.
She didn't stop me talking, but neither did she reply or make any comment on what I had to say.
She seemed to be suffering me in silence, as she suffered everyone and everything else.
I was desperately seeking some sort of reassurance, some sort of comeback from someone, but it soon  became plain that I was not going to get it from her.
She gave me the impression that I was an utter bore (which I probably was) and something of a freak as well-I was not like my sisters.
Helen and Pat both wore fashionable clothes — circular skirts, padded bras, clinging sweaters — and make-up.
I wore jeans or the demure dresses approved of by the school authorities.
To me, my sisters looked flashy and cheap.
To them, no doubt, I looked laughably dowdy.
Their clothes and their make-up were directed towards one end — the acquisition of boyfriends.
Meetings were held in secret — the boy with the bus fare or the motor-bike waiting at the end of the lane — and elaborate lies told as a cover-up until my parents got wise to what was going on.
They argued endlessly about it.
‘You tell her.’
'No, you tell her.’
'You're her mother.’
'You're the one who's getting so worked up about it.’
My father would rage and storm, not so much at my mother as to her, and against Helen and Pat in their absence, but in the end neither of them would say anything to either of my sisters.
As a mother of adolescents myself, I now find this combination of intolerance and inaction extraordinary, although it would seem to confirm Selvini Palazzoli's point that the parents in anorexics' families are both unwilling to assume leadership.
The real, open rows, my sisters have since told me, came later and when I was away from home.
Meanwhile an atmosphere of tension and suppressed resentment prevailed.
In the circumstances I should have been the good daughter, studious and uninterested in boyfriends.
But not at all.
It was made clear to me by my mother, sometimes backed up by my sisters, that as far as the opposite sex was concerned, I didn't stand a chance.
Whatever sexual rivalry was going on was among the three of them, and I was excluded, being too obvious a failure to present any sort of threat.
It seemed to me that I had become what my parents had wanted me to be, and I was getting no thanks from either of them for my efforts.
However, I now see that there could have been less concurrence between them on this matter than I had supposed, and so I was a disappointment to both of them.
I didn't know any boys, except those I met through my sisters, and they seemed to me to be vain, impolite and almost totally inarticulate.
The plain fact of the matter, snobbish though it may sound, was that they were both unintelligent and ill-educated in  comparison to myself, belonging as they did to a different social class from the one into which I had been co-opted at school.
But I was so anxious to please or, more accurately, to avoid the stigma of being abnormal, that I did manage to find myself a boyfriend.
His attitude towards me was one of dumb, doglike devotion, which I found tiresome, but in the circumstances he seemed better than no boyfriend at all.
‘What an unusual boy he must be,’ my mother remarked, ‘if he has the sense to see beneath the exterior to the person inside.’
Needless to say, I didn't find this remark helpful, however well-intentioned it might have been.
I refused to see the boy again, and spent hours anxiously examining my exterior instead.
It seemed to me that it was wanting in every detail, but the objective facts are that I was five feet two and a half, weighed eight stone five, and had my fair share of acne.
Both physically and emotionally I felt myself to be younger than (inferior to) my two younger sisters.
The competition was too strong, and so I opted out.
At the same time I didn't want to be like them.
If they were feminine, then I was not.
But, because I felt even further away from being masculine, I was forced to amend this self-assessment and tell myself that I was not yet feminine.
And I think it was.
at this stage that I made the unconscious decision, later to manifest itself in physiological terms, to postpone sexuality until I felt myself ready to cope with it.
On the conscious level I was at first glad to get back to school for the summer term.
There at least there was no talk of boyfriends; there at least one or two people valued me; and there, at the very least, I knew what I was up against.
But there, too, I found that things had changed.
Most of the girls in my year, though not necessarily my friends, were leaving school at the end of the term.
Their talk had turned to the world beyond O-levels: finishing schools in Switzerland, modelling or secretarial courses, steady romances with the sons of their parents' friends, or the heady excitement of the debutante season.
I could no longer ignore the differences between myself and my companions, and I could no longer lie about those differences, but kept quiet instead, withdrawing further into myself.
I didn't envy them their individual futures, which seemed dull or trivial to me, but I did envy the fact they had futures at all, whereas I had none, or, at least , not one to which I could look forward with any confidence.
They also had a present.
They were now the self-confident, responsible young ladies they had been trained to be by both the school and their own families.
They organised events for charity, gave concerts, formed clubs, and were generally beginning to become part of the administration.
They seemed to enjoy both co-operating with teachers and wielding power over juniors.
At the same time they could become excited about house matches or school matches and take part in such events with earnest aggressiveness.
All this I found despicable.
I had no interest in charitable works, or in clubs devoted to flower-arranging, debating futile motions or even poetry-reading, seeing such activities as being designed to fill out the time of future ladies of leisure.
I was anti-authoritarian, and had no intention of becoming authoritarian myself.
And I loathed all sport to the point of finding its ethics repellent.
My dilemma points up a basic dichotomy in the educational aims of the school.
On the one hand, we were encouraged to be young ladies, polite, modest, and considerate towards others, especially those who belonged to the lower social orders.
Religion was important here, inculcating as it did the traditions of service and good works.
It was, of course, the perfect training for a housewife, even if the house in question were a stately home.
On the other hand, the school aped the traditions of the boys' public schools, encouraging competitiveness and aggressiveness within a rigidly hierarchical structure which depended on eccentric but unbreakable rules.
In neither area was there-room for the development of the individual through creative work.
Such an omission was not peculiar to this particular school, I realise, nor is it peculiar to schools of its particular type.
As Jules Henry points out in discussing American schools,
It stands to reason that were young people truly creative the culture would fall apart, for originality is by definition different from what is given, and what is given is the culture itself.
From the endless, pathetic ‘creative hours’ of kindergarten to the most abstruse problems in sociology and anthropology, the function of education is to prevent the truly creative intellect from getting out of hand.
I am not suggesting that I was a ‘truly creative intellect’— merely that I was denied the opportunity to find out whether I could  achieve any such position, and this was an omission I felt very keenly.
I became a loner, but I had to work at it.
Solitude was an eccentricity the school was at pains to discourage, and its absence gave rise to a sort of panic in me which served to reinforce my sense of loss of self.
For those who are unfamiliar with such establishments, a description of a typical school weekday follows.
7.00 a.m.: rise from a bed in an open dormitory shared with five or six other girls; 7.30: breakfast, followed by bedmaking; 8.30: early morning lacrosse practice or running round the lake; 9.00: chapel; 9.20: three periods of lessons or prep; 11.20: break for buns and milk; 11.40: two periods of lessons or prep; 1.00: lunch; 1.40 approximately: a house meeting in which each of thirty-six girls had to inform the housemistress of her activities for the afternoon, and other house business was discussed; 2.00: lacrosse (tennis, cricket, running) or, if the weather was bad, country dancing, or, with luck, a shampoo; 3.20: wash and change into non-uniform clothes; 3.45: tea; 4.00: four periods of lessons or prep; 6.40: house prayers; 7.00: supper; 8.00 or 8.30, depending on age: half an hour to be spent in chitchat with the housemistress in her room; 8.30 or 9.00: bathtime followed by bedtime.
So, in theory, someone of my age had half an hour of free time, although it was in fact impossible to find any place where one could be alone.
Saturdays followed the same pattern, except that evenings were free.
On Sundays there were two full-length chapel services, walks outside the school grounds, an hour of silent reading, and a similar period for letter-writing and mending clothes.
The rest of the time was free, but of course there was still no privacy.
I was forcibly reminded of these circumstances when I read Minuchin's description of an anorexic's family in which there were ‘no closed doors’ and where the anorexic girl felt that all her actions, even her thoughts, were observed by others, and therefore as much their property as her own.
Two of the prime needs of adolescence, I have found both from my own experience and that of my children, are those for privacy and the opportunity to participate in a subculture.
When adolescence is enforced or prolonged, as it tends to be in closed institutions, these needs become all the greater.
For me, privacy was a rare commodity, and I had cut myself off from the  subculture which had once sustained me — only to find that there was nowhere else to go.
Here is another of the paradoxes of anorexia nervosa: I must, in my unconscious, have wanted to grow up, but at the same time I was determined not to, because the models of potential adulthood with which I was presented were either repugnant or impossible to attain.
Liam Hudson suggests that ‘it may be that a single system of values embraces the individual's perceptions of academic institutions; his perception of himself and his demonstrable behaviour’, and goes on to say that,
the oppositions between authority and freedom, self-expression and self-control, and masculinity and  femininity , are among the basic conflicts around which an individual's life develops and that they cover his responses to a wide range of logically unrelated issues…they represent some of the earliest developmental crises through which each individual in this particular culture passes: the impact of parental authority; the demand for self-control, first physical, later verbal; and the establishment of a satisfactory sexual identity.
It can and will be seen that the particular academic institution in which I was incarcerated, together with the pressures of my home life, was not conducive to the resolution of any such developmental crises.
Powerlessness, too, corrupts, as Rollo May has put it, adding a maxim from Edgar Z. Friedenberg: ‘All weakness corrupts and impotence corrupts absolutely.’
May connects impotence with the loss of a sense of significance, and the corruption he has in mind is the sort that erupts in acts of apparently senseless and arbitrary violence, especially in large urban populations.
I find his thesis correct in general, but should like to add that the corruption which amounts to violence is likely to be suppressed in someone who has been trained to be a good little girl and can, as one of his own case histories demonstrates, express itself in other, less overt, terms.
As I became more withdrawn, so I became more secretive and more cunning in finding ways of being alone.
I soon learned to differentiate between the occasions on which I would not be missed, like chapel, and those on which my absence would be obvious, like team games where positions were allotted in advance.
By now most of the other girls found me extremely odd, but they were easily cowed by my outbursts of sarcasm.
Teachers  found me irresponsible and anti-social, and for this I had to suffer.
At school there was an iniquitous system known as House Order, according to which all the girls in one house were graded from one to, say, thirty-six, the criterion being the individual's worth to the community.
Usually the grading took place within one year only, the Upper Fifth, for example, being considered inherently superior to the Lower Fifth.
But in my case an exception was made, and girls from the year below mine were moved above me in House Order, as well as being made monitors who had special privileges.
One had just won her school colours, and the other had raised a lot of money for the Endowment Fund by collecting empty jam jars.
Meanwhile, I had written a play which was performed within the house and was enjoyed by all concerned in it.
Nevertheless, I was told that I had ‘contributed nothing constructive’ to the life of either the house or the school.
Perhaps this sounds like a trivial complaint, but within that small, inescapable context I felt my demotion to be a deep, undeserved disgrace.
It was public humiliation — the last thing I needed.
In discussing identity formation at adolescence, Erikson posits that it is partly ‘dependent on the process by which a society (often through subsocieties) identifies the young individual, recognising him as someone who had to become the way he is and who, being the way he is, is taken for granted.
It seems clear to me that no such thing was happening to me, either at home or at school, the former structure being too self-absorbed to take me into account and the latter too rigid.
When the process described by Erikson is successful, ‘the community in turn feels ‘recognised’ by the individual who cares to ask for recognition; it can, by the same token, feel deeply — and vengefully — rejected by the individual who does not seem to care.’
My play was my last bid for recognition and the last occasion on which I was prepared to recognise the community in reciprocity.
From then on, the school had as much reason as I did to feel rejected, and if they perceived my rejection as vengeful, they were right.
I had felt this incident to be the last straw, but it wasn't — quite As a misfit, I was not entirely alone.
I had one friend from another house who felt the same way as I did about the school and the whole process we were being put through.
She, too, was a ‘scholarship girl’ and we prided ourselves on being the two most  intelligent girls in the place.
This may or may not have been true, but we were the most critical and non-conformist.
When she announced she was leaving at the end of the term, I felt this to be the final betrayal, although I could not blame her, even then.
Her parents had had the sense to realise how unhappy she was, and had made alternative arrangements.
It had not occurred to me that alternative arrangements could or would have been made, but, the more I thought about it, the more leaving the school seemed like the most sensible thing to do.
Accordingly, I wrote to my parents and, having pretended for years that I was relatively happy at school, I now confessed that I was utterly miserable, and begged them to take me away.
For once, a letter came back promptly — from my father.
I was being utterly foolish; my duty was to stay on, do A-levels, and go on to Oxford or Cambridge (which took an extra term); the local grammar school was not good enough to fulfil this latter purpose and if I went there, I would only be throwing my education away; and, besides, did I not realise that, in the face of difficulties, one should never give up, but struggle on and thus establish a superior strength of character?
Happiness (or unhappiness) was not mentioned, and I assumed that it was of subsidiary importance.
I could have written back to explain that my life was a daily humiliation and an unrelieved imprisonment, but I felt sure that they would neither care nor understand and, again, pride deterred me.
I could have run away, but I had no money and, even if I had been able to borrow it, I should still have been too frightened because I had nowhere to run to.
If I ran home, I should only have been sent straight back, in even deeper disgrace.
And I couldn't think of anywhere else.
The sensible thing would have been to turn to someone, some sympathetic teacher, perhaps.
But I trusted no one.
I suppose now that I could have freaked out and started smashing the place up, getting myself expelled as a result.
But the thought of actual violence never occurred to me, although there was plenty within.
I did the only thing I could: I became anorexic.
There was nothing conscious or deliberate about my decision, if indeed it can be called a decision at all.
Even my rejection of food was not embarked upon deliberately.
All I knew was that my life was intolerable and that the only way not to be destroyed by it, or by ‘them’ as I called the adult, authoritative world, was to reject them and everything they stood for.
I had to make some sort of last-ditch stand.
When teachers, matrons, the housemistress and finally the headmistress all started to show some concern and more disapproval at my unco-operative (anorexic) behaviour, I refused to answer their questions, or even to talk to them at all, and during the course of their homilies I merely stared out of the window or smiled to myself in a superior, scornful sort of way.
I would shrink away in instant horror from the hand that placed itself on my arm or shoulder in an embarrassed and half-hearted attempt at communication.
All this time I said nothing to anyone of what I truly felt.
Of course I can see now how infuriating this behaviour must have been.
But it was only the beginning.
Euphoria
I stated in the last chapter that, in becoming anorexic, I did the only thing I could.
I should now clarify that statement by rephrasing it: I adopted the only strategy open to me in order to preserve any sort of identity, however precarious, and in order to believe in myself as an individual being, separate from both the family and the school.
Anorexia nervosa is fundamentally about an identity crisis.
And because this phrase has been much abused and misunderstood, it may be useful at this point to refer back to Erikson, to whom we owe it in the first place.
He describes the progress of an individual human life, necessarily rooted in its social context, as a series of such crises, the goal of each being a further step towards wholeness, towards a complete identity.
It seems to me indisputable that, in our culture, adolescence constitutes just such a crisis — perhaps for many people the major one — but because it is one with which we are all familiar, I do not intend to delineate it in detail.
Instead I shall confine myself to what I find directly relevant to anorexia in Erikson's writings on adolescence.
Distinguishing between personal identity, ‘the perception of selfsameness and continuity of one's existence in time and space and the perception of the fact that others recognise one's sameness and continuity, and ego identity, he defines the latter as,
more than the mere fact of existence; it is as it were the ego quality of this existence.
Ego identity, then, in its subjective aspect, is the awareness of the fact that there is a selfsameness and continuity to the ego's synthesising methods, the style of one's individuality , and that
this style coincides with the sameness and continuity of one's meaning for significant others in the immediate community.
It should be clear from the previous chapters that although I  still had some sense of personal identity when I became anorexic, I simply did not have the opportunity or know-how to form an Eriksonian ego identity.
The distinction is important because it leads to yet another paradox inherent in the anorexic predicament.
Without some sense of personal identity, the wilful manoeuvres of the anorexic would not be possible: either suicide or madness might prove a better ‘choice’ of solution to the individual's problems.
But in the presence of a strong ego identity such manoeuvres would not be necessary.
What I am trying to say is that the anorexic has sufficient sense of identity to know that identity is something to be fought for — by whatever means.
Elsewhere, Erikson describes adolescence as ‘the age of the final establishment of a dominant ego identity’ and the point at which the future ‘becomes part of the conscious life plan.’
He concludes that,
The process of identity formation seems to support an individual's ego identity as long as he can preserve a certain element of deliberate tentativeness of autonomous choice.
The individual must be able to convince himself that the next step is up to him and, no matter where he is staying or going, he always has the choice of leaving or turning in the opposite direction if he chooses to do so.
I find the phrase ‘deliberate tentativeness’ a particularly sensitive one to apply to the identity problems of adolescence, in that it allows the individual the right to fail and to try again, to prove that she/he is capable of autonomous action.
If anorexia is about identity in general, it is also specifically and most importantly about autonomy.
Autonomy is important to everyone, but I think it is fair to say that it is of particular importance in adolescence.
It is then that a crisis of autonomy can be most nearly identified with a crisis of identity, and can be seen in many an act of teenage rebellion.
The question to be raised in this context is, why does the anorexic ‘choose’ that particular form of rebellion, make that particular bid for autonomy?
My insight into my own motivations in ‘choosing’ anorexia began when I read this statement: ‘Addiction, obesity, starvation (anorexia nervosa) are political problems, not psychiatric; each condenses and expresses a contest between the individual and some other person or persons in his environment over the control of the individual's body.’
This was the most cogent view of anorexia nervosa I had ever come across.
All I had heard or read before was the usual superficial assumption that the disease was a matter of slimming which had somehow or other (no one ever said how) got out of hand.
But Szasz's observation struck me with the force of revelation.
And he goes on to ask some similarly pertinent questions: ‘To whom does a person's body belong?
Does it belong to his parents, as it did, to a very large extent, when he was a child?
Or to the state?
Or to the sovereign?
Or to God?
Or, finally, to himself?’
I recognised those questions as pertaining to myself at the time I became anorexic.
What was happening to my body — not only the changes brought about by puberty, but the fact that the clothes it wore and the food it consumed were chosen for it by someone else — was a metaphor for what was happening to me as a whole person.
I think I seized upon that metaphor in order to turn it to my own advantage.
I had nothing; I was nothing.
More positively, I was being given what I did not want (which amounted to being given nothing) and being classified as what I was not (which amounted to being classified as nothing).
My only weapon in my bid for autonomy was to go on strike.
Withdrawal of labour, in the literal sense, would have been impractical and, more importantly, would have caused further destruction to my self-esteem in that without work (schoolwork) I should have had and have been less than the nothing I already felt myself to have and to be.
So I ‘chose’ a form of passive resistance.
Just as the worker's ultimate weapon in his negotiation with management is his labour and the threat of its withdrawal, so my body was my ultimate and, to me, only, weapon in my bid for autonomy.
It was the only thing I owned, the only thing which could not be taken away from me.
My motivations were not as clear-cut as those of any contemporary workforce, but there is no doubt in my mind that I was going on strike in the only way I knew how to, and that in this sense Szasz is right to describe anorexia nervosa as a political problem.
Even so, this assertion raises as many questions as it answers.
I have, in part answered the question, ‘why the body?’ and I hope to be able to answer it more fully by using a different approach.
Polanyi suggests that,
the relationship between mind and body has the same logical structure as the relationship between clues and the image to which they are pointing .
I believe that the paradoxes of the mind-body relationship can be traced to this logical structure and their solution to be found in the light of this interpretation.
This is a statement, in more general terms, of the conclusion reached by Freud in his treatment of hysterics: he was able to relate a specific physiological symptom, such as facial neuralgia, to a specific and painful psychic event, such as a bitter remark received years earlier by the patient as a slap in the face.
In this case, a drama involving the relationship between mind and body was being played out.
The process, known as ‘hysterical conversion’, is described by Fairbairn as a defensive technique ‘designed to prevent the conscious emergence of emotional conflicts involving object-relations.
Its essential and distinctive feature is the substitution of a bodily state for a personal problem ; and this substitution enables the personal problem as such to be removed.’
The parallel with the anorexic process is clear, and the reasons for such a substitution in both cases are probably similar.
Both hysterics and anorexics have almost invariably been middle-class women or girls.
Those who posit a purely biological basis for this phenomenon are ignoring the class or political element.
It is not a view which includes the recognition that educated, underemployed women are singularly lacking in personal autonomy, and so prone to a frustration which is not necessarily or primarily sexual.
Yet it is one with which both hysterics and anorexics seem to have concurred overtly, while rebelling, often despite themselves, by the only means available to them.
Although I believe that hysteria, as classically defined, can provide only a part of the answer to the problem of anorexia nervosa, it is a starting-point and, in the light of Szasz's observation that ‘hysterical conversion is best regarded as a process of translation,’ I propose to translate the history of my own symptoms back into the language in which they were intended to be expressed.
My decision to adopt this method is not  an arbitrary one.
Neither does it imply that my approach to anorexia nervosa is based on orthodox Freudian psychoanalysis.
Jung was of the opinion that Freud's greatest achievement probably ‘consisted in taking neurotic patients seriously and entering into their peculiar individual psychology.
He had the courage to let the case material speak for itself.’
In my capacity as my own analyst I feel that the least I can do for my patient, and my readers, is precisely to ‘let the case material speak for itself’.
But at the same time I should like to show that the speaking is by no means straightforward speech.
In dealing with anorexia nervosa we are dealing with metaphor — sometimes a startlingly apt form of metaphor.
It is for this reason, following on from Freud and Szasz, that I propose to treat my patient as a text.
But I take my immediate clue from the American critic, Norman Holland: ‘unity is to the text as identity is to a person; or you could say, identity is the unity I find in a person when I look at him as if he were a text.’
Given what has already been said about identity, it is unlikely that we shall find in the anorexic a unity of text.
It is my belief that anorexic speech (or, more literally, behaviour) consists of two quite separate and often contradictory texts, and that it is only by studying them both, in order to fit them together and so come up with an amended text, that we can understand what is going on inside the anorexic herself.
When I gradually began to eat less and less it was with no thought of slimming in the normally accepted sense of the term.
I know that many girls who become anorexic set out with this express intention, and may even be able to persuade themselves that this is the sole cause (whole truth) of their subsequent condition.
I know, too, that the stomach, on receiving less and less food, will shrink and gradually require less and less food at any one time.
If this were indeed the whole truth about anorexia nervosa, it would be a straightforward medical problem, and therefore comparatively simple to resolve.
But it is not.
The first question to be asked of the slimming thesis is, why do people, especially young girls, want to become slim?
The answer is, in order to look good or, more bluntly, in order to become (more) sexually attractive; slimness in our culture being an essential ingredient of sexual attractiveness.
In other words, to slim is to take a rational decision with a conscious aim in view.
When that aim has been reached, the slimmer will abandon or moderate her strict dietary habits and try to maintain what she considers to be her ideal body weight.
My case, like so many of those studied in the literature, does not bear out these facts.
What, for instance, would have been the point of my striving towards sexual attractiveness?
I was in an all-female establishment, and, even when I was out of it, lived in an almost exclusively female world.
As far as I was concerned, men and boys  constituted a separate species, with whom I had nothing in common, and the last thing I wanted to do (had I given the matter any thought) was to arouse their interest, which I feared might be predatory.
I had no conscious aim in view.
If I had, I should also have had the sense to know when I had achieved it, and therefore when to start eating normally again.
Although the slimmer and the anorexic are both to some extent governed by anxiety, there is an important difference between them.
Slimming is a conscious process; anorexia nervosa (being more than non-eating) a largely unconscious one — at least at the outset.
In observing the behaviour of the slimmer and the anorexic, we may read the same text, ‘I want to lose weight.’
But the sub-texts differ.
Whereas the slimmer's reads, ‘I want to be a sexually attractive woman’, the anorexic's reads, ‘I want to shed the burden of womanhood’.
Slimming is basically a matter of vanity.
Anorexia is much more a matter of pride.
Loss of weight has meanings other than slimness.
The most obvious is thinness: anorexics are not slim, but thin, often to the point of appearing almost completely fleshless.
An anorexic may tell her friends or parents, ‘I'd like to be slim’, and, if pressed for a reason, may reply along the lines of, ‘So that I can wear nice clothes, date good-looking boys, and generally have a good time.’
These conventionally acceptable statements constitute the apparent text of her behaviour.
But the subtext texts reads somewhat differently: ‘I want to be thin because I don't like flesh.’
Flesh, female flesh, is to the anorexic an imposition from outside and, in extreme cases, an imposition of something swollen, polluted, dirty.
Selvini Palazzoli quotes a dream related by one of these latter cases: ‘On my way home from the convent I stopped outside the hospital.
A woman who had just given birth was being lifted off a stretcher.
I was horrified by her swollen and distended  stomach.
I heard them say that she had been brought to hospital because her belly was still full of urine.’
My reaction to female flesh was neither as extreme nor as ignorant as that, and it was only my own, not that of other women, which caused me to feel revulsion.
I have described how I looked in the mirror and, seeing myself ‘in the flesh’ did not recognise myself.
My horrified, ‘That can't be me’ soon became a determined ‘That won't be me’.
But I had no idea how to implement my refusal and, when I began not to eat it was out of apathy and depression, out of a hopelessness concerning myself (including my body), rather than according to a definite plan.
The inescapable fact is that I didn't want to be a woman, although I was unaware of this at the time.
What I did know was that I didn't want to grow up, and my diary records that I confessed as much — when pressed to my housemistress.
To me, the adult world was not a place where the individual could act freely and achieve growth, both in the acceptance of responsibility and in the likelihood of success.
To me, it was just another place where I would be pushed around, perhaps even more violently than I had been before.
Jung suggests that ‘something in us wishes to remain a child; to be unconscious or at most conscious only of the ego; to reject everything foreign, or at least subject it to our will; to do nothing, or, in any case, to indulge our own craving for pleasure or power.’
Such a wish, which presumably applies to both men and women, seems as impossible of fulfilment as my determination, ‘That won't be me’.
And Jung's phrase ‘something in us’ implies that the wish constitutes only a small element in the psyche — one that is not difficult for a sensible, mature person to reject, once she/he has recognised how unrealistic it is.
But for me, it was difficult to reject and, far from being a minor psychic element, became a major obsession.
The miracle of anorexia is that this wish can be fulfilled: one does not have to grow up; one does not have to become a woman, even in the biological sense; one can reject all foreign substances, for which food is a metaphor, and subject them to one's will.
This is power indeed.
Once the process is under way, it all seems easy: the only attribute required is an initial and stupendous effort of will.
My non-eating started from positions of helplessness, of hopelessness, of a barely deniable adulthood and an even less deniable womanhood.
By the time I  had become fully anorexic, all these unwanted or unwelcome positions had been reversed.
At school we were weighed regularly — at the beginning, middle and end of each term — and it had been customary for me to record my weight in my diary on all these occasions.
At the beginning of the O-level summer term I weighed eight stone three pounds and, if I was pleased at having lost two pounds, I certainly didn't say so.
The omission is meaningless: I could well have been delighted, although I can't remember whether I had actually begun to think consciously about weight in terms of stones and pounds at this time.
By half-term I weighed seven stone nine pounds, and I suspect it was only then that I became weight-conscious in the literal sense.
During the first half of the term, my diary scarcely mentions food, apart from the occasional comment on the revolting nature of some too-frequently presented dish.
This in itself is odd because in previous terms I had often (though not regularly) described meals in detail.
As anyone who has ever been confined to a closed institution will know, meals are events: they are the landmarks in each repetitive day, often providing the only elements of novelty or surprise in an otherwise predictable routine.
I think I didn't mention food in my diary during this period because I didn't want to mention my own eating-habits.
Maybe I was worried that someone else would read my diary, but if so this worry could only have been a slight one: I was much too careful to afford anyone the opportunity to snoop.
It is more likely that the elements of secrecy and self-deception involved in my behaviour were already so strong that what I was actually doing couldn't be described in words at all, least of all in the incriminating written word.
If I had used words, I should have had to think more carefully about what I was doing.
I was, so to speak, keeping the secret even from myself.
Having recently re-read my own, I have come to the conclusion that diaries furnish the perfect vehicle for self-deception and self-enhancement, provided that, in later years, the reader/writer is incapable of reading between the lines or unable to remember what has been left unsaid.
I can remember exactly what I was doing and, out of context, my behaviour seems so harmless that the need for secrecy appears quite mysterious.
I was refusing second helpings of food, asking unfailingly for small helpings, and skipping optional meals like tea or Sunday breakfast.
It was what was going on in my mind that had to be kept secret, on pain of interference, on pain of ridicule, on pain of punishment and, inevitably, on pain of self-understanding.
It was this: the less I eat, the more I am getting away with.
O-levels began ten days after the half-term weighing session, and if anyone noticed the drop in my weight, I suppose they attributed it to anxiety over the forthcoming examinations.
In fact I wasn't particularly anxious, although my diary is full of the usual teenage moans and groans about the impossibility of absorbing any more information, and the exams themselves are described as ‘foul’, ‘really foul’, or, at best, ‘not very nice’.
I knew very well that I was going to pass them all.
And my new-found confidence was not unconnected with my weight loss.
I had already achieved something; I had already proved to myself that I was capable of independent achievement.
This discovery made it all the more important to me to maintain my behaviour and to maintain it in secret.
I told myself that my intention was maintenance of the status quo, but this was at best a half-truth.
The truth was that I didn't know how to effect such an aim, and if I found myself eating any more than the minimum — that is, enough for me to remain undetected by the authorities-I considered myself guilty of backsliding, and had to punish myself by eating even less the next day or at the next meal.
After O-levels there was still a month of term to go, a month in which I had ample time to devote myself to my obsession.
Although I read a great deal, and wrote a great deal , meal-times were still what kept me going.
But whereas before meal-times had implied some sort of positive interest in eating, their purpose now was the active avoidance of eating, the opportunity to prove to myself that I was still achieving, still winning.
I would now ask for very small helpings, eat perhaps a mouthful, and then smear the rest of the food all over the plate, hiding the residue underneath an upturned fork.
My diary records such incidents as, ‘Had to eat another roll at breakfast, much to my disgust’, or ‘M. insisted that I eat another piece of toast, so I walked out in disgust.’
(It should be noted that the word ‘disgust’ is being used in both cases with literal force.
) I was becoming more upfront, and  not just as far as food was concerned.
Instead of withdrawing and being generally anti-social, as I had been, I began to argue with people — teachers and pupils alike — and to disrupt other people's activities for the sake of disruption.
Having lost weight, I was beginning to ‘throw my weight around’.
My diary is full of diatribes against the childishness, laziness, conceit or inefficiency of others.
I had emerged from apathy into active aggression, and my housemistress's report for the term includes the advice, ‘Sheila must learn to curb her natural exuberance.’
I went home for the summer holidays weighing seven stone six pounds.
And at the beginning of the following term I wrote in huge letters on the front of my rough book (regularly inspected by the housemistress), ‘Exuberance is beauty’.
So my resolve had not weakened during the holidays.
I had spent some time on a camping/cycling holiday with my family in the West country.
I didn't enjoy it, but for me there was one advantage: there were no regular meals, and so no one noticed how much or how little anyone else ate.
We shopped in village stores as we went along, and my diary lists items of food bought rather than consumed.
At the beginning of the holidays I spent a week with a school friend in London, and towards the end another week with another friend in Bedford.
During those two periods my diary makes no mention of food, and I assume I must have eaten more or less normally.
During the time I spent at home I seem to have eaten nothing but apples and, if I am to be believed, an inordinate number of them.
Only the entry for 15 August reveals some alleviation of my anorexic anxieties in a reaction which is, at the same time, typically anorexic: ‘O-level results came today.
Have passed them all, thank goodness.
Cooked huge meal to celebrate.
Ate masses.’
Because there are no expressions of regret afterwards, I assume I felt entitled to some sort of reward.
But for the last two weeks of the holidays I was continually feeling ‘sick’ and ‘shaky’, and went back to school, weighing seven stone one pound.
This time — at last— someone must have noticed what was happening to me.
The entry for a week later reads: ‘Had to go to Hospice.
Dr. ordered no games, extra rest, milk, butter, cream!!
Nothing wrong with me at all really!
The housemistress even presented me with a glass of milk at lunch.
Ugh!…
Had to have  butter at supper, which I refused to eat.
I don't see why I should, if I feel all right…
Matron said I had to go to bed early for a fortnight.
This place is so depressing!’
The battle was on, and was to continue for another year.
The school authorities decided that my diet was to be strictly supervised, and that I should be weighed every week.
At first it was easy enough to evade supervision, and my weight remained stable for several weeks.
But at the end of October, a diary entry reads: ‘Was weighed and have gained 2 lbs — am now 7 st, 3 lbs!
Went to see Dr and was on Gym for 1st time this term.
Had to play games too, and felt dead.
I wish I were.
I hate this place!’
I felt I was beginning to lose the battle, and the diary for the remainder of the term is full of expressions of hatred for the school, interspersed with the repeated and heartfelt question, ‘Why can't they leave me alone?’
By the time I went home for Christmas, I had gained another pound.
Whether or not the school communicated any concern for my health to my parents I don't know.
I don't remember that the question was ever discussed at home.
My diary for the holidays is, as usual, almost blank, but contains several references to having overeaten and then feeling sick, which served me right.
Nevertheless, I went back to school having lost four pounds.
I now weighed seven stone, the lowest figure I had yet attained.
The general reaction was, ‘Anyone who can actually lose weight over Christmas must be ill.’
But the doctor could find nothing physically wrong with me, and the notion of seeking psychiatric help doesn't seem to have arisen.
I was put back on the diet designed to ‘build me up’.
This time the supervision was stricter, and it became more difficult for me to pass my butter ration on to someone else, to pour Ovaltine down the sink behind the matron's back, or to dispose of extra food by means of the lavatory.
But I had also become more cunning.
I think it was about this time (I can't tell exactly because my diary makes no reference at any point to the practice) that I discovered purging.
How this happened, I don't remember, but I suppose it was a case of a desperate situation demanding a desperate remedy.
I soon found out that if I swigged a mouthful or two of the laxative cascara sagrada from the medicine cupboard, I could get rid of the obnoxious feeling of weight and fullness which had been forced on me.
The sinking stomach pains which heralded this loss were  always welcome to me, and afterwards I would feel triumphantly clean.
It must have bewildered the matron, who watched practically every mouthful I ate, that by the end of term I had lost another two pounds.
The diary entries for the Easter holidays are even sparser than usual, but when I went back to school I had lost yet another two pounds.
This time the diary entry reads: ‘Weighing.
6 st, 9 lbs.
It's awful.
I must go up.’
But of course I didn't think it was awful at all, and was in fact extremely pleased with myself.
I pretended to be as puzzled as everyone else was about the nature of my ‘mysterious illness’.
Meanwhile I continued the strategy I had been following for the previous two terms: feigning compliance with the authorities and responding co-operatively to their apparent concern, while continuing to eat minimally and to purge in secret.
By the end of the summer term I weighed six stone one pound.
Two facts emerge immediately from this resumé.
The first is that I felt my battle to be with authority, whether in the form of teachers, matrons, parents, or even nature itself.
The second is that, up until this point, I was winning.
It seems to me that anorexia nervosa acts as a metaphor for all the problems of adolescence.
But instead of meeting each problem separately and assessing it for what it is, the anorexic thinks she has a master-plan, designed to solve them all at one stroke.
She is convinced that it works; it can't fail.
It is like a dream come true.
It is euphoria.
When I first came across Szasz's dictum, ‘Mental illness is a self-enhancing deception, self-promoting strategy’, I considered it to be a harsh judgement on a suffering fellow-creature.
But when I substituted ‘anorexia nervosa’ for ‘mental illness’I could see the truth in what Szasz was saying, and realise at the same time that his judgement was not so harsh.
After all, if the self is felt to be nothing, any strategy adopted to enhance or promote it, desperate though it may be, is a step towards what most of us would consider to be health, and an action necessary for survival.
The anorexic's skinny body proclaims, ‘I have won; I am someone now.
But thinness, as opposed to slimness, also carries connotations of weightlessness and emptiness.
The sub-text to be read in that  skinny body is, ‘I am weightless/worthless; I am empty/nobody.
This is what my behaviour is all about.’
The strategy works by means of paradox, a paradox which has ultimately to be resolved through some sort of fusion between the apparent text and the sub-text.
But in the first, euphoric phase of the disease, only the apparent text is granted recognition by the anorexic.
I have said that the anorexic starts from a position of helplessness and hopelessness, and I have tried to demonstrate that this was so in my case.
As my weight decreased, so did my helplessness.
Anorexia provided me with the illusion that I was in control, not only of my body and my own status within the community, but of that community itself and, finally, of the biological processes which others around me were powerless to influence.
In short, I became convinced of my own omnipotence.
The conviction started from my body and the discovery that no one could prevent me — if I were determined enough — from treating it as I wished.
I had discovered an area of my life over which others had no control.
And although the sub-text of my increasing thinness (which I chose to ignore) read, ‘I am doing this because I feel so helpless that not even my own body belongs to me’, the apparent text read to me, and increasingly to others, ‘My body is my own and I can do what I like with it.’
At first I was exhilarated to be able to make such a statement.
I had considered my body to be lumpy, untidy, anomalous and entirely unsuited to the person within.
My behaviour had accordingly been unstructured: I was lazy, untidy, uncommunicative, forgetful and generally inefficient.
But when I managed to convert my body into something trim and neat, my personality changed too.
I became lively, hard-working, and so well-organised that I found inefficiency in others deplorable.
My diary, in my pre-anorexic days, often refers to a ‘weight of depression’ which I felt myself to be carrying around.
Once I became anorexic, that weight vanished with my flesh.
My step lightened, I was full of energetic high spirits, and during the summer term I even became keen on playing tennis, which I would practise with the assiduousness I had formerly devoted to the piano.
At night I would often get up and go for long walks in the school grounds, especially when the moon was full and I felt particularly restless, enjoying the silence and solitude of the  woods.
I don't remember ever being afraid, and I would boast of my nocturnal activities to a few close friends, who were duly impressed.
As far as the physical aspect of this sort of behaviour is concerned, the apparent text read, ‘My body is strong and healthy, super-healthy, despite your insistence that I am ill.’
But, as Bruch has pointed out, anorexics tend to deny fatigue, and my diary is full of complaints such as, ‘felt dead tired’.
So the subtext of my behaviour could be interpreted as, ‘I feel weak and tired, but I'm damned if I'm going to admit it, because that would only prove you right.’
Far from making any such admission, I became more and more fanatically energetic as the disease progressed.
If my body was now trim and neat, redeemed from the excrescences of flesh, it was also clean.
When I reached six and a half stone or so, my periods stopped.
I mentioned this to no one for two practical reasons: one was that I loathed swimming, and if I pretended that I was still menstruating, signing the little red book every four weeks, I should be able to evade an unpleasant experience for at least one week out of four; the other was that I feared further reprisals might be taken against me.
It was easy enough to deposit the unused sanitary towels in the school dustbins during my nocturnal wanderings.
But the main reason for my silence was that secrecy and deception had by then become second nature to me.
I didn't want my periods to start again.
That I had managed to stop them was a major achievement on my part.
Instead of growing up, I had, as it were, grown down, and thus reversed a natural biological process.
I was no longer a woman.
I was what I wanted to be: a girl.
I was what I felt unconsciously I had never had a chance to be: a little girl.
I rejected womanhood, not because I preferred manhood, but because I preferred girlhood.
At the time my idea of manhood was personified as someone who had to work hard at a job he hated in order to support not only himself, but other people whose very existence he resented; someone who was forever having to make difficult decisions and take frightening initiatives, both of which ended in frustration; and someone who might be called upon to fight in wars (National Service was then still in operation) and kill people.
This was not an attractive proposition, but my idea of womanhood was hardly preferable.
In her attempt to ascertain why anorexia nervosa is a girls'  rather than a boys' disease, Selvini Palazzoli emphasises the manner in which the adolescent girl ‘is exposed to lewd looks, subjected to menstruation, about to be penetrated in sexual embraces, to be invaded by the foetus, to be suckled by a child, etc.’
I find this emphasis generally correct in that it describes what the anorexic girl believes to lie in store for her as a woman: a passive role, a position of helplessness, a loss of self.
It is what she has experienced already, but with the addition of responsibility, pain, and bodily suffering exemplified in the bearing of children and the shedding of blood.
When I was anorexic I had only dim feelings of resentment as to how my body was destined to be used, and the thought of anything as positive and specific as penetration never entered my mind.
Incredible as it may seem, I never thought about sex at all, and didn't even masturbate: starvation reduces libido.
However, I now see my very sexlessness as a flight from sexuality, and mainly my own sexuality.
I think I was afraid that, once I recognised it, it too might get out of control — just like my body in general.
On the conscious level, sexuality was to me only one of the responsibilities of adulthood: as far the sexual act itself was concerned, I simply didn't want to know, as a child who is exposed to sexual information at an age when she/he feels incapable of absorbing it will not want to know.
And I use the word ‘responsibilities’ rather than‘pleasures’because whereas no one had ever discussed with me the possible pleasures of sexuality, the responsibilities of adulthood had been habitually stressed, both at home and at school.
With the weight of my flesh, I had also shed the weight of responsibility.
It seemed to me obvious at the time that to be a child was safer and easier than to be adult and that, specifically, to be a girl was safer and easier than to be a woman.
As far as I was concerned there were two types of women, the true type and the failed type.
The true type, as personified by my own and other mothers, was destined to bear child after child, some of whom could miscarry, some of whom could die, and all of whom were a perpetual source of worry and expense.
This true type, having found her man, was forced to accept that biology was indeed destiny.
But I couldn't accept any such thing.
The failed type of woman, as personified by most of the teachers at school, had been unable to find a man.
All the same, they were no freer, no happier, than the true type.
It was generally assumed among the pupils that our teachers, being women, would have preferred to be fully sexual, childbearing beings.
But instead they were ‘dried-up old spinsters’, miserable biological failures.
At that stage in my life I couldn't take any kind of failure, and so this latter model of womanhood was as unacceptable to me as the former.
I think too that because I had postponed rather than rejected sexuality, the latter model was even less acceptable.
But, for the time being, the rejection of womanhood had to be complete.
When I looked in the mirror and told myself, first, ‘that can't be me’, and later, ‘that won't be me’, what I was seeing was a woman.
In my rejection of the image I saw I was making a statement, the apparent text of which read, ‘I don't want to look like (be) that.’
And I think I was right to make the equation between ‘look like’ and ‘be’because a woman is what she looks like.
That she is so is essentially an untruth, but it is at the same time a socially undeniable fact, even today, although it was probably a more widespread one 20 odd years ago.
It is also a fact which should be given careful consideration in the attempt to determine why it is that girls rather than boys tend to become anorexic.
When a man looks in the mirror, he can tell himself, ‘You may be an ugly old devil, but you're brilliant/successful/ virile.’
When a woman looks in the mirror, she sees the totality of her being: because of the social brainwashing to which she has been subjected, the mirror seems to tell her more than it can tell a man.
And so my sub-text read, in part, ‘I can't cope with this; I'm not going to be any good at it.’
The flight from womanhood was linked with the flight from failure, the fear of which had practically been bred into me.
Thus far the sub-text had a certain logic, but fear (or, rather, anxiety) can lead to panic, and the second part could have been expressed as, ‘I don't want to be a woman because I would rather be myself.’
On the face of it, this was an illogical statement, but by becoming anorexic I refuted logic.
When I eventually weighed under six stone and looked at myself in the mirror (which, in common with other anorexics, I did a great deal) I saw someone  beautiful : I saw myself.
No matter what anyone else thought or said, I was beautiful: I was myself.
The clearer the outline of my  skeleton became, the more I felt my true self to be emerging, like a nude statue being gradually hewn from some amorphous block of stone.
This is the distortion of perception referred to by Bruch, but I must add that in my case I see it less as a longstanding perceptual difficulty than as a consequence of my general state of confusion as to my self-image.
To see my starved self as beautiful was to dissipate a large part of this confusion: I was, literally and metaphorically, in perfect shape.
The distortion of perception extended itself to areas other than my body.
Having disposed alike of unwanted flesh and unwanted menstruation, I had become pure and clean, and therefore superior to those around me.
I was so superior that I considered myself to be virtually beyond criticism.
The intellectual form of superiority was the one most accessible to me both at home and at school.
At home it was a simple matter for me to parade my learning in front of my sisters, stressing my more advanced academic achievements at every possible opportunity, and remaining quite oblivious to their assessment of me as an insufferable little prig.
My attitude to my mother was similar: I would feign amazement at her ignorance of the intricacies of the Punic Wars, while at the same time snobbishly correcting her pronunciation or her misapprehensions of social niceties.
With my father I had more difficulty: all I could do with him was to argue about literature, citing my teachers' opinions as being more up-to-date and therefore more valid than his own.
At school I worked hard, spending most of my time in the library.
Anything less than a straight A disappointed me, and even when I had clearly gained the best grade in the class — a slightly alleviating factor-I still told myself that it wasn't good enough.
My reading was not confined strictly to the syllabus, and my book-list for the period shows that I was prepared to read around it.
As I remember, I was even readier to advance in class the theories of, for instance, F. L. Lucas on the decline of the Romantic ideal, or E.M.Y. Tillyard on poetry direct and oblique, while suspecting that none of the other girls (or perhaps even the teachers) had read the books in question.
People were impressed — maybe too easily.
I didn't fully understand everything I read, and although the apparent text of my behaviour was, ‘Look at me — how learned and knowledgeable I am’, the sub-text was something more like, ‘I'm trying  frantically hard to learn and to understand, despite my stupidity.
Give me some credit.
Tell me I'm not so stupid.’
The book-list also shows that I read Virginia Woolf, Aldous Huxley, Samuel Butler, Maxim Gorki, Henry James, Samuel Beckett, and so on.
I have always been a quick reader and my capacity, not to say my voracity, was generally admired.
I felt good.
But perhaps I was as oblivious at school as I was at home to the sneers or the impatience of others.
At the euphoric level of the disease, the anorexic perceives only what she wants (needs) to perceive.
Anything else would only threaten her hard-won sense of unique achievement.
From this stage I proceeded to a more general sense of superiority, which can only be described as moral.
At school I would follow certain rules in an ostentatious manner (while breaking others in secret) and become severe, even morally censorious, towards those who lapsed from my hypocritically high standards.
Most of these rules, I should point out, were petty, automatic ones relating to punctuality or tidiness and can generally be described as ‘going by the book’.
At home I ‘rationalised’(the word used in my diary) the kitchen cupboards, according to a system in which items most frequently used were most accessible, and vice versa.
I cleared out the forgotten corners which exist in every family home, sending old clothes to jumble sales, and asking boy scouts to collect useless piles of old newspapers and magazines.
I tried to take over the kitchen, but in this I was thwarted by my father who had his own ideas about food, and who would keep interfering and making a mess, whereas I preferred to clear away and wash up as I went along.
Whenever I did succeed in preparing a family meal, I insisted that everyone eat whatever was placed on her/his plate.
Serving large helpings, I ate nothing myself and my abstinence was only another proof of my moral superiority.
The apparent text of my behaviour, openly declared, read, ‘I'm superhuman.
I don't need food’, and the sub-text, admitted only to myself and ignored as far as possible, read, ‘I'm starving.’
Similarly, the apparent text of my obsessive orderliness read, ‘Form and order make for efficiency, and efficiency makes for a well-structured, meaningful life’, while the sub-text read, ‘Unless I impose some form and  order on life, I shall lose control, chaos will ensue, and life will become meaningless.’
My twin obsessions were food and order.
It is at this point that the analogy between anorexia nervosa and hysteria, which Freud saw as separate from and possibly opposed to the obsessional neuroses, seems to break down, along with Dally's separation of the two as different forms of the disease.
Both terms may be outmoded by now, but I think that in view of what I have already said about gender confusion and gender avoidance in my own case, they may not be entirely unhelpful.
In Freudian terms, I had taken upon myself the typically female neurosis of hysteria along with the typically male one of obsessiveness.
Nevertheless, it is Adler rather than Freud who sums up for me what was happening at this stage of the disease.
Delineating his theory of retreat into illness as a means of obtaining power, he wrote, ‘Every neurosis must be understood as an attempt to free oneself from a feeling of inferiority in order to gain a feeling of superiority.’
Although I denied being ill and scorned to make the demands for attention usually employed by invalids or malingerers, there is no doubt that I was by this time making a bid for power.
The sense of superiority I gained was essentially related to control and, eventually, to the triumph of the will.
The apparent text of superiority read, ‘I am in control.
I can influence events and people.
I am all-powerful.
My will is supreme.’
But the sub-text, wilfully suppressed, read, ‘I'm terrified that I have no control over events, over other people, over myself.
Everything is arbitrary and therefore meaningless.’
It amazes me now how little of this sub-text was legible to those around me.
I suspect that my parents simply took my word and my active behaviour as proofs of my essential health, and that my non-eating was something I would grow out of and could therefore be ignored.
The possibility that I might starve myself to death was never raised: instead I was scolded for looking like a scarecrow, and my mother told me that she was ashamed to be seen with me.
At school I was told by the matron that I would die if I continued to lose weight.
I didn't believe her: my sense of superiority had extended itself to include a conviction of my own immortality.
But I humoured her, agreeing that she and I should co-operate in order to save my life.
Thus I deceived her into thinking that she had scared me, and that I would take the  necessary steps to ward off fatality.
Outwardly it must have seemed that I had overcome my emotional difficulties and, apart from the mysterious phenomenon of my continuing thinness, had become a bright, helpful, well-adjusted member of the school.
I told myself that I was happy, that I was free at last.
In a way I was happy: I had achieved something, I was winning for the first time in my life, and I had a strong sense of myself as a differentiated individual.
But the combined sub-text of my behaviour, which I shall deal with in the next chapter, shows that this was far from being the whole truth about my psychic state.
As for being free — to be in thrall to a ruling obsession is hardly to exist in a state of freedom.
I thought I was doing what I, and I alone, wanted to do, but my pursuit of academic superiority shows that I was still striving to be the person my parents wanted me to be.
And my excessively tidy and authoritarian behaviour shows that I was striving to be the person the school wanted me to be.
Up to a certain point I was succeeding in both roles, driven as I was towards success by anxiety and the fear of failure.
In reality, I was back where I had started — in a position of helplessness and hopelessness — but with one important exception.
I now had something I could call my own: my disease, my unique neurosis, which I perceived as my thinness.
The connection with neurosis was not unconscious, nor yet fully conscious in the sense that I could have expressed it verbally, but it was, in being unique, all-pervasive.
Perhaps this may help to explain the determination of the anorexic to go on starving herself: without anorexia, I should have been nothing.
I know that I had no intention of stopping the procedure, whatever anyone said or did to influence me.
I was determined never to give in.
Depression
The euphoric effects of fasting have often been described by mystics, hunger strikers and others who have spiritual or political reasons for their actions.
Perhaps their attitude can be summed up in a nice little phrase from one of Dally's patients: ‘The pleasures of eating are fleeting, but the pleasures of fasting are lasting.’
It is those who suffer from chronic malnutrition, caused by a poverty to which they can see no end, who are more likely to give evidence of the depressive effects of starvation.
In countries (or social classes) where such poverty is endemic, anorexia nervosa is unknown; it is a disease of affluence.
But even those of us who have never been anorexic and live in the affluent Western world must know, perhaps through some isolated experience of our own or others', that non-eating leads to fatigue and thence to depression.
Both the anorexic and the mystic are impervious to this simple chain of events.
I myself have no inclinations towards mysticism whatsoever: I see it as a conscious attempt to transcend the exigencies of the material world, including poverty, in the interest or pursuit of some higher mode of consciousness.
And in my experience, this sort of transcendence is not involved in anorexia nervosa, where the material world has to be grappled with and controlled, rather than dismissed as an ultimate unreality.
The mystic surrenders his will to some being or idea which he considers superior to himself, whereas the anorexic strengthens her individual will against the impingements of an apparently inescapable reality.
Nevertheless, there are similarities between the two: both are empty; both deny the pain of emptiness; and both are impervious to the possibility of impending death.
I cannot profess to know how successful, or otherwise, the mystic's attempts at transcendence may prove, but I do know that all the anorexic is capable of transcending are her own immediate difficulties and that, in most cases, this achievement is comparatively short-lived.
It may appear to an outsider that the anorexic is following a set pattern: self-confidence combined with an incredible energy is succeeded by despair and eventual collapse.
But, as I have tried to show, the relationship between euphoria and depression is synchronic: depression does not follow euphoria, but is masked by it.
The two co-exist, but in a state of war and, more often than not, depression wins.
The battle is a hard one for the anorexic — at first, hard-won, and then hard-lost.
The main problem, as far as the body is concerned, is that nature will insist on reasserting itself.
By nature I mean, first, the principle of survival which drives us to continue living and necessarily entails the ingestion of food; and, second, the principle of growth which transforms us from childhood to maturity and thence to old age.
In normal circumstances these principles or facts of human life can be defeated by one means only: death.
But although I wrote in my diary that I wished I were dead, I never seriously considered death — suicide — as a solution to my problems.
Both Bruch and Minuchin show that a very small minority of anorexics commit suicide, but at the same time Bruch resists, as I do, the description of anorexia nervosa as ‘suicide in refracted doses’.
Suicide and anorexia are by no means mutually exclusive phenomena, but in the typical case of primary anorexia nervosa suicide is simply not a factor, except perhaps when depression has won a particularly resounding victory, and the shame of defeat becomes unbearable.
Nevertheless, the suicide, like the mystic, resembles the anorexic in certain ways.
The American writer Leslie Farber has a great deal to say about ‘the life of suicide’, which he insists, ‘must not be seen as the situation or state of mind which leads to the act, but that situation in which the act-as-possibility, quite apart from whether it eventually occurs or not, has a life of its own.’
And although suicide is a conscious act, whether it is carried out (or even contemplated)‘when the balance of the mind is disturbed’, and anorexia is, at least at first, more of an unconscious process, I think there is a ‘life of anorexia’ too, in which the act-as-possibility is never entirely absent.
If I admit that there is such a thing as a suicidal temperament, then I am forced to admit that there is also such a thing as an anorexic temperament.
Failed suicides tend to try again, just as (failed) anorexics tend to relapse, and yet both can live for years without resorting either to self-destruction or self-starvation.
Neither does the one tend to adopt the other's behaviour as a replacement for her own more habitual strategy.
In the light of Farber's observation, I should like to suggest that if one ‘has’ anorexia nervosa, one does not need suicide.
If the worst comes to the worst, says the suicide, I can always kill myself.
And, in similar circumstances, the anorexic can always starve herself again.
Other similarities between the suicide and the anorexic seem to me to relate to the individual's reactions to an impinging world.
Impingement asks the question, where does the self end (or begin)?
With it, we are back with the problems of identity, specifically those of projection, the process by which certain aspects of the self are seen as located in some object external to the self, and of introjection, the process by which certain aspects of external objects are seen as being located within the self; we are firmly back in the area of object-relations.
In other words, we are back with the relationship between the self and significant others or the world in general.
On reading the works of Sylvia Plath, who did indeed live the life of suicide, I have noticed that her comments on impingement often seem to coincide with my own feelings at the time I was anorexic.
The examples are too numerous to quote, so I shall confine myself to two.
The first concerns her obsession with purity and her ambivalent attitude towards it.
On the one hand, she writes, in The Munich Mannequins , ‘Perfection is terrible.
It cannot have children.’
On the other hand, in Tulips, where the poet is ill and in hospital, the flowers, brought as a gift, ‘are too red in the first place, they hurt me’, and the smiling faces of her husband and children in a family photograph ‘catch on to my skin, little smiling hooks’.
She declares, ‘I am a nun now, I have never been so pure.’
The flight is from the impingements of  blood (the red of the tulips) and pain and from the complexities of close human relationships.
It could also be read as a flight into death.
Similarly, in Fever 103 , she writes, ‘I am too pure for you or anyone.
/Your body/Hurts me as the world hurts God.’
The two latter poems describe states of physical illness, but I think it is not unfair to quote them along with the former because all three only express in an overt form what is often expressed throughout her work: the connection between purity and superiority, the connection between purity and death.
In anorexia nervosa, which becomes a living death, the same connections are prevalent, together with the same confusing implications.
But it is in Lady Lazarus that the similarity between the life of suicide and the life of anorexia is at its clearest: ‘Dying/is an art, like everything else.
/I do it exceptionally well.
’ On reading these lines I realised that, if the word ‘starving’were to be substituted for the word ‘dying’, they could be read as a description of my own attitude at the time I was anorexic.
There are the same elements of bragging, self-dramatisation, childish defiance, and an assumption of the uniqueness of one's own behaviour, all combined with a heavy sense of irony.
I, too, thought I was doing something unique and practising an art exceptionally well.
And the irony entailed in starving myself in order to survive was not altogether lost on me.
For me the poem also has a more elusive quality, which I have perhaps hinted at in describing the extract as self-dramatising.
I get the impression that the poet did not take death seriously, did not quite believe in it.
It may seem ridiculous to suggest that a suicide does not believe in death, but there is a certain amount of evidence to suggest that some forms of suicide (usually referred to as ‘schizoid’) are in fact attempts at rebirth.
In this context, E. S. Shneidman and N.L. Farberow have something useful to say.
And although I do not agree with them that either suicide or anorexia are attempts to ‘get attention’, but rather attempts to get identity and wholeness, the following passages may serve to illustrate the paradoxical type of thinking which dominates both states of mind.
‘If anybody kills himself, he will get attention, I will kill myself, therefore I will get attention.’
Deductively, this argument is sound, but the fallacy is concealed in the concepts contained in the word, ‘I’.
Here the logical role of the pronoun is related to the psychology of the conception of the self.
This type of suicide believes that he will survive his own death, witness the discovery of his own body, and participate in the reactions of others towards his death.
The passage continues, ‘More accurately, it is not a fallacy in the words of reasoning, but rather in its fallacious identification.
Hence we call it a ‘psychosemantic fallacy’.’
I see ‘psychosemantic fallacy’ as a perfect description of anorexia nervosa — a disease in which the concept of the whole person is so confused, so dialectically divided, that ‘I’can at the same time be choosing to live, as the self, and choosing to die, as the body, however unconscious those choices may be.
And I would agree with Schatzman that ‘possibly one day we shall speak of lingua somatic or psycho semantic not psychosomatic illnesses.’
The point I am trying to make is that both suicide of the schizoid type and anorexia nervosa involve a denial of reality which depends upon an acceptance of a split between self and body, and is only possible through paradox.
A paradox is, among other things, a linguistic device, and can be used by the anorexic as the most expressive one in the language of her symptoms.
As such it is neater than the confusion presented by a reality which can be seen as not belonging to the self; or as perhaps belonging to the self; or as, if belonging to the self, equally incapable of assimilation by it or separation from it.
Death must represent one of the strongest impingements of reality, and perhaps the most confusing for the confused self.
But although the schizoid suicide and the anorexic both deny the reality of death, it seems to me that they do so for different reasons and in different ways.
I have already stated that I discovered death at the age of six, and also that I never considered suicide as a possible course of action.
In view of my evident misery, both at the onset and towards the end of the disease, the two statements may at first seem irreconcilable: I was desperately unhappy and had known for years that death can put an end to everything, including unhappiness.
But, to return to Shneidman and Farberow's ‘psychosemantic fallacy’, ‘We believe that this confusion or ambiguity may indeed occur whenever the individual thinks about his death, whether by suicide or otherwise.
It may arise  because he cannot imagine his own death.’
I knew what death was, but I still couldn't imagine it.
My knowledge, or rather realistic apprehension of it, at such an early age came from a coincidence of circumstances.
First, my pet rabbit died; one morning I found it stiff and cold in its hutch, for no apparent reason, and I was told that it was dead.
It was buried in the garden with all due ceremony, and all I knew or felt at the time was grief that I should never see my beloved pet again.
But some days later I realised the full truth of what had happened.
My parents were discussing some incident in the past and, when I joined in the conversation to ask some question, they told me, as they often had on similar occasions, ‘Of course, that was before you were born.’
The innocent words suddenly filled me with horror: there had been a time before I was born, a time when I had not existed, a time when I lacked individual consciousness — this last being the most horrifying notion.
But it was only when I was in bed that night and unable to sleep that I realised the meaning of my horrified reaction: there would be another time, after I was dead, when I would not exist, when my consciousness would be extinguished.
And although such an eventuality was beyond my imagination (like trying to envisage infinity) and utterly unacceptable to me, I still knew it to be true.
For long periods throughout my childhood I was afraid of going to sleep, afraid of the extinction brought by sleep.
Although I dreamed and could thus distinguish sleep from death, although I woke up again each morning, the fear remained, and my sister's death only served to strengthen it.
If I had killed myself, I should have known perfectly well what I was doing.
I had none of the schizoid suicide's delusions about being able to survive my own death.
Of two prisoners in goal, one may hang himself, the other go on hunger strike: the former is committing a positive act, the latter an act of passive resistance.
The two acts embody differing attitudes towards life and death.
For me, suicide would have been too active an act.
My rejection of death was less a denial than a postponement of the recognition of its ultimate reality.
Death, like sexuality, is a biological fact, but anorexia nervosa entails the denial of biology, and in particular the notion of biology as destiny.
When I was anorexic I postponed the idea of  myself-as-mortal in the same way as I postponed the idea of myself-as-sexual-being.
In the idealised world of childhood, to which I was trying to get or get back, neither death nor sexuality existed except as unwarranted intrusions, and all was a paradisal oneness, where to be individual and autonomous meant the same as to be accepted and understood.
There was no separation anxiety, which in itself is a paradox, involving both the need and the fear of separation.
Perhaps it is a universally irresoluble paradox, but it is one of particular importance for the anorexic.
Death, like sexuality, exacerbates separation anxiety, each emphasising the conflict between the individual and the universal, as well as all the conflicts inherent in object-relations.
Each reiterates the question: where does the self begin or end?
For me, death, like sexuality, was an aspect of the adult world, with which I felt myself incapable of coming to terms.
But although I scarcely, if ever, thought about sex, I wallowed in thoughts of death, utilising them, rather than death itself, to bear or deny my increasing depression instead of taking steps to put an end to it.
To bear and deny depression at the same time may seem like yet another paradox, but my diaries testify that somehow I managed to do both.
Even as I was recording my triumphs over a hostile and alien world, I was also expressing such sentiments as, ‘Oh, it's not even worth writing down — the same, usual, dismal, tedious, boring story.’
The plethora of adjectives point, again, towards self-dramatisation, and it is clear to me now that I used this device as a means of bearing depression in general.
What I did was to make a virtue of my misery.
I sank into a kind of Romantic melancholy, which I could feed and sustain by reading Keats, Shelley, Tennyson, Matthew Arnold, and (above all) Byron.
I could apply their larger statements about the futility of life to the smaller futility of my own, at the same time identifying with them in the literal sense and recognising the irony inherent in any such identification.
I could enjoy being ‘half in love with easeful death’, or telling myself, ‘I have not loved the world nor the world me’, or agreeing that, ‘our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought’.
Literature has its uses.
And I could turn out imitative verse which expressed similar sentiments.
Melancholy cheered me up.
It also helped me retain the image of  myself as someone special, set aside from the throng, this time because of superior talent.
That I only half-believed in this self-image — and even that is probably an overstatement — was a circumstance I tried desperately hard to conceal, both from myself and others.
Farber sums up the whole process:
While despair means literally the loss of hope, the movements of despair are frantically directed towards hope; but the hope born of despair may turn to the prescription of the isolated will.
Spurning the self-illumination arising from humility, despairing hope concerns itself pridefully with certainties.
Even the certainties of hopelessness may paradoxically appear as a form of hope, promising to make reasonable what is unreasonable, namely hopelessness itself.
I know that as I became more and more anorexic, I also became more and more despairing and, at the same time, because of my stubborn, isolated will, more and more determined to deny my despair by finding solace in despair itself.
Even then I knew in a way that despair underlay my behaviour, but I wouldn't have been able to take the consequences of its admission.
I didn't and couldn't see it as a progressive condition which was bound to culminate in some sort of breakdown or breakthrough.
At first the physical symptoms of the disease were easy enough to deny: outwardly, I was fit, healthy, energetic, and never felt tired or hungry.
In short, I was a walking, running, bouncing miracle.
But gradually those symptoms had to be admitted and faced up to.
The first to gain recognition was fatigue.
In my diary I recognised it almost from the beginning, probably because I made no connection between it and non-eating, but seemed to have ascribed it to being overworked academically or being hounded into sporting activities which I resented for their profound pointlessness.
I voiced my resentment openly, but my fatigue was confided only to my diary and to those of my friends who already knew that I was in the habit of getting up and wandering around at night.
The truth is that I was suffering from insomnia: a full stomach is more conducive to sleep than is an empty one.
The thinner I became, the more difficult I found it to be comfortable, even when lying in bed.
Whatever position I adopted seemed to be the wrong one, and it was possible for certain parts of my body to be relaxed and at rest only at the  expense of certain other parts.
If I lay on my side, my shoulders and hips gave me particular trouble; if I lay on my front, my back ached; and if I lay on my back, the springs of the mattress dug into what little flesh I had left.
At the time I attributed this discomfort to my surplus energy, and not to my thinness.
I couldn't lie still, and found my oblivious companions both irritating and enviable.
To lie awake hour after hour, while they were all so deeply asleep, became unbearable to the point of claustrophobia.
At first I would go for short walks, lasting perhaps half an hour, and then return to bed sufficiently impressed with my own daring to be able to relax into sleep.
But as the anorexia progressed, my walks became longer as well as more frequent and, if I decided to follow the perimeter of the school grounds, could last for up to three hours.
The times are noted in.my diary and, if they are accurate, I must have survived for several days in succession on as little as one or two hours' sleep per night.
This was obviously not a state of affairs which could continue indefinitely and, although I knew as much at the time, I couldn't will myself into sleep.
Rather, I was willing myself out of it.
Authority had decreed when I must sleep and when I must not, just as it had decreed when and how much I should eat; it was my business, in my bid for autonomy, to reverse the decisions of authority.
I didn't deliberately set out to become an insomniac, but such an attitude fits into the general anorexic pattern, and should be seen as a part of it.
My nocturnal adventures had become an addiction, being in themselves part of a larger addiction — that of non-eating.
But even I couldn't will wakefulness with complete success, and the events of those nights soon began to affect my day-time behaviour.
When I wasn't dozing off in chapel, I was having difficulty in keeping awake in class and, to a greater extent, during prep-time, when I was supposed to be working alone.
School chairs tend to be even less comfortable than school beds, and I found it impossible to sit still for long— a fact which didn't endear me to irritable teachers, especially those who also resented my ‘witty’(i.e. irrelevant) remarks.
Nowhere in my diary do I mention this physical discomfort, and even now I can't remember it as amounting to pain, although I do remember the school doctor  drawing the matron's attention to the extensive bruising on the softer parts of my body.
What I did complain of was restlessness and the inability to concentrate.
Alone, I could hide my inability, force myself to concentrate and to finish any given piece of work to the best of my ability, no matter how long it took me.
In class, it was less easy to convince others that I was coping not only adequately, but brilliantly.
Increasingly, I was baffled by what was going on, and kept silent, only to be rebuked for not trying or for adopting a disdainful attitude.
The truth is that I kept on having mental lapses, during which I could hear every word that was being spoken, understand the meaning of each word and even of some phrases, but couldn't make these disparate utterances add up to anything that made sense.
Often I could see no connection between a remark made by one person and the reply given by another.
It was not as though other people were speaking a foreign language, but rather as though they were using the English language as the basis of a code to which I had somehow lost the key.
Given my reputation for intelligence, I hardly dared confess my lack of comprehension.
On the one occasion on which I did so (according to my diary) the other girls laughed, and the teacher became annoyed, accusing me of being deliberately provocative.
My diary records the incident in a tone of self-righteousness, omitting to mention my feeling of incompetence.
Instead, around this time, I tended to express feelings of impatience and boredom.
I don't doubt that I — in my tenuous superiority — was impatient both with the school routine and the people around me, but I don't think I was bored.
‘Boring’ is a convenient portmanteau word for adolescents to use in describing anything they find alien or frightening.
And I think I was beginning to become frightened.
I had regarded the English language almost as my own private possession, something which was mine by right, and now it seemed that I was going to have to fight to hang on to it, as I was having to fight for everything else.
It seems ironic that, in my struggle towards meaning, I was faced with its loss, hit with its loss, in the place where it hurt most.
At home I slept better.
There was no need for me to get up and prowl around while the rest of the family was sleeping because I  could read all night, if I wanted to, and if I didn't get up until the middle of the day, no one seemed to mind very much.
There was altogether less to be frightened of.
I wasn't watched closely; I had opted out of the (sexual) competition with my sisters; and some of my eccentricities were tolerated on the grounds that my presence in the house was only temporary and, in the long run, of little relevance to its essential life.
In other words, some measure of independence was granted me.
But for this there was a price to pay: when I wasn't being ignored completely, I was being made fun of, especially in regard to my physical appearance which was frequently compared to that of a twelve-year-old boy.
I should point out that the comparison was no aberration on the part of my family.
I had very short hair, always wore jeans, sneakers and an anorak (being perpetually cold), and strangers would often mistake me for a boy — my younger sisters' younger brother.
I found this mistake hurtful: 'more specifically, I didn't regard it as a source of amusement.
The fact that I was anorexic, rather than odd-looking, was never openly discussed, and no steps were taken to halt the disease.
Although these omissions suited me at the time, I have since found them incredible to the point of doubting my own powers of recollection, but when I checked recently with my sister, she confirmed their accuracy.
I assume that my parents, preoccupied with their own affairs, thought that if my appearance and eating habits were ignored, they would, like all other unpleasant circumstances, eventually revert to normality.
The importance of my schoolwork was still stressed, especially by my father, while that of any form of social contact was given no consideration.
I had no money to go anywhere or do anything.
Here I was bored.
The blank pages in my diary testify as much, and in addition that I was too apathetic to continue recording just how bored I was in the periods between my bouts of organising activity.
So the superficially more relaxed atmosphere at home did nothing to modify my anorexic behaviour.
Whereas at school I felt harried, browbeaten and driven to surpass, at home I felt neglected, devalued, and isolated.
The drive to surpass had originated and was maintained from home; my sense of neglect and isolation was a partial consequence of belonging intermittently to a cohesive community.
None of it hung together.
My  mental lapses in class were, as well as being the result of fatigue, a metaphor for what I felt about my life in general.
At home my anorexic behaviour sustained me: it was the only consistent factor in my life, the only thing that made sense.
I could look forward to going back to school, astonishing everyone with my further weight loss, and engaging in battle with true adversaries — those who would fight back.
Certain forms of discomfort, certain forms of boredom, can be ignored or at least tolerated by means of diversion.
But one of the oddest things about the anorexic is her ability to tolerate two deprivations in particular which others find quite intolerable, namely, cold and hunger.
During the whole time I was anorexic, there is only one reference in my diary to feeling cold, and that was when the school heating system failed.
In the first stages, the first winter, I don't remember feeling cold at all; or, at least , I don't remember that I suffered from cold any more than anyone else did.
On the contrary, my hyperactivity helped to keep me warm.
Outside, I would always walk briskly, urging on my more sluggardly companions, or walk along walls, rails, edges, like a child, delighting in my ability to balance myself.
On the lacrosse pitches my behaviour took a similar turn.
Whereas before I had more or less ignored the game and engaged myself in gossipy conversation with whoever was E) laying opposite me, I now began to act out a parody of the ludicrous pastime in which I found myself, tackling everyone in sight, yelling for the ball to be passed to me, jumping up and down, and generally getting in everyone's way.
At home, I would go on long walks, which were less the contemplative rambles I had previously enjoyed than frantic attempts to keep the body going, to keep the machine working.
No one else walked quickly enough for me, so I went alone and was able to indulge in yet another secret activity — climbing trees.
I enjoyed physical exercise, but I also enjoyed the thought that I was getting away with the sort of behaviour commonly considered inappropriate to a sixteen-year-old girl.
Even indoors, where vigorous exercise was impossible, I would insist on open windows, explaining that lack of fresh air made me feel sleepy.
I suppose that at school, where I had so little sleep, this assertion was true.
If I had admitted to cold in any of these instances, I should also have had to admit that my fund of energy  wasn't limitless.
I should have had to admit to fatigue.
But the fact remains that, while other people were shivering and in obvious discomfort, I felt impervious to cold.
Needless to say, this discrepancy served to boost my sense of superiority.
As the disease progressed, however, cold became more and more difficult to deny.
I would wear extra layers of clothing and pull the sleeves of my sweater down to hide my white, numbed fingers.
I told myself that I didn't feel cold, that I felt nothing, that I had ‘shut off my nerves’.
This last phrase, used in my diary, is a revealing one: cold wasn't something imposed on me by anything as trivial as the outside temperature; it was something which could be controlled from within and by myself alone.
My self wasn't my body.
And cold was a property of my body — some tiresome thing which was nevertheless now completely under my control — and not of my self.
During the last summer of the disease, when I weighed under six stone, I must have been perpetually cold.
While my sisters wore sundresses, their backs and shoulders bared, I swathed myself in jackets, scarves and gloves.
And still, I couldn't admit, even to myself, that I was cold.
It seemed to me at the time that I was doing something other than trying to keep myself warm.
What I felt I was doing, as I dressed my shivering body in layer upon layer, was protecting myself.
If I went out without my battered old anorak, I simply didn't feel safe.
I am not denying the truth of this feeling: to feel cold is to feel unprotected and each is a metaphor for the other state.
But it seems clear that I was diverting the feeling of cold, which pertains to the body, away from the physical and into the psychological realm, where alone I believed myself to exist.
My behaviour must have seemed as absurd to others as my physical appearance which, with only the goose-pimply face visible, was pathetic.
My mother told me that I was cold because I didn't eat enough.
Whatever the objective truth of this assertion, it could have been formulated on purpose to infuriate me, and I denied both halves of it.
I did eat enough — if anything, too much.
And I wasn't cold — I just liked wearing my anorak because I was fond of it and felt comfortable in it.
Those were my spoken replies to my mother, but my unspoken one was that it was up to me, and not to her, to decide when and to what extent I was either cold or hungry.
If I had admitted to being cold, I should also have had to admit that I was hungry, and this was something I was incapable of doing — if only because I didn't believe it to be true.
To admit to hunger would have been to admit to my disease, and so be robbed of it.
And at that point I should have endured anything to prevent such a theft.
I was miserable with cold, but although I was prepared to admit that I was miserable, I wasn't prepared to admit that my misery had any connection with cold.
My anorak served as armour in more than the literal sense: it protected me, as anorexia protected me, from the confusing impingements of reality as defined by others at home or at school, and who could not even agree among themselves, on my behalf.
But in fact I was, in failing to come to terms with this total reality, only creating further confusion for myself.
It would be too simple to say that I was always cold and hungry, as I appeared to be, at this latter stage of the disease.
The truth is that I could no longer tell whether I was cold or not, hungry or not.
Most people know when they are hungry and will eat, more or less, accordingly.
Bruch contrasts this fortunate majority with both the anorexic and the obese person, neither of whom knows how to gauge the state of her own stomach or assess what is a reasonable requirement of food for her own bodily needs.9 The obese person cannot recognise that her stomach is full, nor the anorexic that hers is empty.
It is easy enough to see how someone, especially someone who has suffered a childhood of poverty, can be led to a fear of emptiness, of not getting enough to eat, of starvation itself, and so in later life to stave off or compensate for such a fear.
And indeed obesity is a disease of the poor rather than the rich.
It is perhaps less easy to see how someone from a privileged background can be led to seek emptiness as a physical state, when it is obviously such an unpleasant, even painful, one.
Repletion is probably a more pleasurable state for most people than is emptiness, and its metaphorical implications are now widely understood: to be well-fed is to feel safe from poverty and death; it is to engage in an enjoyable activity; and it is to feel loved, if only by oneself.
But the metaphorical implications of emptiness are less clear.
Because it is both difficult and painful to maintain one's stomach in a state of emptiness, we cannot doubt that there are powerful psychic motivations for sustaining such an activity, which is not only abnormal, but directly contrary to both physiological and social pressures.
Selvini Palazzoli has found that,
this psychobiological sensitivity invariably goes hand in hand with a remarkable elan vital , a passionate though suppressed love of life, a ‘sthenic spur’ which alone explains [the anorexic's]heroic defence reactions.
Let me add that it is this very spur…which has made her choose anorexia in preference to, say, toxicomania or obesity, two conditions that spell surrender to her own greed.
It is, I believe, this same ‘sthenic spur,’ or determination to survive as a self-defined individual, which causes the anorexic to reject suicide — another form of surrender — and to choose the more arduous life of self-starvation, not in order to die, but in order to live and go on living.
Like Bruch's patients, I denied hunger and the pangs which accompany it.
As the disease progressed, the denial became easier.
In the earlier stages I knew the denial to be conscious and saw it as being some sort of test of my will.
Later, when I began to lose weight more rapidly, I would dream frequently (probably almost every night) about food and eating.
The food was always of the type that anorexics tend to shun — solidly starchy and savoury peasant dishes, followed by mounds of sweet, creamy puddings and richly decorated chocolate cakes.
The feasts took place out of doors, in convivial company, with the sun shining benevolently on us all.
In the dream I would savour each delicious mouthful slowly, and share in general comments on the pleasure of what we were doing or, indeed, on any other topics of conversation.
But I would wake up, startled and guilty, horrorstruck that I had somehow managed to allow myself to get out of control.
The relief which followed the realisation that my conduct had been ‘only a dream’ was always tinged, however slightly, with regret.
It seems to me that these dreams were not only manifestations of hunger, but that they also evinced a desire to be normal and part of the natural world.
Clearly I connected eating with the beneficence of nature (the sun, the products of the earth) and with friendship, companionship and community.
I must have known that those were the very advantages I had been denying myself in denying myself food.
Food is to the body what friendship and community are to the psyche, and the world of nature to the  integrated personality expressed as body-and-psyche.
In my dreams I was admitting the full implications of my habit of self-denial, that is, that it amounted in effect to life-denial.
I was also admitting that ‘I’ was not a separate entity from my body, that we were both one, and both in need of nutrition.
But in waking life I ignored the implications of such a ‘sthenic spur’, and continued to deny its existence.
At that time I could only eat alone.
My nocturnal escapades sometimes included visits to the school kitchens, where I ate bananas, leaving a mound of their skins conspicuously on one of the tables, and quantities of ice cream, which I scooped up in handfuls, defiling the common stock with the unhygienic touch of my individuality.
Now I think of an animal or a small child depositing its excreta in the wrong place so as to annoy its owner or parent.
I ate like an animal too — furtively, quickly, and as if in fear of discovery, but without enjoyment.
It is clear that there was a vengeful aspect to this behaviour, and one that was heavy with oral aggression.
I think that in my secret eating I was saying, speech also being an oral activity, all the resentful and hostile things I wanted to say about the school and about my life in general.
My secret eating was expressing what my secret writing (a misplaced oral activity) could not: my hatred towards those who oppressed me, my desperate sense of isolation.
It was also expressing, on the most literal level, my determination to survive.
However, this behaviour was short-lived, and when I dropped it, my dreams began to change.
I still dreamed of food and the convivial, outdoor feast, but I no longer took full part in the proceedings.
I would talk and laugh with my companions but withdraw, lapsing into silence, when I was offered any food.
Then, at once, I would wake up before I could allow myself to touch a mouthful.
In other words, my guard was now so strong that I would wake myself up rather than allow myself to eat, even in a dream.
In waking life it was too strong to allow me to indulge myself in secret feasts, and I no longer felt any desire for them.
By this time there was no need for me to deny hunger: I felt none.
I could talk lengthily about food without longing for it, and at home I could cook meals without tasting and without my mouth watering.
Food was still interesting material, but orally neutral, like cloth or paint or clay.
Occasionally the sight or smell of it nauseated me, and I found certain smells, like those of bread or sugar or chocolate, overpowering.
But what really disgusted me was the sight of other people eating.
It seemed to me shocking that they should engage in such a crude, almost obscene activity in public, and I would watch them with fascinated repulsion.
The whole world stank, both literally and metaphorically, and I withdrew fastidiously from it.
In this way hunger, in the sense of the desire for food, gradually disappeared, and I was no longer lying to myself or others about its absence.
But I was still denying emptiness.
The most obvious connotations of emptiness are the helplessness and hopelessness to which I have so often referred and, in addition, a general sense of worthlessness.
An obese person can strive to overcome such feelings by overeating and so gaining size, weight and (subjectively speaking) importance.
And so it might seem at first that the anorexic is striving to maintain worthlessness.
However, this is clearly not what is going on in anorexia nervosa, although I do believe that emptiness is being used as a metaphor.
It is, in the first instance, a metaphor for that portion of the sense of worthlessness which cannot be denied, whatever the anorexic's outward behaviour is saying to the contrary.
To the obese person, emptiness is a space which must somehow be filled, overfilled, in the attempt to deny its existence.
It seems to me that the implication in such an attitude is that the space can be filled — it is possible — and that this is therefore a more simple and perhaps less courageous attitude than that of the anorexic.
For her, the dreadful underlying fear is that the space can never be filled: any such attempt would be futile, and so the best thing to do in the circumstances is to accept that the space exists, and to turn this fact to advantage.
In her paradoxical way, the anorexic is facing up to the truth implicit in her own convictions.
That she sometimes has bouts of overeating in no way contradicts this assertion: after each one she is overcome by self-disgust and depression, and her sense of futility is confirmed.
Minuchin's description of the anorexic as one who takes upon herself the burden of familial conflicts and the internal conflicts of those around her indicates that the anorexic ‘sees’ what is going on within and among other people in a very special way.
Without realising it, she is facing the otherwise unadmitted truth about  father's inability to assume responsibility, or mother's suppressed craving for power, or whatever the problems happen to be in her particular environment.
And in doing so, she is internalising, that is, she is filling herself with what does not rightfully belong to her.
She cannot tell what belongs to her and what does not.
As I see it, she is, in a sense, full, and so her own emptiness can be ignored or pacified.
But, in another sense, she is full only of other people's emptinesses, and so her own remains, mingled with theirs and therefore all the more difficult to deny.
But, in order to survive, in order not to be engulfed by it, she must deny it.
And at the same time, she must distinguish her own from that which belongs to others, separate it, examine it and, if necessary, cherish it, as she must cherish anything which tells her who she is, anything which belongs to her alone.
I can well believe that at home I was going through some such process for many years before I became anorexic, as well as during the course of the disease itself.
I felt my parents' anxieties about both their own and their children's lives so keenly that they became my own, quite against my will, and I had to fight to reject them.
But I cannot honestly say that I find such an analysis applicable to my attitude towards the school authorities.
As far as my own case is concerned, the scapegoating theory, delineated above, describes only a portion of the truth about emptiness.
For a start, it doesn't cover the aspect of emptiness which I consider to be of most relevance to anorexia nervosa, that is, its peculiar meaning for females rather than males.
Both Fromm and Erikson see it as woman's basic fear, bound up inextricably with her anatomy and, more specifically, her role in the sexual act.
In describing the differences in anxieties about sexual function, Fromm describes the man's as a fear of failure to pass a test, whereas the woman's lies in that of being ‘left alone’, of not having control, of dependence on the man.
'l I have already emphasised the importance of control and independence as factors in the anorexic process, so I shall now quote Erikson to illustrate the relation between emptiness and being left alone, and the relevance of both to anorexia nervosa:
The fear of remaining empty (oral) or being emptied (anal) has a special quality in girls, since the body image of the girl (even before she ‘knows’ her inner anatomic arrangements) includes a valuable inside,
an inside on which depends her fulfilment as an organism, a person, and as a role-bearer.
This fear of being left empty and, more simply, that of being left , seems to be the most basic feminine fear, extending over the whole of a woman's existence.
The famous experiments carried out and observed by Erikson at the University of California indicate that such arguments may amount to more than outmoded Freudian theorising.
To oversimplify: very young children of both sexes were given similar sets of building blocks with which they were asked to construct some sort of dwelling.
The boys — the future architects of tower-blocks, perhaps?— built tall (phallic) structures, whereas the girls built low-rise structures, round and enclosing an open space in the middle.
Of course various conclusions can, and have been, drawn from these experiments, but I think that they bear out Erikson's theory about the connection between women and inner space.
The anorexic cultivates emptiness (and being emptied, through purgation, etc.) and at the same time denies it — or, at least, denies its pain.
If emptiness, like passivity, is seen as an identifying characteristic of womanhood, we can see that the anorexic recognises and even values her own (potential) womanhood, while at the same time denying it.
I would therefore agree with Selvini Palazzoli's contention that the anorexic, despite her apparent rejection of womanhood, is also showing ‘a keen desire, however distorted, to become an autonomous adult’, and, indeed, an autonomous woman.
But to the anorexic, that last phrase is a contradiction in terms: autonomy and femininity have been shown to be irreconcilable.
And yet she cannot surrender either of them completely.
Just as she uses passive resistance in order to overcome her own passivity, so she uses her empty stomach to overcome her own emptiness.
Emptiness is both a cause and a result of passivity, and can be seen as its physiological epitome.
The picture of the rejection of femininity is thus brought into sharper focus.
Erikson connects the fear of being empty with that of being left, the fear of abandonment.
Fromm connects the fear of abandonment with the frustration arising from a necessary dependence upon others.
Both are referring specifically to the woman's role in personal relationships, but it seems to me that their comments could just as easily be applied to the role of children in relation to adults.
Children are similarly dependent, frustrated, and in fear of abandonment.
I would surmise that at adolescence such fears remain with girls, whereas boys are diverted towards other anxieties connected with proving themselves.
The conventional way of looking at adolescence does, at any rate, emphasise some such division.
If this view is correct, I can only conclude that I was saddled with both sets of anxieties and, in addition, that there are more and more adolescent girls today who are finding themselves in the same position.
On the one hand, I had been instructed, both implicitly and overtly, to prove myself and, in Fromm's words used to describe typically male anxiety, to demonstrate what a ‘good performer’ I was.
In doing so, I should prove not only my own worth, but that of my immediate family, of the people of Lewis and of all MacLeods everywhere.
Needless to say, I never felt myself equal to such a mission.
If human communication were a simple matter of reciprocally exchanged words, if words had no resonances beyond themselves, I might have been proud to be cast in such a role, and either self-confident enough in my ability to fulfil it, or else realistic enough to modify my directives and declare myself in favour of some more modest role.
But communication between parents and children doesn't work like that.
Young children believe what their parents tell them, verbally or otherwise: there are no other sources of information.
(At least, there were fewer when I was a child than there are today.)
In my parents' expectations there was always an element of unspoken threat: you must do this, or else…
Or else what, I didn't know, except that it must be something terrible.
And there was the unspoken assumption that, if I failed, I was letting the side down, disappointing my parents, hurting them.
In believing my parents, I was forced into the position of not believing myself and of not believing in myself.
I was brilliant and I was stupid; I was a credit to the family and I was a disgrace to it.
In becoming anorexic, I was attempting to overcome this confusion, and for a while I partially succeeded.
But the weaker I became physically, the more inadequate I felt.
I existed in a state of permanent exhaustion, unable to eat or sleep, and unable to laugh or even smile.
Engaged as I was in the struggle with myself, the struggle between my self and my body, other people had no  real existence for me.
I no longer believed them or believed in them, having to believe in myself as a matter of survival.
But at the same time I dimly knew that they were somehow successful human beings and that I, I alone, was not.
Depression, however ruthlessly suppressed, was inevitable.
On the other hand, I had also been instructed in what it was to be a woman and how to function successfully in that role.
If a boy has to prove himself a man by his performance, then a girl has to prove herself a woman by her attractiveness, her desirability.
Through my mother and my sisters, this was the stereotype I had learned at home.
But I considered myself to be unattractive, and in becoming so thin as to render myself totally undesirable sexually, I was saying, ‘I may be unattractive, but this is because I choose to be this way.’
At school the ideal of womanhood was based on the assumptions of a different social class: woman's life was service, the dispensation of charity, whether she was married and dependent, or earned her own living.
The picture can hardly be described as a dynamic one.
Rather, it encompasses the traditional passivity and the traditional secondary role, whether of helpmeet within marriage, or devotion to duty and to ‘those worse off than oneself’ outside it.
I felt that I was more in need of charity myself than capable of dispensing it.
In becoming anorexic, I was saying to those who were in effect my social superiors, ‘I can contribute nothing to the community; look how little I have/am.’
In both instances I was declaring my unwillingness to compete and my fear of competition.
This was not only because I would rather have won than lost anything, but also because, winning being unlikely, I would rather have opted out altogether than lost.
I was running the wrong race; I should never have been entered for it in the first place.
Such an attitude is, of course, typical of the ‘oral personality’, as classically defined in the annals of psychoanalysis, and I think it is no coincidence that anorexics, who are almost invariably subject to heavily competitive pressures, should choose eating as the focal point for expressing the resulting conflicts.
I am sure it must be possible for an adolescent girl to reconcile the male and the female sets of anxieties.
All I am saying is that it wasn't possible for me.
And as the disease progressed, all the anxieties became more difficult to ignore — necessarily, because I  was growing older and, in my regressive, pre-pubertal state, more of an anomaly than ever among my peers.
It was, in other words, becoming more and more difficult to postpone the future.
And although I knew by then that I was wretchedly unhappy in comparison with other girls of my age, this was still what I wanted to do, because however joyless and painful the present might be, the future could have been even worse.
It was still my task to fight for the present, although that task was becoming less appropriate daily, and to maintain the status quo which I had made for myself, and which was the only place where I belonged.
Again, depression was inevitable.
The conflict between male and female anxieties was compounded by the conflict between the disparate values of home and school — two closed systems at variance with each other.
It was to some extent a class conflict and, although I am glad to have had what is commonly regarded as a ‘good education’, I must seriously doubt the wisdom of the County Council's charitable and well-intentioned scheme.
As so often in this story of my own anorexia nervosa, I find myself arriving at the same conclusion, the same central statement: it could have worked for some people, but it didn't work for me.
What was peculiar about my own circumstances I have already tried to describe in the hope of finding and revealing some useful clues.
Clearly my history is not one of overt cruelty towards me on the part of others; neither is it one of extreme neglect, restriction or hardship.
It is rather one of lack of understanding on the part of others, of ignorant if well-meaning insensitivity towards a sensitive child and adolescent.
It is a history of confusion and of a last-ditch defence against confusion.
According to Peter Lomas, there are
two main theories about the psychological origins of mental illness: the ‘defence theory’ and the ‘confusion theory’…
These two theories are, to my mind, unquestionably correct and compatible.
What has so far prevented them from becoming assimilated to each other is not only the fact that in the field of psychotherapy, differing theories do not readily and happily intermix, but that each theory tends to take sides (without this necessarily being apparent) in the eternal dialogue between youth and age.
Whereas the defence theory, which stresses the child's unwillingness to adapt, is on the side of the adult, confusion theory, by focusing on the failure of the family, is on the side of the child.
Although I don't think I was mentally ill for most of the time I was anorexic, I find Lomas's remarks illuminating in my own case and pertinent to anorexia nervosa in general.
I don't want to take sides between myself-as-child-and-adolescent and the adults around me: the issue is not that clear-cut.
Still less do I want to take sides between differing schools of psychotherapy.
But I do want to stress that ‘confusion’ and ‘defence’are two of the key words in anorexia nervosa, and that the disease could serve as an illustration of Lomas's belief, being a process in which the two concepts are inseparable and mutually reinforcing.
I ‘chose’ anorexia rather than mental illness as a defence against confusion.
But towards the end of my anorexic period I think I was verging upon mental illness in the sense that even those who disbelieve in it might accept, that is, I had become out of touch with reality as perceived by others and unable to cope with demands of everyday life.
I had begun to feel that there was some sort of glass partition between me and the rest of the world.
Until then I had succeeded in holding the impinging world at bay as well as in the desperate attempt to establish my own identity, but it was only at a bitter cost to myself.
Nothing moved me, and Coleridge's line, ‘I see, not feel, how beautiful they are!’ sums up my eventual attitude to all that I had ever found valuable or of emotional significance.
I could see, and I knew what was the appropriate emotional response to, say, a beautiful day, but I couldn't feel it.
This is depression.
In 1968–9 I wrote a novel,The Snow-White Soliloquies , which tells the story of a girl who endures a living death in a glass coffin, and is trailed around the country in a glass vehicle by a motley collection of social misfits (dwarves) under the supervision of a sinister authority-figure called Doc.
The theme was based on that of the Snow White story, and the authority-figure's name derived from the Walt Disney version of it.
When questioned at the time, and for some time afterwards, as to what the novel was ‘about’, I would reply vaguely that it referred to a period in my life in the 1960s, when I was married to a successful pop star and spent much of my time travelling up and down motorways, lulled with anti-depressants and sitting, an immobile non-person, in the back of a sealed, silent and chauffeur-driven Rolls Royce.
This was, of course, true as far as it went.
But it was only later, when I was forced to admit that, at the time of writing, I had begun to become anorexic again, that I realised in addition how closely the central character's circumstances resembled those of anorexia nervosa.
Later still, my realisation was confirmed for me when I read the following statement from one of Bruch's patients: ‘I am completely isolated, I sit in a glass sphere.
I see other people through a glass wall, their voices penetrate to me.
I long for being in real contact with them.
I try, but they don't hear me.’
This is just what happens in my novel: the girl, Snow White, listens to the life-stories of her companions but, try as she may, she can neither comment nor reply in kind.
The total symbolism of the novel shows that it is ‘about’ alienation, depression, and the inability to cope with an ever-increasingly impinging world: it is in the details that the references to anorexia are revealed.
For instance, Snow White is fed by means of tubes, a procedure which, unknown to me at the time, is still a common practice in the treatment of anorexics.
She resists being fed because she is afraid that she will swell up and become too big for her coffin.
Her eventual release can only come about through the death of Doc and the proof of her recovery lies in her willingness to participate in a wedding-feast.
Sex, symbolising conjunction, is reconciled with food, symbolising conviviality and an acceptance of the natural world.
The problems of object-relations have apparently been resolved.
But not quite.
Before she can eat, Snow White assumes the authorial voice, insisting that the other characters are her inventions, and that it is she who has always held the real power.
At no time during the writing of The Snow-White Soliloquies did I make any conscious connection between its contents and anorexia nervosa.
This is the point (not self-advertisement — the book is out of print) of referring to my own work in such detail, and it is one to which I shall return in discussing the treatment of anorexics, in particular their apparent imperviousness to psycho-analysis and their liability to relapse.
At the time of writing I was too taken up with the present to make any but the vaguest connection with what had happened to me in the past.
This seems strange to me now because I feel sure that if I had been presented with the image of the glass coffin when I was well into the  depressive phase of anorexia, I should have recognised it instantly.
But I am not so sure that I should have recognised what I recognised unconsciously at the time of writing: that I was in a state of helplessness, the helplessness of being a non-person.
It seems more likely that I should have denied depression, helplessness and, above all, being a non-person.
But in fact, towards the climax of the disease, there was very little of me left, in more than the physiological sense.
As life in general was unreal and remote — seen through a sheet of glass — so my own suffering seemed unreal.
The sight of, say, a field of corn interspersed with poppies on a sunny day didn't move me; the spectacle of a woman who had slipped and fallen in the street didn't move me — either to sympathy or to ridicule.
Why, then, should I be moved by cold or a stomach cramp?
What was going on in my body was as unreal, as devoid of meaning, as were the events in the outside world.
The two were part of one whole, a whole of which ‘I’ was no part.
‘I’ had shrunk to a nugget of pure and isolated will whose sole purpose was to triumph over the wills of others and over the chaos ensuing from their conflicting demands.
Distinguishing between will of the first realm, which must ‘to some degree remain impenetrable to inspection’, and will of the second realm, which is both conscious and utilitarian, Farber suggests,
The problem of will lies in our recurring temptation to apply the will of the second realm to those portions of life which will not only not comply, but that will become distorted under such coercion.
Let me give a few examples: I can will knowledge but not wisdom; going to bed but not sleeping; eating but not hunger…self-assertion but not courage…reading but not understanding…
Some similar process is going on in anorexia nervosa: the conscious will has to be supreme because the anorexic has to be in complete control.
Because of her fear of loss of control, her essential helplessness, any control that is less than complete is no control at all.
But of course the human body is simply not capable of being subject to such control over prolonged periods.
The anorexic who has achieved her emaciated state is faced with two choices: she can relax her control and surrender her will, thus admitting defeat; or she can allow herself to die of starvation, thus gaining her paradoxical victory.
There is a point of despair at  which she is forced to choose between life and death, however unconscious that choice may be.
Without the aid of any sort of therapy, and certainly without the sympathy and understanding which should attend it, I managed to opt for life.