

Elasticity and the theory of strength
Cohesion or how strong ought materials to be?
‘Again, the things that we see to be hard and dense must needs consist of particles more mutually hooked and must be deeply held compact by branch-like elements.
In this class, for example, stands adamantine rock, accustomed to laugh blows to scorn, and stalwart flint, and the hard strength of iron, and the copper bolts that scream as they resist their rooves.’
Lucretius,De rerum natura .
Before one can start arguing about how strong materials ought to be one should be able to measure how strong they actually are.
Although nowadays a certain amount of mechanical testing is done for what might be called academic reasons, by far the most of it is done for strictly practical ends and in fact a thorough knowledge of the actual strength of its materials is, like drains and income tax, one of the things which no advanced civilization can do without.
There are generally two pragmatic reasons for knowing the strength of a material.
The first and the most obvious is to have a figure to put into one's calculations on the strength of structures.
However since proper scientific strength analysis is a recent affair, much the older and the commoner is that of maintaining the quality of materials.
In other words, is this batch as good as the last?
A variant of this is, can I use this as a substitute for that?
Of course anything as scientific as a mechanical test has not always found favour with traditional craftsmen or indeed with  business men.
The procedure described in Weston Martyr's (1885–1966) delightful book The Southseaman (which is about wooden shipbuilding in Nova Scotia in the nineteen twenties) was probably much commoner.
Before any plank was put into place, MacAlpine and Tom and anyone else who happened to be about held a consultation over it.
First they examined it very carefully, and then they bent it, tapped it, listened to it, and, as I live by bread, I swear that once, at least, I saw MacAlpine tasting it.
At any rate he applied his tongue to the wood, and then went through all the motions of an expert tea-taster — even to that final feat of expectorating through the clenched teeth with precision and gusto.
The first published tensile tests seem to have been done by the French philosopher and musician Marin Mersenne (1588–1648) who was interested in the strength of the wires used in musical instruments.
In 1636 Mersenne made a series of tests on wires of different materials but it is doubtful if any use was made of the information.
As far as I know, the first actual record of an objective mechanical test, which had results of practical consequence, occurs in Pepys' diary for 4 June 1662.
Povey and Sir W. Batten and I by water to Woolwich; and there saw an experiment made of Sir R. Ford's Holland's yarn (about which we have lately made so much stir; and I have much concerned myself of our rope-maker, Mr Hughes who represented it so bad) and we found it to be very bad, and broke sooner than, upon a fair triall, five threads of that against four of Riga yarne; also that some of it had old stuffe that had been tarred, covered over with new hempe, which is such a cheat as has not been heard of.
The Woolwich people may have broken these ropes in direct tension by hanging weights on them, having tied some sort of scale pan to one end and the other end to an overhead beam.
On the whole, however, it is more likely that they used a comparative  test, tying the two competing ropes end to end, in series, and breaking them by means of a capstan.
The number of strands in each rope would then be adjusted until there was an equal chance of failure.
Ropes and wires are fairly simple to test since it is easy to grip the ends by winding them round the barrel of a winch or capstan.
Rigid solids are much harder to get hold of in tension and so for a long time such testing as was done was confined to compression and bending.
Testing machines now exist which have vice-like grips, called ‘friction grips’, so that one can take an ordinary bar of metal, cut off a short length, and break it in tension.
In practice however, this is generally an unsatisfactory arrangement since the grips damage the metal and cause premature failure at the ends so that the result is unreliable.
It is usually better to cause an hour-glass or wasp-waisted specimen to be made as this can be arranged to break in the middle where it is thinnest.
Even so, the design and making of satisfactory test-pieces calls for a modest degree of skill and experience as the best shape will be different for each kind of material.
With regard to the actual mechanics of testing, it is of course possible to apply the load to each specimen directly, by means of weights.
However, since the breaking loads for convenient sized test pieces (say ¼ inch thick) are typically between about one and ten tons (a motor car weighs about a ton) and since most testing is done by girls, it is usual to apply the load mechanically or hydraulically and there are a large number of more or less automatic testing machines on the market.
All that the operator has to do is to insert the specimen, watch the machine break it, then divide the recorded breaking load by the area of the cross-section at fracture, which is easily measured.
The result is the breaking stress.
Of course this figure tells one nothing at all about why the material has the strength which it has and whether it ought to be stronger.
On the other hand, in practice, the strength of any one individual engineering material tends to be constant.
There therefore grew up a tendency to ignore the whys and wherefores and to regard the tensile and other strengths as innate properties with which the material happened to have been endowed by  Providence in a rather arbitrary way.
Metallurgists knew that this or that ingredient or heat treatment would strengthen or weaken an alloy but this knowledge was empirical and the effects were not susceptible to an obvious rational explanation.
Engineers like their materials to be consistent and are not too deeply interested in reasons, so they encouraged the idea that each material has a characteristic strength which could be determined accurately, once for all, if only one did enough tests.
Materials laboratories of a generation ago centred upon magnificent collections of large testing machines.
We filled a great many notebooks with testing data but learnt very little about the strength of materials.
Indeed it is difficult to exaggerate the impenetrability of the mystery which for centuries hung over the problem of the strength and fracture of solids.
Lucretius (95–55 B.C.) set forth at great length the theory of the atomic nature of matter which had been propounded earlier by Democritus (460–370 B.C.).
Though the theory was many years ahead of its time it was almost wholly guesswork and rested on no satisfactory contemporary experimental evidence.
However Lucretius recognized the problem of cohesion and suggested that the atoms of strong materials were provided with hooks with which to grip each other.
In the middle of the nineteenth century Faraday (1791–1867), one of the wisest of men, could do no better than to say that the strength of solids was due to the cohesion between their fine particles and that the subject was a very interesting one.
Though both these statements were true they were not a great advance on Lucretius.
Chapter 2 contains a list of the practical strengths of various materials.
Like the values for Young's modulus or stiffness, the figures vary a great deal between different substances, but then, so do the strengths of the chemical bonds within them and one might expect the engineering strengths to be proportional to the strengths of the chemical bonds.
This is one of the differences between strength and stiffness.
One can relate the Young's modulus,E , for a material in bulk to the fine-scale stiffness of its chemical bonds with considerable accuracy.
Generally speaking this is not true of strength.
The iron to iron bond in steel is not especially strong, it is easily broken chemically when iron rusts.
Rust, iron oxide, is weak mechanically although its chemical bonds are strong.
Again, magnesium metal is stronger than magnesium oxide, magnesia, though the energy difference in the bonds is dramatically shown by burning magnesium ribbon in oxygen.
Any attempt to relate chemical to mechanical strength works only in a vague and irregular way.
About all one can say is that while it is only too easy to make a weak material (or indeed a material of no strength at all) from strong chemical bonds, it is not possible to make very strong materials from weak bonds.
The plastics and polymers which came into use between the wars were, or were claimed to be, the first man-made strong materials to come out of chemical laboratories and they rather went to the heads of the chemists, who supposed, not unnaturally, that these polymers were strong because they had put them together with strong chemical bonds.
When the last war broke out, a very able young academic chemist came to work with me.
He set to work straight away to make a stronger plastic.
He explained to me that it must be stronger because it contained stronger bonds and more of them than any previous material.
Since he really was a very competent chemist I expect it did.
At any rate it took a long time to synthesize.
When it was ready we removed this war-winning product from the mould with excitement.
It was about as strong as stale hard cheese.
Griffith and energy
We must now go back to about 1920 when the whole subject could be described as pretty well bogged down.
At this time A. A. Griffith (1893–1963) was a young man working at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough.
He had ideas which cut through the mass of tradition and very dull detail which hung around materials work everywhere but unfortunately nobody took them very seriously.
Griffith asked in effect ‘Why are there large variations between the strengths of different solids?
Why don't all solids have the same strength?
Why do they have any strength at all?
Why aren't they much stronger?
How strong ‘ought’ they to be anyway?’
Until fairly recently these questions were regarded as unfathomable or unimportant or just silly.
We now understand in a general way how strong any particular solid ought to be and why it falls short of that strength in practice.
Furthermore we know more or less what to do to increase its strength.
Much of this success is due directly and indirectly to Griffith.
In what follows I have shortened and transposed Griffith's arguments.
To calculate how strong a material ought to be we need to make use of the concept of energy.
Energy is officially defined as ‘capacity for doing work’ and it has the dimensions of force multiplied by distance.
Thus if I raise a two-pound weight through a height of five feet I have increased its potential energy by ten foot pounds.
This energy (which comes from my dinner which comes ultimately from the sun and so on) can be transformed into any of the many alternative forms of energy but it cannot be destroyed.
Potential energy is one convenient way of parking energy until it is wanted and this energy can be followed through its various subsequent transformations by a sort of accounting procedure which can be very revealing.
The stored or potential energy in a raised weight can be used, for instance, to drive the mechanism of a grandfather clock though in most clocks a spring is usually more convenient, if only because it stores the same amount of energy which ever way up it is.
The strain energy in a stretched material is very like the potential energy which is in a raised weight, except, of course, that the stress is changing as the material is strained whereas the  weight of a weight is constant as it is raised to any normal height.
Because of Hooke's law, when a material is strained the stress in it varies from nothing at the beginning of the operation up to a maximum at the final strain.
For this reason the strain energy in a material is:
That strain energy is more than a triviality was demonstrated by the bowmen at Agincourt and, incidentally, one is well advised to keep out of the way of a stretched hawser such as is used for checking a ship.
The kinetic energy, or energy of motion, of the ship has been exchanged for strain energy in the rope.
There is a lot of energy, and, if the rope breaks strain energy is reconverted to energy of motion in the rope and somebody may get killed.
All stressed solids thus contain strain energy and this strain energy can be converted by one means or another into any of the other forms of energy.
Most commonly a relaxed stress simply reverts to heat but children have discovered that it is possible to convert the strain energy of catapult elastic into the fracture of, say, glass.
Whether or not something of the sort put into Griffith's head the idea of fracture as an energy process, I have no idea.
When a brittle material breaks, two new surfaces are created at the point of fracture which were not there before fracture, and Griffith's very brilliant idea was to relate the surface energy of the fracture surfaces to the strain energy in the material before it broke.
Energy has many forms — heat, electrical energy, mechanical energy, strain energy and so on— but it is not immediately clear that the surface of a solid has energy, merely by virtue of its existence as a surface.
From watching raindrops, bubbles and insects walking on ponds it is obvious that water and other liquids have a surface tension.
This tension is a perfectly real physical force which is quite easily measured.
Consequently, when the surface of a liquid is extended, as by inflating a soap bubble, work is done against this tension and energy is stored in the new surface.
In the accountancy of energy, surface energy counts in the balance just as much as any other kind of energy.
When an insect alights on  water, the surface is dimpled by its legs and thus extended and so the surface energy is increased.
The insect sinks until the increase of surface energy just balances the decrease in its potential energy when it sinks no further and is, presumably, happy.
Liquids tend, if they can, to minimize their surface energy.
For instance a thin stream of liquid, from a tap which is being turned off, will reach a diameter at which it pays it to break up into separate drops simply because these have less aggregate area then the cylindrical stream.
When a liquid freezes, the molecular character of its surface is not too greatly changed and the energy of the surface remains much the same although the surface tension is no longer able to change the shape of small particles by rounding them off into drops.
With a number of solids the interatomic forces are stronger and stiffer than they are in common liquids and so the surface energies are higher, often ten or twenty times the values for ordinary liquids.
The reason why we do not notice surface tensions in solids is not that the surface tensions are weak but rather that solids are too rigid to be visibly distorted by them.
Just as we could, perhaps, calculate the weight of the largest insect which could walk on a given liquid, so we can use these concepts to calculate how strong we ought to expect materials to be.
As calculations go, this one turns out to be surprisingly simple, once somebody has had the original idea.
What we want to do is to calculate the stress which will just separate two adjacent layers of atoms inside the material.
At this stage we need not worry too much whether the material is glassy or crystalline and all we really need to know about the solid is the Young's modulus and the surface energy.
The two layers of atoms are initially x metres apart and so the strain energy per square metre for a stress s causing a strain e will be: But Hooke's law says: So, putting in  for e : Strain energy per square metre = 
If G is the surface energy of the solid per square metre, then the total surface energy of the two new fracture surfaces would be 2 G per sq.
metre.
We now suppose that, at our theoretical strength, the whole of the strain energy between any two layers of atoms is potentially convertible to surface energy, then: so:
Actually, this is a bit optimistic because we have assumed that the material will go on obeying Hooke's law right up to failure.
As we saw in the last chapter, Hooke's law is really only true for small strains and at large strains the interatomic force curve bends over so that the strain energy is less than we have calculated, very roughly about half.
We can allow for this effect by dropping the two from the strength equation which we have just derived, bearing in mind that we are in no position to quibble about exact values.
Thus a reasonable expectation for the strength of a material would be: which could hardly be much simpler.
For steel some typical values in S.I.
units would be:
Putting in these values gives us a strength of about 3 x 10 4 MN/m 2 or about five million pounds per square inch.
Say (E /6).
This is rather over 2000 tons per square inch.
The strength of ordinary commercial steels is usually about 60,000 p.s.i.
or 400 MN/m 2 while very strong wires may reach about 400,000 p.s.i.
or 3,000 MN/m 2 .
Since the values for E and G vary, of course, for each solid the values we get for the theoretical strengths will vary too.
The only thing they have in common is that they are all very much above any strength normally realized in ordinary experiments.
In fact steel is exceptional in sometimes reaching strengths as high as a tenth of its calculated strength; the great majority of common solids can show only a hundredth or a thousandth of what theory indicates.
As a matter of fact, forty or fifty years ago, nobody actually and openly disbelieved this calculation.
If they had, they would have had to provide an alternative explanation of where the surface energy of a newly broken surface came from, but somehow nobody took it very seriously.
There was a discrepancy somewhere and perhaps the less said about it the better.
If we confine our calculation simply to strength as such, we get a different figure for the theoretical strength of each material.
However, we can nearly as easily do the sum for the theoretical elastic breaking strain, and if we do this, we are apt to find that the answer we get is very roughly the same for any solid, almost irrespective of its chemical entity.
Generally speaking, this strain is something like 10 or 20 per cent.
If this is more or less  true, then the strength of any solid should lie between E /10 and E /5.
Hence, although we cannot say that every material ought to have the same strength, we can say that, very approximately, all materials ought to have the same elastic breaking strain.
In everyday practice it is palpable that not only do materials not have the same breaking strain but also that the calculated strengths are, without exception, far above any commonly realized practical strength.
Griffith set out to find some physical theory which would bridge this gap between theory and practice.
I never knew Griffith himself but Sir Ben Lockspeiser, who acted as Griffith's assistant at this time, told me something about the circumstances under which the work was done.
In those days research workers were expected to earn their money by being practical, and in the case of materials they were expected to confine their experiments to proper engineering materials like wood and steel.
Griffiths wanted a much simpler experimental material than wood or steel and one which would have an uncomplicated brittle fracture, for these reasons he chose glass as what is now called a ‘model’ material.
In those days models were all very well in the wind tunnel for aerodynamic experiments but, damn it, who ever heard of a model material ?
These things being so, Griffith and Lockspeiser took care not to bring the details of their experiments too much to the notice of the authorities.
The experiments, however, involved drawing fibres and blowing bubbles of molten glass and one day, after the work had been going on for some months, Lockspeiser went home leaving the gas torch used for melting the glass still burning.
After the inquiry into the resulting fire, Griffith and Lockspeiser were commanded to cease wasting their time.
Griffith was transferred to other work and became a very famous engine designer.
The feeling about glass died hard.
Many years later, about 1943, I introduced a distinguished Air Marshal to one of the first of the airborne glass-fibre radomes, a biggish thing intended to be  bolted under a Lancaster bomber.
‘What's it made of?’
‘Glass sir.’
‘GLASS! —GLASS!
I won't have you putting glass on any of my bloody aeroplanes, blast you!’
The turnover of the fibreglass industry passed the £100,000,000 mark about 1959 I believe.
To return to Griffith's experiments, Griffith was not the first man to draw strong glass fibres but he was probably the first man to do it in a systematic way and to provide a plausible explanation of the results.
Griffith had first to determine, at least approximately, the theoretical strength of the glass he was using.
The Young's modulus was easily found by a simple mechanical experiment and two or three Ångström units is a fair guess for the interatomic spacing and cannot be far out.
It remained to measure the surface energy.
It was here that one of the advantages of glass as an experimental material lay.
Glass, like toffee, has no sharp melting point but changes gradually, as it is heated, from a brittle solid to a viscous liquid and during this process there is no important change of molecular structure.
For this reason one might expect there to be no large change in surface energy between liquid and solid glass so that surface tension and therefore surface energy, measured quite easily on molten glass, ought to be approximately applicable to the same glass when hardened.
When the end of a glass rod is heated in a flame the glass softens and tends to round off into a blob because surface tension remains active long after permanent mechanical resistance to deformation has disappeared.
The force, which is easily measured, needed slowly to extend the rod under these conditions is therefore that which will just overcome the surface tension.
From experiments of this type, done with very simple apparatus, Griffith could deduce that the strength of the glass he was using (at room temperature) ought to be nearly 2,000,000 p.s.i.
or about 14,000 MN/m 2 .
Griffith then took ordinary cold rods of the same glass about a millimetre thick and broke them in tension, finding that they had a tensile strength of about 25,000 p.s.i.
or 170 MN/m 2 which is round about the average for laboratory glassware, window panes, beer bottles and most of the other common forms of glass but was  something between a fiftieth and a hundredth of what he reckoned it ought to be.
Griffith now heated his rods in the middle and drew them down to thinner and thinner fibres which after cooling he also broke in tension.
As the fibres got thinner so they got stronger, slowly at first and then, when they got really thin, very rapidly.
Fibres about one ten thousandth of an inch (2–5 mμ) thick showed strengths up to about 900,000 p.s.i.
or 6,000 MN/m 2 when they were newly drawn, falling to about 500,000 p.s.i.
or 3,500 MN/m 2 after a few hours.
The curve of size against strength was rising so rapidly (Figure 1) that it was difficult to ascertain 8 maximum or upper limit to the strength.
The increase of strength with thinness was not entirely smooth but showed a certain amount of scatter or  variability.
However, there was absolutely no doubt about the general trend.
Griffith could not prepare or test fibres thinner than about a ten thousandth of an inch (2.5 m) and, if he had, it would have been difficult at that time to measure the thickness with any sort of accuracy.
However, by the simple mathematical device of  plotting reciprocals it was possible to extend or extrapolate the size-strength curve fairly reliably so as to ascertain the strength of a fibre of negligible thickness.
This turned out to be 1,600,000 p.s.i.
or 11,000 MN/m 2 .
It will be remembered that Griffith had calculated a value a little under 2,000,000 p.s.i.
or 14,000 MN/m 2 for the glass he was using.
He therefore concluded that he had approached the theoretical strength quite closely enough to satisfy most people, and that if thinner fibres could actually be made, their strength would be very near to the theoretical value.
The achievement by experiment of an approximation to the theoretical strength was of course a triumph, especially when one considers the conditions under which the work was done.
During the last few years, John Morley, of Rolls Royce, has prepared silica glass fibres (with a composition different from Griffith's glass) with strengths rather over 2,000,000 p.s.i.
(14,000 MN/m 2 )(Plate 4).
As we shall see in the next chapter these very high strengths are not in fact confined to glass fibres but can be got from almost any solid, glassy or crystalline.
Griffith had demonstrated that the theoretical strength could be approximated experimentally in at least one case, he had now to show why the great majority of solids fell so far below it.
Cracks and dislocations or why things are weak 
‘The fault that leaves six thousand ton a log upon the sea.’
Rudyard Kipling, ‘McAndrew's Hymn’.
Griffith wrote a classic Royal Society paper about his experiments which was published in 1920.
In this paper he pointed out that the problem was not to explain why his thin fibres were strong, since a single chain of atoms must, inescapably, have either the theoretical strength or none at all, but rather to explain why the thicker fibres were weak.
It was becoming clear, at any rate to Griffith if to nobody else, that in a world where practical materials only reached a small and highly irregular fraction of the strength of their chemical bonds, the weakening mechanism, rather than the bond.
strength, was what really controlled mechanical strength.
It is only quite lately and now that we are able regularly to get strengths which are a large fraction of the theoretical value, that it has become really important and worthwhile to make materials with very strong chemical bonds.
The weakness of glass fibres brings us to the question of Griffith cracks and it also brings us back to Professor Inglis, whom we left in Chapter 2 worrying about why ships broke in two at sea when simple calculation showed them to be amply strong enough.
Inglis made calculations about the effect of hatchways and other openings in large structures like ships.
Griffith had the wit to apply Inglis's mathematics on a far finer scale, to ‘openings’ of almost molecular size and too fine to see with an optical microscope.
Stress concentrations
Whatever the scale, the practical importance of stress concentrations is enormous.
The idea which Inglis expounded is that any  hole or sharp re-entrant in a material causes the stress in that material to be increased locally.
The increase in local stress, which can be calculated, depends solely upon the shape of the hole and has nothing at all to do with its size .
All engineers know about stress concentrations but a good many don't really in their hearts believe in them since it is clearly contrary to common sense that a tiny hole should weaken a material just as much as a great big one.
The root cause of the Comet aircraft disasters was a rivet hole perhaps an eighth of an inch in diameter.
Small holes and notches are particularly good at starting fatigue failures but they also do very well for starting ordinary static fracture.
When a glass cutter wants to cut glass, he does not bother to cut right through but makes a shallow scratch on the surface after which the glass breaks easily along the line of the scratch.
(By the way, so-called ‘cut glass’ is ground to shape, not cut.)
The weakening effect of the scratch has very little to do with the amount of material removed, a shallow scratch will do nearly as well as a deep one, it is the sharpness of the re-entrant that increases the stress.
It is not difficult to form a physical picture of what is actually happening at a re-entrant such as a crack, especially if we consider the matter upon a molecular scale.
Referring to Figure 1 it is obvious that a single chain of atoms in tension must be uniformly stressed and should reach the theoretical strength (la).
The mere multiplication of such chains, side by side, to constitute a crystal, does not prevent each separate chain from still carrying its full theoretical stress (1b).
Suppose now that we cut a number of adjacent bonds so as to constitute a crack, then of course we have interrupted the flow of stress in the broken chains and the load in these broken chains has got to go somewhere (1c).
In fact it does the most natural thing, which is to go round the end of the opening.
Thus the load in the whole of the cut chains may well have to pass through the single bond which closes the tip of  the crack (Id).
It is obvious that in these circumstances this bond will fail long before its companions.
When this over-tried bond has broken the situation is no better.
Indeed it is worse, for the next bond has to bear, not only the load in all the initially broken chains but also that in the chain which has newly snapped.
Thus the situation goes from bad to worse.
In this way a crack is really a mechanism which enables a weak external force to break even the strongest bonds one by one.
And so the crack runs through the material until total fracture occurs.
Inglis calculated the stress concentration factor, that is to say by how many times the stress is increased locally, not only for rectangular hatchways, but also for other openings such as round and elliptical holes.
By making an elliptical hole very long and narrow we get a crack, or something very like it.
For an elliptical crack Inglis's stress concentration factor is: Though this was calculated for an ellipse it turns out that it is very nearly accurate for any sharp re-entrant or notch.
Incidentally, for a circle, that is to say a round hole, it will be seen that the stress concentration factor becomes three.
Consider now a crack, say, two microns long and of one Ångström unit tip radius.
Such a crack is far too small to see under the optical microscope and might be hard to see with an electron microscope.
It would however produce a stress concentration of 201 among the molecules near the crack tip.
This would reduce the strength of Griffith's glass from something like 2,000,000 p.s.i.
or 14,000 MN/m 2 to a figure in the region of 10,000 p.s.i.
or about 70 MN/m 2 , which is very roughly the strength of common or domestic glass.
Griffith therefore postulated that ordinary glass is full of very fine cracks, too small to be seen by any ordinary means.
What the cracks were like and how they got there he did not say, but he did show that, if they existed, which  was not unreasonable, they would account for the weakness of ordinary glass.
He supposed that for some reason they became rarer in thin fibres and almost non-existent in the very thinnest fibres, perhaps because there was simply no room for them.
Griffith cracks
Griffith seems to have supposed that the cracks which he thought existed were scattered throughout the interior of the glass and were perhaps a consequence of a failure of the molecules inside the glass to join up completely when the glass hardened.
Looking back, it is curious how long it took us to get rid of this idea of some kind of defect inside the body of the glass.
Griffith's calculations showed that the cracks, whatever they were, must h quite narrow, perhaps a hundredth of the wavelength of ordinary visible light.
Since one can never hope to see things which are much smaller than the wave-length of the light which one is using, there was clearly no hope of ever seeing them directly by means of the ordinary optical microscope which reaches its limit with objects about half a micron thick.
This is the reason for the invention of the electron microscope which uses electrons with a wave-length of something like a twenty-fifth of an Ångström instead of light with a wave-length of about four thousand Ångströms.
However, before the electron microscope was available, in fact in 1937, Andrade and Tsien decided to look for the cracks by the method of decoration, using of course an optical microscope.
This method, which is often very effective, may h thought of like this.
Imagine a fine wire which is too far away and too thin to see by any ordinary means.
If we can persuade birds to come and perch on it in a row fairly close together we have obviously made it much easier to see the wire.
(The Post Office sometimes put corks on the telegraph wires for the same reason.)
If we can now persuade more birds to come and perch on top of the first lot we can in principle build up the wire to any thickness we choose.
Now it happens that when some substances crystallize they find it easier to do so if some kind of irregularity is present.
By choosing  the right substance to crystallize on a surface one can often get the new crystals to form almost entirely upon the fine irregularities of the surface and thus show them up.
Andrade treated the surface of glass with sodium vapour and produced linear patterns which seemed to intricate the existence of surface cracks.
In this work it is extraordinarily easy to produce ghost images and chimeras, like the canals on Mars, which may or may not be cracks, but even if Andrade's patterns showed genuine surface cracks, which seems likely, this would not prove that there were not also internal cracks.
In the years after the last War it was found that not only were the thinnest fibres strong, but, if they were carefully made, quite thick fibres could also show high strength.
Strong fibres were weakened by touching while weak fibres were improved in strength if the surface were removed chemically.
All this was a strong indication that the important weakening defects lay on the surface and around 1957 Margaret Parratt, David Marsh and I spent a lot of time examining the surface of glass.
By refining Andrade's sodium technique Mrs Parratt was able to produce the most beautiful crack patterns on the surface of all kinds of glass and what was more, many, perhaps most of them, did seem to be genuine cracks.
Furthermore the frequency of the cracks correlated quite well with the experimental strength of the various specimens of glass.
The question was how the cracks got there.
In many cases there was no doubt at all: the glass had been in contact with some other solid and the cracks were due to simple scratching or scraping.
Plates 5 and 6, Mrs Parratt's photographs, show quite typical scrapes.
Very little glass is wholly untouched from the time it is drawn or blown from the melt, and it takes only the lightest contact to create an elaborate crack pattern.
Very probably this simple explanation accounts for the weakness of the majority of common glass.
The high strength of thin fibres may be due in part to the fact that such fibres are very  easily bent and it is therefore easier to bend them than to scratch them.
However, there do remain a number of cases where there are variations in the strength of glass whose surface is genuinely untouched.
One reason for this was investigated by Marsh.
When most liquids freeze they crystallize and usually the crystal, being more orderly, is better packed and therefore more dense than the mother liquid.
Water is an exception for complicated reasons.
Glasses behave as they do because, while they are cooling, they are so viscous that the molecules do not have time to sort themselves out into crystals and so cool glass is a solidified liquid, not a crystalline solid.
However the tendency to crystallize is there and given time some glasses will in fact crystallize.
This is known as devitrification.
Since devitrification involves shrinkages, the glass is often weakened and sometimes falls to pieces in the process.
Devitrification is almost universal in ancient glasses which were usually badly made in the first place and have had plenty of time to crystallize; the result, however is, often very beautiful, though these old glasses have become very weak.
Marsh showed that in some glasses there is incipient devitrification even when they are new.
He photographed tiny crystallites in the electron microscope and showed that the shrinkage which accompanied their formation was sufficient to initiate a crack which would spread into the main body of the glass (Plate 7).
It must be emphasized that there is nothing very special about thin glass fibres which is specifically due to their thinness as such.
If the surface of thick glass can be got smooth and kept smooth it will be just as strong as a thin fibre.
In practice, however, this is generally more difficult to do.
If a material like glass does not fail owing to the spread of a crack from some local defect then how does it fail?
The answer is that it fails by flowing in shear, just like Plasticine or soft metals.
Because the flow stress of glass is very high at room temperature and because glass is very susceptible to fracture by the spread of cracks, glass, and materials like it, nearly always fracture in the familiar brittle manner and we find it difficult to imagine anything different happening.
In fact, if glass is prevented from cracking  in tension, say by putting it into compression, then it is quite easy to get it to flow like a soft solid; for instance, glass will behave like putty under the blunt point of a diamond indenter but the shear stresses required to cause flow are well above the normally observed fracture stresses — in common glasses at room temperature usually above 500,000 p.s.i.
or 3,500 MN/m2.
Fairly recently Marsh has shown that glass which is quite free from cracks does in fact fail in this manner by flowing, and that when this happens around room temperature, the stresses are usually upwards of 500,000 p.s.i.
An interesting point is that the tendency to fracture by the spreading of cracks is relatively little affected by temperature whereas the viscosity or shearing stress is very dependent upon temperature.
For this reason, when we heat glass to a temperature well below its melting point the shearing stress is reduced more than the brittle fracture stress and thus we can bend and shape and blow hot (but not necessarily very hot) glass quite easily.
Contrariwise, defect-free glass can be strengthened by cooling which raises its viscosity or resistance to flowing.
In this way the strength of smooth glass tested at — 180°. is about twice that of the same glass tested at room temperature.
Very generally, there are always two fracture mechanisms competing to break a material — plastic flow and brittle cracking.
The material will succumb to whichever mechanism is the weaker; if it yields before it cracks the material is ductile, if it cracks before it yields it is brittle.
The potentiality of both forms of failure is always present in all materials.
The strength of brittle crystals and the whisker story
All this accounts fairly satisfactorily for the strength and weakness of glasses, with which are included natural glassy minerals such as flint and obsidian, but then the vast majority of hard solids, both natural and artificial, are crystalline.
There is some kind of popular superstition that crystalline materials are weak.
The garage foreman, appearing with your broken crankshaft or back axle, will tell you that it has ‘crystallized’.
What state it was in  before it crystallized he does not explain; certainly it was not glassy.
Needless to say all metals, the great majority of minerals, most ceramics and common solids like salt and sugar are crystalline.
From common sense one would not expect the mere possession of a regular, orderly arrangement of atoms or molecules to be a cause of weakness, and of course it isn't.
When we are dealing with hard, brittle crystals, however, the practical strength is generally even lower than that of bulk glass and in their crude state most of the non-metallic crystals deserve the contempt with which they are generally regarded by engineers.
At this stage it is necessary to talk about whiskers.
People often mention ‘metal whiskers’ as if they were the only kind but, as a matter of fact, metal whiskers are less common and less interesting than whiskers of non-metals and it is about these latter that we shall mostly talk.
Whiskers have nothing to do with human hair and are in fact long thin needle crystals which can be grown from most substances by accident or by care.
They can be grown in a large number of different ways but are typically one or two microns thick though they may be millimetres or even centimetres long.
Whiskers sometimes grow by accident from the surface of metals and if the metal happens to be part of an electrical device then there is likely to be a short circuit which will be annoying, expensive or dangerous according to the circumstances (Plate 9).
Metal whiskers of this kind had been known of, in a general sort of way, for a long time but had been regarded as a nuisance or a curiosity.
They were not thought particularly interesting, until, in 1952, Herring and Galt chanced to bend some tin whiskers and noticed that they could be bent to a strain of about 2 per cent and still recover elastically.
This corresponded to a higher stress than had ever been observed before in tin and perhaps in any other metal.
It looked like another case of thin fibres showing anomalously high strength and it naturally attracted a good deal of attention.
Herring and Galt worked with tin.
Tin is a metal and somehow everybody expects metals to be strong.
What interested me at the time was whether the ‘naturally’ weak non-metallic crystals could be made strong too.
Thinking about this one morning in 1954, I  went along to the keeper of the laboratory chemical stores and asked him for something which was water-soluble and formed needle crystals.
He gave me a bottle of hydroquinone, a common substance used in photographic developers.
The bottle was full of dry crystals about as thick as an ordinary pin and about a centimetre long.
Manipulating these crystals by hand with the dissecting tools which biologists use it was quite obvious that their strength was negligible.
I then dissolved some of the hydroquinone crystals in water, put a drop of the solution on an ordinary glass microscope slide and allowed the water to evaporate naturally in air so that new, but much smaller, needle crystals were produced as the solution dried under the microscope.
The new crystals tended to be long, smooth, whip-like filaments, initially so thin that they were hardly visible in the optical microscope.
By poking about with a dissecting needle it was obvious that these little threads were very strong, exactly how strong it was difficult to say (Plate 12).
This was exciting and I was very soon trying crystals of all sorts of substances taken from the shelves of my own and my colleagues' laboratories.
With a little skill and low cunning it was possible to get almost any common soluble solid, such as Epsom salts, or even sodium chloride — ordinary table salt — to crystallize in the form of these very thin filaments, whiskers, and in every case these whiskers were obviously strong.
It might be supposed that their strength had something to do with the crystals being wet.
A man called Joffe observed, about 1928, that some things got stronger when they were wet.
(Actually, other things get weaker.)
However, drying the whiskers out did not seem to have an important effect upon their strength, as far as I could tell.
One of the difficulties in the early stages of this work was to find any reasonably reliable method of measuring whisker strengths.
We used to bend the whiskers under the microscope with a dissecting needle and, having measured the thickness and radius of curvature very approximately we could estimate the breaking strain by simple beam theory.
As one might imagine this method was maddeningly inconvenient and very inaccurate.
The whiskers generally began life as exceedingly fine filaments which could be seen to thicken as they got older.
I therefore introduced  the refinement of bending the infant whisker, by troubling the waters around the moment of its birth, and then simply allowing it to thicken until it broke, this was a little less clumsy but still highly unsatisfactory.
Just at this time (1956) David Marsh came to work with me and one of the first things he said was ‘Why don't you build a proper tensile testing machine?’
I am afraid that I told him to go away and not be silly.
The whiskers were too small to see with the naked eye and nobody could possibly make a testing machine on that scale.
Marsh went away and was not silly for he came back with a micro-testing machine which worked, which he had designed and built himself.
The Mark III version of the Marsh machine went into commercial production and now no gentleman's laboratory is complete without one.
This remarkable machine will, if pressed, test fibres down to one tenth of a square micron cross-section (that is, virtually invisible in the optical microscope) and about a quarter of a millimetre long.
It will detect extensions down to less than five Ångström units which is about the resolution of a good electron microscope.
With this tool in our hands, we were able to get some real results.
The first thing we discovered was that we could get high strength from almost anything from Epsom salts to sapphire.
Provided it was in the form of a thin whisker, it did not matter what the chemical nature of the stuff was or by what method the whiskers were grown.
We must have worked on well over a hundred different substances and there was absolutely no doubt about it.
When we plotted strength against thickness for any given whisker we got a curve which was uncannily like Griffith's size-strength curve for glass fibres (Chapter 3).
What was more, when we plotted, not strength but breaking strain, against thickness, we found that it did not matter what the whiskers were made of, for they all plotted on the same curve.
Figure 2, for instance, shows the breaking strains of whiskers of two very different substances, silicon and zinc oxide.
It is impossible to tell them apart.
The temptation to assume that the strength and weakness of whiskers, and therefore presumably of other crystals, was due, like glass, to surface cracks was of course strong.
However, we were unable to find any cracks and there were good reasons, based on the mode of growth, to suppose that they should not exist.
When a whisker grows from solution or from vapour there generally first appears a very fine filament or leader which in the electron microscope can be seen to be almost perfectly smooth.
This leader then thickens by the spreading down it of new, sleeve-like layers of material.
At first these layers may consist of single layers of atoms or molecules, but, naturally, the various successive layers of new material will be fed with molecules from the surroundings at slightly differing rates.
Thus the layers which are  fed faster will advance faster and may catch up on slower underlying layers which they have no means of passing.
The advancing edge or step is now twice the normal height and so would require twice the amount of new material if it were to advance at the same rate as the other layers.
In fact, however, it is only likely to be supplied by diffusion at the same rate as the single layers.
Thus the double layer moves more slowly than the average and so yet more growth layers pile up behind it and cannot pass.
Thus there build up a series of steps with sharp, cliff-like fronts (Plate 10).
On the average these steps will be higher the older and therefore the thicker the crystal.
When the crystal stops growing, because it is removed from the solution, or for any other reason, these steps will remain on the surface and can often clearly be seen in the microscope.
It is quite easy to see, intuitively, that a crack is a nasty dangerous thing to have about the house but it is by no means so obvious that a step can cause a bad stress concentration.
The problem of the step was so little regarded that there was no standard solution in the literature and so I asked David Marsh to get one.
Working with a series of transparent resin models in polarized light, Marsh was able to show that a step was just as bad a stress concentrator as the equivalent crack, in fact it might be regarded as half a crack.
This experimental solution has since been confirmed by a purely mathematical analysis carried out by H. L. Cox.
Though this work was done to explain the strength of very tiny crystals it is worthy of the attention of engineers who are perhaps somewhat frightened of cracks but take a rather light-hearted view of steps in machinery and structures.
It will be realized that with the step, as with the crack, what governs the stress concentration or weakening effect is not the absolute size of the re-entrant but the ratio of depth to the root radius.
Marsh examined a number of whiskers in the electron microscope and found that, for the substances he was using, the root radii of the growth-steps was roughly constant at about 40 Ångströms.
He then compared the heights of the worst steps with the measured strength of the whiskers.
The correlation was  extraordinarily good and left no room for doubt that this is the true explanation of the size-strength effect in whiskers.
Since a large whisker is in no way different from any other crystal except in size it must also be a general explanation of the strength and weakness of all brittle crystals.
That the strength behaviour of whiskers is no different from that of much bigger crystals was confirmed by Dash who took a large (2 cm.) crystal of silicon, which is normally quite a weak material, and polished it very carefully.
He then enclosed it in a transparent box which he provided with a mechanism for straining the specimen in bending.
He used to take this affair round various conferences and demonstrate to all and sundry that the crystal could be repeatedly bent to a strain of 2 per cent which is equivalent to a stress of about 600,000 p.s.i.
or 4,000 MN/m2, a very respectable figure.
When we come to everyday crystalline materials, however, there is one more link in the argument.
It is possible, by taking care, to grow quite large single crystals, as Dash did, but normally each individual crystal in a common material is quite small.
Whiskers are small single crystals of rather a special kind but ordinary sizable solids are what is called polycrystalline, that is to say they are made up of a.large number of small crystals fitting together in three dimensions like crazy paving or like counties on a map.
Although the shape of the individual crystals is irregular the fit at the boundaries is usually very good and in a pure material there is good contact on a molecular scale.
In general the surface energy of these boundaries is actually higher than that of fracture planes within the crystals and so, in a reasonably pure material, the ‘grain-boundaries’ are not usually a source of weakness.
The case is somewhat different however with an impure material.
As is well known, when a liquid freezes by crystallizing the crystals tend to expel impurities.
For instance ice which is formed on salt water is substantially fresh, to the great convenience of Polar explorers.
This effect causes impurities in solids to accumulate at the grain boundaries (and also vacancies, that is, holes) and this may cause the grain boundary to become a line of weakness.
This is one of the reasons why the addition of quite  small amounts of the wrong impurity can ruin an alloy.
A useful application of this weakening effect occurs when we add anti-freeze to the water in a car radiator.
It is true that the glycol does depress the freezing point of the resulting mixture considerably and so postpones freezing but, when this eventually does happen the result is a mushy ice without mechanical strength which is unlikely to do much harm to the engine.
For most fairly pure crystalline solids, however, the grain-boundaries are quite strong and, for a hard brittle material, a polycrystalline solid may be regarded as behaving in a manner comparable to whiskers and other single crystals and this, as we have seen, is very like the way glass behaves.
In both cases the problem of strength and weakness is almost entirely a matter of surface smoothness.
In the case of glass the important defect is usually the surface crack, in the case of brittle crystals it is usually the surface step.
The presence of internal defects in a brittle crystal is usually of minor importance.
As we shall see, the problem with a ductile material, such as a oft metal, is quite different.
Dislocations and ductility
So far we have dealt entirely with what are technically known as ‘brittle’ substances.
This does not mean, of course, that they will fall to pieces at a touch and as we have said, some brittle substances are very strong.
There is no absolutely sharp division between brittle and ductile substances but generally speaking brittle solids have fairly well defined characteristics.
Apart from the small elastic strains which recover when the load is taken off brittle solids do not distort before failure and fracture is usually by a crack or cracks which run cleanly through the material.
Thus the bits will fit together after fracture so that one can often glue a broken vase together quite plausibly.
In a ductile material such as mild steel, a good deal of irreversible distortion takes place before actual fracture occurs so that broken parts do not fit even approximately.
This is one of the reasons for the high cost of car repairs.
Brittle substances in common use include glass, pottery, bricks, cement and some plastics and these are fairly satisfactory for the purposes for which they are generally used.
For the more exacting uses, such as machinery, we generally tend to choose ductile metals.
In a brittle solid, fracture occurs by the total separation of two adjacent layers of atoms or molecules under a tensile stress, the rest of the material being undisturbed.
A metal behaves rather more like Plasticine.
Before actual fracture occurs, in the sense that the specimen separates into two pieces, there is extensive flow, something like a viscous liquid, in the body of the material.
This is caused by adjacent layers of atoms, not coming apart, but sliding over each other after the fashion of a pack of cards.
After the adjacent layers of atoms have slipped to a greater or less extent, so that the material is deformed in shear, no serious weakening has necessarily taken place, so that broken bonds have reformed with new partners.
In some cases metals are actually strengthened by this process, which is known as cold working.
If the process is carried too far the material will however be weakened and eventually broken.
The amount of shearing or elongation which a ductile material will withstand varies enormously between different metals and alloys.
It nearly always increases when the metal is heated; hence the village blacksmith and his forge.
The ability of ductile metals to be permanently distorted and therefore shaped either cold or hot is of course an outstanding advantage of metals.
Besides this, it goes a long way to account for their toughness, as we shall see in Chapter 9.
However it is also the principal cause of their weaknesses.
This is because, as we have said, if a material does not fail in a ‘brittle’ manner because of a crack at right angles to a tension stress, then it may fail by ‘sliding off’(Figure 3) at 45° to it, and if this is the weaker mechanism this is what will happen.
Kelly has shown recently that correct calculations about the shearing strength of solids are rather complicated and that there is a good deal of variation between the theoretical shear strengths of various substances.
However we can achieve an approximation to the theoretical shear strength by means of a very simple model and the result is not grossly in error.
Consider a model, on paper or in the solid, consisting of sheets Or spheres or balls to represent the atoms.
There will be certain positions in which such  sheets of spheres will lie on each other as close together as possible.
To disturb the layers from this position involves moving them further apart, which is resisted by tension in the bonds.
The rows of atoms, as it were, dislike being dug out of their comfortable trenches of lowest energy.
Figure 4 represents a two-dimensional model such as is afforded by two parallel rows of pennies lying on a table.
It is clear that all  resistance to shearing has vanished by the time that the atoms are balanced on top of each other, which will occur when the whole material has been distorted in shear through an angle of 30°.
Beyond this point the rows of atoms will subside into repose in the next valley and shearing through one atomic spacing will have occurred.
The resistance to this shearing will start at nothing, build up to a maximum, and decline again to zero when the atoms get to the top of the hump.
Resistance will be a maximum about half-way up the hill, in this case about 15°.
The three-dimensional case is slightly more complicated but the peak occurs around 7°.
Crystals made from arrangements of atoms of differing sizes may also tend to reduce the angle at which maximum resistance occurs.
Arithmetic of a rather crude sort again gives figures in the general region of 10 per cent of the Young's modulus for the theoretical shear strength.
(Kelly's more sophisticated approach gives figures between about 5 per cent and 10 per cent E.) In a way it does not matter very much if our figure is not very accurate because it is seldom or never reached when testing real materials in bulk.
The theoretical figure for iron is something like 1,500,000 p.s.i.
or 10,000 MN/m2 but in practice a crystal of really pure iron shears at about 3,000 p.s.i.
or 20 MN/m2, commercial steel at about 25,000 p.s.i.
and the very strongest steel at 250,000 or so.
Really soft metals like pure gold, silver and base lead can easily be sheared in the hands.
If they are extensively sheared or cold-worked, however, there is some improvement in shear strength, though not nearly up to the theoretical value.
Hammering a metal to harden it is not uncommon: this was the way of hardening the edges of copper and bronze weapons and the old clockmakers always hammered their brass gear-wheels.
(If one refrains from oiling the gear teeth of a grandfather clock, the teeth will not only not collect the dust and so not grind each other away, but also become harder and more polished as times goes on and so last virtually for ever.)
Until about 1934 the Establishment explanation of these phenomena was remarkably unconvincing and seems to have reflected mainly a desire not to be asked embarrassing questions.
‘Slip is due to little bits of crystal getting loose and acting as roller bearings between the layers.
When too many break away they jam each other and that is the cause of work hardening.’
As the Duke of Wellington said, ‘If you believe that you will believe anything.’
In 1934 G. I. Taylor, a Cambridge don who invented the ploughshare anchor, a major alleviation of human misery, also invented the dislocation.
At least he put up the dislocation as a hypothesis in a scientific paper.
The essential idea is extraordinarily simple, so simple that it must be true, and it turns out that it is.
It is most unlikely, said Taylor, that metal crystals are really as perfect as we suppose them to be when we do sums about their strength.
Let us suppose that every now and then, perhaps every million atoms or so, slight irregularities occur.
What we need is not so much a point irregularity such as a foreign atom, because that could only facilitate movement at one point, but rather a line defect which will allow the army of molecules, as it were, to sweep forward on a broad front.
Crystals, of course, consist of sheets or planes of atoms, which to an electron-sized observer would seem to lie, piled upon one another , in awful and endlessly regular array, virtually for ever , like the pages of some enormous celestial book.
What Taylor suggested was that every now and then, but very rarely, a sheet of atoms is not complete.
It is as if somebody had slipped an extra sheet of paper between the pages of the book which now, at one point consists of perhaps a million pages, at another of a million and one.
The interesting bit occurs of course along the line where the extra layer of atoms comes to an end.
Referring to Figure 5, it will be seen that there must be two places, one on either side of the tip of the extra sheet, where the atoms are distorted to an angle which approximates to the theoretical shearing strength of the crystal.
In other words, at these two points the crystal is pretty well broken away.
What is even more important, the dislocation turns out to be  movable.
If we put a gentle shearing force upon the crystal as a whole we can easily apply that little extra strain needed to break the whole line of sorely stretched bonds but we find (Figure 5b) that we have merely reformed the whole arrangement one atomic spacing further on.
By going on loading the crystal in shear we can repeat the process indefinitely and eventually squeeze the dislocation out of the far side of the crystal (Figure 5c).
Furthermore the force needed to do so may be very small.
Engineers and some metallurgists resisted the idea with the whole force of their emotions and even today some of them are still making growling noises in caves in the backwoods.
Academic physicists, on the whole, however, fell upon dislocations with glee.
For many years nobody saw a dislocation in the flesh, or perhaps ever expected to, but their hypothetical movements (dislocations of like sign repel each other etc.) and breeding habits (when the union of two dislocations is blessed about five hundred new dislocations are suddenly released upon the crystal) could be theoretically predicted and provided a superb intellectual exercise like three dimensional chess.
As a matter of fact nearly all these academic predictions turn out to be true.
Taylor supposed originally that slip in ductile crystals was due entirely to those dislocations which were present initially in the crystal due to the accidents of imperfect growth.
It turns out that there are generally not enough dislocations originally present in most crystals to account for the very extensive slip which can take place in a ductile material.
Large families of new dislocations can however be nucleated either by dislocation interaction (known as a Frank-Read source), or, more frequently, by severe stress concentrations, such as occur at crack tips.
These mechanisms enable a stressed metal to be rapidly filled with dislocations (something like 10 per square centimetre) and thus to flow under a steady load or the blow of a hammer quite easily.
It will be recalled that the dislocation is essentially a line defect which can move about in the crystal fairly freely.
When there are many dislocations they do not have to move far before two or more dislocations meet.
In rather special circumstances this can result in the creation of new dislocations but the much more usual effect is for them to repel each other.
As more and more dislocations are born and move about they impede each other and get tangled up, like so much string.
The result is that after a period of free movement the material begins to harden and if one goes on deforming it it will become brittle.
The most familiar example of this is when one wishes to break off a piece of metal such as a wire or the opened lid of a tin can.
This can usually be done by bending it backwards and forwards a few times.
The metal yields easily at first, hardens somewhat and then breaks off in a brittle fashion.
Metal hardened by deformation can be returned to its initial soft condition by ‘annealing’, that is to say by heating it until total or partial recrystallization occurs, in which case most of the excess dislocations vanish.
Thus copper tubes must be annealed after bending to shape or they will be brittle.
Altogether, the dislocation mechanism has been found to explain the mechanical properties of metals very well indeed.
Although dislocations do exist in non-metallic crystals they are not usually very mobile and they seldom breed, thus dislocation movement does not play any important part in the way non-metals behave.
It is the mobility of dislocations which accounts for the mechanical differences between metals and non-metals.
Needless to say, dislocations cannot exist in glasses because glasses are not crystalline.
The non-metallic tradition
Crack-stopping or how to be tough 
‘And yet flint is considered to involve comparatively easy work, as there is a kind of earth consisting of a sort of potter's clay mixed with gravel, called ‘gan-gardia’ which it is almost impossible to overcome.
They attack it with wedges and iron hammers; and it is thought to be the hardest thing that exists, except the greed of gold which is the most stubborn of all things.’
Pliny,Natural History .
Pliny the Elder (A.D. 23–79) in his highly unreliable Natural History gives directions for distinguishing a genuine diamond.
It should be put, he says, on a blacksmith's anvil and smitten with a heavy hammer as hard as possible; if it breaks it is not a true diamond.
It is likely that a good many valuable stones were destroyed in this way because Pliny was muddling up hardness and toughness.
Diamond is the hardest of all substances and the hardness of diamond is useful when one wants to cut or scratch or grind materials and this is its main industrial use.
But diamond, like other hard precious stones, is quite brittle so that, even if one could get it cheaply in large pieces it would not be a very useful structural substance.
The worst sin in an engineering material is not lack of strength or lack of stiffness, desirable as these properties are, but lack of toughness, that is to say, lack of resistance to the propagation of cracks .
One can allow for lack of strength or stiffness in design but it is much more difficult to allow for cracks which catch the engineer unawares and are dangerous.
Most metals and timbers, and also Nylon, Polythene, fibre-glass, bones, teeth, cloth, rope and jade are tough.
Most minerals, glass, pottery, rosin, bakelite, cement, and biscuits are brittle, and so is ordinary table jelly as one can readily prove by propagating a crack in it with a spoon and fork.
It is not at all easy to see what it  is that makes one thing tough and another brittle because the substances in each of these lists seem to have little enough in common.
The distinction is a very real one however.
Pottery and commercial tinplate may have roughly the same tensile strength but if a cup is dropped on the floor it will shatter, perhaps almost explosively.
If we drop a tin can probably nothing will happen; at the worst we may make a small dent.
The actual tensile strength of ordinary glass and ceramics can be quite high; the reason why we do not make motor cars, for instance, from them is not that they are weak but that they are far too brittle.
Anybody can tell this from common sense.
But why?
What is really happening?
First of all brittleness is not primarily a matter of the rate of loading.
Psychologically there is a great difference between a statically applied load, that is one which is put on slowly, and a dynamic load, that is one suddenly applied, usually by means of a blow.
The distinction does arise and it cannot entirely be neglected but it is much less important than appears at first sight.
Generally we use a hammer simply because it is a convenient and cheap way of getting a high local force, which we do by decelerating the heavy head.
Usually we should get much the same results by applying the same load slowly.
To a certain extent this applies to dropping things on the floor and to car and aeroplane crashes, though as we shall see there are some important reservations.
However, in most brittle materials, whether the force which causes fracture is applied quickly or slowly, once failure has begun, the consequent cracks will propagate very quickly indeed, usually at several thousand miles an hour.
Thus to the eye fracture appears to be instantaneous.
In a way there is no essential difference between a stressed material and an explosive.
When an elastic material is strained, strain energy is stored in the stretched chemical bonds and when the material is fractured this energy is released.
At the theoretical breaking strain of the material all the bonds are stretched to their maximum and the strain energy is roughly equal to the chemical energy, as we ought to expect.
In practice materials generally only reach a small fraction of their theoretical strength before they break and so the release of strain energy is usually far less than the energy which would be provided by an equivalent weight of  explosive.
All the same, it may make a very respectable ban& When strong fibres and whiskers are broken, for instance in the Marsh machine, one can realize a high proportion of their theoretical strength.
In these cases one is not left after fracture with two or more broken pieces: there is an explosion and the fibre vanishes in fine dust.
Only the fact that these strong fibres are generally quite small prevents the operation of breaking them from being a dangerous one.
Impact strength
Before going on to the general question of crack propagation and control, it is worth considering some of the special effects of a dynamically applied load such as a blow.
The highest speed at which a stress can be transmitted through any substance is usually the speed of sound in that substance.
Indeed, sound is perhaps best thought of as a wave, or series of waves, of stress passing through a substance at its natural speed.
Now the speed of sound in any substance is where p is the density or specific gravity of the substance and E is the Young's modulus.
Given the common values of E and p in structural solids we find that the speed of sound in these substances is very high indeed: for steel, aluminium and glass it is about 11,000 miles an hour or 4,800 metres per second, which is much faster than the speed of sound in air.
Such speeds are far faster than any hammer blow and considerably faster than the flight of bullets.
The result is that the hammer or the bullet is pressing against its target for a period, perhaps about a hundredth of a second, which is very long compared with the time which is required to conduct the energy away from the point of impact in the form of waves of sound or stress.
As photographers know, a great deal can happen in periods of time as long as a hundredth of a second.
What is apt to happen when we strike a solid is that a whole series of stress waves radiate from the point of impact and move off into the body of the material.
They reach the further boundaries of the solid in a time which is probably between a ten-thousandth and a hundred-thousandth of a second and are reflected back, as a  kind of echo, very little attenuated or diminished in intensity.
What happens next depends upon a great many things such as the shape of the solid, exactly where the blow was struck and so on.
What may happen is that the returning reflected stress waves repeatedly meet the outgoing ones at some critical or unlucky point and thus the stress may pile up at this point until fracture occurs.
The stories about singers fracturing panes of glass may well be true.
There are some elegant instances of the sort of things which can happen.
The British Ceramic Research Association, for instance, have a routine impact test for ceramic tiles in which a loosely supported square tile is struck a measured blow in the centre of one flat face.
In many cases the tile does not break in the middle where it is struck.
What happens is that the four corners drop off because the stress waves are reflected and crowded into the corners.
When a shell is fired against armour plate, if the shell does not penetrate, then what is known as a ‘scab’, a jagged piece of armour, sometimes becomes detached from the inside or back surface.
If this happens the scab may bounce about with great speed and energy within the turret and may do as much damage as if the shell had actually penetrated.
In a similar way, when a projectile is fired into a tank of liquid, such as the fuel tank of an aeroplane, it is the exit hole which is much the largest and the most difficult to seal since the shock waves which are readily transmitted through the fluid may burst the back of the tank.
Unfortunately the human head is structurally rather like a tank of liquid and the consequences when it is struck by a bullet are well-known.
What is less well-known is that rather similar effects may happen with a blow on the forehead which does not penetrate.
The important factor in the design of crash-helmets is therefore the cushioning of the shock wave so as to prevent damage at the back of the skull.
This is the reason for the internal head-band in helmets which looks as if it was put in in order to provide ventilation.
In engineering it is usual to test materials for toughness by means of a routine impact test of what is called the ‘Izod’ type.
In this test the material is in the form of a bar a quarter or a half an inch square and is often provided with a standard notch to  initiate failure.
This bar is clamped at one end and the other end is then broken off by means of a heavy hammer in the form of a pendulum.
By measuring the difference in the height to which the pendulum swings before and after breaking the specimen the energy of fracture can be estimated.
Academically, this test is not very accurate but it does have some value as a rough comparative test between different materials.
It is very popular with engineers.
The Griffith criterion and critical crack length
To return to crack propagation in brittle solids, it does not really matter for our present purposes whether fracture is initiated by a dynamic blow or by a static load.
On the whole, if the fracture stress is produced, by whatever means, at a given point, fracture will probably occur there.
There are some exceptions to this: a few substances, such as pitch and toffee, are sensitive to the rate of loading.
Every child knows that the way to break the most intractable toffee is to hit it with a poker.
This will work when slower methods are quite impotent (Chapter 9).
However, most normal materials are not much affected by considerations of dynamic and static loading.
Of course it would be ideal to have a material in which it was impossible to initiate cracks at all.
Unfortunately in practice this does not seem to be a possibility.
As we have seen in the last chapter the surface of even the smoothest glass is infested with tiny invisible cracks and even if it were not, it soon would be when it had brushed against some other solid.
What therefore counts most of all is the ease with which the cracks can be made to extend by applying a stress to the material.
The basic theory of crack propagation is again due to A. A. Griffith.
Griffith said that two conditions must be fulfilled if a crack was to propagate.
First it must be energetically desirable and secondly there must be a molecular mechanism by which the energy transformation can take place.
The first condition requires that at every stage in the propagation of the crack the energy stored in the material is being reduced, just s when a car runs  downhill its potential energy is being reduced.
On the other hand, however energetically desirable it may be, the car will not run downhill unless it is provided with wheels and the brake is off.
The wheels are the mechanism by which the car runs downhill and implements the transformation of energy.
As we have said, a strained material contains strain energy which would like to be released just as a raised weight contains potential energy and would like to fall.
If the material is completely fractured naturally the whole of this energy is in the end released.
Consider, however, what happens during the intermediate stages of fracture.
When a crack appears in a strained material it will open up a little so that the two faces of the crack are separated.
This implies that the material immediately behind the crack is relaxed and the strain energy in that part of the material is released.
If we now think about a crack proceeding inwards from the surface of a stressed material (Figure 1) we should expect the area of material in which the strain is relaxed  to correspond roughly to the two shaded triangles.
Now the area of these triangles is roughly l & sup2 , where l is the length of the crack.
The relief of strain energy would thus be expected to be proportional to the square of the crack length, or rather depth, and in fact this rough guess is confirmed by calculation.
Thus a crack two microns deep releases four times as much strain energy as one one micron deep and so on.
On the other side of the energy account book is the surface energy, 2 G.l , which is needed to form the new surfaces and clearly this increases only as the first power of the depth of the crack.
Thus a crack two microns deep has twice the surface energy of a crack one micron deep but as we have seen it releases four times as much strain energy.
The consequences of this are fairly clear.
When the crack is very shallow it is consuming more energy as surface energy than it is releasing as relaxed strain energy and therefore the conditions are energetically unfavourable for it to propagate.
As the crack gets longer however these conditions are reversed and beyond the ‘critical Griffith length’lg , the crack is producing more energy than it is consuming, so it may start to run away in an explosive manner.
There is a characteristic critical Griffith crack length for each stress in the material.
At the theoretical maximum stress the critical crack length lg , is extremely short and at zero stress it is infinitely long, which is what we should expect.
Algebraically, this can be shown to be equivalent to, If the energy required to propagate the crack by producing the two new fracture surfaces were really confined to C, the free surface energy (which is seldom much above I J/m 2 ), then simple arithmetic will show that, at any realistic stress level, the critical crack length would be very short indeed, perhaps around a micron.
Fortunately this is seldom actually the case with practical  materials because, in order to produce a new fracture surface, we have generally not only to break all the chemical bonds at the fracture surface (which requires only the free surface energy), we also disturb the molecular structure of the material to a depth which is sometimes very considerable; in doing so we break a great many other bonds as well.
In other words, fracture is a brutal process.
The total energy which has to be used up in producing a real fracture surface is therefore greater than G and is known as the ‘work of fracture’,W , such that, Although W is always considerably bigger than G , its actual magnitude varies very greatly between different materials.
With glass, for instance, the molecular structure is only disturbed to a comparatively shallow depth below the fracture surface and W is generally around 6 J/m 2 — in other words about six times G — and so, although lg , the critical crack length, is six times as high as it otherwise would be, it is still very short and glass is a brittle material.
Most ceramics are not much better than glass in this respect but the ductile metals, such as wrought iron, mild steel, copper and aluminium, have works of fracture which are enormously higher than their free surface energies and range between 10 4 and 10 6 J/m 2 .
That is to say,W is from ten thousand to a million times higher than G and so the critical crack length is longer in direct proportion.
Thus mild steel structures, for instance, can generally put up with cracks at least a metre long without breaking.
This is what makes ductile metals so safe and tough and so popular.
In fact the possession of a high work of fracture — at least a thousand times higher than the free surface energy — is an essential characteristic of all safe and practical structural materials which are used in tension.
However the actual molecular mechanism by which so much energy can be absorbed during fracture varies a great deal between the different kinds of solids.
With metals it is essentially due to the operation of the dislocation  mechanism which was described in the last chapter; we shall discuss how this works in Chapter 9.
Timber, again, has a high work of fracture — about 10 4 J/m 2 — but this is produced by a totally different mechanism which we shall talk about in Chapter 6.
The various plastics and composites are different again and we shall come to these presently.
As we saw in Chapter 4 the stress concentration at the tip of a crack is about: Now in many materials,R , the tip radius of the crack, remains constant whatever the crack length, so that as the crack gets longer, the stress concentration gets worse.
In practice R may have a value comparable to atomic dimensions, say about I Ångström unit.
A crack length of about 1 micron (i.e. 10,000 Ångströms) will therefore produce the theoretical stress at the crack tip when the average stress in the material is quite modest and for longer cracks the stress at the tip will be far higher.
However, paradoxically, and as Griffith pointed out,as long as the crack is shorter than the critical length, nothing will happen — however high the stress at the tip may be .
Thus the chief safeguard against brittle failure lies in a high work of fracture.
This is basically why glass (W = 6 J/m 2 ) is brittle and steel (W = about 10 5 J/m7sup2;) is tough, although both these materials have roughly the same tensile strengths.
With any luck a serious crack in a large steel structure will be spotted by an inspector and remedial action will be taken before anything dangerous happens.
As we have seen 20 per cent of ships are found to have serious cracks in their hulls, say a metre or so long.
If the ships had been made of a material like glass they would have broken long before a crack became conspicuous.
This is basically why engineers are traditionally addicted to ‘ductile’ materials and really one cannot blame them.
However, in any material, a crack may sooner or later reach its  critical length, whether this be a micron or ten metres.
Once this has happened, as the crack gets longer, everything gets worse.
The stress concentration gets worse and the Griffith energy balance gets more and more favourable to crack propagation.
If the load is maintained, the crack therefore accelerates rapidly and soon reaches its theoretical calculated speed which is generally about 38 per cent of the speed of sound in the material.
In the case of glass this crack speed is 4,000 miles an hour or 1,700 m/s, a velocity which has been confirmed experimentally.
By this time stress waves are probably racing about in the material in all directions at the speed of sound (that is faster than the crack), being reflected off both old and new surfaces, and we are likely to end up with not one crack but with a great many.
In other words the material has shattered.
This is possible because, at high stresses the total strain energy in the material will ‘pay’ for a great many new surfaces, indeed at the theoretical strength it will ‘pay’for dividing the whole material up into individual sheets of molecules.
A completely brittle material like glass is reasonably safe as long as we are content to operate it at a very low stress level, for instance as a shop window, because the Griffith crack length is then quite long and so the material is safe against minor chips and abrasions.
If we want to work at a high level of stress, however, anywhere near the potential strength of glass for instance, we must be prepared to keep the surface free from even the most microscopic cracks for, if even one crack is allowed to exceed the Griffith length, which may be only about a thousand Ångströms, catastrophic failure will occur.
This makes homogeneous brittle materials much too dangerous to use in practice when there is any serious stress on them.
The ability to propagate cracks freely under a small stress was not wholly a disadvantage to primitive man who was thus able to shape flint and obsidian, which are more or less natural glasses, into various cutting tools.
When the flaking is done skilfully, only light hand pressure with a piece of wood is needed to detach long slivers of material which can themselves be used as knives.
Using a non-brittle stone, such as jade, shaping could only be carried out by the infinitely more laborious process of grinding.
Most of the tensile stresses in tools are due to bending and by  keeping stone tools short and compact stresses could be kept low enough to ensure reasonable durability.
A weapon like a stone sword would of course have been quite impracticable.
TOUGHNESS IN NON-METALS
The history of the attempts to prevent cracks spreading or to evade the consequences, is almost the history of engineering.
The most obvious way of preventing cracks from spreading in brittle materials is not to use them in tension, in other words to use them in compression.
This is what masonry is about and as we have seen in Chapter 2, starting with the simple wall one can go from the arch to the dome and to the most complicated cathedral, keeping everything in compression, or at least trying to do so.
Masonry is extraordinarily satisfactory in its way but it is inherently heavy and immobile.
There are therefore a number of variants of the same idea.
One of these is prestressed concrete in which the brittle component is kept in compression by strong tension wires.
Then there is toughened glass, which is homogeneous in the sense that it is all glass, but the outside, which is susceptible to cracks, is put into compression at the expense of a tension in the protected middle.
* This has been widely used for car windscreens and, in a much more sophisticated form, is being developed for serious engineering in America.
This may turn out to be an important development in new materials.
Rather curiously, this line of thought does not seem to occur at all in biological materials which all depend, as do some artificial  ones, on reducing the effective stress concentration at the tip of the crack.
Again, the methods used by nature are quite widely different from those which the metallurgist employs.
* This is usually done by chilling the outside of the hot glass by means of air jets.
Glass, like other substances, contracts as it cools and if the outer parts of the glass be cooled and hardened before the inner parts then the outside will, of course, contract more initially than the inside but, since the inside is still soft, it will yield in the early stages of cooling.
In the later stages of cooling however both the inside and the outside behave elastically and thus their contractions get out of step.
As a result, when the glass has finished cooling the outside is in compression while the inside is in tension.
Strains in glass — as in most other transparent solids — become visible in polarized light and sunlight is partially polarized especially when it is reflected from non-metallic surfaces such as a road or the paintwork of a car.
In this way the pattern of the air-jets used for cooling the glass can often be seen in car windscreens.
Naturally the effect becomes more pronounced when one wears polarizing glasses.
It is rather strange that so little attention has been given so far to the mechanical properties of biological materials, though perhaps in human terms it is understandable.
Many people become biologists and doctors by a reaction against things mechanical and mathematical and contrariwise engineering has been going through a phase of rejecting natural materials.
Metals are considered more ‘important’ than wood, which is hardly considered worthy of serious attention at all.
Cellulose, which is the main constituent of wood, cane, bamboo and all vegetable fibres, is very tough.
Cricket bats are made of willow, mallets of elm, polo balls of bamboo roots and loom shuttles of persimmon, a tree which grows in Persia.
Aeroplanes used to h made of wood and gliders still are; wooden ships are supposed to be more robust in ice than steel ones.
Cellulose cannot be considered as either weak or brittle yet it is chemically a sugar, being made by stringing glucose molecules together.
Ail crystalline sugars are very brittle and so are glassy sugars, that is toffee.
Bones and teeth are made from quite simple inorganic compounds which in their normal crystalline and glassy forms are very brittle.
Of course it is possible to break a bone or a tooth but this is comparatively rare.
Teeth are especially worthy of admiration, being capable, with proper maintenance, of cracking nuts for something like forty years.
Even the most modern dental cements are very much weaker and more brittle than tooth substance.
The interface as a crack-stopper
The incentive to investigate the toughness of materials of this kind came, not from the biologists, but from the development of reinforced plastics which present an interesting paradox in the matter of toughness.
The commonest, or at any rate the best known, reinforced plastic is fibreglass.
This material consists of a very large number of thin glass fibres glued together with a resin.
Now the fibres are chemically and physically in no way  different from ordinary bulk glass, which, as we have seen, is catastrophically brittle.
Furthermore, the resin which is used to bond the fibres is also brittle, perhaps not quite as brittle as the glass, but very nearly so.
When the two are put together however, the result is a material which is sold in large quantities primarily on account of its extreme toughness.
A few years ago, John Cook and I set out to examine this effect quantitatively.
The difficulty with so many problems in materials science has been that the algebra and arithmetic, though theoretically soluble, are too laborious to be done by traditional methods.
This applies to a certain extent to the solution of the detailed stress distribution around a crack and until this was known in some detail it was not possible to predict what a crack would do when it met an inhomogeneity such as the interface between a fibre and a resin.
Nowadays computers are changing all this.
The stress concentration at a crack tip was first calculated by Inglis in 1913, as we have said, and his results are classic and correct as far as they go.
Since then a number of people a great deal abler than ourselves have worked on the problem but, because of the sheer labour of handling the algebra they were forced either to assume that the crack tip was infinitely sharp, that is had zero radius, or else, with a finite tip radius, to use very approximate methods, or at least to map the stress system only in certain regions.
The assumption of an infinitely sharp crack tip leads to infinite stresses at the tip and this is clearly meaningless when one wants to investigate fracture.
The other approximation using a finite tip radius did not give sufficient detail close to the actual crack tip where fracture was occurring.
Computer or no computer, I should certainly not have been able to handle the mathematics myself but John Cook likes that sort of thing and using the Mercury computer at Farnborough he was able to map the stresses very close to the tip of a crack which had a finite tip radius.
The rough general picture is of course very much that indicated in Figure I of Chapter 4.
Generalizing a little, we might plot the stress trajectories, that is the direction in which the stress is handed on from one atomic bond to the next, very much as in  Figure 2 of this chapter.
This will perhaps serve to put John Cook's detailed maps of the tip region into perspective.
He and I were of course aware that we were making two assumptions which were obviously incorrect.
One was that the crack tip was elliptical or rounded, which is clearly not the case in detail in a material made out of atoms.
Secondly we assumed that, elastically, the material behaved as a continuum and obeyed Hooke's law.
This is also not true in detail either.
However, this was the best we could do and we hope that the consequent errors are not too great.
One of the things which John Cook found in his exercises with the computer was that, as far as the stress distribution at the actual crack tip region is concerned, it does not very much matter how the load is applied.
Whether the crack is forced open by a wedge, such as a nail or a chisel, or whether it is opened by a remotely applied tensile stress or bending load affects the general stress distribution in the whole body of the material very greatly, but, as far as the region sensitive to fracture is concerned, that is the area a few molecules wide in the region of the tip, the stress  pattern is identical.
This means that the mechanism of failure is likely to be the same by whatever means the material is broken.
This was an important simplification and a step forward.
We may now turn to Figures 3 and 4, which are the actual stress distribution maps which John computed for a crack 2 microns long and 1 Ångström tip radius.
The shaded area is empty space at the notional crack tip.
The curved lines are not stress trajectories but are contours of stress concentration for stress at right angles and parallel to the plane of the crack.
The numbers on each contour represent the stress concentration factor K by which the mean stress remote from the crack is multiplied at each point.
As the crack gets longer, the tip radius remaining the same, the stress concentrations get more severe but the pattern and proportions remain similar.
The reverse is true, of course, if the crack is shorter.
Figure 3 shows that the stress at right angles to the surfaces of the crack, that is the force tending to open and extend it, is very severe and is concentrated very close indeed to the crack tip.
In fact the worst stress is concentrated within an area about equivalent to that covered by a single atomic bond.
Its numerical value is the same as that calculated by Inglis for this critical point, though one should not attach too much importance to the exact numerical values in any of this work since all the presuppositions are approximations.
However, by the time we have moved forward from the crack tip to roughly the position of the next interatomic bond, the stress has fallen to rather less than half the peak value.
Such values are probably roughly true and they show fairly vividly how a great part of the load in a material is concentrated upon a single line of atomic bonds at the tip of a sharp crack, remembering of course that a material is a solid and that a crack tip is a line in a three-dimensional picture.
Once the critical bond at the crack tip has broken, the peak stress concentration is transferred to the next bond, and so on, like a ladder in a silk stocking.
Merely using stronger chemical bonds will have a small effect upon the strength of a cracked material by comparison with the stress concentrating effect of the crack and this is why diamond and sapphire are brittle and usually not especially strong, in spite of their hardness and high chemical bond energies.
So long as we  are dealing with materials which are approximately elastic and approximately homogeneous this is virtually the whole story as far as strength and brittleness are concerned.
It does not make any appreciable difference whether the solid is glassy or crystalline or even polymeric, nor does it matter whether it has a high or a low Young's modulus 50 long as it more or less obeys Hooke's law, virtually up to failure.
Brittleness is not a special condition, it is the normal state of all simple non-metallic solids which cannot generate dislocations and so achieve a high work of fracture .
Toughness requires some increase in complexity; in a sense it is a property which has to be designed for.
In non-metals we can achieve an effective toughness either by devising some kind of work of fracture mechanism without making use of dislocations or else by stopping cracks from running by one means or another.
Useful non-metallic materials often work by some combination of the two.
(We can sometimes stop a crack by increasing its tip radius — it is fairly common to see holes drilled at the ends of cracks in glass and Perspex in the hope of preventing the crack from spreading any further.)
Tough non-metallic materials often contain interfaces or planes of weakness within the materials and many of them are heterogeneous, that is to say they consist of two or more constituents, such as fibre and resin.
We must refer now to Figure 4 which is a map of the stresses parallel to the surfaces of the crack.
On a first consideration one would not think that there would be appreciable stresses parallel to the crack surface but on reflection it will be seen that this must always be so.
As Figure 2 shows, all the stresses have to get round the crack tip and are sharply bent in doing so.
These stress trajectories can be thought of, more or less, as strings under tension and they will try to straighten in much the same way.
If one passes a string round a post and pulls on both ends there will be a force on the post in the direction of the pull which is reacted by the post pushing in the opposite direction.
In other words, there must be a tension in the area just ahead of the crack and in a direction parallel to the crack surfaces.
John Cook's computations explored the distribution and magnitude of this tension and the results are mapped in Figure 4.
Unlike the stress at right angles to the crack surfaces which is mapped in Figure 3, this tension starts at zero at the crack tip and increases as we move forward away from it.
The maximum is reached at one or two atomic spacings ahead of the crack but the distribution is not very peaky and a fairly high tensile stress level exists over a considerable area ahead of the crack.
Irrespective of the proportions of the crack or the means by which it is loaded  the ratio of the maximum value of this stress parallel to the crack surfaces to the peak opening stress at right angles to the crack is constant and has a value of one to five .
This state of affairs seems to be fundamental to all cracks existing in a stretched material.
This is where the internal surfaces in biological materials and reinforced plastics become important.
It is significant that these interfaces are generally weaker than the surrounding material.
This is not because Nature is too incompetent to glue them together properly but because, properly contrived, the weak interfaces strengthen the material and make it tough.
Consider what happens when a crack approaches an interface of this kind which is roughly at right angles to it.
When the area  of tension stresses ahead of the crack tip reaches the interface, it will try to open it by pulling the two sides apart.
If the strength of the interface is greater than about one-fifth of the general cohesion of the material then the interface will not be broken, the crack will cross it and the material will behave as a normal brittle solid.
If however the adhesive strength of the interface is less than about one-fifth of the general cohesive strength of the solid then the interface will be broken before the main crack reaches it and a crack trap or crack stopper has been created .
*
This is shown  diagrammatically in Figure 5 and in the flesh, in a reinforced material in Plate 11.
Of course, if the adhesion at the interface is too weak then the material as a whole will be weakened so that , when there is no adhesion at all , one has to have some arrangement like cloth or rope or basket-work to hold the material together by friction.
For the best results, exact control of the adhesion seems to be critical but when this is achieved, as it seems to be in the best natural and artificial composite materials, very excellent combinations of strength and toughness are created.
* I suppose that one could consider that the crack has been blunted.
The tip radius, from being very small, is now very large, practically infinite in fact It is true that we have now a new crack, at right angles to the original one, but then the tendency to propagate a crack which is parallel to the applied stress is usually nil.
Since the condition for effective crack-stopping is that we have to weaken the material by a factor of five, the process does not sound a very promising one.
We have, as it were, given up before we have started.
As toughening processes go, however, the interfacial weakness method seems to be rather efficient.
This is because the true fracture stress at the crack tip is presumably the theoretical strength of the material and this generally lies between 10 and 20 per cent of the Young's modulus,E (Chapter 3).
Reducing this to one fifth still leaves a potential strength of between 2 and 4 per cent of E , which is roughly what is achieved in practice in fibre-glass and is a good deal more than one can reach, keeping a safe amount of toughness, with the metallic ductility mechanism (Chapter 9).
In any case, as we shall see in Chapter 8, strengths very greatly in excess of I per cent of the Young's modulus may not be of much interest in practical engineering.
Most natural minerals are brittle because they are more or less homogeneous but it happens that a few have cleavage planes of about the right strength.
The commonest of these are asbestos and mica, which is why they have their peculiar and useful properties.
How great the effect of the interfaces may be is shown by a famous experiment of Professor Orowan's with mica.
Mica is an ionically bonded mineral in which, because of the arithmetic of the electrical charges in the molecule, every so often there is a layer of metal atoms in the crystal in which each atom has to share a single electron's worth of charge with several near neighbours, so that this layer in the crystal is a weak one.
The useful form of mica is called Muscovite (because it originally came from Russia) and in this mica the strength of the bonds on the weak cleavage plane is nominally and very roughly a sixth of the strength of the bonds elsewhere in the crystal.
What Orowan did was to measure the strength of Muscovite mica in tension.
In his first experiment he cut from a sheet of mica a normal hour-glass shaped test-piece (Figure 6(b)).
This test-piece was flat and quite thin and the planes of weakness lay parallel to the broad flat surfaces.
The whole specimen might be regarded, on a molecular scale, as being cut from a number of sheets of paper, weakly glued together.
The edges of the specimen, which had been cut mechanically, were, in detail, quite rough.
When the specimen was loaded in a testing machine the edges  were stressed as much as the middle and so cracks started at the edges and spread inwards across the material in the usual way.
The tensile stress developed in this test was about 25,000 p.s.i.
(170 MN/m 2 ), much the same as ordinary glass and perhaps a little less than commercial steel.
Orowan now tested a differently shaped specimen of the same mica.
In this case the sheet of mica, though otherwise similar, was not waisted but was of a rectangular, playing-card shape, somewhat wider than the clamps which gripped it.
It was assumed that the stress followed a path similar to that sketched in Figure 6(a).
Thus the edges were largely unstressed.
The outside surfaces lying on the stress-path between the grips were, of course, fully stressed and no doubt contained all manner of iniquities in the way of scratches and stress concentrations.
For these to extend, however, the crack would have had to cross the planes of weakness in the crystal which were in their path.
For a specimen of Muscovite of this shape Orowan found that the tensile strength was about 460,000 p.s.i., that is to say nearly twenty times as strong as a specimen in which the cracks did not have to cross the planes of weakness.
460,000 p.s.i.
(3,100 MN/m 2 ) is about 1½ per cent of the Young's modulus and a very respectable strength.
Now Margarite, for instance, which is another kind of mica, quite similar to Muscovite except that it has twice the electrical charge across its planes of cleavage, has negligible strength and is very brittle.
This sort of experiment shows however that with materials of this character one cannot really distinguish between practical strength and brittleness so that the introduction of weak internal surfaces can be regarded as raising the strength.
Mica and asbestos were of no use to stone-age men for tools and weapons because the planes of weakness run straight through from one side to the other.
Jade however consists of a tangled mass of needle crystals, tightly packed together but with poor adhesion at the interfaces and might be regarded as an inorganic equivalent to a briar pipe or a bamboo root.
Jade is therefore very tough and would have been almost ideal for tools and weapons if only it had not been so difficult to work and so scarce.
Since jade cannot be flaked, like flint and obsidian, it could only be shaped by grinding it with sand on a piece of wood for weeks or months.
Hence, though very durable, jade implements were very costly and partly for this reason, and partly for the beauty and scarcity of the material itself, they remained symbols of prestige after the introduction of metals.
Jade is scarce because it can only crystallize in that form under geological conditions of heat and pressure which were confined to certain faults in the earth's crust.
These occurred in the Far East, in New Zealand and in Central America.
Jade axes were being made by the Maoris in New Zealand, almost within living memory.
According to Heinrich Harrer axes are being made from a jade-like stone in central New Guinea today.
He says that the polishing takes several months.
A curious problem is set by the discovery of a few jade axes in England recently.
If these are not the product of a Piltdown-type hoax, then either there must have  been a source of jade somewhere in Europe or else the axes must have been brought an unimaginable distance from the Far East, a journey comparable in its way to that of the monoliths of Stonehenge.
However, as Herodotus remarked on finding Scythian artifacts in Delos, they may have ‘diffused’.
The instances of effective crack-stoppers in minerals are fortuitous.
When one looks at biological materials one is impressed with the enormous care which Nature seems to take over the interfaces when she is being, as it were, teleological.
A good example is the construction of teeth, about which a certain amount is known.
Teeth consist of a hard, tough surface layer called enamel while the interior is made of a material called dentine.
Both constituents however contain elongated inorganic crystals distributed in an organic matrix and the principal difference between enamel and dentine lies in the proportion of inorganic material to organic material.
The hard part of both enamel and dentine consists of elongated crystals of a substance which is nominally hydroxyapatite,, although the exact chemical composition varies widely, reflecting the environment in which it was formed, and carbonoapatite, fluorapatite, calcium fluoride, calcium carbonate and so on may be present.
These crystals are quite small and in enamel are about 3,000 to 5,000, Å in length and from 500 to 1,200 Å thick.
In enamel these crystals are very closely and beautifully packed together so as to constitute 99 per cent by volume of the material.
They are separated by a thin layer of a very complex organic material.
This separating layer is undoubtedly mainly a protein and was originally thought to be similar to keratin which is the protein in hair.
It is now thought that it is a special protein unique to tooth enamel.
Incidentally it changes its composition considerably between the foetus and the adult.
Dentine differs from enamel in that the inorganic part constitutes only about 70 per cent by volume.
The apatite crystals are also much smaller being 200–300 Å long and 40–70 Å wide.
These apatite crystals are embedded in an organic matrix which is mostly collagen.
The adhesion between the hydroxyapatite and the separating  protein layer is of a most complicated chemical nature being partly by hydroxyl bonds and partly by ionic bonds (see Appendix 1).
No doubt very precise control is exercised over the interfacial adhesion and thus over the propagation of cracks.
The presence of the weak organic layer, however, must enable decay to get a start and, once the enamel is penetrated, the high organic content of the dentine enables the attack to propagate fast.
Apparently one cannot have it both ways.
If the vulnerable organic layers did not exist teeth would not rot so easily but then they would be brittle and would probably break early in life.
The use of hydrogen bonds, that is hydroxyl groups (-OH)(see Appendix 1) to control adhesion at an interface is very common in living organisms and it is presumably a convenient method where the environment is continuously wet.
When natural materials are used by man in a dry environment difficulties arise.
The drying of the hydroxyls, each of which normally has a shell of water molecules around it, leads to the shrinkage of materials like wood.
It can also lead to drastic embrittlement, because the interfacial adhesion gets too strong.
This can be the case with ivory, which is pretty nearly tooth material.
The Parthenon in Athens contained a famous gold and ivory statue of Athene and the Parthenon must have been even hotter when the roof was on than it is today.
To preserve the ivory from becoming brittle and cracking, the statue was surrounded by a shallow pool of water which, besides reflecting the light upwards on to the statue, maintained the humidity high in the naos.
This pool was kept topped up, and the statue preserved, for about eight hundred years.
The remains of the rim of this pool, which was only an inch or two deep, can be seen on the floor of the Parthenon today.
Thermoplastics
So far we have dealt mostly with metals and with natural non-metallic materials of various kinds.
The large class of artificial non-metallic solids which we generally call ‘plastics’ are all based on arrangements of long-chain molecules, usually made preponderantly from carbon atoms.
The earliest material of this sort  was ‘Bakelite’, a polymer made by reacting phenol with formaldehyde; it was patented in 1906.
Such materials have the advantage that they can be made permanently hard by heating them to a temperature around 15°C, for which reason polymers with this sort of constitution are called ‘thermosetting’.
However, because thermosetting plastics consist essentially of an irregular three-dimensional network of molecules, something like glass, they have quite a low work of fracture — seldom more than 100 J/m 2 and usually much less — and so they behave mechanically in much the same way as glass does.
As we shall see in Chapter 8, the only way to make thermosetting plastics reasonably tough is to incorporate fibres of one kind or another, in other words to use them in a composite material.
Although the addition of fibres is a fairly effective way of making these materials tough it does put up the cost of manufacture and it also restricts the number of applications for which they are suitable.
Many of the objections to plastics of the thermosetting type for household goods and such-like applications have been got over by the development of the ‘thermoplastic’ resins which came into use on a large scale after 1945.
These materials are based on polymeric chains which are not cross-linked, in other words the molecular arrangement is quite different from that of glass.
As the name implies they do not harden permanently but will soften repeatedly if one subjects them to some temperature between about 100° and 150°C.
Although this characteristic is to some extent a handicap in that they cannot be used, for instance, with boiling water, there are very great manufacturing advantages since the stuff can be squirted out hot in the form of tubes and sections or else into an elaborately shaped mould where it can be hardened almost instantaneously by rapid chilling.
These processes are known as ‘extrusion’ and ‘injection moulding’and for many purposes they have proved the cheapest of all manufacturing methods.
Nowadays such materials exist in a great many chemical varieties and their trade names are legion though ‘Polythene’ and ‘Nylon ‘, together with ‘P.V.C.’(polyvinyl chloride) are probably still the most popular and the best known, at least in this country.
The really phenomenal success of these materials during the last  thirty years or so has been due to the combination of cheap and rapid mass-production with adequate toughness — added of course to chemical inertness, lightweight and bright and cheerful, not to say garish, colours.
The text-book example of this sort of thing is polyethylene (Polythene).
This consists, basically, of , in other words it is a linear long-chain molecule much like Figure 7.
Other synthetic polymers are chemically rather more complicated but, elastically, apparently not very widely different.
But now consider that the E of diamond — which has similar carbon-carbon bonds — is around 170 x 10 6 p.s.i.
(1,200,000 MN/m 2 ).
Diamond has a density of about 3.5 grams per c.c., polyethylene about 0.92; when we have made all the necessary corrections however we find that we ought to expect an E of about 10 x 10 6 p.s.i.
(70,000 MN/m 2 ) for polyethylene and similar thermoplastics.
In experimental fact, the E for polyethylene is around 0.3 x 10 6 p.s.i.
or 2,000 MN/m 2 — about a thirtieth of what theory predicts — and most of the other synthetic polymers are not much stiffer.
What is remarkable about the text-books (which describe the chemical structure of the various chains in loving detail) is not so much that they do not explain the discrepancy but that they do not even notice it; nor are they apparently interested in the fact that the work of fracture for a material like Polythene or Nylon is at least a hundred times higher than it is for most of the thermosetting plastics.
Owing to the work of Frank and Keller at Bristol University the probable explanation is now apparent.
It has long been known that the chain molecules of many natural and artificial polymers are arranged in a way which is at least partially crystalline.
What emerges from Frank and Keller's work is that the nature of the  crystals is different in natural and synthetic polymers.
As we shall see in the next chapter, in natural materials like wood, the long-chain molecules are arranged roughly parallel to the length of the tree, that is to say, more or less in the direction of the most important stresses.
This is why timber develops a good fraction of its theoretical modulus in actual practice.
In materials such as polyethylene, however, Keller finds that the long  chains are arranged in quite a different sort of way.
In fact they are folded on themselves in a zig-zag pattern something like Figure 8, for polyethylene the fold length is usually pretty constant at about 180°Å.
Examining this structure with the eye of an engineer it is at once evident that very little of the stiffness of the carbon — carbon chain will be reflected in the macroscopic modulus of the plastic since the bonds which control the extension are not the covalent primary bonds but the secondary or van der Waal forces which attach the convolutions of the chain to each other.
The experimental values for the E of polyethylene do, in fact, fit very well with both the known stiffness of the van der Waal  forces and also with that of molecular crystals of the phthalocyanine types.
(Chapter 2)
Thus the folded, Keller-type crystallization results in a large reduction in the stiffness of thermoplastics of the polyethylene type.
This may, or may not, be a technological handicap, depending upon what the material is meant to do.
It does seem, however, that Keller crystallization is wholly beneficial in regard to the work of fracture of these materials.
Before the plastic can break, many of the crystals have to unfold, rather like concertinas, and, in doing so, a great deal of energy is expended in unravelling the long molecules (Plate 13).
It is to this property that thermoplastics owe a good deal of their commercial success although, as we have seen, toughness is obtained at the price of very considerable loss of stiffness.
Such a molecular arrangement does not seem to be common in natural structural materials and indeed, a Polythene tree of any considerable height would be a public menace because of its low modulus.
Wood retains its popularity because it can offer much more stiffness for a given weight than any existing thermoplastic.
As we shall see in the next chapter, the consequence of this stiffness is that timber has had to evolve a work of fracture mechanism which is quite different and a good deal more ingenious.
Timber and cellulose or Wooden ships and Iron men 
‘Plastics are made by fools like me
But only God can make a tree.’
During the war, when we were doing research on strong plastics, Professor Charles Gurney used to recite this little ditty to me nearly every day and I found it depressing because wood was in fact a better material for making aeroplanes than the plastics which we could then produce.
Even today there are classes of structures such as sailplanes and some kinds of boats for which wood is still the most efficient material available.
Not only are wood and other forms of cellulose technically efficient but they are also fantastically successful, judged by any quantitative criterion.
Cellulose is the structural part of all vegetable matter and it is the strength and stiffness of cellulose which displays leaves and greenery to the sunshine so that photosynthesis can take place and become the principal chemical starting point for all forms of life.
Cellulose forms on the average about a third of the weight of all vegetation and the world tonnage of plants is almost beyond computation, locking up in cellulose a large fraction of the world's limited supply of carbon.
Cellulose seldom occurs in animals but there is one rather dim little class of marine animals, the Tunicates, which are mostly made from cellulose.
They look rather like elongated jellyfish and appear to have no structural virtues.
However chitin, the structural polymer in insects, is very similar to cellulose.
When we come to the works of man, cellulose is still in the leading place.
If we consider the timber which is sufficiently industrialized to get into the official statistics, the annual world consumption (not counting fuel) appears to lie between 800 and 1,000 million tons.
The rough timber, fencing, bamboo, reeds, thatch and so on used by farmers and primitive people may possibly amount to nearly as much again, but naturally, no records are available.
The world production of iron and steel is somewhere round 450 million tons, that of all other metals is negligible  by comparison.
* Since, weight for weight, the strengths of commercial steel and timber are comparable, the total of the burdens supported by wood may well be greater than those supported by steel, though no doubt many of the loads which steel carries are the more spectacular.
Since the density of wood averages about one-fourteenth of that of steel it may be that about thirty times the volume of wood is used, taking the world as a whole.
The ratio of the consumption of wood to steel varies considerably between different countries but it is not necessarily an index of the degree of industrialization or of technological advancement.
England and Holland both use about 1,100 lb. of steel per head per annum as against about 700 lb. weight of wood.
In U.S.A. the consumption of steel per head is about the same, 1,100 lb., but the consumption of timber per head is much more, about 2,400 lb.
In Canada it is as high as 3,300 lb. per head per annum.
The characteristic of less developed countries is that their consumption of both wood and steel, that is the total tonnage of their artifacts, is less.
* It is rather difficult to get a comparison in money values.
The relative prices of timber and steel vary greatly in different countries and also the price of timber itself varies from that of rough timber, which may be much cheaper than steel, up to expensive plywoods which cost far more than steel sheet.
Again it depends at what stage of manufacture one makes the comparison.
Very, very roughly, however, the cost of ‘industrial’ timber is about the same as that of commercial mild steel per lb.
Plant growth
Cellulose is an example of standardized production on the part of nature.
Although plants vary so greatly in their shape, function and general appearance, the cellulose molecule is the same in all.
It may vary slightly in length and in its physical arrangement but these are matters of detail; the chemistry is the same.
All the more advanced plants contain hollow, elongated, spindle-shaped cells (Plate 13) whose walls are made largely of cellulose.
(Which is why it is called ‘cell ulose’, ‘-ose’ being the chemical termination for sugars, ‘fructose’is the sugar found in  fruit, and so on.)
These hollow spindles are the fibres which take the loads and provide the strength.
Initially the simple sugar, glucose (Figure 1), is synthesized in leaves from atmospheric  and water by the action of sunlight on the green catalyst chlorophyll.
Like other simple sugars, glucose is soluble in water (which is why it is easily digestible) because it has five hydroxyl groups (see Appendix 1) which have a strong attraction for water molecules, and also because the glucose molecules are physically small enough to shuffle around fairly freely in a liquid, provided there are not too many of them.
Concentrated solutions of glucose approximate to treacle.
Glucose in dilute solution in sap-water thus passes through internal passages in the plant until it reaches a growing cell.
In the wall of the growing cell the glucose molecules are joined together endwise (Figure 2) by a chemical reaction known as a ‘condensation reaction ‘:
The result is an oxygen linkage and a molecule of water which goes off in the sap.
This process is controlled in the plant by substances called ‘auxins’ though how it is done is not at all clear.
The oxygen linkages between the sugar rings remain the vulnerable links in the cellulose molecule which may reach a length of several hundred glucose units.
It is the oxygen link which is broken by the enzymes in the stomachs of animals, such as sheep and cows, which can digest cellulose and by the various fungi or rots which attack wood.
It is also the linkage which is attacked by simple chemicals, such as bleaching powder, which are used by laundries, and accounts for the gradual weakening of shirts in the wash.
The cellulose chains which are laid down in the cell-wall are long and they have their length more or less parallel to the length of the cell or fibre, that is to say in the direction of the applied stress.
The growth of cellulose is altogether a very remarkable business.
If we consider an ordinary tree, by the time it is a few years old it has usually acquired a number of little branches, coming out more or less horizontally from the main stem or trunk.
Each of these little branches is in effect a cantilever beam stressed in bending by its own weight (Chapter 2).
Thus means, as we have seen, that the upper surface of the branch is stressed in tension and the lower surface in compression, like any other cantilever.
As the bough grows thicker and longer, it gets heavier, and this increases the stress in the top and bottom surfaces near where the branch emerges from the trunk.
The branch thickens and grows, like the rest of the tree, by laying down a layer of new material all over, under the bark and near the surface, each year.
If this layer of new material were put down each summer free from mechanical stresses the beam or branch would droop until the new material took up the strain and we should have a tree like a weeping willow.
In the majority of trees this does not happen.
The boughs grow out from the trunk at nearly the same angle throughout the life of the tree and the sapling can be regarded as a geometrical model of the fully grown tree.
It follows that, in the majority of trees, the new cellulose is laid down in the cell already containing the stresses and strains which it has to bear.
Working with hydroquinone and other fairly simple soluble substances, I have grown long needle crystals or whiskers (Chapter 4) which thicken by the growth of sleeve-like surface layers which are geometrically not unlike the growth layers in a tree.
The initial whisker crystal or filament is often highly bent and the growth layers can be seen to exert a very strong straightening  action on the bent filament, such that, by the time the sinuous initial thread has grown to a millimetre or so thick, it is in, variably straight.
From this it is clear that the growth layers of these crystals are formed under considerable mechanical stress if this is needed to straighten the crystal.
This occurs quite frequently in simple, non-biological systems and there is no question of any additional controlling substance or biological mechanism being needed to cause it to happen.
We might therefore suppose that it is normal for the growing bough to straighten under stress by some simple non-living mechanism.
However, not all plants do this and a number of trees which normally produce straight, stress-carrying boughs can be grafted so as to behave like weeping willows.
There is a suggestion that the growth-controlling auxin gravitates to the bottom of the bough and this produces more wood on the compression face, but to me, this is only a partial answer.
The cellulose chains are always simple thread-like molecules and do not branch by forming oxygen linkages at the sides of the sugar rings, as do other, weaker, polysaccharides such as starch.
In the vegetable cell these cellulose molecules form very long, more or less crystalline, threads or fibrillae which are about 150–200 Å thick, say about 30 to 40 molecules wide.
As we have seen, most of the internal volume of wood material is taken up with empty space, or at least by air and sap.
The cell walls are comparatively thin and the cross-section of the cell is often roughly rectangular (Plate 8).
These relatively thin walls are largely composed of cellulose, in the form of fibrillae, and Professor Preston, of Leeds, finds that these thin threads are disposed in the form of a very steep spiral or helix, wound around the long axes of the cells (Figure 3).
The helical angle varies between about 6° and about 30° but what is really remarkable is that the direction of the twist or helix — which may be either right — or left-handed — is always the same in any one tree.
All this seems a very curious — indeed an eccentric — arrangement on the part of Nature who, if she had had a proper training in the theory of fibrous composite materials, would surely have known better.
A little while ago Dr Giorgio Jeronimidis came to work with me on just this subject.
The first thing that George found was that  the work of fracture of wood was quite exceptionally high, although of course it has nothing resembling a dislocation mechanism to help it.
In fact the work of fracture, W, turned out to be around 10 4 J/m 2 , which, weight for weight, is at least as good as a ductile steel and a good deal better than ‘tough’ composites like fibreglass.
In fact the figure is much better than one would predict from composite theory (Chapter 8), supposing wood to behave like an artificial composite.
As Punch would have said many years ago, ‘collapse of Stout Party’.
Since this high work of fracture — which makes trees able to stand up to the buffetings of life and which makes wood such a useful material — cannot be accounted for by any of the recognized work of fracture mechanisms which operate in man-made composites, George set out to find out what was really happening.
Now the various cells in wood are glued to each other(by means of the various non-cellulosic constituents which exist in timber) in a way which is reasonably effective, but not very effective.
This is why the paper-maker is able to make a fibrous pulp for your morning paper from wood.
If a crack begins to.penetrate into the wood across the grain, the Cook-Gordon mechanism — which we discussed in the last chapter — comes into operation in the region around the crack tip and the various cells become separated so that each of them operates as an independent helix, something like a drinking straw.
When this happens the thin walls of the tubes are able to buckle, the helical fibrillae can then straighten themselves out and so the cell is enabled to elongate under the tensile load by something like 20 percent.
Both by calculation and by experiments with model cells, George was able to show that the process of buckling and elongation absorbed a great deal of energy.
This process shows great cunning on the part of Nature, also a good deal of cleverness on the part of George.
It adds, very usefully, to our repertoire of work of fracture mechanisms and, as we shall see, it seems likely to turn out extremely useful in the design and manufacture of artificial composite materials.
In fact the arrangement of the cellulose molecules in wood is partially crystalline and partially amorphous.
The crystalline regions are held together sideways by hydroxyls which have got  rid of all their attached water molecules and once the system has locked solid into a regular crystal, the interstices of the crystal become inaccessible to water.
We know that this is so because the X-ray diffraction pattern, which shows the crystal lattice spacing, does not change when cellulose swells in water.
On the other hand, cellulose absorbs both liquid and atmospheric moisture very actively and this, from the engineer's point of view, is one of its worst vices.
The proportion of crystalline material in natural cellulose varies a good deal but may be about thirty or forty per cent of the whole.
The non-crystalline, that is the amorphous cellulose, has no mechanism for protecting its hydroxyls from moisture, since most of them are not firmly attached to their neighbours, and so they pick up a shell, round each hydroxyl, of any water molecules which are available.
This naturally reduces their attraction for each other and so the forces holding the cell wall together laterally are diminished and the cell swells.
It is stopped from passing completely into solution, partly by the large size of the cellulose molecules and, more, by the fact that, in natural cellulose, the whole system is tied together mechanically by the presence of the crystals, which are water-proof and form a good proportion of the whole mass.
So-called ‘regenerated celluloses’, such as Cellophane, are made by dissolving natural cellulose by chemical methods which break up the crystals.
The resulting solution is then precipitated to form a transparent film which is largely a tangled-up felt of individual molecules, and is much less crystalline.
When such films are wetted they become very flabby indeed and lose all their strength.
The Cellophane which is made for wrapping and packaging is therefore protected by a very thin coating, on each face, of a water-resistant lacquer.
This gives sufficient protection for its ephemeral purpose but, after prolonged wetting, such materials are hopelessly weak, whereas natural celluloses retain a good part of their strength.
The natural celluloses which we use include a very large number of timbers, bamboo, cane, flax, hemp, cotton, ramie, sisal, esparto and so on.
However, as we might expect, their mechanical behaviour and especially their swelling in water and the relation between their temperature and moisture content and  their strength, differ only in detail and present much the same general picture.
The properties of wood
Trees grow in all shapes and sizes and their timbers look very different.
These variations are however more or less superficial and the main differences between timbers lie in their density.
Seasoned balsa has density of five to ten pounds per cubic foot (s.g. 0.1), spruce around thirty (0.45), oak about fifty (0.7) and lignum vitae between seventy and eighty (1.1).
With quite minor additions and subtractions the actual wood substance has in all cases about the same chemical constitution and about the same density of ninety pounds per cubic foot (that is, much the same as sugar — say 1.5).
As we have said, the main structure of wood consists of large numbers of tubular cells or fibres of squarish cross-section fitting very neatly together (Figure 3 and Plate 8).
There are minor distinctions in the geometrical arrangement of the fibres in different species.
For instance, some timbers, notably oak, have a certain number of fibres, medullary rays, running radially in the trunk and thus crossing the longitudinal fibres at right angles.
From the engineering point of view, however, all woods may be considered as bundles of parallel tubes, rather like bundles of drinking straws.
Since the tubes are made of substantially the same material the large range of density is caused by the various thicknesses of the cell walls.
One consequence of this is that, to a first approximation, most of the mechanical properties of different timbers are proportionate to their densities; a timber twice as dense will be about twice as strong and so on.
This is not quite true but it is roughly so.
Wood substance consists of about sixty per cent of cellulose, various other sugar compounds and lignin, a substance having affinities to a resin, which impregnates adult wood substance in some fairly intimate way.
Unlignified cellulose is birefringent, that is to say, it rotates polarized light because of its highly directional nature and it also stains brightly with certain dyes.
Normal wood substance containing lignin does not do either of these things.
However, immediately before mechanical failure, and before any weakness can be distinguished by mechanical methods, wood becomes both birefringent and easily stained by characteristic dyes.
This is probably due to the early stages of George Jeronimidis' fracture mechanism of which we talked on page 135.
These phenomena cannot be used as a warning of incipient fracture because, to observe the effects, it is necessary to cut thin sections of the stressed part and to look at it in an optical microscope.
However, the method can be very useful when investigating accidents and it also serves to show how subtle is the nature of wood substance.
Some tropical woods such as teak and green-heart contain small amounts of toxic chemicals and also of silica.
These protect the timber from insects and rots but they also help to account for the high cost of working the best tropical woods because the silica blunts tools very quickly and the splinters of greenheart are poisonous.
As we have seen, wood depends for its defences against crack propagation partly upon Jeronimidis' work of fracture contrivance — which ensures that the critical Griffith crack length is a long one — and also, by way of a further safety device, upon the Cook-Gordon mechanism for stopping any crack which gets past George.
The other mechanical properties of wood are very much what we should expect from a bundle of tubes or fibres.
Laterally, that is across the grain, they separate or crush quite easily, so that the lateral tensile and compressive strengths are very low, only a few hundred pounds per square inch.
The lighter woods, such as balsa, can be crushed with the finger.
On the other hand, it is just because the fibre tubes can be crushed locally that wood can be nailed and screwed without splitting, provided we do not abuse the wood too much.
Incidentally, nails and screws of reasonable size, put in with reasonable care, do not weaken the wood, as a whole, in any measurable way, * in other words wood is astonishingly resistant to stress concentrations.
The tensile strength of spruce, for instance, is around 17,000 p.s.i.
or 120 MN/m 2 when carefully measured.
This represents an elastic strain or interatomic separation of about 1.0 per cent, perhaps between a tenth and a twentieth of the theoretical strength.
These figures are much better than those for most other engineering materials, especially cheap ones.
A commercial mild steel strains elastically about 0.15 per cent.
Weight for weight, the tensile strength of wood is equivalent to that of a 300,000 p.s.i.
steel, which is four or five times the strength of the steels in common use.
In practice, as we shall see, it is not very easy to make effective use of the high tensile strength of timber.
The weakness of wood is in compression along the grain.
In this respect it is the opposite of cast iron, which is strong in compression and weak in tension.
Again, a bundle of drinking straws glued together provides a realistic model.
Under a compressive load the thin wall of one of the tubes decides to buckle or corrugate and all the rest have to follow it (Figure 4).
The compressive strength of spruce generally lies between 4,000 and 5,000 p.s.i., say 30 MN/m 2 .
Weight for weight, this is still quite respectable, as compared with steel, but it is of course much less than the tensile strength.
When wood begins to fail in compression little lines of buckled  fibres can just be seen running diagonally or across the grain but these are easily missed unless the surface is clean and you know what to look for.
For some time after the initial failure nothing very sensational or catastrophic happens, the wood just yields gradually.
In most cases wood is used in bending and the result of gradual crushing on the compression side of a beam is to transfer load to the tension side.
In this way, the nominal stress in a wooden beam before actual collapse occurs may be up to twice the true compressive stress.
It is this which makes a structure made out of timber such a safe one, generally one can very nearly get away with murder.
Again, timber is noisy stuff and it will frighten the wits out of you before it is in any real danger of breaking.
Sailplanes are often launched by means of half a mile or so of wire, reeled in by a winch.
Having no engine, gliders are delightfully silent, except for a slight noise from the wind so that one can hear the structure very well.
On a fast, gusty launch a wooden glider will treat you to a series of creaks and groans, and occasionally bangs, which are alarming until you realize that it is all pretence and that the structure is not in the least danger of breaking up.
In fact it puts on this performance several times a day.
I am pretty sure that these noises do not proceed from incipient compression failures.
I have often wondered where they do come from but confess that I have absolutely no idea.
They are however counted to wood for righteousness: as long as one can hear a timber structure one is very unlikely to break it.
For its weight, therefore, the strength of timber is as good or better than most of its competitors.
Strength however is not enough: one must also have adequate stiffness.
Substances like Nylon have plenty of strength but they are not sufficiently stiff to make engineering structures.
The Young's modulus of spruce is about 1.5 to 2.0 x 106 p.s.i.
(12,000 MN/m 2 ) and the other timbers are, roughly, more or less stiff than this in proportion to their densities.
Curiously, weight for weight, the Young's modulus of timbers is almost exactly the same as steel and aluminium and much better than synthetic resins.
The good stiffness, combined with low density, means that wood is very efficient in beams and columns.
Furniture, floors and bookshelves are usually best made in wood and so are things like flagstaffs and yachts' masts.
The  railways in America could be built very quickly and cheaply in the nineteenth century partly because of the efficiency of the timber trestle bridge.
As against these virtues, timber creeps.
That is to say, if a stress is left on for a long time, wood will gradually run away from the load.
This can be seen in the roof-tree of an old house or barn, which is generally concave.
The creep of the wood is the reason why one must not leave a wooden bow or a violin tightly strung.
The cause of the creep is most probably simply that, in the amorphous part of the cellulose, the rather badly stuck hydroxyls take advantage of changes in moisture and temperature to shuffle away from their responsibilities.
It is unlikely that the crystalline part of cellulose creeps to any measurable extent.
Swellulose
No doubt it would not be beyond the wit of nature to join up the cellulose molecules sideways with primary chemical bonds so that it would be thoroughly tied together and would have much the same strength in every direction.
However, as we said in the last chapter, it seems to be a condition for the strength and toughness of materials of this type that there should be planes of weakness parallel to the strongest direction.
If not, wood would be something like a lump of sugar: homogeneous but weak and brittle.
For its weight, there is really nothing wrong with the mechanical properties of wood and the weight of wooden structures is generally at least comparable to that of metal ones.
We pay for this however in the vulnerability of wood to moisture.
Wood is affected by liquid water in the form of rain, rivers, seas and so on with which it may come into contact but, more importantly, it is affected by the moisture vapour which is always present in the air.
Air at any given temperature can hold so much moisture; any excess is precipitated as rain, fog, mist or dew.
Such air is called saturated and thus the ‘relative humidity’ on a wet day is around 100 per cent.
Indoors, or in drier weather, the relative humidity decreases, although it seldom falls much below 30 per cent even in hot dry climates.
All timbers tend to come to an equilibrium with the relative humidity of the surrounding air.
Exposed for a long time to moist, saturated, air timber might settle down to a moisture content of 22 per cent or 23 per cent.
In a very dry climate the moisture content might reach as low a figure as 5 per cent.
Regarded as mere changes of weight these figures are of secondary importance.
What is important is the effect of the moisture on the wood.
The most important effect is that the wood shrinks or swells.
The movement in the direction along the grain of the wood is negligible, as one would expect from the molecular structure.
The cross-grain swelling and shrinkage is however very large.
Every one per cent change of moisture content may cause about a half per cent shrinkage or swelling.
Over the range of moisture contents likely to be reached in air the lateral dimensions of wood can thus change between five and ten per cent, that is up to an inch on a ten-inch-wide plank.
Amateurs rather like to use wide planks if they get the chance, professionals are wiser and prefer narrow ones so that the movement at each individual joint is smaller.
Of course one does not often get shrinkage and swelling as gross as ten per cent but as little as one or two per cent can be sufficiently troublesome.
Paint and varnish slow down moisture changes in wood but they do not prevent them for no paint is impermeable to water vapour.
Even indoors, the relative humidity is changing all the time, especially between night and day.
Floor boards and furniture tend to follow the humidity and this is the reason for the ghostly noises one hears in the house at night.
If wood is physically restrained from shrinking when it wants to do so it will split, because it has almost no tensile strength across the grain.
If it is physically restrained from swelling when it wants to swell, very considerable pressures are built up.
The Egyptian method for quarrying large blocks of stone, such as Cleopatra's Needle, was to outline the shape by means of a stress concentration, in the form of a groove in the surface of the rock.
Deep holes were made along this groove into which dry wooden pegs or posts were driven.
These wedges were then supposed to have been soaked in water until the rock split along the required line.
The shrinkage of cordage and textiles is much the same in  principle as that of wood.
Individual fibres change their thickness but not their length with moisture changes, and it is the helical geometry of ropes and textile yarns which causes rope and cloth to get shorter when it gets wet.
Flax sails, especially, were very porous and sailing ships ‘in chase’ would wet their sails to swell the fibres and reduce the porosity.
As we see, the most important effect of moisture on wood is to cause it to swell.
A rather less important effect, from the practical point of view, is to change the mechanical properties.
Thoroughly wet wood has something like a third of the strength and stiffness of completely dry wood.
Biological materials always operate in the saturated state: this gets rid of the problem of shrinkage and swelling at the expense of a reduction in strength.
In engineering, cellulose is never used in the completely dry condition so that the range of strength and stiffness is not quite as bad as it sounds.
Wet wood is rather easier to bend than dry but the principal agent for bending wood is heat.
Traditionally, wood which has to be bent for tennis racquets and boat ribs is steamed.
It is often supposed that the steam does something because it is steam.
In fact the steam is a convenient way of heating the wood without drying it out and the mechanism is exactly the same as that used by hairdressers for curling hair.
Sometimes amateurs wrap wood in hot wet rags when they want to bend it.
The wetness of the rags does not accomplish much but the wood gets heated and the rags may insulate the hot wood and prevent it from cooling too quickly.
Wood will not come to much harm in moist heat below about 140°C. but, of course, in dry heat it will soon crack due to shrinkage.
Seasoning
A great deal of rubbish has been talked about the seasoning of timber by craftsmen and by romantic but ignorant amateurs.
Wood, as we have said, consists of closed tubes which, in the living tree are partly full of water, or rather sap.
In freshly felled wood the moisture content varies but may be over 100 per cent of the weight of the dry wood substance.
About 25 per cent of this water is absorbed in the hydroxyls of the fibre wall, the remainder is liquid water inside the cell.
Seasoning consists in removing most  of the water in a controlled way: essentially it is a drying operation and nothing more.
It is necessary to bring the wood to a moisture content which is nearly at equilibrium with the environment in which the timber is going to be used for if this is not done one must expect warping and shrinkage.
For external use a moisture content of perhaps 20 per cent may be suitable, for an unheated building about 15 per cent, and for a steam-heated environment about 8 or 10 per cent .
Since the cells are closed, spindle-shaped tubes, the liquid water inside them is not very easy to get out.
It can only be dried out by diffusing it slowly through the tube walls.
This would present no great difficulty if one were dealing with a single cell but real lumber contains many thousands and it is necessary to diffuse the water from the inner cells through the walls of most of the other cells which lie between them and the outer world.
To do this it is necessary to maintain a moisture gradient between the inside and the outside of the wood.
The sharper this gradient is, the faster moisture will be lost from the inside.
On the other hand if the moisture gradient is too steep the outside will be notably drier, in the intermediate stages of seasoning, than the inside and so it will shrink more and will thus split.
This is why one cannot season too fast without ruining the timber.
Traditionally, wood was seasoned ‘naturally’ in the open air or in open.
unheated sheds.
This might take a year or so for planks an inch or two thick and seven years for large oak ship's timbers.
With primitive methods and knowledge this is about the best that one can do.
One of the reasons why the better shipyards and coachbuilders were expensive was that they kept large stocks of valuable timber seasoned and seasoning.
A great deal of technological work has been done recently on the seasoning of wood, and safe accelerated drying schedules have been worked out for all kinds and dimensions of timber.
By carefully controlling the drying rates in large kilns the time for seasoning can be reduced to a matter of days or weeks.
Another factor which reduces seasoning time is the modern tendency, because of the existence of efficient glues, to use timber in much smaller sizes, which of course dry more quickly.
Timber which has been properly kiln-seasoned (which needs expensive kilns and  close supervision) is in no way worse than ‘naturally’ seasoned timber and indeed is rather less likely to have picked up the infections of rot during the seasoning process.
However, original or commercial sin keeps breaking in and there is undoubtedly a great deal of badly seasoned wood on the market.
The moisture content of wood may be determined simply by weighing a small sample before and after oven drying.
In industry it is usually done with portable meters which measure the electrical resistance between two needles pressed into the wood and thus give the answer much more quickly.
Up to about 25 per cent moisture content the whole of the water in wood is held in association with the hydroxyls in the cell walls.
At about 25 per cent moisture content however these hydroxyls become saturated and the cell walls can absorb no more water; this is known as the ‘fibre saturation point’.
Up to the fibre saturation point the lumen or hollow part of the cell is empty of water, above the fibre saturation point virtually the whole of the additional moisture exists as loose liquid water within the lumen.
All the dimensional and mechanical changes in wood which are due to moisture occur below the fibre saturation point, that is between 0 per cent and 25 per cent moisture content.
After that no further swelling takes place and the additional water simply adds, very considerably, to the weight of the wood.
Wood substance has a specific gravity around 1.4 but freshly felled timber floats (unless it is a very dense species) because, even in the unseasoned wood, there is a good deal of air.
Wood will, however, eventually become waterlogged and sink though, like seasoning, this takes a considerable time.
The crew of the Kontiki raft were worried lest their balsa logs should sink under them on their long voyage although, in the event, the soakage was not very great.
The American clipper ships of the 1850 s, the famous ‘soft-wood three skysail-yarders’, became water-soaked within about ten years by which time they had no doubt paid for themselves very handsomely.
The hardwoods from which English ships were usually built are more resistant to soakage and there are several instances of wooden ships afloat and in service for over a hundred years.
Rot
Rot is caused by fungi which live parasitically on cellulose since fungi have no  chlorophyll and cannot photosynthesize sugars for themselves.
The spores of various fungi are nearly always present in woodwork, just as the germs of many diseases are present in our bodies, but they do not become active unless the conditions are favourable.
Rots cannot flourish if the moisture content of the wood is below 18 per cent although the spores can remain alive in quite dry timber, waiting for a rainy day.
Even when the moisture content rises above 18 per cent the fungi may not grow if the ventilation is good.
As the moisture content of the wood in an unheated structure may be around 15 per cent, it only requires a small amount of damp in an unventilated corner to get the rot going.
One cannot always control moisture content but one can generally arrange for ventilation and this is usually a sufficient preventative.
Many chemical treatments are effective in killing active fungi in wood but, in an old and complicated structure, the practical difficulty may be to reach the diseased parts without pulling the whole structure expensively to bits.
If the rot is accessible one can generally arrange for ventilation anyway.
In the cyclic natural scheme of things some kind of decay is essential, otherwise not only would the earth be cluttered with the stems of most of the plants which have ever lived, but most of the world's supply of carbon would be locked up in cellulose so that life could not be carried on.
This is a general objection to the use of biological materials by man for nature's planned obsolescence may be in conflict with ours.
Wooden ships
‘But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind called Euroclydon.
And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive.
And running under a certain island which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat: which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the  ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, struck sail, and so were driven.’
Acts of the Apostles , Chapter 27.
The wooden sailing ship was par excellence the artifact which made the expansion of Western civilization possible and thus, more than any other device, was responsible for our present condition.
Wooden sailing ships explored the world and later surveyed it.
They carried passengers and troops, emigrants, convicts and slaves.
They carried gold and coal, machinery and books, tea and wool, cotton goods and cheap tin trays, not only to the ends of the earth but also round the coasts and up the rivers.
For hundreds of years the ship of the line was the ultimate argument of kings, frequently used.
Ships like this are not things of a dim past, there were first-class passenger sailing ships on the Australian run within living memory * and there are Admirals alive who first went to sea in wooden sailing ships.
* ‘The last major wooden (actually composite) passenger sailing ship seems to have been Torrenns which ceased carrying passengers to Adelaide in 1903.
Iron and steel sailing ships of various lines were carrying first-, second- and sometimes third-class passengers to Australia well into this century.
Contrary to modem popular opinion these were splendid ships with excellent accommodation and many modern conveniences for both crew and passengers.
Steamship competition was the cause of many hard-ships in cargo sailing ships but passenger sailing ships had to compete by offering more comfort.
See for instance Painted Ports by A. G. Course (Hollis and Carter, 1961).
The largest wooden, sailing, cargo ship — the six-masted schooner Wyoming, of about 6,000 tons burden — was built in America in 1910.
Although about the middle of the nineteenth century large improvements were made in both the hulls and the rigs of ships, for three or four hundred years before that the basic methods of construction remained nearly constant.
The two controlling facts were that wood swelled and that metals were expensive.
Large ships were heavily framed from ‘grown’ timbers.
That is to say the curved members, such as ribs, were built up of naturally curving wood, chosen to have the right shape.
The watertight skin and deck were put on over this closely spaced framework of ribs and beams in the form of planks, nearly as thick as they were wide, which ran longitudinally at right-angles to the ribs.
The  planking and the underlying ribs thus formed a rectangular trellis with no diagonal bracing or shear members.
The edges of adjacent planks were not fastened together mechanically but stood open so as to form a V-shaped groove.
Into this groove oakum, made by picking old rope to pieces in the prisons and workhouses, was driven by means of a mallet and a caulking iron which is a chisel-like tool with a groove along the edge.
Outside the caulking there remained an open groove between the planks nearly half an inch wide.
In the case of decks this had to be ‘payed’ which was done by running in hot pitch from a special ladle.
When cold the surplus pitch was sufficiently brittle to be scraped off, leaving those pleasing black lines in the deck.
The bottom and topsides were payed or stopped with a putty like composition.
The point of all these arrangements was that the flexible caulking could accommodate shrinking and swelling of the planking, and to some extent movement of the hull, without leaking very much.
The whole structure was, and to some extent was intended to be, quite flexible, almost like a basket.
Besides accommodating the shrinkage and swelling of the skin planks, it was supposed, perhaps correctly, that the flexibility of the hull contributed to its speed and sea-kindliness; certainly the Viking ships and the Polynesian canoes were even more flexible.
When the much more rigid ‘composite’ constructions came in in Victorian times one or two of the racing clippers were built with hulls of deliberately controllable rigidity.
Of one such ship her rivals would say, as she drew ahead, ‘They've unscrewed the beams and we shan't see her again today.’
This was all very well and most wooden ships were watertight in harbour but, without exception, they all leaked when they got to sea.
The rate of leakage varied from ‘enough to keep the bilges sweet’ to something very serious indeed.
In spite of all the centuries which he had to learn about it the traditional ship-wright seemed to be unable to understand about shear.
Any shell structure subject to bending and torsion puts heavy shears into the skin and bending and torsion are just what a ship, especially a  sailing ship, receives at sea.
The orthodox ship construction was like a five-bar gate without the diagonal member.
Since there was no official way of taking the shear it was taken, unofficially, by the caulking which was squeezed and relaxed alternately, like a bath sponge.
Occasionally, but surprisingly rarely, the labouring ship spat the caulking from some underwater seam, in which case she probably foundered.
More often she just leaked and leaked and leaked.
The danger was then, not that she would sink immediately, but that the crew would become exhausted from continual pumping and general misery, after which anything might happen.
When the situation became intolerable an attempt might be made to undergird or frap the ship by passing cables under the hull as St Paul describes in the Acts of the Apostles.
It has been done repeatedly since and very likely, in some corner of the ocean, an Arab dhow is being undergirded at this moment.
The whole point of the undergirding cables was to provide some shear bracing and so unless the operation was done with a knowledge and accuracy which were rather unlikely in the circumstances, so as to get the cables roughly at forty-five degrees, the expedient probably had usually as little effect as it seems to have had upon Paul's ship.
As far as the Royal Navy were concerned the nuisance of excessive leakage was largely put a stop to when Sir Robert Seppings (1764–1840) introduced diagonal iron bracing into wooden hulls about 1830.
Seppings, who used to say ‘partial strength produces general weakness’, seems to have been one of the first Naval Architects to have a clear mental picture of the stress systems in a ship's hull.
In the merchant service wooden hulls were to a considerable extent replaced by composite and iron and steel construction after the middle of the century.
A number of wooden ships continued to be built without adequate shear bracing, however, and such ships got more leaky as they got older, until, in an age when most of the pumping was done by hand, it became uneconomic to run them any longer.
Up till 1914  Norwegian shipowners were still making money by buying up British sailing ships and running them with windmill pumps.
In spite of their faults, wooden sailing warships were in use for between three and four hundred years and were abandoned by Admiralties with reluctance because they were, in their context, most effective and economical weapons.
They had a range and endurance, an independence of overseas bases and an ability to vanish indefinitely into vast spaces which we have only lately regained with the atomic submarine.
Fleet actions were rare, and strategic pressure was generally exerted by blockade and by the threat of a ‘fleet in being’.
However, until the middle of the eighteenth century it was considered impracticable to keep fleets continually at sea throughout the winter because of the severe and rapid deterioration in the condition of the ships.
However, these difficulties were overcome by the efforts of devoted officers.
To anyone familiar with the coasts, with sailing ships and with the cellulose molecule, the maintenance of the blockades of Brest and Toulon, winter and summer and in all weathers, must appear as an almost incredible feat.
‘Those far-distant, storm-beaten ships, upon which the Grand Army never looked, stood between it and the dominion of the World.’
Rope and spars came mostly from the Baltic states and the convoys got through with difficulty.
Although the blockading squadrons very rarely saw the French they had daily and hourly to struggle with rope and canvas and timber which stretched and broke and rotted.
Nelson wrote ‘I have applications from the different line of battle ships for surveys on most of their sails and running rigging which cannot be complied with as there is neither cordage nor sails to replace the unserviceable stores and therefore the evil must be combated in the best manner possible.’
In spite of this, Mahan wrote ‘For twenty-two months Nelson's fleet never went into port, at the end of that time, when the need arose to pursue an enemy for four thousand miles, it was found massed and in all respects perfectly prepared for so sudden and so distant a call.’
When a sailing ship has a fair wind, even though it be a gale, the loads in her rigging are moderate.
However when she is heeling and lurching her way to windward the aggregate of the tensions in the shrouds and stays which support the masts is comparable to the ship's displacement and may thus amount to several thousand tons.
Until the middle of the nineteenth century the whole of this load, equivalent to the weight of many railway trains, had to be carried by hemp ropes which were always shrinking and swelling, rotting and stretching so that it called for great skill to avoid the loss of some or all of the masts and spars.
There was therefore an understandable reluctance to undertake regularly long voyages to windward in rough weather.
A voyage round Cape Horn, for instance, was quite different in character to the routine voyages to the East coast of the Americas or even to India.
Bligh's crew, for example, in the Bounty mutinied after one appalling attempt to beat round the Horn in which the ship could barely be held together structurally.
Eventually Bligh had to turn round and run in the other direction, right round the earth, into the Pacific.
Bligh, though unpopular, was a superb seaman and, if he could not succeed, probably nobody else could.
Wire standing rigging was introduced into the Royal Navy in 1838.
Its adoption by the merchant service seems to have been fairly gradual (and was not complete until the 1860 s) because about this time hemp rope was improved by being laid up, or twisted, mechanically, and thus much more tightly, so that the creep was considerably reduced.
By chance the introduction of better rigging more or less coincided with the gold discoveries in California.
About half of the emigrants and all of the heavy cargo went by sea and by then numerous clippers were prepared to beat regularly from New York to San Francisco in a hundred days.
In the years 1849 and 1850, 760 sailing ships beat round Cape Horn carrying between them 27,000 passengers.
It is difficult to determine what proportion of these ships had wire rigging and which used the improved hemp but in any case it is clear that the West was largely won with better rope.
Another important development was in the matter of chain  cable.
Hemp anchor cables have certain advantages but their drawback lies in the space needed to stow them; the enormous ventilated cable tiers in H.M.S. Victory are impressive.
Chain, which was introduced in 1811, could be stowed in a small damp locker and so it can almost be said that chain cleared the space needed below for engines and coal bunkers.
When ships were slow and there were no dockyards on the other side of the world, the fouling of ships' bottoms by weed and the attack on timber by boring animals was a serious matter.
Both problems were solved to a large extent by the introduction of copper sheathing about 1770.
This did more than any other eighteenth-century innovation to increase the speed and range of ships and it was so successful that shipowners were most reluctant to use iron hulls which could not be coppered directly on account of electro-chemical action between the iron and the copper in salt water.
Some iron hulls were sheathed with wood and then coppered.
This was popular for warships but it made for a heavy hull.
Many of the best racing clippers were therefore composite built.
Cutty Sark (launched 1869) is planked with teak and greenheart bolted to wrought-iron frames, with adequate shear bracing.
The bottom was sheathed with a brass alloy called Muntz metal.
There are people who consider this arrangement as being the most perfect construction yet devised for ships of medium size.
This may well be true but it is unfortunately also a very expensive one.
The fall in the cost of iron and steel plates in the 1870 s made composite shipbuilding uneconomic and, towards the end of the nineteenth century most of the world's deep sea cargo was carried by big sailing ships of almost standardized construction with steel hulls, steel decks, steel spars and steel rigging.
Such ships were completely watertight and could be manned by small crews.
The loss of speed from their rougher bottoms was compensated by the fact that they could be sailed harder than wooden ships in blowing weather.
Over the centuries officers had had to nurse their wooden ships for structural reasons and this had provided a certain measure of protection against excessive sail-carrying.
Hard driving clipper captains regarded their new ships as unbreakable and, when expostulated with, would reply ‘Hell, she's iron isn't  she?’
Quite a number of iron and steel ships were driven under and lost by this attitude of mind.
Steamships were in a minority until about 1890 and in any case tended to take the shorter voyages.
Of course plenty of wooden steamships were built but the tendency was to turn to iron and steel earlier than in the case of sailing ships.
This may have been partly because iron hulls resisted the vibration of the early engines better than wooden ones and also because fouling was less of a problem with continuous speeds and shorter voyages.
It is the becalmed sailing ship which fouls quickly.
Orthodox wooden construction is still being used today for fishing vessels, minesweepers and yachts of up to four or five hundred tons.
For racing yachts it generally provides the lightest of all hulls and it is also the cheapest way of getting a ‘one-off’ design built.
In its cheaper forms it still suffers from the classical trouble of intolerable leakage in bad weather, especially because of the much higher loads put into the hull by modern rigs.
It is true that it is possible to get over this by good workmanship and sophisticated construction but then the cost is higher than that of building in steel or plastics.
Glue and plywood or mice in the gliders 
‘When all else fails
Use bloody great nails.’
Until recently the fact that the strength of engineering materials is usually only between one and five per cent of the strength of their chemical bonds was of little practical significance because the joints between the various component parts of structures were so inefficient that even the strength which the material had was scarcely used.
Properly made knots and splices in rope are from forty to eighty per cent efficient; that is, the joint has that fraction of the strength of the continuous rope.
Nailed, bolted, screwed, pegged or dovetailed joints in wood are far less efficient than this, at any rate as the joints are generally made.
In pure strength, apart from their flexibility, the lashings, sewings and bindings used by primitive peoples, and by seamen down to recent times, are more efficient than metal fastenings, indeed sledges are still made in this way.
About 1920, flying boat hulls were made by sewing them together with copper wire.
Wood-screws, beloved of amateur carpenters and boatbuilders are the least efficient of all joints.
Between the wars the Germans did a good deal of research on nailed joints and also invented new and clever forms of mechanical connectors.
This information is sometimes used today in building wooden houses but, on the whole, mechanical connexions of all kinds have been driven out by modern glues which have made the efficient use of wood possible but have introduced problems of their own.
Glue
Various pundits and committees have made a great mystery about gluing.
In fact the elementary theory is simple enough, it is the practice of gluing which is difficult.
As we said in Chapter 3, all surfaces have an energy, just because they are surfaces, and this applies both to solids and to liquids.
If we consider a solid and a  liquid separately, each being in contact with air, then of course each surface has its own surface energy.
If now the liquid is brought into contact with the solid, so as to wet it, then the energy of the interface between the solid and the liquid will be less than the sum of surface energies of the two surfaces when they are in contact with air.
Thus wetting involves a reduction of energy and will take place whenever the liquid is given the opportunity to meet the solid.
After it has wetted the solid surface, the liquid may be hardened, by freezing it or otherwise.
If this is done, the energy of the interface will not be greatly changed and to remove the hardened liquid mechanically will now need strain energy and therefore a mechanical force.
Thus, in principle, adhesion is very like cohesion and there is no great difference between the stick of a glue and the strength of a solid.
The surface energies of glue-solid interfaces are generally rather less than the free surface energies of strong solids, but not very greatly so.
In fact this difference is not usually of much consequence because in both cases the practical strengths are well below what they ought to be.
The causes of weakness in adhesion are rather less understood at present than they are in cohesion but no doubt they are generally similar in character.
Any two solids can therefore be glued together if we can find a liquid which will wet them both and then harden.
The difficulties which arise are practical ones.
Wood can be glued very well by wetting it with water which is subsequently frozen.
Such joints are said to pass most of the tests in the specifications for wood adhesives.
Hide glue or carpenter's glue may be considered as a variant on ice in that the melting point is raised to a more practical temperature.
Hide glue is the same as table jelly, except that less water is added to the gelatine, which may be made from hide, hooves, bones, fish and so on.
A stiff solution of gelatine melts in a heated glue-pot at 70° or 80°C.
After it is painted onto the wood it sets very quickly as it cools and the joint is soon firm.
Unfortunately the process is easily reversed by heating the joint or by soaking it in water.
Gelatine is also excellent food for fungi and bacteria.
For these reasons hide glue or Scotch glue is only suitable for use indoors.
Nevertheless it was used in the early  aeroplanes and an attempt was made to protect it by binding the joints with varnished tape which was never very effectual.
Until lately, fishing rods were glued with hide glue which was hardened and rendered partially waterproof by soaking the rods in formalin.
This treatment was of no use for aeroplanes because it could only be used when the component was small enough for the formalin to penetrate.
Bad as they were, gelatine glues were better than the alternative, the gums or starch glues which were made by boiling some kind of flour in water.
Rather strangely, a much better glue had been known but unregarded for centuries.
Casein was used as a glue in ancient Egypt and as a vehicle for pigments by the medieval painters.
In modern times it was used as a glue from about 1800 in Germany and Switzerland.
Why it was not introduced into engineering earlier is not clear.
Casein became a recognized adhesive in aircraft and yacht work some time around 1930.
Its use made the modern wooden aeroplane, and the Bermuda rig in yachts, practicable.
Casein is the whey in milk and is therefore similar to cheese.
Whey is soluble in alkaline water but not in acid.
It is thus precipitated from milk by any weak acid, in the nursery notably by rhubarb juice, in industry usually by weak hydrochloric acid.
The precipitated whey can then be redissolved in water containing, say, a little caustic soda.
On the other hand, casein will react slowly with lime to form an insoluble chemical, calcium caseinate.
Casein glue, therefore, is sold as a white dry powder consisting of dried whey, caustic soda or something similar, and lime.
When the powder is mixed with cold water it first of all dissolves to a creamy white paste and then slowly sets to a hard solid.
As a glue it is easy to use and nearly foolproof.
The only thing that upsets it is leaving the lid off the tin for long periods during storage when the reaction to calcium caseinate takes place prematurely because moisture gets in.
Casein joints set hard in a day or two and are more or less waterproof.
However, although calcium caseinate is not soluble in water it does soften to some extent after soaking.
Casein glues were very widely used during the war in aircraft and one day somebody discovered that the tensile strength of specimens of  wet casein is one-fifth of that of dry casein.
It was not unreasonably feared therefore that the strength of wet aeroplanes glued with casein might also be one-fifth of the strength of dry aeroplanes.
Because of the resulting flap we got hold of a hundred similar wooden casein-glued tailplanes.
Fifty we sunk in a pond for six weeks, the other fifty we kept dry.
In the meantime a jig had been prepared such that the tailplanes could be broken under loads not dissimilar to those they would meet in the air.
When all was ready we broke the lot.
To our surprise and to many people's relief, they all broke at about the same load, the strength of the wet and the dry ones being very much the same.
The reason for this happy result is instructive.
The stress distribution in a glued joint is very far from uniform and, in a typical joint, such as Figure 1, virtually the whole of the load is carried in the extreme ends or edges of the joint.
Very little load gets across through the middle.
This is merely a variant of our friend the stress concentration which governs so much of engineering and materials science.
As a consequence, incidentally, the strength of a glued joint does not depend upon the area of the joint, but mainly upon its width.
This is just as true of a mechanical  joint as it is of a glued joint and most of the load in such joints comes upon the first and last bolts or rivets.
This is one of the reasons why a designer's life is a hard one.
Now dry casein is a hard, brittle substance which transmits loads in the best style of Mr Hooke.
When the stress at the ends or edges of the joint reaches the strength of dry casein therefore, cracks appear at the edges of the joint which immediately produce their own private local concentrations of stress, and so the cracks run through the middle of the joint, much as they would in glass.
Damp casein is very like damp cheese and its elastic behaviour is anything but Hookean.
As a result, it just yields in a soggy sort of way to the concentrations of stress at the edges of the joint and the load is shared by the glue in the middle.
With a glue like casein the various effects cancel out so that the wet and dry strength of practical joints are nearly identical.
This is an excellent characteristic and one of the reasons for the popularity of casein.
In a sterile world casein would be nearly an ideal glue.
Unfortunately, as we have already said, casein is more or less a mixture of cheese and lime and under prolonged moist conditions casein behaves very like cheese.
Its last hours are like those of Camembert; it becomes a liquid smelly mess and runs out of the joint, leaving only a dirty mark behind.
Curiously, the addition of fungicides to the glue is not very effective.
For this reason there has been a great effort, over the years, to develop synthetic resin glues based, more or less, on the plastics which became popular in the 1930s.
About the best and most durable of these, in the early days, was phenol-formaldehyde or ‘Bakelite’.
This was available in the forms of either a treacly liquid or a dry powder.
Under heat and pressure, the powder would melt and both it and the liquid would then set permanently to a hard, insoluble solid nearly immune to decay.
Where hot-setting conditions could be used, phenol-formaldehyde became the basis of a series of really excellent glues.
Since it is essential, not only that the glue should be heated to about 150°C. but also that there should be no appreciable gap or space in the joint, the gluing operation had, in practice, to be carried out in a heated hydraulic press.
For this reason it was really only  suited to the manufacture of plywood, for which it was immensely successful.
Although phenol-formaldehyde glues resulted in good waterproof plywood, they left the problem of the gluing of joints in the assembly of aircraft and boats unsolved, since it is generally impracticable to heat the joints of large structures in a controlled manner.
It is true that phenol-formaldehyde resins can be set in the cold but this requires large additions of a chemical catalyst, or hardening agent.
These catalysts were strong acids which damaged both the wood and the workmen.
The first synthetic assembly glues were therefore of the ureaformaldehyde type which could h set with much weaker catalysts.
Although successful in their way, the earlier glues of this kind were structurally rather dangerous.
When used in a properly fitting, thin joint they were reliable enough but, when the joint fitted badly so that the glue-line was thick, the shrinkages and internal stresses set up when the glue hardened often caused the glue to craze and to fall to bits in the joint.
As it was impossible to inspect the inside of the joint after manufacture this was a potential cause of accidents.
Another trouble was that, once the catalyst or hardener had hen added to the glue, setting began, so that the safe working life of the liquid glue was a matter of minutes.
Moreover there was no infallible way of telling how long ago the hardener had hen put in; With the usual frailty of human nature this led to all sorts of mistakes.
This defect was ingeniously got over by developing a hardener which could be painted by itself on to one half of the joint while the glue was painted on the other half, nothing began to happen in the glue until the two halves were brought together.
As a further guard against human frailty the hardener, and occasionally the glue, were dyed characteristic colours.
This is about as far as the development of glues had got by the end of the war.
Excellent and highly waterproof plywood was universal.
For assembly glues the arguments were about even between casein and urea-formaldehyde.
Casein was nearly foolproof in application, of excellent strength both wet and dry, but rotted catastrophically when it got the chance.
Urea was resistant to rot but in these early forms was tricky to apply and rather apt  to fall to bits without warning in middle life.
Since then, urea glues have been much improved and we have two new synthetics in particular, resorcinol formaldehyde and epoxy resins which, though they are rather expensive, have nearly all the technical virtues, bearing in mind however that epoxy resins frequently cause dermatitis.
Among the dozens of glues now available the arguments for and against are mostly on the grounds of ease of application, durability and cost.
With all reputable glues the joint, when properly made, is stronger than the surrounding wood.
Typical failures exhibit a thin layer of wood covering the glued surface.
The strength of a well made glued joint in good condition is not increased by nailing or screwing the joint in addition to the glue, On the other hand, all glues need to be tightly clamped while they set and the simplest way to do this is generally to assemble the wet joint with nails or screws; having once done this, there is no particular benefit in taking the fastenings out afterwards.
Furthermore, a joint in poor condition may peel, like a banana skin, and the presence of mechanical fastenings is a great insurance against this.
In the old days, with casein, it used to be said of some of the aircraft in the tropics that they were held together by the assembly brads.
In most cases this was slander but I have seen instances where it was not far from the truth.
Where glues are concerned, I, personally, would not scorn to wear both a belt and braces.
Laminated wood and plywood
One of the troubles with wood has always been getting it in the right sizes and making sure that it is free from hidden defects.
Years ago one could buy great logs of Kauri pine from New Zealand, yellow pine from Quebec and so on which were virtually perfect but those days are long gone.
Nowadays most of the wood which is used in engineering is laminated in one way or another.
This means that it is cut up into comparatively small pieces which are then glued together again, usually in hydraulic presses with synthetic glues.
In this way members of any size can be supplied and practically the whole volume of both large and small trees is made use of.
Furthermore any serious defect is seen  and rejected.
Such members can quite easily be made in curved shapes and a not uncommon obstruction on the roads of England is a lorry carrying vast timber arches for some architectural project.
The shortage of high-grade timbers for aircraft and boat-building would have been a serious matter during the War if all these woods had not been ‘upgraded’ by lamination with perfectly satisfactory results.
These laminated woods were simply ordinary timber cut up and glued together again.
There existed, however, a distressing class of material known as ‘improved woods’ which had very much the properties and fate that one would expect from so hubristic a name.
In these materials the wood was impregnated to a greater or less extent with a resin and then compressed to a considerably higher density.
The intention was that the mechanical properties would be thereby improved; they were, but generally only in proportion to the increase in density, at the same time much of the toughness of wood was lost.
Worst of all, they liked to swell back to their original dimensions in water and this swelling was generally unpredictable and irreversible.
To be fair, these materials performed a useful function for a time in the propellers of Spitfires and similar aircraft.
Plywood is a different story and can almost claim to be a new material and a most successful one.
It is made by gluing together three or more veneers, or thin sheets of wood, with the grain directions crossed.
Veneers are made either by slicing or peeling.
In the case of sliced veneers a baulk of timber is clamped and slices are peeled off it by a machine very like a large plane.
With peeled veneer, a round log is heated in a steam pit for about twenty-four hours and then set up and rotated in a lathe in which a long knife peels the veneer circumferentially at a speed which is wonderful to watch.
The veneer is cut up, dried, the defects are removed and finally stacks of plywood are glued in large presses.
The early plywoods were glued with vegetable or blood glues and, having virtually no moisture resistance, the word became almost a term of abuse.
The introduction of phenolic glues changed all this and, incidentally, presents an interesting picture of the way in which the public image of a material can be changed.
Modern phenolic glued plywood is quite impermeable to water, in  the sense that the veneers will not come apart when it is soaked, and it has become an important material in modern boatbuilding.
As one would expect, the dimensional movement due to moisture changes is about halved.
In other words the maximum movement, which now occurs in both directions, is around five per cent and in practice generally a good deal less.
However, when the surface veneers dry, as in the hot sun, they are subjected to cross-grain tension and may thus ‘check’, that is produce a large number of small cracks.
These, in themselves, do not do much harm, but in unpainted ply they form little traps for moisture and bacteria and so lead to trouble.
Most of the original infections in plywood are killed in the hot pressing process, but if the material is subsequently exposed to bacteria or fungi and water it will rot quite quickly.
Wooden aeroplanes
It is generally a mistake to despise any form of construction and this certainly includes the ‘stick and string’ biplane.
The main factor which governs the choice of materials and structural form is the ratio of the load on the structure to its dimensions.
When the loads are comparatively small in relation to the size it is generally best to concentrate the compression loads into a few compact, rod-like members and to diffuse the tensions into fabric and cords.
This is clearly the case in the rigs of sailing ships, in tents and in windmills and with certain variations it is true in balloons as well.
Any other arrangement would be heavier, more expensive and inconvenient.
All the early aircraft had very low wing loadings for sufficient reasons.
Their actual dimensions were, in many cases, not much smaller than those of equivalent modern aircraft, but their weights were less than a tenth of modern, hard-skinned machines.
In the circumstances, a construction of fabric over a wire-braced framework of wood or bamboo was logical and efficient, and sometimes, nothing else would have got off the ground with the power available.
The biplane form enabled efficient lattice girders, and also an efficient torsion box, to be achieved in a very robust form with little weight.
The solid members needed only to take  compression and since the principle danger in this condition was buckling, such components required to be as thick as possible for their weight and for this purpose bamboo or spruce was especially suitable.
The numerous tension members could be simple piano wires.
The problem of tension joints in bamboo, however, was always a serious one.
This philosophy produced strong and excellent aeroplanes so long as one was quite sure which members were in tension and which in compression, for, though a strut could at a pinch take tension, a wire could not take compression.
In some of the more elaborate biplanes it was not always easy to tell which way the loads were going and it was a stock joke at one time that the way to check the rigging of a certain aircraft was to put a canary between the wings; if it got out something was wrong.
S. F. Cody, of the ‘Cathedral’ biplane, was addicted to elaborate rigging and furthermore, not very technically minded.
My grandfather, who was one of the aircraft pioneers, told me that he had a long argument with Cody about whether a certain member was in tension or in compression in flight.
Cody maintained that it was in tension and had provided a wire.
It turned out that my grandfather was right for Cody was killed a few minutes afterwards for just this reason.
By some kind of irony this was exactly the reverse of the trouble with masonry cathedrals which fell down because they turned out to be in tension when the builders held that they were in compression.
It took some time, and many lives were lost, before the stressing conditions to which an aircraft is subject were sufficiently understood.
In this country this achievement was largely due to the group of highly intelligent young men who were gathered together at Farnborough in the famous Chudleigh Mess in the first War.
The principles of stressing and testing aircraft have remained much the same from the days of wooden biplanes down to supersonic fighters although there are many differences in practice.
When an aircraft has been designed and built a full-sized specimen must be tested for strength and stiffness.
Stiffness testing is relatively simple but strength testing may involve engineering which is both heavy and difficult.
In the 1914 period the custom was to turn the aircraft upside down and then to load  the wings with bags of sand or lead shot distributed so as to represent the various aerodynamic loads which occur under the worst conditions, such as pulling out of a dive.
Quite soon the loads on aircraft got too big for this method (though shot-bags are still used from time to time for certain simple tests) and nowadays the loads are applied by means of hydraulic jacks operating through very elaborate multiple lever or ‘family tree’ systems; each of the hundreds of branches ends in a mechanical attachment to the wing surface.
There are so many of these attachments that the diffuse nature of the aerodynamic load is imitated (Figure 2).
In its better forms, such as the Avro 504 and the various Moths, the wooden biplane was almost everlasting and the structure  could really only be broken by flying it into the ground.
The feeling of structural security about flying in strutted and braced aircraft was very comforting but unfortunately did not always extend to the engines with which they were fitted.
Cantilever monoplanes felt much more dangerous.
As loads increased the general trend of design was however undoubtedly towards monocoque, or hard-skinned, monoplanes in which the loads, as far as possible, were taken in the skin.
There is no difficulty about taking tension in a thin membrane, the problem is how to take compression without causing the skin to buckle.
In practice this was done by a compromise, the thin skin being stiffened by attaching to it spars and stringers, with which it shared the load, the whole rather elaborate surface forming a shell stiff in bending and therefore unlikely to buckle.
The outstanding early example of this was the D.C.3, later known as the Dakota, and this was followed by the Spitfire and by many of the famous aircraft of the last War.
All these were metal aircraft, built of aluminium sheet to which were riveted L-shaped aluminium stringers.
This system proved almost exactly equal in structural efficiency, that is in weight, to wood and fabric with the advantage of a smoother outside surface and the almost total elimination of airframe maintenance.
This construction proved very successful and, with minor modifications, is still the standard way of making aeroplanes.
By 1939 it was widely believed that no more wooden aeroplanes would be built and this might have come true if the War had not created shortages of aluminium and of the machinery and skilled men for handling it.
Furthermore there were furniture firms short of work and again the development time for a wooden aeroplane has always been much shorter than that for a metal one.
One expert achieved unwanted fame by stating, categorically, that it was no longer technically possible to build modern aircraft out of wood.
The ink was scarcely dry upon this document when the Mosquito appeared.
This wooden aeroplane was one of the most successful aircraft of all time, and 7,781 of them were built.
It was probably more detested by the Germans than any other Allied plane.
Besides the Mosquito and a large number of trainers, the other big production of wooden aircraft was of gliders.
Most of these were large machines with spans up to 110 feet (33 metres), frequently made to carry tanks and other heavy equipment.
The original idea was that the gliders should be built to make one flight only.
This turned out to be impracticable, partly because they were needed for training and also had to be moved between aerodromes because of changes in the strategic and tactical situation, but also, more importantly, just how do you build an aeroplane for one flight only?
In practice the gliders became much like any other aeroplanes, except that they had no engines.
On the whole the wooden aircraft were extraordinarily successful and I suppose that we could hardly have won the War without them.
Far too many of them, however, soon started to produce technical problems of one kind or another which almost immediately swamped the tiny number of experts in organic materials who were available at the Royal Aircraft Establishment.
It was most fortunate that a young Cambridge biologist called Mark Pryor was extricated by the powers that be from a searchlight unit and sent to Farnborough to take over this work.
The fact that the accident rate in wooden aircraft was kept to a reasonable figure and that enough gliders arrived in France in adequate structural condition was due in a considerable measure to Mark Pryor.
Quite a number of soldiers and airmen owe their lives to his interminable wartime journeys between his microscope and the aircraft factories and airfields.
Given all the circumstances, it is difficult to see how most of the problems which arose could have been foreseen.
The old fabric biplanes were entirely satisfactory but then they were made out of small pieces of wood, they were well ventilated and they were kept in good dry hangars.
None of these conditions applied to wartime aircraft.
First of all the new machines were of monocoque construction with comparatively heavy spar-booms and stringers rigidly glued to thick plywood webs and skin.
We shall come to the further consequences of this construction shortly.
Its immediate result was to divide the aeroplane up into a large number of badly ventilated and inaccessible compartments.
As the aircraft were left out ‘dispersed’ most of the time in English or in tropical rain these compartments soon became little damp  boxes, often with a puddle at the bottom.
Rot, either in the glue or the wood or both, was only too likely within a few months.
It is not very easy to arrange ventilation schemes when the designer has forgotten to do so and often the best that could be done was to arrange to leave the inspection doors open when on the ground.
Many aeroplanes, however, collected loose water inside, often in the most inaccessible places.
The cure was to provide drain-holes, not just anywhere, but at the lowest point in each compartment.
This was done with almost no result.
It turned out that mechanically drilled small holes in plywood were fringed on the inside with a little coronet of splinters which could not be removed because it could usually neither be seen nor reached.
These splinters soon collected enough dirt and fluff to block the drain holes and there we were with a puddle again.
The cure for this turned out to be to burn the drain-holes with a red-hot skewer which, of course, gives a clean edge to the hole.
Obvious, when you have thought of it.
This solution was applied both to aircraft and to Motor Torpedo Boats, which had much the same troubles as wooden aircraft.
The burnt drainage holes did a lot of good, but there seemed to be no cure for mud.
Mud is apt to be thrown up by aircraft wheels in landing and taking off, muddy water enters the aircraft through drainage holes and all sorts of other orifices and then the water drains out, leaving a film of wet mud.
This often contains the seeds of grass and other plants which before long sprout, like mustard and cress on a damp flannel.
Internal gardens do no good, of course, to aeroplanes.
On the whole these troubles were less severe with powered aircraft than they were with gliders.
Powered aircraft naturally flew more frequently and the consequent draughts were good for the aeroplane and bad for the fungi.
More and more gliders were being produced all the time and it was quite impracticable to house them all in hangars, so they stood endlessly around the edges of airfields in the rain, waiting for an invasion which might come this year or might come next.
As rather over 5,000 gliders were built in this country it was not possible for ‘experts’ to inspect them all continually so Mark Pryor issued instructions that he should be informed if they stank.
Now an unpleasant smell in a wooden structure is due to one of three things; drains, mice or rot and they all smell very similar.
Drainage smells arose because there weren't any drains and could cause damage.
Mice entered aircraft in pursuit of sandwich crumbs, usually under the floorboards.
By the time they had eaten up the crumbs they had forgotten the way out and in their hunger ate the insulation from the wiring.
Mark dealt with mice by obtaining an official issue of cats.
Rot was more complicated and difficult.
In all the circumstances some rot of some kind was almost inevitable in a good proportion of gliders.
Perfectionism is out of place in war and the practical problem was to condemn and ground those gliders which were dangerously attacked and to detect and stop the rot in those in which the attack was trivial.
This called for a great deal of judgement because there are about forty different species of rot, and the damage which they do varies and is not necessarily proportional to the visible effects.
Problems of rot were always with us but there were other problems as well which were just as serious.
As I have said, the general structure of these aeroplanes was quite different from the old fabric biplanes.
The main spar booms and other main structural members were sizable pieces of laminated wood, several inches square, and were generally boxed in on three sides by the plywood skin and shear webs.
Now the spruce spar boom wanted to shrink and swell about twice as far as the plywood which was glued to it and this naturally gave rise to serious stresses near to where the two met along the glued joints (Figure 3).
Large pieces of timber take some considerable time to come to equilibrium with the surrounding humidity and, because the English weather changes so often, there was generally no time to build up dangerous differences in swelling strains so that we had comparatively little trouble from this cause, so long as the aircraft were in this country.
When they were sent overseas the situation was different.
In many climates there are long dry seasons followed by long wet seasons, each season giving ample chance for the wood to dry out thoroughly and then, in due time to soak up a great deal of water and swell.
In such places there  was serious trouble.
Big stresses were built up near the glue-lines; if the glue was in bad condition it broke; if not, the wood failed near the glue.
There was really no cure for this except to bring the aircraft home.
Gluing troubles arose, not only from the glues themselves but from other causes.
The worst of these was the so-called ‘case-hardened’ failure.
It will be realized that there is no way of testing a glued joint which actually forms part of an aeroplane except by breaking the aeroplane, which is a self-defeating activity.
One is therefore guided to a considerable extent by the appearance of the joint and also relies upon the inspection procedure during manufacture.
Soon after wooden aircraft went into large scale production it began to be realized that a proportion of aircraft plywood was  ungluable.
The joints in such plywood, made with all due care, looked like any other joints but had no strength and, in bad cases, could be peeled off with one's little finger.
Worst of all, there was no way of telling which plywood was affected.
What was happening was this.
Wood consists of tubes with quite thin walls and when wood is cut on the side grain the tubes are very seldom accurately parallel to the surface.
Such a surface therefore consists of a large number of tubes emerging at a fine angle so as to present an array of slanting holes.
At the same time, the operation of cutting wood is, viewed on a fine scale, a brutal one and the cut edges of the tubes are therefore damaged and mechanically quite weak.
For a wood glue-to be effective it has to penetrate down the tubes for some distance so as to get hold of the undamaged wood.
If it is prevented from penetrating, the glue will adhere only to the damaged edges of the tubes which will break away as soon as a load comes on.
In the case of ‘case-hardened’ plywood the edges of the tubes are bent over and turned inwards by the hot plattens of the press which makes the plywood, so that the glue is prevented from penetrating and the joint has no strength (Figure 4).
This is a very lethal condition and has been responsible for a great many accidents and much loss of life.
The only reliable cure for it is to sandpaper off the damaged surface of the plywood.
The sanding must be done thoroughly, merely scratching the wood is no good.
Since one never knows what plywood is affected it is absolutely necessary to sand all plywood which may find its way into an aeroplane.
This turned out to be a major administrative problem.
It proved impossible to rely on hand sanding and a system of mechanical shot-blasting was instituted, after which the plywood was dyed or stamped to indicate that it was safe to use.
Wood is not a material which suffers fools gladly and a great deal of the trouble with wooden aeroplanes was due to wooden people.
This could occur at all levels.
Some designers felt that wood ‘ought’ to behave like a metal.
If they made a mistake on this account then it was the wood's fault, not theirs.
Engineer Officers, or at least the more recently joined ones, were brought up to consider metal the thing and sometimes had no patience  with wood.
There was the Engineer Officer, in civil life a garage proprietor, who lined up his wooden aeroplanes on the tarmac every morning and had them well hosed down.
In the factories, experienced inspectors were few and over-worked.
Some mistakes were due to genuine misunderstanding or fatigue; others I am afraid can only be accounted for by criminal stupidity or irresponsibility.
There are always a few people for whom the most obvious sequences of technical cause and effect have no meaning.
Gluing is not so much a skilled job as a responsible one and a large number of mistakes are available to a determined man, all of which can have dangerous results.
Herein, I think, lies the real difficulty about wooden aeroplanes.
If they are wanted at all they are probably wanted in large numbers and to be made in a hurry by unskilled labour.
Wood, which is really a craftsman's material, does not take kindly to the inevitable abuses of an emergency.
For all these reasons wooden aeroplanes are under a cloud at the moment.
However it would take a brave man to  prophesy that they will never come back.
One never can tell where wood will turn up next.
There is now a very efficient motor car on the market with a wooden chassis.
It is said to be selling well.