

Let the people vote on Europe
JOHN Major is in profound trouble and it is inevitable that Wednesday's vote will be seen as a test of his ability to control both his party and the country.
But while it is true that some Tory rebels would oppose any motion proposed by the Prime Minister, it is worth remembering that the vote is still about the Maastricht Treaty.
A poll has shown that only 52 per cent of MPs are in favour of the treaty in its present form.
Their views reflect a lack of enthusiasm among the British people at large for John Major's idea of European unity.
Opinion polls have revealed a deep unease about Maastricht throughout the country.
This is not helped by the suspicion that a preoccupation with Europe is distracting the Government from cleaning up the mess on its own doorstep.
It is now time to put the issue to the British people.
A referendum on Maastricht would give everyone the opportunity both to understand it and to debate its implications themselves.
If Wednesday's vote is close, the Maastricht Bill could still stumble through the Commons after being pushed around in scores of hours of Commons debate.
Why not allow the British people to debate it first?
There is still plenty of time for that.
Never say Di
LAST week Princess Diana looked radiant as she was photographed with her husband at the opera.
Immediately some commentators claimed that she and Prince Charles had succeeded in mending their marriage, while others sniffed cynically that in private nothing had changed.
This week they will visit Korea together in a professional capacity.
Already one carefully leaked report has suggested that they will share a bed there, even though hotel workers have been told they prefer separate suites.
It would be fanciful to suppose that Charles and Diana are enjoying marital bliss just months after their faces confirmed that they were living separate lives.
But that does not mean that they should not look positive for the world.
If they have both come to terms with their differences and can now work together successfully, then they are to be congratulated.
Smoke signal
THE French love to smoke and it will come as a shock to them that they can no longer enjoy their Gauloises cigarettes in public.
Sympathetic officials have said that they will be patient as people learn not to light up automatically with every cup of coffee and glass of wine.
But what an excellent development this is for their health.
British pubs and restaurants should follow it without hesitation and who knows, we might all see a time when smoking is considered a bad habit of the past.
Brave Lester
IT comes as no surprise that Lester Piggott is likely to return to racing even after his terrible accident on Saturday.
He is not Britain's favourite jockey by default.
Lester has brought pleasure to millions with his fine sportsmanship and personal bravery.
It was typical of him that, immediately following the accident, his concern was not for his own injuries but for his horse Mr Brooks.
We wish him a swift recovery and look forward to his return to the racecourse.
Two moments that changed US history
David Seymour
AMERICA expects to wake up two days from now to find that it has a new President.
Bill Clinton, the brash young challenger, should comfortably walk into the White House if the opinion polls are even only half right.
That will be a remarkable achievement.
Not only will he be one of the few Democrats to win the presidency in the past 50 years but he will have humiliated an incumbent President in the process.
Poor old George Bush.
But perhaps Governor Clinton's most remarkable achievement will have been bringing to an end the Reagan-Bush years.
Under President Reagan, America prospered and regained its self-respect.
Mr Bush, who was his Vice-President, won the top job for himself in 1988 on the back of that achievement.
Less than two years ago, at the end of the Gulf War, he had the highest poll rating of any President.
Not surprisingly, the Democrats could find no major challenger to take him on.
The big hitters were content to wait until 1996.
They did not want to waste their time, effort, money and future chances in taking on an impregnable President.
Even in a field of Democrat minnows, Bill Clinton seemed unlikely to be picked as candidate.
Yet now here he is, on the threshold of the White House.
How has it happened?
There were two crucial moments in Mr Clinton's rise and Mr Bush's fall.
Two moments which set the course of the presidential election and which changed the course of American history.
Both happened in January this year.
The first came as Governor Clinton struggled to gain the Democratic nomination.
A night-club singer called Gennifer Flowers claimed that she had a 12-year affair with him.
In moral America, it looked as if the Clinton campaign was over before it had begun.
But then he went on television with his wife Hillary, a forceful, highly political lawyer.
Sitting together on a settee as they faced hostile questioning, Bill Clinton seemed at first to be struggling as he was tackled over the Flowers affair.
Then in leapt Hillary.
She brushed aside the accusations and told the viewers: ‘Heck, if you don't like it, don't vote for him.’
Never before has a woman stood by her man to such effect.
The Clinton campaign surged again and he easily won the Democratic nomination.
Yet even though he got the chance to fight Mr Bush, he would not now be heading for the White House if it had not been for the disaster which hit the President a few days after that TV interview.
Mr Bush travelled to Japan for a flag-waving visit.
He did the usual George Bush things — jogging, playing tennis with the Emperor, waving a lot and smiling even more.
Then he went to a huge formal dinner.
During that, on live TV, President Bush, the leader of the United States of America, collapsed and was sick over the Prime Minister of Japan, the nation they had beaten in the war.
It was a symbolic, humiliating moment for Americans who had begun after the Reagan years to believe that, despite Vietnam, they were still the greatest nation on earth.
As Clinton went from strength to strength, Bush failed to struggle out of that image of being weak.
Too weak to fight against recession.
Too weak to finish off Saddam Hussein.
Too weak to even avoid humbling himself in front of the Japanese.
Of course, there are other factors which will have shaped the result of this historic presidential election.
But if it had not been for Hillary Clinton's TV performance and George Bush's Japanese collapse, neither of them might now be ordering the removal vans.
Little Rock gets ready to roll
Jim Gallagher
WIN or lose for Bill Clinton, it promises to be the biggest street party Arkansas has ever seen.
From hillbillies to Hollywood stars, 75,000 of the state Governor's fans are now descending on his humble home town of Little Rock.
Local trade is booming and every hotel room for 40 miles has been booked for tomorrow night when the results will be known.
Stars like Tom Cruise, Danny de Vito, Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger will be there, along with 4,000 journalists.
Huge parties and rallies — non-alcoholic at the Governor's request — will be held while giant screens keep supporters outside up-to-date until Clinton appears at 10pm.
As Little Rock cashes in, other Arkansas towns are following suit.
Hot Springs boasts of being Clinton's boyhood home and the village of Hope of being his birthplace.
All remember the boom in Plains, Georgia when local peanut farmer Jimmy Carter became President.
Arkansas people bitterly resent George Bush calling them ‘the lowest of the low’ for health, education and pay.
Tomorrow, they could have their revenge.
I said ‘Lennox, do what you have to do.
But win or lose you will always be my champ’
Jane Gordon
THE small, middle-aged woman sitting alongside me in the rowdy ringside throng did not look particularly important.
Barely five feet four and dressed in sensible shoes, blue silky dress and yellow sash, she was nothing like the glittering bimbos in stilettos and the quietly elegant wives of the money men sitting all around us.
But without Violet Blake, this match would not have been taking place.
She is the inspiration of Lennox Lewis, Britain's greatest boxing hope.
She is also his mother.
And tonight she was at Earls Court watching her son face his greatest and most daunting challenge — the ‘fight for the right’.
Although at first it was hard to connect this short, shy woman with her six feet-five and 16-stone son, the likeness between the two soon became clear.
Watching Violet sitting through the preliminaries to the world title elimination bout was rather like watching her son as he prepared for the fight.
She too held her head high as they announced the fight and played the national anthems.
She too seemed unaffected by the snarling posturing of her boy's hostile and much favoured Canadian opponent Donovan ‘Razor’ Ruddock.
She too remained composed while those around her became more aggressive and uncontrolled.
She was as focused outside the ring as her son later admitted he was within it.
‘I'm not frightened.
I'm agitated,’ she said with a gentle smile as the tension mounted around what seemed such a small ring for two massive men.
‘I've told him just go out there and do what you have to do but remember, regardless of what happens, you are still my champion.’
In the days leading up to this fight to decide who would fight for the world title next year, Violet had been steeling herself to be tough and resilient for the sake of her son.
She knew that her presence and unwavering support was as important to the outcome as all the physical and psychological preparation that Lennox had been through in the past few months.
Nothing seemed to penetrate Violet's consciousness as she waited for the fight to start.
Not even the formidable presence, just yards away in Ruddock's camp, of his jeering and cheering supporters.
‘Raizure,’ chanted a tall blonde girl covered in jewellery.
It's not usually Violet's style to shout support for Lennox but this time, just seconds into the fight so many feared her son could not win, she found herself shouting louder even than ‘Raizure's’ girls.
She leapt to her feet, she screamed, she yelled.
Watching her you had the impression that months of tension had suddenly been released.
‘This was the first fight I found myself screaming.
When Razor went down the first time I was shouting and jumping up and down,’ she said.
Could she believe how well her son was faring against a man who had twice stepped into the ring with Mike Tyson?
‘Of course I could believe it.
I always believed he would win.’
When Razor hit the canvas again in the second round, Violet lost control of her emotions.
She was completely overwhelmed.
For months, she admitted later, she had faced the possibility of her son being badly injured against such a highly-rated opponent, but now Lennox was not only the winner but emerged with hardly a mark on his body.
The ring that had seemed so small for just two men was suddenly full of ecstatic members of the Lewis camp.
But there was only one person who Lennox really wanted alongside him in this moment of victory — Violet.
‘She is my inspiration,’ he said.
Somehow this small but formidable woman made her way through the throng to reach her son.
They stood together for a few moments, her head sunk in his mighty chest, his head finally bowed as he looked down on her.
Both, after all the control they needed before the fight, finally were able to show some emotion.
‘A lot of other people thought there might be a problem with this fight.
They didn't have enough faith in him,’ Violet said glowing with pride.
‘But I knew.
I'm the happiest mother in the world.’
Of course as soon as the fight was over everyone said they knew he would be victorious.
But apart from Violet and Lennox, it was probably only clairvoyant Eva Perkovic who had an inner knowledge that he'd win.
‘I got it a little wrong,’ says Eva.
‘I thought it would be the eighth round.
But I ‘saw’ that man on the ground and I knew Lennox would win.’
Although he was born in London, Lennox and Violet moved to Canada when he was 12.
And it was there that Lennox's talent was discovered.
Despite returning to London after winning the heavyweight gold medal at the 1988 Olympic Games, there have been constant jibes about his right to call himself British.
This weekend, as he took the fight surrounded and supported by fluttering Union Jacks, it was clear that Lennox regards himself as ‘one of ours’.
And it looks very much as if he will not just be his mother's champion — but also Britain's, and maybe even the world's.
And the suspicion still remains..
THE two sides remain divided.
Barbara Rich, who looked after Prince Charles's hunters, said of the saboteurs: ‘They really are a dirty and smelly bunch.
They don't wash.
Apparently most are students paid £35 a day and given a lunch by the League Against Cruel Sports.’
Captain Barker said: ‘Some antis are knowledgable and don't like the fox being killed.
I understand that.
But a lot would protest against anything.’
But Mr Evans countered: ‘Half our members are employed, a quarter aren't and a quarter are students.
That includes teachers, lawyers, farmers, people from all walks of life.
No one is paid.’
Top 20 singles
1 (1) End Of The Road Boyz II Men
2 (6) People Everyday Arrested Development
3 (10) Run To You Rage
4 (2) Sleeping Satellite Tasmin Archer
5 (4) I'm Gonna Get You Bizarre Inc Feat Angie Brown
6 (—) Boss Drum Shamen
7 (3) Erotica Madonna
8 (7) A Million Love Songs Take That
9 (14) Supermarioland Ambassadors Of Funk-MC Mario
10 (—) Who Needs Love (Like That) Erasure
11 (5) Keep The Faith Bon Jovi
12 (9)(Take A Little) Piece Of My Heart Erma Franklin
13 (19) Be My Baby Vanessa Paradis
14 (34) Would I Lie To You?
Charles & Eddie
15 (11) It Will Make Me Crazy Felix
16 (8) Tetris Doctor Spin
17 (20) To Love Somebody Michael Bolton
18 (15) Miserere Zucchero & Pavarotti
19 (13) Faithful Go West
20 (16) Boom Boom John Lee Hooker
Jekyll and Hide
Alison Veness
How leather can bring out the dark side of your soul.
DO YOU want your wardrobe to be practical and hard-wearing — or darkly sensual and sexy?
Normally it has to be one or the other, but leather is so versatile it can be both.
For daytime Dr Jekylls leather jeans are a ‘must’ for winter wear.
The classic Levi cut with zippered fly is a best seller.
It's durable, comfortable and keeps the cold out.
And for adventurous night owls — or Mr Hides — the twilight world of zips, belts, buckles and straps offers an outrageous alternative.
Madonna underlined the material's dark and dangerous appeal in her book, Sex, and designer John McKitterick's back-zipped jeans helped wannabe sex kitten Kylie Minogue kick away her girl-next-door image.
Top designer Gianni Versace has led the risque revolution with his strappy leather tops and studded jeans shouting loudly from the pages of glossy magazines.
At the Versace emporium on London's Bond Street, customers are clamouring for his suggestive leather look.
But you don't have to spend £1,000 on Versace or cut a threatening figure in studs and straps to keep abreast of the trend.
As our list on the right shows, plenty of high street chains now stock a range of leather items and you should be able to find good-quality leather jeans for around £100.
Miss Selfridge, for instance, has commissioned the streetwise Red Or Dead design team to produce a range of leather clothes including mini belted trench coats and ultra-soft jeans.
Dry-cleaning will set you back around £28 but don't forget that leather outlasts denim.
And for those who remember the hard-as-a-board jeans of past revivals, the good news is that hides are now supple, soft and more comfortable.
HIGH STREET STOCKISTS
RIVER ISLAND Play suit £70, waistcoat £69.99.
MISS SELFRIDGE Jeans £115, coat £220 (selected stores).
TOP SHOP Patch jeans £69.99, waistcoat £34.99 (selected stores).
BENETTON Jacket £208, hot pants £88, jeans £139.
FENWICK Jeans £139, shirt £199, long skirt £99.
For mock leather
C&A waistcoats £21.99, jeans, £24.99, hot pants, £16.99.
EMPIRE STORES Flying jacket £169.99.
FREEMANS Jeans £99.99.
Jeremy Irons
JEREMY Irons' latest movie Damage has been given an adults-only rating by American censors.
The fuss focuses on one scene where the former Brideshead Revisited star has sex on the floor with his son's fiancee.
Shannen Doherty
SHANNEN Doherty has confessed to going on a six-month drink and drugs binge after running away at 18 to live with her 31-year-old boyfriend.
Now, 21, the Beverly Hills 90210 star told People magazine: ‘It was a bad scene.’
Madonna
MADONNA is teaming up with Frank Sinatra for a world tour.
The unlikely duo will swap songs with Madonna, 34, singing classics like New York, New York and Frank, 76, crooning Like A Virgin.
Robbie Coltrane
ROBBIE Coltrane is set to land a lead role in Mel Brooks' Robin Hood spoof Men In Tights.
The tubby Scot has been offered the part of Jewish holy man Friar Tuckman.
Demi Moore
DEMI Moore is said to be devastated after police snatched l3l X-rated nude photos of her in a raid on a porn magazine.
She is afraid they may be displayed in court as evidence after they were stolen from a photographer.
Dudley Moore
DUDLEY Moore is finally going to catch the chickens in the Tesco advert.
Next year he ends the chase in which he tries to get the free-range hens.
Dudley, 56, said: ‘I've no idea how it'll happen.’
John Reid
ELTON John's manager has his sights set on Hollywood.
John Reid has splashed out more than £1 million to buy a new home so he can look at the famous sign.
Reid has homes in London, Australia and Spain.
Jenny Agutter
JENNY Agutter's images of homelessness will spearhead a Christmas campaign.
Photos of youngsters at a National Children's Home project taken by the star adorn six fundraising BT phonecards.
Jim Kerr
Simple Minds singer Jim Kerr rocks seven-week-old son James to sleep with a walk near his Kensington home yesterday.
Wife Patsy Kensit, 24, inset, stayed out of the chill.
Madonna film role reveals acting talent
By Tim Satchell
MADONNA is being tipped as an Oscar nominee for her role in her new film Body Of Evidence, which will be released in Britain next March.
‘It's extraordinary, most people have dismissed her as a hype-merchant who's just good at working the system, but then she delivers something like this.
It's the best performance I've seen on screen all year,’ says one member of the American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, who give the awards.
Body Of Evidence co-stars Willem Dafoe, Oscar-nominated for Platoon, Joe Montagna, and Anne Archer, Oscar-nominated for Fatal Attraction.
It is a thriller about a girl who is charged with killing her boyfriend but who then falls for her lawyer.
The film is directed by Uli Edel, who made Last Exit To Brooklyn, and produced by Dino de Laurentiis.
Despite her early film success with Desperately Seeking Susan, Madonna has impressed more with her enthusiasm than ability in movies such as Shanghai Surprise, Who's That Girl? and Dick Tracy.
Her latest film, A League Of Their Own, has shown she can develop a career as a real actress.
Madonna, 34, was born Madonna Ciccone (pronounced Chick-oh-ny) in Bay City, Michigan.
BBC Director General Michael Checkland will be among the guests tonight at No 1, Knightsbridge, to help launch the new free satellite television channel UK Gold.
‘It is sure to give dish sales a boost as it will be financed by advertising so no dish owner will have to pay extra for it,’ says an industry analyst.
It is reshowing EastEnders, Dallas, Neighbours, Dr Who, Bergerac, 'Allo 'Allo and other gems from the BBC and Thames archives, and is a great hope for BBC income.
And…
By Tim Satchell
FIRST girl: ‘Did you hear I'm going to marry an Irishman?’
Second girl: ‘Oh, really?’
First girl: ‘No.
O'Reilly.’
Fusion in from the cold
By Tim Satchell
AN important breakthrough has taken place in developing cold fusion.
This brings hope of pollution-free energy at a fraction of its present cost by the end of the century.
Cold fusion means joining atoms together at room temperature to generate large quantities of energy.
Pioneering research a few years ago by American chemists Martin Fleischmann and Stanley Ponns, was dismissed as a false dawn and ‘con fusion’.
Now, new evidence from Robert T Bush, a professor at California State University acting on an idea from Randell L Mills, President of HydroCatalysis Power Corporation, vindicates the original findings of Professors Fleischmann and Ponns.
A scientist tells me: ‘It will come in a size no larger than a Calor Gas cylinder.
Families could put it in their kitchen and become fully self-sufficient.
It will be expensive to buy but will then cost nothing to run.’
The Conservative Party is reviewing its candidates list.
Tory vice-chairman Andrew Mitchell has written to all candidates asking if they want to remain on the list and requesting a new CV.
Dancers in step with film pair
By Tim Satchell
THE impressive performance of Paul Mercurio and Tara Morice in the marvellous, low-budget £125,000 Australian film Strictly Ballroom has given vast new encouragement to ballroom dancing societies.
As in Australia, where Strictly Ballroom has taken the astounding sum (for Australia) of £4 million, British ballroom dancing is booming with new dancing schools (tel. 071 609 1386 for details of lessons).
From Exeter University, Kathy Bostock, President of the Guild of Students, tells me: ‘Our Ballroom Dancing Society is very popular.
They do everything from jive to the old-fashioned stuff and host an annual ball which is very well attended.’
Top Come Dancing trainers, The Spencer Dance Centre in Penge, South London, goes from strength to strength says Principal Peggy Spencer.
‘Ballroom dancing has certainly gained from the new film.
It shows the athletic aspect of competitive dancing.
It also shows ballroom dancing as macho,’ she says.
‘What could be more manly than a man holding a woman in his arms?’
Screen booking
By Tim Satchell
SIR Richard Attenborough plans to direct a big screen version of the West End hit Shadowlands.
Anthony Hopkins has been signed to play the role of writer C S Lewis and several top American actresses are vying for the role of his American girlfriend.
The play was the true story of bachelor Mr Lewis, author of The Lion, The Witch And The Wardrobe, and his meeting at the age of 50 with writer Joy Davidman.
In the West End Nigel Hawthorne played Mr Lewis, Jane Lapotaire played Miss Davidman.
Sir Richard has also been making final adjustments to his latest film Chaplin, the biography of Charlie Chaplin, the subject of a Royal Film Premiere next month.
The real reason Sinead slipped over the edge
Fergus Kelly
WHEN it comes to controversy, nothing compares to Sinead O'Connor.
She tore up the Pope's picture in front of 30 million TV viewers.
She has accused the Catholic Church of condoning child abuse, and in the past has even expressed sympathy for the IRA.
And now, after being booed off stage in New York, the woman they call Bambi in Bovver Boots says she is quitting the music business.
Here we talk to former teachers, old friends and relatives in a special TODAY investigation to discover what lies inside the tortured soul of Sinead.
LIKE a child playing secret games, Sinead O'Connor crept up to the window and peered into the cosy room.
There, watching TV, was the mother she fled from two years earlier to escape a ceaseless round of drunken beatings and ill-treatment.
The elfin-faced Irish singer, just 18 but already on the threshold of success, had finally resolved on a reconciliation.
But at the last moment her courage deserted her and she ran, sobbing, away from the house into the arms of a friend.
Sinead, now 25, was never to make her peace with her mother.
A week later Marie O'Connor was killed in a car crash.
With her died the chance for Sinead to exorcise the demons that had scarred her childhood and turned her into a rebel whose talent to shock would ultimately overshadow her singing ability.
‘She had been totally geared up for a reconciliation,’ says Columb Farrelly, then manager of Sinead's band and the man who persuaded the troubled teenager to seek out her mother.
‘At the last moment she tried to back out but I dragged her back by the elbow.
I said: ‘I'll wait here — go and confront it.
She loves you, she will accept you.’
‘Sinead didn't go to the door but crept up to the window.
She could see her mother and younger brother John watching TV.
‘From my point of view it was like a child climbing up on a wall to look in but she rushed back and said: ‘No, I can't do it,’ and started crying in my arms.
‘I have never met a more gullible person than Sinead.
She's childlike.
She just fires off and hasn't really grown up.
‘Now I see her as a potential suicide — the ultimate protest.
I am chilled by some of the things Sinead is coming out with nowadays.
Her statement about leaving the business is already suicide of a kind.’
Farrelly last saw the singer earlier this year and was stunned at a furious outburst she launched at him.
‘It was at a photo-shoot a couple of days before a charity gig at the National Stadium in Dublin,’ he says.
‘She was just about to leave in a limousine and there were a lot of journalists about.
As I approached she began to smile but then stopped and screamed ‘How can you f…ing live with yourself?’ and stormed off.
‘I just replied: ‘it's easy’ but I don't know what she was referring to at all.’
Sinead's torment began when she was just eight years old.
The comfortable middle-class life she had enjoyed fell apart when parents John and Marie split up.
It was to lead to a long period of self-confessed misery for her, including beatings by her tranquilliser-addicted mother and spells of being locked naked with her sister in cupboards.
The young Sinead was even taken out by her mother on shoplifting expeditions.
Eventually she fled to live with her father, attending a succession of schools including one for girls with behavioural problems.
But all the while her musical talent was growing, fed by her bitter experiences.
Farrelly met Sinead when she advertised for a band in an Irish music paper.
He was immediately entranced by her voice and built a band called Ton Ton Macoute around her.
Even in those early days before her bizarre behaviour was to make headlines, her insecurities were all too apparent.
‘She was extremely paranoid,’ Farrelly says.
‘She would misinterpret everything you said to her and she had to be reassured about 20 times over.
She lacked a sense of humour.’
He admits to becoming irritated about Sinead's continual soul-searching over her family problems.
‘I thought they were the ravings of someone who was incredibly self-pitying.’
When she first joined the band, Sinead was still at school, a liberal Quaker establishment called Newtown School in Waterford.
Farrelly rented a house nearby and she would play truant, hitching the eight miles there to rehearse.
The boarding school was her father John's idea after a spell at Grianan Training Centre — a school for girls with behavioural problems run by nuns under a strict regime — had failed to quell her rebellious attitude.
Sinead has since said of her time at Grianan: ‘I have never, and probably never will again, experienced such panic and terror and agony over anything.’
If she misbehaved, she was packed off to sleep in the old people's home in another part of the building — a terrifying prospect for a girl with such a vivid imagination.
But it also led to her first public performance.
One of her tutors, Jeanette Byrne, who helped her buy her first guitar, invited her to sing the lead in a choir of girls from Grianan at her wedding.
It was at the rehearsal, where Sinead sang Barbra Streisand's Evergreen, that she met Jeanette's brother Paul who was in a local band.
‘She just blew me away,’ he says.
‘I was so impressed I gave her a tape with a backing track on it the band had done, and asked her if she wanted to do some work on it.
‘I didn't expect to hear anything for at least a week, but the next day she rang with the words and melody all worked out — and she had sat a school exam the same day.’
Paul also remembers that even though she was then only 15, Sinead was desperate to join the band.
‘But we were all in our twenties, taking it very seriously, and we didn't feel we could take a chance with someone still at school.
‘She was so disappointed and hung around the recording studios all the time.
It broke my heart to see that little face and big eyes.’
Two years later, Paul saw Sinead on stage with Ton Ton Macoute in Dublin and witnessed first hand the raw emotion she could generate in a performance.
‘Some guy she was seeing, who was messing her around, had just walked into the back of the hall.
She saw him and launched into this song, directing it straight at him.
‘It was pure emotion.
I went up to her after the show to congratulate her on the song which was the best of the night.
‘She told me she had made it up on the spot as soon as she saw the bloke.’
After a year at Grianan, which Sinead had voluntarily entered, she went to Maryfield College in Dublin.
One of the teachers there was her aunt Nuala O'Connor who did not immediately realise the quiet, intense girl was a relative.
‘Her father is my husband's first cousin and I only found out who she was when her year was half over,’ she says.
‘Sinead felt very deeply about things and she's running true to form now.
I taught her English and her essays were interesting and original with very definite views.
‘She was always a defender of the down-and-out.’
Sinead had a hard time at school because she was a newcomer in a class which had been together for two years, and some of her fellow pupils knew her recent history.
‘One or two of them taunted her about Grianan, but she always responded fiercely,’ says Nuala.
Sinead's father John saw the progressive school in Waterford as a last chance for his wayward daughter and for the first time in her life she came across a school where she had nothing to rebel against.
Teacher Joe Falvey soon befriended her.
‘She was outspoken in the sense that she didn't lack confidence, but not in a pushy way,’ he says.
‘The fact that she was from middle-class Dublin was obvious in that she was more strident than the farming kids from the south-east of Ireland.’
Falvey encouraged his pupil's singing.
‘What struck me immediately about her songs was how intense they were, especially for a 16-year-old.
I think she had two-thirds of her first album composed or in her head when she was with us.’
He took the youngster for her first recording session, making a tape of three songs in two hours for £50 at a local recording studio.
‘A friend of mine owned the studio and had been in the music industry a long time and was amazed that this 16-year-old had the whole production idea worked out in her head.’
Even more stunning was Sinead's stage debut at a tiny folk and arts club held in the T H Doolin's pub near the school.
‘I'd asked the headmaster for permission and he replied: ‘She's going to end up doing that sort of thing anyway’,’ says Falvey.
‘I can clearly remember that night, the hush that fell over the audience after the first song.
They were amazed at this big, big voice coming out of this tiny girl.’
By this time, Sinead had already linked up with Farrelly in Dublin 
‘School became less and less important,’ says Falvey.
‘About two-thirds of the way through her leaving year, she said: ‘Look, I can't be bothered with this.
My future lies in writing and playing songs.’
‘I did my teacher's bit and told her to stay on until she got her leaving certificate.
I warned her: ‘There are sharks out there and it's littered with the corpses of hopefuls.’
‘She replied with sheer conviction: ‘Nobody's going to get me’.’
The singer would show the same sort of decisiveness when she left Ton Ton Macoute and headed for London, where she and husband John Reynolds, from whom she is now separated, set up home with their baby son Jake.
Record company talent scouts in Dublin had already expressed an interest in her, but not the rest of the band.
Today ex-manager Farrelly claims he is not bitter about the split but says he is annoyed about the things Sinead has said about that period.
‘The only thing that rankles me is what she says about Ireland.
She's rewritten her own biography, and is very touchy about her past.’
He wants Sinead to put her commitment where her mouth is.
‘She could be such a positive force for the organisations she purports to feel for, such as CARE, a charity for abused children.’
No one can dispute that Sinead's behaviour of late — particularly tearing up the Pope's picture — has been outrageous but many feel that her protest statements are at least based on strong personal beliefs.
‘It was childish of her to rip up the picture,’ says Nuala O'Connor.
‘But unlike Madonna, she believes in what she does.
Everything Madonna does is for specific business reasons.
Sinead — even in that mad moment — believed it was the right thing to do.’
Male rape
WE READ of ‘male rape’ but the law does not recognise it as such.
Perpetrators are charged with sexual assault which carries a lesser sentence and victims also suffer additional turmoil by being named in court.
The offence should be regarded as rape and carry the equivalent penalty and anonymity.
Duchess of York's biscuits
I WAS surprised to read that the Duchess of York's favourite biscuits are lemon puffs.
She always struck me as a ginger nut sort of person.
Potatoes
INSTEAD of destroying their bumper crop of potatoes, farmers should give them to the needy.
Windsor Safari Park
WHAT a shame Jane Gordon spares only an ‘odd thought’ for the doomed animals of Windsor Safari Park.
For years they have educated and delighted us.
They deserve better.
Kenya's tourist industry
I AM fed up with the media blasting Kenya's tourist industry.
Other places have far worse security records for visitors, London among them.
Evil spirit on the streets
THANK goodness Hallowe'en is over — and what a shame that this time of superstition and harmless fun has been replaced by an imported nonsense called trick-or-treat.
This so-called custom is not part of our native tradition or heritage.
It is robbery.
Old people are frightened to open their doors because they know they may face a menacing crowd, all demanding sweets or money.
If they don't comply, damage is sometimes done to their house, path or car.
It is very wrong if parents encourage young children to go out, demand what they want and threaten violence if their demands are not met.
If adults behaved like this they would be arrested, and rightly so.
What is more, in this day and age it is madness to allow children to roam around after dark knocking on strangers' doors.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Tennis player Ken Rosewall, 58.
Actor Burt Lancaster, 79.
ON THIS DAY: In 1899, the siege of Ladysmith began in Natal.
In 1924, the first crossword appeared in a British newspaper.
In 1959, the main section of the M1 opened.
Invalids made to pay for Government's ills
THE Government is becoming sicker by the day.
Not only is it allowing certain health authorities to waste millions of pounds on computer systems that don't work, it also allowed the London Ambulance Service to put lives at risk with a system that had not been fully proven in practice.
Now the Government plans to tax people like myself who are on invalid-ity pensions.
What other fiendish plans have they got in the pipeline?
It will not be long before we're holding out our begging bowls to the Third World, asking them to help us.
Invalids made to pay for Government's ills
I HAD to retire early after several operations but because I am on an invalidity pension, and not income support, I do not get mortgage, rent, poll tax, dental or any other sort of relief.
I can't even get a bus pass.
What amazes me is that young families on income support can get almost any accompanying benefit, yet I am expected to meet these bills in full.
I am being punished for being an invalid and paying my national insurance contributions for 40 years.
Now the Government wants to tax my pension.
How low can it sink?
Invalids made to pay for Government's ills
SO the Government wants to tax disabled people who already feel bad enough about not being able to work.
They suffer as it is, and now may have to pay tax on money they deserve.
Marti Poopers
IT IS unfair to accuse Wet Wet Wet's Marti Pellow (right) of putting fans at risk by urging them to dance during the band's Edinburgh concert.
I was there and he only urged people in the flat part of the arena to dance.
Those in the stands were told to stay seated.
Marti is owed an apology.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE pub name The Case Is Altered is probably a corruption of the Spanish ‘casa alta’, the high house.
The name was brought back by troops involved in the Spanish Peninsular (1808–14) War.
‘Alta’ is directly linked to ‘altar’which basically means the high place.
As a rule, all sacrifices were carried out as close to the heavens as possible.
When early Christians adopted the pagan altar they did so to represent the table of the Last Supper and placed upon it a white cloth symbolic of the Shroud.
Rights of sanctuary once available to miscreants who reached a church altar no longer have any foundation in law but the colleges of Oxford retain a similar privilege.
Although the fictional Inspector Morse freely wanders the cloisters, technically police cannot enter college grounds without permission from the master.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
US voters
JANE Gordon's warning to US voters about election ploys was right but I think our politicians are more devious.
I can well believe that many Labour supporters changed their minds on polling day after being terrified by newspaper ads warning how much extra tax they would pay under Kinnock?
Training schemes
IF Mr Major is intent on further training schemes, he should concentrate on the police, Customs officers, bus drivers, railway staff, children's nurses and home helpers for the elderly.
These are fields where there is a dire shortage of trained personnel.
Real heroes of the slump
GEORGE Brettel and Tony Wilson run their own business and employ six staff.
Yet since January they have taken home less money than their teenage trainee.
They now take home just £50 a week each and have also given up their company cars.
These are sacrifices by any standards but they have not made them because they want to be heroes.
They have made them because they are determined to do everything they can to save their business and their employees' jobs and to secure a healthier future.
Their reaction to the recession is worth considering as the Government is engaged in thrashing out how it will make its own ends meet.
It is blindingly obvious that there is not enough money in its coffers to finance the public spending programme.
The Home Secretary, Kenneth Clark, has warned that ‘there will be some painful choices to be made’, meaning that some services will suffer.
Deciding how much money each department will get calls for tough decisions.
The Government must weigh up the needs of vital areas like job training, social security benefits, hospital building and the changeover to the council tax.
It must also put together a package which will help to ease Britain out of the recession.
Then it must work out where the money will come from.
Having pledged that it will not raise taxes, the Government is faced with trimming corners where it can or increasing its borrowing.
As the calculations are worked out it is vital that everyone in the Government ensures that all expenditure is scrutinised, that no money is wasted and that cuts do not fall on or anywhere near the people who are worst off in our society.
Pay freezes have been proposed to preserve jobs.
The Government's first move should be to heed the example set by George Brettel and Tony Wilson and immediately freeze their own salaries and those of all MPs.
Copy cowboys
FOR too long a number of unscrupulous photocopier firms have persuaded their customers to sign contracts with expensive small print.
So far they have got away with their high-pressure selling techniques and the only people who have lost out have been the customers who were faced with massive charges they had neither understood nor anticipated.
Now, thanks to TODAY's campaign against the photocopier cowboys, the Office of Fair Trading is to consider a dossier of complaints against them.
We set up a phone hotline for businesses and charities that had unwittingly signed unfair contracts.
Now, as the campaign's evidence is handed to the Office of Fair Trading, it is up to its officials to take action.
There are still 50 new complaints a week about photocopier companies which are failing to explain their charges.
They must now be forced to carry out their business in a proper way, and the key to that is Government action.
Bearing up
IN these bleak times it is good to see that one veteran television star has succeeded in resurrecting his career.
He is a small but forceful creature who survived the untimely death of the man who manipulated him so brilliantly and went on to forge an equally close bond with a second partner.
Now he has been given a new show by Granada TV.
Three cheers for Sooty who has proved that life can begin at 40.
Handful of states decide who will be next President
Margaret Hall and Jim Gallagher in Washington
THE final opinion polls before today's real vote in the US presidential election have Bill Clinton sweeping into the White House.
The close race of the weekend now has the makings of a landslide victory for the Governor of Arkansas who ten months ago was just an also-ran for the Democratic nomination.
The polls gave him a lead of between five and eight points but when ‘undecided’ voters who traditionally opt for the challenger are considered, Clinton is pushed to a commanding 12-point lead.
Last night he was at almost unbackable odds of 1–8 with Ladbrokes in Britain.
George Bush was rated 4–1, and Ross Perot 100–1.
Only two out of 15 well-known media pundits, whose outspoken role in the campaign Bush has ridiculed, have staked their reputation on the President winning a second term.
But that didn't stop Bush campaigning vigorously in six battleground states yesterday in a last-ditch effort to throw off the veil of defeat which looms over him — and warning Clinton to put his planned victory parade on hold.
The razzmatazz of a US election can be an education for anyone not fully versed in politics the American way, but just how does the rather involved system work?
The major difference between the American and British systems is that we vote for an MP, the party with the most MPs wins and its leader moves into Number Ten.
In the United States the vote for the President is cast separately to those for members of The House of Representatives (lower house) and The Senate (upper house).
And the presidential election is not won on a first-past-the-post basis by simply tallying the votes for Bush, Clinton and Ross Perot across the country.
Each of the 50 states casts electoral college votes equal to the number of its delegates in Congress, the House of Representatives and the Senate.
Rural, sparsely populated states such as Montana, Wyoming and North and South Dakota have just three votes each.
California, with 52 representatives and two senators, has 54.
If the majority of voters in California opt for Clinton — even if by only one vote — he will win all the state's electoral college votes.
The man who becomes president is the one who gets the most of these 538 electoral college votes across the nation.
Therefore it is possible for a candidate to win the key to the White House even if he loses in most of the states.
The important thing is to win the most populous states, such as California, New York (33 votes) and Illinois (22).
Opinion polls in these three vital regions show Clinton way ahead, meaning he is almost assured of their combined electoral college vote of 109 — well on the way to the 270 he needs to win.
Bush is so certain that he's lost The Big Three he has stopped campaigning there, concentrating on a dozen battleground states which could go either way.
But pollsters believe his efforts are all in vain, and claim that Clinton is performing just as well in the smaller states and could win as many as 302 of the 538 electoral college votes.
This election concept was introduced because the founding fathers felt the public was not in a position to make up its own mind.
Therefore informed ‘electors’ did the job for them.
The college itself, established in 1787, does not meet until after the national election.
The ‘electors’, usually prominent citizens, then vote according to the public mandate in what is essentially a rubber stamping process.
They do not officially vote for the president until December 14 but, as they follow the will of their states, the result will effectively be known after today's election.
The college's vote is sent under special seal to Capitol Hill to be formally announced by the new Congress on January 4.
Should Clinton win, that official announcement would herald the biggest clearout of personnel the White House has seen.
From the internationally known names — such as press secretary Marlin Fitzwater — to anonymous civil servants, they will be packing their bags and moving on in their hundreds.
Washington DC estate agents have already been flooded with business — from Republicans who know their time is up, to Democrats chomping at the bit to get settled in.
After a 12-year reign it won't be easy for the Republican workers to start over again.
Many of the political appointees who will find themselves ‘displaced persons’ tomorrow arrived in Washington DC as ambitious thirtysomethings and are being tossed-out over-the-hill in their late forties and early fifties.
One of the best known of the departing faces, the State Department's Margaret Tutweiller, is more fortunate, with a new life already lined up.
She will stay with the man at whose side she has been for years, Secretary of State James Baker.
He, of course, will be out on his ear.
But not flat on his face.
There's a certain 1996 event in which he aims to make his mark.
Ms Tutweiller will be working towards that time because she plans to be back with a vengeance — when Baker challenges President Bill Clinton for the White House in four years' time.
When the results are expected
BRITAIN should hear the first US election result around 11.30pm tonight.
And if Clinton wins it, George Bush can start packing his bags.
That result will be from Indiana, a traditional Republican stronghold and home of Vice President Dan Quayle.
There it will only be 6pm local time, but thanks to Indiana's all-electronic system, votes will be tallied on a running basis throughout the day.
Polls in most states open today at 6am local time, which translated into British time means 11am for New York and 2pm for California.
Closing times vary considerably.
In New York, all votes will be cast by 9pm local time (2am Wednesday), in Washington DC an hour earlier.
In California they stay open until 11pm (9am on Wednesday).
Because most of the closest-fought states are in the Eastern Time zone, American TV networks expect to be able to forecast the final result from 2am on Wednesday.
But if the polls are wrong and it's a fight to the finish, the verdict may not be known until the West Coast results are in.
Among the battleground states that will give early signals, watch out around 1.30am for New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, North Carolina and Kentucky.
An hour later, the second time zone results should be coming in from the Mid-West.
States that could swing the result are Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa, Kansas, Tennessee and Louisiana.
In this time group, pay special attention to Alabama.
It could be a good indicator for the Deep South where Bush must make an impact if he wants to stay in the race.
The President can only rely completely on three states — Utah, Nebraska and South Carolina.
Polls show Clinton with a solid lead in 19 states.
The look of a winner, but will he still have it in four years' time?
Dominic Midgley
BILL Clinton criss-crossed America yesterday, looking every inch a winner and living up to his promise to ‘burn up’ the last 48 hours of his presidential campaign.
Struggling with a rasping voice Clinton, wife Hillary at his side, embarked on a gruelling, non-stop 4,106 mile journey to ten cities in nine states, flying from one airport rally to the next.
Before setting off Clinton addressed one of his biggest campaign rallies yet, at East Rutherford, New Jersey.
He told 20,000 supporters: ‘This is a contest between the courage to change and the comfort of the status quo.
I think I know what your answer will be.’
Hollywood stars Richard Gere, Glenn Close, Kathleen Turner, Gregory Hines and singer Michael Bolton were also present.
Fatal Attraction actress Close said of George Bush's campaign: ‘How dare they talk about a kinder and gentler nation.
This is the first time in 20 years I have felt any hope.’
After the rally Clinton began the toughest lap in his race for the White House.
It started at a diner in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania at 7am.
Three hours later he was addressing an airport rally at Cleveland, Ohio, before flying to Romulus Airport, Michigan, at 12.30 and then on to St Louis, Missouri at 4.30pm.
Next stop was Paducah, Kentucky, at 6pm, followed by McAllen in Texas at 9pm.
Travelling on through the night the Clintons were due in Forth Worth, Texas, after midnight before flying to Albuquerque, New Mexico, early this morning.
Another airport rally is planned for Denver, Colorado, at 5am and then it is back to his home town of Little Rock, Arkansas, to vote.
But while Clinton is bursting with energy now, what toll will the next four years take if he enters the White House?
There have been 17 US presidents this century.
Eight have had heart conditions and two have died of illness while in office.
Several have undergone major surgery.
It's a job which men take on when they are at the height of their powers but all too often they have been reduced to a sickly shadow of their former self.
Richard Nixon took over the Oval Office in January, 1969.
Four years later he spent a week in hospital with viral pneumonia.
In mid-1974 he developed phlebitis — inflammation of the veins — and within months it was revealed that he had a thrombosis which could have killed him in seconds.
By the time he was forced out of office by the Watergate scandal in August of that year, observers were openly speculating as to whether he had become mentally unhinged and he was said to have lost his will to live.
His vice president Gerald Ford took over for the remainder of his term but lost the 1976 election to Jimmy Carter.
The peanut farmer captivated America with his Colgate smile but he was a different sight three years into his presidency when he took part in a six-mile road race.
Ashen-faced and gasping for breath, he had to be helped to his car with less than half the course completed.
President Bush took over from the 78-year-old Ronald Reagan at the age of 64 but within 11 days the rigours of office had taken their toll.
He had to cancel a meeting at Camp David, complaining of a stubborn cold and hoarse throat.
In 1991, he was rushed to hospital by helicopter after collapsing while jogging.
He was later diagnosed as having Graves Disease, a thyroid ailment, and he now takes a daily synthetic thyroid hormone pill and a blood-thinning drug.
This did not prevent him falling off his chair and being sick on the Japanese premier at a state dinner in Japan earlier this year, an embarrassing incident captured by the TV cameras.
And now, judging by Bill Clinton's croak as he addressed supporters yesterday, there are already signs that he is feeling the pace.
But that won't stop him joining an expected 200,000 supporters in Little Rock tonight for what promises to be the biggest election party ever seen.
Warning This woman could seriously damage your health
Robyn Foyster
TO THE thumping beat of rock music, Cindy Crawford pushes her fabulous body to the limit.
The message is clear: if you want to look as sexy as me, this is how to do it.
The problem is, the supermodel's new exercise video could give you more than a bruised ego.
It could leave you nursing serious injuries.
Fitness experts claim some exercises in Cindy's Shape Your Body Workout — launched by the star in Britain yesterday — are potentially dangerous.
And they say that the camera spends too much time focusing on her taut buttocks and perfectly sculpted breasts, and not enough on proper instruction.
A review in this month's Health and Fitness magazine describes Cindy's technique as ‘atrocious’.
‘She over-extends her back during most arm movements and back kicks,’ says writer Martica Heaner who has a degree in exercise science.
‘Though this can seriously strain intervertebral disc structures and spinal ligaments, it does look much sexier because her chest sticks out and her sultry gaze and parted lips are emphasised.’
The video, which cost £1 million to produce, has already sold three million copies in America in its first three weeks on release.
Asked why it concentrates so much on close-up shots of her breasts and buttocks, Cindy says: ‘You exercise to look good.
If I looked like Roseanne Barr then nobody would buy my video.
Jane Fonda is great, but I wasn't into jumping up and down.
That just gives me a headache.
This video is for my generation but can be used by anybody.
‘It caters for people who don't necessarily want to be Cher.’
But aerobics expert Tee Dobinson from London's top gym Cannons remains unconvinced.
She says: ‘It's the most dreadful exercise video I have seen in a while.
Her technique is poor and her instruction often shows her lack of knowledge.
‘Many of her exercises with weights are fast and uncontrolled which makes them potentially dangerous.
Also, her hyper-knee flexions, where the knee goes beyond the recommended 90 degree angle, puts too much pressure on the knee ligaments.
‘She does full neck circles and extends the neck backwards — both of which are potentially harmful to the neck.
Fitness experts recommend you don't do them.’
Another movement which Tee says shows her lack of knowledge is lying flat on your back and lifting straight legs.
‘This puts unnecessary strain on the back,’ Tee says.
‘When she does her buttock squeezes she lifts the whole of her back off the floor, but the back should remain flat on the floor.
Cindy created the video with the help of her personal trainer Radu Teordescu whose clients include Michelle Pfeiffer, Calvin Klein and Bianca Jagger.
She even goes so far as to say her grandmother does the warm-up exercises, using tins of soup instead of weights, though her husband Richard Gere sticks to Tai Chi and riding his bike.
The video cover says it includes two 40-minute fitness workouts plus an extra 10-minute jump-start mini workout.
What it fails to say is that it is a high intensity workout which does not suit all fitness levels.
Even Cindy can barely make it through the routine.
‘Cindy says at the start of the video ‘watch it and then try it’,’ says Tee Dobinson.
‘I would say watch it and then don't try it.’
Daryl Hannah and John F Kennedy Jnr
PARTING was such sweet sorrow for actress Daryl Hannah and John F Kennedy Jnr, above, when they spent 45 minutes saying their goodbyes on a New York street.
Daryl, 32, couldn't tear herself away from her new boyfriend after they had lunch at a Manhattan diner.
The couple previously denied rumours of romance, saying they were just old friends.
Now there can be no doubt.
Mitch Mitchell
ROCK drummer Mitch Mitchell won substantial libel damages in the High Court yesterday after a book claimed he made racist comments to Jimi Hendrix when he played in his band, the Experience.
Mitch, 46, of Rye, East Sussex, said in court he was ‘shocked at its nastiness and livid at its total untruth’.
Glenys Kinnock
GLENYS Kinnock, wife of the former Labour leader, is writing to Margaret Thatcher to ask if she will be interviewed for her new book, called Radical Women.
‘That would be good because she's a radical woman in the broadest definition of the word,’ Glenys said.
Nicky Docherty's car
THIEVES broke into TV announcer and DJ Nicky Docherty's car and took everything — except Des O'Connor's album Lovin' Feeling.
Nicky, of Falkirk, West Lothian, said: ‘It was adding insult to injury to see Des's face on the record cover smiling up at me.’
Joan Collins
JOAN Collins, recently named one of the top 10 sexiest women of all time, flew into London from Argentina yesterday with just one thing on her mind — bed.
The 59-year-old, who has been on a hectic 10,000-mile round trip to Buenos Aires, said: ‘I've only just woken up and my only plans now are to go to bed.’
What a swell party this is, Mr President
By Tim Satchell
TONIGHT Americans in London will stage some of the swellest election parties ever.
From 10pm, 1,800 guests will be at the American Embassy in Grosvenor Square, sponsored by 11 international companies including AT&T, Hanson and Virgin Atlantic, who have donated Pounds 2,000 each.
Beer will be supplied by Budweiser and crisps by Kettle Chips.
Coca-Cola have contributed 2,400 cans and Haagen-Dazs 1,800 ice cream bars.
The embassy canteen will be open all night supplying famous embassy BLTs — bacon from American hogs and imported lettuce and tomatoes.
Republicans Abroad and Democrats Abroad have been allocated 200 tickets each — preference given to those who make a £25 donation.
A Dixieland band and barbershop quartet will entertain them.
For other Republicans and Democrats, from 8.30pm the English Speaking Union in Mayfair is hosting a £20-a-head party, sponsored by Hill and Knowlton.
Seventy British MPs are expected.
At the Criterion in Piccadilly Circus, US restaurateur Bob Payton tells me: ‘We have camera crews from ABC, CBS and NBC coming.
‘So if anyone wants to be on television in America, they'd better be at my party.’
Stateside: Bill Clinton's sore throat has rallied support.
‘It gives him the image Americans love of the battling underdog even though he is ahead in the polls,’ says an image consultant.
‘People remember James Stewart in the film Mr Smith Goes To Washington.’
Jilly's novel dress sense
By Tim Satchell
NOVELIST Jilly Cooper, 55, makes her first appearance as a fashionmodel today.
At a photographic session, she will wear a figure-hugging leopard print outfit of cross-over top and skin tight leggings.
The garments by the London fashion house L'Ultima will raise funds for Save The Children.
They will retail at cost price, plus £5 which goes to the charity.
Miss Cooper will also feature in a major advertising campaign for the firm.
And…
By Tim Satchell
JIMMY Greaves on Lester Piggott, who will be 57, on Thursday: ‘He should be knighted.
If ever a man deserves an honour from his country, it's this man.’
Action this day.
Not a lot to grouch about
By Tim Satchell
THE Groucho Club, Soho haunt of Stephen Fry, Harold Pinter and Dawn French among others, is over three floors above the next-door Chinese restaurant.
Announcing a third year of increased profits, managing director Anthony Mackintosh tells me: ‘We plan to have a new front entrance, so in the evening it's not quite so like Twickenham.’
Pre-tax profits to the end of May 1992 were £251,828, 14 per cent up on 1991.
All-action Cara in all-star company
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Cara Konig makes her West End debut tonight in Our Song, seducing Peter O'Toole in Keith Waterhouse's new play.
Miss Konig, 25, who has an Irish mother and a father of German ancestry, is also a producer.
In 10 days time, Playing The First Wife, produced by Miss Konig's De Musset & Co — named after French playwright Alfred de Musset — opens at the Watermans in Brentford, directed by Tim Piggott-Smith and starring Barry Foster.
‘I like getting my hands on things,’ says Miss Konig, left.
‘Being a producer seemed a natural thing to do.’
Tonight she plays a call girl sharing a flat with actress Tara Fitzgerald.
Director Ned Sherrin, whose Theatrical Anecdotes has just entered the paperback best-sellers, will not be there.
‘I have a previous engagement in Harrogate with the Leeds Permanent Building Society,’ he tells me.
‘A fast car will take me back for a drink with the cast afterwards, but if they haven't got it right yet, they never will.’
Mr Sherrin, who describes Keith Waterhouse as ‘a Melvyn Bragg who can write’, says: ‘The play can't fail to be a hit.’
The final showdown
Clive Nelson
PRINCESS Diana toyed with the envelope nervously, running her fingers across the distinctive red wax seal embossed on its flap.
She was opening the post in her private office at Kensington Palace, a task she usually relished.
Despite having the heaviest postbag in the Royal Family, Diana enjoyed skimming through the scores of letters which found their way on to her desk every day.
They kept her in touch with the ‘real world’, she reasoned.
And, of course, they were almost exclusively from fans offering their praise and support.
There were rarely any nasty surprises.
The occasional crank letter was invariably weeded out the moment it arrived at the sorting office at the Royal Family's own Post Office within Buckingham Palace.
But this letter was different.
It had not been posted from outside or even sent through the internal mail in one of the recycled envelopes Prince Charles insisted they used for the interminable memos that are a feature of Palace life.
It had been hand-delivered to Kensington Palace and then carefully placed on top of all Diana's other mail.
With a strange mixture of curiosity and fear, she took a silver letter opener and sliced through the flap of the envelope.
Nothing in her 11 years as a member of the world's most famous family had prepared her for the contents of the letter inside.
It was written by Prince Philip.
His words surprised her at first, then anger took over — an anger so intense that she was prepared to walk out of her marriage and do irreparable damage to the Royal Family.
He said that she had betrayed her husband, her sons and, above all, her Queen.
He believed she was to blame for the tide of scandal enveloping the Royal Family.
And he told her so.
It was, as Diana confided later, the ‘unbearable coldness’ of the letter which hurt her as much as its contents.
‘She couldn't believe a man she had once regarded as an uncle figure could turn against her so viciously,’ one of her closest friends says.
Prince Philip asked if she had co-operated with royal writer Andrew Morton as he prepared his best-seller Diana: Her True Story.
Without mentioning the title of the book, serialised in newspapers before going on sale, he warned of the dangers of ‘damaging stories’ to the Royal Family.
And, without waiting for a reply to his question about whether she gave Morton tacit approval for the book which became the biggest seller in the history of royal publishing, Philip went on to accuse his daughter-in-law of putting the dignity of the Crown at risk.
One friend who was told of the contents of the letter reveals: ‘He told her in no uncertain terms that she had to help maintain the dignity of the Crown and consider the repercussions of her actions to the Queen.
‘He told that her next responsibility was to be loyal to her husband above all else.
He advised her to spend more time with the Prince of Wales.
And he ended by warning her that the stories being published were doing untold damage to the Royal Family — and she should be aware that she was to blame.’
Diana was devastated.
She firmly believed that her life as a royal was over.
Close to tears, she contacted a close friend and said: ‘That's it.
I'm out.’
The letter was the latest bombshell to rock Diana's eventful life as Princess of Wales.
The repercussions of the Morton book, planned by friends to help portray Diana's viewpoint on her troubled marriage, were in danger of overwhelming her.
The carefully leaked revelations about her battle with the binge-eating disease bulimia nervosa and her suicide attempts had caused her husband's friends to hit back.
On top of this, rumours about the ‘Dianagate’ scandal of the bugged phone calls between her and old friend James Gilbey were rife.
When Prince Philip appeared to turn against her she finally cracked.
On June 11, as she visited a hospice in Southport, Merseyside, the facade of bravery she had managed to sustain crumbled and she burst into tears.
It all became too much as a woman in the crowd shouted: ‘We love you, Di.’
Again, Diana was forced to turn to the small group of friends she regards as unofficial advisers.
Their advice was unanimous: ‘You have to fight back.’
So she did.
As Diana prepared for battle she knew she needed a strategy.
Her first step was to contact a solicitor to advise her on the wording of any reply to Prince Philip's devastating letter.
As she told a close friend: ‘I knew I had only one chance to get it right.
It was absolutely make or break.’
After days of reflection she decided to write back in the same icy terms Philip had used with her.
And, slowly, she realised the whole situation could be turned to her advantage.
The friend says: ‘Diana's mood changed one morning.
‘She had been very sad, really very down.
Then she recognised the ball was in her court.
‘The next time I spoke to her she realised this was her golden opportunity to have her say, to get her retaliation in.
‘This was the surefire way of making sure her perspective was put across to The Firm in writing.’
Diana had a new sense of purpose in the days that followed.
Courtiers who had come to expect her barely to acknowledge them were suddenly treated to radiant smiles and cheerful banter.
She bought little treats for princes Wills and Harry and — always a tell-tale sign — paid more attention to her appearance.
An aide who spent time with her says: ‘We all saw the change straight away.
There was a real spring in her step.
‘We didn't know what caused it.
We were just very grateful that it was taking place.’
Diana drafted her reply carefully and made several attempts at matching the frosty tone which Philip had used in his.
She listed the points she wanted to make, ticking them off when she found the precise words she wanted to use.
Her three-page typed reply, when it was finally received, dropped like a bombshell.
One who was told of its contents says: ‘Her case was stated in very precise, legal terms.
‘There was a formal denial that she had taken part in anything which would discredit the Royal Family.
‘And the allegation that she had been disloyal to anyone was very firmly refuted.’
Diana warmed to her theme as the letter, written on Kensington Palace notepaper, continued with her favourite lament — the work she had done for the Royal Family.
The source says: ‘She went on to say that she had done more for the Royal Family than any of its other members.
‘She outlined her regard for the children and made the point that she showed them more attention than the Prince of Wales appeared to.’
That final point — an echo of the affectionate question she often asked her sons ‘Who loves you most?’— is said to have struck a chord with those who read it.
In a last defiant gesture Diana fastened the letter with red sealing wax and had it hand-delivered, just as Prince Philip had done with the one he sent to her.
By all accounts he was thunderstruck when he received it.
Its contents and tone led him to suspect that Diana was on the verge of quitting The Firm.
And she was.
The source says: ‘When the Duke read it he honestly thought he had lost her.
‘That was when the order went out: Be nice to Diana.’
Suddenly the senior courtiers who had sniffily averted their eyes when the Princess approached were forced to treat her with more respect.
Diana recognised and relished her new-found authority.
As she was to tell one of her oldest friends: ‘I only wish I'd put my foot down with them years ago.’
The next step was to call a meeting, a move which was made with surprising ease.
Both sides appeared keen to work for some kind of reconciliation, although how much of their willingness to co-operate was purely political was never made clear.
One who saw both camps preparing for the talks says: ‘It was all arranged so that Diana could stay more or less on her terms.
She was allowed to feel she was getting her way to a certain extent, although there were certain limits.’
The thorny question of divorce was discussed and argued out in the frankest tones.
It was the Queen, not Prince Philip, who spelt out the brutal alternatives.
Diana could choose to stay within the Royal Family and be allowed a greater measure of freedom.
But divorce meant she would have to hand over her children to Palace care.
She would lose contact with William and Harry and, as heirs to the throne, the two princes would continue to be brought up within the Palace confines regardless of their mother's whereabouts.
They would in reality become wards of the Queen.
That, it was always felt, was the trump card the Palace held over Diana.
But in reality she had always been aware of its presence.
One Palace source says: ‘There was never any question of her leaving.
I hate to say it but Diana played it brilliantly.
She called their bluff.’
Observers believe a bargain was struck and a compromise reached in which Diana would get increased freedom and yet appear to toe the Palace line.
And that is how matters have been left.
The new partnership allows Diana to base herself at Kensington Palace and to continue to see her circle of friends including James Gilbey and James Hewitt.
Meanwhile Charles lives at Highgrove and can pursue his interests and also socialise with his own friends, including Camilla Parker-Bowles.
Both are happy with the set-up and for people to know that they have come to an arrangement on leading separate lives.
Twice last week she appeared at stage-managed public engagements with her husband, smiling and gazing at him.
Yet those who know Diana know this is nothing more than a working business arrangement.
Of course it's not easy to keep up the smiles in public, as the couple showed in Seoul yesterday when they arrived for a five-day Korean visit.
They didn't even glance at each other when greeted by traditional musicians dressed in 14th-Century attire, and their suite at the Seoul Hyatt Hotel has two bedrooms.
But it is still only early days for the new arrangement, and both Diana and Charles are determined to make it work.
‘She is happier because things are on an even keel, but to say they are all Happy Families is silly,’ one royal watcher says.
‘For the first time in ages they are tackling their problems in a sensible, mature manner without hysteria on one side and bloody-mindedness on the other.
‘It might only be a tiny step forward — but at least it is a move in the right direction.’
Safe haven for nervous investors
TEETERING markets are giving investors an understandable bout of the jitters.
But now there's a new bond that provides a failsafe investment.
With Save & Prosper's Guaranteed Stockmarket Bond, if shares go up you win and if they go down you get your money back.
It's a product built for safety, even though S&P confidently predicts that share prices will soar by 50 per cent in the next three years.
You'll have to stump up at least £2,500 for the bond and leave it invested for five years.
You can get at your money in an emergency but the charges could reduce your payout by five per cent or more.
Many similar products are entering the market but S&P's has lower costs and charges.
Details: 0800 282 101.
Could you afford a brief encounter?
Stephen Ellis
IF THE Government slashes legal aid, many people will shrug their shoulders and think ‘so what?
I'm not likely to take anyone to court.’
But what if the unexpected happens, or someone decides to take you to court?
With reduced legal aid payouts and a tough new means test for applicants looming, it could spell financial disaster.
Legal aid was provided for more than 337,000 people last year, including many who found themselves on the receiving end of a court action.
And now Lord Chancellor Lord MacKay has warned that spending cuts are likely to severely restrict the amount of aid available.
Solicitors in some areas are now charging as much as £100 an hour.
So what can you do to limit the danger of a ruinously expensive court case?
It makes sense to have some form of legal expenses insurance, and by far the cheapest way to do this is through the ‘add on’ offered for as little as £10 a year with home contents insurance.
Hambro and DAS are two major providers of this sort of low-cost legal cover, which pays out up to £25,000 a claim.
But there are restrictions.
Cover does not extend to employment problems, building disputes, arguments with local authorities or troubles connected with the Data Protection Act.
It is usually limited to this country and your case will be considered only if there is ‘a reasonable prospect of success’.
You can, however, buy a much more comprehensive policy which will help in almost any circumstances, provided there are ‘reasonable grounds’ for the case.
The Rolls-Royce of the legal insurance world is offered by Legal Protection Group, which is owned by Sun Alliance.
It costs £180 a year but gives £50,000 of cover for all members of a family sharing one home.
Slightly cheaper but less comprehensive is the policy from CareAssist, part of Royal Insurance, at £150 a year for a £50,000 maximum payout per claim.
Whatever the policy, it's vital to check details to be sure it's what you want.
Employment problems now account for more claims than any other factor, according to LPG, who in one recent case picked up a £13,000 legal costs bill for an accountant dismissed by Lambeth Council.
Neither the man nor his union could have pursued the case alone, but thanks to the insurance he eventually collected £22,500 compensation.
As well as disputes with neighbours, shopkeepers and workmen, the dearer policies also cover criminal prosecution — provided you haven't brought the charge on yourself or admitted guilt.
All legal insurances and many household policies give you access to legal advice and emotional counselling through free telephone helplines.
£10 keeps camera rolling
LAWRENCE Baker from Southend reckons the £10 annual premium it cost him to add DAS legal expenses insurance to his household policy was the best tenner he ever spent.
Last September he bought a camcorder which stopped working within six months.
As it was still under guarantee, he took it back to the shop and a month later was told it had been repaired.
It soon went wrong again and this time the ‘repair’ took six weeks.
Yet when Lawrence tried to use it, the camcorder failed for the third time.
Rows with the shop got him nowhere so he contacted DAS who wrote on his behalf claiming Breach of Contract and threatening to sue.
It was enough to get the shop moving and this time they offered Lawrence a replacement — but of an inferior model.
DAS stepped in again and now the shop has come up with a top-of-the-range camcorder in perfect order.
‘DAS made it clear to the shop that they weren't going to be messed around,’ explains Lawrence.
In fact it is the second time he has used the policy.
Two years ago he bought an exotic parrot for £385.
Within six weeks it was a ‘deceased parrot’.
‘The pet shop refused a refund but I got one thanks to DAS,’ he says.
Collectors' Corner
Adrian Furness
YOU know something is a major collectable when the fakers move in.
The latest target is an unlikely one — imitation Dinky toys which Scotland Yard says are fetching up to £1,000.
The heyday of Meccano's Dinky vehicles was the Fifties and early Sixties, when a standard boxed Dinky car cost a few shillings new.
Now it fetches £35 to £50, or more than £100 for an unusual colour variation.
Lorries go from £50 to £1,000 and rare pre-war Dinkys can be worth even more.
Which makes The Edward Collection, built up by two brothers over 40 years, worth a fortune.
As children the boys spent all their pocket money on Dinkys.
And they bought two of each model — one to play with and the other to save in mint condition.
Now their 2,000-strong collection has been sent to Christie's, where it is expected to make hundreds of thousands of pounds.
The first half goes under the hammer on Friday and there are some real treasures, says Christie's expert Hugo Marsh.
‘The Guy Warrior van with an advert for Heinz ketchup on the side cost 8/6d in 1960.
We have two in the sale, estimated at £1,800 to £2,200 each.’
So what should we spend our pocket money on now to make a fortune in 40 years' time?
‘Buy quality,’ says Marsh.
‘Makers such as Tomy show that edge.’
Christie's diecast toys sale is at 85 Old Brompton Rd, London SW7.
Shooting stars bring fireworks for Major
Penny Thornton
REMEMBER, remember the fourth of November.
How convenient of John Major to have put himself in the position of bringing the Maastricht issue to a head — and at the same time virtually assuring a no-confidence vote in the Government — on the day the sun and Saturn are in a tense 90-degree angle to each other.
At best this is a portent of immense struggle, at worst an omen of defeat.
And a clear case of life imitating astrology.
But will John Major and the Government go down with the sun-Saturn boat or be swept away by the sun-Pluto tidal wave on the 14th?
Or will they live to fight another day?
Certainly this is a month of trials and tribulations but I suspect what will be rooted up, thrashed out and spat out will do us all a favour in the end.
Despite the general feeling that Major's intractability on the Maastricht Treaty will prove his downfall, his chart is looking rather healthy — as indeed it was in April.
And I don't expect him to lie down and die under these current aspects.
But given the volcanic climate of November's stars, something fairly dramatic and transformative is about to ensue.
Perhaps the best way to proceed is by a process of elimination.
Astrologically, there is no indication that the Labour Party will be in power this year.
John Major looks set to remain on his perch — although he is by no means secure.
But what about December's forthcoming eclipses?
These could indicate a referendum rather than another General Election.
Given the buoyancy of Major's chart, he should be able to gather the support he needs for tomorrow's crucial debate for he is a tactical Capricorn-rising every bit as much as he is a stand-by-my-principles Aries.
Either way, there will be a lot of people who'll remember the fourth of November.
This is a month of turning points and U-turns all round.
ARIES Mar 21 — Apr 20
AN intense month with the accent on feelings and your security.
On one level you may be preoccupied with establishing greater financial stability but what may be equally as pressing is finding a real sense of belonging and a deep emotional rapport with a partner.
You are unlikely to escape some emotional turmoil, but after the 14th the way should be clear for a new chapter to begin.
You are an ambitious sign capable of achieving great things.
With Venus at the zenith of your chart from the 13th, the climate is right for success in your worldly endeavours and in affairs of the heart although it won't be plain sailing.
TAURUS Apr 21-May 21
UNTIL mid-month you may have your work cut out trying to make the pieces of your life come together — or finding them.
You seem to be coping with one thing after another, especially if you're a 2nd or 12th May birthday.
Nevertheless, there is just as much of a chance that you will win through your difficulties as there is of reaching the point of throwing in the towel.
Relationships are at their most transformative stage, and after the 14th you should be reaping the harvest of love's labours or indeed digesting the results of your efforts in other directions.
And with Venus in the area of the far off, it might be appropriate to set your sights on pastures new.
GEMINI May 22-Jun 22
THIS is one of the most important months of the year for your career or for anything that contributes to your well-being.
Around the 4th, and between the 10th and 14th, events could radically alter the existing pattern of your experience.
And even though these events could be elevating there's a chance of some accompanying stress.
Your ruler, Mercury, turns retrograde on the 11th which means that from this point you must be prepared to sit certain situations out and not to expect an immediate response from people.
On the plus side, you may get a welcome blast from the past.
You may also expect more love and support than of late.
CANCER Jun 23-Jul 23
THERE is a degree of planetary turmoil to contend with in November although, because much of it is focused in a sign entirely compatible with your own, you may do rather well out of the situation.
While the first week looks a bit of a damp squib, the full moon on the 10th and the sun-Pluto conjunction of the 14th could leave their transformational mark on you.
This is a tremendously creative and self-expressive period of the year, although it would be foolish to expect an easy ride.
Romance is under powerful influences, and there could be some surprise developments or fateful encounters around the 26th.
LEO Jul 24-Aug 23
THERE have been three other potential points of the year when much has been primed to change — not in the easiest of ways, nor in the most predictable of fashions — and this is another one.
Between the 10th and 14th aspects conspire to bring you on line with your destiny.
In other words, events dictate where you go from here.
Whether this is an experience revolving around personal or family life or your career, you are likely to feel the effects at a deep and lasting level.
It may help to remember that you cannot build a towering future on inadequate foundations and that the deeper you sink into experience, the higher you can soar.
VIRGO Aug 24-Sept 23
OH, what a tangled web we weave, might well serve as this month's motto.
Situations on more than one front look frustratingly perverse especially during the second week.
If you seem caught in half-truths and mysterious delays, avoid analysing the situation because it will only up your anxiety levels and create even more confusion — Mercury will right itself eventually.
And there are compensations, notably Venus's arrival on the 13th in the romantic, creative and social centre of your horoscope.
The decisions thrust upon you in November, though difficult, will prove the making of you rather than the breaking.
LIBRA Sept 24-Oct 23
WHAT Saturn glues together, Pluto and Uranus may attempt to sunder — in other words, as much as one situation refuses to budge another is set for blast off.
The 4th, 10th, 14th and 27th are all times when you may feel the cosmos has it in for you although these are the very points at which you could break the chains that have held you back for so long.
Certainly this is a month when your material assets are under transformational stars.
So too are domestic matters and emotional ties.
You may be a sign that avoids deep, dark and passionate waters but often what you most fear turns out to be the best thing for you.
SCORPIO Oct 24-Nov 22
FEBRUARY, May and August could be seen as rehearsals for November's main event so that what may have been a series of happenings in these months could lead to November's denouement.
Pluto, the planet of transformation, joins with the sun on the 14th, and with Mercury on the 27th making these prime times for fateful developments.
Whichever way situations go, and however other people behave, do not allow the experience to dent your faith in yourself.
And even if you score a triumph, avoid crowing about your success.
It is almost impossible to see where events will lead but you are going through a baptism of fire.
SAGITTARIUS Nov 22-Dec 22
THIS month's all-powerful astrological events occur in rather covert zones of your solar chart which could mean that what will eventually prove hugely important to your personal and professional standing escapes without notice at the time.
An apparently unimportant meeting or incident in the first half of the month or around the 27th may well contain the seeds of something far greater.
Certainly Venus protects your interests while the planetary storm rages mid-month and may provide you with a real romantic or financial fillip.
Wrap yourself in cotton wool and you'll find you're in mint condition for events in late November and early December.
CAPRICORN Dec 23-Jan 19
NOVEMBER has one big thing going for it — it's an improvement on October.
There are at least only a couple of potential potholes rather than a series.
The Sun-Saturn aspect on the 4th could pose a small threat to your equilibrium as could the configurations between the 10th and 14th — friendships and financial affairs are vulnerable then.
But the best news is Venus alights in your sign on the 13th marking a four-week period when your personal and romantic life flourishes.
Indeed, if something rather special fails to come your way in November or early December, your must be very hard to please — or resisting the irresistible.
AQUARIUS Jan 20-Feb 19
IN theory, November should be the month when career is uppermost on your agenda or, indeed, those aspects of life that constitute your aspirations, if not your dreams.
Between the 4th and 15th and on or near the 27th you may face some extraordinary turns of events.
Whether these are welcome or entirely unwanted you can be sure they will alter your course in some way.
This is not the first time the issue of control has come up in this column but because yours is a sign that tends to resist going with the flow, all too often you meet people and circumstances that appear to block your path.
There is a certain sweetness in surrender.
PISCES Feb 20-Mar 20
A MONTH containing a sun-Pluto conjunction is bound to be memorable — even if you are not directly involved in any major event.
Indeed, sometimes your life changes far more because of other people's actions and intentions than your own.
Once or twice this year there has been a suggestion you should seek fulfilment further afield — even radically changing location — and the time is ripe for this.
The 10th, 14th and 27th are departure points, whether this means leaving the past behind in a literal or a figurative way.
Grasping life's nettles takes courage but the more powerfully you do it, the less it hurts.
Niki Taylor
I FELT it was wrong to show 17-year-old American model Niki Taylor munching on a cheeseburger.
This sets a bad example to teenagers, many of whom are overweight and eat too much junk food.
Most models are very strict about what they eat, and they would not last long on a diet of cheeseburgers.
Time changes
I FIND it harder with each passing year to adapt to this silly messing about with clocks when the seasons change.
After 79 years I've yet to meet anyone genuinely pleased at this interference with natural time.
Prince Charles's bow tie
NEVER mind the narrowness of Prince Charles's bow tie.
And does it really matter what material it's made from?
What I noticed in your picture of the Prince was not his clothes, but the Poppy on his lapel.
I admire him for remembering the day.
Do I want to make a will
ENOUGH is enough.
I've just had a telephone sales call to see if I want to make a will.
What next — a funeral?
Such calls could cause distress and should be stopped.
Baby's life worth saving
EVEN though Marion Plock has been declared brain dead, her unborn baby should be given the chance to live.
As Jane Gordon mentioned in her article, there can be no doubt that Marion, fatally injured in a car crash but being kept alive by a machine, wanted her child.
No sane person would want to kill this baby when there is every chance that it will survive and be part of a loving family.
Society must be very mixed up when so many terminally ill people want to die but are denied the chance while others think it is morally wrong for this child to be born.
As for the stigma the child might face, doesn't everyone have to live with some kind of stigma at one time or another?
The doctors are doing everything they can to ensure the child will be born healthy.
It is wanted by its family, so why shouldn't it be given the chance to live?
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Viscount Linley, 31.
Boxer Larry Holmes, 43.
ON THIS DAY: In 1843, the 17ft statue of Lord Nelson was hauled to the top of the column in London's Trafalgar Square.
In 1957, Laika the dog was launched into space aboard Russia's Sputnik II.
Invest in BR for a first-class Britain
I CAN sympathise with the businessman who stands to lose a Pounds 30 million contract because BR delays repeatedly made him late for meetings.
As millions of rail travellers will testify, the ‘service’ is now no more than a sick joke.
Worse still, we're now entering that part of the year when those pathetic excuses ‘leaves on the line’ and ‘the wrong type of snow’will be trotted out to explain away timetable chaos.
Let's face it, British Rail is decrepit.
Nor can I see privatisation improving matters much.
All we will have then is a patchwork of networks — some good, some not so good — and all no doubt charging even more than the current exorbitant fares.
I noticed that the panel of ordinary people you gathered together recently to give Norman Lamont the benefit of their wisdom recommended ploughing more cash into public services.
Let's start with BR.
Instead of selling it off we should invest, even if it means that taxpayers have to contribute.
The benefits would not be limited to the traveller.
A programme of growth would create thousands of jobs and avoid the rail redundancies looming because of pit closures.
We all want to get Britain moving again.
What better symbol of that than a new, improved BR.
Fine conquest
I WAS sad to read the scathing comments of Bristol cinemagoers about the movie 1492: Conquest Of Paradise, starring Gerard Depardieu (right).
I was very impressed with the film, it was brilliantly made and riveting — and I speak as one who hated director Ridley Scott's Thelma And Louise.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
TABLE manners are a relatively recent invention, designed to clarify class boundaries.
In the Middle Ages everyone ate in the same manner — like pigs.
There were no plates, instead a meal was served on a loaf that had been torn in two.
The more important members of the household were given the crisp, tasty top halves — earning themselves the name ‘upper crust’.
It was the Duc de Richelieu who was responsible for the introduction of refined cutlery.
Apparently tired of watching his guests pick their teeth with knives, not to mention stabbing each other during drunken arguments, he ordered all the points to be ground from his cutlery — thus the modern table knife was born.
To emphasise his feelings, he outlawed the manufacture of pointed table knives and most of Europe followed suit.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Cities for the country
SO 13 million people want to escape Britain's cities for the country.
It's easy to understand why — cleaner air, room to move, a sense of community.
But soon the dream would turn sour.
Rural areas just couldn't cope with the influx — what is country now would become city, so what's the point?
Britons and their pets
IT doesn't surprise me that a survey showed very few Britons would give up their pet for £1m.
We spend a fortune on giving our cats and dogs the good life.
It is just a shame we don't treat our fellow human beings so well, rather than allowing so many to go hungry.
Cast a vote for Britain
IF this newspaper were a backbench Tory MP, it would tonight cast its vote against the Government.
It does not matter whether the big Commons debate is about the Maastricht Treaty or John Major's recent performance.
Both need a shot across the bows.
The arguments for Britain holding its place in a growing, prosperous European economic community are unanswerable.
The arguments for a common currency, common defence and foreign policies and moving towards a united Europe have hardly started to be made.
They have been deliberately avoided by politicians who know they currently find little favour with the British people.
The Government — as well as Labour and the Liberal Democrats — are gung ho for a European dream which the majority of the country does not share.
That is a strange way to exercise democracy.
The failure of Britain's membership of the European Monetary System should have led to a complete rethink of the Maastricht agreement to move to a single currency.
Instead, it goaded John Major to an even more single-minded determination to push the Treaty through Parliament.
That is just one reason why TODAY will not weep if tonight's vote goes against the Prime Minister.
Over and over again in the past few weeks he has shown himself to be leading a rudderless, aimless Government.
Some of the policies have now, grudgingly, been changed for the better.
But there will be no change of direction until Mr Major is convinced that there must be.
And only his own backbenchers can do that.
This country faces an enormous crisis which stretches wider and deeper than the recession.
It is a crisis of confidence and purpose.
That will not be solved by the Opposition which, whatever happens tonight, will not get the chance to form a government and which does not deserve to anyway.
The solution lies within the Tory Party, which will remain in power for another four years and so has a duty to revive and spur the nation towards the next millenium.
What TODAY cares about is not any single politician or any party.
We care about the country and what is happening to its people.
Tonight's vote must be used to persuade Mr Major that the priority for his Government is not Maastricht but Manchester — and Birmingham, Sheffield, London, Glasgow and every other city and town and village in Britain.
We want an economic revival that puts our people back to work and restores our companies, large and small, to prosperity.
Maastricht is an irrelevancy in that but tonight's vote is not.
It should be the moment when this Government is finally brought to its senses.
Royal let-down
THIS week Prince Charles and Princess Diana have a job to do.
That is to do what the Royal Family has always done supremely well, to meet foreign dignitaries as Britain's ambassadors.
Yet the faces they are showing to the world are thoroughly miserable ones.
This makes them appear not just personally unhappy but it presents a negative impression to their hosts.
That is bad for Britain.
Everyone knows that their marriage is miserable.
But in having to work together they are doing no more than thousands of couples and millions of professional people who may not like each other but who understand that there are times when they must look positive.
So please, cheer up Charles and Di.
At least in public.
Charles Bronson and Kim Weeks
MOVIE tough guy Charles Bronson shows off bride-to-be Kim Weeks — 40 years his junior — at a Beverly Hills charity function.
The 70-year-old star's wife Jill Ireland died of cancer more than two years ago.
Eddie Murphy
TEST audiences hated the ending to comic Eddie Murphy's latest movie, so Disney Pictures paid him an extra £500,000 to shoot another.
Distinguished Gentleman first ended with Murphy moralising.
Now he just brawls with the bad guys.
Joe Pesci
HOME Alone co-star Joe Pesci is touring LA bars and record companies in the hope of landing a singing contract.
Pesci, a bungling burglar in the movie and its upcoming sequel, gave up singing for acting 15 years ago.
Maria Santos
DANCER Maria Santos sued crooner Julio Ingeslias for paternity last week because he once threw her and their son out of his hotel.
‘I have no feelings for him but I am hurt by his attitude,’ said 16-year old Javier.
Cher
ROCK grandmother Cher is threatening to retire.
At the end of a four-year-long tour this week the 46-year-old told a New York audience it could be her ‘last live show ever’.
The announcement was met with howls of protest.
Sequel to The Commitments
FILMING of a sequel to smash hit The Commitments begins in New York this winter.
The plot is said to bring the disbanded soul group together in New York, where they hang out in Irish pubs and eventually play a concert.
Britt's time slip
By Jane Gordon
BRITT Ekland has worked very hard to make time stand still.
She has toiled endlessly to keep her body in the shape it was in 20 years ago with a punishing regime of exercise and diet.
‘I'm always hungry,’ she once said.
‘That's the price you pay.’
She used every trick to ensure that at 50 she looks no more than 30.
Her bid to stop the clock led her to marry a man nearly 20 years her junior and to have a child at 46.
But what she forgot as she jogged on the spot was that even though time might have stood still for her, it has moved on for her 31-year-old husband Slim Jim McDonald.
Marriage, as most of us who have tried it know, is a lot to do with timing.
Not just meeting the right person at the right time but also developing at the same pace so that you both have the same needs and expectations from life at roughly the same time.
Britt and Jim were probably right when they said, a couple of years ago, that they did not suffer from an age gap.
But what they did suffer from — and what finally split them — is a time gap.
While Jim's career moved forward, Britt's slowed down.
While he wanted LA and partying, she wanted a quiet life.
Little wonder, really, that right now the two of them are looking for the time of their life with someone of their own age.
How dare Philip criticise Di.
He has damaged the royals more than anyone
By Jane Gordon
THIS week, as the royals entered another tortured phase, it became clear just who is responsible for the disintegration of their family.
Not Fergie and her topless holiday snaps.
Not Diana and her Squidgy phone calls.
Not even Prince Charles and his confidante Camilla Parker-Bowles.
No, the real Windsor villain is none other than the holier-than-thou Prince Philip.
His cold and frankly hypocritical accusations against Diana, detailed in TODAY, reveal him to be the perpetrator of his family's problems.
After all, wasn't it his persistent criticism of Fergie, long before that holiday, that finally forced her to flee the family?
And hasn't his constant interference in the lives of his children probably been as damaging to their personal relationships as any of the recent scandals?
But his role in their problems goes back further than that.
It was said to be Philip who chose to send his sons to Gordonstoun, regardless of the effects the school's strict regime might have on them — a regime that might, along with their father's exacting standards, have contributed to their inability to sustain loving relationships.
And it was Philip, it is said, who insisted on Edward joining the Royal Marines — a decision that nearly broke his sensitive son and ended in an embarrassing scandal when Edward quit.
Yet, curiously, when Philip himself was a young man he was not so concerned about the ‘dignity of the Crown’.
The man who is now so Victorian in his manners and morals was a rampant socialite.
Had the paparazzi been around in the early days of his marriage it's doubtful Philip would have escaped criticism.
Revelations about his string of dancing partners and unsuitable friends might have earned him a reputation not unlike Fergie's.
But the Prince seems to have forgotten his youthful adventures.
Nowadays he is a sanctimonious old man seemingly unaware of his own involvement in the problems of his family.
If he believes Diana and Andrew Morton's book have brought the Crown into disrepute what will happen in a year or so when the notorious biographer Kitty Kelley delivers her tome on his life?
Now that really might bring down the House of Windsor.
Zenouska Mowatt
By Jane Gordon
THERE can be few pictures more appealing than the latest shots of Zenouska Mowatt.
Yet the 2½-year-old daughter of Marina and Paul Mowatt still has not had proper contact with grandparents Princess Alexandra and Sir Angus Ogilvy.
Even those of us who have had a sneaking sympathy for Marina's parents find their inability to accept their grandchild hard to comprehend.
I mean, fair enough, I can understand why they might not want to see Mr and Mrs Mowatt.
But how on earth can they resist the delicious little Zenouska?
Baby's snug as a rug
By Jane Gordon
THERE aren't many sounds worse than the squalling of a baby.
A police siren, perhaps, or a vacuum cleaner.
Yet according to Electrolux, many harassed mothers have discovered that the vacuum produces a sound similar to that which a baby hears in the womb, which sends them to sleep.
The tape they have released really does work and my son now rarely stirs.
My only worry is that I'm turning him into New Boy with an unhealthy interest in housework.
My son the dustbuster?
It's Indiana John and the Temple of Doom
By Jane Gordon
IT'S quite clear our Prime Minister, in his ‘Mission For Maastricht’, sees himself as anything but the grey man he has been painted.
‘I am walking over hot coals suspended over a deep pit at the bottom of which are a large number of vipers baring their fangs,’ he said of the fight against anti-Europeans in his own party.
And isn't he, when you think about it, the EC's Indiana Jones, on perhaps his Last Crusade?
Hasn't his search for Maastricht supporters resembled Indiana's quest for the Grail?
Isn't the House of Commons looking more and more like his Temple of Doom?
Indeed, as members shuffle in to vote on this issue vital to Mr Major's survival, the suspense will be as killing as in any Indiana Jones movie.
Still, if he can manipulate his Chief Whip like Indiana manipulated his bull whip maybe today he will pull off the kind of last-minute, knife-edge victory the film hero always managed.
George Carey
By Jane Gordon
GEORGE Carey has always looked as if he might be more comfortable in a cloth cap than a mitre.
This week when he went to a Christian Rave in a paper hat he looked more like Elton John than the primate of all England.
But then, as far as I am concerned, the Archbishop is the nearest thing the Church of England has got to a superstar.
Yet every time he gets up to make an impassioned speech about the important issues of our time the elitist establishment of the church rushes in to gag him.
When he soundly supported the principle of women priests they made him modify his statement.
When he launched a well-timed attack on the greed of the boss class and their salary increases he was again made to feel that he had spoken out of turn.
And this week, when he rebuked the ‘adulterers in public life’— apparently alluding to the behaviour of Government ministers and the Royal Family — his aides in Lambeth Palace immediately tried to defuse the effect of his speech.
If the Church would only have more faith in Carey and the wise words of moral guidance that he offers perhaps more of us would have faith in the Church.
Michael Parkinson
By Jane Gordon
MICHAEL Parkinson has never been my favourite TV presenter — I've always found his brusque, man-of-the-people style somewhat contrived.
But now it's personal.
Parky, you see, is the reason why my husband and I (like Charles and Di) are in separate beds.
His Halloween programme Ghostwatch so scared my children that I have had to sleep on a camp bed in their room.
Perhaps, I muse counting bunnies on the children's wallpaper, those outraged viewers' calls might finally persuade the BBC to exorcise Parky from its schedules.
And…
By Tim Satchell
A MAN asks his dentist the cost of fixing his tooth.
The dentist says: ‘It'll cost £150.
Come back next week and I'll do an impression.’
‘For £150 I expect you to sing, dance and play the piano.’
Champagne to Ben Higgs, of Aylesbury.
High flier Branson gets wings at last 
By Tim Satchell
VIRGIN supremo Richard Branson is the latest rich and famous identity to be lined up in the sites of photographer Annie Leibovitz on behalf of American Express.
The 42-year-old multi-millionaire was snapped — dressed as an allegory of flight — on his private island of Necker in the British Virgin Islands for a world-wide advertising campaign due to be launched next month.
The wings were constructed by a stylist from the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden and Mr Branson donated his £15,000 fee to charity.
Others who will appear in the same campaign include Jose Carreras, Wim Wenders and Karl Lagerfeld.
Despite his business commitments, Mr Branson now spends more and more time with his second wife Joan and two children at home in the village of Kidlington, Oxon, where the garden contains a Balinese pavilion.
Mr Branson's preparatory school headmaster Richard Vickers recently revealed his most famous ex-pupil ‘was a natural games player, a very exuberant personality’ who ‘had the stick on a number of occasions’.
In a history of Scaitcliffe School in Egham, Surrey, Mr Vickers recalled a knee injury Mr Branson suffered as a boy of 12 which meant he could never play contact sports again.
MPs turn over an old leaf
By Tim Satchell
MEMBERS of Parliament are being canvassed by the New Statesman, the weekly left-wing magazine, to find which books have influenced them.
This exercise originated in 1906 when newly-elected Labour MPs were asked what books had influenced their political beliefs.
Members mentioned the Bible most frequently, but also acknowledged Dickens, Scott and Bunyon.
This year the survey will include MPs from all parties.
Whiskey with too many Es
By Tim Satchell
SCOTTISH MPs are angrily boycotting Green's Restaurant in Westminster.
The dispute arises out of the inclusion on their puddings menu of ‘orginal Scottish Clootie dumplings served with custard or whiskey cream.
£3.75.’
It is not the price Scottish members object to, but the spelling of ‘whiskey’.
One said: ‘Who on Earth would want Clooties with Irish whiskey?’
Norma writes on
By Tim Satchell
NORMA Major is forging ahead with her plans to write a film script from Audrey Erskine Lindop's novel The Way To The Lantern.
‘Plans are well advanced,’ says Andrew Lownie, Mrs Major's literary agent.
‘But first she has to finish work on her book on Chequers, which is being published by Little, Brown in Spring 1994.’
The story of The Way To The Lantern is inspirational and tells of an actor called Robert during the time of the French Revolution who, by assuming different personae, evades the guillotine.
Agent Vincent Shaw, who represents Miss Lindop's book, tells me: ‘I've heard that both Mr and Mrs Major love the book and apparently they read it on their honeymoon.
Why?
I don't know, I wasn't there.’
Stews and soups oust food fads and fancies
Robyn Foyster
FORGET tiny portions, exotic ingredients and arty arrangements.
Recession has put traditional country cooking firmly back on the menu.
As budgets contract, appetites are expanding for old favourites such as oxtail soup and casseroles.
And restaurants are getting the message.
Andrew Eliel, editor of the newly-released Egon Ronay's Cellnet Guide to Hotels and Restaurants 1993, says well-cooked English fare is not only cheaper but often tastier than the novelty dishes of nouvelle cuisine.
He adds: ‘In the last year, most restaurants have brought their prices down or kept them the same as last year.
‘Posh restaurants have been closing for renovations and re-opening as cheap eateries.’
The move towards rustic food has itself helped to keep prices down.
Andrew says: ‘Meals like stews, ham hocks and lamb shanks are cooked with reasonably-priced cuts of meat.
‘By slow-cooking it in its natural juices, it ends up tasting delicious.’
TODAY asked Andrew to compile a list of ten top value-for-money eateries around the country (below).
And for all budget diners, here are some hints on how to keep the bill for your meal at a sensible figure:
ALWAYS call a restaurant first to ask them the price of an average meal.
SET menus or buffets always offer better value than choosing from the a la carte menu.
AVOID paying the service charge twice by making sure the blank space on the credit card slip is filled in.
Waiters often slap an additional ten per cent on the bill.
TEN TOP-VALUE EATERIES
The Brackenbury Brackenbury Rd, W6, London (081 748 0107).
Belgo Chalk Farm Rd, NW1, London (071 267 0718).
Francs Goose Green, Altrincham, Greater Manchester (061–941 3954).
Number Twenty Four Middleton St, Wymondham, Norfolk (0953 607750).
Pierre Victoire Victoria Street, Edinburgh (031 225 1721).
Quince and Medlar Castlegate, Cockermouth, Cumbria (0900 823579).
Riverside West Bay, Bridport, Dorset (0308 22011).
Cafe Fleur Royal Parade, Harrogate, North Yorkshire (0423 503034).
Jack Fuller's Brightling, E Sussex (042 482 212).
Leadon's Brasserie Beaufort Square, Chepstow, Gwent (0291 627402).
Superchefs spill the beans
Robyn Foyster
Roux and Co cook up a treat at Food Show.
KEEP it under your hat is the golden rule for top chefs when it comes to sharing culinary secrets.
After all, who wants to let rivals steal their recipes while diners are still calling for more?
But some of the world's greatest chefs will be breaking that rule at next week's BBC Good Food Cooking and Kitchen Show in Birmingham.
Tickets on the door at the National Exhibition Centre are £7.
But TODAY readers can dial a ticket hotline on 021 780 4133 to buy advance tickets at just £5.50 each.
And the BBC Good Food Show is giving away 50 pairs of free tickets in a simple TODAY competition.
For details, see below.
The star line up at Birmingham's National Exhibition Centre includes TV chefs Michel Roux and Michael Barry who will spill the beans along with Lloyd Grossman, Prue Leith, Glynn Christian, Ken Hom, Josceline Dimbleby and more.
The BBC Radio Two Roadshow and the Gloria Hunniford Show will broadcast live from the exhibition, which runs from Thursday November 12 to Sunday November 15, between 11am and 6pm.
More than 300 firms are taking part in the giant event.
Visitors will be able to sample delicious new foods and wines, discover the latest kitchen and cookware, compare appliances and tableware and improve their cookery skills.
For a special advance taster for the show, four top chefs — Michel Roux, Shaun Hill, Gary Rhodes and Roselyne Masselin — have revealed some of their mouthwatering recipes exclusively to TODAY.
Michel Roux is known to millions of TV viewers.
He and his brother Albert have starred in their own TV show as well as running the award-winning Le Gavroche and Waterside Inn restaurants.
Shaun Hill, of Gidleigh Park country house hotel in Devon, has just been named Egon Ronay Chef of the Year, while Gary Rhodes of The Greenhouse in London won The Times' Restaurant of the Year 1991 award.
Roselyne Masselin is the founder of La Cuisine Imaginaire, a vegetarian cookery school in London.
Creamed Lettuce Soup With Flageolet
(Roselyne Masselin) Serves 4–6.
8oz soaked flageolet beans, 1oz butter, 2 shredded round lettuce, 2 vegetable stock cubes, 4tbsp creme fraiche, 2 tbsp flat-leaved parsley, pinch salt, black pepper.
To serve: extra 3tbsp creme fraiche, continental parsley or fresh coriander.
Drain beans thoroughly and place in pan covered with 1½ pints of water.
Bring to the boil and boil fast for ten minutes.
Reduce heat, cover pan and simmer for 30–35 minutes.
Drain, reserving water.
Melt butter and fry lettuce slowly until soft.
Add cooked beans, cooking liquid (made up to 1 pint if necessary) and stock cube.
Boil.
Add parsley and simmer for 15 mins.
Cool, then blend until smooth.
Place creme fraiche in a mixing bowl, add a few tablespoons of blended soup to it, stir well, then add the rest of the mixture.
Season and reheat.
Caramel And Apple Tart (Shaun Hill) Serves 4
6 Granny Smith apples, 8oz plain flour, 2oz caster sugar, 5oz unsalted butter, 1 egg.
For sauce: 6oz unsalted butter, 9oz sugar, 1fl oz Calvados, 5fl oz double cream.
Make pastry using rub-in method.
Cover with cling film, and rest in a cool place for an hour.
Roll out to ⅛ inch thickness.
Line four 4in tart cases.
Rest them for an hour.
Bake blind at 350F/180C/Gas 4, for 10 mins.
Cook two apples in a covered saucepan with 1tbsp water until they start to disintegrate, then puree.
Spoon puree into tart cases.
Make caramel sauce by cooking butter and sugar in a pan until it turns a rich brown colour.
Add Calvados and cream, and stir to blend away from the heat.
Poach remaining apples for two mins in enough water to cover, then slice thinly and fan across the puree.
Coat with warm caramel sauce and serve with vanilla ice cream or clotted cream.
Moules Au Cidre Du Pays D'Auge (Michel Roux) Serves 4
2lb scrubbed, de-bearded mussels, 4oz butter, 3 shallots, 14fl oz medium dry cider, 1 sprig thyme, 1 bay leaf, 7floz double cream, salt, pepper, 1 tbsp snipped chives.
Melt 1½oz butter in a pan.
Add shallots and sweat for 1–2 mins, then add 11fl oz cider, thyme and bay leaf.
Reduce by about a third, then add cream and mussels and cover.
Raise heat to very high and cook for 3–4 minutes, shaking pan.
When mussels have opened, drain them in a colander set over a bowl.
Pour juices into a saucepan and reduce.
Add remaining cider, boil, then swirl in rest of the butter by shaking the pan.
Season.
Pour mussels into a tureen or large bowl.
Discard thyme, bay leaf and any mussels which have not opened.
Pour two-thirds of sauce over mussels, sprinkle with chives and serve rest of sauce separately.
Smoked Haddock With Welsh Rarebit (Gary Rhodes) Serves 8
8 4oz slices smoked haddock, 8 peeled and sliced tomatoes, vinaigrette with herbs, black pepper.
For rarebit: 1lb grated mature cheddar, 3fl oz milk or lager, ½oz flour, 1oz white breadcrumbs, 1 dessertspoon dry mustard, 2 shakes Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper, 1 egg, 2 egg yolks.
Mix grated cheese with milk or lager.
Put in pan and slowly melt over a low heat, but do not boil.
When mixture starts to bubble, add flour, breadcrumbs and mustard.
Cook until mixture comes away from side of pan.
Add Worcestershire sauce, salt and pepper.
Cool, then combine with the egg and yolks in a blender.
Refrigerate for a day.
Cover each slice of haddock with rarebit mix and place under a hot grill.
When coloured, cook in the oven for two minutes at 425F/220C/Gas 7.
Lay tomatoes in a circle on each plate and sprinkle with vinaigrette and pepper.
Place haddock on top and serve.
To be in with a chance of winning free tickets to the BBC Good Food Cooking And Kitchen Show, all you have to do is answer the following question: What is the name of Michel Roux's brother?
Write your answer on a postcard and send it to Good Food Competition, TODAY Features, 1 Virginia Street, London E1 9BS, to arrive by Monday November 9.
Remember to include your address and a daytime phone number, where possible.
The first 50 entries out of the bag will receive a pair of tickets worth £14.
Normal News International competition rules apply.
The editor's decision is final.
Supermarket Round-up
SPLASH out on a luxury meal that won't break the bank at Tesco.
Fillet steak is reduced from £7.48 to £6.48 a lb and Scottish salmon tail fillets from £5.39 to £4.39 a lb.
To sip with your meal, Tesco Spanish red wine is reduced from £2.39 to £1.99 a bottle and a 10-pack of 25cl bottles of French lager from £4.79 to £4.29.
THERE'S a fruity feeling at Gateway.
Pick up eight kiwi fruit for the price of six (99p), four grapefruit for the price of three (89p), five lemons for the price of four (79p) and black grapes reduced from 59p to 49p a lb.
On the drinks front, a litre bottle of red Fitou is going for the price of a 75cl bottle (£3.15), as is a litre of Lutomer Riesling (£2.85).
And Gateway is giving away a 250g box of After Eight Mints with every bottle of Martell Cognac (£16.49).
AT Sainsbury's, English matured cheddar is reduced from £2.25 to £1.99 a lb, a dozen eggs from £1.20 to 99p, a large pot of French set yoghurt from 93p to 75p, 500g of Sunflower margarine from 63p to 49p and a raspberry trifle from 42p to 36p.
Off the shelf
THREE new meals have been added to the Findus Lean Cuisine range — country cottage pie, lasagne verdi and barbecue chicken.
The 14oz servings cost about £2.29.
FOR every purchase of 70cl of Tia Maria before Christmas, a bottle of French designer fragrance comes free.
Well-known perfumes such as Paloma Picasso, Anais Anais and Lou Lou are all on offer.
ICELAND'S new Alaskan pollock fillets are now available.
This fish has a sweet taste, and at £1.99 for a 1½lb pack is £1 cheaper than cod.
The store has produced a frozen food recipe leaflet, compiled by magazine cookery experts.
To obtain a free copy, write to: Recipe Selection, Iceland Frozen Foods, Honeypot Lane, Stanmore, Middlesex, HA7 1LE, enclosing a 34p SAE (9½in x6½in).
SPICE up your cheeseboard with two unusual new varieties from Millway Foods, of Melton Mowbray.
White stilton with stem ginger, at about £2.60 a pound, is ideal for dessert or cheese cake filling, while white cheddar with mango chutney, at about £2.55 a pound, makes tangy sandwiches.
Motoring fines
THE COST of running a car is staggering enough already, what with MoT, insurance and garage charges.
But now under a new law motorists face fines of up to £2,500 (plus three penalty points) for each illegal tyre on their car.
It is certainly one way of reducing the number of vehicles on the road.
French smoking ban
BRAVO to the French both for their ban on smoking in public and their softly-softly approach to imposing it.
Tobacco is a drug and addicts should be given a chance to ease off gradually.
Stelen car accidents
NEWS that one in every nine fatal road accidents involves a stolen car is sickening.
Enough is enough.
The law must be changed to allow the courts to pass severe prison sentences on these so-called joyriders.
They are no better than murderers.
Bosses cut their pay
IT WAS heartening to read of the bosses who cut their own pay to help their business survive.
Theirs is an example many high-flying executives would do well to follow.
Too often in lean times the poorest are asked to make the largest sacrifices.
This time, let's share the burden.
The battle to save Bart's
THANK God someone has at last written an article attacking the proposed closure of St Bartholomew's Hospital.
I echo your writer's every comment.
Although my husband lost his fight against leukaemia, a part of my heart will always be at Bart's and I have written a book about his illness to raise money for leukaemia research.
So far I have had no luck with publishers, but there are some lines in the book which your writer's cancer-stricken nephew would surely identify with.
They are as follows:
‘Whenever we walked into the ward, we were enveloped in a duck-down duvet of love.
We were home and safe.’
Maybe my motives in writing are emotional.
But I am also a nurse and I know how vital the hospital's research is.
I appeal to all who have ever known this best of all hospitals — fight for Bart's.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Actress Loretta Swit, 48.
Labour MP Michael Meacher, 57.
ON THIS DAY: In 1852, the building of the new House of Commons was completed.
In 1942, the second battle of El Alamein ended after 12 days.
In 1946, UNESCO was founded.
Cruel hunts deserve to be hounded out
YOUR article on foxhunting was well balanced.
Hunt supporter Barbara Rich says saboteurs are a dirty, smelly bunch, but they go to great lengths to object to what they consider a barbaric ‘sport’.
We are supposed to be an animal loving country but using fox cubs to train young hounds to tear foxes to pieces leaves me almost speechless.
Once the veneer of hunt balls and dressing up for the occasion is stripped away all you have left is a very cruel activity which is a disgrace to those of us who live in the modern world.
More than 90 per cent of people in this country are against hunting in any form but we still have to pay in our rates for the cost of police to protect those who hunt.
Cruel hunts deserve to be hounded out
IF Fred Barker, Master of the Quorn, believes that changing garb would make one iota of difference to those who object to hunting then he must live in cloud cuckoo land.
He could ride naked with a rose in his mouth but the opposition would not lessen.
The antipathy to blood sports is more profound because it is unethical to torment and kill any sentient creature for mere entertainment.
Come on, Fred, and all the others of like mind, get your act together and take up ‘drag hunting’.
Using a fake scent for the hounds to track rather than a live fox would take the blood out of this sport and opposition would cease.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
ALTHOUGH table forks have been used in this country since the middle of the 15th Century, they were not used in conjunction with knives until almost two centuries later.
Diners used either a fork or a knife to eat their food until the idea of putting the two together was imported from Italy in 1608.
Mystery surrounds the runcible spoon — the pickle fork with broad prongs and one curved cutting edge.
The term first appeared in the nonsense works of Edward Lear, but where it came from no one knows.
There have been attempts to attach the origin to certain famous men called Runcie — not least of all the grandfather of the former Archbishop of Canterbury.
Other people see it as a corruption of the French place name, Ronceval, where, it is believed, the spoons were first made.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Rachel Brown
WHAT a tragedy that the life and career of Flake model Rachel Brown could now be ruined because of the dreadful drug Ecstasy.
I only hope that those youngsters who may believe it is cool to take substances like this will take heed of Rachel's terribly sad case and think again.
Janet Murray Cancer Fund
HELP cancer victim Janet Murray raise £50,000 for supplies of the drug Temozolomide which offers hope to brain tumour sufferers.
Cheques or postal orders payable to the CRC Team Up Appeal c/o Cancer Research Campaign, Cambridge House, 6–10 Cambridge Terrace, London NW1 4JL.
Credit card donations:
Back on the ladder
Stella Bingham
First-timers spot bargains as home market moves at last.
WHEN the Eighties boom sent property prices skyrocketing, London set the pace.
When the trend went into reverse, it was London which fell first and furthest.
But as the ripples of recession spread out from the capital and prices at last start tumbling in Scotland, there are signs that values are stabilising back where it all began.
And that's great news for first-time buyers keen to get on the property ladder.
‘A significant number of estate agents report a revival of interest among first-time buyers, a group conspicuous by its absence from the market in recent years,’ says a report from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
Prices have fallen by up to 40 per cent since their peak in 1988/89 and interest rates are down from 15 to just over nine per cent.
Average annual earnings have risen from £15,686 two years ago to about £18,000 today — the best ratio of earnings to house prices since the early Eighties, the Halifax Building Society claims.
And there is no shortage of homes to choose from.
Even so, many potential buyers are still reluctant to take the bait for fear of unemployment, according to a survey by the Royal Institition of Chartered Surveyors.
But if the majority are still hesitating, some are at last being lured into the market — and more must follow to make even a modest recovery possible.
Early signs are encouraging.
Sales of prime London properties are picking up and the latest quarterly bulletin from the London Research Centre shows that for the first time in over a year, average prices have not fallen.
Meanwhile, the knock-on effect of the slump is still being felt out in the provinces.
This is how estate agents around the country see the market in their regions:
LONDON ‘I'm optimistic that prices have levelled,’ says Simon Agace of Winkworth.
‘In the central area we are running out of stock.’
SOUTH EAST ‘October was encouraging,’ says Clive Robertsom of Carson & Co.
‘We haven't seen the bottom of the market yet but the trend is in the right direction.’
SOUTH WEST ‘Fewer properties are coming on to the market, which is a good sign,’ says Julian Knops of Andrews in Bath and Bristol.
WEST MIDLANDS ‘The market is a bit busier following the interest rate cuts but prices are continuing to fall,’ says Stuart Tullah of Collins Son & Harvey in Birmingham.
‘The spectre of unemployment is stifling any signs of improvement.’
EAST MIDLANDS ‘Falling interest rates have done nothing.
People are more concerned about their jobs,’ says Margaret Allen of William H Brown in Grantham.
NORTH WEST ‘Properties costing over £100,000 have come down by about 20 per cent, semis by about ten per cent and terraces by about five per cent ,’ says Clive Watkin of the Clive Watkin Partnership on the Wirral, Merseyside.
NORTH ‘We've seen an increase in activity but people are reluctant to commit themselves,’ says Newcastle-based Peter Miller, Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors' housing spokesman.
SCOTLAND ‘The knock-on effect has come through to us and at last it is being admitted in Scotland that prices are falling,’ says Dunan McDougall of Ryden Residential in Edinburgh.
‘Prices at the top end have fallen quite dramatically and now unemployment fears have filtered through to the middle and lower end of the market.’
Firm foundation in history
IF YOU were down on your luck in Devon in the early 18th Century, you could count on a hot meal at Bowden House, near Totnes.
The Giles family fed 200 paupers a day there until they sold up in 1704.
Since then, the Grade I listed property has had a succession of owners.
It is now on the market again at £995,000, some Pounds 500,000 down on its previous asking price.
The Queen Anne mansion with a Norman core has six reception rooms, seven bedrooms, walled gardens, a listed Elizabethan arch and jail with guard room above.
In the grounds are eight holiday cottages providing an annual income of about £30,000 and the British Photographic Museum complete with cinema, restaurant and staff flat.
Architectural features include a Queen Anne hall, a Tudor bakery and Tudor hall with a 1510 frieze.
The agents are Constables.
Agents Constables are asking £995,000 for Bowden House in Devon
Maastricht's real losers
THERE never were going to be any winners of yesterday's Maastricht debate.
Every side had too much to lose and very little to gain.
The Government had forced itself into a corner for no reason at all other than the Prime Minister's stubbornness.
The Labour Party was opposing a European ideal which its leader believes in passionately.
The Liberal Democrats were supporting a Government which they had pledged to defeat.
And the Tory rebels could only win by making their own party lose.
There were scenes in the Commons which would have shamed a school playground.
Mr Smith's speech was unmemorable and Mr Major's is best forgotten.
This is no way to deal with Britain's future in Europe.
Particularly if that is as important as just about every politician insists it is.
The real problem is that the Government refuses to accept what the Maastricht Treaty is about.
And that is a common currency and economic policy with moves towards a united Europe.
If Mr Major genuinely thinks it isn't, as he seemed to say yesterday, then it is no wonder that the Maastricht debate is so confused.
It is made worse because the Opposition understandably wants to take advantage of a Prime Minister who seems dangerously, if not fatally, wounded.
It is made worse still by those Tories who feel they would be better off with a different leader, though none say that publicly.
It is no wonder that yesterday's debate did little for democracy and nothing to help the country understand Maastricht.
Debate with no winners
THIS was no great victory.
This was no soccer match won by three goals nor a race won by three seconds.
It was a wafer-thin majority for a Prime Minister who had invested everything in its outcome.
The boyish enthusiasm and glee with which John Major and his Cabinet greeted the result showed just how important it was to them.
And how little they realised the implications of such a narrow win.
Look at the facts.
This debate need never have been held, as the Commons was repeatedly told yesterday.
But Mr Major, knowing the risks, insisted on holding it.
He raised the stakes by threatening at one stage to call an election if he lost.
Then he launched what was called a charm offensive against Tory MPs who might not support the Government.
It was, though, more offensive than charm.
And even after all that, the best Mr Major could do with his 21-seat majority and the support of the Liberal Democrats was to scrape home by three measly votes.
Yet there can be no satisfaction for anyone in the result of the debate.
Labour was opposing a European ideal which its leader believes in passionately.
The Liberal Democrats were supporting a Government which they claim to want defeated.
And the Tory rebels could only win by making their own party lose.
They came so close to doing that.
The debate and the votes that followed it solve no problems.
Certainly the crisis over Maastricht is no nearer solution, especially as the Government still refuses to accept what the Treaty is about.
And that is a common currency and economic policy with moves towards a united Europe.
But the even greater crisis, so brutally illustrated by the closeness of the vote, is over John Major's leadership.
When Mr Major learned the result, he acted as if he had seen Chelsea win the Cup rather than his own MPs come so close to humiliating him.
He is not yet out of the woods.
Not by a long shot.
And if he thinks he is, it would be a fatally stupid misreading of last night's result.
Dawn of hope
THERE never was a leader who came from a place with a more appropriate name.
Bill Clinton was born in the town of Hope and that is what he has given the American people.
They hope he will lift their economy out of recession, hope he will heal the racial disharmony and end the violence in their cities, hope he will keep their country the sole superpower in a fast-changing world.
His victory is a remarkable triumph not just for him but for his party.
Only a year ago the pundits were shaking their heads and gloomily prophesying that the Democrats would never again provide a President.
Now they have their hands on every lever of power.
but Mr Clinton was the right man in the right place at the right time.
Yet But he also showed brilliant tactical and political skill in winning hearts and votes.
Yet that would not have been enough if President Bush had not thrown away the election and the keys to the White House with it.
Twenty months ago, at the end of the Gulf War, he seemed a dynamic and energetic leader.
By this summer he appeared tired, lacklustre, bereft of ideas.
A bankrupt leader of a nation which feared that he would bankrupt it, too.
He lived in the past — in the Second World War, in which he had fought, and the Cold War, which had shaped much of his political thought.
Now there is a brave new world and the American people want a leader who appreciates that.
They believe they have found him in Bill Clinton.
The new President already has a legion of critics who find him shallow and lacking in principle.
But Mr Clinton has done what needed to be done to be elected.
When he arrives in the White House we will discover if he is more than a brilliant campaigner.
For the sake not just of the American people but for the whole world, we pray that Mr Clinton will fulfill his promise.
RIP House of Hartnell... and British fashion
Alison Veness
FOR 70 elegant years, the House of Hartnell ruled British fashion.
Its head, the urbane Norman Hartnell, designed the Queen's wedding gown and went on to dress the women of the Royal Family in the finest fabrics.
This week the company went into receivership and the heart went out of the British fashion industry.
For while Hartnell was couture for the older royals, its demise followed the shocking news that the higher-profile Edina Ronay house, which counts Princess Diana and the Duchess of York among its customers, is in serious trouble.
Its wholesale arm has now gone into compulsory liquidation.
The collapse of these two leading houses will have repercussions for the whole industry.
For where haute couture shows the lead, the High Street swiftly follows.
Both, of course, are victims of the recession.
But the fact remains that in France, where couture is seen as part of the national heritage, there would be questions in parliament before Dior or Chanel foundered.
Some would say that Hartnell failed to move with the times, and that the death of its founder merely sealed its fate.
Even with French designer Marc Bohan at its helm it failed to attract the patronage of the younger, trend-setting royals.
Not that their patronage would have necessarily ensured success.
The young Royals flocked to Edina Ronay, along with customers from the world of showbusiness such as Marlon Brando who commissioned them to knit a sweater.
So what went wrong?
Annette Worsley-Taylor, organiser of the London Designer Collections, blames the economy.
‘Edina Ronay has had enormous pressure this year, struggling to keep business alive.
It's the usual story, lack of investment.
‘The company had everything — talent, credibility, great clients.
Then the recession hit.’
Young designers to have suffered a similar fate to Ronay include Val Piriou, Joe Casely-Hayford and John Galliano, although Galliano is one of the luckier ones.
He was rescued by the French company Faycal Amor.
Some pundits believe British designers may be forced to take their talents abroad in order to survive.
John Wilson, director of the British Fashion Council, agrees — although he hopes Government action may make it unnecessary.
‘We recently met ministers at the DTI and put forward our desperate need for more money for export promotions and greater financial education for designers,’ he says.
Wilson points out that the designer side represents only a fraction of the fashion industry's £6.5 billion turnover.
But this fraction is the most creative, he says.
Hard on the heels of Hartnell's collapse Fashion Editorand troubles at Ronay comes news that the March London Fashion Shows may not take place.
Until recently the British Clothing Industry Association subsidised the event, enabling Britain's designers to show their collections in an international venue.
But the association has tired of being the sole supporter and other sponsors are needed.
Designer Jasper Conran has had another idea.
The event, he has suggested, should move to Paris.
But Wilson believes this could never work.
‘What we need to do is establish and uplift the identity of British fashion throughout Europe,’ he says.
Until that happens, many designers are just having to hang on.
Monica Zipper of the Monix label, who won the recent More Dash Than Cash fashion prize, recently came close to financial disaster before being saved by a big manufacturer.
‘If British manufacturers don't pull their fingers out and put their might and muscle behind us then more will go to the wall,’ she warns.
‘I was lucky — but only just.’
Meanwhile, with Hartnell just a memory, who will now become the Queen's couturier?
Buckingham Palace declined to comment but the honour is likely to be shared between Hardy Amies, who has already designed outfits for her, and Victor Edelstein, who specialises in glamorous evening wear.
Downfall of a legend
NORMAN Hartnell was born in 1902, the son of a South London publican.
He opened his own salon in 1923 and hit the big time in 1935, when he designed the wedding dress for the Duchess of Gloucester.
He went on to make the Queen's wedding dress in 1947 and her Coronation gown in 1953.
He also designed Princess Margaret's wedding dress in 1960.
Hartnell was knighted in the By 1990, the company was ailing and Marc Bohan, formerly designer at Christian Dior, was brought in to revive its fortunes.
He attracted new customers but not enough to save the company.
The receivers were called in on Tuesday and the Hartnell legend ended.
Plain English the set course for Boothroyd
By Tim Satchell
SPEAKER of the House of Commons, Betty Boothroyd, has yet again made a change in the running of Westminster, by ensuring that menus for her official dinners are written in English instead of French, the traditional language of banquets.
Speaker Boothroyd has decided that in future all menus in her house will be in English.
‘It's not chauvinism or anything of that kind,’ Yorkshire-born Speaker Boothroyd tells me.
‘But the language of our Parliament is English and it seems only right that any hospitality I give should be in English too.’
Tonight at 7.30, when she entertains the Speakers of the three regional Parliaments of Germany — Saxony, Brandenburg and Thuringia — in the magnificent State rooms of Speaker's House, the first course, in plain English, will be avocado and lime salad, with an award-winning English wine, Chiddingstone 1989.
This will be followed by breast of chicken Westminster (in a light cream sauce), pilaf rice, green beans and braised carrots, accompanied by House of Commons claret.
After caramelised oranges with Grand Marnier there will be coffee and more liquers.
A spokesman in her office says: ‘The Speaker doesn't see why the menus should be written in a foreign language.’
This will be a small and quiet dinner.
It will be the first time that politicians from Eastern Europe have been to dinner in the Speaker's apartments.
THE sons of two members of 60s rock band Cream are to appear together on a new album to be released in January.
Kofi Baker, 23, son of drummer Ginger, plays drums and Malcolm Bruce, 22, whose father Jack was the bass guitarist, plays piano and keyboards.
‘The album isn't going to sound like Cream.
But Malcolm and I have the same idea on musical direction,’ says Kofi, of Harrow, north London.
The ‘son of super-group’ has yet to settle on a name.
Misery begins for Jane
By Tim Satchell
NEXT month Cagney and Lacey star Sharon Gless is to star with Bill Patterson, currently in BBC1's Tell Tale Hearts, in a new stage production of Stephen King's psychological thriller Misery.
The story was made into a film two years ago with James Caan and Kathy Bates.
Miss Bates won an Oscar for her performance.
Now Simon Moore has adapted the story for the theatre and the play is to open on December 15.
The production takes over at the Criterion Theatre from Making It Better starring actress and cake-maker Jane Asher, which is to close unexpectedly on December 5.
The expected run until February was curtailed by falling attendances, despite Miss Asher giving the performance of her career.
Clinton win has marines on the hop
By Tim Satchell
THE rabbits in Regent's Park have welcomed the presidential victory of Democrat Bill Clinton.
They have had a pleasant and pastoral existence since Republican Ambassador Charles Price, the man who replaced Ambassador Raymond Seitz, banned the gun-toting marines on duty at Winfield House, the official residence in Regent's Park, from taking pot shots at them.
In embassy circles it was considered that a Republican victory, combined with a recent noticeable major increase in the nearby rabbit population, might lead to a renewal of hostilities.
A marine at the residence said: ‘We don't believe that President Clinton's man will allow us to start potting the rabbits again.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
A WAG in the City was heard to say:
‘Have you heard that Pedigree Chum are in a spot of trouble?
The other day they had the retrievers in.’
Yeltsin checks in for luxury
By Tim Satchell
RUSSIAN leader Boris Yeltsin, who will address Parliament on Tuesday morning, has booked the Royal Suite at the five-star Hyde Park Hotel, Knightsbridge for himself and his wife, Naina, for his two-day visit to Britain which begins on Monday.
The Royal Suite, which costs £1,762 and boasts two bedrooms, a magnificent sitting-room and small dining-room, is greatly favoured by Luciano Pavarotti, Richard Gere and other prominent showbusiness people.
There are views over Hyde Park and from the room they can see the Household Cavalry exercising in the mornings.
The suite features a substantial Pavarotti-sized shower where the Yeltsins can prepare for their visit to the Stock Exchange, laying a wreath at Westminster Abbey, and that night's banquet with Prime Minister at the Royal Naval College, Greenwich.
On Tuesday they will tour the Palace of Westminster and lunch with the Queen at Buckingham Palace.
The Russian Embassy tells me that this is the first time their head of state has visited London and not stayed at the embassy.
A night out with friends
By Tim Satchell
TONIGHT Kenneth Branagh and the cast of Peter's Friends will be guests of honour at a gala dinner at the Cafe Royale in Piccadilly to celebrate the world premiere of the film and the opening of the London Film Festival.
Among the 1,100 celebrity guests will be directors Sir Richard Attenborough and Ken Russell and actors Miranda Richardson, Susan George and Patrick Bergin.
To attend the event Mr Branagh will take time off from rehearsing his RSC Hamlet, and Hugh Laurie and Stephen Fry from filming Jeeves and Wooster.
Mr Branagh will be starring in Hamlet at the Barbican from December 18 to May 1.
Putting Clinton in perspective
Dominic Midgley
BILL Clinton today prepares to stride across the political landscape as the world's most powerful man.
But how does he shape up against his counterparts in other countries?
TODAY has put Clinton in perspective against other world leaders.
He is: HEIGHT: 6ft 2½in.
This puts him marginally below 6ft 3in George Bush and makes him appreciably shorter than the giant German Chancellor Helmut Kohl at 6ft 5in but otherwise he will walk tall on the world stage.
Our own John Major props up the height league, just an inch taller than French president Francois Mitterrand at 5ft 10in.
WEIGHT: 15st 5lbs.
Despite his much publicised jogging regime, Clinton is clearly overweight, a problem caused by his addiction to junk food which saw him balloon by 25lbs this year.
But there is no doubting his overall fitness.
He was seen on the campaign trail running around throwing a football, and he was far more convincing than similar efforts by the labouring Bush.
But perhaps the most amazing statistic is Clinton's age.
At just 46 he is the third youngest president of all time and five years younger than the voice of rebellious youth, Bob Dylan.
And in an era when we have become used to world leaders in their Sixties and Seventies, many other former rebels and youth heroes are now older than the world's ultimate figure of authority.
Joanna Lumley, Mick Jagger and Anna Ford are all older than the new US President and he has six years advantage on Cliff Richard.
Beatles Paul McCartney and George Harrison are 50 and 49, and the Rolling Stones are now gathering moss with Mick Jagger at 49.
Former Supreme Diana Ross is 48 and Linda Ronstadt is a month older than Clinton.
Most telling of all, the widow of the King of Rock and Roll, Priscilla Presley, is now 47.
Country music star Tammy Wynette is 50 and Dolly Parton is seven months older than the president-elect.
Some of the world's most beautiful women have also cut more birthday cakes than Clinton.
Joanna Lumley, who thrilled a generation of young TV fans as Purdey in the New Avengers, is three months older and Charlotte Rampling seven months older.
Clinton should also give up his bus seat for Julie Christie, 52, Britt Ekland, 50, Goldie Hawn and Mia Farrow both 47, and Raquel Welch, 52.
Anna Ford is three years older than the man who will now feature constantly in her news bulletins, and her former rival Angela Rippon is 48.
Patriot Games star Harrison Ford is 50, Woody Allen, 56, and Billy Connolly, the Glaswegian comic now making it in Los Angeles, is 49.
Tim Rice, the lyricist of the early Seventies hit stage show Jesus Christ Superstar, is 47.
Former sports stars suddenly look ancient too.
Billie Jean King, who little more than a decade ago was still thrilling Wimbledon crowds, is 48 and Sixties soccer idol George Best is three months older than Clinton.
Eccentric American chess grandmaster Bobby Fischer, currently playing his old foe Boris Spassky, is 49.
As for British politicians, Clinton has no match for his youthful vigour in John Major, 49 or Opposition leader John Smith, 54.
Former Labour leader Neil Kinnock is 50 and former GLC leader Ken Livingstone is 52.
And if Mrs Thatcher, 67, should make a comeback as British premier, she'll have to bridge a 21-year age gap to forge a special relationship with Bill.
Sex appeal swung him in to the White House
Isla Whitcroft
BILL Clinton used every last drop of his charm and charisma to make the most important conquest of his life.
He won the hearts and minds of the American people — but mostly their hearts.
Like John F Kennedy before him, Clinton's appeal to women voters proved to be crucial.
The ruggedly handsome Clinton took 60 per cent of the female vote in his presidential victory, proof above anything else of his sexual chemistry.
He flirts, he touches, he gazes deep into the eyes of the person he is talking to, no one is immune to his immense charm.
One of the phenomena of his campaign was the presence of large groups of women who would scream and faint whenever he came anywhere near them.
‘When he talks to you he makes you feel as if you are the only person in the entire world,’ said one woman who met him on the campaign trail.
‘He just gives out this incredible air of sexuality.
He is unbelievably charismatic.’
But it is not just women who have succumbed to his chemistry.
Like all truly charismatic people he can work his magic on both men and women.
Men love him for his hearty back-slapping and hand-shaking, for his habit of bear-hugging his male aides when things are going well.
His good looks and twinkling eyes may have won him female fans, but his 6ft 2½in frame and his alleged affair with Gennifer Flowers also firmly marked him out as one of the boys.
While the Bush camp exposed Clinton's sexual peccadilloes in the hope of lowering his public esteem, the revelations seemed actually to increase his sex appeal rating among women voters.
It was the classic case of idolising a rogue whom you can never quite trust but whom you can't give up trying to reform.
He is all things to all women.
To the home bodies he comes across as a good father, a man who always helps his daughter with her homework.
To feminists he is a New Man, pro-choice on the abortion issue and married to a strong, career-minded woman whom he freely acknowledges as the driving force behind his win.
He has Hollywood charisma, cowboy machismo and a heavyweight intellect all in one handsome package.
Compared with the emotionally sterile George Bush he appears to be nothing short of a sexual dynamo.
Early on in his race for the White House Bill Clinton said: ‘If I win the race it will be on the coat tails of women.’
The women of America responded beyond his wildest dreams, but they may not have been quite so eager to help out if he hadn't been blessed with such an abundance of sex appeal.
On a more serious level, Clinton was more in tune than his rival with the political issues that really mattered to women.
He won their favour in the wake of last year's Anita Hill case when he vowed to clamp down on sexual discrimination and harassment in the workplace.
Hill had accused Supreme Court aspirant Judge Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment years earlier, and feminists were outraged when the court rebuffed her claims.
Bush, as head of the establishment, was blamed for Hill's humiliation.
Clinton consistently supported women's right to abortion at a time when Bush adopted an anti-abortion stance.
And many American women see Hillary Clinton as much more of role model for the Nineties than the white-haired Barbara Bush.
If Hillary is the perfect partner, then in Al Gore he had the perfect running mate.
It really was a dream ticket for women.
Where Clinton is rugged and earthy, Gore is clean cut and preppy.
Between them, they have the nation's sexual tastes sewn up.
Indeed, they probably will be the most attractive President and Vice President to have resided in the White House.
They are also one of the youngest presidential teams in US history, and that showed at the celebrations which lit up Clinton's home town of Little Rock, Arkansas.
Loud rock music blasted from massive speakers.
Children years too young to vote boogied in the street.
Crowds chanted the name of their new hero.
Young girls even screamed and squealed for the politician as if he was their favourite teen rock idol.
More than 100,000 delirious members of the Clinton fan club turned out on the streets.
They went wild with jubilation as they paid homage to the local boy who made President.
For the thousands of families who flocked into Little Rock this was more than a mere election.
This was their day.
This was their man.
This was their President.
One man wiped away a tear and said: ‘This is the night of Little Rock's redemption.’
The Clinton camp had promised the Election Watch '92 party would be like no political rally ever seen and it lived up to its billing.
Stars such as Richard Gere, Cindy Crawford, Richard Dreyfuss and Woody Harrelson from Cheers turned up to lend their support.
Every hotel room in a 40-mile radius was booked.
As the Clinton cavalcade approached the Old State House, on the steps of which he first announced he intended to run for President, a black choir sang America The Beautiful.
Mass enthusiasm turned a celebration of political principles into a pop festival-cum-carnival.
The eyes of the world were on them and they savoured, relished and devoured every moment.
Tornado alerts were broadcast throughout the afternoon but the crowds still hit the pilgrimage trail to the Arkansas capital.
Torrential rain lashed down but the people were patient.
Temperatures plummeted 20 degrees so they clapped harder.
Bill Clinton was 90 minutes late giving his victory address but, after 13 long months of campaigning, who was counting?
As the ecstatic President-elect, his deputy Al Gore and their wives Hillary and Tipper approached the podium, Clinton seemed to hesitate, overcome with emotion.
Hillary whispered in his ear and took his speech out of her pocket.
With a nod she sent him forward to accept his accolades.
His voice trembling and his eyes watering, he spoke of the ‘bright new beginning’.
‘My fellow Americans, on this day, with high hopes and brave hearts and massive numbers, the American people have voted to make a new beginning,’ he told the crowd.
‘You can trust us to wake up every day remembering the people we saw in the bus trips, the people we saw in the town meetings, the people we touched at the rallies, the people who had never voted before, the people who hadn't voted in 20 years, the people who'd never voted for a Democrat, the people who had given up hope, all of them together saying we want our future back.
I intend to help give it to you.
‘Together we can do it.
Together we can make the country that we love everything it was meant to be.
I still believe in a place called Hope.
God bless America.
Thank you all.’
And he didn't forget the man he had beaten, and to whom he acknowledged America owed a debt: ‘I want all of you to join with me tonight in expressing our gratitude to President Bush for his lifetime of public service, for the effort he made from the time he was a young soldier in the second world war, to helping to bring about an end to the Cold War, to our victory in the Gulf War, to the grace with which he conceded the results of this election tonight in the finest American tradition.’
It was a generous and graceful tribute to the man who had led a highly personal campaign against him.
But the crowd loved it.
They clapped, danced and sang along to what has now become their anthem, Fleetwood Mac's Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow.
Later, at another party, the same group came on stage to a fanfare of John Lennon's Power To The People.
The divide between the old regime and the bold, young newcomers could not have been more complete.
Al Gore summed up the changing world when he said that he and Clinton were the first two leaders of their country to be born after 1945.
The younger generation had taken over the reins.
For those at Little Rock's night of celebration, the memory will linger forever.
It was the night America fell in love with Bill Clinton.
All that remains is to see how long the honeymoon lasts.
?
Additional reporting from Jim Gallagher in Little Rock
Mirroring the Kennedy dream
Penny Wark
IT has all the hallmarks of history repeating itself, the charismatic young pretender ousting the tired old campaigner, so it is inevitable that comparisons between Bill Clinton and John F Kennedy are coming thick and fast.
Like Kennedy, Clinton has a robustly youthful presence.
Kennedy was 43 when he beat a lacklustre Richard Nixon to the White House.
Like Kennedy, Clinton has a physical force that works on the campaign trail.
He jabs his finger to slam home his message and he is happy to press flesh and kiss babies.
Women like him too, and not just for his civil rights stand and political correctness.
And just like Kennedy, Clinton likes women.
Whether or not he shares Kennedy's insatiable sexual appetite, few people believe he didn't have an affair with Gennifer Flowers.
‘They share this notion of youth and change,’ says Dr Richard King, Reader in American Studies at Nottingham University, and an American himself.
‘Both ran against former vice-presidents who couldn't match up to their predecessor's popularity.
‘Compared to Nixon, who seemed old and slow, Kennedy appeared young and vital.
‘That lodged in people's consciousness.
It was something he could build on.
‘But most significantly, both ran at times when there was a mood of stagnation and disunity in America.
‘Both pitched themselves as being about change, the future rather than the status quo and the past,’ says Dr King.
The words, ‘Let's get this country moving again,’ and ‘We stand on the edge of a New Frontier,’were actually spoken by Kennedy, while 32 years later Bill Clinton promised to ‘lift up the American people,’and of, ‘a victory of hope over fear…instead of four more tired old years, four new years.’
The sentiments are the same, they embody a new, noble America which will arise from the ashes of the recession.
Clinton's intention to include a Republican in his Cabinet also mirrors Kennedy, who made Douglas Dillon, a typical Republican, his Treasury Secretary.
‘He did it for roughly the same reason as Clinton, an attempt to indicate consensus on economic and foreign policy,’ says Dr King.
But there is a significant difference between the two men.
Clinton was raised in a gambling town in a poor and ridiculed state.
He never knew his father, his uncles were on the fringes of crooked activity and his drunken step-father sold second-hand cars.
So doing favours and cutting deals comes naturally to him and he knows how to enjoy himself.
But while that social ease can work in his favour, he has had to temper it by becoming an earnest, moderate, church-going swot.
He admitted that he and Hillary had been through marriage difficulties, but insisted (helped by some Hollywood training) that they are now deeply in love.
Kennedy's background was solidly middle-class — his father Joseph was a self-made, albeit corrupt, millionaire who served on government commissions.
But does America need another Kennedy?
Dr King believes it does in the sense that it needs change, and by offering that Clinton is the right man for the job.
‘His reputation for saying different things to different people, for working both sides of the street, is a classic politicians method.
‘Clinton has a first-rate mind and I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing that he's undefined.
He can move in several directions, and he wouldn't have that manoeuverability if he was a known quantity.
‘He needs to combine conciliation and compromise with a willingness to get mean a few times and draw lines against big business.
‘His first priority seems to be some sort of national health care service.
‘If he can get this through with the momentum he's got now, his first administration will be successful.
‘Unlike Kennedy, he does have experience as an executive and he is interested in policy.
He's better prepared intellectually.
I think his qualifiactions and experience more than match up to Kennedy.’
It has been said that what made John F Kennedy great was that he was the right man in the right place at the right time.
That may well also be true for President Bill Clinton.
Does your mouth need a breath of fresh air?
Julie Woodgate
YOUR mouth tastes as though a small, furry animal has crept into it and died.
You cup your hands, breathe into them and sniff.
You detect nothing too unpleasant.
Then a friend asks if you've just been chewing a clove of garlic.
Bad breath, or halitosis, is one of those ailments that often provokes ribald comments but it can cause intense embarrassment to the sufferer.
The problem is made worse by the fact that it is difficult to detect in yourself.
‘The reason why you can't smell your own breath is because you can't get your nose in your mouth,’ says dentist Roland Comet.
‘Also, you get used to your own smell.
‘Quite apart from the oral causes, dietary and digestive problems can cause odour.
‘That's why some people reek after garlic and some don't — it relates to their metabolism.’
Smoking, drinking and spicy food all contribute to halitosis, but the biggest cause is build-up of plaque on teeth and gums, especially when fibres of food get trapped between teeth.
‘The mouth is teeming with bacteria,’ says Sue Lloyd, president of the British Dental Hygienists Association.
‘That's why regular brushing and flossing are so important.
‘Food debris collects in holes in the teeth, gaps between teeth and gums, uneven surfaces and so on.
The bacteria sticks to it, causing decay and, eventually, odour.
‘Also, plaque around gum margins can lead to gum diseases such as gingivitis.
In a mild form, this manifests itself as slight swelling, with gums bleeding.
The inclination is to stop brushing to reduce bleeding but the only way to cure it is to keep brushing.
‘Acute ulcerative necrotising gingivitis is far more serious.
The bacteria destroys flesh, so what you smell is in fact rotting flesh.
‘You'll know if you've got it because it is very painful, your mouth fills with ulcers and the flesh between your teeth becomes puffy and ragged as it rots.
People under stress are most susceptible to it.
‘The cure is a course of antibiotics, plus strict oral hygiene.’
Bedford dentist David Woolley has written an in-house leaflet for his patients to warn of the problems of halitosis.
‘Bad breath on waking is caused by decreased saliva and lack of shedding of skin cells due to the inactivity of the mouth during sleep,’ he says.
‘This is usually relieved by brushing, which removes the build-up and gets the saliva working.
‘Infections such as sinusitis, tonsilitis, bronchitis, pharyngitis and mumps are another cause, and malignancy or radiotherapy can also cause a dry mouth which leads to halitosis.
‘Various foods can also lead to mouth odour.
Onions, garlic and alcohol are excreted through the lungs, which affects the breath.
Meat contains volatile fatty acids which are excreted into the breath, so vegetarians are less likely to get halitosis.
‘A distinctive odour is also produced through hunger and emotional upsets which affect body chemistry.’
Even painful periods can affect your mouth, says David Woolley.
‘The mucosa becomes slightly softer and you get a furry tongue,’ he says.
‘This collects more bacteria, which leads to odour.’
Anyone who suspects they might have bad breath can check by looking at their tongue.
Its uneven surface attracts food debris the way a deep pile carpet collects dust — but research shows that thorough cleansing can reduce mouth odour by 60 per cent.
If a toothbrush tickles or makes you gag, try the new A/Mano tongue cleanser (£6.95, Harrods).
It is a surgical steel scraper that removes oral debris in a couple of strokes.
Meanwhile David Woolley has ten tips for reducing halitosis:
Regular brushing, flossing, and visits to the dentist are a must.
Don't forget to brush your tongue.
Never wear dentures at night.
Control your intake of smoking, alcohol and spicy food.
Sucking mints increases saliva flow and reduces areas that retain stagnant saliva.
Chewing sugar-free gum helps cleanse the oral cavity.
Remember mouthwashes only mask the underlying cause of halitosis.
Eat fruit at the end of a meal.
Drink lots of water.
Use an aerosol freshener.
THE surface of the tongue, magnified above, is like a deep pile carpet, trapping halitosis-causing bacteria.
The new A/Mano tongue cleanser (Pounds 6.95 from Harrods), below, is designed to scrape away debris
Top five questions bothering every body
Louise Bowen
THOUSANDS of readers rang our Health Works Dial A New Body phoneline last week for advice on looking good from top to toe.
Questions ranged from how to exercise for a ‘natural facelift’ to how to slim down fat knees.
Yvonne Harper-Wake, managing director of London's The Gym at The Sanctuary, was amazed to find that many of the callers were overweight because they were eating all the wrong things.
‘Loads of people just didn't know their problems were diet-related,’ she said.
Yvonne was so shocked at how widespread the problem was that she has installed a hotline in her gym.
Health Works readers can ring in free today and talk to a trained nutritionist about diet.
For details, see the facing page.
Meanwhile here are the five most common questions you asked — and the answers our health, fitness and beauty experts gave:
I'd like to have a younger-looking face, but don't like the idea of plastic surgery.
Are there any exercises I can do to tighten up facial skin and muscles?
Abby Knight, a health and beauty writer and expert in skin and hair care, replied: ‘Yes, there are exercises that tauten facial muscles but the most important thing to remember is not to pull the face into contortions that are not natural to you.
‘That way, you could just be adding lines that aren't there.
‘A huge, broad smile exercises 27 muscles, so give a series of very exaggerated ones, but don't hold them too long.
‘Puckering up for a kiss exercises 12 muscles, so do the same there.
Another good face lifter is to raise the eyebrows up and down swiftly (no holding) one at a time and both together.
‘I'd also recommend Eva Fraser's Facial Workout (Penguin £3.99) and a book by Joseph Corvo, The Natural Facelift (Century £2.99).’
I'm over 40, so how can I firm up a sagging bustline?
Julia Swift, author of 12 Steps To Beautiful Breasts (Thorsons), replied: ‘Breasts are just fatty tissue, but toning up the muscles which lie underneath and around does improve a profile.
‘Firstly, don't just stick to one exercise.
Instead, mix and match.
The all-fours press-up is the best thing for all-round upper body toning.
‘Light weight training is very good too, and also aerobics.
Posture is all-important.
Stay aware of your chest and upper back muscles and walk tall.’
How can I get a flat tummy?
Yvonne Harper-Wake, who puts scores of women through her Tums & Bums exercise classes, replied: ‘Most people phoned hoping for a magic remedy but it doesn't exist.
If you can grab handfuls of your tummy then that's fat, not muscle, and you can't tone up fat.
‘The answer is to burn up calories by regular, committed exercise.
Once you've found the muscles under there, then you can try to tone them up.
Swimming is one of the best exercises.
But the only way you should attempt abdominal exercises is under strict supervision in a responsible gym.’
How can I slim down my hips?
Martica Heaner, a fitness writer who has produced a video workout called Thighs, Tums & Bums (Video Collection), replied: ‘Doing one day's exercise a week will give you health benefits, but to change your body shape you need to burn calories.
That would take exercising at least three to five times a week.’
What can I do about my fat knees?
Libby Roberts, dance teacher and the body behind Slimline Complete Works (Video Collection), replied: ‘Exercise can strengthen and tone muscles, but not reduce fat.
Go on a sensible, calorie-controlled diet and take up some aerobic exercise — swimming, walking or step classes — at least three times a week.’
DIET HELPLINE
IF you need to lose weight, give nutritionist Janine Whiteson a call between 10am and 5pm today, on 071 497 0653.
Ask her too for a free half-price voucher which will give you a day at the gym at The Sanctuary in Covent Garden, London for only £5.
Lisa ties up her trainers ready to start her energetic new lifestyle
CALL 071 497 0653
Fit Tips
BABIES who suddenly become bad-tempered and restless may not be sick — they may simply be suffering growing pains.
Babies do not, as doctors have always believed, grow at a steady rate but in stops and starts — even shooting up by half an inch in 24 hours.
Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania found a big increase in crankiness and hunger during these growth spurts.
ALTHOUGH 63 per cent of new mothers breastfeed their babies, 15 per cent give up in the first week after birth, according to a survey by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
Health experts say breast is best, and to encourage women to breastfeed the Health Education Authority has brought out a new leaflet explaining the benefits.
It is available free from the authority's distribution centre at Hamilton House, Mabledon Place, London WC1 9TX.
A NEW technique to enable men with irreversible vasectomies to become fathers has been developed by the Surgical Advisory Service, a private London infertility clinic.
The method involves taking sperm directly from the man's sperm duct, mixing it with the woman's egg and implanting it.
However, the treatment is certainly no snip at £3,500 a time.
Beverley's saddled with a fitness plan
WHEN Beverley Fleming (left) phoned our Health Works hotline about her spreading hips, the experts were clear.
They told her to get on her bike.
Beverley, 37, of Leytonstone, East London, already played badminton and pounded the exercise bike a couple of times a week.
‘But Martica Heaner, the hips and thighs expert, said I had to exercise every day for at least 10–15 minutes, and combine that with a calorie-controlled diet,’ she says.
‘Martica was quite right.
I put on a stone after a recent holiday and I haven't got round to getting it off.
‘I do run around after my kids — Leonie, 5, and Danielle, 9 — quite a bit, but then I'm always nibbling their leftovers too.
‘I want to go back to a size 12 again.
I just needed to be told to to change my ways.’
Now I'll diet and jog to cure my bloated tummy
LISA Cosh rang the Dial A New Body hotline for advice on her tummy — and ended up with a new lifestyle.
‘I'm a fairly standard size 12, but my stomach gets bloated very easily and tends to stick out,’ she says.
‘I rang Yvonne Harper-Wake, who gave me a lot of advice on my diet which was really helpful.
I must admit my diet has been appalling.
I tend to eat through boredom, and all the wrong things.
‘One of the reasons for my downfall is that I am a rep for Taunton Cider, and one of the first things Yvonne told me was to keep off alcohol.’
With her diet sorted out, Lisa was also advised to do a lot more exercise, because her job entailed driving around all day rather than walking.
Now she has started jogging near her home in Diss, Norfolk.
‘I'm going to really get going,’ she says.
‘I'm also joining my local gym.
There's really no excuse because it's just round the corner.
‘The hotline has given me just the motivation I needed to get moving.’
Report fuels cancer fears
SPECIALISTS are urging women not to be alarmed by the results of a Canadian study on breast cancer screening which is due to be made public soon.
The study suggests that women under 50 with breast cancer are more likely to die from the disease if it is first picked up by mammograms than if they discover the lump by feeling their breasts.
But many doctors around the world believe that the Canadian breast-screening programme is inaccurate.
They point out that setting up a screening system that is as accurate as the UK one is very difficult.
Already a study conducted at Massachusetts General Hospital contradicts the Canadian results.
The American study shows that 95 per cent of women whose cancer was found by mammogram lived for at least five years, compared with only 75 per cent of those who found lumps after self-examination.
Sooty
WITH all the talk of recession wasn't it great to read that at least one important institution has been given a reprieve.
Sooty the bear and friends have been educating children in the simplest manner for 40 years now, and it is wonderful to think that more youngsters will get to enjoy their antics.
New 10p coin
WITH the new 10p coins we now have that annoying situation of some vending machines taking only the new coins and others taking only the old.
Why do authorities make the little things in life so difficult?
Lennox Lewis
NOW that Lennox Lewis has earned a world-title shot it's interesting to see so many people who previously dubbed him a Canadian imposter jumping on the Brit-for-Champ bandwagon.
I've always supported him.
Britt Ekland
BRITT Ekland wants to be the next Jackie Collins-style novelist.
How professional authors must bristle when celebrities turn to writing, knowing that their name alone will ensure sales.
Saturday golf pages
AS a newcomer to the sport, I really enjoy your Saturday golf pages.
Well done.
Make peace with the city
WE are told that 13 million people plan to escape from polluted cities to the clean country — but who polluted the cities in the first place?
How long do they think the countryside will remain clean after they descend on it like a swarm of locusts with their cars, motorbikes and stereos?
If people want to escape urban gloom I have a good suggestion: throw your TV, video and stereo through the window, lock your car in the garage and buy a bicycle.
You'll be surprised how tranquil your life will become and how much time to talk you will have.
Make peace with the city
RETREATING to the country is a backward step.
What we really need is more green spaces in cities, adequate public transport, traffic-free town centres and vastly improved public cleaning services to make our cities the thriving centres they could be.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Jockey Lester Piggott, 57.
Actress Tatum O'Neal, 29.
ON THIS DAY: In 1605, Guy Fawkes failed to blow up James I and Parliament.
In 1909, Britain's first Woolworth store opened in Liverpool.
In 1927, Britain's first traffic lights went into service.
This is no time to ask for a pay rise
IT really annoyed me to see leaders of the public service unions on TV going on about how a pay freeze would be unacceptable to their members.
One of them said: ‘A one per cent rise would be a disaster for our members.’
What does he mean a disaster?
We are in the depths of a terrible slump and hundreds of thousands of people are losing their jobs.
Miners, aerospace workers, no one seems to be safe from the axe — except perhaps all these public servants who think that if they don't get a hefty pay rise every year they are hard done by.
When the company I work for went through a rough patch, there were no pay rises for two years.
Yes, that meant we were earning less in real terms after taking inflation into account but at least we still had a job at the end of it.
As far as public sector workers are concerned, their ‘company’— the Government — is doing worse than anyone.
Where do they think the money is going to come from to finance their wage rises?
Out of taxpayers' pockets?
It is time they pulled in their belts like everyone else is having to.
This is no time to ask for a pay rise
THE Government is sick and hypocritical to say it has no choice but to close three London hospitals.
They showed no qualms in spending £3 billion in a futile attempt to prop up the Pound.
It is time they forgot their obsession with the money markets and concentrated on real issues, like saving the NHS.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE hands were once referred to as forks, hence to fork out.
And because Duke of York became the rhyming slang for ‘fork’, people wishing to be engaged in fisticuffs began telling their opponents to ‘put up their dukes’.
In America the belligerent are said to be ‘on the prod’, a reference to the cowboy employed in the stockyards to move cattle along with a pole tipped by a metal goad.
From farther north in America comes the more familiar ‘to have a chip on your shoulder’ which was born in the logging camps.
Any lumberjack who was feeling sufficiently ill-disposed towards his fellow drinking companions could place on his shoulder a small chip of wood to indicate he would take on any man who cared to flick it off.
In the more remote camps even water had to be hauled in, so the more sober jacks were ‘on the (water) wagon’.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Princess Diana
NO wonder Princess Diana has been driven to desperate measures.
If I had a father-in-law as cold and unfeeling as Prince Philip — not to mention a mother-in-law more concerned with protocol than emotions and a husband who prefers to talk to his plants — I'd have had a nervous breakdown by now.
Janet Murray Cancer Fund
HELP cancer victim Janet Murray raise £50,000 for supplies of the drug Temozolomide which offers hope to brain tumour sufferers.
Cheques or postal orders payable to the CRC Team Up Appeal c/o Cancer Research Campaign, Cambridge House, 6–10 Cambridge Terrace, London NW1 4JL.
Credit card donations:
The View From No 11
David Seymour
NIGEL Lawson wants the world to know that, like Edith Piaf, he regrets nothing.
Certainly things went wrong when he was Chancellor, but none of it was his fault he explains in THE VIEW FROM NO. 11 (Bantam Press, Pounds 20).
Mrs Thatcher stopped him going into the ERM, and Treasury forecasters failed to spot the recession.
Lord Lawson, as he now is, gives many ‘through the keyhole’ insights into the woman who lived next door to him for six years, Margaret Thatcher.
He also takes credit for setting John Major on the road to replacing her by making him No 2 at the Treasury.
But Lawson then covers his back: ‘For a time I was concerned that I might have made the wrong choice as Chief Secretary — a view I suspect was shared by John Major himself.’
Lawson comes over as smug and arrogant, yet his is the best book yet to emerge from inside the Thatcher years.
How I made a killing from death
Katy Bravery
HIS horror books leave no taboo unturned and are outsold only by Stephen King and James Herbert.
But ask Shaun Hutson what terrifies him and he quickly replies…his mum.
Hutson is not so much preoccupied with the success of his latest bestseller Heathen (Little Brown, £14.99) as his mother's opinion of it.
‘She reacts to the wrong bits,’ says the 34-year-old author who gave the world the stomach-churning chiller Slugs.
‘She will read though the most gratuitously disgusting violent passages and not bat an eyelid.
‘But as soon as someone says that four-letter word, it will be ‘do you have to use that language?’
And when I appeared a bit scruffy on Jonathan Ross, she said ‘couldn't you have put a shirt on?’’
The author's mother isn't unhappy however about the fame and fortune her boy is enjoying following 13 blood-spattered, intestine-strewn best-sellers, although Hutson himself is coy about how much he is worth.
‘I'm not complaining,’ he says.
His publishers are now aiming at the US market, and Hutson is touring America next year to promote Heathen.
‘If it takes off in the States, the sky's the limit,’ he says.
The book centres on young blonde Donna, a crack shot with a .45 Magnum.
Her husband dies in a car accident alongside another woman and driven by grief and jealousy, she investigates his secret life and becomes entangled with a rather nasty mystic group, some of whom are 400 years old and tend to drop rotting flesh and eyeballs on the carpet.
You might expect the creator of such grisly images to be a bit of a ghoul himself but Hutson is a small, chirpy bloke who lives with wife Belinda in a new, mock-Tudor Bovis home in Milton Keynes, listens to heavy metal music and supports Liverpool.
‘I don't know why I'm such a warped, twisted little git,’ he says.
‘I had an appallingly normal family.
But I suppose everybody has a dark side.’
Belinda frowns: ‘Sometimes he reads bits of his work to me when I'm eating.
‘There's always maggots and things in the pieces he reads.
It's a wonder I'm not down to two stone by now.’
Hutson began by writing to commission — his record was five days for Sabres In The Snow.
Then his horror tales caught on.
More than half his mail now is from women.
‘I think they like the violence,’ he says.
‘Perhaps there's a hidden streak in them.’
Paperback Round-Up
PRINCESS Michael of Kent's second book Cupid And The King (Fontana £6.99) examines royal mistresses through history.
Nell Gwynn and Mme de Pompadour are there as well as the mistresses of Henri II of France and Napoleon.
KEN Follett's NIGHT OVER WATER (Pan £4.99) builds the tension nicely as diverse characters are thrown together at the outset of the second world war during a luxurious 30-hour flight across the Atlantic.
EQUALLY satisfying is Harry Bowling's The Girl From Cotton Lane (Headline £4.99).
The Great War is over and Bowling's East End heroes must build new lives.
TITIA Sutherland's OUT OF THE SHADOWS (Black Swan £5.99) deals tenderly with the relationship of a girl and an ageing woman, as well as bringing in a ghost story and wartime tragedy.
OPENING LINES
‘THE man and boy walked along the London street trying to keep clear of the gutter, the man hurrying, clutching the boy with sharp, bony fingers, turning down one dark alley then another like a rat that has learned its way through a maze.’
From Prophecy by Peter James (Gollancz).
Secrets of our success
Louise Bowen
NO MATTER how talented or hardworking you are, if you're a woman it always takes extra effort and drive to succeed in business.
Next Wednesday, 11 women who made it to the top will speak on success and motivation for women at Women Who Win, a major conference at London's Institute of Directors (for details ring 071 839 1233).
Dr Ann Robinson, head of the IoD's policy unit, says: ‘Anyone can do anything, that's my motto.’
LOUISE BOWEN asked some of the other conference speakers to cast modesty aside and reveal the reasons for their success.
JENNY KIRKPATRICK Company director and former director of Burson Marsteller ad agency.
THE things that matter are conviction, acceptance of your own individuality, single-mindedness and inner belief.
Women know their strengths and skills and should find an environment in which they can flourish.
If they are going to succeed, above all they should know that they are men's equals and be relaxed about it, even in the face of quite blatant unfairness — which they will meet.
I've never let male colleagues grind me down.
And don't worry about your weaknesses, as long as you have strengths.
Men don't worry about theirs.
TINA KNIGHT Owner and managing director of Nighthawk electronics manufacturers.
I AM sure that, in the end, success comes down to boring, old-fashioned things like hard work and determination.
It means grasping opportunities and being in the right place at the right time.
Women who sleep with the boss to get promotion never reach positions of real power.
To win people's respect you must be able to hold the job down.
People will respect your ability.
Gender inequality starts at home and at school — we still haven't got the message through.
But I don't think in gender terms at all when I interview someone for a job.
LIZ BARGH Opportunity 2000 director, equal opportunities campaigner for 13 years.
I HAVE always had a clear idea of what I hoped to achieve at certain points in my life, which has given me a sense of direction.
I have been helped by mentors, women and men, at various stages in my career and I have a very strong network of people who have given me advice and support when I've needed it and shared the ups and downs.
Finally, I am able to take time off.
I know when my stress levels are too high and I make time to manage them.
I do not like the word success, though, and I would not claim to have succeeded.
TERESA WICKHAM Safeway director and co-founder of Women's Farming Union.
WOMEN need confidence, which begins with believing they are good at what they do.
I gained confidence working with the WFU without realising it.
A sense of humour is important, too — and being able to laugh instead of getting uptight is much easier for older women.
Another thing women are beginning to discover is the benefit of networking — making contacts outside work at places like Club 2000 and Forum.
It's good to have someone to bounce ideas off and talk to — it's something men have known about and done for years.
EMMA BRIDGEWATER Chairman of her own successful company, Bridgewater Pottery.
I HAVE a simple, five-point formula for success: ONE — marry a man with domestic skills who will help with the children at weekends.
TWO — banish guilt.
Find a good nanny and then help her get on with the job of looking after your children.
THREE — trust your business partner.
FOUR — have fun.
If you haven't had a good laugh about work in the past two days, something's wrong.
FIVE — never let ignorance hold you back and don't pay consultants to teach you things you ought to find out for yourself.
DIANA LAMPLUGH Director of the Suzy Lamplugh Trust, a national charity.
I THINK the secret of success is stickability.
I'm like a corgi — I keep smiling while my teeth are firmly dug in.
Women need to have more confidence in their capabilities and not be easily deflected.
The loss of my daughter Suzy gave me good reason to do what I'm doing and I have nothing to lose.
I can look at things straight and put things across straight — I'm not here to be liked.
Being Welsh helps enormously.
They just don't recognise hierarchy, and I take no notice of whether or not I'm acceptable to people.
Dustin Hoffman
DUSTIN Hoffman's new film Hero is due for release in Britain next February.
Hoffman plays a reluctant hero who disappears after rescuing plane crash survivors.
The movie also stars Andy Garcia and Geena Davis.
Lady Helen Taylor
By Tim Satchell
Lady Helen Taylor, daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Kent, who is just giving up her job as a Soho art dealer, and her husband, West End art dealer Tim Taylor, have traded in their black 10-year-old Porsche sportscar for a K-registered £27,500 family-sized black Range Rover.
Frank joins Britain's black elite
BOXER Frank Bruno is named Britain's second richest black man in a survey of the world's wealthiest black people.
But his fortune of £5.5 million is dwarfed by the £20 million of Ghanian businessman Kojo Nyantekyi, who runs a palm oil business in Richmond Green, West London.
The British top 20 is dominated by sportsmen and entertainers.
There are four women, including model Naomi Campbell at No 12.
Few of the British contenders would figure on the US list, which is topped by an entrepreneur with a fortune of more than £250 million.
TV star Bill Cosby comes second with almost £200 million but even singer Michael Jackson only makes it to No 7, according to black newspaper The Weekly Journal.
Sportsmen dominate the British list, including footballers John Barnes, Des Walker and John Fashanu.
Of the four singers Billy Ocean is the only male.
BRITISH TOP 12
1 Kojo Nyantekyi £20m
2 Frank Bruno £5.5m
3 Shirley Bassey £5.2m
4 Sade £5m
5 John Barnes £4m
6 Joan Armatrading £4m
7 Des Walker £3.5m
8 Billy Ocean £3m
9 John Fashanu £3m
10 Chris Eubank £2.6m
11 Linford Christie £2.4m
12 Naomi Campbell £2.3m
US TOP 12
1 Reginald F Lewis £261m
2 Bill Cosby £196m
3 John H Johnson £177m
4 James B Llewellyn £167m
5 Oprah Winfrey £114m
6 Herman J Russell £98m
7 Michael Jackson £72m
8 ‘Magic’ Johnson £65m
9 Evander Holyfield £65m
10 Berry Gordy £52m
11 Quincy Jones £49m
12 Prince £46m
Businessmen dominate the US list with Reg Lewis, James Llewellyn and Herman Russell.
Publisher John Johnson is in the top three, well above Motown founder Berry Gordy.
The history of a failing marriage
JUNE 7
Andrew Morton's book Diana: Her True Story shocks the nation.
JUNE 9
Diana attends Prince Harry's school sports day alone, while Charles goes to Copenhagen.
JUNE 16
Charles, with Diana by his side, drives away from Royal Ascot so photographers can get shots of them together.
But down the road Diana gets out and travels back to London in another car.
JUNE 17
Again at Ascot, Prince Philip snubs Diana as she enters the Royal box.
JULY 18
After the Windsor Castle wedding of Lady Helen Windsor and Tim Taylor there is a peck on the cheek for Diana from Charles and they go their separate ways.
AUGUST 6
Diana and Charles take William and Harry on a Greek Islands cruise.
A row follows after Diana finds Charles talking on the phone to old flame Camilla Parker Bowles.
Days later it is revealed a tape of a phone call between Diana and her friend James Gilbey exists in which Gilbey calls the Princess ‘Squidgy’ and expresses his love for her.
SEPTEMBER 7
The Prince and Princess put on a show by travelling in the same car as Harry starts at his new school.
SEPTEMBER 9
The couple are together for 90 minutes on a visit to a Nottingham hospital.
SEPTEMBER 26
Charles and Diana together at Highgrove with their sons.
After the weekend the couple go their separate ways again and are not seen together again until: OCTOBER 14
They join the Queen at a service in Westminster Abbey to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Battle of El Alamein.
But Camilla Parker Bowles turns up.
OCTOBER 22
They attend an 80th Birthday party for conductor Sir Georg Solti.
OCTOBER 26
Charles and Diana join the Queen at her 40th anniversary of her accession to the throne but sit apart.
OCTOBER 27
Charles and Diana visit the Royal Opera House to watch Otello.
NOVEMBER 2
The Royal Tour of Korea.
Observers see the Royal couple no longer enjoy each other 's company and reports reveal Diana did not want to go on the trip.
Scandal of the Whips
WHAT went on at Westminster on Wednesday was a scandal.
It was a disgrace to Parliament, a disgrace to democracy and a disgrace to Britain.
Unless the MPs who spoke to TODAY reporters yesterday were lying, Government Whips used the tactics of the Mafia to get the majority they wanted on the Maastricht vote.
No victory is worth lowering yourself that far.
The activities of Whips are a mystery to most people outside Parliament but it is known that they do occasionally cajole, threaten and even bully MPs who might not toe the party line.
Until Wednesday, the worst manifestation of that was warning young Members that they would not get promoted if they did not do what they were told.
But that was not enough when it came to the Maastricht debate.
MPs were hounded and harassed, shouted and sworn at, and subjected to the most appalling blackmail, intimidation and aggression.
Most of this took place within the precincts of the Mother of Parliaments.
It must have been a breach of Parliamentary privilege.
The Speaker, Betty Boothroyd, should order an immediate inquiry into the activities of the Whips that night.
Those who are found to have brought the Commons into disrepute should be suspended from the House.
But that is not enough.
What was done by the Whips was done in the name of the Prime Minister.
He is widely accepted as a decent and honourable man.
Now he knows exactly what they did, he must act to demonstrate his disapproval.
The Chief Whip, Richard Ryder, should carry the can, even though he may not have known exactly what was being done by his people.
His resignation should be on Mr Major's desk today.
If it isn't, Mr Major should sack him.
This is not a matter of party politics or personalities or policies or even principles.
It is more important than all of those.
If Members of Parliament — elected by the people to represent the people — can be treated so disgustingly, we are only one step from dictatorship.
True courage
LITTLE Laura Davies has shown extraordinary bravery throughout her young life.
She had her first operation when she was 21 days old and has never experienced the life of a healthy child.
Now at last the successful bowel and liver transplant carried out in America has given her the chance of a normal future.
Yesterday as she returned home, happy and full of energy, she was an inspiration to every parent who suffers the agony of watching their child face pain and illness.
Another inspiring figure was Keith Chegwin, who also showed great courage by admitting on television that he is an alcoholic.
In an emotional interview he spoke of his fear of the condition and his worry that he will never work again.
For everyone with an addictive and self-destructive problem, absolute honesty is vital.
Recovery depends upon it.
By summoning the guts to speak out, Keith too can now face the future with hope.
Open secret
AT last the royal publicity machine has admitted that Charles and Diana's marriage is less than perfect.
Their lack of ease with each other is tangible and to pretend otherwise is sheer folly.
Now, rather like Keith Chegwin, they have told the world that there is a problem.
And in doing that they have taken the first positive step towards solving it.
In the grip of the enforcer
By Paul Wilenius, Political Editor
THIS is Richard Ryder, head of the Enforcers.
They are the Tory Whips who quashed the Maastricht revolt that nearly toppled John Major on Wednesday.
On the facing page Maastricht opponent Teresa Gorman reveals how she was subjected to unprecedented harassment and even sexually offensive remarks by fellow MPs as the crucial vote approached.
There is no suggestion that Chief Whip Mr Ryder or his Whips Office colleagues were guilty of this particular brutish behaviour, but many other Euro rebels complained that they were mercilessly browbeaten to make them withdraw their opposition.
The Whips are largely a mystery to the public.
It is a rule that they do not appear on TV or talk to the Press.
So who exactly are the Enforcers, why do they do it and what sort of a hold have they over their fellow MPs?
Many MPs see the Whips Office as a stepping stone to better things.
A stint here can even lead to the highest office as ex-Whip Mr Major found.
It is also regarded as a men's club and its members all possess comfortable rooms.
But more importantly, they can make or break political careers.
Richard Ryder is friendly, tactful and warm but has a ruthless streak which has been exposed in recent days.
His deputy is the former green Minister David Heathcoat-Amory — the Mr Nice compared to Mr Ryder's Mr Nasty.
Then there is 17-stone David Lightbown, dubbed Terminator Three.
He is the heavyweight Whip that was so busy strong-arming Tory rebels on the night of the critical vote that he failed to vote himself.
If Mr Lightbown is set on young and weak Tory miscreants, they either crumble or he persists until they do.
Another of the tough brigade is the blunt-spoken Sheffield MP Irvine Patnick.
But if all the threats fail, the Whips can always turn to trained solicitor Greg Knight and his practised line in legal persuasion.
For the gentle touch there is Sydney Chapman, the tall, shambling, bespectacled MP from Chipping Barnet who is a past master at talking round rebels.
Squat, snubnosed Tim Wood, MP for Stevenage, is regarded as a stocky busybody ideal for Whipping reluctant members into the lobbies while Tim Boswell uses his beaming smile to win them over.
For the more intellectual approach, Nicholas Baker and his waspish charm are recruited.
Leeds MP Tim Kirkhope is building up a reputation as a quiet but skilful Enforcer but the other junior Whips are relatively inexperienced.
David Davies is seen as ineffectual, Andrew McKay lightweight, Robert Hughes a learner and the witty James Arbuthnott as largely untested.
In the grip of the enforcer
Paul Wilenius
IN all my years in political and business life I have never seen anything like the pressure put on the rebels in Westminster on Wednesday night.
It was nasty, brutish and to be frank frightening as they tried to make sure they won the vote over Maastricht.
People say that I can handle myself, but they have no idea what some of us went through.
I was called a Scab.
I was called a Judas.
They asked me if I had 30 pieces of silver, to pay for my disloyalty.
Otherwise sane men were nearly hysterical trying to get rebels to change their minds.
Grown men were made to cry.
Sitting on the terrace or in gloomy corridors to hide their shame.
It was almost a gang thing.
It was like the sort of bullying you see in a public school yard carried out by men who are supposed to be professional politicians to put pressure on the weaker ones and the new boys.
My own whip was a perfect gentleman, but it was really other colleagues who got really nasty.
And not just the whips.
One member followed me around all day abusing me verbally with what can only be called dirty talk.
He saw it as his mission to make sure the Prime Minister did not lose this crucial vote.
I was so offended I asked him to leave me alone.
There is a line between joking and dirty talk, and this man crossed that line.
People do say —‘Oh, it is all right Teresa is tough she can take it’— but no woman should be subjected to this treatment.
This went too far.
I know I am a rebel and am opposed to Maastricht, but I hold my views as sincerely as the Prime Minister holds his.
I hoped my vote would make him think again.
That is fair.
That is what backbenchers are for.
But that pressure has been missing in Parliament for too long.
I do not think I deserved this sort of treatment.
What did surprise me however was that some of my colleagues in the Commons took it on themselves to force me and others to change their minds.
They tried to demoralise me, but as far as I am concerned they were just abusing me.
I suppose in some ways they thought I would not buckle, so they put even heavier pressure on some of the new MPs.
I know that the constituency chairmen of several MPs were told by Central Office to put pressure on their MPs to back down.
This happened to Walter Sweeney, a new MP.
He changed from voting against to abstaining.
He was brave, but he did not buckle.
No member should be subjected to that sort of attack.
Some of them will inevitably give in to that sort of intimidation.
Pressure was put on some MPs who are the directors of companies from the bosses of the companies, warning them not to vote against the Government.
This too was orchestrated from on high.
But on the night of the vote it was very physical.
You had to force your way through the flow of MPs to get to the No lobby and I had to force my way through to get to the No lobby.
And as I did so the abuse gathered pace.
Some MPs had their way into the Opposition lobbies physically blocked by Whips and MPs.
Even Ministers tried to block them.
Some of those who stuck with the rebellion had to force their way through the Tory crowd and shake off the intimidation.
The thing that upset me most is the verbal abuse.
It is the sort of thing groups of men aim at women.
It is not easy to hit back at that sort of conversation.
I had the support of Anne Winterton, so we could at least talk together and walk through the lobbies together to give each other support.
Some men do not understand what they are really doing, and they just become foul-mouthed.
I have really not seen anything as bad as that, apart from the attacks I had from Labour members when I first got the Commons, when they called me Harvey Proctor in drag.
I am sorry if the Prime Minister takes it seriously that I oppose Maastricht.
Maastricht is personal to him, it is not just another policy.
But things do get to him.
It showed when he was upset when he was mocked by Peter Hain and attacked over Spitting Image at Questions earlier this week.
What worries me is that it is not going to end there.
Rebels might be punished.
They will work on the weakest MPs, and try to force them into line.
What they can do is refuse to answer questions, not allow MPs to speak in the House, stop people going on visits overseas.
There are many ways of getting back at you.
But I am not worried.
In some ways I am seen as beyond the pale, but it is the newer MPs who I feel most sorry for.
I have popular support in the House, and the party cannot manipulate me.
But for some rebels and waverers they will become ‘redundant’ to the party organisation.
There are some people who will put out black propaganda to blacken the name of MPs.
They can also threaten to get rid of you or deselect you.
I feel there are some people in Central Office who cannot wait to get revenge.
Calling all golfers
IF you're interested in golf you can't afford to miss TODAY International Golf Club on Saturdays.
Tomorrow you can take part in a superb two-for-the-price-of-one weekend golfing break at one of seven superb Best Western golf resort hotels around Britain.
So stay ahead of the game and don't miss TODAY tomorrow and every Saturday.
TODAY — the whole in one.
Cher and Bon Jovi
SINGER Cher and her Bon Jovi guitarist toyboy Richie Sambora, right, fuelled rumours of a wedding as they hugged at a London party.
Back together after two years, Cher, 46, had just watched Sambora, 32, at a West End gig.
Mike Tyson
JAILED Mike Tyson is writing a sci-fi thriller called Brain Dead about a punch-drunk boxer who suddenly recovers.
The former world heavyweight champ was supposed to write a book documenting his prison experiences but clearly finds fiction more enjoyable.
Sylvester Stallone
SYLVESTER Stallone, above, has warned that an imposter is claiming to be his brother in a bid to get parts in films.
He said the man who calls himself Sal Stallone is not a relative ‘either close or distant, by marriage or blood’.
Madonna
BOUNCERS barred Madonna from a Hollywood club when she could not prove she was over 21.
She stormed: ‘Don't you know who I am?
I could buy this club and fire you.’
A credit card with her name on it finally got her in but she left in a huff 30 minutes later.
We prove power is the ultimate aphrodisiac
Robyn Foyster
BILL Clinton made it to the White House by wooing women voters with his gleaming smile, his chunky good looks and his boyish charm.
But the features that make Mr President sexy don't work the same trick when the man behind them is thought to be a vacuum cleaner salesman from Bolton.
The truth is that Clinton's sex appeal is nothing to do with his looks.
Once the trappings of power have been stripped away, he loses all his charisma.
TODAY proved it by showing six women a picture of Clinton lookalike Bill Kay, who is on the books of modelling agency Susan Scott Lookalikes, and telling them he sold Hoovers for a living.
The six were asked to rate Kay's sex appeal on a scale of one to ten.
None of them gave him more than four.
Then they were told that he looked a lot like Clinton — and suddenly his ratings rocketed.
For Carolyn Sharp, a 26-year-old illustrator from North London, it was enough to increase his sex appeal rating four-fold.
‘As a vacuum cleaner salesman he has no sex appeal whatsoever,’ she said.
‘But as a Bill Clinton character you are talking about a new ball game…
‘He has all the appeal of Blake Carrington from Dynasty.
He's got the older man appeal and the essential ingredient of power.
‘I can see why American women voted for Clinton — he looks like a winner.
I wouldn't say no to him.’
Marketing executive Elisabeth Ankarcrona, 31, of South London, agreed that power is an aphrodisiac.
Like Carolyn, she had to look at Bill Kay with new eyes before finding him sexy.
When she first saw his picture she described him as ‘an extremely unattractive man with very little, if any, sex appeal’.
Then she added: ‘He definitely shapes up better looking at him like a Bill Clinton character.
‘Many women want power, and one way to get it is to have a powerful husband.
Control him and you control the reins of power.’
Roma Smith, a 44-year-old part-time merchandiser from Brewood in Staffordshire, said she thought high office could make a man more attractive.
‘It would definitely alter my opinion of him, only slightly though,’ she said.
‘Even before you pointed out his similarity to Clinton, I would have given him a reasonable rating.
He has a nice build and he's a tidy, clean-cut man.’
Student Vivienne Wilson, 18, from Purley, Surrey, said she would never be won over by a salesman — but a President would be another matter.
After Kay's similarity to Clinton was pointed out, she upped his rating from two to six.
‘If he had the power of the President he'd start to grow on me,’ she said.
‘Most women would agree that power makes a man far more attractive.’
When market researcher Maya Nygaar, 25, saw Kay's picture and was told he was a man from Bolton without wealth or power she dismissed him.
‘He is completely lacking in sex appeal,’ said Maya, of South West London.
‘I'd give him a sex appeal rating of one.’
But the Clinton connection soon changed her mind.
‘He's still fat-faced and not sporty enough for me, but looking at him this way I have to say he scores on winner appeal and the self-confidence power brings him,’ she said.
‘I prefer men like that.
I've gone out with people just because they've got a high status in their job.
I think most women would.’
Cambridge secretary Francis Langton, 21, agreed.
‘On the whole, women do prefer powerful men,’ she said.
‘Clinton's sex appeal shot up in my opinion when he became President.’
Waitress Janet Hartley, 31, echoed the other women when she did a hasty rethink on Bill Kay's sex appeal on the strength of the Clinton look.
‘Give me a man with money and power any day,’ she said.
Fortunately for Bill Clinton, he has both.
As for Bill Kay, he's working on it.
Chelsea faces the blues
IF AMY Carter's experience is anything to go by, four years at the White House could be a traumatic experience for 12-year-old Chelsea Clinton.
Amy was just nine when Jimmy Carter became President.
Suddenly she found herself under an intense media spotlight, enduring a 24-hour guard until she was 16.
That could prove difficult for Chelsea, a fun-loving girl who likes ballet dancing, volley ball and playing poker.
Like Amy she may find the White House becomes a hothouse.
Amy was allowed to invite friends to the White House pool but security guards were never far away, and many of her holidays were spent travelling the world with her parents.
She was sent to a local predominantly majority school in Washington, and although credible from a political point of view, the move presented the impressionable girl with a confusing and often unstable lifestyle.
Chelsea already goes to a black majority state school in Arkansas, but for Amy the change was sudden.
From the luxury of the White House she would be driven five blocks in an armoured black limousine with armed guards to her state school in a poor black neighbourhood.
Amy's experiences turned her into a radical activist as a teenager.
During her late teens she was arrested twice for her part in political demonstrations and was later kicked out of university for neglecting her studies.
Still actively politically, she now lives with her boyfriend in a one-bed apartment in Atlanta.
Norma thanks Jarvis after hearing voices
By Tim Satchell
NORMA Major has been listening to Jarvis's Frayn, the latest cassette recording from actor Martin Jarvis, on her car cassette.
Mrs Major, a long-term admirer of Mr Jarvis, is reported to have written to him expressing her admiration.
‘I can't talk about this,’ says Mr Jarvis, 50, who this week opened with his wife Rosalind Ayres in Alan Ayckbourn's Just Between Ourselves at the Greenwich Theatre, south London.
Jarvis's Frayn was partly taken from an original BBC Radio 4 series.
In the multi-tracked recording Mr Jarvis plays 99 roles, many of which bear an uncanny resemblance to well-known actors.
The pieces he is reading are adapted from the writings of playwright and author Michael Frayn.
Mr Jarvis, who first gained the attention of Mrs Major through his readings of the Richmal Crompton's William stories, says: ‘The BBC have been after me to record some more William stories but I have decided that one series a year is quite enough.
‘I am delighted that Jarvis's Frayn has had a good reaction, as I think it is some of my best work.’
In the New Year Mr Jarvis and his wife are off to Los Angeles to work with Richard Dreyfus at his theatre company.
Next year they will be appearing in Channel 4's production of a 1906 melodrama, Emily's Ghost, as well as a Children's Film Unit production of Mama and Papa in Suffolk.
Author Meredith Etherington Smith launched her biography of Salvador Dali at Christie's on Wednesday evening.
His lobster telephone and pouting lips made a rare appearance.
Canapes were suitably Daliesque — smoked salmon, potato crisp and olive creations shaped as lobsters.
The Dali theme extended to the lavatories where giant white soap cakes in the form of pouting lips sat on the basins…for five minutes, before they were lifted.
And…
By Tim Satchell
Overheard at the Groucho club last night, actor to female companion: ‘That's enough about me, let's talk about you.
‘What did you think of my latest film?’
Clinton in step
By Tim Satchell
FIRST Daughter Chelsea Clinton, 12, is following the hottest trend in footwear by stepping out in Birkenstocks.
Birkenstocks are the most comfortable shoes available, according to wearers.
‘They follow on from the Beatnik look and have actually been around since the Sixties,’ a spokesman for the Natural Shoe Store in Covent Garden says.
‘They are particularly comfortable because they have a moulded instep.
They have become incredibly trendy.
They even turned up on the catwalks of Milan.’
Madonna and Harrison Ford are known to be devotees of the sandal.
Cost?
Around £45 a pair.
Tied to luxury
By Tim Satchell
DOES a gentleman require a tie case?
There is much sartorial debate about this.
Jameson Irish Whiskey is offering a luxury tie case worth £20 in return for two bottle tops along with £4.99.
But just what is a tie case?
‘Ours zips down the middle and opens up like a book to hold two ties,’ say Jameson.
‘It protects ties while travelling and is made of best quality canvas.’
Tie Rack shops sell a £7.99 vinyl version which holds 10 ties.
‘Certain shops are selling a lot,’ says a spokeswoman.
‘There is definitely a growing demand for tie cases.’
Jane's big success in Little Voice
By Tim Satchell
JANE Horrocks's role in Little Voice is attracting impressive audiences.
Last week Kathleen Turner and Joan Collins turned up on different nights to see the show at the Aldwych Theatre.
While Miss Turner left halfway through to go on to another show, Miss Collins popped backstage at the end to congratulate the actress.
‘I'd have been more excited if it had been Shirley Bassey,’ Miss Horrocks, 28, tells me.
‘But it was still very kind of her.’
Next week Miss Horrocks stars in a new BBC 2 comedy, Absolutely Famous, with Joanna Lumley, Jennifer Saunders, June Whitfield and Julia Sawalha.
The Liverpool Six — Professors Sir Alan Walters, Patrick Minford, Tim Congdon, Bill Martin, Gordon Pepper and Peter Warburton — aim to discourage Britain returning to the exchange rate mechanism.
The free market Institute of Economic Affairs has taken them under their wing.
‘Under their previous director Graham Mather the IEA was anxious not to rock the boat.
Now under John Blundell they are becoming more outspoken,’ says an economist.
Linda, Naomi and Claudia, the £9.99 supermodels
By Alison Veness, Fashion Editor
HOW much would you expect to pay for a dress modelled by Linda Evangelista? £15,000? £25,000?
That would be the normal price bracket for a Dior or Chanel creation — but now the supermodels have gone from catwalk to catalogue.
And that means you can buy an outfit ‘as worn by Linda, Naomi or Claudia’ for as little as £9.99.
Six supermodels feature in the new spring/summer Littlewoods home shopping catalogue, and though they all charge up to £10,000 for a single day's work the clothes they model for Littlewoods are all within easy reach of every woman.
Linda and Co are used to wearing the most luxurious quality fabrics, cut by the world's top couturiers to fit their finely-tuned bodies to perfection.
So what did they make of these budget off-the-peg outfits which the rest of us wear every day?
A spokesman for Littlewoods says: ‘They were perfectly happy modelling the clothes, but that's what you would expect from these highly professional girls — they are adaptable.’
And they have adapted themselves here to become ordinary girls-next-door.
None of them would look out of place in the local supermarket or disco.
Claudia Schiffer, pouting Bardot of the Nineties, looks like a giggling girl in her cut-off hot pants and jacket — a far cry from the sultry pictures we usually see.
Linda Evangelista looks homely and comfortable in her sweater and leggings, Naomi Campbell plays simple and sensible in a little black dress and Karen Mulder wears a practical sweat top and mini skirt.
All the models were photographed separately, Karen and Linda in London and the other four — Claudia, Naomi, Yasmeen Ghauri and Shana — in New York.
The supermodels are used to having top names such as Steven Meisel and Helmut Newton behind the camera.
But for the Littlewoods shoot the photographers were relative unknowns Martin Thompson and Marco Glaviano.
Littlewoods is the latest in a growing list of High Street names to use the supermodels.
Hennes led the way and Marks & Spencer followed with Linda Evangelista starring in their recent campaign.
But this is the first time supermodels have appeared in a home shopping catalogue.
‘In the past we have used celebrities such as Stephanie Beacham, Jane Seymour and Joan Collins but now supermodels are the new celebrities,’ says the spokesman.
‘They've become instantly recognisable.’
Littlewoods say they are not worried by the prospect of disappointed customers complaining they don't look like catwalk queens in their £9.99 clothes.
‘We haven't tried to hide anything, the clothes speak for themselves.
We aren't promising haute couture.’
For the next issue they are contemplating using the latest catwalk star, the waif-like Kate Moss.
Cindy Crawford is another possibility — providing she hasn't been snapped up already by another catalogue.
FOR a free copy of the Littlewoods catalogue phone , quoting reference number:472-0621-2.
St Bartholemew's Hospital
I FULLY support your writer Rory Clements' plea to save St Bart's Hospital and understand his gratitude after his nephew was successfully treated there.
I was treated in the cancer unit several years ago and cured.
Of all the bad things this Government has done, closing St Bart's would be the worst.
Blood sports
IF THE Queen wants to restore credibility to the royals she should back a ban on blood sports.
People who enjoy seeing a fox ripped apart are sick.
Breeders Cup
IT WAS shameful of British owners to enter racehorses in the Breeders Cup in Florida — the 90-degree heat and dirt track must have put these horses in great distress.
Charles Bronson
I AM pleased Charles Bronson is marrying new love Kim Weeks even if she is 40 years his junior.
Charles showed great loyalty to his cancer victim wife Jill Ireland and deserves a new start.
Bosses cut pay
THE two bosses who cut their own pay to less than that of a trainee to preserve jobs set a fine example in these tough times.
It would be a tragedy if they went under.
Tax on needy is a sick idea
I AM deeply concerned at the prospect of sick people being made to pay for the Government's mismanagement of the economy.
It is hard enough to cope on invalidity benefits at the moment and any cuts or taxes will make life very difficult.
There is no help with medicines and the sick don't get any of the benefits that are paid to those on Income Support.
More help is needed for these people, not less.
How anyone can tax ill people and sleep at night is beyond me.
Tax on needy is a sick idea
PEOPLE on retirement pensions have to pay tax if they have any other source of income, so why shouldn't those who receive invalidity benefit?
If they are very ill they can claim other benefits, such as attendance allowance.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Comedian Frank Carson, 66.
Actor Nigel Havers, 43.
Singer P J Proby, 54.
ON THIS DAY: In 1429, the coronation of Henry VI of England took place.
In 1869, London's Blackfriars Bridge opened.
In 1893, composer Tchaikovsky died of cholera.
Fitness videos must exercise restraint
YOUR article highlighting the potential for injury in Cindy Crawford's new exercise video was timely and pertinent — too many celebrities are getting on the health bandwagon and producing ill-conceived ‘fitness’ manuals.
I was particularly concerned to read your experts' views that some of the movements in Cindy's Shape Your Body Workout could strain spinal ligaments and put terrible pressure on knee ligaments.
In fact the first thing I did was ring my 35-year-old daughter who has been a ‘fitness freak’ ever since Jane Fonda took to jumping about our TV screens and warned her not to overdo it if she intended to buy the tape — which I am certain she does.
Just because Cindy's exercises have produced stunning results for her does not mean Britain's tubbies will end up with a similarly sylph-like shape.
I dread to think of the thousands of women who stretch their limbs to unhealthy lengths in a vain bid to attain taut buttocks and breasts.
Fitness videos of this nature — either home-grown or imported — must be subjected to the strictest controls and scrutiny from a recognised medical-athletic body.
Warnings should also be put on the sleeve if any of the exercises are deemed to be risky.
Welcome news
HOW marvellous to see Julia Somerville (right) recovered from her brain tumour operation and raring to get back to reading the news at ITN.
Julia's courage must be a great inspiration to those people facing a similar ordeal.
By the way, I think her new short hairstyle looks simply great.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
By Graeme Donald
YOU will probably have seen many films in which cases of dynamite catch fire and detonate to great cinematic effect within a few seconds.
But that is impossible.
Dynamite needs a tremendous heat — around 360F — before it will explode.
Explosives experts therefore use a fuse which ignites a firing cap, made of fulminate of mercury.
When the cap burns it creates a sufficiently high temperature to set off the dynamite.
In icy American logging camps it was common for the cook to detonate small amounts of dynamite to cook the first meal of the day, which brought a whole new meaning to bangers for breakfast.
One of the earliest explosive devices was the petard, which was a mine used to breach castle walls or gates.
Petards were unreliable and apt to detonate as soon as a match came anywhere near the fuse, resulting in the hapless sapper being blown up or ‘hoist by his own petard’.
Ecstasy
IT SICKENS me that hit records promoting the drug Ecstasy through hidden messages in the lyrics have been allowed when there have been so many deaths from it and now the hospitalisation of Flake model Rachel Brown.
These groups should put the cash into a drug rehabilitation programme.
Mortgage rates
WHEN will the much-vaunted reduction in bank rates be passed on to people struggling with mortgages?
I was thrilled to hear of cuts on TV on at least two occasions but NatWest must have missed this.
I wonder how fast other lenders pass on reductions and why the time varies.
Daniel wins day in epic encounter
By Sue Heal
WELL here it comes folks, the biggest, most rip-roaring, full-throttle, Boys Own movie yarn of the year, and resplendent movie with a capital M it most certainly is.
There is no way anyone should see Michael Mann's splendid panoramic epic The Last Of The Mohicans, based very loosely on James Fenimore Cooper's classic novel, on anything but the best wide screen and in full Dolby sound.
Mohicans is a giant double-box-of-popcorn number as it hurtles across your vision throwing out an eye-popping panoply of crimson-coated armies, ferocious battles, cascading waterfalls and musket and tomahawk clashing.
Behind all the razzmatazz of exploding cannons lies a movie that contains many more considered pluses, not least being Daniel Day-Lewis's mesmerising central performance as Hawkeye.
There are also quieter, moodier moments that shine a clear light on the underlying reasons for such a destructive frontier conflict in the Albany wilderness of 1757.
Much high praise has already come Mohicans' way and it has done astounding US box-office business, but despite this it is on occasion a flawed film with a sometimes patchy pace and a structure that wobbles in the final 30 minutes.
If Day-Lewis is the movie's greatest strength then its most noticeable defect is that it was shot by two different cinematog-raphers, often with the same scene lit very differently as if taking place at contrasting times of day.
Mohicans is set among the wild, untamed undergrowth and soaring, sheer mountained backdrop to the American war between France and England with each side sporting its native American allies.
Only Chingachook, the last of the Mohicans (Russell Means), his natural son Uncas (Eric Schweig) and his adopted son Hawkeye,(Day-Lewis) remain resolutely unpartisan.
Until, that is, they come across an ambush of British Officer Heyward, Steven Waddington with upper lip as stiff as an ironing board, and his two charges Cora and Alice Munro (Madeleine Stowe and Jodhi May), the daughters of a commanding officer of a far-flung fort.
After routing the group's marauding Huron attackers, led by an extremely irate Magua, Wes Studi with an unbridled hatred of all Munros, the Mohicans offer to escort the Brits on their hazardous journey.
Day-Lewis and Stowe fall madly in love which severely irks Waddington who has been proposing non-stop to the woman since the movie began.
Stowe gives a stirring, luminous performance as a strong, spirited female out of step with the bemused, bonneted members of her sex such as May, who wanders through the action in a panic-stricken daze.
The love scenes between Stowe and Day-Lewis are vibrant and passionate with the kind of crackling screen chemistry reminiscent of Gone With The Wind's Gable and Leigh.
The small band eventually finds the fort under siege.
Colonel Munro (Maurice Roevens) claps Day-Lewis in irons for allegedly preaching sedition, the Brits surrender to the French and there is a horribly violent battle in which our stalwart bunch escape yet again.
They are pursued by the ever-vengeful Wes Studi who blames the Colonel for massacring his family and literally rips his heart out in the heat of battle.
Studi's pack of baying, war-painted Hurons are the kind of scalping psychotics who would think Dances With Wolves is a big girl's blouse.
But it is Day-Lewis who dominates everything as he races around, long locks flowing and trusty musket in tow.
I defy any woman not to think he is simply the most scrumptious thing on two legs.
He is supported by a wonderful cast which graces a movie that deserves the label of epic.
Nevertheless it did lose me momentarily after the Mohicans and Munro daughters escape the scene of the Huron massacre.
Mann tries to combine the desperation of their plight with a more lyrical look at Indian respect for struggle and death, all of which sits together a smidgeon uneasily until the final reel.
This is also a very violent film in parts that should rightly have a 15 not 12 rating and parents are strongly advised to bear this in mind.
But Mann has battled through everything to make a visually stunning piece of cinema that has launched a notoriously shy and guarded actor on to an international career as a leading man.
Some very violent scenes
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS
Starring: Daniel Day-Lewis, Madeleine Stowe, Russell Means, Eric Schweig
Director: Michael Mann
Producers: Michael Mann, Hunt Lowry
Running Time: 112 mins
Certificate: 12
Top 20 movies
1 (1) BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: Dazzling Disney animation using the latest computer graphics.
Cert U National: General Release.
2 (—) BOOMERANG: Love 'em and leave 'em adman Eddie Murphy gets his come-uppance when his firm is taken over by a woman in this frivolous star vehicle.
Cert: 15 National: General Release.
3 (2) PATRIOT GAMES: Retired CIA man Harrison Ford is dragged back when he witnesses an assassination attempt on a British royal.
Cert: 15 National: General Release.
4 (3) 1492 — CONQUEST OF PARADISE: Ridley Scott's beautifully-filmed epic stars the magnificent Gerard Depardieu as Christopher Columbus.
Cert: 15 London: Barbican, MGM Trocadero National: Selected Locals.
5 (4) WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP: Woody(Cheers) Harrelson and Wesley Snipes star in this basketball buddy movie.
Cert: 15 London: UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington, MGM Oxford Street National: General Release.
6 (5) STRICTLY BALLROOM: Stunning high-energy Australian film about a talented but unorthodox ballroom star.
Cert: PG London: Screen On The Hill, UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington.
National: Selected Locals.
7 (11) HUSBANDS AND WIVES: Woody Allen's vividly-drawn tale about a middle-aged lecturer who falls for a young student.
Cert: 15 London: Gate Cinema, MGM Chelsea National: Selected Locals.
8 (6) UNFORGIVEN: Clint Eastwood's highly-acclaimed Western about an old bounty hunter who comes out of retirement.
Cert: 15 National: General Release.
9 (8) HOUSESITTER: Romantic comedy about an architect, Steve Martin, who builds a dream home for a girlfriend who drops him and is replaced by Goldie Hawn.
Cert PG National: General Release.
10 (7) A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN: A movie that probes the heartbreaks and home-runs of an all-girl baseball team.
Cert: PG National: General Release.
11 (10) CALIFORNIA MAN: Wayne's World style comedy about a rock dude.
Cert: PG National: General Release.
12 (9) CARRY ON COLUMBUS: New-wave faces join survivors from the old crew for high farce on the high seas.
Cert: PG National: General Release.
13 (—) THE CRYING GAME: Drama about an IRA volunteer who guards a kidnapped British squaddie.
Emotionally charged performance from Stephen Rea.
Cert: 12 London: Camden Plaza, Curzon West End, MGM Fulham Road National: Selected Locals.
14 (14) BEETHOVEN: The house is turned upside down when a puppy comes to stay.
Cert U National: General Release.
15 (12) BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER: Valley girls meet vampires in this horror romp.
Cert: 12 London: MGM Panton Street National: General Release.
16 (—) UNLAWFUL ENTRY: Ray Liotta plays an obsessive maniac with a charming smile who terrorises an unsuspecting couple.
Cert: 18 London: Camden Parkway National: General Release.
17 (13) CITY OF JOY: Drop-out doctor Patrick Swayze finds his conscience is pricked when he visits the slums of Calcutta.
Cert: 12 London: MGM Shaftesbury Avenue National: Selected Locals.
18 (17) BITTER MOON: Roman Polanski's dark and disturbing tale of erotic obsession.
Cert: 18 London: Chelsea Cinema National: Selected Locals.
19 (16) LETHAL WEAPON 3: Mel Gibson and Danny Glover return to cause mayhem.
Cert 15 National: General Release.
20 (—) GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS: The superb screen version of David Mamet's acclaimed play set in the high-pressure world of real-estate salesmen.
With Al Pacino and Jack Lemmon.
Cert: 15 London: Odeon Haymarket National: General Release
Simple Men
By Sue Heal
AMERICAN independent filmmaker Hal Hartley is a wonderfully original and quirky voice who consistently brings an intelligent breath of fresh air to the movie scene.
I adored his previous two features The Unbelievable Truth and Trust.
Simple Men is Hartley's most ambitious film to date and contains many of his illuminating trademarks — the cast talk to each other in monotone bite-size truths, the characters circle each other warily constantly considering closer contact, the humour is dark and rich and each sparse frame is carefully staged.
However I did get a bit cheesed off with the movie's rather plodding pace.
Robert Burke, a Hartley regular, is Bill McCabe, a small-time conman who has just been dumped by his girl.
He proceeds to mooch about in a hang-dog way until he runs across his younger brother, quiet student Dennis (William Sage) who informs him their long-lost father has just been arrested for bombing the Pentagon 20 years previously.
Dad (John Alexander MacKay) is a former star baseball player who blew it all by turning Sixties anarchist, ‘the only radical short stop in history ‘as Burke deliciously puts it.
The lads arrive at the local nick to find their Houdini pa has done a bunk and they wander about the country trying to locate him, pitching up in a one horse Long Island seaside town.
Here they run across wayward convent schoolgirl Kim, Holly Marie Combs, who directs them to the deserted cafe of Kate, an enigmatic Karen Sillas.
Burke falls for Sillas and loses interest in locating father which upsets Sage, he wanders off on his own and runs across young Romanian epileptic Elina (Elina Lowensohn) who bizarrely turns out to be pater's juvenile mistress.
Sounds wacky?
Well, this is a typical Hartley scenario if there is indeed such an animal.
From this point on everyone in the movie starts colliding like large tankers with their navigation shot to hell.
There is a flavour of Twin Peaks about this movie, only more interestingly handled.
Consider Simple Men strongly recommended.
Nothing disturbing
SIMPLE MEN
Starring: Robert Burke, William Sage, Karen Sillas
Director: Hal Hartley
Producers: Ted Hope, Hal Hartley
Running Time: 104 mins
Certificate: 15
Flaming Ears
By Sue Heal
WALKING out of movies is something I have done only four times in my career.
Flaming Ears was the fourth and I joined three of my colleagues in a mini-mass walkout of this totally unstructured, ineptly shot, meaningless mish-mash of an Austrian vampire lesbian flick set in the year 2700.
It is not worth a mention but for the fact its distribution and promotion is funded by our own dear British Film Institute.
The BFI has long been overdue a public trial and major clear-out with several pretentious posteriors needing kicking out of its West End headquarters.
I'd like to know why that day is such a long time coming.
Disturbing imagery
FLAMING EARS
Starring: Angela Hans Scheirl, Susanna Heilmayr, Ursula Purrer
Directors: Angela Hans Scheirl, Dietmar Schipek, Ursula Purrer
Producers: Angela Hans Scheirl, Dietmar Schipek, Ursula Purrer
Running Time: 89 mins
Uncertificated
Screen feast with the best of British
By Sue Heal
THE 36th London Film Festival — on now until November 22 — offers the most interesting and comprehensive menu for years.
The numerous delights include: a galaxy of new British films — yes, really — with a £10,000 prize for the most popular; a section devoted to dance movies, a ‘horror’ selection; debates and lectures for all tastes; a children's festival; animation; silents; movies from every continent; and a chance to see some upcoming mainstream films.
Look out for the following.
Larry ‘Boyz N' The Hood’ Fishburne gets his first, long-awaited starring role as an undercover narcotics cop in the gripping thriller Deep Cover.
The battle with his own fragile personality is set against his struggles with corrupt attorney, played by Jeff Goldblum.
Of Mice And Men, a new version of the classic John Steinbeck novel, has won high praise.
It stars John Malkovich and Gary Sinise as two itinerant workers who become the object of a vicious manhunt.
Sinise also directs.
The Public Eye is a major feature with wee Joe Pesci as a low-life ‘shuttterbug’— that's paparazzi to you — in 1942 New York who becomes embroiled with beleaguered nightclub owner Barbara Hershey.
Clive Barker's chilling horror story Candyman is brought to the screen by Bernard Rose, one of Britian's best young directors, and stars Tony Todd as the alleged killer.
Or is he just an urban myth?
That underrated favourite of Martin Scorsese, Harvey Keitel, appears in Reservoir Dogs, a tense thriller about a diamond heist that goes badly wrong because someone has grassed on the top thieves.
But who exactly?
Those who have not yet had a surfeit of Monsieur Depardieu can see him in one of his period roles in the sumptuous Tout Les Matins Du Monde.
The beefy one plays court musician Marin Marais in curly wig and white-powdered face who muses on his success and the decline of his musicianship in Louis XIV's France.
Among the festival highlights are two screenings of a beautifully restored The Four Horsemen Of The Apocalypse (1921) starring Rudolph Valentino.
Important missing scenes have been found and inserted and there is a new score from Carl Davis.
The screenings are at The Camden Parkway, which is under threat from developers.
So come along and support The Parkway on November 20 or 21.
Details of LFF offerings and full brochure from: The London Film Festival, South Bank, London SE1 8XT (071-928-3232).
Your movie verdict
By Sue Heal
NO matter what the critics say, it is you the public who decide whether a film is a hit or a miss.
London movie-goers gave Glengarry Glen Ross, about cut-throat estate agents, the thumbs up this week.
Security guard Ed Collett, 32, from Highbury, north London, said: ‘It's the best film I've seen in the past few years.
Lemmon is absolutely brilliant.
The language is a bit spicy but it didn't put me off in the slightest.’
BBC studio managers Annette Stevens, 23, and her partner Giles Aspen, 26, both from north London, loved it although Giles was shocked at the swearing.
Annette said: ‘It was really slick.
A bit slow to start but when it got going it was outstanding.’
Melissa James, 27, a TV company executive from north London, said: ‘There are excellent performances in it but the dialogue is wordy and peculiar.
It's a very intellectual film.’
Eddie Murphy's adland comedy Boomerang had a mixed reception.
Hairdresser Terry Brooks, 28, said: ‘It's not as good as his earlier stuff.
As a black guy I find it definitely relates to everyday life.
But it's not all comedy, I think he's trying to show a more serious side to his acting.’
Secretary Debi Gaskin, 27, said: ‘There is nothing new in the film, it was just a good night out.’
Receptionist Amanda France, 23, said: ‘It's not as funny as his other films but I still laughed out loud.’
Dying croaks of Dylan's talent
James Bennett
SO THIS is it: the long awaited, much trumpeted comeback album from Bob Dylan, foremost poet of a generation.
Hands shaking in anticipation of words of dazzling insight and originality, I put the record on.
This is what I hear: Froggie went a courting and he did ride, mmmm, mmmm…
Thank you but no.
This is not what I want to hear from the man who once shook me to the core with a string of incendiary albums.
Admittedly there's nothing else as inane as the tale of Froggie and Miss Mousey among the 13 tracks on Good As I Been To You (Columbia)— but neither is there anything actually written by Dylan.
What you get is Bob returning to his roots with songs from the American folk and blues archives performed with just a single guitar and voice.
The vocals are the problem.
I was once a staunch defender of Dylan's extraordinary voice, but now it's such a cracked nasal whine it's hardly bearable.
The album has its moments, and some people — forever willing a return to greatness from Dylan — will no doubt say it's a masterwork.
They're kidding themselves again.
At the risk of committing rock blasphemy, I'd say do yourself a favour and lighten up with Erasure instead.
Pop: The First 20 Hits (Mute) is exactly that — a greatest hits album worthy of the name, confirming Andy and Vince as lightweight pop maestros.
Cher is pretty good at pop too.
Though her long musical career has seemed very erratic, the overview provided by Greatest Hits 1965–1992 from I Got You Babe and the brilliant Gypsies, Tramps and Thieves right up to The Shoop Shoop Song — proves she has a great voice and a devilish way of picking the best tunes.
Erasure and Cher are just two among the onslaught of Greatest Hits which has begun to assault us as marketing replaces music in the run-up to Christmas.
Anyone under 21 might not realise that Rod Stewart was not always a smug, smarmy middle of the road crooner.
Between 1971 and 1975 he was a vital force in British music — and those are exactly the years covered by Best Of The Mercury Years (Mercury).
Listen again to Maggie May, Stay With Me and You Wear It Well — and mourn a fallen giant.
Andy Williams, of course, was always smug and smarmy.
That doesn't stop Can't Get Used To Losing You, Can't Take My Eyes Off You and Home Loving Man being all-time classics.
All can be found on Best Of (Dino).
Dylan once called Smokey Robinson America's greatest living poet.
Certainly he was Motown's greatest songwriter and Greatest Hits (Polygram) contains 22 superb songs including Tracks of My Tears and Tears Of A Clown.
My problem with Smokey is that I know every song backwards and familiarity cuts the excitement quota.
Not so Jimi Hendrix.
Twenty-five years after everyone else, I am now discovering the joys of Hey Joe, Voodoo Chile and Purple Haze courtesy of The Ultimate Collection (Polydor) which contains 20 great songs from Hendrix who would have been 50 this month.
June Moon
Tony Rennell
BE patient with JUNE MOON (Vaudeville Theatre).
The slow-burning first half may induce yawns but the pace quickens in Act 2 and by the end you don't want the music and laughter to stop.
This is an all-American comedy, vintage 1920s, about a hick country boy who comes to New York to be a song writer.
He's so innocent he rhymes June and moon and thinks he's original.
Is he a sucker?
Or will he have the success that eludes the smart boys of Tin Pan Alley?
The answer is never in doubt, and neatly topical in a week when American voters showed their preference for small-town boys over city slickers.
Adam Goodley has star quality as the young innocent abroad, but even he has to bow to age and experience: Frank Lazarus as the seen-it-all piano player (with a heart of gold, natch!) is wonderfully witty and quietly steals this entertaining and pleasing show.
Our Song
Ivan Waterman
IT'S a classic situation.
She is the stunning young beauty dripping red lipstick and he is the wayward, womanising, ageing sophisticate with a young son and terribly understanding wife.
We know it will end in tears, but Peter O'Toole and Tara Fitzgerald simply sizzle while they keep their faltering affair alive in OUR SONG (Apollo Theatre), Keith Waterhouse's searing study of forbidden modern romance.
Snatching afternoons and nights of high passion, O'Toole is in his element in this brilliantly dark and witty sexual landscape.
And the young, dazzling and fiery Tara is a huge star in the making.
Dance
Sam Carlisle
JEREMY Healy was the genius responsible for the pop classic John Wayne Is Big Leggy, but let's not hold that against him.
Healy has returned in the guise of successful club DJ and mastermind behind the group E-Zee Posse.
Their first album, THE BONE DANCE (More Protein), is a wonderful concoction of mood music, soul and rap, made stranger by the guest vocalists, including Tara Newley and Beverley Skeetes.
Healy moonlights as an advert composer and it shows.
His talent, like that of his label boss Boy George, is making quirky, quality, catchy pop tunes.
Kiwi caper is a cute mover
By Amaya Lopez
ESSENTIALLY a cutesy platform romp, New Zealand Story (Master System) tells the tale of a rather dodgy walrus who has kidnapped loads of kiwi chicks and sold them to a zoo in New Zealand.
However, this walrus had reckoned without the courage and determination of a certain Tiki, also a kiwi, who vows to rescue his like-feathered friends.
You take the part of Tiki working your way through five different locations in search of your kidnapped chums.
Each level is divided into four sections and at the end of each, you'll be expected to rescue a caged kiwi.
Every level has traps, baddies, bonuses and a huge nasty thing lying in wait at the end.
Tiki, however, sports a handy bow and arrow and can also pick up other weapons and handy methods of transport, such as balloons, along the way.
New Zealand Story undoubtedly holds its own on the Master System — it's extremely playable and very amusing.
SCORE: 8/10
ONE of the only games to be out on virtually every format, Domark's Prince of Persia is also available in mini-version on the Game Boy.
It's a platform arcade adventure where you play the exotic pyjama-clad Prince in a desperate attempt to rescue your loved one, locked up in the castle's highest tower.
You start off in the dank dungeons and your aim is to work your way to the top.
There are lethal swordsmen, hidden traps, guillotines which will slice your top off, and sections of the ground which drop away.
Not only do you have to keep an eye out for hidden switches to help you get across treacherous terrain but, hardest of all, you have a time limit to complete the game — exactly 60 minutes — or it's curtains for the Prince.
Prince of Persia was lauded for its beautiful graphics and excellent animation.
The lead sprite can jump, crouch, dangle convincingly from ledges, take different sized leaps, tiptoe cautiously — he is amazingly lifelike.
These moves have been superbly converted for the Game Boy and Prince of Persia retains its first class gameplay.
SCORE: 9/10 YOU'VE seen the film — now you can play the game as Alien 3 storms on to the Sega Mega Drive.
You play Ripley, who has to despatch hordes of alien-infested humans from an underground penal colony.
She does this by using a host of spectacular alien-mashing weapons.
At the end of every set of three levels a stomach-churning guardian awaits.
The graphics are very impressive.
My one gripe is that at times the control system is not as good as expected.
SCORE: 8/10
WHIP-WIELDING Indiana Jones will be appearing shortly in his own action game, Indiana Jones and The Fate of Atlantis, courtesy of Lucas-arts/US Gold, on home computers.
Sadly, the game is nowhere near as polished as the films.
You play Indy, who takes on the Nazis as he searches for the precious power-giving material, Orichalcum.
He is aided by his sidekick Sophia Hapgood and, rather neatly, you can switch between Indy and Sophia depending on the situation.
There are nine locations to plunder for food, weapons, artefacts and Orichalcum.
The function keys allow you to call up a variety of viewpoints but, despite this, it was sometimes hard to tell what was going on.
Overall the game was lacking in atmosphere.
The gameplay should have been a lot more action-packed.
SCORE: 7/10
Best Sellers
TOP-SELLING games for Amiga at Virgin Games Centres.
1 ZOOL
2 LOTUS 3
3 ASSASSIN
4 SENSIBLE SOCCER
5 SILLY PUTTY
6 MONKEY ISLAND 3
7 CIVILISATION
8 GRAHAM TAYLOR
9 THE MANAGER
10 HEAD TO HEAD.
Cheat spots
IF YOU want your opponents to be the same player as yourself in Streetfighter 2 on the SNES, here's a cheat to make your day.
Basically when you see ‘Capcom’ appear on your screen at the start, press Down, R, Up, L, Y, B and after a few seconds you'll both be able to choose the same character.
To get extra lives in the wonderfully titled Magical Hat Turbo Adventure on the Mega Drive, just jump directly on top of the poles.
If you want to skip the first quest in The Legend of Zelda on the NES, you can go straight on to the second one by entering Zelda as your name on the initial screen.
Here are some vital passwords for anyone having trouble with The Rocketeer on the Game Boy.
Simply enter the following codes: 2: 492629312; 3: 435765818; 4: 775545421.
Warm hatch cools insurance bills
Russell Bray
SKY-HIGH insurance premiums mean few people can now afford the luxury of a ‘hot hatch’ but that doesn't mean you will never be able to get behind the wheel of a sporty performance car.
Motor manufacturers have responded to the declining fast car market by producing toned-down versions which retain much of the performance while squeezing into a lower insurance bracket.
The first of this new generation of ‘warm hatches’ is Citroen's ZX Furio, which costs up to £900 less to insure than some rivals.
Yet the Furio is on a par for performance with cars like the Escort XR3i, Rover 216GTi, Astra SRi and Golf GTi.
Its top speed is 117mph, the 1761cc engine develops 103bhp and acceleration to 60mph takes 9.5 seconds.
But insurance is in Group 11 rather than 13 for the Astra, 14 for the Rover and Golf, and 15 for the Escort.
A computer survey of 80 insurance companies revealed that a 24-year-old male living in St Albans with three years' no claims bonus would pay £676 to insure a Furio, compared to £1,344 for a Golf and £1,560 for a 105bhp Escort XR3i.
An insurance broker explained: ‘Performance isn't the only thing assessed when it comes to car insurance.
‘More cars are damaged in accidents than are stolen, for instance, so repair costs are a very big factor.
‘Citroen has done a lot of work in this area, starting back with the BX and this is now paying off with insurance quotes across the model range.’
The Citroen Furio scores on list price too, costing £10,750 compared to £13,100 for the XR3i, £11,955 for the Rover, £12,295 for the Astra and £14,495 for the Golf.
Yet it isn't a stripped-out bargain basement model.
Standard equipment includes electric sunroof, remote control locking and electric windows.
It is light on petrol, too.
The Furio does 30mpg round town, 50mpg at 56mph and 41mpg at 75mph.
Del's dream machine
DEL Boy's beloved Reliant is going upmarket.
But the new model should still be in the right price range for the Only Fools And Horses hero.
The British-based company is working on a nifty two-seater convertible that will retail for less than £10,000.
With an 850cc fuel-injected engine, it will have a top speed of around 95mph with acceleration to 60 in about 11 seconds.
The car, code-named Project R931, will have the added bonus of slotting into a low insurance group, making it ideal for younger drivers.
‘We believe there is potential in the UK and Europe for small-engined, budget-priced sports cars, especially among younger buyers,’ says Chris Winter, Reliant's sales and marketing director.
Reliant's decision to bring out a British-made sports car follows its success with the revamped Sabre, which sells at £15,000.
Deals worth more than £7 million are in the offing, with orders from France, Italy and Malta.
The R931's most serious rival will be the Suzuki Cappuccino, a 657cc modern version of the Midget which goes on sale next year.
Its price is expected to be about £12,000 — which makes the Reliant a better bargain that even Del Boy could afford.
Secret life of Selina
By Jackie Annesley
AS COOL as she is beautiful, Selina Scott has the reputation of being one of Britain's most secretive women.
Earlier this week she launched a withering attack on the Press claiming stories about her personal and professional life were ‘venomous’ and ‘guff’.
So we set out to find the truth behind the mystery — and discovered a woman who forged a dazzling career with precision and determination.
At 13 she took a weekend job with a local paper and promptly demanded a pay rise.
Later she worked in public relations on an island playground for Scotland's hunting and fishing set.
It was the launching pad for a media career that has made her one of the highest paid people on British TV.
What the author had to say
THE Princess of Wales is understood to have been objecting to two claims.
The first was that the Queen had ordered her to go to Korea.
The second was an exchange of letters mentioned in the rewritten final chapter of Andrew Morton's book on Diana.
The book went on sale in New York yesterday and below is what Morton says about the letters.
In another extract Morton makes it clear that the Queen has supported Diana.
THE LETTER
…nothing prepared her for the angry letter she received from the Duke of Edinburgh soon afterwards.
In the early days of her royal career Diana would have burst into tears on receipt of such a tart missive and shrunk back into her shell.
Now she was no longer prepared to accept this onslaught from the royal family.
If she was going to go down, she would go down fighting.
She immediately contacted a friend to recommend a lawyer.
Diana needed advice urgently — not just on drafting a suitable reply to Prince Philip but also on how she should conduct negotiations with the Royal Family in the coming months.
A short-list of five lawyers was drawn up from which Diana made her choice.
Suitably armed, the Princess felt confident enough to write a long and detailed rejoinder to her irate father-in-law which effectively spelled out the way she felt she had been treated by husband, the Royal Family and their courtiers.
THE ALLY
During the crisis Diana found a sympathetic ally at the Palace in the Queen, whose understanding and helpful attitude did much to encourage Diana.
Time to tell us the truth
IT IS unprecedented for Princess Diana to issue a statement denying newspaper stories.
And it is significant that the stories she refers to relate not to her unhappy marriage but directly to the Queen.
She protests that allegations made this week are untrue and hurtful.
Yet it is worth remembering that they were fuelled by intense speculation about her marriage.
And this was prompted by a book which was tacitly approved by her.
When it was published she made no attempt to distance herself from it.
In fact she went out of her way to show her support for the people who had contributed to it.
She can hardly have been surprised that the spotlight stayed on her marriage — her husband is, after all, the man who will be our next king.
Yesterday's denial was the result of pressure from the family firm which is now closing ranks in a very obvious damage limitation exercise.
The Royal firm may now like to consider that in other countries, monarchies have benefited from being open.
Surely the time has arrived for the British Royal Family to put a proper end to the speculation that surrounds it by telling the truth.
Farm farce
JACQUES Delors has come in for a lot of flak for the collapse of the Gatt world trade talks.
But the real hub of the problem is not a personality but the French farmers who are holding the world to ransom.
They want to hang on to their fat subsidies and America is entirely right to say that this is unacceptable.
Britain has a policy of not subsidising industry.
If one company is not competitive enough, another is likely to pick up its business and the ailing firm is left to secure its own survival.
That is the essence of free trade.
Yet we do give subsidies to one group of workers, our farmers.
Hence the sea of yellow rape seed fields that swamp southern England.
They are there for the sole reason that they bring farmers huge subsidies.
It is a ridiculous system which has now ricocheted out of control in France, where the tail of the militant farmers is wagging the government dog.
America's threat to hit back at them is a frightening prospect for all of Europe.
For that reason the French farmers must be stamped on.
It it the duty of the European Commission to do just that.
‘I say, I say’
AN hour is a long time in politics.
Jack Cunningham MP.
I AM having difficulty knowing what today's debate is about.
Geoffrey Dickens on the Maastricht debate.
THEY tried to demoralise me, but as far as I am concerned they were just abusing me.
Teresa Gorman MP on the Whips' pressure to vote for Maastricht.
ALL is not happy in their marriage.
A Royal aide on the marriage of Charles and Diana.
I'M sore, but I have no plans to retire.
Lester Piggott as he recovered from a racing fall.
I STILL believe in a place called Hope.
President-elect Bill Clinton.
IT frightens the life out of me because I fear I'll never work again.
I could so easily pick up a drink.
Keith Chegwin, admitting that he is an alcoholic.
MY heart absolutely bleeds for those people of my age who are now suffering hardship.
Betty Maxwell on the pensioners robbed by her late husband.
John's sales boom is a record
By Andrew Penman
VETERAN bluesman John Lee Hooker has just achieved the honour of becoming the oldest person to have a UK Top 20 hit.
Now 72, he's back in the charts with Boom Boom, a remake of a track he first released 30 years ago.
Frank Sinatra, previous holder of the golden oldie crown, was a mere stripling of 71 when New York New York was a hit for him in 1986.
Hooker nearly notched another record, too — for the longest gap between hits.
His last UK hit, Dimples, was in 1964 but his 28-year absence from the charts was not quite enough to beat Eartha Kitt, who disappeared from the charts in 1955 and didn't return until 1983.
Hooker's success could be even more impressive than it first appears, since some reference works list his date of birth as August 22, 1917.
That would make him 75 — though he claims to be ‘only’ 72, saying he lied about his age years ago so he could join the army.
His life story could have come straight from one of his classic blues songs.
One of 11 children, he was born on a Mississippi farm where his deeply religious father disapproved of the blues.
He ran away as a teenager, got caught, ran away again and settled in Detroit.
Working in car factories by day and playing in blues bars by night, he found success in 1949 with the million-selling Boogie Chillen.
The success of Boom Boom is thanks to the ‘denim connection’— it's the theme for the latest Lee Jeans ad.
Seven places higher at number nine is the latest hit spawned by Levi 501 ads — Erma Franklin's Piece of My Heart.
It's hard to imagine Hooker's age record tumbling, but who knows — perhaps in 2031, Madonna will be making a comeback aged 73…
What a Trade War will mean to you
By Dominic Midgley
A ROW over a million tons of cooking oil seeds threatens thousands of British jobs and could lead to spiralling price rises on our High Streets.
Those humble seeds were the sticking point in negotiations between the US and EC which led to Washington walking out of the Gatt trade talks in Chicago this week.
Now the Americans have fired a warning shot over Europe by tripling the duty on some EC imports.
To most people the term Gatt means very little but the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade which 108 countries have been wrestling over for the past six years is vital to fair trading throughout the world.
And without it, a trade war could devastate already shaky world economies.
The effect on Britain would be disastrous.
The US is our third largest export market after Germany and France, buying goods worth £11.36 billion.
Though France is the primary target when the US hits the first $300 million worth of exports in December — America believes that they are behind the EC's ‘stubbornness’— Britain is next in the firing line.
For the moment the hit list includes white wine, wheat gluten and grapeseed, colza and mustard oils — all widely produced by French farmers.
The EC's subsidies mean farmers can set their prices at a level lower than that of unsubsidised US producers and the US estimates this has cost its farmers $1 billion in lost sales.
Unless a Gatt agreement is reached soon, Washington has vowed to target a further $1.7 billion of EC exports — and this is when Britain will start hurting.
Furniture makers, distilleries and sweet manufacturers are just some of the many British industries that rely heavily on the US export market.
In all, $170 million worth of British goods could be affected.
These firms are already suffer-ing from the US recession and a further hike in duty could be a fatal blow.
The result would be all too familiar.
Thousands of British workers would be forced on to the dole.
But that is not the end of the story.
European producers, denied sales across the Atlantic, may then be forced to try to sell their products to other countries within the EC, forcing prices down and driving companies already operating on tiny margins of profit into yet more serious trouble.
The EC wouldn't stand back and take this American action.
It would retaliate by raising the duty on US imports.
That is where Britain would suffer even more.
Last year we imported £13.7 billion worth of goods from the US.
With extra duty on these goods, prices on the High Street would rocket.
Computers, cereals and a huge amount of raw materials for our industries come from the US.
Were these to be hit then the extra cost could be passed on to shoppers, causing higher inflation and putting even more jobs at risk.
With so much at stake it is understandable that the Department of Trade and Industry is doing everything in its power to avoid all-out war.
‘We really want talks to go on.
You may have heard talk of retaliation but it's too early to talk about that,’ says a spokesman.
But Edward Carr, trade correspondent of The Economist, is not so sure: ‘What's worrying is that there doesn't seem to be anyone in control any more.
Before you always felt that someone's got this under control and they're just going to the wire, but now they've crossed the wire.’
Unless they all retreat, the casualty count could be horrendous.
LOST JOBS?
IF US officials go ahead with their threat to raise tariffs, it will almost certainly increase unemployment in Britain.
Our firms which export to the US may have to raise their American prices, which could lead to fewer sales, cuts in production and ultimately job losses.
Higher tariffs would affect an array of British exports — from gin to furniture, from perfume and toilet water to sweets and biscuits.
Other British manufacturing industries which could expect to be hit by the changes include car tyres, paper goods, ceramics, glassware, pipes, and CDs and audio tapes.
PRICES UP?
THE EC would almost certainly respond to any US tariff rise with duty increases of its own, the cost of which could be passed on to British consumers.
The price of office equipment such as fax machines, photo copiers, answering services and computer networks could climb.
Sitting down to breakfast could become an expensive family business with the cost of raw cereals likely to rise — along with sugar and honey.
A trip to the chemist might leave a bigger hole in our wallets, with US pharmaceuticals costing more.
And don't try running away from it all, because the cost of trainers will probably soar as well.
Mystery date is led down a blind alley
By Jaci Stephen
LONDON Weekend Television has a new show on Saturday nights.
It's called Bandage On A Cowpat.
Or is it White Collared Dog Mess?
The billboard advertisements currently on our streets may have confused you.
They feature an unsavoury brown splodge with a white kerchief around its upper region.
It may be several hours before you realise that the cowpat is a date, and the white bit a blindfold.
Blind Date, y'see?
Geddit?
IT'S a myth that the three words a woman most likes to hear are ‘I love you.’
The three words she adores most are ‘Clinique Bonus Time’.
Debenhams' offer ends today.
Anyone like to swap their Naturally Black Glossy Mascara for my Beige Extra Help Make-Up?
Sex in barn case fuels male myth
By Jaci Stephen
THE story of the twins who died in a barn fire after having sex with the men they were with is a tragic one.
But the prosecution's description of events leading up to the fire was appalling in its sexist implications.
Paul Chadd QC is reported to have said: ‘These three men took the girls to the barn for a common purpose — sexual activity.’
One man was then described as having ‘finished what he wanted to do with Emma.’
The implication is that these women were the sexual victims of men who just wanted a good time.
But that is to deny that women can also want and enjoy sex purely for the fun of it.
Nobody was ‘taken’ anywhere for sex here.
A group of men and women went together, willingly.
That is not to deny the horror of the events which followed.
But to imply that the deaths occurred because the men were the initiators of sexual activity is unforgivable.
If the situation were reversed, women would be protesting outside the court.
It is largely because men have come to believe their own sexual PR that no male protesters were doing so.
Funeral supermarkets
By Jaci Stephen
BRITISH shoppers can look forward to having a bigger say in their deaths when funeral supermarkets hit the streets.
France already has 40 stores full of wreaths, candles, Bibles and so on.
The problem is when to do your shopping.
Do you combine it with the weekly ‘big shop’ at Sainsbury's, wait until you fall ill or hang on for the January sales?
The worry will probably take ten years off your life.
At least, that's what the supermarket managers are hoping.
TV could teach the tabloids a thing or two about intrusion
By Jaci Stephen
THE Princess of Wales is extremely happy in her marriage.
She had a very jolly time in Korea and she does not like being photographed by the Press.
And I'm the Sultan of Brunei.
The Why Don't Newspapers Leave The Poor Royals Alone saga droned on yet again this week in Kilroy on Thursday morning, in a show which threw all the old arguments at representatives (all male) of the Press.
The audience, who knew for a fact that the Press had its facts wrong about the marriage, wittered on about ‘ordinary people’ being able to solve problems in the privacy of their own homes.
They failed to recognise once again that the subjects of the discussion are in no way ‘ordinary people’, either by their own or our admittance.
I won't go into detail about the Press's usual defence about our right to know about people who are, effectively, on our payroll.
What interests me is what discussions such as these reveal about the relationship between television and the Press.
Broadcasters are quick to jump on the Press when they feel public opinion is that the papers have Gone Too Far.
Whether the subject is the Royals or Nazis, researchers are immediately on the phone to hordes of ‘ordinary people’, inviting them into studios all over the country to spout forth.
Television is therefore seen to be taking the moral high ground, the side of the punter against the forces of evil.
In reality, the only difference between the two media is that the public knows how newspapers get their stories — though they don't know that it's exactly the same way as people in television get them.
Yet do we hear any outcry about Roger Cook harassing his ‘victims’?
Oh no, that's good television.
What about the investigative current affairs series World In Action?
Does the public really believe these stories are spilled willingly over friendly cups of tea?
I'm afraid they do, but because they perceive television as entertainment, it goes right over their heads.
Television not only gets its news stories in the same way as newspapers, it gets most of its feature stories from the very tabloids it is so fond of attacking.
Go into any TV studio any time of day and you will see mountains of tabloid newspapers being molested by researchers and producers desperate for an idea.
It's not that the TV folk like to be topical, it's because they rarely have the nous to come up with anything original.
The relationship of television to newspapers is an extremely close one, but it is one which people in television refuse to acknowledge, largely because they believe their product to be morally superior.
But it isn't, and it's about time the public knew that.
Somerset Maugham said that hypocrisy, like adultery or gluttony, cannot ‘be practised at spare moments; it is a wholetime job.’
That certainly seems to be true where television is concerned.
Zek and Misha Halu
By Jaci Stephen
SACRED Sexuality is a doctrine being preached by a couple of Czechs called Zek and Misha Halu, and they are currently holding weekend courses to teach Westerners how to fulfil their own sexual potential.
Using ancient techniques, they teach you how to make love for hours (doesn't that take away the man's fun of rolling over and going to sleep after 45 seconds?).
They also advocate the delights of ‘orgasmic valleys’, which I suspect are different from the kind you find in the Rhondda in Wales.
Presumably you have your first one when they hand you the bill for £195.
Prison Life
By Jaci Stephen
A NEW American magazine called Prison Life is about to hit the stands.
Not only is it ‘the first publication geared towards the unique needs and interests of prisoners,’ it tempts convicts to spend their cash on the mail order goods on its advertisement pages.
American inmates receive between $1,200 and $1,500 per annum, and their needs are various.
Canned asparagus, stereo headsets and satin underwear are among the most popular requisites.
Whatever happened to punishment, for goodness sake?
You wonder what they'll come up with next.
Last Minute Microwaveable Meals from the lads on Death Row?
Saving Energy: Gas Versus Electricity from the executioners?
Why not give prisoners some reading material called Victim Life, about the suffering they inflicted on others in pursuit of the very ‘unique needs and interests’ that put them in prison in the first place?
Eldorado creator who can't watch a single episode
By Ivan Waterman
THE producer who created Britain's most expensive soap, Eldorado, has refused to watch it since she quit.
Julia Smith left after reviews which unanimously declared her £10 million brainchild a disaster of monumental proportions.
She has not seen a single second of the Costa Del Sol soap since.
‘If you part from a lover there is no point in saying goodbye and then seeing him every day,’ she said.
Julia insisted the reviews and subsequent calls for changes from the BBC hierarchy were not the prime reasons for her departure after six months.
‘I was just totally exhausted.
I didn't know what had hit me.
I had never felt like that in my life,’ she said at her London home.
‘It was just the weirdest feeling of my life.
I wasn't having a nervous breakdown but I was unable to operate or function efficiently.
I was through.
‘I was sitting there staring at four white walls wondering what was happening to me.
‘I'd never suffered like that, not to the extent where tears were pouring down my face for no apparent reason.
‘It wasn't even that I felt unhappy.
It was just pure physical exhaustion and then collapse.
But I decided fairly quickly that once the reins were in somebody else's hands, and that somebody knew exactly what they were doing, there was no point in coming back.’
Her successor was her friend Corrine Hollingsworth.
Within weeks she had sacked Kathy Pitkin, who played teenage bride Fizz and told six others she would not be renewing their contracts.
They included Fizz's screen husband Roger Walker, beach bar brothers Darren Newton and Jon Morrey, odd-job man Patch Connolly, German toyboy Kai Maurer and French teenager Arnaud Leduc.
An acting coach was brought in to help the less experienced actors and actresses but BBC sources say at least two more continentals are to go.
Channel 4's Right To Reply tonight focuses on the future of Eldorado.
Julia refused to appear, preferring to speak exclusively to TODAY.
But senior members of the cast reveal their surprise at the lack of training for young, inexperienced colleagues, the lack of rehearsals and the way lacklustre storylines were sent out from London.
Many of them believed that Eldorado's launch in July was six months too early.
Those problems have now been solved, according to executive producer Verity Lambert who believes the BBC will stand by the series.
‘They would be foolish not to,’ she added.
Every episode of Eldorado is still only watched by four million viewers.
But even ITV executives are starting to admit it has improved.
But its fate no longer interests Julia, who created East-Enders as well as Grange Hill and Angels.
She is planning a long holiday in Egypt and America and there has been talk of her working on a new ITV soap called Routes.
But her experiences on Eldorado have left her convinced that bureaucracy is in danger of ruining the final on-screen product.
‘I'm concerned about where television is going.
I'm giving that a lot of thought,’ she said.
‘I'm not happy with it.
I'm really worried, concerned about the integrity of what has been the finest service in the world.’
Emily Lloyd
BRITISH actress Emily Lloyd is all smiles after watching the Hollywood premiere of In The Soup — but she's nursing an aching heart.
Her producer boyfriend Brian Kestner is on the other side of the United States, in New York.
‘We're going to have a bicoastal relationship from now on,’ she said.
Kim Basinger
Kim Basinger is refusing to open an Argentinian disco named after her unless blondes are banned from standing near her in a photo session.
On the flight from Los Angeles, she wants 12 rows of seats around her kept empty.
Boris Becker
TENNIS champion Boris Becker has revealed that his girlfriend Barbara Feltus rescued him from a ‘life crisis’ caused by becoming a teenage millionaire overnight.
‘I was world number one and I didn't have a clue about life.’
The secret life of Selina
By Jackie Annesley
THE Ice Maiden finally lost her cool this week.
In an unprecedented outburst, TV presenter Selina Scott vented her spleen in The Times, saying most of the articles written about her were either ‘guff’ or ‘venomous’.
She likened those who wrote about her to fish gutters and hookers.
And while admitting to being ‘pampered, cosseted and over-paid’, she dismissed reports that she will earn £300,000 a year from January, when she will front a new BBC show Entertainment Express, as untrue and exaggerated.
In a frank and often amusing outburst, full of the colour and character normally missing from her stand-offish image, she put herself forward as being terribly misunderstood.
But how much of that is the fault of Yorkshire-born Selina herself?
She is ferocious and uncompromising in protecting her privacy.
From her days as a newsreader on ITN through to Breakfast Time with Frank Bough and more recently The Clothes Show and BSkyB News, Selina's cool aloofness has tantalised her audience for more than a decade.
At 41, she remains an enigma, her private life far more of a secret than most public figures have managed to maintain.
She has never been romantically linked with anyone and the biggest revelation to emerge in recent times came when a photographer spotted her shopping in Kensington last week and discovered she ate Kellogg's Special K for breakfast.
Had she been able to, Selina might even have tried to prevent that small detail from slipping out.
A journalist in Yorkshire recounts the time he bumped into Selina and her father at York Station.
‘She recognised me and had some idea I wanted to do a story about her on York station.
They slipped off so I wouldn't approach her, which I had no intention of doing at all.’
When covering the wedding of her sister Vanessa in 1981, the same journalist was later phoned by ITN's corporate head of public relations and accused of taking photographs without Selina's proper consent.
This desire for control over all aspects of her life is allied to a single-minded approach to her career which dates back long before she became famous.
Born near Scarborough on May 13, 1951, Selina was brought up as one of four children in a middle-class family where her mother was a journalist and her father a police officer.
Her parents still live in Yorkshire where her mother Betty runs an antique lace shop, simply called The Corner Shop, in the market town of Malton.
By all accounts Selina was a bright child who ended up as head girl of her secondary school in Guisborough near Middlesbrough.
Signs of the tenacious Selina ambition had already begun to show at the age of 13 when she secured her first job on the Darlington and Stockton Times.
She was paid a few shillings to cover funerals, weddings and jumble sales at weekends.
However, when she felt confident enough, she attempted to renegotiate her pay deal and was promptly fired.
It was to be the first in a long line of pay battles that would give her a reputation for being one of the toughest negotiators in the business.
‘Maybe this childhood trauma left me permanently scarred where men and money were concerned,’ she was to say later in a rare mention of her childhood days.
At 18 she went to East Anglia University in Norwich to study English and American Studies but there was little sign then that she was a girl who would go far.
She neither wrote for the student magazine, nor was particularly remembered.
At a reunion of her year at the university last week, not one of her dozen or so classmates could recall the tall slim Yorkshire girl with light brown hair.
After university, she pressed on with her ambition to be a journalist, joining Scotland's Sunday Post in Dundee.
Editor Bill Anderson remembers her as ‘very much a trainee reporter’ who spent most of her time writing human interest stories for the centre pages.
‘She was a very well educated girl with a lively mind — a girl with ambition,’ says Anderson.
‘But I have to be honest and say I never marked her as someone who was going to become a great journalist.
She was more cut out for television.’
Although Selina's career was still in its infancy, she was already building up barriers against the outside world.
‘I wouldn't have described her as sociable — she was a very private person, never really a mixer,’ says Anderson.
‘She seemed to know where she was going and had her eyes focused on that rather than her colleagues.’
Selina's next move might have seemed an odd one for someone out to make a name for herself.
At 24 she got a job in charge of public relations on the remote Selinaish Isle of Bute.
But she knew what she was doing.
It was the playground of Scotland's rich hunting and fishing set.
‘There were always plenty of boyfriends — Lord this, someone that.
She had a busy social life,’ says Eileen Boath, who worked as Selina's assistant in the tourist office in the main town of Rothesay from 1976 to 1978.
It was also a job in which Selina was able to call the shots, or so she thought.
‘Selina didn't always get what she wanted,’ says Eileen, now in her 70s.
‘There were a lot of decisions made on the mainland — and she was not someone to be sat on.’
Eileen remembers Selina as a bubbly girl who helped to scrub the floors of the tourist office, made her own clothes and lived in a small cottage.
But after two years, the frustrations of the job led Selina to move on in search of a new challenge.
Not everyone on the island was sorry to see her go.
‘I liked Selina very much but a lot of people in Rothesay didn't.
It was sheer jealousy.’
This was to be a common reaction to Selina as her career gathered pace.
Her next job was at Grampian Television in Aberdeen where she met the man who shaped her TV career.
That man was Ted Brocklebank, who employed her as a reporter for the nightly news programme North Tonight, and continues to be her mentor today.
When Selina's new hour-long documentary on King Carlos of Spain is broadcast at Christmas, Ted Brocklebank's name will be on the credits as executive producer.
‘If anyone knows Selina it is Ted,’ says Bill Anderson.
But, like all those close to her, Ted is not giving anything away about Selina.
It is testament to her power of control that few people dare talk openly about her.
‘Meeting her for the first time was nerve-racking to say the least,’ says one insider at BSkyB.
‘She's terribly sweet but you almost feel you are in the company of royalty.’
In fact, the Princess of Wales — a woman Selina is often compared with — must wish she was able to keep the lid on her private life as tightly as Selina has.
There are no talkative friends or ‘Squidgy’ tapes lurking in Selina's background.
But there are most definitely critics, none more so than the BBC's Peter Estell.
In a document leaked to TODAY earlier this year Estell revealed that Selina ordered guests not to kiss her and said her performance as Terry Wogan's stand-in proved where her interests lay — in ‘how much money people earn and what clothes they wore’.
But such criticisms were rebutted this week by Selina herself with the simple argument that whatever her talents are, one of them lies in getting people to watch her on the television.
Perhaps rock star Bryan Adams, the victim of Selina's odd questioning on the Wogan show, offered the best explanation for the success Selina will be looking for when she interviews celebrities on Entertainment Express next year.
He said: ‘She's attractive and if she wants to talk about my Land Rover and muddy boots, why not?
I like rudeness.’
Ultimately Selina Scott's face enables all to be forgiven.
‘We laughed all day, and still won the tournament’
MY HUSBAND Leslie taught me to play golf when I was about 20.
As all the world knows I'm now 61 so it follows I've been playing for yonks, interrupted only by a broken leg and two children.
It is desperately important to have an outside interest if you're in politics.
Golf was mine, though I often found it more of an aggravation than a relaxation.
My home club is Coombe Hill in Kingston, Surrey, and I play off a handicap of 17.
I played off seven at my best — politics left me little time for practice, but lack of concentration was the real problem.
I would be addressing a putt and instead of thinking about it some political problem would come to mind.
With so many years of golf behind me, it was a task to recall my best round.
But one does stand out.
It was at the beautiful Vintage course in Palm Springs, Florida, one glorious sunny day 10 years ago.
There were four of us: Leslie, a Canadian lady named Jackie Desmarere, singer Howard Keel (who kept singing Oh, What a Beautiful Morning) and myself.
I don't know whether it was the mountain scenery, the flowers, the sunshine, the company or the singing, but for some reason everything gelled that day.
We each played superb golf.
I can't remember any particular hole, any particular stroke, just a glorious blaze of heaven.
I played a similar round at about the same time at the Nabisco/ Dinah Shore Tournament at Mission Hills, California.
My partner for the event was the marvellous American player Muffin Spencer-Devlin, who turned up with a bag which had ‘Save the Whales’ written all over it.
We laughed and joked throughout and won the tournament.
I am convinced that good play has something to do with relaxation and good company.
Dame Shirley was the leader of Westminster City Council from 1983 to 1991, and Lord Mayor of London from 1991 to 1992.
A to Z of Golf
Nigel O'Mahony
CHIP: Probably the hardest shot in golf.
There is nothing worse than playing two superb shots to get within spitting distance of the green on that monster par five, then fluffing two chips and three-putting to end up with the dreaded double-bogey.
On the other hand, the satisfaction of chipping straight into the cup has to be one of the most satisfying ways of holing out.
Just ask Larry Mize.
He was up against Greg Norman and Seve Ballesteros in a play-off for the 1987 US Masters.
Ballesteros dropped out after bogeying the first sudden-death hole and Mize and Norman continued.
Mize looked in trouble after they'd played their second shots.
Norman pitched his into the heart of the green and had an outside chance for birdie.
But Mize pushed his approach out to the right and had to get his chip close to be in with a chance of halving the hole.
He did even better than that.
It pitched just short of the green and lazily rolled all the way into the cup.
Norman had to hole his putt to stay in the hunt — and failed.
COURSE: Eighteen holes that professionals can breeze around in less than 2½ hours but which can take a Sunday fourball anything up to seven.
CLARET JUG: It is no accident that golf's most famous trophy, presented every year since 1872 to the winner of the Open, is a claret jug.
When golf clubs were originally formed they were used more as eating and drinking houses and the favourite tipple was claret.
The trophy was first won by Tom Morris Jnr.
CLUB: The maximum number of clubs you are permitted to carry is 14.
Most players break this down to three woods, ten irons, and a putter.
The penalty for carrying an extra club is two shots for every hole played with the wrong number, to a maximum of four strokes.
If you accidentally break one you are allowed to replace it.
But if in a moment of madness you do a John McEnroe and smash it to smithereens, all you get is the satisfaction.
Deliberately broken clubs may not be replaced.
CUP: Often used instead of hole.
The most difficult thing to find on a golf course.
CUT: After yips, this is the most feared word for all professional golfers.
The cut is the figure under or over par that determines who qualifies for the final two rounds of a tournament.
One of the most consistent players in beating cuts last season was Nick Faldo, who missed the top ten in only six of his 23 tournaments.
Railing at the hazards of Aberdovey
Mark Simpson
WHEN respected pro Ian Woosnam wants a quiet game in winter he often pops along to Aberdovey.
Set beside the estuary of the river Dovey in Cardigan Bay, it is a 6,445-yard par-71, but naturally Wee Woosie goes round in the mid-60s.
‘It is the course my soul loves best,’ says golf writer Bernard Darwin, and it's easy to see why.
Here among the Welsh sandhills you will find fast greens, firm fairways and crisp turf — even in the depths of winter.
Woosie aside, most of us might score closer to the 100 with which Bernard Darwin won the first official Club meeting in 1893.
Little seems to have changed in the years since then.
A description of the course penned in 1892 holds true: ‘Like many of the best links, the Aberdovey course lies partly among the sand-hills and partly on the low ground just inside.
‘Thus is obtained the combination of good sporting hazards with long stretches of very fine turf.’
A railway line running along the eastern side is one of the more interesting hazards.
A member playing the 16th hit a passing train recently.
The driver stopped to complain but was told it was his own fault — if he had been on time the ball would have missed.
At many courses, if you've struck one hazard too many you can nip into the bar for some refreshment after the first nine.
Not at Aberdovey.
It is an out-and-back course where the tenth tee is farthest from the clubhouse.
The 407-yard par-four 11th has one of the most challenging tee shots — three ditches, heavy rough and a bunker await the wayward drive.
The yardage booklet advises: ‘It demands a longish tee shot up the left, but the best approach is from the right.’
Confused?
I was.
Depending on where your drive ends up you will face a tricky second shot to a long, narrow green.
There is a saying in golf: ‘There's hope for a hooker.’
Forget it on the 443-yard par-four 18th, unless you're left-handed.
An accurate drive is crucial because a hook means a certain bogey, or worse.
A welcoming ditch runs up the left-hand side of the fairway.
‘If you go to the left of the ditch you will be in real trouble with reeds rushes, bushes and goodness knows what,’ professional John Davies warned me.
Green fees were a shilling a day when the club was founded in 1892.
They have gone up somewhat since then, but Aberdovey still represents some of the best value golf in Britain.
As the club motto says: ‘Os na bydd gryf bydd gyfrwys.’
And you can't argue with that.
Club pro: John Davies.
Course length: 6445 yards.
Winter green fees: weekdays £17 a day; weekend £19 a day.
Tel: 0654 767602.
Bunker play hotline
YOU can call the Golf Doctor, John Mulgrew, this week for advice on BUNKER PLAY on 0891 400 651.
John is also on hand if you have a problem with SLICE.
For this ailment call him on 0891 400 650.
Calls cost 36p a minute (cheap rate), 48p (at other times).
Or you can write to John: The Golf Doctor, TODAY International Golf Club, TODAY Newspaper, 1 Virginia Street, London E1 9BS.
Time waits for this Man
Anna Goy
IMAGINE you were asked to design the perfect island.
You might start with mountains carpeted in heather overlooking valleys and sparkling streams, lush meadows and forests.
Add a mild climate and miles of beaches where sea-birds swoop on their fishing grounds from lofty cliffs rising from the foam.
If this sounds familiar, you have probably already discovered the Isle of Man.
‘Traa de loor’, meaning time enough, is a favourite saying on the stress-free island which seems to have been trapped in a time-warp.
Leave the palm trees and pastel terraces of Ramsey and drive north across the flat plain stretching to the Point of Ayre, where the lighthouse blinks rhythmically beyond a great moorland garden of yellow gorse and purple heather.
Or drive south from Ramsey to Douglas on a road that snakes upwards into the collar of cloud that rests on the shoulders of Snaefell, the highest mountain on Man.
Douglas, the capital, is a busy town by island standards with a long beach and traditional Victorian promenade.
The Victorian station is straight from the pages of Thomas The Tank Engine, and the steam railway is still operative.
Douglas also has one of the best museums in Britain with sound effects and videos enhancing the displays.
The picturesque harbour town of Castleton, the ancient capital, is also worth a visit with its fine nautical museum and castle.
The Isle of Man is full of surprises.
Who would expect it to be the home of the biggest water-wheel in Europe?
The wheel, at Laxey, pumps water from the lead mines, now disused but once a major source of employment for Manxmen.
The great Irish sea-god Manannan Mac Llyr made the island his home and still occasionally throws up a veil of mist to hide his erstwhile kingdom from passing pirates.
The island has survived Viking, Scottish and British occupations but maintains an endearing independence.
I left with some enchanting images, from the old woman by her fireside in Cregneish Folk Village, quietly treading her wheel while speckled hens strutted back and forth across her threshold, to the lone figure in the rain on Douglas beach digging for clams.
There was much left to see by the end of my trip but ‘traa de loor’, I shall just have to come back again…
DEPARTURES
Everyman Holidays (0624 629914) Palace Hotel, 3 nts B&B, with flights from Liverpool, £175.
Small hotels, 3 nts half-board, with sea travel £99.
Enquiries: Department of Tourism, The Sea Terminal, Douglas, Isle of Man.
Sun, sea and not a sound..
By Sarah Whitfield King
HOLIDAY resorts don't come much louder than Benidorm.
So you'll be surprised to learn that the town's tourist bosses are now taking urgent steps to control late-night noise.
A map has been produced to show exactly what level of decibels the music in each street is allowed to reach.
The map is colour-coded, easy to follow and essential for anyone booking a holiday in the resort.
It will be particularly useful for early risers who once had to endure deafening music from Benidorm bars until the small hours.
All they have to do is pick a hotel or apartment away from the disco areas.
Any bar or disco which exceeds its permitted decibel limit can be shut down on the spot for the night by police.
So far eight bars have been raided.
The map is the latest step in a series of moves the resort is making to clean up its tarnished image.
‘We have already spent £2.5 million on making beaches clean and safe and regularly testing the sea water,'says Juan Ruiz of the Benidorm Tourist Office.
‘Each morning 60 beach cleaners make sure everything is spotless.
The result is that we have three much-prized Blue Flags for our beaches.’
At the height of the summer season there can be up to 42,000 people soaking up the sun in Benidorm, so the litter problem can be awesome.
But new measures have been taken, and sweeping machines constantly ply the main streets collecting rubbish.
While no one could possibly argue that Benidorm is attractive, it is well-run and very popular.
Thomson's Young At Heart programme to the resort is 60 per cent sold for the winter, with a 6 per cent increase in sales.
Repeat bookings account for 73 per cent of holidays sold, so Benidorm must be doing something right.
What certainly need attention, however, are the Sixties hotel blocks.
Many have not changed their decor for 20 years or more.
Bedrooms are sparsely furnished and the dining rooms look drab.
What little service there is at meal times also leaves much to be desired.
But no one can deny that Benidorm has the perfect late autumn/winter climate.
This week it was 74F at lunchtime, with clear blue skies and radiant sun.
The pollution-free air has made the World Health Authority recommend the Costa Blanca as one of the most healthy places to live.
This month there are some excellent deals from tour operators, such as Portland which is offering a week's half-board for £119.
But I would opt for a self-catering package which enable you to take full advantage of the excellent weekly markets.
Fruit and vegetables are half the price of home and sacks of oranges and lemons are virtually given away.
If you can't be bothered to cook, there is a wealth of choice for restaurants.
Spanish, Chinese, French, Indian, and McDonalds all vie for attention against English-run establishments.
For those determined to stick to home cooking, you can still get roast beef, gravy, chips, salad, ice-cream, beer and coffee — all for Pounds 2.70.
Local fish is worth seeking out since the area has one of the largest fishing fleets in the Mediterranean.
It is sold in markets or the well-stocked supermarkets such as the Mercadona, near the centre of town.
The best buy in Benidorm is leather, and particularly shoes.
The Danieli shoe supermarket sells leather shoes for between £6 and £20, while Skorpios, along the same Avenue Mediterraneo, has soft glove-type leather shoes and boots for around £35.
There are no bargains in the clothes shops, however.
Cheap end designs are tacky and ill-made and classic fashions are expensive.
But now that the resort is quieter and cleaner, it more than compensates for the lack of clothes bargains.
And with luck we should see the other tourist giants in Spain — Torremolinos and Lloret — moving along the same lines.
If Spain is to keep up its tourist figures the resorts need to move with the times by providing clean beaches and modernised hotels.
DEPARTURES
Viva Air (071–830 0011) fly daily from Heathrow to Alicante, apex return £124.
Must include Sat night, max stay 1 month.
Portland (071–388 5111) has one week's half-board £119, or full-board £125, departing on Nov 26).
Enterprise (061–831 7000) has one week self-catering £109, departing on November 21.
Cosmos (061–480 5799) has one week self-catering £164, departing Nov 14.
Thomson (081–200 8733) has one week half-board (ex-Newcastle, departing Nov 14) for £189, self-catering £139, or two weeks from Luton, departing Nov 24.
Spanish Tourist Office, 58 St James's Street, London SW1.
Bowled over by Vail's powder paradise
By Richard Holledge
THERE'S nothing quite like powder snow.
The way it slips down the neck of your new one-piece after you've crossed your tips and plunged head-first into the stuff.
The way it fills up behind your goggles, rendering you a mountainside Magoo.
Soaking gloves, damp socks…
Oh, the joy of it.
Well, there's a lot of powder snow in Vail, Colorado.
The resort's legendary Back Bowls have over 2,600 acres of the stuff.
Wide, wild and challenging, the runs have evocative names such as Morning Thunder, Dragon's Teeth, Yonder Gully and Cow's Face.
They come alive with Pepi's Wedel Weeks — seven days dedicated to powder fanatics.
Run by ex-Austrian ski racer Pepi Gramshammer, Wedel is the system of short turns perfected by Austrian ski schools.
Keen skiers are taken through the turning techniques, slalom and bumps.
And, of course, they can glory in the unending powder of the Bowls.
What's nice about the weeks, which are graced by the rich and famous including tennis ace Martina Navratilova, is that people return year after year, creating a friendly atmosphere.
But for newcomers it is daunting to stand on the brink of Genghis Khan — one of the runs in China Bowl — and gaze down at unending acres of snow.
‘Come on you guys,’ exhorts Linda, our daredevil guide, ‘Let's get to the edge of the envelope.’
I was still trying to work out what that meant as she flurried off up to her bobble hat in snow.
Once you fall into the rhythm of off-piste powder it is intoxicating.
And it is quiet.
The Back Bowls have only two main lifts so there is none of the mechanical clanking that blights so many resorts.
Skiing in the front half of Vail is, however, a technological miracle.
High-speed lifts land you on manicured pistes after well-disciplined and good-tempered queueing: ‘After you.
No, after you!
Have a nice day.’
The slopes above the village are full of tidy runs through pine woods.
There are a few serious black runs, but for the most part they are ideal for beginners and intermediate skiers.
And this being America, there are areas for families with Go Slow signs to stop bombers wreaking havoc.
DEPARTURES
The Lodge, Vail, has Wedel weeks starting Nov 29, Dec 6, Dec 13 and Jan 9 for $1,230-$2,195, includes lodging, instruction, lift passes.
Orient Express, London,(071–928 6000).
Crystal Ski (081–399 5144) 1wk in a catered chalet in Vail £549, 2wks £739 (Jan), includes American Airlines scheduled flights.
Ski and boot hire 6-days £37.50, Lift pass £121.87.
Details: US Travel And Tourism Administration, 22 Sackville St, London, W1.
Great escapes
Sarah Whitfield King
A DAY trip to Lapland to meet Santa is being organised by Airtours on December 13.
The action-packed day costs £249 and includes being met at the airport by Rudolf the reindeer, a trip to the Arctic Circle and Santa Village, snowmobiling and reindeer rides, a buffet lunch and a chance to do some shopping.
Flights from Gatwick.
Other day trips planned include Berlin, Prague or Paris for £99.
Details: 0706–260 000.
SEALINK has a new Ski Link package for £159 from December 1 to March 31 which includes a return ferry crossing for a car and two passengers, with a choice of three routes to France.
Extensive personal ski insurance and AA five-star vehicle cover is also included.
Additional adults can go for £49 and children £39.
For details: 0233 647047.
FLY to Australia or New Zealand for £499 return this month with Austravel.
Flights to Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns, Melbourne, Perth, Sydney and Auckland are with Britannia Airways from Gatwick.
Details: 071–734 7755.
A NEW fixed-price voucher scheme to stay in Spain's Paradors (hotels) is available through Five Clouds Travel until June 1993.
Advance bookings are not necessary and there is no time limit on your stay.
Vouchers cost £78 for a double room and include a buffet breakfast.
Details: 071–497 1222.
A THREE-NIGHT, B&B break is on offer for £69 from 20 Premier House properties until January 31.
The lodges and inns stretch from the Gosling Bridge in Carlisle, Cumbria, to the Caldicotte Arms at Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire.
The accent is on a warm atmosphere, good food and en-suite bedrooms with colour TVs.
The deal includes a £10 voucher towards an evening meal.
Details: 0925 413416.
GLOBESPAN has cut £40 off its Gatwick to Toronto fares until early December.
The new fare is now £199 return.
Los Angeles fares from Heathrow are £269 return, children £205.
Details: 0800 252701.
On Sale
By Steve Howard
SPEARHEADING the Christmas build-up this week is Walt Disney's animated classic Cinderella, £14,99.
FANS of Fatal Attraction will be fascinated to know that the director's cut containing a totally different ending is now available (CIC, £12.99).
BBC Video this week brings you the show which saw comic genius Harry Enfield bury Loadsamoney and introduce 20 new characters.
Harry Enfield's Television Programme: Series One costs £10.99.
Video View
By Steve Howard
A YOUNG woman suckling a baby is one of life's most natural and delightful scenes — but not in The Hand That Rocks The Cradle (Hollywood Pictures, 15, out Nov 10).
The woman here is a demented nanny who is surreptitiously breastfeeding the child of the mother she intends to destroy.
It's just one horrific aspect of a tremendously suspensful film underpinned by extraordinary performances from Rebecca De Mornay as the mad minder and Annabella Sciorra as the unsuspecting mum.
Claire Bartel (Sciorra) has just had her second baby and needs a nanny so she can get on with her hobby of building a greenhouse.
She hires Peyton Flanders (De Mornay), a stunning blonde with a sympathetic manner.
What she doesn't realise is that this is the widow of the doctor who shot himself after Claire complained of sexual abuse at his hands.
Worse still, Peyton lost her own child with the shock of it all and now intends to make Claire pay.
Mary Poppins she ain't.
After winning the love of Claire's daughter and the respect of her husband Mike (Matt McCoy), Peyton begins a systematic campaign to ruin her employer's life, culminating in a chilling climax when she goes on the rampage.
The Hand That Rocks The Cradle sets back the cause of nannies by 50 years — but boy, what a film.
THE bleakest film I've seen this year has to be Rush (Warner, 18 out Nov 11).
Jason Patric plays narcotics cop Jim Raynor who goes undercover with female cop Kristen Cates (Jennifer Jason Leigh) to nail dealer William Gaines (Gregg Allman).
Together they build an impressive wall of evidence — but their success carries a big downer.
Raynor becomes a coke fiend himself while Cates hovers perilously close.
There's little hope in this film — the forces of law are as bad in their way as the drug barons.
The scenes of Raynor injecting himself are sickening and his drug withdrawal sequence is harrowing.
But no one can blame Rush for telling it like it is.
SCOTT BAKULA of TV's Quantum Leap displays his wider talents as a cop with a conscience in the true life tale In The Shadow Of A Killer (Odyssey, 15 out now).
He plays New York detective David Mitchell, a hero with 30 arrests to his credit but an aversion to killing.
When Mitchell nabs a Mafia gangster and cop killer the district attorney's office sees it as a perfect opportunity to exercise the death penalty.
But Mitchell won't condone the taking of life and soon it seems both good guys and bad guys want him out of the way.
This is a thoughtful movie with its fair share of action scenes.
EVER since Dances With Wolves, the American Indian has enjoyed an enhanced reputation on our screens.
That new-found respect is maintained in The Last Of His Tribe (New Age, 15, out Nov 11).
In 1911 a man dressed in buckskin and simply known as Ishi (Graham Greene) is found foraging in the bins outside a California slaughterhouse.
He is quickly shipped off to San Francisco to be studied by a German scientist (Jon Voight), and found to be the last survivor of a tribe massacred by the White Man.
As the film progresses we come to appreciate Ishi's dignity and the courage of his now departed people.
Fascinating, powerful stuff.
Me and My TV
Graham Bridgstock
THE actor Jack Watling put his finger on it.
As we sat in the ATV canteen after recording the first eight episodes of The Power Game, he said: ‘Think of all the fame stored up in those rolls of tape.
You have no idea.’
He was right — I didn't.
But I should have done because there were only two channels in those days and people were addicted to TV.
‘Saw it last night,’ they'd say next morning.
Or: ‘Oh, that Wilder!
He's a bit of a bastard, isn't he?’
It's 26 years now since The Power Game was screened and 13 since Telford's Change.
Yet people still associate me with them.
Mind you, some do a double-take when they see me in the flesh.
‘Weren't you Peter Barkworth?’ they say.
‘Still am,’ I reply.
With two abodes, I have two of everything.
One of my TV sets lives in my cottage beside Hampstead Heath, the other in my penthouse by the sea at Folkestone.
My homes are a far cry from the attic flat in Bloomsbury where I had my first set in 1958.
Back then, I'd watch Tonight before heading to the West End to play in Roar Like A Dove.
Now, as a rule, the Six O'Clock News is the first thing I watch, then Newsroom South East.
When I'm working in the theatre, I tend to steer clear of TV dramas, though I have a soft spot for P D James and Ruth Rendell thrillers.
They're stunning.
So too Summer's Lease.
And Coronation Street and EastEnders are brilliant.
Some programmes are unmissable if I'm home, like Blind Date, Dame Edna Everage and Antique Roadshow — Hugh Scully just gets better.
Master Chef is a bit too nouvelle cuisine for me, but I love watching it.
After a while, you even like Loyd Grossman's accent.
Curiously, I find snooker riveting though I don't play myself.
TV didn't exist when I was a boy.
We made our own entertainment.
Mother played the piano, sister Hazel danced, father blew the Swanee whistle, and I did recitations.
Friends who called were subjected to our party pieces.
One of mine was an impersonation of Winston Churchill saying Mary Had A Little Lamb.
I was 19 and still studying at RADA when I made my first TV appearance.
Father had given up tobacco and alcohol to send me £2 15s (Pounds 2.75) a week to make ends meet.
The part was in a live 20-minute play from Alexandra Palace about a tart on the walls of Jericho.
Barbara Jefford, a fellow student, played the tart and I the guard sent to capture her.
My line was: ‘You better come with me.’
Telford's Change is one of my favourite TV memories.
It was my idea originally.
Writer Brian Clark gave me the persona of a middle-class, middle-aged professional with a wife problem and for a time it became my trademark.
Life became so stressful that when I was making The Power Game the doctor put me on Mogadon and I became hooked for a while.
A viewer with the same problem wrote to me, saying her doctor refused to give her any more and she was on the point of suicide.
‘There is a light at the end of the tunnel,’ I replied.
‘It will take time.
But you WILL get over it.’
She reckons those words saved her life.
To this day, she still writes.
Preview
By Steve Howard
DESERT Victory, which relates how Monty's Eighth Army drove back Rommel's Afrika Korps at El Alamein 50 years ago, is widely regarded as one of the greatest war documentaries ever made.
After 12 days and nights of fierce fighting, the Germans and Italians were finally routed, leaving 20,000 dead.
The Oscar-winning documentary is the Allies' own record of that historic turning point.
The tape is released by DD Video and costs £12.99.
Credit card orders: 081–863 8819.
We're still forging ahead
TODAY is roaring ahead with thousands of new readers attracted by our unique mix of hard news, great supplements and bright sports coverage.
Going against the trend of static or falling sales by other newspapers, our October circulation was up a fabulous 57,403 on the same month last year.
More than 1.5 million readers love our dedication to proper news rather than propaganda.
Time and again we have scooped our rivals with the top stories and pictures.
And our supplements — Assets, Good Taste, Health Works, Entertainment Today and TV.
This Week — give super added value.
Our average daily sale of 532,370 from May to October was up almost 13 per cent on the same period for last year.
TODAY is Britain's fastest growing newspaper.
And we're still only 25p.
Last chance to save Britain
THIS is the week which could make or break John Major's Government and the British economy.
On Thursday the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, makes his Autumn Statement.
Most years that is an uninteresting financial speech but this time it is crucial.
The Government has not had an economic policy since it was forced to withdraw from the European Monetary System and let the value of the pound plummet.
Mr Lamont has already given some clues about what will replace his former failed policy, but only when we hear Thursday's statement will we know exactly what he intends to do.
At least, we hope we do.
For there is not much time left to pull the economy out of the slump into which it is hurtling and further delay will be fatal.
If Mr Major and his Chancellor are still not sure of the size of their task, they will find it in the latest TODAY/ICM Feelgood Index, which measures consumer confidence.
It shows that however bad things are now — and they are pretty desperate — they are going to get much worse.
The Government has insisted that confidence is needed before the economy can improve.
If that is right, there is little hope unless they can quickly persuade people to start buying again.
On Thursday Mr Lamont will announce the results of the bitter and heated arguments over public spending.
Whatever he says is bound to be controversial, though that does not matter as long as it is not provocative.
What does matter is that the Cabinet has got right not only the level of spending but where the money is to go.
It has to be directed at providing jobs, for that is one of the two keys in what needs to be a two-pronged attack on the recession.
The other prong must be to create a climate which encourages businesses to invest — not just in equipment and plant but in workers.
John Major cannot afford many more stumbles, let alone disasters.
But neither can the British economy.
The Autumn Statement, and the interest rate cut that should accompany it, should be the first light of a new economic dawn.
Beating bigotry
THE enormous turn-out of marchers in Berlin yesterday was not just another demonstration.
It showed that the German people have learned the lesson of the 1930s.
Sixty years ago when the Nazis began their attacks on Jews and foreigners, ordinary citizens stood back and let it happen.
The consequence was the death of millions.
Now the same ugly forces of racial hatred are beginning to rear their heads again.
But, as yesterday's march showed, this time the vast majority of decent Germans will not stand idly by.
There is a world recession today as there was in the 1930s.
There is enormous social unrest, as there was then.
Yet these can be overcome if people unite to show their contempt for the cruel, vicious minority.
It is right for the rest of the world to be concerned at what is happening in Germany.
Those who fight against it there deserve our support and appreciation.
Deadly verdict
JOHN Major has a lot to worry about but yesterday he received a truly bitter blow.
Lord Owen, who as Dr David Owen ruined the Labour Party, the Social Democrats, the Liberals and the Alliance, said that the Prime Minister is doing a good job.
Just when you think things can't get any worse…
This is the unromantic truth about the IRA, Mr Clinton
Colonel Michael Dewar
YESTERDAY was the anniversary of the Enniskillen bombing, when a Remembrance Day crowd was cut down by an act of indiscriminate terrorism.
No democratic government, and certainly not that of the US, could gain much mileage from giving political status to the perpetrators of carnage such as this.
But it was always feared that a Clinton victory in an American Presidential election might lead to a shift in US policy with regard to the Northern Ireland problem.
And now it looks as if the worst fears of the Foreign Office have been realised.
In an official letter to Bruce Morrison, an Irish American and a former congressman, the President-elect has demanded that the British Government should introduce more effective safeguards against what he calls ‘the wanton use of lethal force’ by the security forces.
Clinton also refers to ‘collusion between the security forces and the Protestant para-military group’.
In another passage of the three-page letter he hints that his administration will resist the extradition of suspected terrorists from the US back to Britain: ‘We will work to ensure that political considerations do not hinder the workings of our courts in asylum cases.’
If any further evidence is needed to underline the growing possibility of a US-British rift over Northern Ireland, Clinton emphasises his support for the ‘MacBride Principles’, which would require American firms based in Northern Ireland to abandon their operations there unless they complied with strict anti-discrimination criteria.
In saying that, Clinton is climbing aboard a bandwagon which already has considerable momentum in the US.
The MacBride Principles have already been adopted by 24 states.
It may just be that Clinton is taking advantage of the transition period until he takes over the Presidency to air some personal prejudices and satisfy the grievances of some of his supporters.
He may consider himself to be a latter-day President Kennedy, or be tempted to follow the pro-IRA line taken by Senator Edward Kennedy.
But the demands and realities of Presidential office should cause him to consider his foreign policy statements more carefully.
In the two months before he assumes power, Clinton must familiarise himself with what is really going on in Northern Ireland.
President Bush claimed, during the election campaign, that his ‘dog Millie knew more about foreign policy than Bill Clinton’ and there is much evidence to suggest that it is not Clinton's strongest card.
Let us look at his accusations.
First, he suggests the Government should clamp down on the ‘wanton use of lethal force’ by the security forces.
It is not the security forces who have wantonly and consistently used lethal force during the past 20 years.
It has been the para-military organisations, notably the IRA, who have murdered and maimed innocent men, women, and children.
There have been occasions when the security forces have over-reacted and strayed from the strictly enforced doctrine of ‘minimum force’.
But if the lives of members of security forces or of those for whom they are responsible are in imminent danger, then the minimum degree of force that is appropriate may well be lethal force.
That is the awful decision which soldiers have had to take on hundreds of occasions.
Because they are highly-trained professionals, prompt action has saved many innocent lives and accounted for terrorist gunmen engaged in the act of indiscriminate killing.
In a tiny minority of cases mistakes have been made.
In these, soldiers have been tried for manslaughter or, if negligence can be proved, for murder.
But trying to keep the peace between the two communities in Northern Ireland is no enviable task, particularly when both are apt to turn against the peacemaker.
It is doubtful that any other army could have coped without resorting to massive retaliations.
Clinton's second allegation, that there has been collusion between the security forces and Protestant para-military groups, is based on a very few isolated cases in which part-time members of the Ulster Defence Regiment (UDR) have been found guilty of passing on sensitive information.
Such actions are entirely reprehensible.
But, in a highly polarised society such as Northern Ireland, some cases are inevitable.
There is no evidence to suggest it is widespread.
The few incidents that have occurred have been dealt with promptly and severely, resulting in harsh jail sentences.
The British Government has taken every possible precaution to safe-guard sensitive information and screen prospective recruits for the UDR.
As for President elect Clinton's oblique references to the asylum laws, one can only assume his administration will have no intention of interfering with the due processes of law in the US.
The IRA pretence that it is a ‘political organisation’ is having less and less resonance around the world as its increasingly desperate terror tactics remove any lingering doubts about its real intentions.
The British Government has introduced tough anti-discrimination legislation.
Of course more needs to be done, but what will not help is discouraging investment in Ulster.
Such action would only damage the interests of both communities.
Clinton's final suggestion is the most bizarre of all: the appointment of an American peace envoy to the province, a suggestion that would be akin to the British Government announcing its intention to send a peace envoy to the riot-torn streets of Los Angeles.
One can only assume that Clinton means well.
The trick will be to turn his good intentions into policies that will work in the real world.
Progress is made slowly in Northern Ireland but people of goodwill will eventually succeed in constructing a peace.
Until then the security forces remain the ultimate bulwark against the breakdown of society.
Clinton would do well to support them.
'Allo 'Allo, I zink I 'ave found ze real Nouvion
Ivan Waterman in Nouvion
THE brown cow eyed us suspiciously as we approached.
Of course, I was not fooled.
I know ze difference between a piece of boeuf and those decidedly dodgy British airmen Carstairs and Fairfax.
Leaning across a fence I whispered: ‘Leesen varry carfully, I shall say zis only wernce’ into its big floppy ears.
It promptly bolted, along with its three companions.
It was only a minor setback.
As we headed into the French village of Nouvion, immortalised in the BBC comedy series 'Allo 'Allo, we would surely find Rene and Edith Artois, Yvette and Mimi, Crabtree the gendarme, Michelle of the Resistance, Herr Flick and Helga.
As the long-running show begins its final series tonight, TODAY had decided to send out a reconnaissance party to see how the real Nouvion — the name was chosen by in Nouvion writers Jeremy Lloyd and David Croft sticking a pin into a map of France — lived up to its TV image.
Unfortunately, the inhabitants of Nouvion — two hours from Boulogne on the main road to Paris — remain unaware of the fame their village's name enjoys in Britain.
Or so they claim.
Of course, it could be a clever charade orchestrated by Rene to put us off the track.
The genial mayor, Monsieur Gerard Thibaut, met our questions with blank bewilderment: ‘I know nothing about a picture of the Fallen Madonna hidden in a Bratwurst sausage,’ he said.
‘Do I know anybody called Edith?
I am afraid not.
The wife of the man who owns the bar is Monique.
‘Yes, it is true that there is a photograph of Rene in the town hall.
But this man is Rene Coty, a former president of the Republique.
He did not work in our bar.’
The mayor's mystification was understandable.
The adventures of Gorden Kaye, Carmen Silvera and Co must have lost something in their translation for French TV and the entire 'Allo 'Allo saga was screened in 40 days on the subscription channel Canal Plus, noted for its screening of naughty films.
It had clearly passed by the inhabitants of this quiet corner of Picardy.
Undaunted, we scoured the telephone directory for clues.
Under Artois, we located a divorce fixing agency and a company which supplied water — but no sign of Rene.
Exploring the village, we came across a statue outside the church.
Yes, it was he, Leclerc.
Sadly, it turned out not to be the forger played by the late Jack Haig, but a French war hero, Marshall Leclerc.
Back on the main road, our luck changed.
We spotted a sign over a bar saying ‘Artois’.
Could this be Cafe Rene?
On closer inspection it turned out the bar was called La Detente.
The sign said Stella Artois — not Rene's relative, but a sought-after brand of lager.
Inside, owner Jean-Marie Bonaventure and his wife Monique ruled out any question of flirty waitresses flashing stocking tops.
The village elders wouldn't like it, said Monique, though the football team might.
Jean-Marie, a middle-aged charmer who prefers to work minus a white apron, could not recall a Rene in the family.
Nor were there many German soldiers among his customers.
‘Funny Germans?’ he grinned.
‘Surely not.’
At this point, local policeman Raoul Devineaux walked in.
‘Good moaning,’ I said, in Crabtree's best Franglais.
‘Pardon?’ replied Raoul, looking mystified.
The arrival of the local undertaker, Paul Berthe, did little to help our investigations.
Questions about his infatuation with the bar owner's wife were met by a stony stare.
Further embarrassment was spared when Mayor Gerard reappeared armed with a history of Nouvion.
Now the village's secrets were to be revealed at last.
The local stately home, Chateau Gaillard, was occupied by the Germans during the war.
This was more like it.
Perhaps this was where Herr Flick, Helga and Colonel Von Strohm practised their evil wiles.
The Mayor went on to reveal that there was a monastery, the Sanier Institute, from where the Resistance once defied the enemy.
He described how one of the monks, Brother Camille Mabilais, hid retreating British airmen who failed to make their way to the boats at Dunkirk.
Under the very noses of German soldiers billeted at the monastery, the daring cleric, decorated for his gallantry by General Eisenhower, disguised British intelligence officers as fellow monks when they parachuted into the village.
So this was where Fairfax and Carstairs were hiding.
At least now we could leave the cows in peace.
Joan Collins and Tara Newley
MOTHER and daughter Joan Collins and Tara Newley proved a hit with singer Boy George, above, at a London charity ball.
Baby boom at GMTV
THERE'S a baby boom at new breakfast TV station GMTV.
Anne Davies who will present Good Morning and Sunday Best from the New Year, is expecting and co-presenter Eamonn Holmes has revealed wife Gabrielle is pregnant with their third child.
Andrew Sachs
FAWLTY Towers waiter Manuel, alias actor Andrew Sachs, will serve Christmas meals to guests at the five-star Bath Spa Hotel.
A hotel spokeswoman said: ‘He booked in his family and we asked if he would do a turn.’
Emma Thomson
EMMA Thompson looks certain to win an Oscar for best actress for her role in Howards End.
So far no rivals have matched the rave reviews E ma won for the film.
With no major female roles in the year's remaining releases insiders believe the only question is who else gets nominated.
Top 20
1 (1) End Of The Road Boyz II Men
2 (14) Would I lie To You Charles & Eddie
3 (2) People Everday Arrested Development
4 (6) Boss Drum Shamen
5 (3) Run To You Rage
6 (13) Be My Baby V Paradis
7 (—) Never Let Her Slip Away Undercover
8 (9) Supermarioland Ambassadors Of Funk/MC Mario
9 (5) I'm Gonna Get You Bizarre
10 (10) Who Needs Love Erasure
11 (12) Piece Of My Heart Erma Franklin
12 (—) I Will Always Love You Whitney Houston
13 (4) Sleeping Satellite Tasmin Archer
14 (23) Hello Shakespears Sister
15 (8) A Million Love Songs Take That
16 (17) To Love Somebody Michael Bolton
17 (7) Erotica Madonna
18 (11) Keep The Faith Bon Jovi
19 (15) It Will Make Me Crazy Felix
20 (24) Free Your Mind En Vogue
Baby, it's warm outside
Alison Veness
OVERCOATS will do more than keep you warm this winter.
They will make you look lean, stylish and even sexy.
The styles now flooding the High Street are all dramatically long, with hemlines hovering around the ankle.
Some of them are deliberately military, with wide lapels, brass buttons and deep cuffs.
M & S leads the field with an ankle-length wool coat at £99, while Top Shop's fitted version is £79.
Meanwhile look out for the new Fashion Editor Edwardian-style frock coats with their theatrical, dandyish look.
The velvet ones are the ultimate show-stoppers and best worn with a top hat, a velvet choker…and not much else.
If ankle-length coats don't suit you down to the ground, then short ones are not quite extinct.
Top Shop is doing a brisk trade in reefer jackets and A-line car coats.
But for the ultimate indulgence this winter, splash out on one of the new fake furs.
They are glamorous, snuggly and ecologically sound.
To the delight of the animal rights movement, Britain's trade in real fur is in drastic decline, with manufacturing figures issued by the DTI showing that sales have plummeted from £56 million in 1986 to £11 million last year.
For style without the cruelty, High Street chain Wallis has five fabulous fakes ranging from a short swing leopard (£130) to a reversible shawl-collared number (£175).
Whatever you choose, you will get that warm feeling of knowing you are totally in fashion.
Hillary's favourite magazine makes Atlantic crossing
By Tim Satchell
THIS month Hillary Clinton's favourite magazine, Ms, is to launch a British edition.
Backed by a team of British academics and journalists which includes Melissa Benn, daughter of Labour MP Tony Benn, and other leading feminists, Ms will sell at £2.95 and carry no advertising.
Mrs Clinton, the new First Lady, has supported the magazine since it was founded in the United States in 1972, where it has been regarded as a valuable weapon in the campaign for women's liberation.
Of the British version, Miss Benn says: ‘Ms magazine will provide a clear and much needed voice in current British political and cultural debate — feminist and otherwise.’
Others backing the new project include barrister Helena Kennedy, QC, publisher Carmen Callil, image consultant Barbara Follett, wife of best selling novelist Ken Follett, and authoress Victoria Glendinning.
Supporter Jill Tweedie, guru of the feminist movement, tells me: ‘I think they must be careful not to make it part of American colonialism.
‘They do not have an office in London.
Obviously it will not be a conventional women's magazine.
‘It won't have recipes but will have articles on how to relax while you are cooking.
‘They won't have regular fashion articles, but might have something on the political significance of hemlines.’
Spokesman Julia Hobsbawm says: ‘Readers of Hello! and Bella should check us out.’
She adds: ‘Our distribution will be very strong.’
The first issue comes out on November 24 and includes articles on women-only mini-cab firms and an interview with Labour's deputy leader Margaret Beckett.
Maureen Lipman
By Tim Satchell
TOMORROW night Maureen Lipman starts London previews of the new Neil Simon play Lost In Yonkers at the Strand Theatre.
She appears with talented cute kid Matt McGuire, 14, and co-stars Barry Grant, 13,(the only American among the young actors) and Ross McCall, 16.
Reports from Bath, where the play previewed last week, say Miss Lipman, above, as a Jewish child-woman of 35, all ankle socks and over excitement, gives the performance of her career.
And…
By Tim Satchell
QUERY to young shop assistant in Harrods: ‘Do you wrap?’
Assistant: ‘Yes, but I prefer Heavy Metal.’
Designer's classic frame-up
By Tim Satchell
JEAN Muir, Britain's top ready-to-wear classic clothes designer, has donated £4,000 to the National Gallery in London so that her four favourite paintings — of the four seasons by seventeenth-century Dutch painter David Teniers the Younger — can be reframed.
Previously they had been grouped together in one modern frame.
‘They were on our hit list of pictures that needed reframing,’ Dr Nicholas Penny, Clore Curator of Renaissance Paintings, tells me.
‘We have a Frames and Furniture Fund for this purpose.
But it is unusual for a donor to ask that specific paintings be reframed.
‘We could only find one orginal frame, which we used for Summer, so we had three replicas hand carved for Spring, Autumn and Winter.’
The 1644 paintings, in their new frames, have just been rehung in Room 23.
Miss Muir, 59, who with her husband Harry Leuckert has built up an impressive collection of art pieces, declines to discuss the gift, but stresses that her donation was a private gesture.
Cosby girl finds her soulmate
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Lisa Bonet, 24, who plays Bill Cosby's teenage daughter Denise Huxtable in The Cosby Show, has wed her yoga teacher in secret, I hear.
Miss Bonet, left, met her new husband Brian Kest, 27, last year when she attended one of his classes.
‘He has been really good for her soul,’ says one of her colleagues.
Miss Bonet, who has already had her own television comedy spin-off, A Different World, was previously married to rock musician Lenny Kravitz, 30, who has recently produced an album for Vanessa Paradis.
Miss Bonet and Mr Kravitz have a three-year-old daughter, Zoie.
THE Osaka, the fashionable Japanese strain of ornamental cabbage, ‘is selling like hot cakes,’ a London florist says.
For £2.50 one can buy a pot plant that will grow to 2ft in diameter.
Herman Funke, of The Flower House, Brompton Road, tells me: ‘The trend for the Ornamental Cabbage, Brassica Oleracea, is a very exciting thing.
‘It's different, fun, and people love them.’
The jet that broke the pain barrier
Jane Moore
MICKEY Mouse has met millions of children in his time, but few as brave as little Amelia Paskins.
Two years ago, the rare skin condition that has plagued her life became so bad that doctors at Great Ormond Street Hospital said nothing more could be done and sent her home to die.
But 11-year-old Amelia battled on against her illness, and her courage was rewarded with a dream come true.
She joined 191 other seriously ill youngsters on a magical trip to DisneyWorld in Florida.
Amelia's condition makes it painful for her to be touched, but she and the other incurably ill and disabled children had no trouble touching the hearts of the DisneyWorld staff who helped make their visit truly the trip of a lifetime.
The children — aged between seven and 16 — were all VIP passengers aboard Dreamflight, an annual trip to the Florida theme parks of Seaworld, Universal Studios, MGM Studios, and DisneyWorld.
Dreamflight was the brainchild of British Airways colleagues Patricia Pearce and Derek Pereira back in 1986, and has now grown into a ‘roadshow’ of 350 adults working around the clock to help ease the physical pain suffered by their young charges.
The latest trip took a year to organise and cost a total of Pounds 260,000, although the theme parks provided free entry.
Such a financial obstacle would send most people looking for an easier option, but Dreamflight has been helped enormously in recent years by Spar supermarkets who have raised £350,000.
There is an adult helper for every two children, plus a back-up team of drivers, plane crew, night nurses, administrators and American helpers.
These are the people who ensure that the week-long adventure goes as smoothly as possible for children such as Amelia.
Wheelchair-bound and with a high percentage of skin loss that has worn away most of her fingers and toes, she has to endure a 90-minute ordeal of having her dressings changed every morning.
But Amelia is not someone who wants pity.
A proud and fiercely independent child, she made sure she got what she wanted — a kiss from every Disney character in sight.
That meant her regular nurse, Jane Weeks, was kept busy not only ensuring her patient was comfortable but also satisfied.
‘Amelia doesn't have the chromosome that adheres the skin to the body, so it blisters and comes off,’ says Jane.
‘When she was born she looked normal, but whenever her mother tried to cuddle her she screamed.
‘Tests showed that she had this condition, and it has deteriorated over the years.
‘The main problem is that the illness makes her foodpipe so sore that she drinks only milk and rarely eats solids.
That weakens her.’
Amelia now spends weekends at home with her parents and during the week boards at the Lord Mayor Treloar College in Hampshire, from where she was nominated to join Dreamflight.
The meticulous selection process for the trip is done by consultant paediatrician Dr John Holmes-Smith.
Doctors from all over the country are asked to nominate children they feel deserve a slice of luck, and the final selection is made just weeks before the flight.
‘It is important for the children to be medically fit to go, so I ask for a full report from their doctors,’ says Dr Holmes-Smith.
‘I try to avoid including children with serious behavioural problems because they would be too disruptive on a trip like this.’
It is an emotionally charged week when life-long friendships and bonds are made.
Karen Woolley, 20, was one of the children on the first Dreamflight in 1987.
Suffering from leukaemia, she was seriously ill and undergoing chemotherapy.
Earlier this year she was given the all clear and joined Dreamflight as a helper.
Although several of the children on this year's flight will not be as lucky as Karen, every effort is made to ensure they never have a dull moment.
The trip's official photographer Alan Selwood is one of the helpers working towards that aim.
His most touching moment came after Dreamflight a couple of years ago when he was asked to rush to the bedside of a leukaemia victim who wanted to see the photos of the trip that she had just enjoyed so much.
‘I worked through the night to get them done and then drove to her house where she was confined to bed,’ says Alan.
‘She looked at every single one of the hundreds of photos and couldn't stop smiling at the memory.
She died in her sleep later that night.’
At home, some of the children are wrapped in cotton wool by parents whose natural instinct is to cosset their sick or disabled child.
So, for many, Dreamflight is their first taste of freedom.
Invariably the children live in a street where they are ‘different’ to their contemporaries.
But the beauty of Dreamflight is that it is the norm to be disabled or sick.
For the first time in their lives they feel part of the crowd.
Plucky little Ann McDonald from Scotland has spina bifida and hydroencephalus, commonly known as water on the brain.
The first thing I noticed about her was her leg callipers and crutches, but by the second day her disability had been overshadowed by her strength of character.
It's the same story with all the children.
For many, the thought of leaving their parents for the first time left them subdued.
But by day two, 192 totally different personalities began to emerge.
‘The parents do not get the same child back at the end of this trip,’ says Dreamflight co-founder Pat Pearce.
‘Each one blossoms and they return home to be far more independent and mature in their own little way, because they have done and seen things in a way they've never been able to do before.
They haven't been the sole centre of attention — no one is.
‘We have a great deal of responsibility to shoulder because of the condition of some of these children.’
The children are split into groups of 16, each named after a fictional character such as Mickey Mouse.
Each group has a leader, a doctor, three nurses, a physiotherapist, and three non-medical escorts.
Friendly rivalry is encouraged between the 12 groups and the children learn chants such as‘we're simply the best, better than all the rest’.
The Snow White group was a favourite target of the other groups with taunts such as‘eat the apple’ and ‘she likes her men to be 3ft 10’.
Glenn Clements, a burly policeman who took a break from his job to be in charge of the Pinnochio group, says: ‘I've got four kids and I get far more pleasure taking these children on holiday than I do my own.’
That's easy to believe when you see the joy on these children's faces as they meet Disney characters for the first time.
Amelia's face lit up as she kissed an ewok from the Star Wars films — a sight that left the adult helpers in her group struggling to fight back the tears.
Amelia was joined in Florida by her 13-year-old brother Ashley, who had his right leg amputated after a cancerous lump was found in his heel bone.
Cancer, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and cerebral palsy are the most common conditions in the group, although there are children — like Amelia — with quite rare illnesses.
‘There are some conditions here I've never seen in my career or am ever likely to see again,’ says one of the group's doctors.
Many of the children need treatment during the night, when a team of seven night nurses take over.
‘Some need turning in the night, particularly those with muscular dystrophy,’ says nurse Lou Major.
‘A couple of the children with glycogen storage disease need drips all night, and then there's the regular calls of ‘I'm having a nose bleed’ or ‘I want a drink’.
‘There are two children to each room and it's planned that anyone who has difficulty speaking is put with a child who can communicate well.
That way they can ring us for help if the other child needs it.’
After spending a day settling in to their hotel rooms and enjoying a display by the Orange County Police Department, the children began to bubble over with excitement at the thought of visiting Disney's Magic Kingdom.
During the bus journey there the next day, one boy asked another what was wrong with him.
‘Well, I can't walk because I've got something wrong with my spine, but apart from that I'm perfect,’ was the answer.
It's that sort of humbling remark that sums up what Dreamflight is all about.
Donations can be made to Dreamflight, 4 Saxeway, Chartridge, Bucks HP5 2SH.
Tel: 0494 792991.
Driving fines
IT was with total disbelief that I read F Jefferay's letter suggesting that the stiff fines imposed on those caught driving with worn tyres were designed purely to reduce car ownership.
Anyone who includes fines as part of the runnings costs of a vehicle is undeserving of the luxury of a car.
Worn tyres kill.
National lottery
WHAT are the reasons for setting up a national lottery in favour of the arts?
Surely it makes more sense to have a lottery that would benefit the NHS.
Unlike the arts, the shortage of NHS funds causes suffering and even death.
Charles and Diana in Korea
HOW silly it was to make a fuss about the unhappy expressions of Charles and Diana during their first 24 hours in Korea.
They were clearly suffering from jet-lag.
Weymouth Town Charities
I WAS surprised to read in TODAY that Weymouth Town Charities intends to evict a 90-year-old woman from her home for having her TV and radio on too loud.
Has no one suggested that she could use earphones?
Will we remember them?
WE should remember not only those who fought and died to save Britain, but also those who fought and survived.
They risked all for our liberty but today are left with only one freedom — the freedom to grow old in poverty.
Veterans who returned to low-paid jobs without occupational pension schemes now depend upon the state retirement pension.
When the link between average earnings and the pension ended, so too did their hopes of a reasonable standard of living.
Proud veterans who have contributed to National Insurance for decades are reduced to applying for means-tested benefits along with layabouts, New Age travellers and the like who have contributed nothing.
German veterans, who fought to enslave Europe, receive better treatment from their government than our war heroes get here.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Astronomer Carl Sagan, 58.
Actress Katharine Hepburn, 83.
Golfer Tom Weiskopf, 50.
ON THIS DAY: In 1918, Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated as German emperor.
In 1965, Britain abolished capital punishment.
Bullying Whips put democracy at risk
THERE was nothing democratic about Wednesday's vote on the Maastricht Treaty.
As news of the result came through, it was blatantly obvious to most people that underhand tactics must have been used against the Tory rebels.
Reports in TODAY confirmed it.
One must now question how many times these tactics have been used before or will be used in the future.
It is not only the credibility of Mr Major and his lot that needs to be questioned but also their morality.
A Davies, Newark, Notts
IF THE recent revelations concerning Whips' activities are true it makes a nonsense of democracy.
Parliament is a talking shop where members seek to influence others by debate.
If voting is pressurised the outcome is distorted.
The issues of Maastricht — single currency, sovereignty and legal structure — deserve thorough scrutiny and a free vote.
Bullying Whips put democracy at risk
IN RECENT years the ‘secret ballot’ was introduced by the Tories to prevent strong-arm tactics being used by unions in votes on strike action.
It is time MPs were given the same protection so they can vote without fear of reprisals.
Then the Maastricht vote should be re-taken.
Bullying Whips put democracy at risk
THE behaviour of the Tory Whips in the Maastricht debate makes a mockery of the prefix ‘honourable’ in MPs' titles.
True Britt
IT'S not so surprising that Britt Ekland (right) has developed a few worry lines.
The unusual thing is that at 50 she is still stunning, wrinkles or no.
How many of us wouldn't be happy to make it through a half century in half as good shape.
I'd certainly like to know her secret.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Greame Donald
IN the early days of accountancy, the profit side of a balance sheet was known as ‘the good’, hence the expression ‘all to the good’ meaning completely beneficial.
Although many people assume that ‘Queer Street’— the abode of those in debt — is a corruption of Carey Street, in fact the phrase pre-dates the siting of London's bankruptcy courts at that location.
In old accounting jargon, the left-hand column in the record of customers' trading details was nicknamed ‘query street’, as it contained question marks against the names of all those whose creditworthiness was suspect.
This gradually altered to ‘Queer Street’.
The ideal balance sheet — with both sides showing the same figure at the end — produced the expression ‘making ends meet,’ in which ‘meet’is used in its oldest sense of ‘right and fitting’.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Ecstacy drug
YOUR reader M Walkiey is totally naive for thinking that records influence people to take the drug Ecstasy.
The truth of the matter is that it depends on the person and not the music we listen to.
I am a great fan of rave music yet the lyrics have never made me want to try the drug.
J Scott, Stockport, Cheshire
Redundancy
THE thousands of pounds to be paid in redundancy to miners is not the norm.
Most other recession victims, myself included, are only entitled to statutory redundancy based on one week's pay for each year's service.
Thus after 26 years, I will receive just £4,715.
P Banister Sleaford, Lincs
Delivering the goods may net you a packet
Susan Glass
A PARCEL winging its way around the country carrying a homing device may sound like something straight from the pages of a James Bond story but there is nothing top secret about the idea.
In fact, it is modern technology at work in the world of overnight parcel deliveries.
A parcel sent with Amtrak is given a unique barcode at the start of its journey which means the company can keep track of it from the moment it leaves until it reaches its destination.
‘We scan every parcel for its barcode and track that barcode to the point of delivery,’ says marketing manager Roger Gamlin.
‘Each parcel's reference is different which cuts down on mistakes.’
Now the firm is looking for more people to share in its success.
A British company that has nothing to do with the American rail network, Amtrak is expanding and wants to recruit about 200 new franchisees in the next year.
Franchisees will need about £19,000.
This includes a fee of Pounds 12,500, a three-month lease on a van and some working capital.
People who took up a similar offer about four years ago are making up to five times their initial investment.
To make life easier the work has been specially designed for those running the business.
‘Our aim is to take away from the franchisee all those areas which are expensive or difficult for a small business to operate,’ says Mr Gamlin.
‘There is minimal paperwork and centralised accounting.
The franchisee receives commission for every parcel delivered and they are paid at the end of every month so they have a regular cash flow.
‘Small businesses don't want to be collecting debts — it just causes problems.
We try to avoid that.’
Although marketing is done centrally, the success of a franchise is also down to the efforts of the franchisee in drumming up business.
‘We have been successful because we are offering a quality service,’ adds Mr Gamlin.
‘We are competitively priced but we market the service on quality.’
Interested franchisees will be invited to Bristol, the company's base, for a briefing.
If both parties decide to go ahead, further discussions, including finding a sales area, will take place.
Then franchise development manager David Hadley will offer advice.
‘We don't chase people,’ says Mr Gamlin.
‘There is no high pressure.
‘It is more important to have happy franchisees because this is a team effort and there is a connection between all franchisees.
‘The parcels are collected during the day by one of our franchisees and taken back to the depot.
In the evening the firm's fleet of vehicles moves the parcels to a central sorting office in Birmingham.
‘There they are sorted and put back on the vehicles and re-delivered so that the franchisees can deliver them first thing in the morning.’
Delivery prices start at £10.40 plus VAT on a package up to 10kg.
Amtrak deals with about 12,000 parcels every day, and guarantees delivery the next morning.
And being a part of all that could wrap up some healthy profits for you.
Muggers get the message
THERE cannot and should not be any sympathy for Michael Watson, the mugger who was yesterday jailed for five years even though it was a first offence.
As the judge so rightly said, his were not merely crimes of theft but of violence against elderly people.
That made Watson's attacks cowardly as well as brutal.
He picked on the weakest and deserves the strongest punishment.
His sentence should not be reduced on appeal.
Muggers and similar criminals know there is little chance of being caught.
And when they are, their sentences are light.
They can afford to laugh at justice.
But Michael Watson is not laughing today.
He and others like him are not only responsible for hundreds of awful crimes but for instilling a terrible fear in thousands more elderly people.
Even those who have never been attacked themselves are scared to leave their homes, scared to walk down the street, scared, sometimes, even in their own homes.
Thugs like Watson are responsible for that reign of terror.
Yet it is rare for them to be made to take the responsibility for it.
There are valid arguments about prison overcrowding and the size of Britain's jail population.
But those are nothing compared to the effects of crime on the victims, particularly elderly ones.
If muggers can be deterred by punitive sentencing, then some of them must be made an example of.
Everyone who sets out to attack a pensioner should know that if he is caught, he will go to prison for a long time.
Judge Bryan Prior has done society a favour not just by locking Michael Watson away, but by giving a warning to every mugger.
Other judges should follow his example.
Trial travesty
THE trial of three businessmen accused of exporting arms-making equipment to Iraq turns out to have been not just a farce but a scandal.
If they had been found guilty, they could have gone to jail.
Now it turns out that the Government knew all along what they were up to but told them to lie.
Four Ministers apparently tried to cover up the truth by hiding under a cloak of secrecy.
Thankfully, the court saw behind that.
There are two issues here.
First, why was the Government conspiring to break the law?
Secondly, how could Ministers knowingly allow innocent men to go to jail?
In America, the politicians involved would be dragged before a Congressional committee.
The equivalent should happen here.
The Ministers in this scandal should be ordered to appear before a Commons committee so that their actions, and those of the Government, can be properly examined.
Just as the innocent should not be punished, so the guilty should be made to pay.
Out of the Red
THE problems with the British economy and Maastricht, not to mention the American election and the war in Yugoslavia, have pushed the new Russian revolution off the front pages.
So the visit to this country by Boris Yeltsin is a timely reminder of the opportunities in that former superpower.
The end of the Cold War and the creation of a fledgling market economy in Russia present Britain with a great challenge.
Our companies need to take advantage of it and the Government should give them every encouragement.
And if the Russians need to be wooed by a royal visit, so be it.
Even if the Queen can't go, she can surely spare at least one member of her family for a few days there.
Baffled by the economy?
It's as easy as ABC
David Seymour
THE economy is in turmoil — and so are the politicians and economists.
All of them seem to have different ideas about what should be done to get Britain out of recession.
But who does understand economics?
Does anyone?
Is it possible to understand the subject?
David Seymour says it can be as simple as ABC.
Here he presents his own A to Z of economics in the week that Norman Lamont is to deliver the crucial Autumn Statement.
It is so simple that everyone should understand it.
Even the Chancellor.
AUTUMN STATEMENT is this Thursday's announcement from the Chancellor of the Exchequer which is expected to set out his new economic policy.
The Automobile Industry is among the hardest hit by the recession.
An Apology is what you never hear from the Government for getting its economic policies so wrong.
BANKRUPTCIES have hit a record level with 45,000 firms going bust in the first nine months of this year.
No wonder Britain is a country heading for Third World status and just about the only people who are doing well in it are the Bailiffs.
The Bundesbank was heavily criticised by our Government for not coming to the rescue of the pound on Black Wednesday when we were forced out of the ERM.
CONFIDENCE is what is needed to get Britain out of the recession.
Who says so?
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, who has helped to destroy it.
DEVALUATION of the pound is what John Major and Mr Lamont said would never happen.
Depression is when a recession gets really bad.
Debt is what millions of families are still in after the spend, spend years of the late 1980s.
ECONOMICS is a subject which no two people can agree on, particularly Economists.
The European Monetary System was going to be Britain's salvation until we were forced out of it.
Since then the Exchange Rate value of Sterling has plummeted.
FORECASTS from the Treasury have been proved to be hopelessly wrong which is one reason why the economy now seems to be in Freefall, leading to the closure of hundreds of Factories.
Economic policy Failed due to the Government's Fixation with the ERM and exchange rate.
GREEN SHOOTS of recovery were what the Chancellor said he could see last year, but the rest of us are still waiting for them.
Now things could be made even worse by the failure of the Gatt talks.
HOUSING has been particularly badly hit, with prices tumbling and the market stagnant.
High Street shops are getting desperate after two years of poor sales.
Hope that things will get better seems to have been the Government's main economic policy.
Critics say that was merely Hallucination.
INFLATION was the Government's obsession, with everything directed to bringing it down.
Yet businessmen said it was far more important to reduce Interest Rates.
That is now happening, which will be a big help to what is left of British Industry.
JOBS have become the battleground of the recession, with demands growing for existing ones to be saved and new ones created.
The Jitters is what the City is said to have when it doesn't like what the Government is doing.
KEYNES (John Maynard, not Milton) was a great economist in the 1930s who devised the way to get out of recession.
The Chancellor finally seems to have heeded him.
LORD LAWSON was in charge of the Treasury before Norman Lamont and is blamed for the boom which was followed by the present bust.
The Labour Party has an economic policy which is almost indistinguishable from the Tories'.
MANDARINS are the Treasury civil servants who were responsible for insisting that Britain stayed in the ERM and who, it is said, traditionally get things wrong.
Some say the failed policy was really that of John Major, as shown by his devotion to the Maastricht Treaty which would lead to Monetary union.
NATIONAL INSURANCE for employees is to be increased from nine per cent to 10.4 in the Autumn Statement, according to leaks.
This would make a Nonsense of giving people more money to spend but can be expected from a Government which said it would Never devalue or leave the ERM and then did both.
OPPOSITION to economic policy now comes from within the Conservative Party.
Outrage comes from the rest of the country as unemployment increases and the recession deepens.
PUBLIC SPENDING is to be harshly curtailed after a tough round of negotiations between the Treasury and Ministers.
That means little or no Pay Rises for those who work in the Public Sector.
An economic Policy is what the Government has not had since Black Wednesday, although the Autumn Statement on Thursday will hopefully change that.
For the sake of the Pound, it better had.
QUAGMIRE is the mess which the country is in due to the failure to react to the worsening recession.
There are still unanswered Questions about whether the people who got us into it can now get us out.
RECESSION has led to misery for millions but none more so than workers made Redundant and those whose homes have been Repossessed.
Even if the Recovery comes soon, it will not help most of them.
And it will take years to rebuild our Reserves of foreign currency which were frittered away propping up the pound.
SLUMP is where the recession is heading to once it has gone through depression.
By then, tens of thousands more workers will have got the Sack and Sterling will have plunged even lower in value.
TAXATION is unlikely to be increased, though that has been suggested, as it would take much-needed spending power out of the economy and be unacceptable to the newly-powerful Tory Backbenchers.
They are unhappy enough already with the Treasury.
U-TURNS galore have been the main feature of Government activity in the past month but none has been more important than that over the economy.
The new emphasis is on helping the economic Upturn which will bring down Unemployment, currently heading towards 3 million.
VAT could be cut from its current level of 17½ per cent to give a boost to the shops but that would leave the Government short of cash.
Even that would be better than the policy Vacuum there has been since Black Wednesday.
WORLD recession is blamed for the problems in our own economy but only a minority of people in the country accept that.
The majority say it is the fault of a Weak Government which could not run a Whelk Stall.
Xwas the mark placed on 14 million ballot papers last April that put the Tories back in power on a promise that the recovery would start the day after the election.
YO-YO would be a more accurate way to describe the succession of U-turns made recently by John Major and his Ministers.
ZERO inflation is what the Prime Minister wanted Britain to achieve by sticking doggedly in the ERM.
He was proved to be too much of a Zealot.
Mighty Mouse rules 40 years on
Tim Ewbank
A MURDERER has struck 16,636 times in London's West End in the past 40 years, yet the mystery attacker is still at large.
And if theatre audiences have their way, the death toll will mount and mount.
For the world's longest-running play, Agatha Christie's The Mousetrap, celebrates its 40th birthday this month and is still going strong.
The phenomenally popular whodunnit opened on November 25, 1952, with Richard Attenborough and Sheila Sim in the lead roles and since then 9,500,000 people have paid £21 million to see it.
The milestone will be marked with a party for 700 at the Savoy Hotel attended by as many as 150 former cast members.
The play has been presented down the years by impresario Sir Peter Saunders, who has seen all or some of it nearly 500 times.
‘Even the Queen thinks she's seen it, but she hasn't,’ he says.
‘Agatha Christie was a guest at one of the Queen's lunches at Buckingham Palace and she said to Agatha: ‘I did enjoy The Mousetrap.’
Agatha phoned the next day and said: ‘You never told me the Queen had been.’
But she was wrong.
I told Agatha she had seen three of her plays, but not The Mousetrap.’
Even Christie saw the play more than 100 times.
‘But she always bought a ticket through an agency and she always wanted to come anonymously,’ says Sir Peter.
‘The next day she would always phone to say that she had been in and she'd pick on a few things that she wasn't quite happy with.’
Over the years audiences have licked their way through 61,500 gallons of ice-cream during the nail-biting performance.
The production has been staged in 44 countries and translated into 24 languages.
Sir Peter has sold the film rights to Romulus Films — but don't hold your breath waiting for it.
That was in 1956 — with the proviso that it could not be released until six months after the London stage run had ended.
And by the look of things, that could still be a long way off.
New at Ten
Dominic Midgley and Adrian Lee
WHEN the familiar bongs rang out heralding the start of News At Ten last night it was actually the programme itself that was about to make headlines.
ITN's flagship bulletin appeared in a completely different form.
Opening titles, which once featured an animated zoom shot up the Thames ending in a close-up of the clockface on Big Ben, now consist of a camera making a spectacular swoop into the newsroom.
Banks of TV screens line the walls and high-tech graphics have been introduced.
Even the distinctive signature tune has been re-recorded to provide a more modern feel.
But by far the most significant change is the elevation of newsreader Trevor McDonald to superstar status.
He became the most high-profile newscaster in Britain when he made his debut as the programme's anchorman.
The dual-presenter format which ITN has stuck with since News At Ten's launch 25 years ago has given way to McDonald sitting alone in the style of a US network star like Dan Rather.
‘When ITN started up it was a tremendous innovation having two presenters instead of one,’ says a spokesman.
‘It provided built-in variety when the technology of TV was very different.
‘There was no electronic news gathering equipment, live feeds or satellite links.
‘Now the technology is in a different league and we feel it is more appropriate to give the task of pulling the threads together to one person.
Why Trevor McDonald?
Six months of research went into the changes and Trevor emerged as a person who was respected, carried weight and authority and who was liked and trusted.
‘He combines all the virtues, and people take notice of what he says.’
The appointment of McDonald, who was still an interviewer with Trinidadian TV when News At Ten first went on the air, fits in with what sources suggest is a new reliance on star names.
Last night marked the return of one its other star names — Julia Somerville.
ITN bosses insisted the timing of her return, 13 weeks after major brain surgery, was just a coincidence but afterwards 45-year-old Julia said she was excited to be there for the re-launch.
Looking immaculate in a bright red suit she said: ‘I have been looking forward to this moment for a long time and I am glad to have been a part of it.’
The only clue for the millions of viewers to Julia's ordeal as she introduced a feature on the plight of homeowners was her close cropped blonde hair.
But like anchorman Trevor McDonald, she gave a faultless performance and everything went without a hitch.
Stewart Purvis, editor in chief of ITN said he was delighted with the new look.
He added: ‘It was an enormous presure for Trevor to be the single anchor for the show.
‘As for Julia, we are absolutely delighted she has made such a good recovery.
She has been through it all with such tremendous courage and coolness.’
Julia will present News At Ten features called Focus On Britain.
Former This Week reporter Julian Manyon is also tipped for a high-profile role.
ITN describes its new look as ‘warm, friendly, bright, fresh and relevant’ and is convinced it will win viewers from the BBC.
But competitors and disillusioned insiders have dubbed the show's new look as ‘bright, light and trite’.
David Mannion, ITN's editor of ITV programmes, hit back at the BBC in an internal newsletter.
‘Their news programmes are very professional but I believe they are too dry, pompous and sometimes too unimaginative for many people's tastes.’
Some critics have put a cynical interpretation on the changes.
Under the franchise auction introduced by Mrs Thatcher, the ITV network will have to pay £300 million a year to the Government.
Never has it been more important that News At Ten provide a big prime-time audience.
While ‘the Ten’, as it is known in the trade, is having its most successful year since 1986 with an average 7.2 million viewers, it cannot rest on its laurels.
And finally... it was all right on the night
William Arnold, Editor of Media Week
REJIG the music, liven up the graphics, install a hi-tech set and what do you get?
The bongs are still there and the news is still about Maastricht, Yeltsin and redundancies — News at Ten just looks a bit different.
Which is, after all, the whole point of the exercise.
It might be a company with financial problems but ITN has put on a glitzier show.
The music, banks of television sets, the subtle use of lighting all say ‘Watch me, I'm important.’
For a show that wants to be warm and friendly, it is all a bit imposing.
Cue Trevor McDonald.
The success of the new News at Ten will stand or fall on his relationship with the seven million plus viewers.
Borrowing an idea from the fiercely competitive US market, ITN has made McDonald the sole anchorman but his role seems not so much to read the news as to make it simple for the viewer before the reporter fills the story out.
It might be early days but this approach falls a long way short of forging a relationship with the viewer and when he turned to the big screen to ask a reporter a single question, it came across as completely contrived.
Directing the news at the viewer is the idea behind the new Focus On Britain spot which comes in the second half.
Last night's was spot on.
Few people are untouched by the predicament of homeowners and Julia Somerville with Julian Manyon succeeded in making a complex subject perfectly understandable and utterly depressing.
So back to Trevor McDonald.
It was an uneasy switch from the difficulties of homeowners to a light-hearted story about hard-up baboons staging hold-ups of passing cars.
News at Ten may have been ahead of the BBC's Nine O'Clock News in the ratings but last night it seemed unsure of what it was trying to do.
Banks of TV screens line the wall behind anchorman Trevor and colleague Julia Somerville in the revamped News At Ten studio
Chris went blind just before the Dreamflight.
But he refused to let it spoil his joy
Jane Moore
LIKE any little boy, Christopher Hood was thrilled at the thought of seeing DisneyWorld.
But as he was about to leave with 191 other seriously ill youngsters on the charity Dreamflight to Florida, Christopher lost his sight.
The sudden blindness was a result of Batten disease, a rare, inherited disorder of the nervous system that had already left Christopher with great difficulty in speaking.
The plucky 14-year-old was determined however to experience the magic of DisneyWorld and never stopped smiling all week.
The most moving moment came during a trip to Universal Studios when an orang-utan leapt off a stage to hug him.
We watched as Christopher's expression changed slowly from shock to amazement to joy as he stroked the animal's fur.
It was an unbearably touching scene that left many of us in tears.
The youngster's courage won the hearts of the entire team of Dreamflight, an annual trip to Florida's theme parks and attractions for youngsters who are disabled, sick or incurably ill.
His positive attitude was typical of all the children.
From the moment they arrived at Heathrow, magic was in the making.
In the Dreamflight tradition, the crew of the British Airways jumbo that took the group to America were specially chosen for their affinity with children.
Once the flight arrived in Florida stewards and stewardesses joined the team of support workers to look after the children.
After settling the children into their hotel, the team took them on their first visit — to Disney's Magic Kingdom, a giant playground of spectacular rides.
Darren Huddleson from Ireland may be wheelchair-bound, but that didn't stop him taking four rides on the newly-opened Splash mountain, a fast log-flume ride with an almost vertical drop.
Consultant paediatrician Dr John Holmes-Smith, who selected children to go on the trip, said: ‘As long as they are medically fit to go on the rides, there's no reason why they shouldn't.
If they have a heart condition or fits, some rides are out of bounds.
‘We choose children who will fully appreciate this trip, which is why we don't select those who are blind.
‘Christopher is a special case because he lost his sight after he'd been chosen.’
The holiday was particularly useful for children who are still coming to terms with their conditions and may have been robbed of their self-confidence.
Eleven-year-old Michelle Redshaw from Yorkshire hadn't been swimming since part of her small intestine was removed and she had an ileostomy bag fitted.
But by the second day of the adventure, her escort was having trouble getting her out of the pool.
Many of the children had never been away from home before and there were inevitable bouts of homesickness but the Dreamflight team worked hard to make them feel at ease.
Lorna Marsh initially turned down the chance to go on the trip when she found out that Bingo The Clown would be joining them.
Bingo, alias Trevor Pharo, said: ‘Lorna had a clown phobia.
In particular, she didn't like clowns' mouths.
So I went to meet her without my make-up on and demonstrated how I made myself up.
‘Gradually she got used to the idea.’
By the second day of the trip, Lorna was laughing and joking with Trevor in his clown gear.
The visit to Seaworld was a favourite with many children who shrieked with delight as they got a soaking from Shamu the killer whale.
Stacey Connor, seven, who has cystic fibrosis, even sat on Shamu's back.
At Disney's MGM studios, 16-year-old Theresa Powell was one of the first in line to meet the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Theresa, from Bedfordshire, has eight GCSEs and is studying for her A-levels.
That's impressive by anyone's standards but a remarkable triumph for a youngster whose troubles began at 11 when her kidneys failed.
Theresa had a transplant in 1989 and was just recovering from that ordeal when she had a brain haemorrhage and went into a coma for three months.
‘They took the clot out but I lost my memory.
I had to familiarise myself with everything all over again,’ she said.
‘I knew my mum because she'd been with me at the hospital and I remembered my grandad because of his bald head.
But I'd forgotten everyone else.
‘Shortly after that I got blood poisoning and a clot in my leg.
My toes went gangrenous and I had to have an arterial bypass.
‘I can't walk far on my leg now because it's a bit twisted but I'm having physiotherapy.
‘I also have to visit hospital every three weeks for an infusion of white blood cells.’
During all this treatment, Theresa's lung collapsed and she contracted bronchiectasis which results in persistent infection and coughing fits.
Theresa reeled off her ailments like a shopping list but she never complained.
‘It's been a tough couple of years but I've been relatively OK since earlier this year.
Anyway, I only have to look around the Dreamflight group to see lots of children who are worse off than me,’ she said.
‘My eight-year-old brother is really jealous and wanted to know why he couldn't come.
When I told him it was only for children who had something wrong with them, he said he was going to try to break his leg so he could come along!’
There were plenty of examples of courage on the Dreamflight.
Karen Woolley, 20, was an inspiration to many.
She was on the very first Dreamflight in 1987 as a leukaemia sufferer and was now back as a helper, having been given the all-clear this year.
Karen was looking after Ann McDonald from Scotland who was having a terrific time despite suffering from spina bifida and hydroencephalus (water on the brain).
‘These kids have got more about them than most adults I know,’ said Tiny, one of the voluntary American helpers who provided vital back-up.
A 6ft, 20-stone biker, Tiny would look more at home on the set of a Mad Max film but instead gives his time to help the Dreamflight team every year.
As the trip progressed group leaders met each night to discuss problems and timetables.
The organisation was impressive.
As one observer put it: ‘Sneeze and there's a tissue at the end of your nose.’
After all the excitement, the journey home was a subdued affair and it wasn't long before the children fell asleep, many of them snuggling up to their new Mickey Mouse toys.
Each had photographs and memories that they longed to share with their families who were waiting for them back at Heathrow.
It was an emotional moment as parents welcomed them home and swapped addresses with Dreamflight helpers.
With tears pouring down her face, British Airways hostess Gillian Conway promised to stay in touch with eight-year-old Christopher Baldwick, a muscular dystrophy sufferer from Eaglesfield in Scotland.
One seven year-old boy, a cerebral palsy sufferer, was anxious to make a speech.
And as he struggled to make himself understood, there wasn't a dry eye to be seen.
‘I'd just like to say thank you very much because I've had such a lovely holiday.
‘You have been so kind to me and I'll never forget any of you.
I just hope you will remember me too.’
THIS year's major sponsor was Spar supermarkets but the charity also relies on public donations.
If you would like to contribute, the address is: Dreamflight, 4 Saxeway, Chartridge, Bucks HP5 2SH.
Aladdin world premiere
WALT Disney's 31st full animated feature Aladdin brought out the stars for its world premiere on the weekend in Los Angeles at a charity screening.
Goldie Hawn, right, attended the event and Basic Instinct star Sharon Stone left, took her god-daughter Anna.
Paul Heiney
THAT'S Life presenter Paul Heiney was shamefaced yesterday after forgetting to attend a charity cheque presentation.
Fundraiser Dennis Hopkins, who shaved his head to raise money, said: ‘It was very disheartening.’
Paul Newman
PAUL Newman is getting better known for his recipes than his acting.
The star of The Colour Of Money is telling pals how he was let off a speeding ticket by a traffic policeman recently.
‘He said, ‘Wait'll I tell my wife.
We eat your popcorn.’’
Dine with the stars Italian style for £100
By Tim Satchell
ON THURSDAY, one of London's most extravagant society events is taking place when fans of Lord Healey, Sir Anthony Caro, David Frost, Lord Carrington and Joan Collins can have dinner with the objects of their admiration for just £100.
The Accademia Italiana, which sponsors Anglo-Italian cultural links, has organised The Night of 100 Dinners to raise funds.
One hundred dinner parties, ranging from eight to 100 guests, reflecting the charity's many cultural interests, will be held simultaneously in and around London.
Joan Collins will be among the guests joining fashion designer Bruce Oldfield at Piccadilly's Criterion (dress: Bruce Oldfield or black tie).
Impressionist art dealer Martin Summers has invited eight guests on to his yacht Bluebird of Chelsea; board at Cadogan Pier, Chelsea.
Lord Healey will be dining at the home of Italian journalist Mino Vignolo, chief correspondent of Corriere della Sera, in SW1.
Royal Ballet Director Anthony Dowell will dine with interior designer Christophe Gollut (dress: ladies, red or pink).
Menswear designer Paul Smith will spend the evening with Antonio Carluccio at his Covent Garden restaurant (dress: contemporary).
David Frost will be at Brooks's Club.
There will be two dinner parties at the home of Italian society hosts Massimo and Sara Carello.
Interior designer David Hicks will be with Sr Carello and author Josephine Hart with Sra Carello.
Inspired by a similar event held by the New York Public Library, this is a new way of raising funds.
Since it is the dinner party hosts holding the event, the whole £100 a head goes to the charity.
That includes an annual £35 subscription.
I understand that there are still tickets available for the jazz dinner, with some of London's mainstream jazz names, hosted by Pizza on the Park, Knightsbridge.
They are a cut-price £85, from the Accademia (071–225 34740).
And…
By Tim Satchell
IRATE boss to late arrival at Lloyd's: ‘You should have been here at nine o'clock.’
‘Why, what happened?’
Out of court
By Tim Satchell
I HAVE some good news for the Prince of Wales, who was most concerned about Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten, right, walking with a stick during the royal visit.
Mr Patten's office in Hong Kong tells me: ‘He sprained a muscle in his left leg while playing tennis with his coach at seven one morning.
He is much better now and I have just seen him walk out of the office unaided.’
Mr Patten will be off tennis for another couple of weeks.
Vote for love
By Tim Satchell
AFTER working on opposite sides in the American presidential election, James Corville and his wife Mary Matalin have taken a romantic trip on the Orient Express from Paris to Venice.
Miss Matalin was political director of the George Bush campaign, while Mr Corville acted as campaign consultant to the victorious Bill Clinton.
Now they are staying together at the Hotel Cipriani in Venice.
Miranda reads up for tinsel town trip
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Miranda Richardson is now reading three American scripts before flying out next week for Hollywood.
Tomorrow night, Miss Richardson, 34, will be seen in Broken Skin, the latest of Channel 4's Short and Curlies film series.
‘Then we're Hollywood bound,’ her agent Kerry Gardner tells me.
‘We are not sure if the scripts she's been sent are suitable for her, but we are going to beat the undergrowth there to see if anything comes flying out.’
After that, says Mr Gardner, Miss Richardson will come racing back to attend the December premieres in Paris and London of Damage, the Louis Malle adaption of Josephine Hart's novel about a middle-aged man obsessed with his son's fiancee, in which she stars with Jeremy Irons.
Lancashire-born Miss Richardson, who is unmarried, gained fame playing murderess Ruth Ellis in the film Dance With A Stranger.
She can now be seen on general release in the Neil Jordan film The Crying Game, cast as an IRA terrorist.
The Queen of hearts
Isla Whitcroft
As all her children's marriages collapse, Queen looks to next generation to save monarchy.
THE expression is solemn, the lines of age etched deeper by the traumas which have torn her family apart over the past year.
But the latest portrait of the Queen, which goes on show at the National Portrait Gallery next Monday, shows no hint of defeat.
Artist Richard Stone has captured in her eyes and the set of her face the steely determination of a woman who knows that the very survival of the monarchy lies in her hands alone.
In the past few months it has become clear to Her Majesty that her own children have spectacularly failed in their duty to the Crown.
One by one, the royal marriages have come crashing down — Princess Anne and Captain Mark Phillips divorced, the Duke and Duchess of York separated and now Prince Charles and Princess Diana's marriage is exposed as a sham.
Even worse, one by one, her children and their spouses have lost the once automatic respect of their subjects.
The Queen has tried with all her heart to avert this crisis.
She sympathised with the Duchess of York as she fought against her lack of freedom, she was tactful and kind when her own daughter told her that her marriage was dead and, finally, she acted as mediator to Charles and Diana as they fought out the death throes of their loveless union.
But now, even the diplomatic and conciliatory skills of the Queen have been exhausted.
Her children have disappointed and saddened her to the point where she has made the decision to rule them out of future considerations surrounding the throne.
She has accepted that the survival of the British monarchy now lies with her grandchildren — in Prince William as her natural heir and Prince Harry as the future Duke of York.
She refers to them as the ‘Children Of The Crown’.
They are, so to speak, The Firm's most valuable equity.
She is placing her faith in them in the hope that they will restore respect for the monarchy.
It has never been the Queen's style to rant and rave when things have gone wrong — and in truth she has never needed to.
In the past, respect and awe for their mother have been enough to ensure that her children toed the line, and for her part the Queen always held out hope that their difficulties would be resolved.
Despite all the problems that Fergie caused her both personally and publicly, the Queen refused to send her away until, after the publication of the photographs of her with John Bryan were published, it was almost impossible not to do so.
It is not that she no longer feels for her children.
Indeed, if Diana were to ring her tomorrow and ask for her help she would give it willingly and warmly.
Part of her power is that she has always been there for her children, part of her sadness is that they have betrayed that care by what she sees as dereliction of duty.
The recent shouting matches between Charles and Diana, and the revelations about Fergie and her men friends have upset her dreadfully, but have only served to strengthen her resolve that her own deep love for her children must be put aside in order to protect the royal heritage she has always made her priority.
As a result, she has taken a calculated decision to ensure that the royal grandchildren remain — whatever the cost — under her influence.
No longer are they to be considered as Princess Diana's or the Duchess of York's children.
They are now to be taken under the jurisdiction of the Queen, who is determined that they will be protected from the emotional mayhem currently being created by their parents.
Her courtiers have all been informed of this decision and have acted accordingly.
Robert Fellowes, her personal private secretary and the most powerful man in the Palace, is credited with the Princess of Wales's recent announcement that the Queen and Prince Philip had been supportive to her.
And her lawyers have been ruthless in thrashing out a divorce settlement with Fergie which ensures that she will never be able to take her children abroad where they would be out of the Queen's control.
No matter how it embarrasses or humiliates her children, action will now be taken to protect both the Queen and her grandchildren from what she considers the very real threat of the end of the monarchy.
The Queen is also aware that not all her current problems have been created by her children's behaviour.
Public criticism led to speculation she might be asked to pay tax, but with characteristic diplomatic skill she negotiated her way around the problem with the minimum of publicity.
But she knows she cannot trade on the goodwill of her nation for much longer.
She knows that the nation needs some hope for the future of the monarchy and sadly she has accepted that Charles and Diana will not provide an acceptable future for the nation.
Instead, all her warmth, her care and indeed her regal skills will be utilised to ensure that her grandchildren will inherit the respect that she once believed would come by right to her children.
Go for growth with 3-step savings plan
Stephen Ellis
AFTER nearly 20 years of borrowing and spending, Britons seem to be adopting a ‘save, save, save’ mentality.
The average family pays nearly £2,000 a year in interest on debts and mortgages, but last year we ran our household budgets in the black for the first time since the mid-Eighties — and managed to tuck away £10.6 billion in savings.
Savings need to be planned carefully, however, and the first priority is an ‘emergency’ account, says Amanda Davidson, a partner with independent financial advisers Holden Meehan.
‘The first step on the savings and investment ladder is a rainy-day account so you have money to meet sudden emergencies,’ she says.
‘High-interest, instant-access accounts from banks and building societies are ideal for this money.’
At the moment you will get around six per cent gross on sums over Pounds 2,500 in this sort of account.
‘The next step is finding a home for longer-term savings for holidays, home improvements or your first home,’ says Amanda.
Because you will know in advance when you need the cash, you can use a 90-day-notice account or even tie it up for five years for a better return.
‘This is where National Savings, guaranteed bonds and TESSAs come in useful, but people who reach this point on the savings ladder should check their insurances and pension arrangements.
‘It's all very well to plan for next year's holiday or a new home but there's litle point if your family would be left high and dry by the death of the breadwinner.’
If you still have some money to spare after this, then you might like to consider the riskier investments.
Remember that the greater the risk, the higher the potential return.
‘People have to decide just how much risk they are willing to take.
A good starting point is a with-profits bond such as the one on offer from the Pru.’
This will help to even out the peaks and troughs of investing in stocks and shares but will lock in profits by paying yearly bonuses.
‘Even so there is no point in relying on this sort of investment for a short-term profit.
They must be held for five to ten years,’ she says.
Since the 1987 crash, people have been wary of stock-market investment but some new products give an each-way bet.
If shares go down you get your money back, and if they go up you get some of the profits.
‘This is a sort of halfway house where people can dip their toe in the water.
If they like it, the answer is to go for a swim by buying PEPs,’ says Amanda.
‘These are very tax-efficient, especially for higher-rate taxpayers, but you still need to be careful about where your money is going.
‘Most people now use their PEP money to buy unit or investment trusts but there are thousands to choose from.
‘That's where independent advice comes in.
Once we know how much risk people are willing to accept, we can help them pick the ideal scheme.’
You'll also need help if you move on to the next step on the savings and investment ladder — direct investment in unit or investment trusts.
‘These are definitely not short-term investments and not for anyone who panics every time there is a blip in the stock market,’ says Amanda.
But even with these your risks are spread and so there is some form of protection.
For those who want even more excitement, the final step is direct stock-exchange investment.
‘But for this you should really have at least £50,000 and preferably £100,000 — and a stockbroker to guide you through the minefield of stocks and shares.’
Avoid debt trap
BEFORE starting up the savings and investment ladder, you must sort out your personal finances.
Nick Lord, a debt counsellor with the Money Advice Unit of the Citizens' Advice Bureau in Croydon, says: ‘Most people who get into money problems have lots of short-term, high interest debts.
‘If you have money to spare, it makes sense to pay these off first because they cost much more than you'd earn from savings.
‘The first rule of finance is don't borrow to invest — and that's what you're doing if you ignore debts while ploughing cash into savings.’
As a rule-of-thumb, your debts (excluding mortgage) should not total more than three months' earnings before tax.
Your monthly bills, including mortgage or rent, should not be more than half your monthly take-home pay.
Sharing the load
SHARE prices have ridden a switchback since the crash five years ago, leaving investors wary of pumping money into the Stock Exchange.
But while no one can guarantee a profit on stocks and shares, some companies are now offering a safe bet — a profit or your money back.
There are 16 of these guaranteed equity investments but financial advisers Pall Mall Money Management and Brooks Macdonald Gayer will each send a free guide to help Assets readers pick the best.
Just ring Pall Mall on 071 839 4272 or Brooks Macdonald on 071 499 6424.
The guides will help potential investors to compare costs and charges, accessibility of profits, the chances of a higher return and the relative tax advantages of the various schemes on offer.
PEP up your interest
Stephen Ellis
IF THE money market ran charts like the music business, PEPs would be a Number One hit.
Keen investors pumped more than £2,260 million into Personal Equity Plans last year — taking the total invested since the scheme was lauched in January 1987 to more than £6 billion.
PEPs originally were designed as part of the Government's plan to help more people become share owners by offering them the chance to invest in the Stock Exchange.
And a steady relaxation of regulations and the increasing of the maximum investment have made them even more popular.
With profit and income being tax-free, they have proved particularly attractive to high-rate tax-payers.
In the early years of the scheme, most of the money invested had to be used to buy individual shares.
At the same time, there were strict limits on the amount that could be put into unit or investment trusts.
Now you can invest all of the basic £6,000 a year allowance in unit or investment trusts.
In addition, a further £3,000 a year can be used to buy a PEP invested in the shares of one company.
Lloyds Bank fund manager Michael Smith says: ‘If the stock market picks up, as many are suggesting it will, PEPs will look more attractive than ever because the tax-free capital gain will be more valuable for someone who has consistently invested.’
However, with 500 different schemes on offer, it is difficult to pick the best.
To help, Chase de Vere Investments has produced a PEP guide.
It costs £8.95 but the fee will be returned if you buy your PEP through the company.
Many schemes allow you to swap existing investments for a PEP but you should be wary of the costs and charges.
There is usually an initial charge for setting up the scheme, as well as an annual management fee.
In addition, there are brokers' fees when buying individual shares.
Recently, a number of firms changed the way they charge.
Fidelity, for instance, has cut its initial fee while increasing penalties for cashing in your holding after a small number of years.
Others, like Scottish Equitable, have done away with the initial charge but raised the annual fee.
For more information on the PEP guide, write to: Chase de Vere, 63 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3JX.
Legal & General is offering a guarantee with its Recovery Trust PEP.
In five years' time, if the value has fallen below what was invested, you will receive a cheque refunding the difference.
And you will still be able to keep the PEP.
The trust has already proved to be a good performer.
In the past two years it has grown by more than 35 per cent, and anyone who put in £3,000 when it was launched, in April 1988, will have seen their investment swell to £4,267.
The popularity of the L & G guarantee is expected to persuade other PEP managers to make similar offers.
Riding the market — with stabilisers
MANY small investors are disenchanted with unit trusts, originally meant to reduce the risk of Stock Exchange investment.
In the boom of the late Seventies and Eighties companies devised trusts that focused on a type of investment or particular part of the world.
But this effectively increased risks.
Then followed the crash of 1987 and a period of lacklustre performance.
‘As an industry we have failed to meet the needs of savers and investors,’ admits Unit Trust Association chairman Barry Bateman.
‘Too many unit trusts are based on higher risk investments.
What people want is low risk.’
His company is Fidelity and its answer has been Stabiliser, a range of unit trusts which aim to minimise the risks if stock markets fall.
But investors must pay a price for this increased safety — not all of any gains are reflected in the trusts' performances.
Fidelity is also at the forefront of the new style cash unit trusts.
These are able to offer higher interest returns than a bank or building society because they pool everybody's cash.
Unit trusts are also cheaper to run.
Top funds are Fidelity Cash Account, Pru Cash Haven and Mercury Cash Trust.
Tessa tempts
MANY investors have been wooed by Tessa — the tax exempt special savings scheme introduced at the beginning of last year and offered by banks and building societies to anyone over 18.
So long as you leave the money untouched for five years the interest is paid tax free.
Withdrawing any cash before then does, however, make you liable for tax on that amount.
You can invest up to £9,000 over five years, but read the terms and conditions carefully.
Because rates are not fixed, schemes offering good returns now may soon not be the best deals.
Staying the distance is vital
KEITH Hatfield, of News At Ten fame, is a great believer in Personal Equity Plans.
With the help of advisers Chase de Vere he and wife Linette chose a plan that mixed safety with a little risk.
‘For starters we chose M & G Income Investment Trust which invests only in the shares of top companies,’ says Keith.
‘Then to add a little spice we selected Fidelity Special Situations which has a good track record but we're taking more of a gamble in the hope of bigger profits.’
They accept that the money tied up in PEPs must be left to grow.
‘I am 50 next birthday and have an eye on retiring in 10 years time,’ says Keith.
‘My advisers have made it clear that there would be no point in getting involved in stocks and shares unless it was for a minimum of five years and better still 10 years.’
Katy Parker, a development officer from Kent, first became interested in PEPs 18 months ago when she visited a branch of the Woolwich Building Society.
‘I was particularly impressed by the easy-to-understand literature they had on the subject and the lady behind the counter was able to give me instant advice.’
Katy ploughed £3,000 into a Woolwich PEP which has already grown to £3,567.
‘I know it's a medium to long-term investment but it is good to see it growing in the meantime,’ she says.
Go for Gilts
INVESTING in Government Securities — or Gilts as they are usually called — is one way to guarantee the rate of interest you'll earn.
It's important though to remember that the value of the investment itself will fluctuate so you cannot be certain of getting capital back intact.
When interest rates go down, the value of the Gilts will rise and vice versa.
Although they can prove good investments they are a minefield for the uninitiated.
Financial adviser Peter Hargreaves of Hargreaves Lansdown has produced a guide to Gilts which he will send free to Assets readers who call 0272 741 309.
Shop around for best rates
FIERCE competition between building societies and National Savings has so far spared savers even sharper cuts in interest as the base rate falls.
Societies have stayed their hand to woo custom away from NS.
But most of us still feel hard-pressed to keep up with those changes that have already taken place.
That's where the Building Society Shop can help.
They offer a free service identifying the best building society account to suit your needs once you have revealed how much you have to tuck away and how long you are willing to leave it tied up.
Boss Jeff Willis says: ‘The best deals at the moment are on postal accounts.
Cheltenham & Gloucester's London Deposit offers 9.6 per cent gross on sums over £10,000 and that is fixed until January.'
Although some societies allow you to open a postal account at their branch, all further dealings have to be through the post so you must be prepared for the occasional delay in getting at your cash.
Bristol & West have the other current top earning postal account.
Their Balmoral deal pays 9.74 per cent gross on amounts over £25,000.
‘Some savers like term shares where they tie their money up for a set period in return for a limited guarantee regarding the interest,’ says Willis.
One of the problems is the initial guarantee often looks attractive but only lasts for a short time.
After that the return is often slashed.
And although there is usually another promise about interest rates, in the long run it usually means very little.
It will say that the return will always be so many points above the society's basic share rate but that is always low.
‘For those who like term shares, the best deals at the moment are from Stroud & Swindon where you get 10 per cent gross fixed until January on £5,000 or more,’ says Willis.
‘You can also opt for the Woolwich Premium Investment Plus which is guaranteed at 10.2 per cent until January on sums of £25,000 or over.’
Although notice accounts are normally worthwhile, the return on them has been cut so much that there's little reason for people to choose them over postal accounts.
More Shop details on 0602 472 595.
A similar service is offered by Hargreaves Lansdown (0272 741 309).
Shell out for a nest egg
A SIMPLE and tax efficient way to save is through one of the tax exempt schemes run by a number of Britain's 500 friendly societies.
Following changes to the rules, every member of the family can now tuck away either £9 or £18 a month in one of these plans.
Your money is pooled with that from other savers and used to buy stocks, shares and similar investments.
You have to agree to keep up payments for ten years and normally will not be able to get at the cash in the meantime.
But you will be building up a useful nest egg and won't have to pay either capital gains or income tax on the money you get back.
Because of tax changes the amount you can invest has changed over the years.
But had you been able to tuck away today's maximum of £18 a month in 1982, it would be £3,272 by now and all it would have cost you is £2,160.
After ten years you have the choice of continuing to save or stopping contributions and letting the money grow.
Or you can cash in some or all of your investment.
Anyone who is a taxpayer, especially those liable at 40p in the pound, will find these schemes attractive.
Many people use them to build up a tax-free fund for youngsters which they get at 18 or 21, although you are restricted to one scheme per person.
Italian income bonds ensure happy returns
Stephen Ellis
FALLING interest rates may be good news for home buyers but they don't do savers any favours.
Guaranteed income bonds from insurance companies are one answer and it's still possible to get a good return despite recent cuts.
Giant Italian insurance firm Generalli has one of the best deals around by consistently buying the Government's War Loan stock.
In exchange it was promised it would always be paid the interest gross.
As a result they offer a lifetime guarantee on their income bond which fixes the return at the level on the day you buy.
Currently it's around 8.3 per cent a year.
But independent adviser David Aaron is offering to top that up to 10 per cent for the next year for any Assets reader who invests through him before December 31 (Phone 0908 281544 for details).
Minimum investment is £10,000 but because the money is buying War Loan bonds, when you cash in you'll only get what they are worth.
If interest rates go down then it could mean a capital gain.
Should they go up you'll lose out.
Other guaranteed income bonds are paying an average of around 5 per cent on £5,000 left tied up for a year.
Lock the cash away for longer and the return increases to 6.55 per cent.
National Savings also offer guarantees.
The 39th issue Savings Certs pay 6.75 per cent tax free a year if you leave the money invested for five years.
Children's Bonus Bonds, D issue, will turn £100 into £154.60 over five years and FIRST Option Bonds guarantee 6.5 per cent clear of basic rate tax on sums of £1,000 or more which are left untouched for a year.
Capital Bonds pay the equivalent of 9 per cent a year before tax if you leave the money invested for five years.
One of the best guarantees of all is provided by Premium Bonds, though you must never look on these as an investment.
They are a gamble and your stake is the interest you would earn on the cash.
Minimum purchase now is £100 and the maximum is £10,000.
If you bought that many bonds then you would effectively be losing around £3.50 a week in interest, not much more than doing the pools.
Each bond has a one in 11,000 chance of winning any prize.
Someone with the £10,000 maximum, assuming average luck, can expect to collect a prize in 11 out of the 12 monthly draws each year — a return of about 6.5 per cent.
And there is always a chance of winning the £250,000 top prize.
Keep those investments on the rails
Stephen Ellis
INVESTMENT trusts were born in 1868 with the formation of what is now Foreign & Colonial.
The idea was to give small investors the chance to pool their money and so spread their risk and get better returns.
Originally F&C specialised in Government Bonds which returned only about 3 per cent.
In an effort to boost that the company turned its attention to railway and industrial projects, many of them in other countries.
Towards the end of the last century it was one of the main investors in America's first railroads.
As this century has advanced, so investment trusts have developed to embrace more direct investment in the shares of other companies.
There are now around 250 investment trusts worth a combined total of £24 billion.
Until 1984 the only way to buy shares in investment trusts was through a stockbroker.
Now there are savings and investment schemes which allow you either to put in a lump sum or tuck away regular savings.
These start from as little as £20 a month or a £200 lump sum and will save you the stockbroker's commission.
Whichever way you fund your purchase, however, you are still buying shares in a limited company which is one of the main differences between investment and unit trusts.
The similarity is that your risks are spread over a much wider range of investments than you could achieve on your own.
If you already own shares — say, for instance, in companies privatised by the Government — you can swap them for investment trust shares.
Several companies offer this facility and some will even do it free of charge.
Anyone investing £1,000 in the average investment trust just after the second world war would now have a holding worth well over Pounds 250,000.
A number of leaflets on the industry, which explain the various ways to invest, are available from the Association of Investment Trusts, telephone 071 588 5347.
Ghostwatch
THE BBC's Halloween programme Ghostwatch is proof that viewers do react to what they see on TV.
Never again can programme makers say scenes of violence, sex and crime have no effect on the public.
There was no ram-raiding until after the news showed it happening in America.
The Queen and income tax
IF the Queen accepts Norman Lamont's decision that she should not pay income tax the unrest could be extremely serious.
While ordinary young people lose their homes and families struggle to feed and clothe their children, the Royal Family continues to live in obscene luxury.
Royal Family tax
OUR daughter is trying to bring up three children on £8,000 a year and has to pay £800 of that in income tax.
Lamont's decision not to tax the Royal Family is disgraceful and I don't know how the Queen can sleep at night when her subjects are struggling in misery.
The Queen and income tax
HOW dare Norman Lamont decide the Queen shouldn't pay tax while at the same time there is talk of taxing people on invalidity benefit?
What a rotten Government we have.
Magic's tale of courage
IT is one of the most moving stories of the decade.
Magic Johnson is a sporting legend and when he announced he was HIV positive the world admired his courage.
MY LIFE by Earvin ‘Magic’ Johnson with William Novak (Random Century, £15.99) is his fascinating true tale.
Order a copy by filling in the coupon on the right.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Lyricist Tim Rice, 48.
Screaming Lord Sutch, 52.
ON THIS DAY: In 1871, Stanley met Livingstone on the shore of Lake Tanganyika.
In 1919, Britain's first civil airmail service began.
In 1971, Kenny Dalglish made his international debut for Scotland.
Bank's snub gives me identity crisis
I WORK for a company which pays its staff by cheque.
While that is not unusual in this day and age, I find the attitude of the High Street banks a little mystifying.
On a recent visit to the Midland Bank in Southampton to ask about opening a current account I was told that I needed some form of indentification.
I can see the reasons for that and went along with my birth certificate, marriage licence and National Insurance card.
But I was told that unless I could produce a current driving licence or passport — neither of which I possess — they were not prepared to give me an account.
That's not too troublesome for me because my wife has an account (with a different bank), so I can sign my cheques over to her.
But perhaps someone from Midland can explain how they hope to attract accounts from youngsters in their first jobs who have not passed their driving test and have never had a passport.
I was first attracted to the Midland by its advertising campaign which stated what a ‘caring’ bank it was.
Could it be that the only people they really care about are the ones who can afford big cars and foreign holidays?
That's certainly how it appears to me.
Easy listening
I WOULD like to say how much I have enjoyed listening to former Labour leader Neil Kinnock, right, while he has been standing in for Jimmy Young on Radio 2.
Mr Kinnock has such a nice manner, as well as a very pleasant voice.
Thank you Neil, you made a welcome change.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE torch — associated with burning desire and passion — is an attribute of the ancient god Venus.
An extinguished torch held upturned in the hand of Venus's son, that troublesome archer Cupid, represents unrequited love — hence we are said to ‘carry a torch’ for someone.
A development of this usage comes in the form of ‘to take a shine to’ someone which indicates something short of adulation.
The early torch consisted of little more than impregnated rushes twisted about each other.
This is the source of the connection between the words ‘torch’ and ‘torture’, the art of twisting limbs.
It is an unpleasant irony that the most enthusiastic torturer of all time, the Grand Inquisitor Torquemada, carried a name that in part meant the twister — as does ‘torque’, the twisting force of an engine.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Government U-turn
WHY does the Press describe breaking one's word as a U-turn?
In politics the term is just another way of describing lies and fraud, as in the promises used to bribe Tory Maastricht rebels.
No wonder this Government is so despised — Major's double standards smack of deviousness.
W Humphrey, Shrewsbury
The Cellulite Roadshow
ALREADY We haven't even started, and everyone is talking about TODAY's Cellulite Roadshow.
The phone hardly stopped ringing yesterday with readers eager to know more about our team of experts dedicated to fighting the unsightly fat that plagues eight in ten women.
Ladies, you don't have to wait much longer.
Tomorrow in Health Works we reveal the roadshow timetable.
And on Monday the panel — including doctors, nutritionists, dieticians and beauty experts — arrives in the first of six cities, ready to give confidential FREE advice to suit your individual needs.
Don't miss TODAY — tomorrow.
Britain must come first
IN his Autumn Statement tomorrow the Chancellor is expected to give the go-ahead to several multi-million pound projects that would provide British industry with the boost it needs.
Unfortunately, as we reveal today, much of the work will not go to British industry.
The jobs will be created in Germany, Japan, France, Canada and even Australia.
Documents we have obtained show that one contract for the extension to the London Underground Jubilee Line is to go to a German firm, even though a British company is desperate for the work.
What is the point of the Government providing billions to help our economy when the help is mainly going to other countries?
TODAY is all in favour of pressing ahead with the great public works which will give jobs in the construction, building and engineering industries, all of which have been badly hit by the recession.
But it might as well save its money if it is merely going to flow out of the country into the pockets and profits of foreign firms.
The Government always says how careful it is not to waste taxpayers' money.
It is wasting it though if cash which is supposed to help British firms and workers is spent abroad.
The whole point of allowing the big schemes to go ahead at this difficult economic time, after all, is not just to get roads and railway lines built but to cut unemployment and get the economy moving.
The Chancellor's job is to provide the money.
It is the task of the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine, to make sure it is not wasted.
He claimed at the Tory Conference, in a phrase that he must by now be sick of hearing thrown back at him, that he would intervene before breakfast, lunch and dinner.
As soon as Mr Lamont has announced that the cash is there for the Jubilee Line and other great projects, Mr Heseltine must get intervening.
He must insist that work always goes to British firms and British workers unless it can only be done abroad.
If he hasn't the will or the stomach to do that, he had better make way for someone who has before millions intended to help this country are thrown away.
Twisted arms
THE Attorney-General's statement on the collapsed Iraqi arms trial was a masterpiece of political-legal double-speak.
He claimed that the Ministers who allowed the prosecution of three innocent businessmen to go ahead were only doing their duty.
They were right to insist that documents should not be released to the court because, he said, that was what they had to do.
If that is the law, it is a dirty, devious, disgraceful one.
And no Minister, especially no law officer, should countenance it.
Those documents proved that the three accused men were innocent.
How could anyone say that, in those circumstances, they had to remain secret?
What nonsense.
The courts are criticised often enough.
At times like this we can thank God for their independence from politicians.
Cats' whiskers
CONGRATULATIONS to Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber for getting a special award from the English Tourist Board.
They say he has ‘done much to enhance England's profile’.
Well, he has certainly done a lot to change it.
Tourists now think this is a country in which the theatres are haunted by phantoms and the streets are over-run with cats and manic roller-skaters.
And the national anthem is Don't Cry for Me, Argentina.
Lethal weapons
Fergus Kelly
The law must be changed to stop 17-year-olds taking the wheel of 140mph monsters like these.
THEY are the dream wheels of every boy racer, with enough power under the bonnet to smash any speed limit.
But in the wrong hands they are as lethal a weapon as a gun.
As the law stands, it is possible for a teenager to pass a driving test on his 17th birthday — and drive off in a 150mph Ford Sierra or a Mercedes sports.
Yet every year brings casualties: young drivers behind the wheel of cars they are too inexperienced to handle, losing control and killing themselves or others.
These are not isolated cases.
In an investigation sponsored by the AA, Southampton University psychologist Dr Roger Ingham discovered that 42 per cent of male drivers aged under 21 committed at least four unsafe driving acts every mile.
During their first four years as qualified drivers, they persistently followed the vehicle in front too closely, overtook perilously, raced other cars and jumped red lights.
Simon Burns, Conservative MP for Chelmsford, believes the law must be changed to stop youngsters driving superfast cars.
Two years ago he brought in a Commons Bill (which, sadly, failed) to try to clamp down on the boy racers.
It would have forced new drivers to carry ‘P’ plates, denoting a ‘probationary’driver, and restricting them to driving only low-performance cars.
‘Evidence seems to suggest that young drivers are far more likely to have accidents, which is not surprising because they are very inexperienced,’ he says.
‘I suspect a lot of them get carried away and think because they have just passed their test they are great drivers.
‘But it is crazy that a 17-year-old could drive a Porsche or Series 7 BMW.’
Former motor racing ace Stirling Moss agrees.
‘I think the current situation is appalling,’ he says.
‘The trouble with the test is that you don't have to be competent to drive.
‘There should be some form of grading, like a golfing handicap, allowing you to drive only smaller cars at the lowest level.
If you want a bigger car you take another test.
‘People should realise that passing their test does not mean that they are capable of driving all types of car.
The more powerful the car the more difficult it is to handle.’
The problem is getting that fact across to youngsters.
According to the Driver Vehicle Licensing Centre in Swansea, there are 70,361 17-year-old men with full licences in Britain at the moment, and 39,417 women of the same age.
In Northern Ireland new drivers already have to display an ‘R’(for restricted) plate and may not exceed 45mph for one year after passing their test.
The Institute of Advanced Motoring's 120,000 members desperately want to see a change in the law.
‘The danger is that dad says after they've passed their test, ‘Take my BMW for a spin’, and away they go,’ says chief examiner Ted Clements.
‘When people pass their test, it's the end of the beginning.
Previously they have been in with an instructor or parent.
Then they tear up their L-plates and are out on their own.
‘That's when some start taking chances, so we would definitely advocate a ‘P’ or ‘R’plate.’
Meanwhile the temptations for tearaway drivers are there on every garage forecourt.
There are more than 70 models currently on the market which are capable of 140mph or more.
Last year Ford UK took a major step in banning staff members under 21 or with fewer than three years' driving experience from using the fast models.
The insurance industry also provides some blocks to teenagers driving fast cars.
Premiums on high-insurance vehicles soared by 80 per cent earlier this year and many companies are extremely wary of covering very young drivers.
‘Nobody would touch a 17 or 18-year-old wanting to insure a high-performance car with a barge pole,’ says an AA spokesman.
The Southampton study suggested a ‘New Driver Scheme’ which would mean new drivers would appear in court after getting only four or six penalty points.
Anyone exceeding these levels would have to re-take their test.
‘It would be a greater motivation for new drivers to behave themselves,’ says Dr Ingham.
Meanwhile the death toll among drivers in the 17 to 21 age group continues to cause concern.
Last year 3,284 were killed or seriously injured, which is down on the figure of 4,302 in 1981, but a long way from the Department of Transport's aim of cutting it to below 3,000.
The Department is currently awaiting four reports on young drivers from the Berkshire-based Road Transport Laboratory, including one on the R-plate scheme.
‘Not until we fully understand people's attitudes and experience can we put through the appropriate legislation,’ says a spokesman.
But until that legislation is agreed on, the deaths will continue.
For statistics alone are unlikely to stop a 17-year-old putting his foot down in a lethal weapon.
Singing through the pain
Lucy Broadbent
Why musicals are such big business in the recession.
THERE'S not much to sing about in Britain's current economic climate — but you would never know it.
For as the recession bites harder, people are increasingly looking to a rousing chorus line as a way to beat the blues.
Three new musicals are about to open in London and the advance ticket sales are phenomenal.
A record 75,000 advance tickets have been sold for the National Theatre's production of Carousel which opens on December 1.
Annie Get Your Gun, opening on November 25, has sold 25,000 tickets, and 80,000 seats have gone for the revival of Barnum, which opens on December 17 with Paul Nicholas in the starring role.
Meanwhile blockbusters including Phantom Of The Opera and Miss Saigon are booked up well into 1993.
Experts believe it is all part of a wartime spirit of looking on the bright side.
During the second world war, people huddled in air raid shelters defiantly singing Oh What A Beautiful Morning from Oklahoma!, which had just opened in the US.
A few years later in the post-war depression they kept their spirits up by flocking to see the stage shows Carousel and Annie Get Your Gun.
‘Musicals always do well in a recession because people want escapism,’ says Patrick O'Connor of the New Grove Dictionary Of Opera.
‘Musicals are jolly.
You know when you sit down in your seat the performance is going to be uplifting and you will leave the theatre humming a cheerful tune.’
That was certainly the philosophy during the times of economic crisis in the early Eighties when the original run of Barnum played to packed houses, and when the National Theatre hit the jackpot with its first musical, Guys And Dolls.
Psychologist Dr Glen Wilson, author of The Psychology Of Performing Arts, believes an evening of song and dance can actually change people for the better.
‘Musicals give a direct emotional lift,’ he says.
‘The music has an awakening effect, which has you leaving the theatre with more energy and life than before.’
Perhaps the Cabinet should book a few seats…
Arise Sir Tortoise
By Jane Gordon
I HAVE always supported the principle of a person being able to leave their worldly goods to whoever they like.
This week one old dear ignored her relatives and left £25,000 to her tortoise.
Sadly, this right to leave your bits and pieces to your budgie or bulldog is denied those with hereditary titles.
As the twice-imprisoned Marquis of Blandford revealed this week, his father has no power to disinherit him.
‘Blenheim is an irrevocable legacy.
That is quite wonderful,’ he said.
It must be a lot less wonderful for the current Duke Of Marlborough.
I mean, wouldn't a nice tortoise be a more worthy beneficiary than the reptilian Jamie?
Chain reaction
By Jane Gordon
HAVE you noticed the new realism creeping into TV ads?
Not just the irritating Claire Rayner and her things with ‘wings’ but the new ads for toiletries that feature, er, toilets.
Most memorable is the Andrex one showing a cute puppy, and a boy on a loo.
This welcome trend towards honesty in the messy business of personal hygiene is never more obvious than in nappy advertising where one current ad merrily alludes to ‘No 2s’.
It was high time ad men abandoned their prudish stance and accepted the British public was ready to take the journey round that long hidden bend.
Vamp of distinction
By Jane Gordon
FUNNY things have happened to Ulrika Jonsson (left) since she traded in low fronts for big hunks.
(Well, since she's given up weather forecasting in favour of presenting The Gladiat-ors.)
The once sweet and innocent Ulrika is now so determined to throw off that old image that she has agreed to be the body behind the latest Playtex product range.
The result is a set of pictures that expose her as a fabulous vamp with more definition than Wolf and more powerful pectorals than Panther.
How has she done it?
At what point did that slight, pretty girl turn into this glamorous and voluptuous creature?
According to the publicity men at Playtex she did it without the aid of pumping iron or silicone injections.
Her dramatic new figure, they say, is all down to the magical properties of the Secrets body she's seen wearing here.
What a shame there isn't yet a product that can give her personality a similarly dramatic boost and uplift.
If you think Di's marriage is flawed, just look at mine
By Jane Gordon
THE generally held belief that the marriage of Diana and Charles has broken down seems to depend on photographs of the couple on the few occasions on which they appear together in public.
And while it's clearly undeniable that they are no longer lovelorn newlyweds, I am not totally convinced that these pictures — coupled with the comments of anonymous ‘friends’ and ambitious biographers — are proof of their estrangement.
If Andrew Morton, the paparazzi, the Press and the public were to take a similar interest in your marriage or mine, I'm sure it wouldn't be difficult for them to pinpoint dramatic cracks in our relationships.
Take this last week, for instance.
Had an ITN camera crew been present in Safeways when my husband and I (to use a Royal phrase) argued so publicly over who was paying the £75 bill, heaven knows what conclusions they would have drawn.
And if, later that day, 20 newsmen and photographers had turned up at our family bonfire party and witnessed my hysterical attempt to restrain my husband from re-lighting that dud super-rocket (well, I wasn't sure his life insurance was paid up), speculation as to the real state of our marriage could doubtless have made dramatic headlines.
Just two days later, at a party attended by a particularly ‘old’(and tarty) flame of his, the expression on my face as I watched the two of them exchange meaningful glances would surely have revealed the same disgust and disdain that Diana displays whenever she encounters one of her husband's confidantes.
Although I doubt even Camilla would wear the backless Lycra frock that this woman almost had on.
Nor would snatched snaps of us going home in our car that evening have revealed any particular closeness as my passionate tirade about his behaviour fell on deaf or rather sleeping ears as he lay comatose in the passenger seat.
What's more, if our marriage were of public interest, I'm sure that our friends would be falling over each other to tell appalling stories of our life together (albeit anonymously): The arguments, the forgotten anniversaries, the time I threw a carafe of red wine across the room at him, that awful day when he mislaid the baby.
And if this list of disasters wasn't clear enough evidence of our marital discord, I'm sure that our body language — scrutinised by a knowing psychologist — would further reveal us to be living distant and quite separate lives.
In fact I've decided that my own preoccupation with the state of Diana and Charles's marriage is rather hypocritical when my own, if examined under a public microscope, would look pretty ghastly.
The real moments of blissful togetherness that we spend together — and actually there are quite a few — are rarely, if ever, shared in public.
Probably rather like your relationship, and maybe even that of Charles and Diana, ours remains intact because privately, not publicly, we rather like each other.
The maniac in my car
By Jane Gordon
MOST of us admit to personality changes in certain circumstances.
Many women feel that PMS can turn them from normal, balanced folk into devils.
But for me the agent for personality change is not hormonal.
It's my car.
I can clamber into it a smiling, law-abiding little woman.
But once inside I become a snarling, aggressive potential criminal.
I exceed the speed limit, park anywhere, and I've even — in the past — failed to pay my road tax.
I cut up articulated lorries, rashly overtake, and dash through traffic lights when they're more red than amber.
And all this, I'll add, with a baby on board.
Yet despite my criminal tendencies, this week's news that Kenneth Clarke is planning to curb police powers against drivers has rather worried me.
Because the car is a bigger killer than violent crime.
In the wrong hands — maybe even my own — it is potentially deadly.
Police control of the roads is as important to public safety as crime prevention and detection.
Last year their efforts achieved a 12 per cent reduction in road deaths.
Without their present powers even more of us would drive without due care and attention and the road casualty figures would soar.
I might want to poke my tongue out at those new cameras as I slow down to pass them, but deep down even I know that they're there for my protection.
The doctor who sets free trapped genius
Robyn Foyster
HE STRUGGLES to tie his shoelaces and button his shirt.
He can't even cross the road by himself.
But Christopher Taylor will happily chat to you in any one of 18 languages.
Christopher is a savant, a man of 30 with the mind of a 10-year-old but linguistic abilities that have stunned the scientific world.
He is also the latest discovery of British psychologist Dr Neil O'Connor, the world's foremost expert on savants and the man who has spent the past ten years helping to unlock the genius trapped within their flawed minds.
It was Dr O'Connor who Dustin Hoffman turned to when he was researching his Oscar-winning role as autistic savant Raymond Babbitt in Rain Man.
‘Dustin called me to check up on some facts and I was able to shed some light on the character he played,’ Dr O'Connor says modestly.
But his enthusiasm is far more apparent when he speaks about Christopher — who has a non-verbal IQ of between 40 and 70 — and their extraordinary first meeting.
‘I knew some Hindi so I asked Chris in Hindi what time it was.
He looked at his watch and told me, yet as far as I knew he had never heard that language before.
Then I tried some Russian and he spoke that as well.
He was also learning Hebrew.
It was the first time I had ever heard of a savant with a linguistic ability.
‘I gave Chris French, German and Spanish A-level papers.
I thought he'd be thrown but he went through them like an express train.’
Dr O'Connor, 75, has studied autism for the past 40 years.
At the start of his research into savants there were only 50 known cases in the world.
He has since discovered 60 others and is convinced there are many more.
They are people like Louise Fursland, a 37-year-old Down's Syndrome sufferer with an IQ below 30 and no speech.
She can listen to TV tunes once and play them on a piano with one hand and on an accordion with the other.
Savant Alan Carter, 39, was never taught to read music.
Today he is an accomplished musician who has won awards for piano playing.
Michael Agassiz, now 25, is a brilliant mathematician.
‘At nine he could do the most difficult logic tests,’ says Dr O'Connor.
‘He is much brighter than me yet he cannot speak.’
The doctor also discovered Stephen Wiltshire, famous for his intricately detailed drawings of buildings which he produces within minutes.
Stephen did not speak at all until he was seven and even now at 15 only answers questions with a single word.
Examples of brilliance crop up in one in ten autistic children.
Some of the more profound patterns which Dr O'Connor's research uncovered debunk the myth that savants rely on photographic memories.
‘They use certain rules as well,’ he says.
Studies on savants who can tell you the day of the week on which you were born found that they followed the rules of a calendar to work out the dates.
Musical savants could easily learn pieces by Greig which follow classical rules, but were stumped by the less structured avant garde works of Bartok.
And now there is Christopher Taylor who is currently being taught Berber by Professor Neil Smith and Dr Ianthi Tsimpli of London University.
The research should prove invaluable in the study of linguistics.
‘Christopher has a huge vocabulary,’ says Professor Smith.
‘And if he sees a word like camel with parts of the letters C, M and L missed out, he identifies that word faster than anyone else — and that includes my PhD students.’
Imam
TOP model Imam, above, weeps as US senators and reporters in Washington watch a documentary she made of her hunger-torn homeland, Somalia.
Rowen Atkinson
RUBBER-faced funnyman Rowan Atkinson has admitted he plays it strictly for cash.
The Mr Bean and Blackadder star said: ‘Comedy's not funny people, it's people who chose when to be funny — for gain.’
Rowan stars shortly in the new BBC series Funny Business.
Roseanne Arnold
BRASH comedienne Roseanne Arnold was for once left speechless when husband Tom handed her a $1 million (£655,000) set of diamond and emerald jewels at a star-studded 40th birthday bash at Beverly Hills Hotel.
Burt Reynolds
SCREEN legend Burt Reynolds made a rare return to Hollywood for the launch of his debut as film director.
Burt arrived with wife Loni Anderson for the premiere of The Man Upstairs, starring Ryan O'Neal and Katherine Hepburn.
Guy's £50m deal puts Lotus in pole position
By Tim Satchell
GUY Edwards, the former Formula One racing driver, tells me from California that he has clinched a £50 million sponsorship deal for the Lotus Formula One team.
‘We'll be world champions within three years,’ Mr Edwards predicts.
Lead driver for 1993 will be Johnny Herbert, with a number two driver to be announced.
The vital three-year sponsorship deal is with six major Japanese corporations, as well as with European and American companies, including Hitachi, Castrol and Devil Dirt.
Hitachi provides the lion's share of the new Japanese support.
Its name will feature prominently on the 1993–95 Lotus cars' back wing as well as the drivers' racing suits.
Also aboard till autumn 1995 are Shiongo, Komatsu, Yellow Hat, Nichibutsu and Tamiya.
Mr Edwards has just spent two weeks in Japan.
Two years ago Team Lotus looked as though it was about to disappear.
Indeed today in the High Court a petition is being presented for the compulsory winding up of the company.
Mr Edwards tells me: ‘That relates to an old bill and it was settled last September.’
Team Lotus was rescued by Peter Wright and Peter Collins, while Lotus cars and Lotus Engineering were bought by General Motors.
‘We have a particularly close relationship with Lotus Engineering, which employs 600,’ he says.
‘We all share a passion for Lotus cars.’
Mr Edwards, 50, who was awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal for helping to save the life of World Champion Niki Lauda in 1976, previously ran the Jaguar sponsorship programme for six years.
The Princess of Wales' confidant James Gilbey works for Team Lotus.
AN intriguing story has it that Traffic Minister Kenneth Carlisle's American wife Carla, after attending the Sorbonne, spent three years in France lecturing on poultry.
When I rang her, she burst into giggles, saying: ‘No, no.
Not poultry.
Poetry.
You know, Sylvia Plath and all that.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
SCOTTISH recession latest.
Two taxis collide in Kilmarnock.
37 injured.
Zoo purrs over ocelot kittens
By Tim Satchell
FOR the first time in decades a litter of two ocelot kittens has been born at London Zoo.
‘We are delighted,’ says Gina Dobson from the zoo's Regent's Park offices.
She tells that there is only a photograph of one kitten (left) as the keepers weren't allowed near them by the mother, Cato.
Similarly, they have not yet been sexed or named.
‘But any day soon we hope that visitors will be able to see her kittens at play.’
The last time an ocelot at the zoo gave birth to a litter of more than one was in 1955.
‘These kittens will play an important part in securing the future for this beautiful species,’ says Doug Richardson, who is in charge of big cat breeding at the zoo.
‘Ocelots in the wild are facing the increasing threats of habitat destruction and trapping for the fur trade.’
The ocelot is an American cat like a small leopard; its name comes from the Mexican ‘ocelotl’, meaning jaguar.
Emma Fielding
By Tim Satchell
ACTRESS Emma Fielding, above, star of BBC1's Sunday night thriller Tell Tale Hearts, made her stage debut last night.
Miss Fielding, 26, is playing the lead in a new production of Jane Eyre at The Crucible, Sheffield, with Jack Shepherd as Rochester.
Daughter of an army father Miss Fielding left the Royal Scottish Academy of Speech and Drama last year.
Not such a smooth passage for Judith
By Tim Satchell
JUDITH Chalmers, whose new series of Wish You Were Here starts on December 7, is not immune from travel difficulties.
Yesterday, having just returned from Mauritius, she told me: ‘It will look very smooth on the screen.
In fact we checked in at Heathrow at 2pm but our plane didn't take off until nine the next morning.
We were hanging about for 19 hours altogether.’
The new series, which will be seen by 15 million people a week, will include guides from Eric Richard, Sgt Bob Cryer of The Bill, who rode a Harley Davidson across the United States, Jimmy Tarbuck, who played golf in Portugal, and Michael Aspel, who built sand castles in Sardinia.
Miss Chalmers is a keen holiday-goer herself but while the viewers over Christmas will be seeing her in Mauritius, she says: ‘I'll be wrapped up warmly at home in London.’
Please don't make me eat my words
Yvonne Swann
I THINK eating is a private affair.
I'm not a social eater and I hate talking and eating at the same time.
Dinner parties are my dread but I go to them because my wife, Eileen, enjoys them.
She deserves some fun after typing all my manuscripts.
The worst thing is giving a Press interview in a restaurant.
Answering questions while chomping through steak is horrendous.
On these occasions I choose food I can pick at nonchalantly, such as fish or a delicate starter.
When I'm at home in the country I have breakfast at 9 am — cereal, brown toast and tea — and I'm at my desk by 10 am.
I like a light lunch, perhaps scrambled eggs and salmon.
I rarely drink in the week, and I've never acquired a taste for wine.
I have supper with Eileen and any of my three daughters who are around.
We like simple things such as lamb and mashed potatoes.
If we eat out my favourite meal is oysters and caviar followed by asparagus with melted butter.
My taste for asparagus comes from my childhood.
My father worked in a market and he got big bundles of it very cheaply.
Dad sold fruit and vegetables and because there were so many of them about, I never wanted any.
I'm not fond of greens, brussels sprouts or swedes.
And I never eat salad — it's for rabbits.
I've become very choosy about food since researching my latest novel, PORTENT (Hodder & Stoughton, £14.99), which is about weird ecological disasters.
There isn't much I don't know about chemical additives and mad cow disease.
I'm a bit of a bore really when it comes to food.
It doesn't interest me deeply — unless of course it's caviar, oysters and asparagus!
Only the zest is good enough
Fiona Beckett
THAT slice of lemon floating in your gin and tonic is there to add zest.
But the ancient world would have found a lot more uses for citrus fruit.
Egyptians used it for embalming their dead, the Mesopotamians used it as perfume and the Romans thought it was an aphrodisiac.
Over the centuries citrus fruits have also been used to cure fever and protect against poisoning.
The modern world has discovered that citrus fruits are rich in vitamin C — and has started using them in a big way for cooking.
The range is huge, from the well-known oranges, lemons and limes to the more obscure kumquats and mineolas, pomelos and ugli fruit.
These exotic fruits are increasingly finding their way on to supermarket shelves and from there to our fruitbowls.
But, as American author Ford Rogers points out in his fascinating new book Citrus: A Cookbook, they are versatile cooking ingredients.
Everyone knows about lemon meringue pie and duck with orange sauce — but the range also includes soups, salads and pasta dishes as well as tangy sauces, chutneys and marinades.
The peel of citrus fruits can also be dried or candied.
Home-made peel is delicious and a far cry from the dreary tubs that are sold each Christmas.
Where health is concerned, not many people realise that the zest and even the pith of citrus fruit is as valuable as the juice.
Skins on the segment and the pith both contain substances called bioflavonoids which enhance the effect of vitamin C, so it's better to make use of the whole fruits rather than simply pressing them for your breakfast juice.
They are ideal for weight-watchers, since oranges and most soft citrus fruits contain only 35 calories per 100g (3½ oz).
Grapefruit has 22 calories per 100g, while lime and lemon juice contains only 7 calories per 100g.
When buying citrus fruit, look for shiny, healthy-looking skins that are not bruised or discoloured.
The fruit should feel plump and heavy for their size.
Some fruit may have been given an artificial protective coating, so it's best to wash them in warm soapy water and rinse them well before use.
The recipes on the facing page give a few ideas for cooking with these fruit.
Meanwhile here is a guide to the most popular varieties: Clementines are a cross between a tangerine and a Seville orange, with deep, tangy flesh.
Grapefruit were discovered in the 18th Century.
The pink variety is sweeter.
Kumquats are the smallest of the orange family.
They are slightly bitter but every part is edible, including the pips.
Lemons contain twice the amount of vitamin C as oranges, as well as valuable B vitamins.
Limes are popular in Mexican, Caribbean and Thai cooking.
You can substitute lime juice for lemon juice in a recipe.
But reduce the quantity of juice by a third.
Mineolas are large with deep orange smooth skins and distinctive knobs on the top.
They're a cross between a grapefruit and a tangerine.
Oranges were first introduced into Europe by the Arabs and were originally seen as status symbols.
The Seville variety is mainly used for marmalade, while the rest are for ordinary eating and cooking.
Pomelos are thick-skinned yellowy-green fruit with a sweet-sharp taste.
Satsumas are a small, easy-to-peel seedless fruit with sweet, juicy flesh.
Tangerines and Mandarins are sweet, easy to peel and highly scented.
Ugli Fruit are large and knobbly but with sweet, juicy flesh.
Citrus: A Cookbook by Ford Rogers is published by Cassell, price £14.99.
CITRUS TIPS
USE lemon juice in place of salt or vinegar for a cool, clean taste.
ADD the juice of a lemon instead of salt to the water used to boil pasta.
SPRINKLE lemon juice on cut pale-coloured fruit such as apples, bananas, pears or avocados to avoid discoloration.
TENDERISE tough meat by marinating it in any kind of citrus juice or by spooning juice over the meat after piercing it with a fork.
NEVER use iron or aluminium cookware with citrus because the juice reacts with the metal.
The results will be a metallic taste and food with dark streaks.
IF you only need lemon or orange juice in a recipe and not the rind, pour boiling water over the fruit and leave it to stand for 5 minutes to release the maximum amount of juice.
Then squeeze it as normal.
JUICE flows more freely from citrus fruit if you warm the fruit on a medium setting in a microwave oven for a couple of minutes.
Recipes
CITRUS adds a tangy taste to all sorts of savoury dishes, and sharp fruit juices combine well with garlic and spices for an oriental flavour.
These recipes will all add zest to your cookery.
Curried Orange Soup Serves 6
½ oz unsalted butter, 1 onion, 1 lb carrots, 1 large garlic clove, 1¼ pints chicken stock, ½tsp ground turmeric, 3 whole cloves, 1tsp coriander seeds, 12 black peppercorns, ½tsp cumin seeds, 1 dried red chilli, ½tsp fennel seeds, 3in cinnamon stick, 6 allspice berries, 2 cardamom pods, 4 slices fresh root ginger, 16fl oz fresh orange juice, mint and orange slices to garnish.
Melt butter over medium heat in a large pan.
Add chopped onion and saute until golden.
Add chopped carrots, garlic, stock and ginger.
Tie all spices in muslin and add to pan.
Boil, then simmer, uncovered, for 30 minutes.
Remove spice bag and puree soup.
Return soup to pan, add orange juice and heat.
Serve hot, garnished with mint and orange slices.
Fish With Ugli Fruit Serves 4
1oz unsalted butter, 1 lb white fish fillets, ¾ in piece fresh root ginger, 1 small onion, 1 ugli fruit, 2tsps fresh thyme (or ¼tsp dried), salt and black pepper
Preheat oven to 230C, 450F or Gas 8.
Grease a shallow tin with a quarter of the butter.
Arrange fish in a single layer in the tin.
Slice the ginger paper-thin and scatter it, along with the onion slices, over the fish.
Peel ugli fruit, removing white pith.
Separate segments and scatter in the tin.
Top with thyme and salt and pepper.
Dot with remaining butter and bake for about 10 minutes, or until the fish is opaque.
Lemon Fettuccine Serves 4
1 lb fresh Lemon Fettuccine (recipe below), 1tbspn salt, ¼ pint olive oil, 2oz unsalted butter, 1 large garlic clove, chopped, 1 lb raw king prawns, peeled and deveined, 1 large red pepper, chopped, 1 small fresh green chilli, chopped, 1oz chopped parsley, lemon to garnish.
For lemon fettucini, place these ingredients in a food processor: 6oz fine semolina, 5oz unbleached plain flour, 3tbspns finely grated lemon zest, ¼tsp salt, 1 size 3 egg, 1 size 3 egg yolk, 1tbspn olive oil, 2tbspns strained lemon juice.
Process, then transfer mixture to a work surface and knead until fairly smooth, dusting with flour if it sticks.
Wrap and set aside for 30 minutes.
Process through a pasta machine following the manufacturer's directions.
Now bring a large pan of water to the boil.
Add one tablespoon of salt, two tablespoons of oil and the fettuccine.
Stir gently, then boil for 1½–2 minutes, or until al dente.
Drain.
Meanwhile heat olive oil and butter in a large pan.
Add garlic, then prawns and saute one minute on each side.
Add red pepper and chilli and saute for two minutes.
Remove from heat and add parsley and pour over fettuccine.
Grapefruit Poussin Serves 6
3 poussins, halved and backbones removed, 2½oz mint jelly, 8fl oz freshly squeezed grapefruit juice, ½tsp black pepper, ½tsp ground cinnamon, 1tbspn Dijon mustard, 1 garlic clove, grapefruit slices and mint leaves to garnish.
Place poussin halves on work surface, bone side down.
Press down to flatten, tuck wing tip under breast and stick end of leg through a slit in the skin between breast and thigh.
Whisk together remaining ingredients except grapefruit slices and mint leaves.
Pour marinade over poussins, cover and refrigerate for four hours.
Grill poussins under moderately high heat for 15–20 minutes on each side, basting with the marinade.
Garnish with grapefruit slices and mint leaves.
Beef With Tangerines Serves 6
2lb lean chuck steak or topside, cubed, flour for dredging, 3tbspns vegetable oil, 16fl oz dry red wine, 8fl oz beef stock, 12oz button onions, 2 large carrots, cut into chunks, 2 large garlic cloves, 3tbspns soy sauce, ½tsp dried chilli flakes, 1tsp caster sugar, 5 thin slices fresh root ginger, 2 tangerines, 1 large green and 1 large red pepper, in 1in squares, 1oz sliced spring onion greens, cooked rice.
Dredge beef in flour and brown in batches in oil over high heat in a flameproof casserole.
Add wine, stock, onions, carrots, garlic, soy sauce, chilli flakes, sugar and ginger.
Bring to the boil, then lower heat, cover and simmer for one hour.
Near the end of the hour, remove the skin from the tangerines in as large pieces as possible, reserving the fruit.
Scrape pith off peel, cut peel into ½in squares and add to casserole.
Simmer for 30 minutes, then add peppers and simmer 15 minutes.
Add tangerine segments and heat for 5 minutes.
Serve, sprinkled with spring onion greens, over rice.
FISH WITH UGLI FRUIT: The fruit adds a beautiful Oriental touch to humble white fish fillets when combined with a little spice and fresh thyme.
The bonus takes only ten minutes.
GRAPEFRUIT POUSSIN: This elegant dinner party dish is easy to make.
The halved poussins are marinated in a mixture of grapefruit juice and mint jelly before being seared under the grill.
Off the shelf
THE Mangiamo cookbook, containing 300 pages of Italian recipes with a healthy Californian flavour, is available free in a special promotion of August Sebastiani wines.
The book normally costs £12 but is free in return for three cork seals from bottles of August Sebastiani wine, available from Tesco, Asda, Gateway and Davisons Wine Merchants.
A REFRESHING elderflower drink is being launched in selected supermarkets and grocers.
Edwards Aerated Elderflower Spring is made from freshly-picked and cold-pressed elderflowers infused in aerated Kentish spring water.
A litre bottle costs £1.99.
DAIRYLEA triangles have been a must in lunch boxes for years.
Now Kraft brings us Dairylea Light Portions.
Made with skimmed milk, they have half the fat, two-thirds the calories and more protein than the originals.
A 150g pack costs about 86p.
BORED with salt and vinegar and cheese and onion?
Walkers Crisps has something new for jaded taste buds — Worcester Sauce flavour.
The spicy crisps come in 30g foil packs, around 21p, and in multipacks along with Pizza and Prawn Cocktail flavours, around £1.16.
Supermarket Round-up
FOR winter casseroles Gateway has cut the cost of meat and vegetables.
Pork loin chops are down 40p a lb to £1.39, boneless pork steaks down 40p a lb to £1.99 and Somerfield fresh chicken breast fillets down 70p to £2.59 a lb.
A pack of stewing vegetables costs 56p a lb.
Loose courgettes are 65p a lb and a three-pack of mixed peppers is Pounds 1.09.
Dairy bargains include family size Somerfield quiche lorraine down to £1.89, from £2.09.
Six peach and strawberry Petits Filous for the price of four, 86p.
IN the freezer at Tesco, 4lb packs of frozen petit pois are reduced by 80p to £1.69 and 2lb packs of frozen pommes noisettes are 65p, from £1.15.
SAINSBURY is offering four chicken drumsteaks at £1.28, down 20p.
Fresh home-produced lamb shoulder is 88p a lb, down from £1.18.
Fresh premium thick sausages are reduced by 30p a kg to £1.19.
Loose swedes are 15p each, down 10p.
Extra large tomatoes are reduced by 14p to 75p a lb and mixed sweet peppers are 95p a pack, down 23p.
Grocery savings include spaghetti, down 20p to 78p a kg, olive oil down 30p to £1.49 for 500ml and sun-dried tomatoes down to 99p from £1.35 for 285g.
Foreworks code
CONSTANT appeals to follow the Fireworks Code were not helped by the Guy Fawkes Night episodes of Emmerdale and Top Of The Pops showing sparklers alight indoors.
Surely the BBC and ITV realise that this could be dangerous if young children were to follow their example?
Foxhunting
ON Monday November 2 in a foxhunting feature, a hunt supporter incorrectly stated the League Against Cruel Sports gives £35 a day and a lunch to hunt saboteurs.
The League is unconnected with saboteurs.
The League campaigns for legal reform and provides funds for legal action against trespassing hunts and the purchase of sanctuaries.
Tory rebels
A JOCKEY who used his whip with the severity used by Tory Whips on Maastricht rebels would be banned for life.
This Government has all the conviction of a blush on Madonna's cheek.
Crumlin Road Prison governor
I AM disgusted the governor of Crumlin Road Prison stopped Loyalist inmates wearing poppies.
They have a right to honour their war dead.
Sticking up for Sinead
I AM middle-aged, middle-class and not enthusiastic about Sinead O'Connor's music.
But I feel she has been misrepresented.
Surely tearing up the Pope's picture was meant as a symbolic gesture, not a personal affront.
She was mistaken only in not tearing up shots of other religious leaders also.
Hers was a brave demonstration against those whose doctrinaire divisions have caused so much confrontation, pain and death through the ages.
Let them be aware that their ‘divine’ guidance can no longer control the minds of free-thinking youth.
Sticking up for Sinead
SINEAD O'Connor grew up in the worst of environments and knows religion causes many of society's problems.
I am a pensioner and applaud her efforts to change this sick world.
It takes courage to speak out when one is well known.
At least she speaks from her heart.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Politician Lord Jenkins, 70.
Cricketer Rodney Marsh, 45.
ON THIS DAY: In 1880, Australian highwayman Ned Kelly was hanged.
In 1918, the Armistice was signed.
In 1965, Ian Smith declared Rhodesia independent.
Switch on to perils of computer games
IT FRIGHTENED me to see just how addicted our youngsters have become to computer games after reading of the 15,000-strong crowd at the Future Entertainment Show at Earls Court.
These games are fascinating and I too have occasionally indulged in the adventures of little plumber Mario courtesy of my son's console.
But I've also laid down strict guidelines on how much time he can spend at the screen.
I don't want my child to turn into an anti-social loner which, as your article pointed out, is one of the perils of spending hour after hour playing computer games.
Nor do I want him to become blase about the violence many of these packages feature — he might get the notion that beating up people in real life is no big thing.
Obviously parents must show a degree of control here and do as I do by restricting playing time, although that is admittedly difficult with all these portable devices now on the market.
Nintendo and the other makers could help here.
They could use some of the vast profits from these games to sponsor an awareness programme, promoting not only their wares but responsible use.
Stockings will be packed with these games this Christmas.
Let's hope they don't turn out to be double-edged gifts.
'Allo Goodbye
A LOT of people have voiced their relief that the current series of 'Allo 'Allo! is the last, but I will be sad to see Gorden Kaye (right) and the cast depart.
The show was old-fashioned slapstick fun, a real tonic in today's gloomy climate.
I look forward to the repeats.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Greame Donald
THE custom of formalising marriage with an exchange of rings has a fairly basic origin — the finger represents the male side of the bargain and the ring the female.
But the wedding ring was not always worn on the third finger of the left hand.
This became the norm just before the Middle Ages.
Until then any finger — and even the thumb — was used.
Then there arose a pseudo-medical belief that there was a special vein running from the heart to the third finger of the left hand, and that clinched matters.
The sexual overtones of the exchange of rings has not been lost on lovers through the ages to whom a posy was once a sort of promissory ring inscribed on the inside with a message or line of poetry.
As time moved on, more cost-conscious beaux substituted a bunch of flowers with a message attached which brought ‘posy’ to its modern meaning.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Nato
SURE we have a responsibility to NATO, but changes in Europe make it pointless to base so many of our troops in Germany.
Over there, they're just generating jobs and business for Germans.
It would make more sense economically to bring them home, and would not create any military threat.
A Parry, Colwyn Bay, Clwyn
Ulster Catholics
SO Irish Americans think Ulster Catholics are getting a raw deal.
What kind of deal do they think Americans Indians have had over the past 200 years?
Bill Clinton should put his own house in order before listening to IRA supporters in his country.
K Smith W Midlands
Your guide to building on a dream
HELP is at hand for self-builders eager to create their dream home but baffled by where to start.
One of the best sources of ideas is the new edition of Murray Armor's Home Plans (Dent, £14.99).
The book has 300 designs, each with artist's impression, floor plan and room dimensions.
More people are abandoning the big developers for the joys of DIY.
It saves money and you end up with exactly the house you want.
But while it is easy working out how many bedrooms and bathrooms you want, arranging them into an attractive plan that suits your site is another matter entirely.
Armor helps with suggestions for almost every site and home size.
Designs range from two-bedroom holiday bungalows to six-bedroom family homes.
If you can't find just what you want, there is plenty of scope for fiddling with the basic plans.
The book also looks at costings, materials, design features plus the legal and financial angles of building your own home.
Is it mad to spend £1 million on a folly?
Stella Bingham
IT looks more like an obelisk than a hotel, but if you're looking for the unusual and eccentric, the 218-ft Sway Tower piercing the New Forest skyline could be yours for £1million.
The intriguing 13-storey Hampshire landmark is on offer from Fox & Sons jointly with Pavilions of Splendour, a new agency that deals exclusively in architectural follies — any building that serves no political purpose — and other unusual or exotic properties.
As well as the tower, the agency is offering a Hansel and Gretel cottage deep in the woods in Northamptonshire and a temple in Wales.
Sway Tower was built by Judge Peterson between 1879 and 1885 to prove that unreinforced concrete could be successfully used in building work.
It was the first major concrete structure to be built in Britain since Roman times.
Today it is a luxury hotel, the winner of the AA's Best Newcomer of the Year Award for 1992.
Pavilions of Splendour is the brainchild of Gwyn Headley who says the idea was born from a growing demand for unusual properties.
Although it may seem like folly to invest in such buildings, many of them make perfectly good homes and buyers would be helping to preserve Britain's heritage.
‘My time was being taken up by people asking me either to find them a folly or a buyer for some extraordinary building,’ says Gwyn.
‘Then someone asked why didn't I start an organisation selling extraordinary buildings?
I had no idea how the property market worked but I have friends who do, so we are giving it a whirl.’
The agency will handle almost any property of architectural interest in need of tender loving care.
‘We want to help people to rescue ruins,’ says Gwyn.
One of the most tempting homes currently on their books is The Barton, a stone, thatched cottage in the north Devon village of Mariansleigh which is on the market for the first time in 200 years.
But properties do not even have to be habitable to qualify.
‘Some people want to buy an arch on a hill.
A friend said it would be wonderful if she could have a wood with an obelisk where she could go and sit,’ says Gwyn.
Pavilions also hopes to take on tumbledown listed buildings that local authorities have no use for.
‘But we are picky.
It has to be something that makes your mouth drop open.’
Pavilions of Splendour can be contacted on 0622 679447.
Last chance for Norman
TODAY'S Autumn Statement is Norman Lamont's last chance to save the economy and his own job.
If he fails, the recession will descend into slump and Mr Lamont will deservedly be moved out of 11 Downing Street.
So let TODAY once again tell him what he must do.
In addition to bringing down interest rates by another two per cent, he has to establish the right monetary policy after sticking to the wrong one for two years.
Tough choices must be made.
The harsh reality is that those who are fortunate enough to have work will need to make sacrifices for the sake of those who have not.
Sacrifices must start at the very top with those who can most afford them.
In particular, MPs must have their pay frozen.
If Mr Lamont does that, it will be the most popular measure of his statement.
But that means low pay rises for workers in the public sector.
It will be hard on nurses, teachers and low-paid workers but at least their jobs are not at risk.
In the private sector, hundreds of thousands have already been made unemployed by the recession and there will be hundreds of thousands more if recovery does not start soon.
The tough measures should not include any increase in taxation, including National Insurance.
On the contrary, people must be left with as much money as possible to spend.
Industry should be helped with tax concessions and the billions stashed away from the proceeds of council house sales should be spent on helping the construction and building industries.
Those are the measures which we hope to hear today from Norman Lamont.
If he shies away from them, he should reflect that this Autumn Statement will be the tonic that saves his Government or the poison which finally destroys it.
Time to rejoice
THE debate over the ordination of women has been the most heated the Church of England has seen since the Reformation.
Yet this is a debate that should never have happened.
The Queen is the head of the Church of England — in effect its chairman — and the Archbishop of Canterbury is its chief executive, the person who runs its day-to-day business.
He should have taken the decision to allow women to be ordained instead of opening the issue to a damaging debate that has succeeded only in widening rifts within the Church.
Listening to the debate and the old-fashioned ideas of male supremacy it unearthed, you could have been forgiven for thinking that we were still in the 16th Century.
The result of the vote is at least a hopeful sign that sexist dinosaurs are on their last legs in the 20th Century.
Justice for all
PENNY McAllister was robbed of her life by two people.
One was Susan Christie, the young woman who killed her.
The other is Penny's husband, Duncan, who indulged in the affair that brought about her death.
Yesterday the Northern Ireland Appeal Court rightly increased Susan Christie's sentence from five years to nine.
This is a step towards justice though TODAY believes that her sentence should have been longer still.
We also believe that Duncan should bear some of the responsibility for his wife's death by being stripped of his army officer job.
This is another case which proves how vital it is for Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell to correct inconsistencies in sentencing.
That's the least the victims and their families deserve.
Top Secret
Graham Brough
A step-by-step guide to scandal rocking Cabinet.
JOHN Major's ragged band of scandal-bruised and U-turn battered ministers are now gulping for air as they stand at the edge of the Iraqgate precipice.
It is a messy, complicated business dating back to 1985 but the essence of the charge is:
That ministers set one policy for dealing with Saddam Hussein…and operated another in secret.
Worse, they are accused of deceiving Parliament by saying how moral Britain's arms embargo was, while privately encouraging industrialists to bend the law and grab big sales in the Gulf War build-up.
Worse still, they are accused of invoking official secrecy to conceal the deception.
The most difficult part to swallow is that the recipient of all this military gear was Britain's enemy.
Saddam was kitting out Iraq for a war with Britain, with British hardware — and a ministerial nod.
Three men almost went to prison as a result.
They believed they were operating with Government approval and even risked their lives to spy on Saddam.
The story starts in 1985, when Britain put an arms embargo on Saddam's military state.
But the dictator needed British craftsmanship for the fine tools required to operate missiles, so the Iraqis checked out the Midlands engineering firm Matrix Churchill.
It was bought by a holding company called TMG engineering, largely owned by Technology And Development Group of London.
But that group was almost entirely owned by the Al-Arabi Trading Company of Baghdad.
Meanwhile a senior figure in the Iraqi intelligence service, Dr Safa Al-Habobi, was involved in trying to buy equipment useful in the refinement of uranium — essential to build nuclear weapons.
Overnight he became a director of Matrix.
Next came the problem of licences to get the instruments out of Britain and into Iraq.
Matrix Churchill's managing director Paul Henderson had a history of supplying machine tools behind the Iron Curtain and passing information back to Britain via MI6.
Henderson approached the Ministry of Defence in 1988.
They advised him of a way round the ‘export licensing of strategic goods’— by describing the goods as harmless.
In exchange, Henderson would return from Baghdad with details of the Iraqi war machine.
The advice on bending the rules came from the then Defence Minister, Alan Clark.
He admitted it last week at the Old Bailey.
For two years, Clark, William Waldegrave at the Foreign Office and Nicholas Ridley at the Department of Trade and Industry wrangled in secret memos over the morality of turning a blind eye in exchange for information.
The bickering continued until the eve of the Gulf War.
At one point Nicholas Ridley tried to protect arms exports to Saddam just six weeks before he invaded Kuwait, saying Britain stood to lose £1 billion if they were stopped.
Critically, on July 27, 1990, six days before the invasion, ministers endorsed an export order for machine tool technology they knew would be used in a missile project.
No one had told Customs and Excise what was going on.
Unaware that Henderson's sales to Saddam were known in Whitehall, Customs investigators raided Matrix Churchill.
Henderson assured fellow executives they were safe from prosecution because of the ministerial arrangements, but next day they were arrested.
The case came to court 21 months later.
A senior Customs and Excise source said yesterday that all the relevant ministries had been approached for evidence during that time, yet not one warned them off.
Not one gave them an inkling of the Whitehall collusion.
Even Alan Clark gave a written statement to the court which would be essential to convict Henderson, Peter Allen and Trevor Abraham of Matrix.
But last week he admitted having advised that any application for a licence should emphasise the ‘peaceful use’ of the products.
The case collapsed.
Then came the bombshell.
It emerged that Michael Heseltine, Kenneth Clarke, Malcolm Rifkind and Tristan Garel-Jones from the Trade, Home, Defence and Foreign Ministries had signed public interest immunity certificates to keep the Whitehall memos out of court.
Now they claim they only signed at the suggestion of Attorney-General Sir Nicholas Lyell — and the buck passes on.
IRAQGATE: Where the buck stops for selling arms to Saddam Hussein.
PAUL HENDERSON, MD of Matrix Churchill, was accused of illegal trade with Iraq despite years of helping MI6.
He blames everyone from John Major down.
KENNETH CLARKE also signed the public immunity certificate but denies it was an attempt to stop evidence about Government involvement reaching court.
JOHN MAJOR has ordered a judicial inquiry.
But LibDem leader Paddy Ashdown says Major has reneged on assurance in 1990 that ministers were not dodging an arms ban.
MALCOLM RIFKIND, Defence Secretary, is accused of being the third minister to sign the public immunity certificate.
So far he has not tried to blame anyone else.
ALAN CLARK, former trade minister, saved Henderson from jail by admitting Government knew of sanctions busting although at first he denied approval was given.
TRISTAN GAREL-JONES, Foreign Office Minister, is also being accused of being a signatory to the certificate.
He, too, has decided to keep a public silence.
MICHAEL HESELTINE is accused of trying to cover up evidence.
He blames Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell for making him sign the public immunity certificate.
SIR NICHOLAS LYELL, Attorney General, denies a cover-up.
He says people have ‘misunderstood’ the law relating to public immunity, and the ministers had a duty to sign.
My battle to make Patrick walk alone, by Michael Aspel
Tim Ewbank
THE hearts of millions of viewers will go out to Michael Aspel's 12-year-old son Patrick when he appears on TV for the first time next month.
Patrick, who joins Michael and EastEnders actress mum Lizzie Power for a family holiday in Sardinia on Wish You Were Here, was born with cerebral palsy and is recovering after a major hip operation which his father describes as ‘monstrous’.
But though the youngster is still in considerable discomfort, his spirit and courage have never failed him.
‘If you say he's disabled, he'll punch you in the eye,’ says Michael.
‘He simply won't have it.
He feels sorry for people who are disabled although he has never been able to walk properly himself.
It never occurs to him.’
Now Patrick faces another struggle — to find the incentive to try to walk alone.
And it's as much his famous dad's battle as his own.
‘At the moment he is enormously overweight because of lack of exercise,’ says Michael.
‘We've got to beat that.
‘As far as he's concerned he will walk.
He says he will but he needs the incentive to do it.
He says: ‘I'm comfortable, here's the telly, Dad will bring me a drink if I want it.’
He needs a jolt.
‘He has a wheelchair and a minder at school who helps him and he does do short distances on sticks.
But there's a huge weight to carry on his wasted muscles.
And if it's a bloody nuisance to him, like any kid he will say: ‘Forget it.’
He needs a lot of encouragement.
‘So you have to keep at him because like all kids he lives for the telly and various electronic gadgets and he'd be quite happy eating crisps and playing for the rest of his life.
You've got to give him some sort of motivation.
‘The greatest thing is telling him there is no point going to his mainstream school any longer if he is not going to get around and that he'll have to go to a special school — at which point he explodes in terror and starts to make special efforts.
‘But really I just want him to know that he's got to do a bit of work, that he can walk, that he can get around.’
At the preview of the Wish You Were Here special, which will be shown in the new ITV series which starts on December 7, Michael paid tribute to his son's bravery.
The star, who lost his adult son Greg to cancer, spoke proudly of Patrick's considerable talents.
‘He's very gifted, wonderful at languages, good at voices and good-looking, He's a smashing kid and he's very musical.
‘He will hear a tune on a programme and go away and play it on a keyboard.
You wonder, is it something to do with cerebral palsy that makes him clever or is it just that his mother is musical anyway?
She plays the piano and sings and he's her son.’
The presenter of This Is Your Life flinches when he speaks of the recent major surgery on Patrick's hip.
‘It was cutting bones and turning them around and cutting ligaments.
It was such a major operation but it had to be done although sometimes you think: My God, he's worse off than before.
‘His hip had come out of its socket and found its own socket in the muscle.
It meant his leg was all skewed in and pushed against the other one.
If it hadn't been done his other hip would have gone and his spine would have been twisted.
‘At least he is symmetrical but his left leg has not had the same exercise so it's not the same size as his right.’
Michael was shocked by the appearance of Patrick's limb after the operation.
‘The trouble is they never tell you enough.
When the operation is over and after nine weeks the plaster comes off, you expect to see a wasted thin limb.
‘But what you see is a huge, hot swollen, painful limb because of all the damage that's been done within and the kid is in terrible pain.
But nobody tells you this.
That's my greatest complaint — that you aren't led from one stage to the other and you have to keep changing your horizons all the time.’
Michael and wife Lizzie, who played widow Mrs Hewitt in EastEnders, readily agreed to be filmed for Wish You Were Here with Patrick and their other son Daniel, eight.
Michael is pleased the programme will show that a family with a handicapped member can have a rewarding holiday — and equally glad that it does not try to disguise the difficulties.
‘We don't just pretend we are four happy people,’ he says.
‘We say we are three plus one who needs help.
Although the hotel we stayed at was very beautiful.
It was set on various slopes.
As Patrick's a very big boy it was a chore heaving him up and down.
‘But holidays, particularly in the summer, are marvellous because in the water he is entirely independent and he doesn't need anybody.
‘He can swim long distances, mostly one-sided but he manages it, and he adores it.
Swimming is a great therapy anyway.
‘It will be a long time before Patrick walks unaided but I know he will swing along with his sticks and be independent.
‘I never played for England either.
And that's what I always tell him.’
What is Cerebral Palsy?
CEREBRAL palsy is brain damage from birth.
The causes vary and are often unknown.
Some cases are caused by brain injuries sustained during labour and delivery, others by viral infections or abnormally low blood sugar levels during pregnancy.
Victims are divided into two main groups depending on which part of the brain is affected.
Spastics generally have stiff limbs, rigid muscles and a tendency to convulsions, but their intelligence is usually normal.
Children with athetosis have less rigid limbs with poor muscle tone and poor head control.
Speech may be affected but often intelligence is normal.
Great and gross homes
Tim Ewbank
LOYD Grossman has spent six years showing 12 million TV viewers how the other half live.
With his ITV show Through The Keyhole he has given a guided tour of 200 homes of the rich and famous, exposing to public view everything from Viscount Weymouth's erotic murals to Bernard Manning's fish tank.
Even though a new series of the show starts on November 27, Loyd still refuses to let his ‘victims’ see how he lives.
He merely insists that he, his wife Debbie and their two daughters live in ‘an unremarkable family home’.
Rather than do a keyhole job on Loyd, TODAY asked him to choose his ideal home from the hundreds of celebrity houses he has visited.
His choices are as quirky as his TV show:
BEST VIEWS: Norman St John Stevas's house.
It has a deer park around it and a really pretty church virtually in the back yard.
If you have to live in a city, then you cannot beat the fantastic views from Barbara Taylor Bradford's penthouse flat in Manhattan.
BEST HALLWAY: Barry McGuigan's house has a very impressive hall with a domed ceiling.
BEST BEDROOM: Tony Jacklin's — because it is nice and light and has lovely views of Scotland.
It also has two en-suite bathrooms, his and hers.
BEST SITTING ROOM: Vince Hill's.
I love to see water, as long as it's not dripping down walls, and Vince's sitting room juts out over the Thames.
You sit on the window seat and feel you are on the river.
BEST KITCHEN: Delia Smith's.
It's a serious cook's kitchen.
You could make anything in there.
Having sorted out his ideal home, Loyd picked some other favourites from the show.
Again there were surprises…
MESSIEST DESK: Viscount Weymouth's was reminiscent of what the world must have been like before they invented waste-paper baskets.
It was a mess.
Yet, oddly, his wardrobe was neat.
There was even one drawer labelled ‘Kaftans’.
FUNNIEST MOTIFS: Kenny Everett had Chez Edith on the doormat and a cushion saying ‘I'm a luxury few can afford’.
MOST ENTERTAINING HOME: Bill Oddie's.
Each room has a theme.
One is full of Disney stuff, another is done up in jungle fashion with murals and monkeys, and there's a landing like a beach.
It's the most enthralling house for children I've seen.
It's like a theme park.
MOST UNEXPECTED HOMES: The odd thing about Cynthia Payne's house was that it wasn't very sexy.
You couldn't picture orgies going on there because it was so sedate and respectable.
Another unexpected home was Peter Stringfellow's.
There's always an expectation that someone who runs a nightclub lives in a nightclub.
But Peter lives in a very tastefully converted church.
MOST ENTERTAINING CLOCK: Wayne Sleep's has Charlie Chaplin's legs swinging from side to side.
MOST UNEXPECTED FURNITURE: Footballer Vinny Jones's wonderful four-poster bed was swathed in pink fabric.
Maybe that's the real man deep down inside.
MOST STRIKING DECOR: The amazing astrological painting Sir Clive Sinclair had on the ceiling of one of his rooms.
It was very elaborate.
BIGGEST SEND-UP: Tony Jacklin's putter with U-shaped handles for the beginner.
I liked it because he was taking the mickey out of himself.
BEST NOVELTY: Police handcuffs and helmet on the wall at the home of Lord Ted Willis, creator of TV's police series Dixon Of Dock Green.
WACKIEST HOUSE: Doc Cox's of TV's That's Life.
The door-mat says ‘Oh no, not you again’.
In the kitchen you'll find old 78 records drying on the plate rack, a juke box and a chair in the shape of a sheep.
MOST FUN BEDROOM: I'd have to choose Freddie Starr's.
It is huge, canopied and very imperial.
The astonishing bed has a fan-like bed-head and is like a building in itself with built-in spotlights, hi-fi, and telephone.
To me, it was very Elvis Presley which I gather is the perfect impression because Elvis was one of Freddie's inspirations.
ODDEST PICTURE: A framed photograph of model Linda Lusardi's bottom hangs over a chest of drawers in her peaches-and-cream bedroom, which comes complete with an ornate brass ceiling fan.
I can imagine a lot of other people having a framed photo of Linda's bottom…but not necessarily Linda herself.
MOST UNEXPECTED HOUSE: Edwina Currie's converted windmill was another lovely surprise.
You sometimes expect MPs' houses to be reeking of power but this was a nice family house with lots of bicycles around the place.
She's pictured above, relaxing in a simple but effective room with beams and bare brickwork.
Bram Stoker's Dracula
THEY rolled out the blood-red carpet for the Hollywood premiere of Bram Stoker's Dracula.
Among the stars, mostly clad in graveyard black, who dutifully stepped along it, was Sadie Frost, wife of Spandau Ballet star Gary Kemp.
She plays loose, luscious Lucy in the movie — and sported a neckline that left plenty of scope for the vampire's kiss.
Britain's Gary Oldman, who plays the evil Count, flashed a jugular-red ribbon and the witty quip: ‘What a bleedin' night.’
Stars who were nothing to do with the film but stuck their necks out anyway included Sharon (Basic Instinct) Stone and Jason (Beverly Hills 90210) Priestley.
French and Saunders
FILM rushes of a new French and Saunders comedy series have been stolen from a car at Torquay, Devon.
Unless the film is recovered, Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders will have to re-shoot the scenes.
Audrey Hepburn
Hollywood legend Audrey Hepburn's son Lucca has flown to Los Angeles from Europe to be at her bedside after her colon-cancer operation.
Audrey, 63, is desperate to go back to work — campaigning for the United Nations Children's Fund.
Drew Barrymore
ACTRESS and one-time junkie Drew Barrymore, 17, is to play Long Island Lolita Amy Fisher, in a TV film.
Fisher, 18, is accused of the Fatal Attraction shooting of her alleged lover's wife, Mary Jo Buttafuoco, now partly paralysed.
Jeff Ballard shot
AFTER movie star Charlie Sheen's agent, Jeff Ballard, was shot by robbers at his Hollywood home, an excited policewoman rushed over to him as he lay bleeding in the ambulance.
‘Hey, will you get me Charlie's autograph?’ the angel in uniform cried.
Putting trust in talks
By Tim Satchell
TONIGHT The Royal Geographical Society in Kensington hosts the first in a series of lectures to promote the National Trust of Scotland in the south of England.
The talk is by Lord Charteris of Amisfield, a former Private Secretary to the Queen and a Permanent Lord in Waiting.
The National Trust for Scotland (annual membership £22) and the National Trust (Pounds 23) are separate bodies but have reciprocal arrangements.
‘You get far more literature from the English one,’ says a spokesman for Scotland.
The National Trust of Scotland has two regular events in London: whisky tasting and reel dancing.
Britons line up to play that Scarlett woman
By Tim Satchell
TWO British actresses, Elizabeth Hurley and Lysette Anthony, have been short-listed for the leading female role in Gone With The Wind II: Scarlett.
Hundreds of actresses tried for the part in the film which is currently in pre-production in Hollywood.
Both Miss Hurley, 26, a talented actress who narrowly missed out to Joely Richardson as the BBC's new Lady Chatterley, and Miss Anthony, 29, who starred in Woody Allen's Husbands And Wives, have had second screen tests for the role of Scarlett O'Hara.
The part was originally taken by Vivien Leigh in the 1939 film of Gone With The Wind — the most successful film ever made.
The new film, being made by MGM, is expected to be released in 1994.
It is based on the Alexandra Ripley sequel to Margaret Mitchell's original bestseller.
Miss Mitchell died before she could write her own sequel, which was to have been called Tomorrow Is Another Day.
The new story centres on the attempts of Scarlett's grandfather, hopefully to be portrayed by Sean Connery, to get Rhett Butler and Scarlett together.
The plan had been for the Americans to discover an unknown for the lead female role but no-one had Miss Leigh's screen magic.
Miss Anthony's London agent tells me: ‘Lysette is filming The Hour of The Pig, in France, at the moment and it is true she is discussing some forthcoming projects, but I cannot tell you what they are.’
Miss Hurley was not available at her London home.
Shops' snow joke
By Tim Satchell
THE early weather forecast for Wednesday November 25 in London's chic Knightsbridge quarter Walton Street is snow, snow and yet more snow.
The Walton Street Association is to throw a three-hour party, starting at 6pm, and Christmas shoppers should heed the early warning blizzard reports.
Snow-making machines will be blowing out foam-based snow to try to create an early Yuletide atmosphere while trying to tempt shoppers into their stores.
The snow machine costs £70 to hire and £15 for every five litres it spews out.
But snowmen?
Forget it.
The ‘snow’ dissolves on contact.
Earl is host to TV team
By Tim Satchell
THE 150th Antiques Roadshow is being recorded at Arundel Castle in Sussex today.
The castle, the seat of the Duke of Norfolk, is not home to the Duke — he lives near Henley-on-Thames — but to his eldest son and heir, the Earl of Arundel, 36, who says: ‘I might look in while they're here.
My cousin's wife, Josephine Fitzalan Howard, is one of the experts.’
Next week at the Sheraton Park Tower in SW1, the Duchess of Norfolk is holding a two-day charity exhibition of her own paintings, from Pounds 150.
And…
By Tim Satchell
THE magician and his talking parrot had been working an ocean liner, until one day the liner went down in fog.
For hours the magician swam around, with the normally chatty parrot perched silently on his shoulder.
Eventually it said: ‘All right— I give in.
What did you do with the ship?’
We'll fight your cellulite
Louise Bowen
HERE it is — everything you need to know about TODAY'S revolutionary Cellulite Roadshow.
Starting Monday and for six days, our panel of highly-qualified experts will take to the road in a bid to help YOU slim down and shape up.
Our top team is shown on the right.
It includes doctors Nick Walters, an exercise physiologist, and Tim Leigh, an expert in the clinical side of nutrition.
Amanda Ursell and Sarah Godden are trained nutritionists who can give sound advice on diets.
Energetic Martica Heaner is a trained fitness consultant, and Abby Knight can advise on any aspect of beauty treatment that you care to mention.
Between them, they are better equipped than any group has ever been to combat the plague that affects eight women in ten.
Our experts will be waiting to speak to you at the venues on the days shown above.
We begin on Monday in Glasgow, then move on to Manchester, Birmingham, Southampton, Bristol and London.
In each city we have taken over hotel conference centres to provide comfortable facilities for everyone to chat in private to one of our experts.
All you have to do is turn up at the address shown between midday and 7pm.
These consultations, which would normally cost a small fortune, are free.
You will be able to ask whichever expert is available how you can go about getting rid of your cellulite.
Each panellist can advise on a range of weight problems.
Are you eating too much?
Or eating the wrong things?
How many calories would you burn off?
If your boyfriend gave you a massage would it do any good?
Is it spoiling your sex life?
Whatever the problem, our panel will be there to provide an intelligent, informed answer.
Our initiative has taken the beauty and exercise world by storm.
Our telephones have not stopped ringing with calls from readers eager to find out more about the Cellulite Roadshow, and from experts eager to praise our unique idea.
We have resisted the temptation to link up with any beauty product firm simply because we want our panel of experts to give you nothing but honest, impartial and wholly unbiased advice.
The message of our experts is that there IS something you can do about the unsightly, and sometimes painful, form of fat known as cellulite.
Forget quack cures.
Our team will point you on the right road towards a slimmer, healthier figure, with dietary and fitness advice tailored to your needs.
This is open to women of all ages, so bring along your friends and colleagues.
You can even bring along a man, although they are not affected by cellulite.
‘It's very exciting — nobody's ever done anything like this before.
It's a great service and I'm sure we're going to do a lot of good for a lot of women,’ says Amanda Ursell, a trained nutritionist on our panel.
The blight of cellulite is so big that in France it is recognised as a medical condition and treated with medicines available on prescription.
Now TODAY is fighting back in Britain.
WHERE TO BE: NOON TO 7PM
FOR a confidential consultation on your problems with cellulite, come and join us on the TODAY Cellulite Roadshow at one of the locations listed here.
Entrance is free and our team of experts will be on hand to offer help and advice between 12 noon and 7pm daily.
All you have to do is turn up.
GLASGOW: Monday 16 November, Kelvin Park Lorne Hotel, 923 Sauchiehall Street.
MANCHESTER: Tuesday 17 November, Britannia Hotel, Portland Street.
BIRMINGHAM: Wednesday 18 November, Hyatt Regency, Bridge Street.
SOUTHAMPTON: Thursday 19 Nov, Southampton Moat House, Highfield Lane, Portswood.
BRISTOL:Friday 20 Nov, Bristol Moat House, Victoria Street.
LONDON: Saturday 21 November, Drury Lane Moat House, 10 Drury Lane, WC2.
OUR PANEL OF EXPERTS
AMANDA Ursell, 28, is a state registered dietician and a regular guest on TV-am.
From early next year she will be appearing on Channel Four's Food File programme and has just completed a video about healthy eating the Mediterranean way.
NUTRITIONIST Sarah Godden, 23, has a special interest in dietetics and trained as a dietician at Addenbrookes Hospital in Cambridgeshire.
She is an expert on how a low-calorie diet and exercise can beat cellulite and other weight problems.
DOCTOR Tim Leigh, 35, is a clinical research fellow at Westminster Hospital, London, with a special interest in nutrition and the clinical causes of fat deposits.
He graduated from Oxford and is a member of the Royal College of Physicians.
DOCTOR Nick Walters, 39, is an exercise physiologist at the University of Westminster.
Since 1985 he has taught students at the School of Biological and Health Sciences about nutrition, training, sport and health aspects of exercise.
MARTICA Heaner won the 1992 UK National Fitness Leader Of The Year award and was the 1989 British National Aerobics Champion silver medalist.
Martica, 27, produced the top exercise video Thighs, Tums and Bums.
AS a health and fitness writer Abby Knight has a particular interest in cellulite.
Abby, 30, has worked for Woman's Own and writes for Cosmopolitan, Best and Total Fitness, along with a regular column in Weight-watchers magazine.
CELLULITE FACTBOX
THE dimply lumps and bumps called cellulite affect 80 per cent of all women at some time in their lives.
Cellulite is excess subcutaneous fat — fat which lies just under the skin near the surface of the body.
Experts are still debating over exactly why some women, fat or thin, seem to get it while others, and men, escape.
It is believed the characteristic dimply appearance results from a build-up of toxins and fluid which can slow down the metabolism of the cells.
The good news is that cellulite can be banished.
The right exercise, proper diet and even correctly applied massage can all help.
Cellulite usually appears in three forms:
Hard cellulite: This is the toughest to deal with and is generally found on the thighs.
The area feels firm but has irregular nodules which can be painful to touch.
Soft cellulite: This shows up as the classic ‘orange peel’ dimples on stomach and thighs.
Infiltrated cellulite: The most common form.
The hips and thighs look spongy when the skin is pinched.
My Worst Illness
MY biggest problem has been endometriosis, the thickening of the womb lining.
It probably began after the birth of my daughter, Sophie, 11 years ago.
A bit of placenta stayed in the womb and when this was discovered I had to go back to hospital for a D & C. From then on my periods became a nightmare.
Every month I'd look at my diary with a feeling of dread and try to keep the week free.
It really was disruptive, but I had no idea what was wrong.
It was only when I went for my yearly check-up that I was told I had endometriosis.
My gynaecologist suggested that if I didn't want a hysterectomy there were two other solutions — pills or laser treatment to burn away the excess tissue.
I decided to go for the pills first, but after three months I was still in agony so I went for the laser operation.
It failed.
The lining was too tough.
I was told I would have to have another operation a month later, but first I had to take a course of male hormones called Danazol.
If you take these for a very long time you get a beard and a deep voice, but as I only needed a month's supply I escaped such horrors.
Anyway the hormones must have worked because the second operation was a fantastic success.
The only snag was that I had bad after-effects from the anaesthetic.
I felt nauseous and rotten for a week.
I go to a charming Chinese lady acupuncturist and although I detest needles I found it painless and relaxing and it helped me tremendously before and after the operations.
She also gave me some mysterious Chinese herbal pills specially formulated for women and I have to say I feel terrific.
I have no more pain, almost no bleeding and I can enjoy life normally again.
I suspect these things are genetic because my mother's just had a hysterectomy, but I was lucky that the condition hadn't developed into anything more serious.
In some cases, I'm told, pieces of the womb break free and invade other parts of the body, including the lungs, so it's best not to ignore any symptoms.
I am full of energy now, having recently filmed a new six-part series about the menopause for ITV's This Morning (Wednesdays, 11.45am) and a new series of the children's programme Woof (ITV Wednesdays, 4.40pm).
Now I bound about the countryside on my horse or on my feet with my two children and five dogs.
Life is just great.
Fit Tips
SMOKERS using a new daytime nicotine patch to give up the habit are four times more likely to succeed than those who rely on willpower, according to a Gallup survey.
After 12 weeks of using the Nicorette Patch, 41 per cent of smokers gave up compared with only 10 per cent who used a dummy patch.
ASTHMA sufferers should always check their inhalers for insects before use, says a doctor who recently treated two patients with earwigs lodged in their windpipes.
Dr John Scanlon, from Somerset, told the Committee On Safety Of Medicines that people should use the dust covers supplied.
PREGNANT women who eat a light snack shortly before giving birth can shorten labour and produce a stronger heartbeat in their baby, a study carried out in Belfast shows.
Of 90 women surveyed, those who ate in the very late stages of pregnancy had their babies approximately 1½ hours earlier than the others.
BACK-pain sufferers looking for a guide to exercise may find a new video helpful.
A Back For The Future is available from Bramley Mailing Services, Unit 10, Bramley Business Centre, Station Road, Bramley, Surrey GU5 OAZ, price £14.99.
ELDERLY people who wake up too early can be helped to sleep longer by doses of artificial bright light currently used to treat jet-lag.
American researchers believe the problem is caused by a defect in the brain's circadian pacemaker which regulates our ‘biological clock’.
CANADIAN researchers have found that women who smoke tend to have a more masculine body with fat around the stomach, rather than hips, caused by changes in hormone balance.
It shouldn't happen to a doc!
Louise Bowen
CUT SHORT is a book that could put you off hospital for life.
Its tales of euthanasia, bungled operations and sexual grapplings are enough to keep a Carry On team in business for life.
But the most shocking thing about this new black-humour novel is that every life-or-death horror story is true, says its author, consultant anaesthetist Dr Philip Keep.
‘I think I'll be pilloried for it,’ he says.
‘But people think doctors have this inborn compassion and willingness to do more than is absolutely necessary for you.
The truth is that doctors do their best, but people's expectations are too high.
‘In an overworked doctor, feelings of compassion are gone.
They just want to go back to bed — especially if there's someone warm waiting for them.’
Here Dr Keep, 50, tells of the real-life horrors he has witnessed in his long career.
AFTER I'd finished my house jobs as a new doctor, I did a stint on obstetrics as a junior.
Soon after I began, we had a prolapsed cord in the middle of the night — it required a caesarian section.
I rang the senior registrar to tell him but realised after a while he wasn't saying much.
Then I heard a snore.
He'd fallen asleep.
There was no one else around so it was up to me.
I'd seen a couple of caesarian sections, but I'd never done one or been shown how.
But I had my book, and I knew roughly where all the bits were.
Luckily, everything went OK and baby and mother were fine.
I never told her.
AS a student, all I'd done in a hospital was two weeks as a medical student, wandering around.
But when I turned up at the hospital they put me on call and I was called to Casualty to anaesthetise a man.
Anaesthetics are really very dangerous.
You can kill somebody much more easily than anything else.
Luckily I had a little book in my pocket called Anaesthetics For Medical Students.
I dragged it out and did it from that.
Luckily it went OK.
Later I did a hip replacement operation.
Again I did it with book in hand.
ANOTHER horror happened with a patient who had a neck fracture.
What one is supposed to do is put a screw in each side of the head, put on calipers and hang weights off to put their head in traction.
A junior rang in the middle of the night and was told to do this.
He'd seen patients in calipers but didn't know how to do it himself.
Next morning the patient, who was in traction by then, was X-rayed.
It showed that the junior had driven a long pin right through the patient's brain.
Luckily there's a lot of brain that you don't really need, and he was comparatively OK.
IT'S quite common to let people die in extreme cases.
The whole thing is done by sleight of hand and happens perhaps one night in ten nationwide.
If I were the patient I would hope someone would have the common sense not to operate on me.
But it's a dangerous thing to come out and commit yourself to publicly.
It's a grey area.
Death often happens almost by default.
You are a junior, it's the middle of the night, and you're exhausted.
How reliable are the decisions you make?
I remember one case late at night when someone had a cardiac arrest.
The staff started leaping up and down on him.
Then one of them said, ‘Oh, don't do that.
He's got something malignant, cancer, and he hasn't got long to live anyway.’
By this time they had resuscitated him.
They then got his notes out and found that he had malignant hypertension — just high blood pressure.
They had almost stopped resuscitating him on the grounds that the doctor hadn't remembered his diagnosis.
A DOCTOR was checking a patient's eyes with a torch and noted that there was no abnormal pupil dilation.
He didn't notice that one of them was a glass eye.
And doctors look in people's ears all the time, but eight out of ten don't know what they are looking at.
That sort of inexperience is quite usual, says Dr Keep.
‘Remarkably, people tend to think that doctors have had long training,’ he says.
‘They've seen Doctor In The House images — all work, and medical textbooks being pored over.
‘But what you learn about specialities such as eyes, ears, nose and throat or anaesthesia is tiny.’
Cut Short (Self Publishing Association £14.95, out today) is available from major booksellers or by contacting distributors Images in Hanley Swan, Worcs.
Tel: 0684 310725.
Tell us your medical horror story.
Write to Medical Horror, HealthWorks, Today, I Virginia St, London E1 9BS.
Bank accounts
SOME banks make it so difficult to open an account.
My daughter and her boyfriend were recently refused a joint account by Barclays Bank because she had neither a driving licence nor a passport, although her boyfriend did.
TSB on the other hand were delighted to help and were very efficient.
Tory Whips
I AM not worried by the tactics of the Tory Whips during the Maastricht debate because any government has the right to expect members elected on its manifesto to push its business through the House.
But each of us has the right to know how our MP voted.
TV networks
AT last the TV networks have realised that viewers want to be entertained on a Sunday not preached at.
For those who want religion, may I suggest church.
Dan Air
BRITISH Airways has bought Dan Air for £1 but is it too much to expect an equally fair deal for travellers: lower fares?
Disney World trips
YOUR story about the seriously ill children's trip to Disney World was really touching.
Everyone involved deserves praise.
Charity cards give fair deal
WHILE your article about how little revenue from charity Christmas cards reached the charities concerned was accurate for certain card retailers, it tarred many hundreds of volunteers with the same brush, to the detriment of the wonderful charities they support.
As director of Cards for Good Causes, I represent more than 5,000 volunteers in 200 outlets across the country.
The group is the non-profit-making trading arm of the 1959 Group of Charities which provides access in its shops for the sale of cards from nearly 300 charities.
Last year its Christmas turnover was £2.3 million, of which every single charity received a minimum of 85p for every £1 of sales and in some cases the return was £1.
The Charity Commission recognises the 1959 Group as ‘the only charity operating solely to benefit charities in this way’.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Mass murderer Charles Manson, 58.
Footballer Kevin Ratcliffe, 32.
Gymnast Nadia Comaneci, 31.
ON THIS DAY: In 1918, Austria became a republic, ending the Hapsburg dynasty.
In 1927, the first veteran car rally was held from London to Brighton.
Don't expect Wills to be the perfect ruler
YOUR article suggesting the Queen has now given up on Charles and Diana being the next king and queen of England was fascinating.
But if Her Majesty is putting her hopes in Prince William becoming the perfect monarch, I feel she is being rather over-optimistic.
Surely part of the reason for the break-up of her children's marriages is that they never had a ‘normal’ childhood.
If William and Harry were to be brought up in the rather stiff and formal atmosphere of the Palace after suffering the trauma of their parents' splitting up, they would hardly end up as the secure, well-balanced people the Queen hopes will succeed her.
Don't expect Wills to be the perfect ruler
IT SEEMS normal these days to print any story with a connection to the Royal Family.
So it was a breath of fresh air to read Jane Gordon's article ‘If you think Di's marriage is flawed, just look at mine’.
Now that should have been front page news — a well-written piece I thoroughly enjoyed.
Don't expect Wills to be the perfect ruler
MOST people must be thoroughly sick of Princess Diana.
Apart from being a very expensively-dressed woman, it appears she is willing to risk all to get her own way — never mind her in-laws or the unpleasantness it surrounds the princes with.
Let this woman divorce and disappear for good.
We will all be better off.
Frank's fortune
IN the recently-published list of the world's wealthiest black people, I was pleased to see that Frank Bruno (right) is one of Britain's top earners.
He is a lovely man and it's good to know that he is unlikely to end up punch-drunk or fighting in circus booths, as many top boxers have in the past.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
Graeme Donald
THE gentlemanly art of boxing has clouted so many expressions into common usage that it might be time to ‘throw in the towel’.
Back in the days of bare-knuckle bouts the referee scratched a line in the dirt and fighters shaped up to each other by ‘toeing’ this line.
After a knockdown the fallen fighter had so many seconds to make it back to the starting stance and the less able were those who didn't ‘come up to scratch’.
It was from these old fights that the boxing ring became square.
The gentry used to bet heavily on fights and grew tired of members of the crowd influencing the outcome by tripping up contestants.
So they sent in four coachmen who stood with whips extended between them to hold back the mob.
These whips dictated not only the shape but also the size of the boxing ring.
TODAY'S Book Of Things You Didn't Know…is now on sale, published by Simon & Schuster for £3.99.
Bristol market
ON television recently I saw a programme featuring Bristol market where trays of lettuces cold not be sold because EC regulations state that they are too small.
I only hope the same regulation is as strictly enforced in the rest of Europe.
But is there anyone who will check that this is the case?
Cheerful TV programmes
IN THESE days of increasing doom and gloom, why don't TV and film producers make an effort to create cheerful and encouraging films and programmes.
During the war years, it helped keep our spirits up and we need it again now.
We pay more for TV licences and get less than we've ever had.
Paperback Round-up
FOR a powerful saga of the late 19th Century, try Margaret Pemberton's AN EMBARRASSMENT OF RICHES (Corgi, £4.99).
Set mostly in America, it follows the plight of a poor Irish girl who marries into New York society and inherits a host of hostile relations.
ALTHOUGH the new novel from Terry Pratchett, WITCHES ABROAD (Corgi, £3.99), is set in another land, Discworld, it is still brilliant satire.
BY way of contrast, Jimmy Nail has written a book based on his TV character SPENDER (Bantam, £4.99).
It is not a tie-in but a new story full of action, wit and unsavoury characters.
WHILE you are waiting for Andrew Morton's book on Princess Diana, Lady Colin Campbell offers her slightly less rough portrait in DIANA IN PRIVATE(Warner, £5.99).
STAYING with non-fiction, there is THE MURDER YEARBOOK 1992 (Headline, £6.99).
Incorporating crime statistics, true cases and fascinating articles, the book covers 1991 and up to June 1992.
IN the same vein is THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF SERIAL KILLERS (Headline, £6.99).
OPENING LINES
‘THIS book almost didn't get written.’
It Doesn't Take A Hero, by Gen Norman Schwarzkopf (Bantam).
Have you read a memorable opening line recently?
Send it, with title, author and publisher to TODAY Books, 1 Virginia St, London E1 9BS.
We will print the best.
‘I can remember when the air was clean and the sex was dirty’
Katy Bravery
QUOTABLE QUIPS
WHEN the artist Whistler came up with a memorable quip, Oscar Wilde observed wistfully: ‘I wish I'd said that.’
Whistler replied: ‘You will Oscar, you will.’
We have all wished that we'd had the perfect retort at some time, but most of us can only think of something smart about three days later.
Veteran comedian George Burns is a master of the quick comment, with lines such as: ‘I can remember when the air was clean and the sex was dirty.’
Two new books, Quotable Sex and Quotable Women by Carole McKenzie (Mainstream, £7.99), both have hundreds of incisive comments from the quick brains of the famous and little-known: ‘Men should keep their eyes wide open before marriage, and half-shut afterwards’— Madeleine de Scudery (1607–1701) French author.
‘Dramatic art in her opinion is knowing how to fill a sweater’— Bette Davis on Jayne Mansfield.
‘Take the wife’— Edwina Currie MP advising businessmen on how to avoid Aids.
‘Aids can be spread by normal sex between men and women.
This is still rare in Scotland’— Scottish Sunday Mail.
‘The girl speaks 18 languages and can't say no in any of them’— Dorothy Parker, on a rival.
‘A bachelor never quite gets over the idea that he is a thing of beauty and a boy forever’— Helen Rowland.
‘Too much of a good thing can be wonderful’— Mae West.
‘If you are afraid of loneliness, do not marry’— Chekhov.
‘She was good at playing abstract confusion in the same way that a midget is good at being short’— Clive James on Marilyn Monroe.
And from Quotable Women: ‘I'll read almost anything I can get my hands on from women's magazines to Dickens.
I read because I enjoy it’— Lady Diana Spencer before her marriage.
‘Oh, I've got that one!
Unfortunately my husband doesn't like me reading light novels’— Princess Diana, on seeing a Danielle Steele novel in a hospital.
‘Why does a woman work 10 years to change a man's habits and then complain that he's not the man she married?’
‘Never go to bed mad.
Stay up and fight’— both Phyllis Diller.
Sheldon shines again
A SIDNEY Sheldon novel is as vital a piece of holiday luggage as sun lotion.
And in THE STARS SHINE DOWN (HarperCollins, £14.99), the familiar ingredients of sex, money and power are there in abundance.
Orphan Lara Cameron metamorphoses into a beautiful property tycoon.
With grit and determination she makes it in a man's world by hiring and firing at will.
But like many Sheldon heroines, she has a past which threatens to catch up with her.
It's familiar fare but a compelling read.
Inside the mind of a ladykiller
THE fate of missing estate agent Suzy Lamplugh is one of the longest-running mysteries in modern-day Britain.
Now Christopher Berry-Dee and Robin Odell pose a possible solution in LADYKILLER (True Crime, £14.99).
They present the story of John Cannan, who is presently serving three life terms for the murder of Bristol newly-wed Shirley Banks in 1989.
They manage to get inside the mind of a man who, despite being brutal, had effortless success with a string of women.
In an exhaustive reconstruction of his past, they conclude that he could be Suzy's killer — an accusation Cannan has always denied.
How to cope with the office bully
Louise Bowen
YOUR boss is standing over you as you type a report.
As soon as you make a nervous slip, he explodes with anger — humiliating you in front of colleagues.
It's a familiar scene that can cause workers untold misery and loss of self-confidence.
This kind of bullying from aggressive bosses can destroy even the most confident and successful people, as author Jilly Cooper remembers well from her early career.
‘Luckily, I realised what my boss was doing to me and I got out quickly.
I vowed never to put myself in that position again,’ she says.
But it isn't always necessary to take such drastic action.
There are other approaches you can try first, says Roberta Cava, author of Dealing With Difficult People (Piatkus, £8.95).
‘Supervisors who use aggressive behaviour to dominate and control staff are among the most difficult for an employee to deal with,’ she says.
‘The supervisor has not learned one of the fundamentals of good supervision — that employees can't be forced into doing a good job.
They are led into it,’ says Roberta.
Before you tackle the bully, however, evaluate whether it could make matters worse for you.
If you are intent on sorting out the problem, take courage and talk to your boss privately about his/her aggressive behaviour.
Make them account for their actions.
Often such people don't realise how destructive their behaviour is, says Roberta.
Try saying: ‘I find it difficult to handle the put-downs you've been giving me.
I can't defend my actions when you call me names.
‘I don't know how to improve my performance if I don't know what you really want.
Could you give me examples of why you think I'm ignorant or stupid?’
If bosses are sarcastic, try not to react.
When it's no longer fun to use sarcasm, they will take it elsewhere.
Make bosses aware of their behaviour by asking: ‘What is it that you really want to say that you're covering up with sarcasm?’
Whatever approach you choose, don't act defensively.
Often bosses ignore workers or give them the silent treatment — a negative, no-win situation for all concerned.
If issues are not settled through discussion they will resurface.
Your approach should be made directly, simply and without recriminations or emotion.
Get the boss on his own and say: ‘I have a problem and I need your help in solving it.’
Explain how you feel when you are ignored and ask the boss to explain why it is happening.
Go higher up the chain of command only if the boss's behaviour is affecting the rest of the staff.
Author Andrea Adams suggests some further action you can take before approaching the boss.
In her book Bullying At Work (Virago £6.99) she suggests that workers should do the following: LOG instances in which you are attacked, with dates, times and locations.
KEEP copies of annual appraisals or letters praising your work.
SECURE a job description so the boss cannot accuse you of neglecting duties.
‘The need for proof is essential because many organisations fail to recognise bullying, even when it is causing serious disruption within their workforce.
It's important to be specific,’ says Andrea.
If you think that these approaches will make matters worse, it may simply be better to ask for a transfer or move to new pastures.
Before you do, however, make sure that the personnel department knows why you are leaving.
Put it in writing as ammunition.
It will help future victims to prove their case.
Boss forced me out
IT was soon after Tricia Robinson's father died that her boss began to bully her.
Ironically, she was an office manager with a firm of personnel consultants and had done well in her three years with the company.
‘Two months before the bullying started an appraisal seemed to say I could walk on water.
But then my boss started shouting and swearing at me,’ Tricia says.
‘I politely asked him not to bully me but that infuriated him.
He stopped talking to me and changed deadlines so they became impossible to meet.
Then he sacked me.’
Tricia took her case to a tribunal, and won an out-of-court settlement.
She now has another job but cannot completely forget her experiences.
‘I've cut my boss out like a cancer but I can't drive past where I used to work,’ she says.
YOU can hear more of Tricia's story in The Works on Central Television on Monday night.
Dracula girl in model role
ACTRESSES are about to become the queens of fashion advertising.
Dracula star Monica Bellucci is to front a major publicity push in a move which could leave the supermodels out in the cold.
‘They have had their day,’ said one industry insider.
The return of Redford
HOLLYWOOD veteran Robert Redford is back on form in his new movie Sneakers, while British wonderboy Kenneth Branagh unveils his latest, Peter's Friends, today.
We review both in ET along with the best new music and theatre.
Two cheers for Lamont
WE got so much that we had asked for from Norman Lamont yesterday that it might seem churlish not to give his Autumn Statement an unqualified welcome.
There was an interest rate cut, help for business, particularly the building and motor industries, the go-ahead for great capital schemes and no increases in taxation.
And yet there was something missing which leads TODAY to reserve judgment.
Mr Lamont seemed half-hearted about the measures which he introduced.
Probably because his heart wasn't in them.
Or perhaps all those U-turns left him feeling dizzy.
He turned away from the sacred cow of monetarism — sort of.
He gave industry the cut in interest rates it wanted — sort of.
He helped new business and the export drive — sort of.
It was, in fact, the ‘sort of’ budget.
It contained much of what the country needs to get out of recession but not enough to give any of us the confidence to believe that the recovery is about to begin.
The abolition of car tax was a bold move but it should have been done in the Budget last March, as the motor industry had asked.
So far, so good
The increased spending on health and education is welcome in every way, although those who work in schools and hospitals cannot help but feel that they will be paying for it themselves by being denied pay rises.
The scheme to buy up empty houses and rent them to homeless families will help to solve two problems.
But it will make only a marginal difference to the stagnant housing market.
It will hardly get prices moving upwards again and will do little to encourage homeowners to move or first-time buyers to step into the market.
There is also an element of ‘jam tomorrow’ about some of Mr Lamont's measures.
Increased tax allowances for the first year of new businesses is an encouragement but not a positive help for firms which are not going to pay tax anyway — because they are losing money.
The really pointless measure is letting councils spend the money they get over the next few years from selling homes and other properties.
How is that supposed to bring immediate relief?
Councils already have almost £6 billion stashed away.
It is only the Government's stubborn ideology which prevents them using it — or, at least, part of it — now.
Borrowed billions
The great question, of course, is where will all the money come from?
It is not such a mystery really, as the Treasury admitted after Mr Lamont had finished his speech that next year they plan to borrow £44 billion.
What a turnaround for a Government which only a couple of years ago actually raised more money than it spent and was dedicated to not borrowing.
Yet if that is the only way to raise the cash to get Britain out of the recession, so be it.
This Autumn Statement and the new economic policy it set down must be judged on whether it gets the country back to work, reduces the dole queues and brings hope back to the British people.
The danger is that it is not enough, particularly after so many months of failing to respond to the economic crisis.
Every time the Government does a bit and waits to see if it works, by the time it finds out that it hasn't done, it needs to do still more.
Yesterday Mr Lamont did many things right.
TODAY believes still more needed to be done.
He made at least 5 million workers unhappy but if his actions make the unemployed happy because they now can get jobs, his bitter medicine will have been worthwhile.
Verdict of the experts
Yes but…by Professor Patrick Minford
THIS is a moderately encouraging statement.
No more than that.
The Chancellor has made some substantial moves towards boosting the economy.
What bothers me is that I'm not convinced he has done enough.
The inflation target is puzzling.
He puts it at between one and four per cent, which I think could be violated in the short term.
The one per cent cut in interest rates doesn't go far enough.
It will be a modest help and it is moving in the right direction.
I would expect further cuts over the next couple of months.
We need interest rates to drop by another three per cent.
The refusal to raise National Insurance rates is very good because that would have been a tax increase.
Public sector borrowing is very highly inflationary in a recession and you shouldn't raise taxes if your underlying PSBR (Public Sector Borrowing Rate) is OK.
The maintenance of the capital infrastructure is good too.
Then there are the moves to buy up empty properties and for temporary increases in local authority investment.
I greet those with modified rapture.
These sorts of kick-start measures add uncertainty to the economy.
Once you've done them, people expect them to happen again and that takes away from a stable environment.
I don't really approve of that.
The abolition of car tax is a good idea.
It should help the motor industry and it was always an anomaly because you pay VAT on a car anyway.
And I'm glad the Chancellor has been fairly tough on public spending and holding down pay in the public sector.
People got into a rather happy-go-spend frame of mind before the election and he is right to pull back now.
My main worry is that he hasn't brought interest rates down far enough.
This is really the key to getting the economy stabilised but the Chancellor didn't have the courage of his convictions to do it.
I think his forecast of one per cent growth for next year may be optimistic.
He may well find that the economy doesn't react as much to his measures as he hopes.
I would have cut interest rates very sharply now to three or four per cent.
That is the way to have a sharp effect on the monetary environment.
The one per cent cut won't have a substantial impact on people's expectations and confidence.
The risk is that we carry on drifting downwards because there is no real impact on those expectations.
Then you risk unemployment going up again and with that a general lack of confidence.
I am afraid that will continue.
No definitely by Dr Michael Kitson
APART from a bit of financial window dressing, the Chancellor hasn't done much with this statement.
I don't think much of it at all.
The economy is in a perilous state and we needed some imaginative changes.
What we've got is a very cautious policy.
Where it should be visionary, it is broadly neutral.
There is no significant change in Government expenditure which we really need to try to boost the economy and move out of the recession.
The one per cent drop in interest rates will only give very minor help.
If the Chancellor expects the private sector to lead the economy out of recession, then I'm afraid he's going to be disappointed.
There's so much debt in the private sector and he's not going to get consumers out spending with that interest rate drop.
Neither will it encourage investors so it won't bring any significant change in the private sector and it isn't enough to generate sustained growth.
He could have used exports to get the economy going with a substantial reduction in the exchange rate and greater devaluation.
We've had devaluation of 14 per cent and we would need another 10 per cent.
He hasn't done this either.
If you can't rely on the private sector or exports to get the economy going, you need to rely on the Government and there is very little in this statement to reflect that policy.
He has helped the car industry and the construction industry with capital allowances for investment in plant and machinery, but it's only marginal help.
Unemployment is still going to rise — it will be 3.5 million by the end of next year.
The Government still has a myopic attitude to spending.
Mr Lamont has stuck to his public spending target of £244.5 billion but he should have increased that.
I'd be very surprised if he manages to keep to the 1.5 per cent increase in public sector pay.
He should have increased capital expenditure by £6 billion.
That would have created jobs quickly, it's not very inflationary and it doesn't suck in large amounts of imports.
He has done a little bit of manipulation here and there but overall it will not boost the economy.
He has put growth at one per cent for next year.
That's optimistic.
The announcement that National Insurance rates are to stay the same is more window-dressing, I think.
The Government flies these kites of disinformation then people feel grateful when they don't happen.
The Chancellor has shifted a few factors around, that's all.
Brilliant Brown goes for the jugular
By David Seymour
ANYONE who watched Gordon Brown launch into the Chancellor yesterday will have asked the question: why on earth isn't he leader of the Labour Party?
Just about the hardest job in the Commons is making the Opposition's reply straight after a Government announcement, particularly a financial one.
The Labour leader has to do that after the Budget — an art Neil Kinnock never mastered — but it falls to the Shadow Chancellor to reply to the Autumn Statement.
Young Gordon was brilliant.
He had the right mixture of politics and economics, cleverly interwoven with deadly figures and Government pledges to throw back in Norman Lamont's face.
Poor Mr Lamont did his best to rubbish what Mr Brown had argued, but his Shadow had said all the right things and hit all the sore spots.
By contrast, Labour's new leader, John Smith, has delivered a series of luke-warm performances, with the exception of his demolition job on John Major in September's emergency debate.
It was inevitable yesterday, as Gordon Brown gave his performance, that Labour's backbenchers were wondering whether they had picked the right man.
A year ago it was assumed that either he or the other Young Pretender, Tony Blair, would succeed to the leadership if Neil Kinnock stood down.
But in the days immediately after the General Election defeat, Mr Smith not only launched his bid but got into an impregnable position thanks to his support from the big unions.
Maybe Mr Brown's time will come eventually.
But yesterday he showed just how much his party needs him now.
Ticket to ride, but don't leave the train
By Lucy Broadbent
WHEN Tim Barranger and his wife set off on a shopping trip from their home in Ilkley, Yorkshire they asked the inspector on their train for the cheapest day-return ticket to Leeds.
The inspector duly obliged, but when the couple tried to get off he barred them, explaining that on the cheapest ticket they could travel to Leeds and back — but not leave the train.
That is just one of the horror stories told by Jonathan Margolis and Gabrielle Morris in their new book THE COMMUTER'S TALE (Chapmans, £3.99).
British Rail comes in for a fair bit of stick from travellers who would heartily support the loud speaker announcement heard by Philip White.
When his train stopped with only one carriage next to the platform, a voice lamented: ‘British Rail regrets we are a total failure.’
Michael Peachey, a regular commuter from Epping, had similar feelings about the bosses of London Underground.
He was spotted reading his newspaper through the visor of a medieval suit of armour which he wore one day on the Central Line as a protest against overcrowding in the rush hour.
But the book also gives commendations for initiative.
It praises the driver of the 5.05 from London Bridge to Eastbourne who climbed out of his cab with a fistful of messages from passengers who'd asked him to phone their wives after hearing the train would be stranded for some time.
The Red Face Award must go to one of BR Chairman Sir Bob Reid's secretaries who, after a complaint about fleas on an Edinburgh sleeper was passed on to her, sent out Sir Bob's ‘personal’ letter of apology with a memo inadvertently attached, saying: ‘Send standard flea letter’.
Only fools and robbers
Ivan Waterman
IT WAS the crime of the century.
On November 8, 1983, a masked gang forced their way into the Brinks-Mat warehouse at Heathrow and coolly made off with 6,800 gold bars worth more than £26 million.
The police and public were stunned at the size of the haul.
So were the robbers — they expected to find £2 million.
But the law was hard on their heels.
Within two weeks gang leader Michael McAvoy and Brian Robinson were behind bars after a suspect cracked.
Other convictions followed.
Now the story of Britain's biggest-ever robbery — and the massive money laundering operation that went on for months afterwards — will be told tomorrow night in ITV's £2 million drama Fool's Gold (9.05pm).
More than £8 million was never recovered and those still in jail and others undetected may yet end up millionaires.
In fact so much bullion was melted down and dispersed after the heist that this Christmas many women could be given jewellery made from the haul.
‘If the money never recovered was properly invested, it could multiply and multiply,’ says former senior policeman Brian Worth who led the hunt for the gang.
‘Who knows how much that total could be by the year 2000.’
Fool's Gold director Terry Winsor says: ‘The truth is extremely elusive but my understanding is that unlike the Great Train Robbers, the boys who did go inside won't come out as poor men.’
But the story has its fallguys, says Brian Worth — notably McAvoy.
‘There is no honour among thieves.
McAvoy was convinced he could control his cut from the inside but he lost control.
‘He believed in the code of loyalty and silence but he could have done himself a favour by letting us know where all the gold was.’
Here we present sketches of some of the key figures in the Brinks-Mat affair — one of the most intriguing cases in British crime.
GORDON Parry, 53, is played by Trevor Byfield.
Called the brains behind the laundering operation, Parry got 10 years for handling Pounds 4.4 million.
Police said he paid £2.8 million into a Swiss account in one month.
Parry moved from a terraced house to a 15th-Century mansion in Kent and bought a Bentley for £81,000 cash.
He is not due for release until 2001.
KATHLEEN Meacock was later to become the second Mrs McAvoy after marrying the gang leader in jail.
Played by Eve Bland in the film, Kathleen moved from her council flat in Prioress Street off London's Old Kent Road after McAvoy gave her a £500,000 house at Turpington Farm in Kent.
She has always displayed total loyalty to McAvoy.
TONY White was picked up within a month of the robbery at his Rotherhithe home, on suspicion of handling.
White, aged 49, was cleared of all charges in 1984 and later left Britain for a villa in Marbella, where he still lives.
IN Fool's Gold, actor Stephen Frost portrays a member of the gang who was never apprehended.
THE former wife of convicted gang leader Michael McAvoy will be played by Sharon Maiden.
Thirty-six-year-old Jacqueline McAvoy of Bickley in Kent is the mother of Michael's three children.
Prosecutors did not go ahead with charges that she plotted to handle part of the proceeds of the robbery by allowing her husband to buy her a Tudor mansion.
MICHAEL ‘Mickey’ McAvoy, 40, is played by Sean Bean.
A builder from South London, McAvoy was the mastermind of the robbery.
He was given 25 years but tried to negotiate a cut in his sentence by returning half of the stolen gold.
He is due for release in 2009.
A hardman womaniser, McAvoy bragged he could control his share from his cell.
He finally married his mistress Kathleen in jail.
KENNETH Noye, played in the drama by Larry Lamb, was dubbed a ‘new age villain’.
The smooth-talking Noye was given a 14-year sentence for laundering cash from the Brinks-Mat raid.
He posed as a successful businessman and South London haulage boss, but it was believed Noye schemed the melting down and sale of the three tons of stolen gold.
The only gold ever recovered — just a handful of the bars — was found in his garden.
Although not due for release until 2001, the 45-year-old was recently let out of his low-security prison to spend a weekend with his wife Brenda who bought him a £35,000 K-reg Mercedes as a coming home present.
Guess who had the £2,500 facelift
By Jackie Annesley
FIONA Meiklejohn hated the wrinkles that were starting to show on her face.
So she did what an increasing number of British women are now doing — she had cosmetic surgery.
But after spending more than £2,500 on a facelift and suffering a few weeks of looking and feeling like she had gone 12 rounds with Lennox Lewis, Fiona found that few people noticed any difference.
‘Those who knew about it said there was a subtle difference, but then people are so terribly insincere you can never tell if they are telling the truth,’ says the 43-year-old photographic library manager.
The fact is, for a lot less money and pain she could have achieved a far more dramatic improvement in her appearance.
As our pictures show, careful make-up and styling can take off more years than the surgeon's knife.
So can losing a few pounds if you are overweight.
And as Brigitte Bardot has shown recently, even the glow of a new love affair can work wonders.
Since 1985 enquiries about cosmetic surgery in Britain have risen by more than 800 per cent.
Only this week a survey by Gallup showed one in five would like to go under the knife, despite the attendant risks of internal bleeding and excessive scar tissue from poorly performed operations.
Surgery may have prolonged the careers of some Hollywood actresses but for many people it is not the panacea they may believe it is.
Top cosmetic surgeon Anthony Erian says he turns away more than half the people who walk into his Harley Street consulting rooms looking for a new image.
‘If they are doing it to please someone else or save a marriage I tell them I won't do it,’ he says.
‘Many people would be better off spending a smaller amount of money on a new hairdo or a relaxing holiday.
‘A person's basic character cannot be altered by surgery.
But subtle changes in physical looks can have psychological benefits,’
Grace Taylor, 56, went to Erian for a face lift and to have lines around her eyes smoothed out.
The change may not be dramatic but Grace was ‘delighted’.
However some people may find surgery has little effect: ‘People with short necks will not benefit as much from a face lift as those with long necks,’ says Erian.
‘Nor will those with a receding chin because whatever you pull, there is nothing to hook it on to.’
A comparatively cheap make-over, on the other hand, can improve every face.
Becky Wallam and Andrea Carpenter achieved dramatic results with a £95 make-over by the stylists at Cover Girl International.
TODAY hair and make-up artist Roxanne New advises picking out your best features and making the most of them.
‘A highlighter — two tones lighter than your normal foundation — can define cheekbones, make eyes look bigger and slim down a nose merely by being blended into these areas.
‘To make lips look fuller, the trick is to define them with a brown eyeliner and outline the shape you want them to be and then go for a light coloured lipstick.
Dark colours always make your lips look tighter and smaller.’
A hint of a good fake tan and a touch of a warm earthy blusher can transform a jaded looking face into a radiant one.
‘By making your best features look good, the bad bits tend to recede into the background.’
One of Roxanne's biggest beauty tips is available to everyone — a smile.
‘It makes all the difference to how we look if we are happy,’ she says.
Losing weight can also make a big difference.
Janet Garsden Cooper lost the shape of her face when she piled on the flab.
But after losing only 18lbs, Janet's improvement earned her a Weight Watchers ‘ambassador’ title.
‘It completely changed the shape of my face and suddenly I had my cheekbones back,’ says Janet, 37.
‘I also let my hair go darker and grew out my fringe which was a lot more flattering.’
It is not just women who are keen to change their looks.
Thirty-two-year-old Mike Keneally managed to transform himself from a 28-stone blob into a 14-stone hunk.
That dedication had its rewards — Mike won Slimming World magazine's Man of the Year title.
A party for Pet
By Tim Satchell
TOMORROW Claude Wollf is holding a party in Paris to celebrate the 60th birthday of his wife Petula Clark.
Joining them will be their daughters Kate, 29, and 31-year-old Bara — short for Barbara — who is flying in from Los Angeles.
Also there will be son Patrick, 20, who is about to complete his national service in the French army.
Married for 31 years, Miss Clark spends much of her time at her flat in London's Knightsbridge, while Mr Wollf, who is also her manager, lives at their home in Paris.
Champ receives top service at surprise lunch
By Tim Satchell
WIMBLEDON champion Andre Agassi has made a surprise appearance at the All England Lawn Tennis Club for lunch.
Booking a table in the morning, Mr Agassi arrived with his brother and sister.
Wearing his trademark baseball cap, he was dressed in blazer, casual trousers and, as required by the club's regulations, a tie.
On Sunday as he entered the restaurant, which overlooks Courts 3, 4 and 5, the other members present and their guests broke into spontaneous applause.
Club Secretary Roger Ambrose tells me: ‘We were very pleased to welcome him back.
‘He wore his baseball cap throughout lunch, but the club has no rules about that.’
Mr Agassi, 23, became an honorary member by dint of winning the Men's Singles Championship in July.
He had roast beef and sticky toffee pudding.
Lunch for three cost under £50.
He is currently resting at home in Las Vegas, before January's Australian Open.
Princess Margaret
By Tim Satchell
Princess Margaret was at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden on Tuesday to support the Paul Hamlyn Westminster Week.
Publisher Mr Hamlyn and Westminster City Council have donated around £1 million to take over the Opera House for a week and subsidise tickets for first-time opera and ballet-goers.
Tickets that would normally cost over £100 have been made available, through specific community organisations, for £10.
Started in 1986, this is the first year the week has included opera.
Moggie movies
By Tim Satchell
A NEW video designed to entertain bored cats has reached Number Two in the W H Smith Top Ten.
Producer Mike Leander, who is also Gary Glitter's manager, tells me the video has been a blessing for his two Burmese cats.
‘My cats are urbanly deprived,’ he says.
‘They never go out and are real couch potatoes.
‘When I go out I switch on the video and know my cats are having a good time looking at visions of snakes, hippos, mice, rabbits — oh, just about everything.
‘It's all set to music.
There are high pitched whale squeaks and that sort of thing.
It sends them wild with delight.’
However, the video has received complaints from bird lovers, who say it could encourage cats to harm birds.
Cool For Cats Volume One is available at £12.99.
Volume Two is expected next year.
And…
By Tim Satchell
CUSTOMER to landlord in The Old Dog and Grommet: ‘I can tell you how you could sell more beer.’
‘How's that?’
‘You could fill the glasses up to the top.’
Beastly success
By Tim Satchell
TONIGHT Dublin-born Dervla Kirwan opens in Poor Beasts In The Rain at the Bush Theatre, Shepherd's Bush.
It is the second of Billy Roche's Wexford trilogy plays about small-town life in Wexford, southern Ireland.
The others are A Handful Of Stars and Belfry.
Miss Kirwan, 20, has had a remarkably successful career since first appearing in A Handful Of Stars in London at 16.
Next came appearances in Troubles and December Bride, before starring with Juliet Stevenson in Border Country for Channel 4.
More recently she was seen in the television adaptation of Melvyn Bragg's novel A Time To Dance.
At a glance
1% cut in interest rate to 7%.
Public sector pay rises limited to 1.5%.
No rise for Government Ministers.
Pensions and benefits up in line with inflation.
National Insurance rates unchanged.
5% tax on new cars scrapped — saving about £400 on family model.
Go-ahead for Jubilee Line extension on London Underground.
Extra £150 million for British Rail rolling stock.
Consultative paper on toll motorways.
Extra £1.8 billion council capital spending over four years.
Industry investment allowances raised from 25% to 40% for a year.
Additional £700 million help for exporters.
Extra £750 million to buy empty homes for social housing.
Total public spending held at planned £244.5 million.
1% growth forecast for 1993.
I'll put Britain back on the rails
By Matthew Benns
THE price of a new car was cut by an average £400 last night as Chancellor Norman Lamont abolished a tax which has dogged the motor industry for 20 years.
Car tax, imposed in 1973 as an extra levy on top of VAT, was scrapped at midnight.
It means the price of the best-selling Ford Fiesta, in its LX form, will now cost £8,357, a reduction of £348.
The bigger the car the bigger the saving.
A Vauxhall Cavalier 1.6LS drops £500 to £11,100, a Rover 820SI £738 to £17,712 and, for those who can still afford it, a Lotus Esprit can be snapped up for £45,878, a cut of £1,912.
Last night the motor industry was rejoicing at the unexpected cut.
Rolls-Royce spokesman David Preston said: ‘It is well known that our sales have been 50 per cent down on what they were in 1990 so any reduction is welcome.’
A Rolls-Royce Silver Spirit cost £100,000 yesterday but today it is £4,000 cheaper.
At Ford, where workers across the country have been put on short time because of the slump in demand, the feeling was that car tax should have been scrapped much sooner.
‘It is a very encouraging set of measures, even if it lacks the boldness some had hoped for, ' said a spokesman.
The car tax was having a very negative effect on car sales and taken together the Chancellor's proposals could have a positive impact on consumer confidence.’
Sales of Ford's best-selling Fiesta this year are well below last year's sale of 117,000 and plants at Halewood, Dagenham and Southampton have all had weeks of complete closedown.
The move could also lead to an acceleration in the sports car sales.
Lotus communications chief Patrick Peal said: ‘Cars are cheaper and with one per cent off the base rate borrowing the money to buy a car is also cheaper.’
Mr Lamont had cut car tax from 10 per cent to five per cent in March this year but his action failed to pull the car industry out of a three-year nose dive.
Even so, yesterday's move came as a surprise to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
They released their suggestions for revising the car tax less than an hour before Mr Lamont abolished it completely.
‘We are absolutely delighted,’ said a spokesman.
‘We weren't expecting this but we have been campaigning to get rid of the car tax for 20 years.
‘We recognise that the Chancellor has placed an enormous responsibility on the motor industry to get the economy moving again.
Now it is up to us to get customers back.’
At Rover, where earlier this year production on several models had to be slowed, there was jubilation.
‘A combination of the abolition of special car tax and lower interest rates should see people coming back to the showrooms,’ said a spokesman.
There was also delight on the forecourts.
At the Crown Motors Vauxhall dealership in Essex, sales manager Ken Watkins said: ‘This is great news.
It has been very quiet on the sales front so I hope this will give us a boost.’
Drivers face toll charges on major routes
TOLLS could be charged on major roadways under changes to be proposed in the New Year.
The Government is to press ahead with its £23 billion roads programme, but is looking for more help from the public sector.
This could come from tolls on routes such as the M1.
And research is under way to evaluate greater involvement of the private sector in the financing, design, building and operation of national roads.
In the meantime the Government plans to spend £6.3 billion on roads over the next three years, with 40 new schemes starting next year.
They include widening sections of the M1, M4, M25 and M62 and various new by-passes, including one at Bedford.
‘Even at these record levels of investment, it will mean a considerable time before the whole programme is completed,’ said Transport Secretary John MacGregor.
‘It is right, I think, to look to see if the private sector can make a significant contribution.’
£4bn to pull Industry out of the doldrums
THE Chancellor is ploughing £4 billion into industry to help pull it out of the doldrums.
The cash will go to help keep businesses alive, save jobs and boost the crippled property market.
The revival of industry was at the heart of Mr Lamont's Autumn Statement.
He laid the foundations by cutting one per cent off interest rates, scrapping special car tax, and boosting the housing industry.
His package includes:
Extra tax relief for companies buying new machinery or spending money on key investment and a 20 per cent tax incentive for companies putting up new buildings.
New rules to allow private companies to take over the running of key public sector construction projects such as the the Channel Tunnel high-speed rail link, London rail links and major bridge and road projects.
The go-ahead for British Rail to order £150 million of new trains, by leasing them from other companies.
New measures to give £700 million of extra help to exports to take advantage of the lower value of the pound.
Extra £177m to get jobless back to work
SPENDING to help the jobless will rise by £177 million next year.
The budget will increase by one per cent to £4.1 billion.
Employment and training programmes will increase by 500,000 places next year, a rise of 50 per cent.
There will also be extra help for areas hit by pit closures.
A Training For Work programme will replace the existing Employment Training and Employment Action schemes, offering 320,000 adult places in 1993, about the same as this year.
Other measures announced by the Government included:
Expansion of Career Development Loans to provide 60,000 more opportunities over the next three years
Jobclubs and Job Interview Guarantee Schemes will be expanded to provide an extra 180,000 places
A £45 million three-year initiative to promote out-of-school childcare schemes.
Anyone unemployed for a year will have to attend a special workshop.
Labour said the one per cent rise amounted to ‘substantial cuts’.
High streets look forward to big spenders
RETAILERS hope the interest rate cut may boost shoppers' confidence and High Street spending in the run-up to Christmas.
Many big chains had pushed for a 2 per cent reduction, but believe the 1 per cent cut could still help.
One retail analyst said he believed it would make customers more likely to spend on food and gifts.
‘We are quietly optimistic of an upturn,’ he said.
But a spokesman for Asda said confidence was brittle and retailers would have to continue to provide real value for money in the battle to win an important share of High Street custom.
The holiday industry was also cautiously confident.
The Association of British Travel Agents said that the 7 per cent base rate — the lowest since 1987 when a record 12 million Britons took package holidays abroad — might persuade people to travel again.
‘It is the sort of boost we need to add to consumer confidence,’ said Abta's Keith Betton.
‘We are now confident that people will vote with their cheque books.’
BR steams ahead into the new age
THE Chancellor promised a new era for British Rail last night just as this steam train became the last to run into London.
It was ironic that Mr Lamont gave details of aid to BR at the same time as the old-world Princess Margaret Rose was steaming across the countryside to London's Marylebone station to raise £2 million for the museum-like Great Central Railway.
BR, meanwhile, was given an extra £130 million for 1993–4 to fund Channel Tunnel services, improve trains for inner Kent commuters and help pay for signalling and track work.
BR chairman Sir Bob Reid welcomed the announcement as a ‘breakthrough which gives us some investment headroom.’
But he warned: ‘The present limits are extremely tight and will present us with problems in maintaining the quality of services.’
Mr Lamont also gave the green light for the Jubilee Line extension in London, but work will not start until a banking consortium has been set up to provide £400 million of private-sector money for the Pounds 1.8 billion project.
The Government claim building the line will create direct employment for 5,000 people and off-site supply jobs for about 25,000 others.
But, as TODAY reported this week, 500 British jobs have already been lost because the signalling work has been awarded to the company Al Catel, which has manufacturing bases in Canada and Germany.
The tube will be linked with major BR stations and the Docklands light railway.
Despite the go-ahead, Environment Secretary Michael Howard announced yesterday that 2,000 civil servants will not be moving to the Canary Wharf office block in the near future.
Staff from his department would remain at their present headquarters near the House of Commons for the next three years.
London Transport chairman Wilfrid Newton reacted angrily to the Chancellor's cutback.
He said: ‘We now face the real prospect of deteriorating services and the loss of some 7,000 jobs in supply industries.’
If Mr Newton is right, perhaps Mr Lamont will one day be able to please the traditionalists…by announcing that the railways are to go back to the good old steam age.
Prisoners conditions
INSTEAD of surveying prisoners to see how life in jail can be improved, the authorities should talk to ordinary, law-abiding folk who live in fear of crime.
They would learn that in this violent age, not one in 10,000 gives a damn for prisoners' rights.
If people don't like jail, they shouldn't break the law.
Jubilee Line
HOW can the Government allow a foreign company to secure the new Jubilee Line contract in London?
It would never have happened in France or Germany.
Taxing the Queen
HOW dare MPs excuse the Queen from tax.
Surely, if she was the caring person she makes out, she would insist on paying her dues.
Mugger's sentence
WELL done to the judge who gave a mugger five years.
I am a pensioner and live in fear of all the violence.
But it gave me heart to see one thug get what he deserves.
Shelter
SHELTER'S gimmick of sending people fake repossession notices was silly.
There are better ways to highlight the plight of the homeless.
Hard lesson for the rich
PARDON me if I don't break down in tears at the plight of the parents who are having to take their children out of private schools because they cannot afford the fees.
Perhaps when their children have to go to a run-down, underfunded, understaffed State school they will understand why most of the country is up in arms about the state of the education system.
For years, the Tory Government has gone on about freedom of choice in education but it has only been those with money who have had any real choice.
For the rest of us, it has been a matter of being lucky enough to live near a decent State school.
I hope now that the privileged few are having to lower themselves to the level of State schools, there will be more pressure on the Government to put some cash into education.
Perhaps then all our children can have the best education money can buy.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Actor Charles Bronson, 70.
Actress Whoopi Goldberg, 37.
ON THIS DAY: In 1914, the bra was patented by Mary Phelps Jacob.
In 1916, the Battle of the Somme ended, with 60,000 Allied casualties.
In 1942, Tobruk was recaptured.
Boy racers should be forced into slow lane
YOU are right — high-powered cars are indeed lethal weapons in the hands of inexperienced drivers.
As TODAY suggests, one answer could be for newly-licensed young drivers to carry restriction plates for a specified period.
But a better answer would be for them to be prohibited from driving cars above 1.3 litres — a common engine capacity — until they are 25.
Anyone under that age caught at the wheel of any vehicle over 1.3 litres without a very good excuse should then face a life driving ban.
Boy racers should be forced into slow lane
IT IS no use putting all the blame on young drivers for the high number of accidents.
I believe parents should take much of the responsibility.
What 17 or 18-year-old in these desperate times can afford the cash for a powerful sports car?
In many cases it must be the parents who are letting their children use their car without a thought for the consequences.
After all, give someone who is barely more than a child a high-powered ‘toy’ and there is bound to be trouble when they go out to play with it.
Boy racers should be forced into slow lane
BOY racers are not the problem but the symptom.
The real villains of the piece are the motor manufacturers.
In a country where the top speed limit is 70mph, why do they make 140mph cars?
If the Government forced car firms to make cars with more sensible performance levels, half the problem would disappear.
Picture perfect
THE transformation of Ulrika Jonsson (right) from weather girl to Bardot lookalike is a tribute to her photographer and make-up artist, if nothing else.
But as presenters of The Gladiators, she and John Fashanu are more wooden than The Woodentops.
She should take up modelling full-time.
Things you didn't know you didn't know
By Graeme Donald
IT is easy to see the word fan as a simple shortening of fanatic, but the origin actually lies in the old name for the followers of any sport.
They were known as The Fancy — that is those who fancied that particular activity.
Although this usage has almost disappeared, it is still visible in pigeon fanciers.
The term homing pigeon gives foundation to the popular belief that these birds have a natural ability to find their way back to their loft no matter what the distance.
In fact they have to be trained — starting with distances of only a few feet from, and within sight of, the loft.
Only gradually can the range be increased thus lending support to the theory that the birds find their way back by progressing along a line of recognised landmarks rather than by solar or lunar navigation.
The longest flight of a homing pigeon is 11,073 miles, completed in 15 days.
Rodi Woodcock
IT made me angry to read that £2 million pools winner Rodi Woodcock kept her laboratory job.
I'm an unemployed laboratory technician, and there are many like me.
If she wants a routine to fill her day let her do community work.
She doesn't need a salary and should make room for those who do.
C Goodall, Birmingham
Paul Gascoigne
IT WAS unfair to say Gazza won the battle of the soccer superstars with Maradona even though Gazza scored a brilliant goal.
Maradona is not the player he was and Gazza would have found it a lot tougher facing him at the height of his powers in the Eighties when Argentina won the World Cup.
J Perez, London W12
High-tech Redford puts the byte on
By Sue Heal
THOSE who make movies festooned with technology run a very ticklish course.
There are an awful lot of Luddites out there with computer dyslexia, including Yours Truly.
But Sneakers, Robert Redford's long-awaited comeback movie, is no one-dimensional romp in the land of boys'n'toys, despite possessing so many blinking lights, glowing screens and whirring gizmos.
This is a delightful, funny, quirky old thriller, belting along on high octane enthusiasm and using its copious quantities of High Tech to dress up a more human story which gleefully sings the praises of Spirit over Machine.
Redford, looking craggy and bemused, has thankfully jettisoned the po-faced sermonising of such bloomers as Havana and returned to what he does best: sprinkling an intelligent script with finely tuned, anarchic quips and exhibiting twinkling vulnerability to the ladies.
Once again a Leading Man of the charming but self-effacing school, Redford plays maverick computer whizz Martin Bishop, brimming with anti-authority attitude and a secret past, who runs an ad hoc surveillance team full of grumbling, eccentric geniuses for hire.
This motley crew — moaning ex-CIA man Crease (Sidney Poitier), blind tracking king Whistler (David Strathairn), wobbling compulsive eater Mother (Dan Aykroyd) and adolescent Carl (River Phoenix)— log on to a living by breaking into water-tight conglomerates to show the powers-that-be just how leaky their establishments really are.
That is until a pair of greasy Government honchos arrive one day brandishing a 20-year-old Wanted poster with Redford's face grimacing from it and blackmail the team into stealing a little black box from wild-eyed scientist Dr Gunter Janek (Donal Logue).
Panic swiftly sets in when our boys twig they are in possession of the Greatest Microchip In The Universe, capable of breaking any code anytime, anywhere.
And every power-crazed agent is sniffing out their whereabouts, including mobster mastermind Cosmo (Ben Kingsley with face set in concrete and sporting a daft ponytail), who has a festering score to settle with Redford.
Suspicions bubble furiously, contacts drop like ninepins, Redford is bashed on the head a few times, the dreaded box is nicked back and forth between the Good and the Bad like a gunpoint game of Pass The Parcel and Redford's erstwhile girlfriend Liz (Mary McDonnell) ends up offering refuge to the jittery team and their mountains of equipment.
This is a bright, thoughtful movie, but it doesn't waste costly gadget time giving the men major expositions.
There are only the smallest of delicately dropped clues as to how and why they ended up with the social skills of a herd of rhinos.
It is to director Phil Alden Robinson's credit that he manages to invest them with distinct, sympathetic personalities and a taut mutual need which makes their awesome risk-taking seem unquestionable.
Sneakers' other major plus is a disarming unpredictability.
Just as we hare up one terminal-strewn alley we are diverted by quicksilver turns to another, a snappy script is never slave to technology and the piece is universally well acted.
We are led inexorably towards Kingsley and Redford squaring up for a mental duel between software equals, one barmily convinced that He Who Has The Database Rules The World and the other on the side of human compassion which can't be reduced to byte-size chunks.
This is a witty, charming yet relentlessly exciting film.
It has its fair share of crash, bang wallop and does take a mite too long to wrap itself up, but Sneakers is very funny, hugely entertaining and always ingeniously wacky and it's good to see that reports of Mr Redford's celluloid ‘death’ have been been a touch premature and certainly exaggerated.
Nothing disturbing.
SNEAKERS
STARS: Robert Redford, Sidney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd, River Phoenix
DIRECTOR: Phil Alden Robinson
PRODUCER: Walter F Parkes
TIME: 126 mins
CERTIFICATE: 12
Peter's Friends
By Sue Heal
KENNETH Branagh brings a lot of folk out in hives and I was scratching myself furiously at the thought of Ken, Em, Stephen, Tony, Hugh and Imelda — plus Em's distinguished mum Phyllida Law as the faithful retainer — all holed up, chummy as you please, in a country house over the Yuletide hols, quaffing bubbly and beating their breasts.
It has to be said there is a lot that is queasily smug about this English answer to the US ‘reunion’ movie The Big Chill, substituting the products of Oxbridge Eighties ambition and greed for Sixties radicalism gone sour.
But in fact the whole fluffy, vapid confection is so resolutely unmemorable that it gives as much offence as a toothless poodle.
Rounding up long-lost varsity chums for a rollicking angst-fest has always been a reliable dramatic wheeze, but it can only grab an audience by the short and curlies if you're prepared to shed gallons of blood on the tracks.
And Branagh is far too decent a cove for that.
His raw material consists of Stephen Fry playing Stephen Fry thinly disguised as a throw-back aristo who decides to share his recently inherited stately pile for a few days with his old friends from revue days.
They include Andrew (director Branagh), a talented writer now sold out to LA sitcom-land.
He's trailing a booze problem and an egocentric, bulimic wife called Carol (Rita Rudner of the tea granules ad, who co-wrote the piece with hubby Martin Bergman).
Then there's bumbling blue-stockinged publisher Maggie, played by La Thompson as full of gawkish Enid Blytonisms and a mind-boggling pash for Fry.
Relationship-challenged couple Roger and Mary (Hugh Laurie and Imelda Staunton), nymphomaniac costume designer Sarah (Alphonsia Emmanuel) and Sarah's excitable, married boyfriend Brian (Tony Slattery) are also in tow.
So we are all set up with booze, sex, unrequited love, thoughts of separation, ambiguous sexual status, a grand piano for the singing of old songs and a sniffy Law dispensing trifle with a gimlet stare.
Unlike its classic American predecessor, from whom Rudner and Bergman have shamelessly pinched not only the basic scenario but also many a vignette along the way, Peter's Friends never unfolds its characters with any psychological depth or surprise.
Instead, it plonks them down on the gravel path and lets them knock about a bit.
There are one or two passably funny lines which fail to make up a coherent, witty whole but are suddenly shot out from an invisible pea-shooter as if whipped from Ms Rudner's stand-up routine.
‘You make Mother Teresa look like a hooker,’ as Rudner waspishly says to Thompson, is hardly BAFTA-winning stuff.
The pluses are that Mr Fry's antiques-packed rooms give off a suitably mouldering, claustrophobic air, Staunton is very good as an over-protective mother who keeps haring off to ring the babysitter, all concerned do seem to know each other very well and it's all very pleasant, untaxing and time passes jauntily enough.
But who cares?
Kenneth Branagh claims he made the thing to finance his more ambitious upcoming Shakespeare projects but I'm afraid that really isn't good enough.
The film's biggest problem is that the characters were catapulted out of college in the early Eighties, with forgettable soundtrack to match.
But it was an unrebellious era which is nearly impossible to feel nostalgic about.
None of this lot aches because they failed to change the world.
Crying into your Lanson when you haven't made a million simply hasn't got the same ring.
Some mild sex scenes.
PETER'S FRIENDS
STARS: Kenneth Branagh, Hugh Laurie, Imelda Staunton, Stephen Fry, Emma Thompson
DIRECTOR/PRODUCER: Kenneth Branagh
TIME: 120 mins
CERTIFICATE: 15
Tetsuo II Bodyhammer
By Sue Heal
THERE are horror movies and there are Japanese horror movies and without being remotely racist it is a proven fact that in the Land of the Rising Sun they like their severed limbs, blood and gore with knobs on.
Here Shinya Tsukamoto continues the theme of his earlier Tetsuo The Iron Man, in which every demonic image known to film-makers is conjured up before us and best viewed on a day when you've had Nil By Mouth.
Taniguchi Tomoto, played with fiendish note by Tomoto Taguchi, attempts to lead a quiet, uneventful life in downtown Tokyo with his wife and young son.
The trouble is his background keeps coming back to haunt him like last night's sushi.
Taniguchi was adopted at eight and although his conscious mind has no memory of his past his unconscious mind keeps regurgitating unfortunate images of cruelty.
Added to this his young son is kidnapped by some urban skinheads intent on overthrowing the State, and the angry young boy inside his Dad erupts to wreak revenge, mayhem and generally unbelievable havoc.
This is a black and white effort, thank God, which makes the offerings of David Cronenberg look like Disney.
We are served up a series of bizarre experiments which converge into a monster mutant which can absorb all human and mechanical objects in its path.
This is essentially a roving, stultifying, incoherent orgy of images that leads Taniguchi's body to transform itself into a mechanical colossus.
I can cheerfully admit that it made no impact on me apart from an overwhelming urge to be violently sick.
For the ten pints of Special Brew and vindaloo crowd only.
Highly disturbing.
TETSUO II
STARS: Tomorah Taguchi, Nobu Kanaoka
DIRECTOR: Shinya Tsukamoto
PRODUCER: Fuminori Shishido
TIME: 83 mins
CERTIFICATE: Undecided
Smiles of a Summer Night
By Sue Heal
A BRIEF word for this welcome reissue of a 1955 Ingmar Bergman classic which stars Ulla Jacobsson, Eva Dahl-Beck, Harriet Anderson, Margit Carlquist and Jarl Kulle as a series of mismatched couples struggling to sort out their troubles.
Bergman for once forgoes some of his more inaccessible leanings to tell a straight tale with great humour and pathos.
He is served by a lovely cast who lift a gossamer-thin veil to show the misunderstandings and subtle warrings which make up human relations in all their glory.
Seek it out.
Sexual references.
SMILES OF A SUMMER'S NIGHT
STARS: Gunnar Bjornstrand, Eva Dahlbeck, Ulla Jacobsson
DIRECTOR: Ingmar Bergman
TIME: 105 mins
CERTIFICATE: 15
Top 20 movies
1 (—) LAST OF THE MOHICANS: All-action yarn of the year with a mesmerising performance from Daniel Day-Lewis as Hawkeye, the part-native, part-settler who falls for English rose Madeleine Stowe.
Cert: 12 London: Camden Parkway, MGM Fulham Road, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release.
2 (1) BEAUTY AND THE BEAST: Dazzling Disney animated version of the classic fairytale.
Cert U National: General release.
3 (2) BOOMERANG: Love-them-and-leave-them adman Eddie Murphy gets his come-uppance when his firm is taken over in this star vehicle.
Cert: 15 London: MGM Baker St, Plaza, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release.
4 (16) UNLAWFUL ENTRY: Ray Liotta plays the obsessive maniac, who happens to be a cop, terrorising an unsuspecting couple.
Cert: 18 London: Camden Parkway, MGM Oxford Street, Odeon Marble Arch.
National: General release.
5 (3) PATRIOT GAMES: Retired CIA man Harrison Ford is dragged back into action when he witnesses an assassination attempt on a British royal.
Cert: 15 National: General release.
6 (6) STRICTLY BALLROOM: Stunning high-energy Australian film about a young and talented but unorthodox dancer.
Cert: PG London: Screen On The Hill, UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington.
National: Selected locals.
7 (4) 1492 — CONQUEST OF PARADISE: Ridley Scott's beautifully filmed epic stars Gerard Depardieu as Christopher Columbus.
Cert: 15 London: Barbican, Empire Leicester Square, MGM Trocadero.
National: General release.
8 (5) WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP: Woody (Cheers) Harrelson and Wesley Snipes star in this buddy movie set in the world of basketball.
Cert: 15 London: UCI Whiteleys, Odeon Kensington, MGM Oxford Street.
National: General release.
9 (13) THE CRYING GAME: Atmospheric drama about an IRA volunteer who guards a kidnapped British squaddie.
Cert: 12 London: Camden Plaza, Curzon West End, MGM Fulham Road.
National: Selected locals.
10 (7) HUSBANDS AND WIVES: Woody Allen's vividly drawn tale about a middle-aged lecturer who falls for a young student.
Cert: 15 London: Gate Cinema, MGM Chelsea, Odeon Kensington.
National: Selected locals.
11 (9) HOUSESITTER: Romantic comedy about an architect who builds a dream home — but his girlfriend refuses to live there.
With Steve Martin and Goldie Hawn.
Cert: PG National: General release.
12 (8) UNFORGIVEN: Clint Eastwood's highly acclaimed Western about an old bounty hunter who comes out of retirement for a last showdown.
Cert: 15 National: General release.
13 (10) A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN: A look at the triumphs and trials of an all-girl baseball team of the 1940s.
With Geena Davis, Tom Hanks and Madonna.
Cert: PG National: General release.
14 (19) LETHAL WEAPON 3: Mel Gibson and Danny Glover return as the craziest cops in L.A. Cert 15 National: General release.
15 (11) CALIFORNIA MAN: Comedy about a prehistoric man who becomes the trendiest guy in a modern high school.
Cert: PG National: General release.
16 (15) BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER: Valley girls meet vampires in this high school horror movie.
With Luke Perry.
Cert: 12 London: MGM Panton Street, UCI Whiteleys.
National: General release.
17 (12) CARRY ON COLUMBUS: New faces, same old innuendos, this time on the high seas.
Cert: PG National: General release.
18 (18) BITTER MOON: Roman Polanski's dark and disturbing tale of erotic obsession.
Cert: 18 London: Chelsea Cinema, Odeon Kensington.
National: Selected locals.
19 (20) GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS: Life in the high pressure world of real-estate salesmen, with Al Pacino and Jack Lemmon.
Cert: 15 London: Odeon Haymarket.
National: General release.
20 (17) CITY OF JOY: Drop-out doctor Patrick Swayze finds his conscience pricked when he visits the slums of Calcutta.
Cert: 12 National: Selected locals.
Your movie verdict
By Sue Heal
NO matter what the critics say, it is you the public who decide whether a film is a hit or a miss.
Cinema-goers in the North East gave THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS a warm reception.
Dave Martin, a 40-year-old public relations worker from Washington, Tyne and Wear, loved it.
‘It was a real old-fashioned adventure and one of the best films I've seen for a while.’
Barbara Scott, 42, of Whitley Bay, thought the photography was wonderful.
‘It had a really authentic historical feel about it.’
Secretary Janet Pike, 25, of Gateshead, said: ‘I'm a big Daniel Day-Lewis fan and I wouldn't be surprised if this made him a Hollywood heart-throb.’
David Malcolm, 30, of North Shields, said the movie didn't keep to the book.
‘Despite that it was great entertainment,’ he said.
‘It was bloodthirsty but the violence was handled well — after all, they were violent times.’
But student Colin Watkins, 19, of Newcastle, was disappointed.
‘There has been quite a bit of hype and I don't think the film lived up to it.’
THE CRYING GAME was almost universally panned by our judges.
Receptionist Lynn Hailstones, 18, of Whitley Bay said: ‘It was a load of rubbish — a waste of the ticket money.
The storyline was too far-fetched and none of the actors was particularly good.’
Nick Thompson, a 28-year-old mechanic of Morpeth, said: ‘The idea was quite good but it just didn't come off.’
Accountant Bob Hurd, 33, of Hexham, thought that billing the film as a thriller was ‘laughable’.
‘I can't see this breaking any records at the box office.’
Mary Sewell, 36, of Newcastle, was disappointed too.
‘I realise that the audience have to suspend belief somewhat to enjoy plots but this was asking too much.’
But the film did at least have one fan.
Trainee chef Tom Wilkinson, 20, said: ‘The action sequences were entertaining and I rated the whole thing as pretty good.’
An Ideal Husband
Ivan Waterman
THE wit and wisdom of Oscar Wilde always seem to stand the test of time.
His perception of romance and politics at the turn of the century was amazingly spot on.
Take his views on MPs: ‘Only people who look dull go into the House of Commons…only people who are dull succeed.’
Now what could he have meant?
At the centre of his treatise on society, as we once knew it, are upstanding noble politician Sir Robert Chiltern (David Yelland) and his terribly principled and adoring wife Gertrude (Hannah Gordon).
And in An Ideal Husband (Globe Theatre) their marriage and his livelihood are threatened by the appearance of the Cruella de Ville-like Mrs Cheveley who has blackmail and greed on her mind.
Just the sight of the wonderfully decadent Anna Carteret spitting verbal venom is worth the price of admission.
But it is magnificent Martin Shaw who steals the glory as Sir Robert's close friend, the philandering playboy Lord Goring.
For Goring, read Oscar Wilde himself.
He is elegant, blissfully hilarious and outrageously anarchic.
Peter Hall directs all this at a hectic pace around Carl Toms's lavish set.
And it's as close to perfection as you can get.
Dragon: A Fairytale With Claws
Ivan Waterman
BILLED as a family show, Dragon: A Fairytale With Claws (National Theatre, Olivier) takes us to a far away land where a tyrant demands the annual sacrifice of a young village lass to satisfy his blood lust.
Tony Armatrading rushes to the rescue as a modern-day Lancelot in this allegoric story — orginally a diatribe against Stalin and Hitler — about the forces of good and evil.
With some clever animatronics from Spitting Image, I wish I could recommend this to somebody.
But I can't.
Three Birds Alighting On A Field
Sam Carlisle
BIDDY is a housewife with a vacuous expression, a public school education and a very rich Greek husband, in Three Birds Alighting On A Field (Royal Court).
Her social-climbing spouse decides Biddy needs an ‘interior life’ so she becomes an art collector.
And her wide-eyed innocence soon exposes the pretensions of the art world and the characters it attracts such as the inane critic who believes everyone will buy white, and a dealer trying to sell an empty frame.
Writer Timberlake Wertenbaker paints a fascinating canvas while Harriet Walter is superb as the awfully nice but dim Biddy.
Happy return of the Big O
James Bennett
DEATH can do wonders for record sales — Freddie Mercury's departure alone is reckoned to have put several percentage points on total British sales last Christmas.
And with the recession now biting into the music industry, one desperate insider said this week: ‘We have a wish-list of people we hope might pop their clogs before Christmas.’
Happily there was no quick cash-in when ROY ORBISON died just before Christmas 1988, and his widow Barbara has left it four years before releasing his posthumous album KING OF HEARTS (Virgin).
She used that time wisely in assembling a cast of Roy's friends including Robbie Robertson, Don Was, Jeff Lynne and K D Lang to complete unfinished tracks from the sessions for his last album, Mystery Girl.
The recent hit singles Crying and I Drove All Night are featured along with eight other tracks alternating between clattering rockers and delicious ballads.
Crying apart, there are no songs of the calibre of Pretty Woman but that big dramatic voice is so overwhelming and the production so superb, that it's a worthwhile record by any standards.
So too is the debut album from a Japanese girl guitar trio called SHONEN KNIFE.
LET'S KNIFE (Creation) is the most bizarre thing you'll hear all year: Nirvana meet the Shangri-Las for a dozen high energy throwaway thrash tunes with titles such as Flying Jelly Attack, Cycling Is Fun, I Am A Cat and Bear Up Bison.
At first it seems the girls are singing in their native tongue.
Keener listening and inspection of the lyric sheet turns up words like: Riding on the rocket, I wanna to go to Pluto/ Space foods are marshmallows, asparagus, ice cream, oooh.
Then there's a homage to the Barbie Doll which goes: Blue eyes, blonde hair, long legs/ she's glamorous, she's welcomed by boys.
Shonen Knife are already a cult in the US where 30 bands including Nirvana have recorded tracks for a tribute album.
If you get the limited edition of Let's Knife, you too can Singalongaknife with the free karaoke CD: I am a sweet little cat/ and I dance on a flying saucer…
Cheat spot
HERE'S a handy tip for all you fans of SUPER WRESTLEMANIA on Super Nintendo.
If you're having trouble with your wrestler, and want to change him during play in the survivor series, the secret is to press Select once the bout has begun.
TO give yourself three extra continues in PITFIGHTER on the Mega Drive, you will have to fight your way up to level eight.
Then pause the game and insert a joypad in port two.
Finally, press Start on the joypad.
IF you want to become invincible in SNOW BROTHERS on the Game Boy, wait until the title screen appears and then press and hold Left, Down and A.
Then all you have to do is press Start.
TO get a brilliant hidden options screen on Thunderforce III on the Mega Drive, just press A and Start on the title screen.
Charts
TOP-SELLERS for the Master System at Virgin Games Centres.
1 Sonic The Hedgehog
2 Aliens 3
3 Enduro Racer
4 Prince Of Persia
5 World Grand Prix 6 Terminator
7 Asterix
8 Super Tennis
9 Action Fighters
10 Aztec Adventure.
Enter the Dragonslayer
By Amaya Lopez
ELITE, creators of those lovable cavemen Joe and Mac, have come up with another cartoon romp in the form of Dragon's Lair on the SNES.
Fans of the coin-op original will remember the dashing hero, Dirk, risking life and limb to rescue his fair damsel, Daphne, from the dragons.
This is a fairly traditional arcade adventure but offers excellent graphics and several neat, distinctive touches.
Amiga players will recall the top-notch Don Bluth animation of the computer version but also its rather easy and sluggish gameplay.
The SNES version is infinitely more playable.
Most of the action takes place in a castle bristling with platforms and a variety of reptilian nasties in several stages of dismemberment, from full-bodied dragons to dragon's heads, spiders and giant fish.
The game has its fair share of power-ups and bonuses, which are generally obtained by smashing a jewel to bits and reaping the winnings.
Dirk himself is wonderfully animated — running, jumping, climbing ropes and throwing daggers with all the grace of a real cartoon character.
All-in-all, Dragon's Lair isn't wildly original.
But it's a very polished and highly enjoyable game nonetheless.
Score 8/10
NEW on the Mega Drive from Electronic Arts is helicopter sim LHX Attack Chopper.
The scenario is world war two and you are at the controls of the fictional whirly-bird.
Your task is a series of missions, each more perilous than the last, and you are briefed on each beforehand.
It's essential to weigh up all the briefing details in order to plan your tactics and avoid getting blown up.
For example, you'll be told what you need to shoot down and what the weather conditions are.
Then you have to select your weapons and use them with caution — go in with a gung-ho spirit and you could find you've missed most of your targets and run out of ammo.
If you're over-cautious, on the other hand, you'll be dead within seconds.
The vector graphics are well-executed, although it takes time for your eyes to adjust to what's going on.
LHX lacks instant appeal and involves swotting up on the options available.
It also necessitates a certain amount of trial-and-error, but flight sim aficionados are sure to love it.
Score 9/10
AFTER successful outings on home computers and the Mega Drive, Speedball 2 now whizzes on to the Master System.
And a fine conversion it is, too.
The Bitmap Brothers' futuristic sport classic is a cross between American football and Rollerball with very fast, violent gameplay.
The rules are simple, the appeal addictive and there's no referee — which makes for a general atmosphere of near anarchy.
There's a management section where you can swap players and try to buy the best ones on the market, and there are also plenty of power-ups to aim for.
Some of these make your players speedier, others slow down your opponents but best of all, perhaps, are the coins which allow you to buy special kit components in the gym section before each game.
These include the marvellous Thunder Thighs which give players stamina, and Speed Boots which make your squad even faster.
Although the game is slightly slower on the Master System, all features of the Mega Drive version are there except the instant replay option.
The original's brilliant sense of involvement has been retained, and really does the Master System proud.
Score 9/10
News
SEGA system owners and fans of the unique spiky blue hedgehog, will be thrilled to learn that the official release date of Sonic 2, the most awaited Sega game of the year, has been confirmed as Tuesday November 24.
On this important date, the game will be released throughout the world on Mega Drive, Master System and Game Gear.
This time Sonic's got a friend in tow, a little fox by the name of Tails who comes into his own in the two-player split screen option.
To celebrate the launch, Sega is staging several massive promotions including an enormous airship which will fly over from France.
It will loiter in the London area for a week before heading for the rest of Britain.
Capital Radio's Kid Jensen will broadcast live from the ship while it is in London.
There will also be a huge party at Hamleys toy shop in Regent Street, London, which will feature a new band called HWA (Hedgehogs With Attitude).
They will sing the first Sega single, Super Sonic.
Where will it all end?
Ford declares satellite war on car thieves
By Russell Bray
TECHNOLOGY originally developed for satellite warfare will soon be used by Ford to combat theft and provide emergency services for motorists.
Whether you break down, have your car stolen, or need the police or an ambulance, help will be only the press of a few buttons away — without leaving the car.
At its most basic, the message sent from a small dashboard display would give information about the make and model of car, its registration number and position — but there's no reason why it couldn't also relate that the driver was a woman alone or a disabled person.
The system involves the same military satellites used in the Gulf war by the Allies to keep track of vehicle movements.
Ford says it is well advanced with development of a commercial version of the technology and hopes it will be in operation within five years.
The system is compact and easy to fit.
All that is required is a couple of electronic chips built into the car's wiring which will communicate with the satellites.
Because three of the 20 ‘global positioning’ satellites will always be above the horizon the electronics can triangulate a car's position within a few metres.
‘Our prototype system can tell if you are stationary or moving, heading north or south, or even stopped on a roundabout over a motorway,’ says Ford spokesman Peter Watt.
The system will also help motorists if their car is stolen.
On similar lines to the Lojack system — already in use in the United States — police could ask the central control to track a vehicle.
If the car was still moving, police could work out a safe time and location to intercept it.
Thieves would be unlikely to remove the communications chips because it would be time-consuming and mean disassembling much of the car.
Ford plans for the system to operate across Europe, but before this can happen complete digital mapping of all the countries concerned needs to be completed along with guaranteed transmission success from cars.
According to Watt, the system is more efficient than mobile telephone networks which are expensive and have blindspots.
The target price of the system is £200 to £300.
‘We want it to be available to everyone, not just the business user,’ says Watt.
Renault Safrane
RENAULT has relegated the sunroof to the options list for top versions of its new Safrane.
The French firm's flagship model, unveiled this week, instead boasts an air conditioner to help business motorists keep their cool.
‘Air conditioning will be a catch,’ says Renault's UK managing director Michel Gigou.
‘Once you have driven a car which has it, you don't want to go back.
It stops windows misting up in wet weather and keeps the driver fresh and alert.’
The Safrane also features voice synthesisers, a failed trend in Britain which began and ended with the Austin Maestro.
At present a robotic voice, which can be switched off, warns Safrane drivers of simple potential problems such as doors not being properly closed.
But Renault wants the system built-in, ready for traffic navigation systems.
The Safrane, which replaces the Renault 25, is a sleek five-door hatchback powered by two-litre or three-litre engine driving the front wheels.
The three-litre is available only as an automatic, the two-litre also as a five-speed manual.
Both provide extremely quiet and comfortable transport for long journeys, but the very light power steering needs care.
Expect 130mph, 0–60mph in ten seconds and 24mpg for the V6.
The respective figures for the four-cylinder are 125mph, 11.2 seconds and 29mpg.
Prices, when the car goes on sale in January, will range from about £17,000 to £26,000, in line with rival executive models such as the Rover 800.
Terms of endearment captured on tape
JAMES: Oh Squidgy, I love you, love you, love you.
DIANA: You are the nicest person in the whole wide world.
JAMES: Well darling, you are to me too.
Squidgy…kiss me.
Oh God, it's wonderful isn't it?
This sort of feeling.
Don't you like it?
DIANA: I love it.
CHARLES: I love you.
CAMILLA: I love you, too.
CHARLES: I adore you.
I am so proud of you.
CAMILLA: I love you, darling.
CHARLES: Night, darling.
Love you too…
CHARLES: Your great achievement is to love me.
Gulf between true love and flirtation
IF the tape of a phone talk between Prince Charles and his married friend is genuine it reveals true love, a psychologist said yesterday.
And it's a totally different relationship to that revealed on the ‘Squidgy’ call between Princess Diana and bachelor James Gilbey, says consultant Jane Firbank, who has studied language people use in relationships.
‘These are totally different kinds of conversation,’ she said.
‘The Diana tape hints at a lighthearted, flirtatious relationship.
When Mr Gilbey gets too serious, she tries hard not to inflame him.
She talks him down, cracks little jokes, eases the tension.’
But, Miss Firbank said, the Charles tape, apparently made two weeks before the Diana call of December, 1989, points to a far more serious relationship.
In just six sentences, Charles uses the word ‘love’ three times — as well as saying ‘I adore you.’
Camilla Parker Bowles replies: ‘I love you, darling.
I love you, too.’
Miss Firbank commented: ‘That conversation is so stark.
It's almost a confession — though that is perhaps not the right word — of the depth of feeling.
‘It is as if the people involved are desperate to confirm to each other the way they feel.
And it is very hard to doubt that, at the time the conversation took place, they were in love.
‘Of course, a couple who loved each other in December 1989 might not have done so six months later, let alone after two or three years.’
Miss Firbank added: ‘It's just a pity that when Prince Charles declared his love, it wasn't his wife on the other end of the line.’
Amazing phone calls will haunt Charles for the rest of his life
By Clive Nelson
ONE phone call will haunt Prince Charles for the rest of his life.
In a moment of careless intimacy he is said to have told Camilla Parker Bowles: ‘I love you…
I adore you.’
Whether or not those fateful words were ever uttered, his reputation as the faithful husband of Princess Diana is shattered.
Charles and Camilla have called each other many times over their years of friendship, spending hours sharing their innermost secrets.
She was his confidante.
He was a man she had long admired, might even have married.
Many of those calls would have seemed harmless enough, even to the most cynical eavesdropper.
But this time someone indeed appears to have been listening.
Any remarks Charles made to Camilla might now well be taken out of context, their meaning exaggerated.
Whether the tape said to be in the possession of a national newspaper is genuine or not seemed last night almost irrelevant.
The damage to Prince Charles has been done.
The two women closest in the world to Charles were already known to be the Queen and Camilla, whom Charles had readily confirmed was a trusted friend.
Everyone knew that Diana and Charles had decided to stay married for the sake of their children, but were leading separate lives.
Now even the dignity of that compromise has been sullied by questions of just how intimate the friendship of Charles and Camilla has really been.
One source close to Charles — 44 today — who has worked with him for years, said last night: ‘It is incredible — almost impossible to believe that it is true.
‘We were all aware that they were close but would never have suggested that this kind of intimacy existed between them.’
Others close to the Prince often described his friendship with Camilla as ‘the biggest love story that never was’.
They met on the polo field 20 years ago and the attraction was present from the start.
Both were just 23 and shared the same love of horses, fresh air and country pursuits.
More importantly, they had similar senses of humour and enjoyed art and architecture.
‘She was one of the few women Charles regarded as an equal,’ one who witnessed their early meetings recalled.
‘He would listen to her opinions and treat her seriously.
During the time they were together they both came alive.’
Camilla, daughter of a wealthy wine merchant and army officer, invented the jokey nicknames which she was to share with Charles until this summer.
She called him Fred while he addressed her as Gladys — names which they picked from the Spike Milligan radio shows.
The friend who watched them together recalled: ‘Camilla was not what one would call a truly beautiful woman.
‘But she had a certain something which men did find appealing.
And when Charles discovered that she too enjoyed painting watercolours they grew even closer.’
The man who was later to marry Camilla — army officer Andrew Parker Bowles — had already appeared on the scene.
A dashing young bodyguard to the Queen who served in the Blues and Royal, he was a friend of the prince.
For months the two men continued as rivals, gently courting Camilla.
And — in the end — Charles gave way.
Many believe it was his shyness and insecurity which let him down.
The friend said: ‘The ideal solution would have been for Camilla to break off with Andrew, but it never happened.
‘Charles and Camilla enjoyed a kind of secret romance which was meaningful yet never really intense.
‘I honestly believe he loved her but he was afraid to show it.
‘Andrew was somehow more worldly wise.
And in the end he won.’
Charles, advised by the Queen, decided to develop his career as a Naval officer by going to sea.
After a tearful goodbye to Camilla at his Buckingham Palace apartment, he sailed for the West Indies on HMS Minerva in 1973.
Just four weeks after Charles's ship left Portsmouth, Camilla and Andrew announced their engagement.
They were married in the Guards' Chapel, a stone's throw from Buckingham Palace, on July 4 1973, and one member of the close-knit circle of Camilla's friends said: ‘She believed Charles had lost interest and had no intention of considering her as a wife.
‘Andrew was a good bet, so she said yes to him instead.’
Within a few months, Charles firmly believed he had made the biggest mistake of his life.
A firm believer in mysticism and fate, he felt he had ignored the course his intuition was guiding him to follow.
One senior royal source said: ‘Instead of simply forgetting Camilla and getting on with life he retreated further into himself.
He gave every impression of being a man besotted with her — he felt he had failed to grasp the one chance of happiness facing him.’
Over the years which followed the pair met often — at first by chance but later by design.
In December 1974 Camilla and Andrew had their first child — and asked Charles to be a godfather.
Handing Charles that seemingly harmless role gave him the chance to spend yet more time with the woman he still admired.
Even after Charles married Princess Diana he kept in close contact with Camilla.
They spoke frequently by phone and soon found reasons to meet, often at the homes of friends.
At first Diana tolerated the friendship, but soon came to envy the older woman whose company her husband so plainly enjoyed.
When she discovered that he had called her repeatedly on a mobile phone she flew into a rage.
The couple's Mediterranean cruise two summers ago was turned into a farce when she dialled the ship — and spoke to Diana by mistake.
The call was intercepted and the Princess of Wales spent the rest of the cruise away from her husband, chosing to eat all her meals with Princes William and Harry instead of the other adults.
By this June — when the revelations in Andrew Morton's book, Diana: Her True Story, were finally known — the Queen personally intervened, talking to Camilla and her husband at Ascot.
The message was clear: ‘Let things cool off for a while.’
Camilla and Charles then distanced themselves from each other as part of a ‘damage-limitation exercise’ agreed in a series of Palace-negotiated pacts.
Apart from one slip-up last month, when Camilla appeared in the congregation at a church service attended by Charles and Diana, the arrangement seemed to work.
But that lay in tatters last night after the latest revelations.
Those closest to Camilla yesterday tried to play down the scandal.
Her ever-loyal husband insisted it was business-as-usual as he acted as a steward as Cheltenham Races.
Camilla's sister, Annabelle Elliott, admitted that she does not know for sure whether there is any truth in rumours of a relationship with Prince Charles.
‘I am saying nothing at all,’ she said.
Alas, many others had already made their judgment on the flimsy evidence of that supposed phone call…and had found the next King guilty.
Facing life as Mick Jaguar
WILD man of rock Mick Jagger reveals the beast in him with this stunning picture.
Photographer Albert Watson superimposed the giant cat's face on a portrait of the singer for the 25th anniversary issue of Rolling Stone magazine.
Pictures of stars who have made most contribution to the music industry over the last 25 years featured at a glittering party in New York's Four Seasons Restaurant.
Former Supreme Diana Ross posed in a skimpy T-shirt and delightedly declared: ‘Not bad for a 49-year-old mother of five.’
Meanwhile guests Eric Clapton, Melanie Griffith and David Bowie reckoned that Mick looks better as Jumpin' Cat Flash.
Royal secrets must be told
TOO much has become public about the personal lives of Prince Charles, Princess Diana and Camilla Parker Bowles for the Palace to remain silent any longer.
It has never been the Royal Family's policy to comment on private matters.
But there are now clear allegations that Prince Charles has had a loving friendship with Camilla, a married woman, for many years.
There is also the taped evidence of an intimate conversation between Princess Diana and James Gilbey.
We know that both Charles and Diana are anxious to fulfil their duties to the Crown and do so conscientiously.
They feel that they have an important contribution to make to charities and other causes they support.
They do not want to abandon these.
They also believe that their greatest responsibility is to support the future of the monarchy.
Consequently they see it as their duty to continue to be together.
This is becoming impossible for them as, day after day, we learn of new allegations about their private lives.
When the Prince of Wales becomes King he will also be the Head of the Church of England and Defender of the Faith.
We must know how his private life will affect that.
It is now time for the Prince and Princess to learn to trust the British people by admitting the truth of their relationship.
This will not harm the affection of the Queen's subjects for them.
We are not suggesting that the Palace holds a press conference.
All that we ask is that it provides public answers to the question most people in this country are asking.
What is going on in the Royal Family?
Song of praise
RUGBY is about much more than the game on the pitch.
It is about feeling proud of your team and your country.
Nothing expresses that better than joining together to sing traditional and patriotic songs.
The game at Twickenham today will be all the better for the inclusion of the National Anthem.
We should all be able to sing it whenever we like.
‘I say, I say’
IF it had been a Companies Act prospectus, it would have landed the entire Cabinet in jail.
Businessman Philip Goldenberg on the Tory election manifesto.
WE have replaced vacuity with vanity.
We have the President of the Board of Trade.
There is no board, no trade — just the bloody President.
Businessman Roland Long on the Department of Trade.
IF Major wants to make his mark he wants to fire the damn Treasury.
Get rid of the perishing lot.
Businessman Alf Gooding at the CBI conference.
IF you have no money in your pocket, it doesn't matter what the rates are.
Fred Morris, a councillor in Portland, Dorset, on the drop in interest rates.
IT'S not true.
How many times do I have to spell it out?
It's pure fiction.
Brigadier Andrew Parker Bowles denying that his wife is intimately involved with Prince Charles.
WE would like what is best for Tony.
That is the feeding tube being removed and him being allowed to die with dignity.
Allan Bland on his son who has been in a coma since the Hillsborough disaster.
THE governor's dog is probably a supreme delicacy.
Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans on Chris Patten's dog, Soda, lost in Hong Kong.
Jump start
Christian Gysin and Ian Key
NORMAN Lamont's decision to scrap tax on new cars has put Britain's stalled motor industry back on the road according to delighted dealers and buyers across the country.
The move will cost the Chancellor £100 million this year in lost revenue — but it will save buyers 5 per cent— an average £400 — on the price of a new car.
TODAY went to dealers to see what impact this will have.
We visited the showrooms of both the upmarket franchises — selling BMWs, Mercedes and Hondas — and the mid-market fleet range selling Fords, Rovers and Vauxhalls.
In LONDON dealers were gearing up for a rush of prospective buyers.
Phillip Cue, general sales manager at Holland Park BMW, says: ‘We have extra staff on duty because of the response we have had.
And when buyers find out what they are saving, some are upgrading cars.’
The response is more muted for mid-range cars but many dealers are confident of a future boom.
‘The scrapping of the tax is something we have been screaming for,’ says David Austin of Rover dealers H.L Austin and Son.
‘These things take time to trickle down to the buyer but we are looking towards the Spring to see a recovery in our trade.’
Graham Paulter, sales manager of Ford Crouch End Motor Company, says: ‘People still feel their jobs are insecure and they have mortgages to pay rather than get a new car.
But the Government has done all it can and we welcome it.’
Business is also picking up in showrooms outside the capital, with cautious optimism for a boom year in 1993.
CHRISTIAN GYSIN and IAN KEY report.
MIDLANDS
THREE Birmingham motorists contacted Ian Groves, the sales director for Honda dealership Kingsmere Honda in Sutton Coldfield, to order new cars yesterday.
‘We're absolutely delighted with the statement because people have definitely been holding back on buying cars,’ says Ian.
‘Devaluation will mean a price increase on our cars early next year but the removal of the car tax effectively means a rationalisation of how much customers will be expecting to spend.
We are looking at a saving of £306 on our cheapest model, the Civic 1.3 DX, and a £1,991 saving on our most expensive model, the NSX.’
Mark Geobey, 28, and girlfriend Deborah Corbett, 24, signed for a new two-litre Vauxhall Calibra.
‘I've had my eye on it for a while, but as an accountant I like to think I'm getting a bargain,’ says Mark.
‘There are bound to be price increases next year so now has to be the best time to buy.’
WEST COUNTRY
THERE was little immediate response to the tax cut at Torquay's BMW dealership Chenhalls, despite a £2,000 reduction offered on the seven-series model.
But sales manager Rod Etherington is not deterred by yesterday's lack of custom.
‘We are expecting things to pick up generally,’ he says.
‘Our sales staff have been extremely busy contacting people to tell them that this definitely is the best time to buy a car.’
Exeter Ford dealer Evans Halshaw also found few potential customers, and again there were good deals on offer with a five-door Fiesta 1.1 available for £6,801 — a saving of £283.
‘People are likely to sit down and work out how much they can save by buying now, and then they'll come back to us,’ says Evans Halshaw general manager Joe Curley.
‘The tax cut could clinch the decision for many people.’
NORTH WEST
THE Government's decision to drop car tax ensured brisk business for Manchester dealers yesterday.
‘Since the Chancellor's announcement we have had a lot of inquiries which we are confident of turning into sales,’ says Rover dealer Ashmall Parkinson salesman David Bailey.
‘Recent price cuts have kept new car sales buoyant in the past month and every little bit helps.’
Ford dealers Quicks of Altrincham had more potential customers in the few hours after Mr Lamont's speech than they'd seen all week.
‘There were already exceptional deals around but we immediately sold another two cars,’ says sales manager Phil Collier.
Ian Blenkinsop, the sales director of Bolton BMW dealers Ian Anthony, says his firm is delighted.
‘We are delivering a BMW M5 with a £2,000 reduction in price.
‘The scrapping of special car tax enables us to stay competitive in the quality car market.’
HOME COUNTIES
CAR dealers in the Home Counties noticed a dramatic increase in potential customers yesterday.
Staff at Ford dealer Gowrings in Wokingham, Berks, claimed they had fielded 50 per cent more calls from potential customers.
‘This is the boost we have been waiting for,’ says sales director Malcolm Prior.
‘Now you can buy a Ford Escort 1300 for under £8,000.
The original price was £8,620.’
BMW saleswoman Elaine Fountain at Cooper Reading says scrapping the tax has cut the price of an average BMW by around £700.
A BMW 316 four-door saloon is down from £15,150 to Pounds 14,544.
In the fleet market there was caution from Rover dealer Michael Maggs, managing director of Reading CG Maggs.
‘We have waited a long time to have car tax taken off, but VAT is still 17.5 per cent,’ he says.
Maggs says a Rover 214Si now costs £10,576 instead of £10,995.
WALES
CARDIFF dealers in BMWs Wyndham made their first sales within hours of the Chancellor's announcement.
Sales manager Chris Jones says: ‘We're thrilled.
Within two hours of the Chancellor's message we took three orders for new BMW's.
‘The customers all told us their decision was based directly on the price concession offered.
‘It's as if people have been waiting for the Autumn Statement.’
Vauxhall dealers Welch of Newport, Gwent, were also on a roll with five new cars being sold.
‘This is one of the better days in the history of the motor dealing industry.
Customers are saving £425 on a 1.4 Astra, and up to £936 on the price of a top-of-the-range Carlton Diplomat,’ says sales manager Keith O'Connell.
‘It will help the second-hand market too.
We have been starved of second-hand cars because nobody was trading them in for new ones, but this should change that.’
NORTH EAST
DEALERS in Newcastle were forecasting the abolition of car tax could increase new car sales by up to 6 per cent.
Dave Williams, spokesman for Sunderland-based Rover dealers Reg Vardy says: ‘Things are looking great for the future.
We expect a lot more customers to take advantage of the price cuts.’
An average Rover costing around £10,000 would be automatically reduced by £450.
At the top end of the market Robert Blower, of North East BMW dealers Cowies, is just as optimistic: ‘We were very pleased to hear this encouraging news which should provide the stimulus the car retailing industry needs.’
It means a £2,000 saving on a luxury £62,000 BMW 850i.
Vauxhall dealers are also bullish.
‘We feel sales next year could be up by as much as 6 per cent on 1992, which is a big step in the right direction,’ says a spokesman for the region.
Ins and outs of new BBC
By Jaci Stephen
A LIST detailing the ‘ins’ and ‘outs’of the new American Presidency reveals that, under Bill Clinton, style is about to undergo dramatic changes.
Out for instance go Millie the Dog, John Major and Budweiser; in come Socks the Cat, John Smith and Bass Ale.
With the announcement that Michael Checkland is to step down early from his post as Director General of the BBC, it seems an appropriate time to compile a similar list of ‘ins’ and ‘outs’relating to the new BBC regime which will come in under John Birt.
Forgive me if I omit intimate personal details included in the American list — such as whether Y-fronts will be in or out — but I have failed in my mental attempts to undress either man.
The BBC tends to do that to a girl.
THE OLD
Grey, Savile Row
Woollen pleats
Old men
Warm white wine
Melvyn Bragg
Eldorado
Artistic concealment of thinning hair
Le Caprice
Jobs
‘I'd like to get into the BBC’
Fifties nostalgia
On-screen sex
Secretaries, telephones
Everything not news and current affairs
Jonathan Powell
Public insults
Barbers
‘I'll have to ring you back on that’
40 Minutes
BBC training schemes
The Archers
Lace-Ups
Meetings
Local radio
Good Morning With Anne And Nick
THE NEW
Beige, Armani
Linen creases
Time veterans
Perrier water
Michael Ignatieff
Barcelona 24-hour news
Hirsuteness
BBC canteen
Unemployment
‘I'd like to get out of the BBC’
Sixties nostalgia
Newsnight specials
Memos, faxes
News and current affairs
The Man Who Shot Powell Discretion
Styling consultants
‘When would you like it?’
40 Seconds
BBC rehabilitation programmes
The Birtists
Sandals
Symposiums
BBC2
Good Morning, Afternoon And Evening With Jeremy And Francine
Lambs to the slaughter
By Jaci Stephen
A TV WEEKLY poll attracted calls from 9,342 viewers who are vexed by the new theme music for Emmerdale.
In case you haven't noticed, the tune is basically the same as the old one, but considerably jazzed up.
Personally, I love it.
In the old days, as soon as I heard the dirge start up, I'd reach for the OFF button.
It was the kind of sound that made you think of the noise lambs probably make when they can smell the mint being brought in from the garden.
The new, lively version is much more in keeping with the young, sexier image of the show which is the key to its increased ratings.
And frankly, who's interested in the opinion of 9,000 people who have time to phone a poll?
Cindy and Jeff make me unwell
By Jaci Stephen
IF I never see another picture of Cindy Crawford or Jeffrey Bernard, that will be too soon.
The former is of interest only in that she happens to be married to the gorgeous Richard Gere, who not only has ten times her talent but ten times her looks (do people really find that hideous mole of hers attractive?).
The latter is of interest only in that he still manages to stay alive given the muck he is reported to pour daily into his ailing system.
Miss Crawford would probably stand a much better chance of becoming an actress if she stopped talking about it and started to do the necessary work to bring about her ambition.
Mr Bernard, on the other hand, would be destroyed by branching out into another career.
Who wants to write plays or biographies about a man who works hard and doesn't have much luck with women?
These two people, whose success is almost totally dependent upon the effectiveness of the publicity machines which have made them into heroes, are currently (eternally, it seems) in just about every magazine and paper you pick up.
She celebrates the high life, he writes a column called Low Life.
I just wish they'd get the hell out of My Life.
Time for a Swiss Roll
By Jaci Stephen
A SURVEY in this month's New Woman magazine claims that almost half of Britain's women cheat on their partners.
And in a poll on who gets sexual satisfaction, British females are at the bottom.
Apparently the most satisfied females are in Switzerland where 83 per cent say they are happy with their love lives.
But why should this be?
Perhaps it's because Switzerland is the most boring country in the world, and once you've learned to play the Alpine horn there's precious little else to do in terms of entertainment.
Or perhaps it's because they eat all that gorgeous chocolate which, as we know, is an aphrodisiac.
‘It's a case of still waters running deep,’ a Swiss diplomat explains.
I suspect it's because they make such great watches that the women can't be fooled into thinking that 40 seconds is an hour and a half.
Hymn or her, does anyone really care?
By Jaci Stephen
I WATCHED the General Synod debate on the ordination of women priests with my jaw dropped so low that my knee could have nudged it back into place.
Was this really happening, in Britain, in 1992?
When millions around the world are being killed in war, dying from starvation or living below the poverty line?
Was it really happening in a world where women can be lawyers, prime minister, soldiers or just about anything?
It's small wonder that people no longer look to the Church for guidance when the arguing within the very organisation which preaches love and tolerance is tearing it apart.
This week ITV announced that it is dropping the God slot due to lack of interest.
Yet the irony is that it is this quarrelling within the Church Of England which is largely responsible for that lack of interest.
And until the Church begins to acknowledge and address the century in which it now finds itself, it will die.
It's hard to see how anyone could fail to have been convinced by the arguments put forward by the ‘pro’ lobby on Wednesday afternoon.
The ‘anti’ minority, who believe the evidence for their case lies in Scripture, seem to forget (or rather, refuse to see) that the Bible was written predominantly by men in a world which despised women.
Of course they're going to find in Scripture the sexist views which conform to their own narrow-minded view of the world.
But as the Church has always told us — even the Devil can quote Scripture for his own purposes.
CHINESE scientists are currently investigating the spermicide potential of earthworms.
So far they've managed to isolate an ingredient which kills human sperm extremely quickly and efficiently.
It may prove an effective contraceptive, but what effect will it have on the ‘worms’ who produce the sperm in the first place?
Citizen's Charter
By Jaci Stephen
THE general spirit of the Citizen's Charter seems to be sinking in — at least among British Rail staff at London's Euston station.
This week I rang up to inquire about train times and was assisted by the most delightful man I have encountered in two decades of dealing with BR.
Not only did he tell me all the train times I needed to know (without so much as a sigh), he also found out how I might get from Elstree station to the BBC studios.
He was so efficient, I'm wondering if he could do something about the disgusting chick pea casserole they serve on the Intercity 125.
I call it the Citizen's Chunder.
Alexa Brinkley
MODEL Christie Brinkley's daughter Alexa, six, snapped up a Barbie doll on a charity shopping trip in New York yesterday.
Perhaps it looked like mummy.
Nigel Kennedy
VIOLINIST Nigel Kennedy, 35, has pulled out of a Brighton show next month to watch football favourites Aston Villa.
Sting
STING, 41, went home to Newcastle yesterday to receive an honorary music doctorate at Northumbria University.
Forget the knife, this is a makeover
Sheridan Morley
MORE and more women are turning to expensive cosmetic surgery to slow down the ageing clock — but as our pictures show, it isn't always a cut above less drastic beauty remedies.
Yesterday we used photographic library manager Fiona Meiklejohn to show that the surgeon's knife isn't a magic wand.
Fiona, 43, had surgery earlier this year to tighten her sagging jawline.
The half-facelift operation cost £2,500 and left her bruised and sore for more than three weeks.
But when she emerged with her new face, few of her friends noticed the difference.
Today we show how Fiona could dramatically improve her looks with a simple makeover.
Hair and make-up artist Roxanne New transformed Fiona using cosmetics that cost only £50.
‘I put on a light foundation and, using earthy browns, subtly highlighted Fiona's eyes and shaded in her lips with an amber-coloured lipstick.’
The change even shocked Fiona.
‘I didn't recognise myself,’ she says.
Childhood agony that made Luke a teen idol
Ian Markham-Smith
PARENTS and children would collapse in gales of laughter at the outrageous antics of the schoolboy in the giant chicken costume.
What they couldn't see was the sadness in the eyes behind the mask.
That boy was Luke Perry, heart-throb star of hit show Beverly Hills 90210.
The handsome youngster was a flirt and a rebel-rouser at school but mostly he was a clown who craved affection — anything to help him forget the loveless days when he watched his drunkard father beat up his mother.
Luke hated his alcoholic steel worker dad so much that he refused to use his real Christian names Coy Luther because he was named after him.
‘He was violent,’ says Luke, who can be seen in 90210 tonight (ITV, 5.20pm).
‘He was a drunk and he treated my mother very poorly.
He was loud and abusive.
‘Had I been big enough at the time, I would have beaten his ass but I wasn't.
I always felt I should have been able to protect my mother better but I couldn't.
I was only six years old.
‘Of all the feelings you should have for your parents, you should never be physically afraid of them.
‘But alcohol dilutes someone's judgment to the point where they're physically dangerous,’ says Luke who ironically plays recovering alcoholic Dylan McKay in the teen series.
‘I was afraid and scared for my mother.
No one should have to live through that.
The upshot was I saw exactly what not to do with my life.
Now I don't drink spirits at all.’
Coy Senior and Luke's mother, Ann, divorced soon after Luke celebrated his sixth birthday in the poor Ohio farming community where the family scraped a living.
He has always regarded the break-up as good fortune and at last found some degree of stability when his mother remarried six years later.
Luke says of his building worker stepfather Steve Bennett: ‘He is the greatest man I know.
I love him.
I wish he was my real father.
He's the one who taught in Ohio me the important things I needed to know about being a man.’
But the early years of fear and the hostility between Luke and his father, who died of a heart attack in 1980, left a deep scar on the young boy and one that was to shape his rebellious school years.
Patricia McQuigg, the mother of one of his friends, says: ‘Luke practically lived at my house during the last few years he was at school.
He hated his father.
You never mentioned his real dad in front of Luke.
‘I used to call him by his real name Coy Luther and he got real mad.’
Luke, whose big screen debut Buffy The Vampire Slayer is currently showing in British cinemas, escaped the emotional realities of his formative years by making a fool of himself.
Teacher Betty Weller says: ‘Our school had a mascot known as Freddy Bird which made appearances at sports events, functions and parades.
‘Luke was our Freddy Bird.
He used to dress up in this enormous chicken's costume and clown around in front of the audience as a kind of warm-up act.
He was very good at it and seemed to enjoy himself.
‘It was a real escape for him.
He could be as extrovert as he liked behind the bird's mask.’
But the spirited kid who used to wear a badge proclaiming Born To Raise Hell was also in trouble with his teachers more often than not.
Once he almost literally scared the school secretary to death.
Two of his close friends were being kept in detention so Luke and a chum dressed up as terrorists.
Masked and brandishing toy guns, they burst into Fredericktown High School, Ohio, to ‘free the prisoners’.
‘It was only a joke but the school secretary, who had a heart condition, thought they were for real and nearly died,’ says Betty Weller.
‘She turned white and almost fainted.
We thought she was going to have another heart attack.
She did eventually die of a heart attack but it was nothing to do with Luke.’
Luke also messed up his chance at starring in the school play because of his temper.
Mrs Weller says: ‘He didn't agree with the drama teacher and told him so.
One thing led to another and Luke made a rude gesture with his finger.
That was the end of that.
‘Luke got thrown out of the play and never appeared on the school stage again.’
While Mrs Weller confesses to liking the young rebel, he was unpopular with most of the teachers.
‘He was mischievous and a bit of a tearaway.
If he didn't like you, he'd let you know it — just like he did with the drama teacher.
‘He was unruly and a distraction in class and made an enemy of most of his teachers.
His classmates liked him because he was very friendly and outgoing and liked pranks but teachers don't usually like the class jester.’
While Luke was driving his teachers to desperation, he was also driving his female classmates wild.
The star, now 27, recalls: ‘I was the envy of my classmates.
They voted me the biggest flirt and they actually printed that under my picture in the school yearbook.
‘They knew that I liked girls and if I had a choice, I would rather be talking to the girls than doing my homework.’
Luke may have been popular but he never plucked up courage to get the girl of his dreams.
The same year that he was dubbed biggest flirt, Debbie Kauffman was voted her year's best looking girl.
Debbie, who is now married, says: ‘Years later Luke confessed to friends that he really fancied me.
I was very shy and never realised it.
But thinking back, I guess that underneath his outgoing behaviour Luke was shy as well.
‘He did ask me to the school prom but I turned him down.
I remember that Luke, myself and a friend called David Stewart were all talking and messing around one day.
‘David said to me: ‘Come over here, Luke wants to tell you a secret.’
Luke said: ‘No, no, I can't.
David, you tell her.’
‘And with that David kissed me on the cheek.
Luke was trying to tell me he liked me but he was too embarrassed.
‘It's not really the image he gives today — now he's the ultimate Hollywood heartthrob.’
That teen idol reputation has been reinforced with the 20th-Century Fox romantic comedy Buffy The Vampire Slayer.
Luke plays Pike, a rebel school student who falls in love with Buffy, a cheerleader who discovers she has been chosen by fate to slay vampires.
‘Pike is very sweet — he just doesn't expect a lot from anybody or anything,’ says Luke.
‘I've been telling everybody he's the damsel in distress.
I like that.
A lot of times I play the guy who knows what to do, and that's not really me.
I never know what to do.’
The movie is directed by a woman but heart-throb or not, Luke doesn't have a problem with that.
In fact the actor, who reassures fans that he has no plans to quit 90210 now that his movie career is under way, has a more than healthy respect for the opposite sex — a lot of it born out of his admiration at how his mother struggled through during the dark early years of his life.
‘I don't understand people who think women are weak because it wasn't easy for my mother,’ he says.
‘She had to be strong to do what she did and she was great at it.
So instead of immediately looking for the weakness in a woman, I will look for the strength and I will discount the fact that she might have a great body or be simply beautiful.
You have got to look past that.
‘Really, I guess I like women.
I'm not the kind of person who is afraid of letting a woman take charge professionally, personally — or sexually.
‘In fact I love it when a woman takes the initiative sexually.
I have the scars to prove it!’
It seems the lost little boy behind the chicken mask has finally come of age.
Great Escapes
BRITANNIA Sailing has bracing winters weekends sailing around Southampton for £69.
Sailors meet their yachts on Friday night, returning to Shamrock Quay, Southampton, by mid-afternoon on Sunday.
You stay aboard overnight and all food is provided, along with stop-overs in cosy waterside pubs.
Sailing tuition is also available.
Details: 0703 335496.
LITHUANIAN Airlines has a return fare to Vilnuis for £225, departing Heathrow on Monday and Saturday.
Details: 0444 400100.
YOU can escape the November doom and gloom by booking a low-cost, winter sun package with Inspirations.
A one-week holiday in Cyprus, staying at the White Arches Hotel, Limassol, departs on November 29 and costs £119.
Flights from Gatwick to Lanzarote have been reduced to £99 for departures on December 3, 10 and 17.
Details: 0293 822244.
SPEND two nights in Paris for the price of one between November 21 and March 7.
To qualify you must stay two consecutive nights starting Friday or Saturday and book direct with one of the 90 participating hotels eight days in advance.
Prices start at £20 a night per person.
Details in Bon Weekend a Paris, a leaflet free from the French Tourist Office, 178 Piccadilly, London W1V OAL.
Enclose SAE.
AN all-American Thanksgiving Extravaganza will be held on November 26 at Stapleford Park in Leicestershire.
Dinner costs £35 per person, and as a special offer the hotel has a limited number of bedrooms for £45 per person on November 26.
Guests who stay on over the Friday and Saturday nights and also have dinner in the hotel will receive free accommodation.
Details: 057 284 522.
MOSWIN Tours is offering the chance to visit a traditional Christmas market in Germany.
The highly decorated markets are held daily in the town square and offer a wealth of ideas for presents for family and friends.
The three-night package to Cologne costs £156 per person and includes return travel by luxury coach, half-board accommodation and excursions.
Details: 0533 719922.
A hot taste of Mexico
By Matthew Benns
WHEN Ringo Starr announced himself in Cancun, Mexico, he was wined and dined, chauffered and given a week of radio interviews.
But like Cancun itself, Ringo was not all he seemed.
The real Beatle was in Monaco and this imposter, once found out, was swiftly deported.
You can understand why Cancun initially went overboard on ‘Ringo’.
The resort is only 20 years old and grabs at any chance for a celebrity to add sparkle to its budding image as the Florida of the Nineties.
Less famous visitors are tempted to a concrete strip of newly-built luxury hotels which divide the waters of a natural bay on one side and the Caribbean on the other.
Best established among them is the older Hyatt Cancun Caribe whose pools and beach are cooled by gentle sea breezes.
Floodlit tennis courts and markets hawking Mexican trinkets abound in Cancun.
In the evening string bands serenade diners in the scores of ‘traditional’ Mexican restaurants whose spicy hot menus have been toned down to suit the tourist palate.
And if you tire of tacos, nachos, re-fried beans and Guacamole there are plenty of American-style bars and burger joints offering huge portions at cheap rates.
Although tummy trouble, of ‘Montezuma's Revenge’, is almost guaranteed with a trip to Mexico, the top-notch hotels in Cancun boast water-cleansing facilities and sterilised food.
But as you leave the resort metropolis — once a tiny fishing village — and take the bumpy roads through the sub-tropical jungle, American standards are left far behind and real Mexico tilts a lazy sombrero in your direction.
For instance Sol, the beer sold in London's trendy cafe bars at £2 a time, is just 25p a bottle.
Four hours' ride finds you at ruins of the Mayan civilisation where the cousins of the Aztecs built jungle pyramids to worship their gods.
The Mayan city is built from white, hand-hewn rocks, laid out at perfect right angles and dominated by a giant pyramid.
A short boat ride away from Cancun lies the island of Cozumel, a one-street paradise which offers beautiful views as you sip your Tequila Sunrise at sunset.
Wise tourists ignore the beach-based snorkelling and take a hotel pool scuba diving course ready for a two-hour boat ride to the spectacular coral reef, home to vivid living coral and neon-bright fish.
Cancun is not for hardened travellers.
It is aimed at US tourists who want a winter sun break with safe food and time on the beach.
Expect that and you will have a great holiday.
DEPARTURES
Continental Airlines (0800 776464) fly daily from Gatwick to Cancun via Houston, apex return £614 (Nov).
North America Travel Service (0532 430000) has two weeks at the Hyatt Cancun Caribe for £1,102, including flights.
More information: Mexico Tourist Office, 60–61 Trafalgar Square, London WC2 (071–734 1058).
To the French manor born
Anne Trappitt
THERE are times when I'm so desperate to get away that even a tent will do.
But sometimes I want to be pampered like royalty — without having to pay a king's ransom.
There can be few places where you can indulge yourself so cheaply as the chateaux of France's Western Loire.
Whether you choose a chateau hotel or stay in stately homes where families take in guests, splendour is the word and we found it at the majestic Chateau de Noirieux in Briollay, Anjou.
It was hardly necessary to open my bulging suitcase since almost everything was provided, including bathrobe, slippers, hairdryer and toiletries.
Bedrooms and lounges are furnished in a variety of styles ranging from Louis XIII to Louis XV.
Double rooms start at £50.
But much as you are tempted to lounge in the gorgeous yellow dining-room or sip drinks on the patio with views across the Loire, it would be a waste to stay too long in one place.
From Nantes to Angers, there is something for everyone — boating, golf, horseriding, castles, churches — and marvellous food.
An hour's drive from the Chateau de Noirieux lies Saumur, surrounded by underground villages dug out from local white tufa stone.
Don't miss the chance to visit the Bouvet-Ladubay cellars, famous for their sparkling wines.
There's something about the Western Loire that makes you want to savour every moment.
DEPARTURES
Air France (081-742-6600) has a daily service to Nantes from Gatwick.
Apex fares start at £144.
Air France Rail (081–568 6981) £129 from Gatwick to Nantes includes return flights to Paris, and return rail ticket between Paris and Nantes.
Air France also has a fly-drive package.
A weekend to Nantes for two starts at £159 per person.
Chateau de Noirieux (26 Route du Moulin, Briollay, tel: 010-33-41 42 50 05) offers a 10 per cent discount for TODAY readers, plus an up-grade of room and glass of champagne.
Further information: Western Loire Tourist Board (081 392–1580), 375 Upper Richmond Road West, London SW14 7NX (£1 p&p).
On the right track, eight days a week
Penny Wark
HOW do you squeeze eight days of skiing into a week for the cost of a two-day lift pass?
Answer: Boycott Gatwick and travel by the snow train.
To those of us familiar with British Rail, the idea of travelling to Austria by train may be a strange concept.
But the snow train isn't run by BR.
It belongs to St Anton, Austria's most established resort, and provides an overnight sleeper service which takes British skiers into the centre of the resort.
Leaves on the line and the wrong kind of snow leave this train undaunted — it has never been more than 10 minutes late.
It is a painless way to travel with the unrivalled advantage of giving you an extra day's skiing at each end of a week's holiday.
You board the ferry at Dover early Friday afternoon, switch to the train at Calais (where a few French francs are useful) and reach St Anton on Saturday in time for breakfast.
Ski West delivers your luggage to your accommodation and you are skiing by 9am.
The comfortable, traditionally-designed train has six-person compartments.
We passed the waking time playing Articulate and eating a picnic meal before turning the seats into layers of beds — a complex procedure when there are six people and sets of luggage, but not impossible.
There was a disco where beer was on sale but thoughts of dancing the night away evaporated when we found other people were using it for sleeping.
On the final day of your holiday — the following Saturday — you board at 8.50pm after another extra day's skiing.
St Anton is a typically charming Austrian resort.
The skiing is challenging and even blue runs tend to be carved into moguls.
Although this is not a beginner's resort, it's easy to escape to the more gentle slopes of Lech.
I found St Anton crowded in February, but at nearby Rendl the terrace is drenched with sun-seeking poseurs and you'll have the slopes to yourself.
DEPARTURES
Ski West: 1 week half-board in the Chalet Moser with travel by rail £335 (Jan), £539 (Feb).
Ski-hire £30, boots £18, lift pass £99, ski school £65 (0225 444516).
Further details: Austrian Tourist Office, 30 St George's Street, London W1.
Lost balls and loony scores in Los Angeles
Adrian Furness
GOLF is an infuriating game, isn't it?
You can never beat it.
As soon as you think you've got it licked, it smacks you in the face.
I've been playing ever since I hung up my football boots in 1980, and the strongest weapon in my armoury is still my lungs: I can shout ‘FORE’ louder than anyone I know.
But I love the game.
My clubs travel everywhere with me and through golf, I have met the most extraordinary and fascinating people all over the world.
And that's the great thing about it.
If you have the temerity you can go to any club anywhere, pick up a round and spend three hours — did I say three hours?— with people you've never met before and who have no idea who you are.
People like the immaculate Koreans.
It was 1984, and I was in Los Angeles working incognito in the comedy clubs, just sussing out the American scene and seeing how my act went down over there.
One memorable day I wandered along to a municipal course and sat waiting while they fixed me up with a fourball.
After about 50 minutes, three Koreans happened to turn up and I was put with them.
They were immaculately dressed, these Koreans, with matching gloves, hats, shoes, putters, grips, head-covers — you name it, they had it matching.
It turned out that they were the owners of a restaurant in LA.
They scarcely spoke a word of English.
And they were lumbered with me.
Anyway, we got to the first tee and one of these immaculate guys got his driver out and hit the ball about 15 yards — and took a divot out you could put a pot plant into.
But his two friends cried: ‘Ahhhh! yo!’ and gave him a round of applause.
The second guy didn't even hit half that distance and the third took a couple of swings to send his ball skewing off at right angles.
Then they waited patiently for me to try hitting one.
So I hit one.
It went 200 yards, bit of left-to-right, not a brilliant shot.
But they were stunned.
Absolutely stunned.
In unison they all cried: ‘Aaaaaw.
Goo' shot…goo' shot.’
To cut a long story short, the round took seven-and-a-half hours.
I do not exaggerate.
The Koreans' scores were all well into the 200s.
They would be taking anything up to 17 or 18 shots on a hole but every single shot was measured, studied and then commented on.
I can't remember now what my score was.
I'm a 13-handicap golfer but to them I was Jack Nicklaus, Nick Faldo and God all rolled into one.
They were literally in awe of my ability.
All over the course for those seven hours, all you could hear was ‘Aaaaw…goo' shot.
Aaaaaw…goo' putt.’
At least six hours were spent looking for their golf balls.
They would never give up searching — they were like bloodhounds after guinea-fowl.
In the end I would surreptitiously drop one of my own balls and shout ‘It's over here’.
They would never bother to check whether it was really theirs — they'd just try and hit it.
I was God, remember.
If God says he's found your ball you don't question it, do you?
Seven-and-a-half hours!
We used a bit of sign language, and that and ‘goo' shot’ was the only communication we had — and all we needed, because we were golfers.
Come to think of it, it was a real pain, that round.
In January, Jasper Carrott will star in his new BBC1 Comedy series, The Detectives, along with friend and fellow golfer Robert Powell.
Murder on the 13th hole at scenic Silloth
Mark Simpson
NOWADAYS it is rare to find classic golf courses which not only welcome visitors but charge reasonable green fees.
Silloth on Solway is one of them.
Situated west of Carlisle on the shores of the Solway Firth, Silloth boasts superb views of the Lake District on one side, Scotland on the other.
On a clear day you can even see the Isle of Man.
But the course is a tricky test for any golfer.
The wind comes off the sea so predictably that the first nine, which is played into the wind, was deliberately designed 300 yards shorter than the downwind second nine.
The yardage on the card often bears little relation to the club you select.
I asked professional John Burns what the hazards were at Silloth.
His cheerful answer: ‘Heather, gorse — everything bad you can think of!’
In fact the hazards are avoidable if you play sensibly.
The holes are a stern test without being outrageously difficult and the crisp turf is wonderful.
All the holes at Silloth have names and the 466 yard par-5 13th hole, ‘Hog's Back’, illustrates all that is best about the course.
It is short for a par 5 but you soon realise why.
The drive is fairly tight with the wind against you but with the second shot, the real fun begins.
You aim for the green through a narrow neck between humps on each side of the fairway.
John Burns takes up the story: ‘The green is long and narrow and the approach shot has to be perfect.
One mistake and you'll be in thick heather.
‘You need to hit the ball hard to get out but if you hit it too well, you go over to the other side of the green…
Silloth is a thinker's golf course.
If you just want to give the ball a tonk with your new Krypton-shafted driver, you'll end up spending the day knee-deep in heather.
But if you want the golfing equivalent of an IQ test in beautiful surroundings, Silloth is the place.
Club pro: John Burns.
Course Length: 6357 yards.
Winter Green Fees: £15 per day weekdays, £20 per round weekends.
Telephone: 06973 31304.
A to Z of Golf
By Nigel O'Mahony
DALY, John: When rookie pro ‘Long’ John Daly set off for the 1991 US PGA Championship, he didn't even know whether he would get to play.
As eighth reserve for the tournament the chances were slim, but he decided to make the long journey to Crooked Stick, Indiana, on the off-chance.
He arrived at 1.30am on the first day, slept for a few hours and turned up at the clubhouse to find he was in the field.
With no preparation, he blasted his way around the monster 7,289-yard course in a superb 69.
While all the other pros were complaining about the course length, Daly was revelling in it.
Then again, he was averaging 303 yards a drive — which meant he carried all the course's major hazards.
He followed his first 69 with rounds of 67, 69 and 71 to win the championship by three shots — one of a handful of players to open their tournament account with a win in the Majors.
DELHI, Royal: One of India's premier golf courses, Royal Delhi is renowned for probably having the strangest ‘local rule’ in the world.
It reads ‘Tombs are an integral part of the course and must therefore be played out of’.
This is a reference to the many mausoleums dotted around the course.
So much for the residents being allowed to rest in peace.
DEVIL'S CAULDRON: The 175-yard eighth hole at Banff in Alberta, Canada.
A par-three over water, it is considered to be one of the world's great golf holes.
DIVOT: The piece of turf that is taken when the club hits the ball.
Taking too much of a divot is called hitting a fat shot and results in a loss of distance.
Bunker play hotline
RING 0891 400651
YOU can call the Golf Doctor, John Mulgrew, this week for advice on BUNKER PLAY on 0891 400 651
John is also on hand if you have a problem with SLICE.
For this ailment call him on 0891 400 650
Calls cost 36p a minute (cheap rate), 48p at other times.
Or you can write to John: The Golf Doctor, TODAY International Golf Club, TODAY Newspaper, 1 Virginia Street, London E1 9BS.
Swing out, save money on a Best Western break
DUE to a phenomenal response from readers, we are repeating the details of our ‘two for the price of one’ golfing weekend at a selection of Best Western Hotels.
All participating hotels boast their own golf courses, which are situated in some of the most beautiful parts of the country from Kent to Ayrshire.
If you take advantage of our superb offer, you won't have to get up at the crack of dawn and drag your clubs in and out of the car boot.
After a leisurely breakfast at your hotel you will be able to walk straight from the dining-room on to the course.
The great value weekend includes two nights' accommodation with private bathroom, and one round of golf.
Our exclusive offer will then entitle you to two further rounds of golf FREE.
The package is based on two people sharing, with one person paying full price — on average this is £110 — and one going FREE.
The price also includes breakfast and dinner for ONE.
Any additional meals must be paid for.
The offer is valid until April 30, 1993.
All you have to do to book is fill in the coupon below and send it to the address given with £1.50 to cover postage and administration.
Participating hotels are: BEST WESTERN HYTHE IMPERIAL, Kent: Offers a challenging course on the seafront with clubhouse and shop on site.
Offer price £126.
BEST WESTERN STADE COURT, KENT.
Beautifully located on the seafront at Hythe with a resident professional and golf lessons available.
Offer price £102.
BEST WESTERN MONTGREENAN MANSION HOUSE HOTEL, AYRSHIRE.
A 200-year-old mansion in the heart of Ayrshire with a picturesque practice course and 10 local courses.
Offer price £132.
BEST WESTERN BARNHAM BROOM HOTEL, NORWICH.
Set in 250 acres of Norfolk countryside with two 18-hole championship courses.
Offer price Pounds 115.
BEST WESTERN ST MARY'S HOTEL, SOUTH GLAMORGAN.
Set in its own 27-hole parkland, enjoy the largest purpose-built golf centre in South Wales.
Offer price £89.
BEST WESTERN HELLIDON LAKES, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
A four-star hotel with its own championship golf course set in a hidden world of parkland, forest and lakes.
Offer price £120.
BEST WESTERN ALDWARK MANOR, NORTH YORKSHIRE.
A classic 19th-Century building surrounded by a golf course.
The offer price is £102.50.
If you have any queries, call the Today/GB Promotions Information Line on 0442 891146.
Jenny Agutter
Graham Bridgstock
TELEVISION has never been a time-filler for me.
It is there for specific things, like news, wildlife documentaries, Spitting Image and the like.
My son Jonathan, who turns two on Christmas Day, was fascinated to see his own image when I captured him on home video.
He recognised himself, but did not recognise me when we switched on The Railway Children some months ago.
But then I was only 17 at that time.
This is the film everyone remembers, though I've made umpteen films since.
We had a lovely time filming it in Yorkshire.
Director Lionel Jeffries treated me and Sally Thomsett like daughters.
He even stayed up late worrying when we slipped out of our hotel to go dancing and didn't return until 11.30pm.
And if the shot went well he'd give us half a crown and say: ‘Buy yourself some sweets.’
I can't recall what I was paid for the film.
It wasn't a fortune but was enough to help me buy my first flat and first TV.
The flat cost Pounds 11,000, the TV £60.
I still receive small cheques for the BBC's original Railway Children, a six-part series in black and white made three years before the film.
Small is the word.
Every time the series is shown in Nicaragua, Zimbabwe, Iceland or wherever, I'm sent something even if it is only a few shillings.
Those cheques are framed for posterity.
I made my very first TV appearance at 12 in a six-part series on Alexander Graham Bell with Alec McCowen, Francesca Annis and Judy Geeson.
Everyone was supportive when I dried up on my one and only line and we had to do it again.
How will I feel if Jonathan wants to be on TV when he grows up?
Well, I'd prefer him not to go into acting because it is such an insecure business.
I understand now how my own mother felt.
I wouldn't mind, however, if he wanted to write for TV or, say, go into the musical side of the business.
He certainly loves music and will sit rocking to anything that has rhythm.
And he was absolutely mesmerised by Pavarotti on television.
We all were.
We have two TV sets, three if you count the nanny's.
One at our house in Chelsea, the other at our place by the sea in Cornwall.
I remember being down there watching Amityville II alone at midnight when there was a thunderous knock on the front door.
‘Open up,’ commanded a gruff voice.
‘Who is it?’
I asked trembling.
‘The police!’
You see we divide our time between London and Cornwall and I'd stayed up late to watch the film with only one light burning.
The police were worried that squatters had moved in.
For a few moments I was utterly terrified.
It took me straight back to Cyprus where we lived when I was a little girl.
Out there my brother and I were allowed an hour's TV after supper — that was the ration.
My parents had a point, too.
As it is I came to reading very late, at 18 or 19, and I think it is entirely the fault of the box.
When I was nine and they were out for the evening I stayed up late to watch a horror movie and had nightmares.
But I couldn't tell my mother or father because I should have been in bed by that time.
Violence can make such an impression on children.
Jonathan came in the other night when the news was on.
He had heard the guns in Yugoslavia and just stood there going: ‘Boom!
Boom!
Boom!’
My Swiss hotelier husband Johan and I have similar tastes in TV.
But he is not a keen theatregoer so there is some drama on the box that I enjoy and he doesn't, whereas he enjoys the films more.
Whoever sits down first gets the remote-control.
The only difference of opinion so far has been over boxing.
He loves it.
But two men hitting each other about the face and body doesn't make any sense to me.
I think it is weird.
So who wins the fight for the remote?
I guess Johan does.
He watches the boxing and I find something else to do.
But if you really want to punish me, force me to sit down and watch The Gladiators.
It is dreadful.
Johan was one of the patrons at the Bath Festival when we met.
I was making a children's film nearby.
We married two years later and Anthony and Georgina Andrews were the only showbusiness guests.
I'm not big on soaps, though I was in The Newcomers for five weeks when I was about 14 or 15.
I was at Elmhurst Ballet School in Camberley, Surrey, then.
We had a TV set in the common room.
But we were allowed to watch only selected programmes at weekends.
Sunday Night At The London Palladium and The Monkees were two of the favourites.
Hayley and Juliet Mills were there before me and Fiona Fullerton not long after me.
One of the most confusing places to be is the lift at the BBC Television Centre.
Inevitably you recognise all the faces.
But you're not sure you can put a name to them.
That's probably why actors and actresses all call one another‘darling’.
It must save an awful lot of embarrassment.
No wonder viewers often get the two Jennys muddled and call me Jenny Seagrove.
Of course, with a name like mine I'm used to being called all sorts of things.
In America I tell people who are trying to spell it: ‘You know, like the thing that runs round the roof of your house.’
On Sale
By Steve Howard
THE COMMITMENTS, Alan Parker's wickedly funny tale of a fiery young band who bring soul music to Dublin, has just been released by FoxVideo (£12.99).
FRANCIS Ford Coppola staked everything on Apocalpyse Now and almost drove star Martin Sheen bonkers.
The fascinating documentary on the making of the film, HEART OF DARKNESS (Tartan Video, £13.99) is out now.
FANS of the hit TV drama FOREVER GREEN should note that Castle Video has brought out the entire first series in a double-tape set (Pounds 19.99).
Video View
By Steve Howard
EVER since I first heard the quirky tones of Walter Winchell narrating Eliot Ness's adventures in The Untouchables, I've loved gangster yarns.
But I was totally unprepared for the angel-faced, gun-toting striplings that populate Mobsters (CIC, 18, out today).
The film, a polished study of the early days of Lucky Luciano and his fellow hoodlums, is not so much The Godfather as The Godchild, as Christian Slater — looking as if he hasn't started shaving yet — sets out with three cherubic buddies to conquer New York's Lower East Side.
You just know the boys are gonna do it, because the trio in question are suave killing machine Bugsy Siegel (Richard Grieco), business schemer Meyer Lansky (Patrick Dempsey) and mediator Frank Costello (Costas Mandylor).
All the lads are handy with a machine gun and, guided by crime kingpin F Murray Abraham, soon challenge the bootlegging empires of rival families headed by Anthony Quinn and Michael Gambon.
Gambon relishes the Mafia boss routine and the scene where he gives Luciano his famous scar is somewhat offputting — but not as stomach-turning as the sight of a mad dog rival of Lucky's biting off a hoodlum's nose, then cutting out another's tongue.
Young Guns meets Goodfellas is a fair summary of Mobsters.
Even Eliot Ness would have had his hands full with this baby-faced crew.
IT'S disconcerting to see an actor of Sean Connery's stature swinging about the Amazonian treetops like some pulley-assisted Tarzan.
But Connery's antics up in the rainforest canopy at least provide one of the few effective moments in the otherwise slow-moving, uninspired Green adventure Medicine Man (Guild, PG, out now).
Connery is a pony-tailed scientist Dr Robert Campbell who, aided by an elaborate rope and harness system, is collecting a rare plant which, he has discovered, contains a substance that can combat cancer.
The trouble is that he can't recreate the formula, so he is pretty teed off by the time his fund manager Dr Crane (Lorraine Bracco) turns up to find out what's going on.
It gets very predictable from here, folks, as the grumpy Crane — a leading biologist who nevertheless has kittens at the sight of a snake — and dour old Campbell trade verbal punches and then simmering, sensual looks as they scamper about the jungle trying to rediscover the magic mix.
They have to hurry — a giant highway is due to be driven through their neck of the woods at any moment.
Full marks to those behind Medicine Man for highlighting the very real threat to the rainforest.
Shame they couldn't have stumbled upon a more dramatic way of doing it.
FORTY million people have ‘disappeared’ in the icy wasteland of the Soviet Union, and British archeologist Dr Andrei Miller joins their ranks in the harrowing Lost In Siberia (High Fliers, 15, out now).
Anthony Andrews, so often seen as the archetypal urbane Englishman, turns in a performance of immense depth and sympathy as Miller, who is accused of spying and cast into a barbarous prison camp.
Gaunt, head shaven, eyes wide open in horror, Miller soon realises that he must learn the filthy, violent ways of his fellow inmates to survive and perhaps, ultimately, escape.
Much of the film is subtitled, but this only serves to underline the alien nature of the cruel Siberian prison landscape.
Classics
By Steve Howard
ONE of the pioneers of cinema's golden age, producer Hal Roach, died last week aged 100.
Roach's most memorable works were his collaborations with LAUREL AND HARDY — and now The Aikman Archives has released one of the trio's best films, MARCH OF THE WOODEN SOLDIERS.
This feature-length operetta, later retitled Babes In Toyland, has Stan and Ollie as two bumbling helpers of Santa who save the day when Toyland is invaded by a bogeyman.
This delightful 1934 classic is out now at £14.99.
Drug suicide bid by Bardot over animal cruelty
By Wayne Bodkin in St Tropez
BRIGITTE Bardot's love for animals drove her to attempt suicide after an horrific cruelty case near her home, friends fear.
The 58-year-old screen legend took an overdose of sleeping pills after becoming distraught over the fate of a flock of sheep left to starve.
She was released from hospital yesterday after having her stomach pumped.
Brigitte's new husband Bernard d'Ormale, who was at her side in the south of France hospital, revealed Bardot had recently been under severe stress.
She was depressed and suffering nightmares about the starving flock of sheep found abandoned near her villa.
Bardot took the overdose on Saturday while staying at her villa near St Tropez with Bernard and friends.
She was admitted to an exclusive private clinic in a neighbouring village.
A hospital spokesman said: ‘She was brought in by ambulance and was accompanied by her husband and two friends.’
After treatment and being kept under observation, she was released.
Bardot was still recovering from shock after narrowly missing being shot earlier this year by hunters killing her pets.
The Sixties sex kitten is also involved in several legal wrangles.
She is suing a hunter who chased wild boar on to her land and taking legal action over articles about her love life with Bernard, a close friend of extreme right-wing politician Jean-Marie le Pen.
Despite her screen success, Bardot has had a troubled life.
She turned her back on acting in 1973 to devote her life to animals, becoming a recluse.
Her first three marriages all ended unhappily.
In 1952 she wed film director Roger Vadim, the man responsible for turning her into a screen star, but that soon turned sour.
Seven years later actor Jacques Charrier became husband No 2.
Bardot then had a string of lovers including Sacha Distel.
In 1966 she married German playboy Gunther Sachs, following a whirlwind romance.
They parted three years later.
She was also estranged from her only child Nicolas, from her marriage to Charrier, and looked to be facing a lonely old age.
But the loneliness appeared to be over when, in October, TODAY exclusively revealed she had wed husband number four during a trip to Norway where she was also reunited with Nicolas after 10 years.
Last year it was revealed she had beaten breast cancer, but she is still frightened of getting old.
During a recent TV interview in France she demanded the cameras have special filters to hide her wrinkles.
Beyond the call of duty
UNTIL three weeks ago Detective Sergeant Robin Window led a busy but otherwise unremarkable life.
Unremarkable by the standards of police officers, that is.
He was carrying out a routine inquiry when his hand was severed by a Samurai sword.
Thanks to the quick thinking of the people around him and the skill of surgeons, he still has two hands.
But his recovery also owes a great deal to his personal courage.
On Saturday another policeman, PC Ray Hall, was going about his normal duties when he was shot by an IRA gunman.
Ironically, he was shot for doing his job well, so well that his acute observation almost certainly saved lives.
Yet when he was asked what went through his mind as he confronted the gunman, he replied with a joke.
‘A bullet, nearly,’ he said.
Both Detective Sergeant Window and PC Hall are brave men who deserve to be commended at the highest level.
But the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, should do more than that.
He should also take notice of their calm, positive and highly professional approach to their jobs.
Far too often we hear of the politics of policing, and of criticism of the police as they fight crime and protect the public.
When we know that so many policemen carry out their work with courage and good humour, their example should be highlighted to boost morale throughout the country.
Our policemen and women deserve respect and Mr Clarke should make sure that they get it.
Unkindest cut
ISN'T it strange how the moment interest rates go up banks feel compelled to push up their rates?
Yet when interest rates fall, as they have done recently, they rarely show the same enthusiasm for cutting their rates.
This is nothing short of a scandal.
In the past seven weeks the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, has brought interest rates down by 3 per cent in an attempt to revive the British economy.
His theory is simple.
Make it easier for individuals and companies to pay off their debts and they will gradually be able to start spending again.
By being slow to drop the rates, the banks make a mockery of the Government's policy.
Who benefits?
The banks, building societies and credit card companies who swell their profits.
Who loses?
Home owners, customers with overdrafts and small businessmen.
The Chancellor has urged us to spend and invest.
There is fat chance of that for as long as the Government allows the banks to carry on with their grasping one-way policy.
We need interest rate cuts and we need them now in our pockets where we can feel them.
Glazing a trail
JACKIE and Jaafer Sheblee used the kind of high-pressure tactics that double-glazing salesman often use.
But they weren't selling, they were buying.
Now the company they tried to buy from has complained that the price agreed is too low.
They want to cancel the deal.
Jackie and Jaafer insist that it stands and are prepared to take the company on in court.
Isn't it nice to see a couple turning the tables on a double-glazing salesman?
Lording it at our expense
By Penny Wark
THERE is a room in the House of Lords looked after by a clerical officer named Mr Pink.
Peers visit him once a month to hand over expenses forms on which they specify the days they have attended the Chamber for debates.
He takes their word for this.
There is no need for receipts — it is a matter of honour, he says.
Once the Lords have made their claim they will, in due course, receive a cheque for the claimed amount.
Their expenses can be up to £126 a day, plus the cost of first-class travel from their home.
The latest figures show that the Lords cost tax payers £4 million in the year from April 1990 to 1991, or almost £30,000 for each day they sat.
Tonight, Cutting Edge (Channel 4, 9pm) examines the working lives of some of the 1,217 members of the highest court in the land.
Although it shows that there are a few peers who work hard to correct society's injustices, the overwhelming impression is of pomp, ceremony, delicious teas and gentle relaxation at an exclusive club peopled by men and 77 women who are already among the most privileged in our society.
No one would object if they were paying for the facilities themselves.
But this is a club hosted by taxpayers who pay rich people to attend.
Not all claimed expenses in the year to April 1991, but those who did claimed an average of £92 a day.
‘What you put down for, you get.
The Inland Revenue can't take it off you,’ says Lord Teviot, who is also quite open about the fact that all a Lord has to do to qualify for his expenses is to walk into the chamber, have his name logged by a doorkeeper and walk out.
‘It's piecework.
You've got to be in the chamber, preferably sitting on those red cushions.
You just go in and sit down.’
Charles John Kerr Teviot, the Second Baron, is 57.
He inherited his title when his father died in 1968.
Until then he had done ‘various things,’ but ‘nothing terribly special’— Eton, three months in Spain, the Army, six years as a conductor and driver on Brighton buses and a spell at Sainsbury's, which was ‘rather difficult’.
Lord Teviot is listed in Who's Who as a genealogist (one who studies family pedigrees).
He was delighted to find himself not merely a Lord 24 years ago, but in possession of the regular expenses his status brings him.
‘Coming here, at least one has a small income,’ he says.
Two-thirds of the Lords are hereditary peers who succeeded to the title automatically on their father's death.
They did not have to qualify in any other way, and neither will their successors who, like them, will be peers until they die.
There is no such thing as redundancy in the House of Lords.
The system of creating life peers began in 1958 as a way of rewarding people who had excelled in political service, work with charities, industry or at the top of the professions.
But while this has injected a more diverse element into the Lords, it is still an establishment made up largely of rich people.
Sixty-one are listed as among the top 200 richest people in Britain.
More than two-thirds were privately educated and 400 went to Eton.
Almost half are over 70 and only 13 per cent are under 50.
In other words, they are nothing like a representative sample of British society.
Not only is the system which appoints them both ludicrous and antiquated, but it is difficult to quantify quite what the Lords achieves.
It is true that the Government is rarely defeated in the Commons, while the Lords can kick their heels by voting against them.
But what does a Lords defeat actually do, apart from causing some temporary embarrassment to the Government?
And couldn't a younger, elected body of people be even more effective?
Former Labour Chancellor Denis Healey, now Lord Healey of Riddlesden, is careful to paint a positive picture of his new club.
‘They have some very impressive debates.
You get better speeches than in the Commons,’ he insists.
He is right that the Lords has a great deal of collective wisdom, and probably more talented minds than the House of Commons during this administration.
But isn't it due for some extensive reform?
Plans for such reform have rumbled through Westminster since the beginning of the century.
The most recent attempt was made by the Labour government in the late Sixties.
The proposal got as far as a White Paper which suggested a two-tier system — life peers with voting rights and other members who could take part in debate but not vote.
The attempt floundered, and although the Labour Party has regularly called for reform since, nothing has come of it.
The stumbling block is the composition of the Lords itself, predominantly hereditary peers and Conservatives who have a vested interest in keeping their club as it is.
Reform depends on their support, which is growing slowly.
The Duke of Norfolk says the Lords should be replaced by an elected chamber, and Earl Spencer — brother of the Princess of Wales — does not attend because he acknowledges that the system is undemocratic.
Baroness Hollis of Heigham — formerly Patricia, the daughter of a van driver — was a Labour leader of Norwich Council and a university lecturer.
She is one of the hard-working peers who take their political roles seriously.
She often puts in a 60-hour week, and if the Lords had 1,217 members like her there's no doubt it would be an effective place.
But it hasn't.
‘The House of Lords has got to be reformed,’ she says.
‘The hereditary peers have got to go.
The first step would be to confine voting to life peers.
‘If you got rid of the hereditary right to vote you would lose 85 per cent of the problems.
‘And if you had a democratically elected house it would totally alter the balance of the Lords from being predominantly Conservative.’
The Channel 4 film went ahead only after lengthy negotiations.
‘We had about three days of talks before we were allowed to film the expenses sequence,’ says associate producer Lynn Alleway.
‘They were very sensitive about it.
Mr Pink was given a script by his boss, who allowed him to say ‘Good morning’ and ‘Can I help you?’
‘If the House of Lords has nothing to hide about its system of expenses, why are they so sensitive about it?’
We put on a jelly good show for French
By Margaret Morrison
THEY are puritanical, love tea ceremonies and gardening and set great store by good manners.
It sounds like the perfect description of the Japanese.
In fact it is how we Brits are seen by the French.
Patrick Le Gall, a director with French TV station France 3, believes Britain has much in common with Japan.
‘You are both island races with an island mentality’ he says.
‘Just like the Japanese, you tend your gardens, have tea ceremonies, revere royalty, are inclined to be puritanical and drive on the left.’
Le Gall brought a TV crew to Britain to research our national eccentricities.
A plate of jelly in the White Cliffs Hotel in Dover had the film crew in stitches.
‘Look, it wobbles on the plate, it wobbles down the throat, it probably wobbles in the stomach,’ he said.
‘It comes in red, yellow or green and it looks like plastic.’
The results of this Gallic look at Britain will be shown as part of the BBC2 series The Essential History Of Europe, which began last Thursday with Denmark.
Here are some of the things the French find funny about Britain: LOLLIPOP LADIES: They find the uniforms hilarious.
PLOUGHMAN'S LUNCH: If it's a sandwich, why are the ingredients laid out separately on the plate?
CHUTNEY: Is it a sweet or a savoury?
MENUS: Why do restaurants print menus in French when they make so many silly mistakes?
TRAFFIC CONES: Why do we love to decorate the roads with them?
CENTRAL HEATING: If we're feeling the chill of recession, why do we pay to overheat pubs and hotels?
SCHOOL SPORTS: Why force children on to windswept playing fields even if they hate games and aren't any good?
COFFEE: Sometimes it's OK, sometimes it's awful — why can't we agree on how to make decent coffee?
£4m for meals, hotels and travel (first class, of course)
IT costs £37 million a year to run the House of Lords, which includes the £4 million in expenses claimed by peers.
A Lord can claim expenses without receipts or proof of expenditure for any day he attends when the Lords is in session.
They consist of:
£29 a day subsistence allowance to cover meals, taxis and other incidentals.
Up to £68 a night for an overnight stay in a hotel.
This allowance can also be used towards the cost of a privately-owned or rented London property.
Up to £29 a day secretarial allowance.
They can also buy equipment such as a typewriter or calculator.
First-class flight or rail fare from their home to the House.
43.4p-a-mile petrol money regardless of their model of car or whether it is chauffeur driven.
Lords need only enter the chamber to claim costs
My girls couldn't lie to me.
I know they are not killers
By Jane Moore
THE words, written on Holloway Prison paper, are simple but poignant: ‘We both have to say that you have two daughters to be very proud of.
It is hard to find girls of their ages that are so well mannered, kind, thoughtful, considerate and understanding.
‘Neither of these girls has a single nasty streak in them.
We are with them constantly seven days a week and each day that passes it becomes harder to comprehend that they were ever convicted of such a crime.
From inmates Sonia Martin and Lynda King’.
The girls in question are Michelle and Lisa Taylor, two sisters who were given life sentences for murder earlier this year.
The past four months have been exhausting for their mother Ann.
Three stone lighter and a virtual insomniac, she has campaigned tirelessly for their release and her efforts were rewarded last week when Michelle and Lisa were granted the right to appeal against their conviction for the murder of Alison O'Shaughnessy.
Alison, who was the wife of Michelle's lover John O'Shaughnessy, was found stabbed 54 times at her flat in South London last year.
At first it seemed to be a motiveless crime, but then police found out about Michelle's passionate affair with Alison's husband.
The picture painted in court was one of a jealous and possessive mistress who enlisted the help of her younger sister to kill.
But Ann Taylor has vowed she will never give up until she has proved the prosecution wrong.
‘My girls are innocent,’ she says resolutely.
‘I know people might say ‘Well she would say that, wouldn't she?’ but you have to know my girls to know they just wouldn't do such a thing.
‘They are both gentle and kind, and are not capable of doing something like this, let alone covering it up with such success.
‘I would know if they were lying.
Any mother would know if their daughters were lying over such a major thing.
‘They are both finding prison life tough and would have cracked by now if they were guilty.’
Ann and Derek Taylor's semi-detached house in south-east London is not difficult to spot.
Its windows are plastered with posters proclaiming the girls' innocence, as are those of their neighbours.
‘The support we have from people around here is amazing,’ says Ann, 44.
Even the inmates of Holloway Prison, where until recently the girls were placed, think they are innocent, as the letter Ann received showed.
To this day Ann finds it hard to believe they were convicted.
After the 15-day trial in July Ann was convinced the girls would both be returning home having been cleared of the charge.
‘We didn't even contemplate anything else.
There was no forensic evidence to link them to the crime,’ she says.
‘I just went numb with shock when the jury found them guilty.’
One of the most incriminating things against the girls was the discovery of Michelle's diary at the private Churchill Clinic in London where she worked with John O'Shaughnessy.
It detailed her affair with John.
In one entry she refers to his wife as an ‘unwashed bitch’.
Another, eight months before the murder, reads: ‘I wish Alison could just disappear as if she never existed’.
Ann raises her eyes heavenward when the diary is mentioned: ‘It is a fact of life that young girls write horrible things about people in their diaries,’ she says.
‘I am sure that Michelle would rather John hadn't been married to Alison, but that doesn't mean to say she is going to go out and murder her, let alone involve her much-loved sister in the crime’.
The Taylors' world fell apart at 5.40am on August 7 when ten police officers arrived at their home to arrest Michelle and Lisa for murder.
‘I couldn't believe this was happening to my family.
It was like a nightmare I couldn't wake up from,’ says Ann.
‘I have four children, and the police have never had cause to knock on our door before.
We are a good, law-abiding family.
Ann's other children are David, 24, and 14-year-old Tracy, who has been badly affected by her sisters' convictions.
‘She has been through an awful lot,’ says Ann.
‘It's very hard for her because she has lost two sisters.
It was a great shock.’
Both Michelle, 22, and Lisa, 19, have lost a lot of weight since going to prison.
Ann says: ‘Lisa is finding prison very hard.
She gets very down and depressed and rings here a lot.
‘I have to be quite hard on her sometimes because I have so much to sort out I can't let myself become depressed about it too.
‘They have very mixed feelings really — anger because they have been put away for something they didn't do, and defiance to see justice done.’
The girls have now been moved to Bullwood Prison, near Southend but Ann and her husband Derek — a contract cleaner — are hopeful their girls will be home again for the New Year.
In the meantime they visit them once a fortnight.
Ann adds: ‘Even if we lose the appeal and the girls have to see out the full term in prison, I shall still be campaigning to prove their innocence long after they have been released.
‘It is terrible that Alison O'Shaughnessy died in such a brutal way and her family has our heartfelt sympathy.
But it wasn't our girls that did it and I am going to prove it.’
Top citizen
ORSON Welles' Citizen Kane was today hailed as the number one film of all-time by two polls.
The 1941 film was voted top by critics and directors polled by Sight And Sound magazine.
The critics' top 10 included John Ford's The Searchers and Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey.
The directors' list included Martin Scorsese's Raging Bull and Francis Ford Coppola's first two Godfather films.
Morse keeps a low profile for life in Provence
By Isla Whitcroft
JOHN THAW has taken his role in the television version of A Life In Provence so much to heart he has bought a home in the idyllic French region.
The star of The Sweeney and Inspector Morse fell for author Peter Mayle's dream soon after arriving in Provence early this year to begin work on the BBC adaptation of the bestselling book.
Now, with filming still going on, he is living in a converted barn just 10 miles from Mayle's own home.
But 50-year-old Thaw has gone to extreme lengths to keep his location secret and has turned into a virtual recluse.
His terracotta-tiled house with salmon pink shutters is hardly the sort of place you would expect a wealthy actor to buy.
It stands in a group of four renovated farm buildings and is screened from the tiny road by unkempt trees.
On the small flagstoned terrace sits a ramshackle stone barbecue and the garage is an old farm shed at the end of a roughly-laid tarmac track.
The garden is not big enough for a swimming pool.
His nearest shops are at the sleepy hilltop village of Saignon yet just a handful of people are aware the celebrity is a neighbour.
And that includes the many British ex-pats and handful of Americans who also fell for Mayle's picture of the French way of life.
One British couple living just a few hundred yards away were amazed by the news.
Even Maurice Bernard, owner of the one bar currently open in Saignon, did not know the whereabouts of the man who is about to immortalise his region on the small screen.
‘I know who John Thaw is of course,’ he said, ‘but I have never heard any gossip about him buying a house here.
‘But then, we have so many English people moving into Saignon, so one more is not remarkable.’
The local postman had not heard of John Thaw.
And inquiries at the small town hall produced the same shrugs.
But across the road from Thaw, mayor Georges Duclos was more forthcoming.
‘He is a good neighbour of mine, naturally, but very quiet.
We rarely see him and not many people know he is here.’
Top 20
1 (2) Would I Lie To You Charles & Eddie
2 (1) End Of The Road Boyz II Men
3 (3) People Everyday Arrested Development
4 (12) I Will Always Love You Whitney Houston
5 (7) Never Let Her Slip Away Undercover
6 (4) Boss Drum Shamen
7 (—) Invisible Touch Genesis
8 (6) Be My Baby Vanessa Paradis
9 (—) Temptation Heaven 17
10 (5) Run To You Rage
11 (—) Montreaux EP Simply Red
12 (—) Yesterdays Guns N' Roses
13 (8) Supermarioland Ambassadors Of Funk/MC Mario
14 (—) Out Of Space Prodigy
15 (11) Take A Little Piece Of My Heart Erma Franklin
16 (9) I'm Gonna Get You Bizarre Inc featuring Angie Brown
17 (20) Free Your Mind En Vogue
18 (14) Hello Shakespears Sister
19 (10) Who Needs Love (Like That) Erasure
20 (13) Sleeping Satellite Tasmin Archer
Bananarama double act
Bananarama girls Sara and Keren are now a smart new double act.
Party tux deluxe
By Alison Veness, Fashion Editor
IT'S that time of year when there seems to be a party every other night and it takes a little extra imagination to make you stand out from the crowd.
So why not add a touch of elegance to this winter's social circuit by borrowing a proven classic idea from the male wardrobe?
On him it looks smart but sober, but on her it can look daring and ultra-stylish.
The female tuxedo is leaner and more finely honed than the male version, with slim-fitting, narrow-shouldered jackets.
Trousers too are cigarette slim or tapered, complete with satin ribbon down the side.
Adopting this traditional masculine style doesn't mean having to sacrifice your femininity.
For real tux deluxe you can add a spangly corset top, decorative waistcoat and a dandy cravat.
Indulge in some designer name-dropping with the Emporio Armani tuxedo which has the initials EA carved in the back, or economise with Fenwicks' best-seller — a bustier-topped all-in-one with matching jacket.
Alternatively you could pick up a pinstripe suit from tried and trusted Marks & Spencer.
Either way, it looks like women will be as eager as men to invest in a tux for Christmas.
Charles Bronson
TOUGH guy actor Charles Bronson has shown his soft side by telling the world of the ‘beautiful girl’ who has changed his life.
Friends say Bronson, 71, and 31-year-old Kim Weeks are likely to wed on Bronson's ranch in Vermont next spring.
Bronson fell in love with Kim when she comforted him after the death of his actress wife Jill Ireland from cancer two years ago.
Kim has now given up her job as audio producer to dedicate her life to Bronson.
The Death Wish star, who said he was ready to ‘give everything up’ when Jill died, now has the energy of a man half his age, say his friends.
‘Kim is like a ray of sunshine, a wonderful and beautiful girl who has changed my life,’ he told a TV audience in Hollywood.
Bruce Willis
IT seems that Bruce Willis is pulling all the punches on his latest film Die Hard III.
He has inserted a clause into his contract which bans screenwriter Joel Silver from the set while he is working.
The pair are said to dislike each other intensely — only the lure of the big bucks they make keeps them together.
Nick Nolte
NICK Nolte is tuning up for his latest role by taking singing lesson from Madonna's voice coach.
He has hired Seth Riggs to get him in fine voice for the new musical I'll Do Anything.
Michael Caine
MICHAEL Caine does not just want to star in front of the camera, he wants to star behind it.
The veteran actor has said he is ready to direct a film for the first time.
‘I know I can direct just as badly as the people who made all those clinkers with me,’ he joked.
Come and join my church, says Count Nikolai
By Tim Satchell
A RALLYING call to disaffected Anglicans to join the Russian Orthodox Church has been made by historian Count Nikolai Tolstoy.
The Duke of Edinburgh, who was baptised into the Greek Orthodoox Church, has already privately expressed a desire to return to the church of his birth, which is in communion with the Russian Orthodox Church.
Count Nikolai says: ‘I am sympathetic to the plight of Anglicans because our church was seized after the Russian Revolution.
‘We were forced into exile although we had the endorsement of the Patriarch of Constantinople.
‘It was very fortunate that the ecumenical patriarch was free from Soviet control.
‘If a breakaway Church of England was formed, they could be in communion with us, if they wanted to revive the apostolic succession.
‘Then, rather than being a sect, they would be part of worldwide, mainstream Christianity.’
Count Nikolai adds that people can join individually.
‘Anyone serious could take instructions and be baptised.
Many adults are being baptised in Russia at the moment.
‘Our services are in English, as often as not.’
Some are planning to join the Roman Catholics — but Count Nikolai points out: ‘We don't have any Papal authority whereas they do.
‘Also there are trendy changes under way in the Roman Catholic Church as well.
‘We have escaped change and also calls for change.’
The Russian Orthodox Church in Exile is building a new church in Chiswick, west London.
It already has a Convent in North London where services are held.
Those interested in joining the church should phone Abbess Elizabeth on 081 459 0263.
Honours even for the Hon.
Members
By Tim Satchell
BEFORE England beat the Springboks on Saturday, the Commons and Lords XV had an honourable draw against their South African counterparts at Richmond-on-Thames College in Twickenham.
The score was 10–10, with the British team captain, Philip Oppenheim (Cons, Amber Valley) scoring a try in the last three minutes.
‘It was a good game,’ Mr Oppenheim, 36, outside centre, tells me.
Also playing well was Lord Addington, 29, prop forward.
Others playing for Parliament were Tony Nelson (C, Chichester), Nick Hawkins (C, Blackpool South), and Independents Lords Redesdale and St John of Bletso.
A return match in SA in the Spring is planned, also sponsored by Wang.
Doubts, however, surround a return fixture against France following this year's game in Paris.
‘It was not a good game,’ says Mr Oppenheim.
‘In the second half, the French awarded 50 penalties against us and three for us.
‘They sent two of our men off — and then they played for an extra ten minutes so that they had a chance to equalise.’
And…
By Tim Satchell
‘The more I know, the more I worry.
The more I worry, the less I sleep.
The less I sleep, the more I read.
The more I read, the more I know.
The more I know,…’
Hockney in an operatic ecstasy
By Tim Satchell
TONIGHT David Hockney, as set designer, will be accompanied by some 30 friends for the first night of the Royal Opera House's new production of Richard Strauss's Die Frau ohne Schatten (The Woman Without Shadow), directed by John Cox and conducted by Bernard Haitinck.
Mr Hockney, 55, has taken his role as designer seriously — this is the first completely new Hockney design to be seen at Covent Garden.
He worked on the sets with a minature theatre stage in Los Angeles for nine months and, unusually for a set designer, he has attended every minute of rehearsals in London.
Die Frau ohne Schatten is a complex allegory, with an earthquake, a flood and a lengthy musical ending which it was suggested could be cut.
‘Oh, no,’ Mr Hockney said, ‘it takes that long to reach ecstasy.’
Isabelle Adjani
By Tim Satchell
FRENCH actress Isabelle Adjani, 36, above, has moved back to Paris following the ending of her relationship with actor Daniel Day-Lewis, 34, star of Last of the Mohicans.
Mlle Adjani, who has a 13-year-old son, Barnaby, by director Bruno Nuytten, won't talk about the relationship, but does say: ‘He has great Irish charm and used to give me the most poetic gifts.’
Mlle Adjani, who made her first film, Faustine, at the age of 16 and is best known for The Story of Adele H, is now working on new film projects and promoting Christian Dior.
She started going out with Mr Day-Lewis two years ago.
Rianna Scipio
By Tim Satchell
AT the weekend, ITV weathergirl Rianna Scipio, 26, compered her first public event, Fashion Noir, at the Park Lane International Hotel in London's Earls Court for an audience that included Linford Christie and footballer Ian Wright.
‘She looked good, had a great sense of humour and managed to hold things together,’ said one of the guest celebrities.
Lavatorial advertising
I WAS disgusted to read Jane Gordon's comment that lavatorial advertising is a ‘welcome trend towards honesty’.
We may be an enlightened society but I'm sure many people don't want to sit through graphic descriptions of a certain type of sanitary towel — especially at meal times.
Manston
IT'S sick that organisers of a fair at Manston in Kent should pump a donkey full of laxatives for a fund-raising gimmick.
I hope the RSPCA takes action.
Pirated music
CLAIMS that the public is ‘being exploited’ by pirated copies of music tapes are quite laughable when the industry unashamedly sells CDs at such huge profits.
Poll tax
SOME people can't afford Poll Tax but those spongers who simply refuse to pay should have their names published in local papers so the community can see who the free-loaders are.
Zodiac File
I HAD to write to say how brilliant your Zodiac File cartoon strip is.
The descriptions of the characters in relation to their star signs is spot-on.
Arms and the guilty men
WHEN we cast our votes at election time, we don't expect candidates to be paragons of virtue but we do expect honesty and integrity — traits completely lacking in this discredited Government.
The depths its members will sink to were illustrated by the attempted suppression of documents concerning arms sales to Iraq — to cover their own duplicity and allow innocent men to go to prison.
John Major's inquiry should be held in public, not behind closed doors or with the usual excuse that publication would ‘not be in the public interest’.
All concerned should be cross-examined to get to the bottom of the whole sordid affair.
As one of the innocent men remarked outside court: ‘Much more would have come out had the trial continued.’
It is that ‘much more’ that the public needs to know.
Milestones
BIRTHDAYS: Boxer Frank Bruno, 31.
Jockey Willie Carson, 50.
ON THIS DAY: In 1665, the London Gazette was first published.
In 1824, Hamilton Hume discovered the Murray river in Australia.
In 1907, Oklahoma became the 46th state of the Union.
Children suffer most when Dad beats Mum
I CAN fully understand the jury being moved to tears as Daniel Horbury relived the nightmare of witnessing the killing of the mother he loved by the father he also loved.
Like him, my children have had to stand by helpless and in absolute panic while their father has brutally beaten me in front of them.
The only difference between what Daniel had to endure and what my children have endured is that I am still alive and have plucked up the courage to divorce my husband.
But the pain and the damaging effects are still there.
I always gave my husband the benefit of the doubt and ‘buried’ his brutality because I was so ashamed and felt that I was in some way to blame.
I kept this dark secret for 15 years — but when it started happening in front of the children, I knew I had to do something about it.
I know there are many women who endure similar treatment from men who profess to love them.
We protect these men and in so doing help neither them nor ourselves.
But I think the ones who suffer most are the children.
Daniel's story certainly confirmed to me that I did the right thing — and that I should have done it years ago, if only for my children's sake.
My heart and prayers go out to Daniel.
The torment and heartache he suffers will be terrible.
And now he must steel himself to face a future without both his parents.
Smoke signal
WELL done Roy Castle for snubbing Lady Thatcher over her links with a cigarette company.
His lack of hypocrisy is in sharp contrast to some politicians.
How does Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley hope to achieve a ten per cent reduction in smokers without a ban on tobacco ads?
Things you didn't know you didn't know
By Graeme Donald
WITH its name rooted in the Greek for a dwarf lion, the chameleon has entered into the realms of metaphor, describing anyone who is prone to changing their opinion.
However, the creature's capacity to change colour at will in order to blend into its surroundings is not as extensive as is popularly thought.
Chameleons experience only a limited colour-change, instigated by factors beyond their control.
The autonomic nervous system disperses and concentrates pigment throughout the body after external influences such as fear or temperature change.
In short, if you crept up behind a chameleon and shouted ‘boo’ it would respond by changing colour but not necessarily to the colour of its surroundings.
In Spain, rural folk still keep caged chameleons as fly traps, the creatures' long darting tongues being more efficient than any man-made device.
British Library
THE predicted overspend on the new British Library would have paid for a £1 million public library for every UK local authority, leaving over £100 million for an extension to the British Museum Reading Room with a new underground storage area — which was what everyone wanted in the first place.
R Futter, Salford
Religious broadcasting
SO D Webb believes viewers want to be entertained on a Sunday, not preached at.
What about those who would like to attend church but through disability or remoteness are unable to do so?
Surely 30 minutes per week is not excessive for a few televised hymns.
Jack Field Crawley, W Sussex
T-shirts are the right fit for home business
By James Roberts
FASHION is a fickle world where few garments rank as real survivors.
One that fits this description to a T is the T-shirt.
But more than being a mainstay of fashion, the T-shirt is an enduring medium of advertising.
Whether you're plugging a designer label or political ideology, emblazoning your message across someone's chest is a great way of getting it seen.
And there are profits to be massaged out of the medium.
A Atkins Ltd has been in the business of supplying logos and promotional material for 20 years.
With the help of new technology it has now branched out into a franchise operation called Videopics.
Sales manager Graham Cooper says: ‘The introduction of video printing techniques means that images can now be ‘grabbed’ and transferred on to other materials such as T-shirts, mugs, key-rings and baseball hats.
‘This means our machinery can produce personalised goods.
Customers may want a picture of their family on holiday, for example, or to transfer an image from a photograph or magazine.
It can be done within minutes.’
Videopics sells franchise holders the equipment they need to run their businesses.
It offers training and after-sales help but does not charge royalty or franchising fees.
Operatives keep all profits.
‘Videopics just sells the equipment involved on a franchise basis.
We have no interest in producing the goods themselves.
‘We are regularly approached by other firms who want to order promotional material, say 5,000 mugs or t-shirts with their company name, we pass these orders on to our operatives.’
Franchise holders don't need to start big.
Videopics' basic kit — camera, monitor and printer — costs £4,950 and can be used for badges and mugs.
The full kit is flexible enough to print on T-shirts, baseball hats, key-rings, mugs, aprons and tea towels.
It costs £6,950.
‘This is the beauty of our operation,’ says Mr Cooper.
‘The initial investment is very small but we profit from that sale and don't have to charge any more.
Clients are under no obligation to buy their consumables from us.
We do provide high-quality mugs and T-shirts to print on but an operative is welcome to buy from cheaper competition if they can find it.’
Videopics has received inquiries from people hoping to set up in shopping centres and tourist spots, but is keen to stress the potential of running a franchise from home.
‘The machinery itself is so flexible the possibilities of running a mail-order business from home are enormous,’ says Mr Cooper.
‘This type of operation has been run before but never to this standard.
‘Our machines are the first to produce high-quality images on 100 per cent cotton, and non-toxic, durable, images on mugs.’
Videopics keeps in touch with its franchisees once a business is up and running.
Training on how to use the equipment and in marketing techniques is offered, machine maintenance provided and all machinery is covered by a full warranty.
Videopics is presently training franchise holders in a Christmas promotion of personalised T-shirts for teddy bears.
French must accept Gatt
THE new Gatt agreement on trade is far more important than the ego of the French and the greed of their farmers.
Yet those are the blocks over which it is likely to stumble.
It is remarkable that the talks have got so far, even if it has taken six years to get within touching distance of a deal.
But unfortunately, Gatt has turned out to be all or nothing.
Unless there is complete agreement, there is no agreement at all and there will be a worldwide trade war.
The results of that are too horrifying to contemplate.
Millions of jobs are likely to be lost in the developed countries while Third World nations slump deeper into poverty.
And all that would happen because the French farmers insist on getting their over-generous subsidies and French politicians are terrified of losing the farming vote.
It cannot be allowed to happen.
It is possible for the other European Community partners to over-rule France and they should do that.
It would even be for the good of the French themselves, who stand to lose enormously in a trade war.
There might be short-term problems within the EC but, frankly, one more of those at the moment would hardly be noticed.
The aim of Gatt is to tear down trade barriers and open up free markets.
That used to be what the EC was dedicated to as well.
Instead, if it caves in to the French, it will become a protectionist grouping of rich nations, excluded from the American and Japanese markets and the growing wealth of the rest of the world.
That cannot be allowed to happen.
Britain has the European presidency at the moment.
We must use it to force through the Gatt agreement — if necessary, against the selfish tantrums of the French.
The big lie
A LOT of people think politicians are professional liars.
But MPs take it very seriously when one of them lies in the Commons.
That is why the arms-for-Iraq case has caused such interest at Westminster, even if it has not in the rest of the country.
It is said that MPs have not had many letters about the case, in which three businessmen nearly went to jail for doing what the Government had encouraged them to do.
Ordinary people are far more concerned, say those who brush aside ‘Iraqgate’, with the state of the economy and concern over their jobs.
But nothing will more unite MPs of all parties than outrage over a Minister who lies in the sacred Commons chamber.
And the accusation against several of them, including the Prime Minister, is that they did precisely that.
It is because what is said in the House is so important to MPs that John Major cannot brush aside the Iraqgate charges.
He would be making a terrible mistake to think they will just go away.
Trial by TV
IT'S a tough old world, showbusiness, and it is going to get a darn sight tougher.
At least, it is for the ITV companies.
The high cost of winning their franchises means they cannot afford to screen any flops.
So shows which don't get a high enough rating will be unceremoniously axed.
This is going to cause chaos in the studios and even more chaos in the home as viewers desperately hunt for shows they saw last week and which have mysteriously disappeared.
There is a much simpler way to deal with low ratings.
Instead of getting rid of the programmes, they should sack the bosses who put them on in the first place.
Four cases to make Virginia think again
Lucy Broadbent
IT IS one of the oldest and most famous hospitals in the world but if the Government follows the recommendations in the Tomlinson report, St Bartholomew's in London will soon close.
Doctors and Opposition politicians have spelled out why Britain cannot afford to lose Bart's.
But nothing could more eloquently make the case than the patients Bart's has helped with pioneering treatment, dedication and care.
TODAY talked to four people whose cases should make Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley think twice about shutting this proud hospital.
One of the specialists treating them, Professor Tim Eden, head of the paediatric oncology department, says: ‘We recognise that treating cancer is expensive and the public and politicians have to realise that.
‘If the Goverment leaves it to market forces, then the expensive things disappear.
If they want care for children, then they have to provide more cash.’
TOM'S TRUST IS REPAID.
DRIPS and tubes punctured two-year-old Thomas Stimpfig's tiny, frail body as he lay in the Paediatric Oncology Unit at Bart's with leukaemia.
‘Thomas had just had his first round of chemotherapy,’ says his mother Clemency.
‘Every day my husband would leave work wondering if he'd find Thomas alive.’
Eighteen months later, Thomas is making a good recovery, though he cannot be diagnosed as being clear of leukaemia for another three years.
‘I was prepared to go to the United States for the most up-to-date expertise,’ says Clemency.
‘But all the experts told us to stay at Bart's.
The results from this unit are staggering.
‘The Imperial Cancer Research Fund pays the doctors' salaries as well as so much else.
‘It's the trust and familiar surroundings of this ward that have been vital to Thomas.
‘To close down a ward would cause irreparable psychological damage for the children here.
‘It's not fair to do that to sick children.
They've suffered enough.’
LAST HOPE FOR TONY.
CLOSURE of the Bart's renal unit would extinguish Anthony Monti's last hope of leading a normal, healthy life.
For 17 years, 52-year-old Anthony waited in vain for a kidney transplant.
But no suitable donor organ could be found and finally, weakened by long-term dialysis, he was taken off the waiting list when doctors decided his body could not stand an operation.
‘Now they are working hard to get me fit enough to go back on the list — and they're the only ones giving me hope,’ says Anthony.
‘This place cannot close.
There is so much devotion from everyone here.’
Over the years, Bart's renal unit has become Anthony's second home.
He is kept alive by dialysis sessions three times a week and the doctors, nurses and fellow-patients have become his friends and surrogate family.
‘If you ask me where all our patients would go if we closed, I don't know the answer,’ says consultant nephrologist Dr Charles Tomson.
UNIT'S BEDS IN DEMAND.
THE diagnosis was devastating.
Doctors last week told 28-year-old Karen Carter she had ovarian cancer — 75 per cent of those with the disease die from it.
‘My first thought was, ‘who is going to look after the children if I'm not around’,’ says the mother of three from Harlow.
Worse still, the unique Gynaecological Oncology Unit at Bart's was full — she was going to have to wait two weeks for a bed there.
‘I lay in hospital in Harlow thinking, ‘this thing is spreading’,’ says Karen.
Luckily Dr John Shepherd, director of the Bart's unit, is also a consultant at the Royal Marsden Hospital in Surrey.
He knew the case was urgent, got her a bed there and operated.
‘It's a relief to know that something positive is being done at last,’ says Karen.
What her story clearly shows is that Bart's is no ancient, crumbling institution with empty beds.
‘The unit here at Bart's is unique in the UK.
It would cease to exist if Bart's closes,’ says Dr Shepherd.
HEARTFELT SUPPORT.
HEART patient Ken Woods is in the cardiology unit.
He has had two heart attacks and two major by-pass operations.
Ken, 51, was transferred to Bart's from his local hospital which did not have the equipment to cope when his angina worsened suddenly last week.
‘When I had my first heart attack 12 years ago I was terrified.
But it's very reassuring to know I am in safe hands here,’ says Ken.
‘This hospital has been very good to me.
‘The staff really care, and I have learnt that I just have to take things easy.’
He was given a ballooning operation, one of 300 performed at Bart's this year, to widen the arteries to his heart.
Consultant Dr Duncan Dymond says: ‘We are a very specialist unit.
‘We have had patients from as far away as Wales because we specialise in cardiac rhythm problems.
Take Bart's away and I do not know where the patients would go.
They probably would not be treated.’
In Leonora's memory, it mustn't shut
Clive Nelson, Royal Court Correspondent
THE parents of Prince Charles's god-daughter spoke out yesterday to save the hospital which fought in vain to cure her cancer.
Lord and Lady Romsey begged John Major to spare St Bartholomew's where five-year-old Leonora was treated before her death last year.
They praised the ‘quite exceptional’ care given by consultants, doctors and nurses during the final stages of her life and urged the Government to think again.
Lord Romsey revealed he had argued against the Tomlinson Report, which recommends closure, over dinner with Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley last week.
‘She made it clear no decision had been taken and she was going to look at the Tomlinson Report with a totally objective view,’ he said.
Memories flooded back yesterday as the couple presented a £43,000 cheque raised in memory of Leonora for research into children's cancers.
Lady Romsey went back to Kenton Ward, where her little girl was treated, and played with three-year-old Holly Newell.
Holly, from Hainault, east London, is winning her fight against a similar cancer to the Wilm's tumour which killed Leonora.
As Lady Romsey gently cradled Holly in her arms, the girl's mother Julie said: ‘Both the Romseys and their nanny were particularly kind to us when Leonora and Holly were receiving treatment.
We went through all this together.’
As she toyed with a pottery unicorn made by Leonora during her stay in Bart's, Lady Romsey added: ‘When we knew she wasn't going to survive we said, ‘We will get through this and we will still thank Bart's.
We will work hard and thank everybody for what they have done’.’
She revealed that she first learnt of the threatened closure while her daughter was fighting for life.
She said: ‘It was leaked while Leonora was still alive and it was very distressing.’
Her husband added: ‘We arrived here, the three of us, very tired, very scared and very, very desperate about the future.
‘From the moment Leonora was admitted, to her death on October 22 last year, the treatment, and the care with which we were all looked after, struck a very deep chord.’
Today rescues crisp addict
THIN, fat, young, old — they came in all shapes and sizes as the TODAY Cellulite Roadshow was launched yesterday.
Computer analyst Margaret Gibson, 22, was among dozens who turned up in Glasgow for free, confidential advice on cellulite and weight from our panel of doctors, dietitians, exercise counsellors and beauty experts.
At just over eight stone, she did not feel overweight but an addiction to crisps was putting cellulite on her thighs.
‘When I wake up in the morning I've just got to have a packet,’ she says.
‘I can easily get through four packets a day.’
Dr Nick Walters, exercise physiologist at the University of Westminster, tested Margaret on his Futrex 5000 computer, which analyses body muscle, fat and water, and found she had a fat proportion of 28 per cent— well above her recommended level of 22 per cent .
He prescribed low-intensity exercise, suggesting swimming four times a week for 30 minutes.
‘I know he's right — I just needed someone to tell me,’ says Margaret.
Meet our experts this week, and find out the best way to beat YOUR problem.
Just turn up between noon and 7pm at one of the venues shown below for advice.
All visitors have a chance to win some great health prizes.
TIMETABLE.
MANCHESTER: Today, Britannia Hotel, Portland St BIRMINGHAM: Wednesday, Nov 18, Hyatt Regency, Bridge Street SOUTHAMPTON: Thursday, Nov 19, Southampton Moat House, Highfield Lane BRISTOL: Friday, Nov 20, Bristol Moat House, Victoria St LONDON: Saturday, Nov 21, Drury Lane Moat House, 10 Drury Lane, London WC2
Secrets of a beauty scout
Tim Ewbank
HUNDREDS of people were checking in at New York's JFK airport, but one face stood out from the crowd.
It belonged to a 14-year-old schoolgirl with the looks of an angel.
By chance, one of the world's top fashion talent-spotters happened to be booking in for that same flight.
Once they were airborne, the girl was approached.
The next day she was signed up to the top model agency Storm — and the day after that she started her modelling career.
Kate Moss is now one of the world's supermodels.
Her wide eyes and waif-like cheekbones have taken Europe by storm and she is currently the toast of New York since modelling in the Calvin Klein campaign.
The woman who spotted Kate's star potential was Sarah Doukas, 38, a former model whose varied career has including running antique shops in London and Paris, managing a punk band and being a rock star's wife in San Francisco.
‘When I came back to England after my divorce I started working in a modelling agency.’
she says.
‘Then I thought I'd start my own.’
The result was Storm, run by a staff of 18 and with 130 girls and 90 men on its books.
Sarah describes her work as stressful, frustrating and maddening — but thrilling when she stumbles across someone like Kate.
‘I was on my way home from New York with my brother Simon after a scouting mission for models when I spotted her at the airport with her father.
She looked like a child but she had exceptional bone structure.
‘As soon as the seat belt sign had been switched off, we rushed over.
Luckily I had been doing The Clothes Show on TV and her father had seen me and knew I was reputable.
‘I don't think there is any model who has had such a meteoric rise.
Linda Evangelista was brilliantly marketed but there was never quite the attention until she had been established for quite a long time.’
Sarah's eye for a photogenic face has made her fortune.
And although hundreds of young hopefuls turn up at the Storm offices in London each year most of Sarah's ‘finds’ are chance encounters.
Schoolgirl Camilla Rigg, for instance, was up from Cambridge on a shopping trip to London when she was signed up on the spot.
She is now a top model.
Her dramatic Latin looks have made her very much in demand among the Paris designers.
Sarah's eye for stardom is not just restricted to models.
She was bowled over by the beauty of a girl named Jane March who walked into the Storm agency.
Even though Jane was too small to be a model, Sarah helped her win the lead role in the blockbuster film The Lover — and even enlisted her family to help the girl learn to act.
After her success with Kate Moss, Sarah now hopes to work the same magic with Kate's brother Nick, who is 16 and still a schoolboy in Croydon.
‘Nick came to me because Kate kept saying how good-looking he was,’ says Sarah.
‘I signed him up straight away.
Now he is in the States shooting the Versace campaign with Linda Evangelista, Stephanie Seymour and Naomi Campbell.
Like Kate he's got great bone structure but an unusual face with a pronounced nose.
He'd look good in Henry VIII's court.’
Another discovery came five years ago, when Sarah spotted a 16-year-old schoolgirl named Miranda Morton walking along London's Battersea Park Road.
‘She was in school uniform but she made such an impact on me I nearly burst my tyres driving along the pavement,’ Sarah says.
Her remarkable eye for talent has led to star-spotting in some very unusual places.
‘There's a fantastic-looking man called Rob English whom I found when I trod on his toe in a shop in Brighton,’ says Sarah.
‘I told him he would make a fortune.
He has now done a Levi's campaign and a Kylie Minogue video.
And recently I was served breakfast in New York by a waiter called Gareth Evans.
He's just shot Ralph Lauren's ski campaign.’
Despite these finds, competition in the modelling business gets tougher every year, and agencies are constantly looking for new talent.
‘I see everyone that comes in but few of them are right,’ says Sarah.
‘We take on about 15 girls every year, but very few come through the door.
‘There is one I'd strongly tip for the future who came to me that way, though.
She's called Louise Gander and she's doing brilliantly.
Within her first three weeks of modelling she had done a cover of Harper's Bazaar.’
Despite the glamorous careers she creates for her clients, Sarah herself lives a low-key life in Battersea with her daughters Noelle, 13, and 13-month-old Genevieve.
‘Noelle is 5ft 6in and she's already been approached by another agency,’ she says ruefully.
‘But when I pick her up from school I'm not allowed to look around the other girls because I know her headmistress disapproves…’
Macaulay Culkin
He's the boy no burglar ought to be left alone with.
It's 12-year-old Macaulay Culkin at the star-studded US premiere of Home Alone 2: Lost In New York.
Jane Seymour
His £4 million role inspired a performance of the Macaulay scream from Jane Seymour, children Sean, seven, Katy, nine, and director boyfriend James Keach.
Lloyd Bridges
Actor Lloyd Bridges and wife Dot made it a family day out with his son Beau, wife Juli and children.
The film opens here on December 11.
£1m Constable to save Phillips family's home
By Tim Satchell
ON Thursday the final chapter will be written in the story of Nicky Phillips, when John Constable's painting Harnham Bridge Looking Towards Salisbury Cathedral is expected to fetch £1 million at Sotheby's.
Mr Phillips, godson of the Duke of Edinburgh and grandson of the Queen's close friends Lady Zia and Sir Harold Werner, committed suicide at the age of 43 in May last year because of money worries.
Left 19th century Luton Hoo with its 4,000-acre estate by his grandfather — his father had been killed in the war — Mr Phillips invested heavily in an industrial project on his land.
Now his executors hope that the money raised by the Constable will pay off the last of his debts and enable his wife, Austrian Countess Lucy Czernin and their two children, Edward, 11, and Charlotte, 15, to continue living at the house.
‘It's a tragedy,’ says London dealer Gavin Graham.
‘A few years ago this painting would have been worth about £3 million, now it is a third of that.’
TODAY Lord Tebbit will be at Broadcasting House to meet Sue Lawley and select his Radio 4 Desert Island Discs for broadcast on Sunday week.
Lord Tebbit tells me he has still to agree on his luxury —‘the BBC seem to be rather narrow-minded about some of the luxuries I'd thought of.’
But as for returning from desert island exile, he will have no hesitation in answering the programme's traditional question: Would you try to escape?
He guffaws.
‘What — in the present circumstances?’
John Wells
By Tim Satchell