

Tunnel share offer buried
Clare Stewart
CONFUSED shareholders have been seeking help on the complex question of Eurotunnel warrants and what they are worth.
Not much, is the short answer.
Those hoping to cash in on the warrants issued with their shares may find the free gift is now an expensive invitation to buy.
The warrants, which give holders the right to more shares, have to be converted by November 15, after which they expire.
For every 10 warrants held, you can subscribe to 1.1 Eurotunnel units, at a total cost of £4.57.
But right now Eurotunnel shares can be picked up in the market at around £3.60.
Unless the price soars to beat £4.57 in the next week, it's not worth bothering with the warrants.
You'd do better to buy more shares in the market — if you really want more.
It is not worth bothering trying to sell the warrants either, as they are currently trading at around ¼p each.
Eurotunnel has around 24m warrants in issue and will net over Pounds 100m if they are all converted to shares.
The group is a little coy as to how many have taken advantage of this not very tempting offer.
‘Only a small number’, says a spokesman.
Top performer won't be left on the shelf
Cathy Gunn
SHARES in Bradford-based supermarkets group William Morrison should get a boost this morning.
The firm emerges as Britain's top performing company over the last five years.
It also has an unbroken 20-year record of profits growth.
William Morrison is the star turn of a survey by the Institute of Directors, of Britain's 1,000 biggest companies by sales.
Number 146 by sales value, Morrison's profit performance since 1983 outstrips them all.
Then, it made £9m on sales of £223m.
By 1992 that was Pounds 63m on sales of £1.1bn.
It narrowly beat much bigger rival and fellow supermarkets group J Sainsbury to the top slot, and outshone Tesco.
Others on the five-year shortlist were eliminated because of recent spots on their record.
Transport and trailers group Tiphook saw a recent dip in operating profits and earnings-per-share; construction and engineering firm BM Group hit controversy over its accounting practices, and its chairman resigned because of ill-health; engineering group Harland Simon ran into losses, had its shares suspended, and lost its chairman and finance director.
With competition like the last two, is William Morrison really that great?
‘Yes,’ say City fans of the way it quietly concentrates on its local patch and gets on with the job.
Buyers beware, however: the shares are fairly tightly held.
If they jump for joy today hold off until they sober up again.
Water companies came out of the study well, with the ten privatised companies all on the top 24 profit-makers' list.
Their latest pre-tax profits were between 26%-54% of sales.
So hang on to those shares.
They are also a good hedge against all the political and economic uncertainties raging in Britain this Guy Fawkes week.
Analyst Nigel Hawkins of Hoare Govett has been advising big fund managers to switch out of electricity shares now into water stocks.
(But electricity shares are still a safe investment).
So are gilts, especially if you nip in to them before the next — perhaps imminent — interest rate cut.
Since gilts pay a fixed annual rate of interest, you would be locking in a higher return before the rate cut.
And, as gilt prices rise when interest rates fall, you should also be sure of a capital gain.
Even index-linked stocks should benefit, and if inflation is on the rise again, will also protect your income and capital from its impact.
Some index-linked gilts offer protection well into the next century.
Biggest businesses by sales in the IOD survey are BP, at £32.6bn, and Unilever at £23.2bn, followed by BT, ICI and — so far — British Aerospace.
BAT, British Gas, Grand Metropolitan, Sainsbury, and Hanson (at £7.7bn) complete that top ten.
But the big boys earning the best return on their assets so far are GEC, BTR, Unilever, Marks and Spencer, and Sainsbury.
Margins and jobs are still shrinking in many industries and corporate debt has doubled in the last five years.
The biggest 1,000 British companies now owe a total of £114.4 billion between them.
Groups with sales over £500m have seen total debt rise by 76%; and with recession in full swing are likely to continue scaling back jobs, the survey warns.
IOD Director General Peter Morgan wants an instant 2% interest rate cut to lift the gloom.
Thames profits flow in
PROFITS news from Thames tommorow launch the next wave of water company figures.
Half-time figures are expected to show a 4% rise to £123m and a dividend increase to 6.9p.
Supermarket giant Sainsbury checks out interim figures on Wednesday.
Strong growth helped by last year's rights issue and improved sales should mark up profits 22% to £400m, says UBS Phillips & Drew.
A divi of 2.75p is expected.
Tobacco-to-insurance group BAT reveals third quarter figures on Wednesday.
A much improved performance from its insurance arm Eagle Star should push profits for the nine months over the £1bn mark.
More gloomy news is expected on Thursday from oil group BP.
Third quarter figures are likely to show a further profits fall from Pounds 155m to £130m, with high gearing continuing to pose a problem.
Scottish supermarket group William Low is finding sales squeezed by larger competitors.
Year-end profits are expected to slip from £23m to £20m, with an unchanged divi of 8.4p.
Profits at Unilever are forecast to rise from £575m to around £595m for the third quarter.
Sotheby's plunge
TOP people's auction house, Sotheby's is losing money hand over fist.
Losses in the three months to end-September deepened from $11m (Pounds 7.19m) to $13.2m, despite a $15.6m improvement in auction sales to $88.7m.
Boss Michael L Ainslie blames a profits slide at Acquavella, the modern art joint venture, for the plunge.
Marlene Dietrich's ruby and diamond bracelet, sold last month for $990,000, double its estimated value, and the auction of artwork from Walt Disney's Beauty and the Beast, which raised £1.3m, provided some consolation.
The shares added 13p to 663p.
Sunblest is sliced
A FIERCE price war in the bread market has taken a hefty bite out of profits at Sunblest to Silver Spoon sugar giant Associated British Foods.
Boss Gary Weston, one of the richest men in Britain, reports an 11% dive in full-year profits to £297m.
The recession and a drop in interest rates were also responsible for the dive.
But Canadian Mr Weston is not unduly concerned.
At yesterday's price of 443p, his family stake is worth just over £1.2bn — a lot of dough.
He is also very happy with his British Sugar acquisition.
It chipped in trading profits of £139m in the full year on turnover of Pounds 700m.
The group's cash mountain, has shrunk.
At the year-end, cash totalled £409m, a drop of £61m on the previous 12 months.
The profits were struck after charging £15m for rationalisation and reorganisation.
The total divi is hiked from 13p to 14p with a second interim of 5.5p (4.5p).
The group's investments in Berisford and Hillsdown have been further written down resulting in an extraordinary charge of £31m.
ABF has 20% of Berisford and a tiny 8m shares in Hillsdown.
Tie Rack switches on with flashy figures
Liz Dolan
TIES emblazoned with Santas and Rudolphs with red noses that light up at the touch of a button and seductive pictures of Marilyn Monroe are all part of Tie Rack's campaign strategy for Christmas.
So are silk waistcoats and blazers priced at a knock-down £45.
‘We're concentrating even harder on giving customers what they want this year,’ says boss Nigel McGinley.
He is still cautious about forecasting what will happen over the next two months, but reckons that Tie Rack's low-priced, high value ranges should be just the thing to tempt recession-bashed Christmas shoppers.
The former '80s high flier is already well on the way to digging itself out of the mess it got itself into a few years back.
Draconian cost controls, improved distribution and a clampdown on high-spending franchisees helped turn a near-£1m loss into a better-than-expected £301,000 profit in the six months to August 16.
McGinley rates the 11% growth in like-for-like sales ‘a pretty good performance in the deepest recession I've ever seen.’
Tie Rack opened nine stores and closed four in the first half, and plans to have opened another 14 by the year-end, of which at least five will be in the UK.
The 43 US and 21 Canadian stores are on the mend at last, but McGinley has his sights fixed on expansion in Europe.
The group opened a store in Hong Kong this year, its first in the Far East.
The shares jumped 3½p to 53½p.
Cream off the top
DAIRY Crest moved a step nearer to its float yesterday with the appointment of financial public relations experts Dewe Rogerson.
The company, owned by the Milk Marketing Board, is Britain's biggest cheese maker with Cheddar, Cheshire, Double Gloucester and Clover blended spread on its sales menu.
Last year it made the bulk of the MMB's profits with £45.5m after charges of £14.4m, but before £21m exceptional items.
A float could be on the cards by the end of next year, but before then there could be a few punch-ups with Britain's farmers who provide all the milk to make the cheese.
Pound is bushed
George Campbell
THE pound was wobbling like a jelly yesterday ahead of today's US Presidential election and tomorrow's crucial vote on Maastricht.
Wall Street pundits reckon that Clinton is home which boosted the dollar and sent the pound reeling, down three cents.
The pound also hit a new low against the mark at DM2.40.
Shares were just as jittery.
John Major's fate is now in the balance and if he loses the vote on Europe and resigns, dealers reckon we could see shares in freefall with at least £15bn to £20bn wiped off.
But FT-SE shook off the blues and notched up a 29.5-point leap to 2687.8.
A lot of the activity was lined to dollar-orientated stocks.
Stag Furniture jumped 20p to 95p after an approach.
Euro Disney was also in demand, up 20p at 965p after a rise in foreign visitor receipts.
Boots, ahead of Thursday's interims, added 8p to 480p.
British Steel lost 1p to 46p.
Prudential closed 2½p adrift at 276p after restated profits.
A new accounting technique has almost trebled the 1991 profits to £620m.
Power trio in link up
THE UK electrical retail consortium E & S Retail received a shot in the arm yesterday with a new recruit.
Midlands Electricity is to join Eastern and Southern Electric in a joint venture to create the UK's third largest operation.
Midlands will join on April 1 next year and its 82 outlets will be transferred to the organisation, with Midlands holding 28% of the combine.
The shops sell a wide range of brown and white electrical goods.
Duncan Ross, Southern Electric boss, said the move will ‘strengthen the trio's position in the high street’.
Express Foods in £96m buy out
FOOD, drinks and retail giant GrandMet has sold off the dairy unit of Express Foods in a management buy-out worth £96m.
The deal represents the last part of GrandMet's £550m disposal of Express.
Sir Allen Sheppard, GrandMet chairman, said the disposal leaves him free to focus on the group's main strategy of ‘developing highly branded businesses.’
The buy-out team was led by Express managing director Roger Davenport with backing from outside investors.
Grandmet shares jumped 7p to 419p.
RIVAL Allied Lyons has put its top ranking Bordeaux vineyard, Chateau Latour, up for sale.
It could fetch up to £120m, according to analysts.
The favourite to conclude a deal is Axa Midi, the French insurer.
White Knight joins bid fight over TVS
George Campbell
A WHITE Knight has galloped to the rescue of TVS Entertainment, the southern operator that lost its money-spinning TV franchise in the shake up.
The bidder appeared as soon as the stock market opened, but TVS boss Rudolph Agnew is keeping his identity a secret, although it is tipped to be US firm TCW Capital.
There is already an agreed offer worth £38m from Inter-national Family Entertainments (IFE), the US-based concern run by American TV evangelist Pat Robertson, but shareholders reckon it is not enough.
It comprises a cash alternative worth up to 23p a share and 43p per preference share, but irate shareholders say they would get more money — 46p a share — if the company went into voluntary liquidation.
TVS shares shot ahead by 4½p to 26p on the news and there is speculation that a major battle could be in the wings.
TVS, best known for the Ruth Rendell mysteries, is closing down in December.
It lost its franchise to Meridian Broadcasting, the MAI company run by Labour peer Lord Hollick.
The UK side of TVS is being run down but it has a pile of cash and what could be highly profitable operations in the US via MTM.
IFE, a family channel watched by 54m of the 56m homes with cable TV, is mainly interested in MTM.
It makes programmes such as Hill Street Blues, Lou Grant, and Evening Shade, a joint venture between CBS and Burt Reynolds.
Slow flow at Thames Water
Liz Dolan
THAMES Water took time off from battling with angry metering opponents in Surrey to unveil a disappointing set of halftime figures yesterday.
Shares in London's water provider fell 7p to 485p in a rising stock market after the company announced a profits increase of just 5% to £124m to end-September.
Chief executive Mike Hoffman boasted of no hose-pipe bans again this summer.
But all hosepipe users will now have to cough up £33 a year.
The recession has cut the number of Thames's commercial customers and has virtually killed off profits from selling redundant properties.
But cost controls have helped offset the worst effects of the downturn, says chairman Sir Roy Watts.
The halftime dividend rises 8% to 6.9p.
FT-SE has a high old time
SHARES on the London market rocketed to within a whisker of their all-time peak yesterday on hopes of a further cut in interest rates and victory for the Tories in the Maastricht vote.
The FT-SE 100 soared more than 25 points in early dealings taking the Index smoothly through 2,700 to 2713.4, only 24 points below its record high.
It closed at 2705.6, for a rise of 17.8 points.
Stores, housebuilders, properties and leisure stocks were in the vanguard.
Drugs giants Glaxo, Wellcome and ICI were also in demand.
The pound was in good shape, re-couping some of its losses against the mark and the dollar.
However, the prospect of a sweeping victory for Bill Clinton in the US election hit US-orientated stocks in the UK.
There are fears that as President he would sting them with stiffer tax bills.
But an interim advance of 18.5% boosted Powerscreen to 274p.
Appliance company Kenwood also gained, up 2p at 248p, after a £3.5m acquisition in Hong Kong.
A dividend cut hit TIP Europe, down 1½p at 31p.
Sainsbury, ahead of today's interims, lost 6p at 504p.
Boots, with figures tomorrow, added 8p at 490p.
Sainsbury heading for record £750m
George Campbell
SUPERMARKET giant Sainsbury threw down the gauntlet to M & S, Tesco and Safeway yesterday with another set of sparkling results.
In the depth of the slump, with 3m jobless and a dozens of businesses going bust every day, the retailer has proved that food is still a big item on the nation's menu.
The 477-strong chain, which also owns DIY giant Homebase and Savacentre, has notched up a staggering 20% leap in first-half profits to £391m and the target for the full year is an all-time record of £750m.
It is now firmly established as the UK's largest and most profitable food retailer and when I spoke to multi-millionaire chairman David Sainsbury yesterday he confirmed that he ‘is on the brink of making a full scale onslaught into Scotland’.
A combination of tight controls, major capital spending (it will be £800m this year) and competitive pricing, the group has widened the gap between itself and its rivals.
Even Marks & Spencer stands in awe.
While more ambitious retailers diversified, Sainsbury stuck to its core customer base and it has paid off.
Nothing succeeds like success and it applies perfectly to the Sainsbury family, their 100,000 employees and 60,000 shareholders.
Since 1980, the UK staff have shared a massive £250m in profit sharing hand-outs and this year the figure should be around £50m.
The two top men at the company — John and David, who are great grandsons of the founder — are mega rich.
They have an estimated 343m shares worth £1.7bn and last year the wealthier David received more than £30m in dividends alone.
Sales in the UK supermarkets and Savacentre hypermarkets grew by 9.5% — the highest level for five years — and the group has grabbed an 11% market share, up from 10.2% last time.
If you acquired 100 shares back in 1973 you would have paid £145.
At yesterday's prices that stake would have been worth £7,900.
FROM ONE SMALL SHOP
SAINSBURY is the classic tale of rags to riches.
It began as a little shop selling butter, milk and eggs in London's Drury Lane in 1869 run by John and Mary Sainsbury.
By the 1900s it was an established chain with marble-topped counters.
Today the family is one of the wealthiest in Britain.
Grocery departments were introduced in 1920 and cooked meats in the 1930s.
The first self-service store opened in Croydon in 1952 with the first edge-of-town store appearing in 1972.
The company came to the stock market a year later.
Its value for money technique spread from London to the Midlands and North.
Through the 1970s and 1980s growth was spectacular.
The first Savacentre hypermarket opened in 1977 followed by computer check outs and Homebase in 1981.
When Lord Sainsbury became chairman in 1969, profits were £4.3m.
This year they should top £750m.
BAT's birthday billion
Liz Dolan
TOBACCO and insurance giant BAT Industries has celebrated its 90th birthday by smashing through the £1bn profits barrier in the first nine months of the year.
Profits to end-September soared 56% to £1.027bn after a rip-roaring performance by both the tobacco arm and US insurer, Farmers.
There was even good news from previously sickly UK insurer Eagle Star which is now back on the road to recovery.
Tobacco profits jumped 16%, thanks to the growth in smoking in less well-off parts of the world.
Chain-smoking boss Patrick Sheehy proposed a special toast to the old iron curtain countries where sales of BAT's American brands leapt 200%.
He says that smokers in central Europe and the former Soviet Union are crazy about Lucky Strike, Kent, Pall Mall and Hollywood.
Business is also booming in the Far East, though Hong Kong suffered from higher costs and increased import duties.
Central America and the Caribbean shrugged off lousy economic conditions to boost profits.
South America was also ahead.
On the insurance side, Eagle Star had to cough up £10m in Hurricane Andrew claims while Farmers escaped scot-free.
Sheehy said the 9% halftime dividend boost will be at least matched at the year end.
The shares rose 9p to 915p.
Lull in battle over ITN News
THE battle for the ownership of ITN, the TV news service, took a fresh turn yesterday when the bidding companies decided to extend the offer to November 18.
The £1-a-share bid was due to close at 3pm yesterday, but the Carlton-led group of media bidders decided they needed longer to iron out all the problems.
ITN shareholders are demanding that the four bidders — Carlton, Central TV, LWT and Reuters — should cut their intended stakes from 20% apiece to 15%, with the remaining 40% staying with the current shareholders.
The TV companies that own ITN are also clamouring for a higher bid.
But insiders say the decision to extend the offer probably means the consortium has scented victory.
Double lifeline for home owners trapped in debt
THE Woolwich Building Society has two new plans to help people who cannot move because their homes are now worth less than their mortgages.
The first, Parentline, allows parents to use their own homes as security for children who want to move, but cannot afford to pay off the original loan first.
This plan is useful only for people whose incomes have risen fast enough to meet payments on the new loan and the debt on their old mortgage.
Parents with an existing mortgage are eligible, so long as they still own a large enough chunk of the equity.
The second scheme, the Mobility Mortgage, allows borrowers forced to move for work or family reasons to transfer their existing mortgage, including the negative equity part, to a new home.
But the new property must not be worth more than the old one.
Money men look to the home front
What World markets think of Clinton.
SHARES had a bumpy ride in LONDON yesterday following Bill Clinton's landslide victory.
The FT-SE Index crashed nearly 14 points to 2691.7 but the fall had more to do with the Maastricht jitters than America's new President.
Elsewhere, financial markets gave a muted response to the Democrats' triumph.
The dollar, which rose initially in Asia following news of Clinton's win, closed with a marginal gain in London.
The pound, however, inched ahead a pfennig against the mark to DM2.43.
EUROPEAN stock markets showed barely a flicker of interest in the election result.
The German market took a mini dive of 12-points but the Paris Bourse was fairly firm.
TOKYO was up 211.84; SINGAPORE added 15 and the Hang Seng in HONG KONG was also higher.
SYDNEY also had a minor gain.
European markets, however, are more concerned about problems on their own doorstep — high domestic interest rates and the outlook for the European Community's Maastricht treaty on closer union.
The Bundesbank, not Clinton, will decide Europe's fate.
As the German economy weakens, it will be forced to cut its rates.
‘In many ways, Clinton's victory was the least of the unknowns facing the market,’ said Ian Amstad, economist at Bankers Trust in London.
‘We're still left with a list of uncertainties, from the exact scope of his fiscal plans, to who he appoints to key positions and how protectionist he will be,’ he said.
David's own divi: £30m
Sugar's £113m deal to buy back Amstrad
Clare Stewart
DISENCHANTED millionaire Alan Sugar has unveiled his £113m package to regain control of struggling electronics group Amstrad.
He is offering to buy back shares for 30p each.
Sugar, who with his directors holds a 36% stake in the group, is stumping up £19.5m of his own money for the deal.
Amstrad is lending £50m to the new company Amshold with Lloyds Bank advancing £43.5m.
With Amstrad shares edging ahead to 29p, just 1p below the offer price, analysts were expecting shareholders to hold out for a better offer.
The group came to the market in 1980.
Soaring profits from the sale of lower cost hi-fi systems and home computers helped shares to a peak of 240p in the late 1980s.
Only last year the shares touched 79p — the point at which Sugar sold 43m shares and pocketed £34m.
He has made no secret of his irritation with the City and its ways, and in the light of the group's disastrous plunge to losses of £71m for the year to June, shareholders are being presented with a ‘sell me your shares or shoot yourselves in the foot’ type offer.
In his letter to shareholders Alan Sugar paints a bleak picture of a company that has lost its way by becoming too big.
Amstrad has lost its competitive edge and has become a ‘me too’ competitor, he says.
Public or private, Amstrad will have to cut back as there are no blockbuster products in the pipeline, Sugar warns.
Shareholders could remove Sugar from the board, but Amstrad without Sugar would have no flavour.
Sugar needs support from only 15% of shareholders to win.
If successful, the changeover would take place next January.
Amstrad shares ended at 29p, up 1p.
News Corp doubles up
NEWS Corporation, the parent company of 20th Century Fox in the US and The Times, Sun and Today in the UK, has romped in with bumper first quarter figures.
Net operating profits before abnormal items have more than doubled to A$216.1m (£98m) and gains have been notched up by virtually all businesses from TV to newspapers and magazines.
Newspaper profits in the UK jumped 35% due to higher operating margins.
BSkyB (Sky Television) is firmly in the black and the 50%-owned satellite venture now has weekly revenues of more than £6m, with 80% coming from pay service subscriptions.
The 50%-owned Ansett Transport arm in Australia is now making money.
Shares in News Corp and its UK arm News International have enjoyed a dramatic recovery and more than doubled in the last year.
Low's profits dip despite strong second half finish
SCOTTISH supermarket group William Low saw profits squeezed in the year to September.
In line with forecasts, profits fell from Pounds 23.5m to £20.6m though the dividend remains at 8.40p.
A stronger second half when turnover was up 12% helped the group recover from a disappointing performance in the first six months, said chairman James Millar.
Shares responded with a 15p rise to 239p.
The group, which has 65 stores in Scotland and the north of England, added five stores during the year with a further three due to open next year.
INSURANCE giant Sun Alliance and US group Chubb have completed a reciprocal deal and cut their stakes in each other.
Chubb has sold 47.5m Sun shares to brokers S G Warburg, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs who are placing them on the market.
In a parallel move, Sun is putting 3.4m Chubb shares up for grabs to investors through the same three brokers.
Sun Alliance shares fell 16p to 310p.
BT rings up £1bn with US sell off
George Campbell
TELEPHONE giant BT caught the City on the hop yesterday with a sweet £1bn deal in the US.
It is selling its 20% stake in American cellular communications group McCaw to AT & T and there is speculation that it will use the proceeds to mop up Cellnet.
BT has a 60% stake in Cellnet and observers reckon it could be about to buy the remaining 40% held by Securicor and its sister company Securicor Services.
Their initial £4m stake in Cellnet is now worth £1.15bn, one of the best investments ever made.
Cellnet made a profit of £106m last year and should nudge Pounds 140m this year.
It has 600,000 mobile phone subscribers and business is booming.
BT unveils its interims next Thursday.
They will not be sensational and will precede a full year down from £3.07bn to about £2.6bn.
BT shares climbed 6p to 382p.
The news gave a fillip to the telecommunications sector.
Rival Vodafone rocketed 11p to 389p; Securicor ‘A’ roared to 618p, up 56p, and Security Services scorched to 520p for a jump of 57p.
Cable & Wireless also enjoyed a rally, leaping 9p to 653p following a 16% rise in Hong Kong Telecom's interim figures.
Smart boys who got out
ALAN Sugar is not the first entrepreneur who has quit the City.
Music mogul Richard Branson was increasingly disillusioned with his company's rating in the eyes of the City after coming to the market in 1985.
The group was then worth £25m.
In 1988, Branson announced a £248m buy-out deal to regain private control, valuing shares at 140p each — the same as at flotation.
Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber's Really Useful Group, floated in 1986, felt out of tune as a public company.
The group left the market with a 233p share offer valuing it at Pounds 77.4m.
Market Report
A FRESH wave of confidence swept through the market yesterday and boosted the FT-SE 100 Index back through the psychological 2,700 level.
A favourable vote for the Tories on Maastricht and hopes that the Democrats will revive the US economy triggered a mini buying spree.
FT-SE closed at 2711.1, up 19.4 points.
The pound also shook off the jitters and held its own against the mark and the dollar.
Dealers now hope the Chancellor will slash interest rates again in next week's autumn statement.
Oil giant BP failed to rally and after poor third quarter figures lost 4p at 219p.
Further gloom was spread by Dutch consumer electronics giant Philips which revealed third quarter losses of £56.2m.
Jitters on trade war fear
George Campbell
THE threat of a trade war with the US whipped the cream off the top of the market yesterday.
Shares back-tracked most of the session and at the end of the day the FT-SE 100 closed with a drop of 8.4 points to 2702.7.
But the pound found a safety level and was firm against the mark and the dollar.
Soaps to detergents giant Unilever lost 28p to 1081p after disappointing third-quarter figures which pushed the nine-month result from £1.3bn to £1.4bn.
Mr Kipling to Bisto group RHM was also weaker, down 4p at 258p, following Hanson's decision to back off.
This leaves predator Tomkins, down 2p at 226p, on its own.
Allied Lyons, sweating over the planned sale of French vineyard Chateau Latour, lost 10p at 640p.
Food groups Northern Foods and Argyll were in demand ahead of results next week.
Northern climbed 10p to 285p; Argyll jumped 9p to 361p.
Ram bids for Stag
THE mystery bidder for Nottingham-based Stag Furniture emerged yesterday in the form of bathrooms specialist Spring Ram.
The Wakefield firm has launched an agreed cash offer of 160p a share — more than double the market price — which values Stag at £12.35m.
Stag leapt 39p to 158p; Ram dropped 43p to 113p.
Stag's directors, with nearly 34%, and Framlington Investment Management, which owns 15.6%, have pledged their shares.
Spring Ram, which was one of the brighest stars on the market over the last few years, says the acquisition fits with its aims of becoming Europe's leading maker of home improvement products.
There is a loan note alternative for those who don't want the cash.
Cashpoint
THE interest rate for Save & Prosper credit card holders with Robert Fleming who pay an annual fee is being cut from 1.69% to 1.65% a mont from December 1, but the annual fee is upped from £8 to £10 from Janaury 1.
Nationwide Overseas has cut interest rates on its offshore accounts by 0.9%.
Cheltenham & Gloucester has cut the return on the majority of its investment accounts.
The London Share Account now pays 7.75% gross (5.81% net) and 7.49% gross (5.62% net) on the monthly income account.
Rates on the London Deposit account are unchanged.
Birmingham Midshires has launched a debt counselling service in the form of a practical guide for home owners.
For more details ring: 0902 302249.
Big brewers ready to say cheers
Cathy Gunn
THIS is the season of the Chancellor's Autumn Statement.
It falls on Thursday; and everyone is hoping that interest rates do so, too — by another full point to 7%.
This would help homeowners and businesses alike.
Fingers are crossed that huge spending cuts will spare capital projects (road, rail, London tube, for example) that would create — or at least protect — jobs.
Counting on us all, either to celebrate or drown our sorrows, are the big brewers as they embark on a results reporting season.
A heady mix of interim figures (Whitbread, Allied-Lyons, Scottish & Newcastle) and final results (Bass, Grand Metropolitan) are due between November 18 and early December.
Analyst Patrick Kirkby of Nikko Europe anticipates ‘mild recovery’ in UK and US beer consumption in 1993 and 1994 but is gloomier about prospects for European beer sales.
So he favours ‘stocks which have a large exposure to recovery in the UK, namely Bass and S & N’.
GrandMet has lost a lot of froth since giving two warnings in just a month of less than fizzing profits.
As a result, its shares have dropped enough to tempt buyers back in.
Thanks to its huge IDV wines and spirits division they are now seen as a cheaper way into the international premium-branded booze market than those of rivals Allied-Lyons and Guinness.
So Kirby rates GrandMet's shares a ‘hold’, despite expecting news on December 3 of £925m pre-tax (down from £950m) for the year ended in September.
BT faces cut back
George Campbell
BT's half-year profits are due on Thursday and there will be some gasps when they are unveiled.
In its last full year the telephone giant was accused of raking in too much money after making £3bn — a massive £97 per second.
But because of the recession and redundancy costs, BT will be lucky to make £50 a second in its second quarter.
A big drive to trim the staff will cost £300m in redundancies.
But don't hang up on the shares because I reckon they could hit Pounds 4 by Christmas.
BAA flies high
Clare Stewart
INCREASING passenger numbers and lower redundancy costs will lift interim figures from airports group BAA today.
A 46% rise for BAA's profits to £220m is forecast with the dividend likely to go up 13% to 6.5p.
Anglian Water reports interims tomorrow, with a 10% profits rise to £101m expected.
Northumbrian Water on Thursday promises profits up from £31m to £39m.
Insurance groups reporting include General Accident with nine-month losses of £25m, against last year's losses of £128.7m, but with third quarter results showing a healthier trend.
Royal Insurance also looks rosier, with third quarter losses halved at £105m.
Increased exports of banknotes should have helped printer De La Rue boost halfway figures, up by a third to £41m.
Streamlined BAA soars to £200m
AIRPORT giant BAA, owner of Heathrow and Gatwick, continues on its upward flightpath.
The average passenger spent 3% less time at the airports but the numbers are 4m ahead at 44m in the half year to September.
This pushed profits from £151m to £200m.
The workforce has been slashed by 2,000 and boss Sir John Egan, the man who used to run Jaguar, says that productivity per head has leapt 30%.
The shares took a bit of a knock due to profit-taking but are well worth holding ahead of major expansions.
By 1996, the group plans to inject £85m and double its airport retailing space.
This year it is pinning its hopes on an 8% uplift in passenger growth to around the 82m mark.
Heathrow is rapidly turning into a ‘hub and spoke’ airport with international passengers using it to change planes for other destinations.
City expects reckon full-year profits will emerge at around the Pounds 280m level, against £192m last time.
‘There will not be a rights issue,’ said a spokesman, ‘because we generate a lot of cash’.
The shares slipped 13p to 745p, 35p below their all-time high.
Nervous dealers hang back
SHARES were on ice ahead of the Chancellor's Autumn statement on Thursday.
Nervous selling hit FT-SE and it slipped more than 7 points.
Hopes are high that the Government will kick-start the economy with a two-point cut in rates to 6%.
But the CBI reckons it will trigger a further fall in the pound.
Mr Kipling-cakes-to-Bisto-giant RHM notched up a penny gain to 258p following speculation that Tomkins now has more than 20%.
Boots gained 5p to 497p ahead of Thursday's figures.
Rentokil has expanded its tropical plants business with a £6.5m deal in the US.
The shares lost a penny to 194p.
A surge in demand for parachutes boosted Wardle Storeys profits by 13% to £9.2m.
Shares closed at 414p, down 3p.
General Accident, ahead of third quarter results today, lost 16p to 532p.
Unigate, with interims tomorrow, added 10p to 297p.
But trade war fears continued to undermine brewers with Guinness down 6p to 510p.
Ratners, seen as a recovery play, gained 2p to 18½p.
Water shares, firm for most of the day, lost ground toward the close on fears that today's Ofwat measures on prices may rock the boat again.
Mopping up extra 124%
Liz Dolan
DOOR-to-door brooms and buckets seller Betterware is cleaning up in the recession.
Now that high streets are deserted, the trick is to grab customers at home.
Most can still afford a new potato peeler or washing up bowl if someone bothers to deliver them.
And there is no shortage nowadays of people willing to slog round the streets delivering Betterware catalogues to earn a few quid.
A 50% increase in the sales team to 9,000 helped spark a 124% profits surge to £6.3m in the six months to September 12.
A bigger, brighter catalogue boosted the average customer spending from £7 to £8, says boss Andrew Cohen.
‘So, while demand slumps for other consumer products, we're actually selling more.’
Betterware France is going great guns at the end of its first year.
Average spend is £13, and one in four deliveries results in a sale (compared with one in five over here).
Now Betterware plans to set up shop elsewhere in Europe, with Spain the likely first stop.
The shares added 3p to 171p after a 47% hike in the half-time divi to 0.5p — especially good news for the Cohen family, who between them hold more than 60% of the shares.
Big Mac fans eat more but McDonald's dives
George Campbell
THE UK recession has taken a giant bite out of McDonalds, the American burger chain.
Although Britain's hungry kids munched their way through enough Big Macs and French fries to boost turnover by 8% to £480m, profits at the 431-strong outfit crashed 44% to only £19m last year.
Andrew Taylor, vice-president, lays the blame squarely on the slump and big rent increases.
Many of the outlets in the UK are franchised and on short-term leases where rents have increased sharply.
The company also opened 50 new outlets, of which about 40 are expensive drive-through restaurants.
The latter are booming, says Taylor, but the town centre outlets have been hit hard.
However, Big Mac is poised to bounce back.
The group has launched a huge promotional campaign involving free meal vouchers and this is expected to boost sales to between £550m and £600m this year.
About 85 new restaurants will be opened in the next two years to bring the total to well over 500.
McDonalds was launched in the UK in 1974 and since then has invested £750m.
New Virgin Music blow hits shares
TOP music man Simon Draper is quitting Virgin Music just seven months after he and co-founder Richard Branson sold it to Thorn EMI for £560m.
Thorn confirmed Draper's resignation yesterday, but denied it was a major problem as ‘he's been part time for years.’
But the City, already nervous about the hefty price Thorn paid for Virgin just before the industry down turn — and by talk that 160 people have quit Virgin since the sale — marked Thorn's shares another 9p lower to 808p.
Try again, Sir John
TROUBLE-shooter Sir John Harvey Jones is back on TV tonight (BBC2 9.45pm) and also back in the soup.
He re-visits the Copella fruit juice farm in Suffolk, the business he told the owners to sell a year ago because they had no chance of making money.
They sold out to Taunton Cider — but ignored the former ICI boss's advice and bought it back again earlier this year.
Sports car maker Morgan also reversed a number of Sir John's decisions — and have doubled their profits.
‘Arrest’ leak probe
AN inquiry is underway at the Serious Fraud Office following a leak suggesting that former boxer George Walker was about to be arrested.
It is understood that a top fraud officer has been carpeted for leaking information.
A spokesman said last night: ‘We really can't discuss this.
We would certainly never inform anyone when we were likely to make an arrest’.
Police were called into leisure giant Brent Walker last year when directors alleged that £12.5m ‘went missing’ from the group.
Consumers pay off £60m debts
BLACK Wednesday put the boot into any faint hopes of consumer revival in September.
The collapsing pound and frightening, if temporary, surge in lending rates to 15%, sent people flocking to pay off credit-card bills.
Figures out yesterday from the Government's Central Statistical Office show that banks took in £60m more in repayments than they lent out.
The news took City experts by surprise.
They had expected around £30m.
Figures from consumer credit group, Infolink, confirmed government findings.
And boss Brian Bailey warns that credit applications continued to fall last month too.
Hurricane hits Gen Accident
George Campbell
HURRICANE Andrew, the storm that devastated Florida has blown a gaping hole in Perth-based insurance giant General Accident.
The group plunged £37m into the red in the nine months to September, with most of the damage caused by insurance claims to cover the hurricane.
This compares with a profit of over £133m in the corresponding period.
But boss Nelson Robertson sees recovery ahead.
A hike in premiums and a tight grip on costs are reaping rewards.
‘But for the hurricane we would have a third quarter profit of almost £22m and a return to profits in the nine months,’ says Robertson.
UK underwriting is on the mend and results from Canada and the Pacific are ‘excellent’ he says.
Meanwile, the loss on the group's 400-strong estate agents chain is falling.
And motor account losses fell from £85m to around £50m.
The homeowners side, again due to higher premiums, reported a plunge in the deficit from £34.5m to only £1.3m.
Shares did well, up again yesterday to 555p, a whisker below their peak of 558p.
Crunch time for United Biscuits
FOOD giant United Biscuits, famous for McVities, KP and Keebler, has gobbled up a major concern in Australia.
It has snapped up CCA Snacks from Coca-Cola Amatil for £198m and will partly fund the acquisition with an £80m share placement.
A cookie war on both sides of the Atlantic has kept UB on its toes and it will have to move a bit quicker if it wants to keep its investors satisfied.
Shares have slipped back from a high of 440p and a lot of the blame lies with its US offshoot Keebler.
The latter was mainly responsible for a plunge in half-year profits from £84.4m to £70m and analysts have downgraded the full-year figures on the back of it.
They expect the year-end result to crash from £211m to about £160m to £170m.
The shares were on the slide again yesterday, down 7p at 339p.
Car parts firm T&N is buying Goetz, a privately owned German concern for £104m.
The company is based near Cologne and is Europe's largest piston ring manufacturer with a turnover of £375m and plants in the US.
T&N boss Colin Hope said the deal offers ‘a strong German base and enhanced US operations’.
The shares added 7p to 142p.
Nat Express calms price war jitters
Liz Dolan
ROY McEnhill, boss of coach giant National Express, yesterday slammed talk that aggressive price-cutting by British Rail was battering his profits.
Recent fare-slashing moves by BR include: Super Apex tickets to Glasgow and Edinburgh effectively as cheap as National's own; Boots' two-for-the-price-of-one rail ticket offer; and plans to extend cheap Apex fares to all routes.
McEnhill said National normally undercut BR prices by 30%.
The Boots offer was nothing new and Apex fares were not a problem, though Super Apex was possibly ‘a different matter’.
But National, which is due to join the stockmarket next month, never suffers from leaves on the line, says McEnhill, and BR's privatisation should force rail fares higher and speed the closure of routes.
He was speaking at the publication of National's ‘pathfinder prospectus’ which forecasts a turnaround from last year's £1.24m loss to £6.5m profits to end December.
The share price will be unveiled on November 24, the offer for sale closes on December 1 and dealings start on December 10.
National's £50m to £90m price tag will make McEnhill and finance director Adam Mills paper millionaires worth somewhere between £5m and £9m apiece.
A quarter of the shares are on offer to the public.
Around 1,000 customers have already rung the share information line on 0800 800434.
Rate cut booster
SPECULATION of a fresh cut in the cost of borrowing gave shares a shot in the arm yesterday.
A cut of 1% to 7% could be on the cards in tomorrow's autumn statement and this pushed the FT-SE 100 Index ahead by over 19 points to 2714.6.
The pound, however, was still on the rack.
Water shares spurted on the back of a report by the industry watchdog, Ofwat.
Top analysts gave it the thumbs up and prices took off.
South West and Thames Water breached 500p and others enjoyed double-digit gains.
Meanwhile, a 9% profits leap by Anglian Water to over £100m pushed the price to 477p, up 10p.
Merchant bank Warburg also lost ground, down 45p to 479p after a 44% slump in half-year profits to £51m.
Shares in Cabra Estates, owners of Chelsea and Fulham football grounds, were suspended at 2p following negotiations with the Midland.
Housing tax reform plea
TONY Fitzsimons, the boss of Bristol and West Building Society, is urging the Government for a radical change in mortgage tax relief to boost housing.
Give all the tax relief on mortgage interest for the next five years as a lump sum in the 1993–94 tax year, he says, to ‘boost consumer confidence’.
Dealers sit tight
SHARES were in limbo yesterday ahead of the Chancellor's autumn statement due this afternoon.
The FT-SE 100 Index lost most of Tuesday's 19-point gain and at the end of the session was 17 points adrift at 2696.8.
Dealers on the foreign exchange markets were also hedging their bets and the pound was also on ice.
But water shares bucked the trend and, as usual, were a haven in times of trouble.
Most enjoyed good rises, helped by Ofwat's favourable report the other day.
Northumbrian Water, ahead of today's figures, jumped 19p to 562p.
BT, ahead of its interim results today, plateaued at 373p.
Massive redundancy provisions are expected to dent the figures which could be £0.6bn adrift at £1bn.
A 58% profit setback and 70% off the divi, sent William Cook down 8p to 88p.
Forecast of increased losses hit Taylor Woodrow, 8p adrift at 67p.
Hambros also lost ground, down 11p at 233p, after a 34% drop in interim figures.
Cables giant nets £480m
TELECOMS giant Cable & Wireless has announced a £500m deal with Canada's BCE.
The latter will buy a 20% stake in C&W's 'phone arm Mercury for £480m with C&W reciprocating with a £30m investment in their cable and TV interests.
Cable & wireless shares jumped 24p to 673p.
How £100 became £7,900
George Campbell
MY phone has been red hot this week with calls from Sainsbury investors.
They have found it hard to believe that 100 shares bought in 1973 for £145 are now worth nearly £7,900.
But the table here speaks for itself.
The supermarket giant has had no fewer than four scrip issues in this period and on each occasion the number of shares held has effectively doubled.
The value of the original investment, therefore, has swollen from £145 to £7,881.
This equates to compound growth per annum of 23.4%.
The food retailer unveiled its half year results last Wednesday.
Profits jumped 20% to £391m and the forecast for the full year is a leap from £632m to around £735m to £740m.
Home owners fear rate cuts will be short-lived
George Campbell
HOME owners are far from convinced that the cost of borrowing will stay low.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is about to announce a further cut in base rates, but most people fear they are just as likely to go up again in the New Year, according to a new survey.
Pearl Assurance, the third biggest insurance company after the giant Prudential, with £9bn of reserves, asked home owners and tenants what they thought would happen to bank rates in the next few months.
A staggering 52% — mostly females — said they expect rates to be higher in 12 months' time with a consequent knock-on effect on mortgages.
This is making people hesitate to go out and spend money.
The same survey, looking at a three-month period, told a different story.
Seventy per cent then thought bank base rates would either fall or plateau.
The Chancellor's Autumn statement, due between 3.30 and 4pm today, is likely to signal a fresh cut in base rates to 7% or even 6%.
The Pearl findings coincide with the latest Home Owners Confidence Monitor unveiled by the Britannia Building Society.
Its autumn survey says that home owners feel that prices have now bottomed out, even though activity has fallen off significantly since the summer.
The majority believe that it is up to the Government to kick-start the housing market again.
But a rates cut could hit the pound and push up inflation — the main worry for Bank of England Governor Robin Leigh-Pemberton.
Luxury items save Dunhill
Liz Dolan
DUNHILL's string of luxury brands, ranging from Montblanc pens and top tailor Hackett, to French clothes and perfume houses, Chloe and Karl Lagerfeld, helped keep consumer blues at bay in the first half to end-September.
Half-time profits actually rose slightly from £30.1m to Pounds 30.8m, despite the interest income on Dunhill's cash pile falling by £2.1m to £8.3m after lower interest rates and acquisition costs.
Boss Lord Douro said that brand development was the key.
Both Lagerfeld, bought in June for a reputed £16m, and Chloe held successful fashion shows in Paris recently.
Alfred Dunhill opened shops in Geneva and Madrid, and Hackett has started trading at its new flagship store in Sloane Street, London.
Shareholders get a 2.9p (2.75p) dividend.
The shares slipped 9p to 384p.
Threat to pit jobs hits the Barnsley
THE forthcoming pit closures will mean an extra headache for Barnsley Building Society, whose borrowers have already been hard-hit by earlier closures in the '80s.
The area's only three remaining pits, Grimethorpe, Houghton Main and Markham Main, are all on the list of the 10 most likely to close.
The jobs of around a tenth of Barnsley's 7,000 borrowers are under threat.
Worst affected will be those who upped borrowings when miners' earnings hit a peak in the early 80s.
Average mortgages are thought to be Pounds 25,000.
But chief executive David Roebuck reckons the worst has already happened in South Yorkshire.
The real pain is likely to be in the Midlands.
The society's rates drop by 0.7% to 9.29% on December 1.
Regalian flattened
REGALIAN has yet to sell one of the 20 luxury flats in the block that infuriated close neighbour Prince Charles a couple of years back — even after slashing the combined price from £90m to £65m.
Now the whole block in Kensington Palace Gardens, London, is up for sale for just £57.5m.
This, plus the cost of carrying other unsold flats, helped turn profits of £6.4m into a £21.5m loss in the six months to end-September.
Provisions totalling nearly £25m did most of the damage.
But recent price cuts have sparked sales and debts have halved to Pounds 66m.
EC bans link
A LINK-up between Gillette and Wilkinson Sword has been axed by the European Commission.
The EEC has applied competition rules and has ordered Gillette to dispose of its 22% stake in Eemland, the parent of Wilkinson Sword.
We need an antibiotic not a cough medicine
By George Campbell, City Editor
THE Chancellor's strategy for growth received a mixed reaction in the City last night.
The City's top gurus reckon that the new package will certainly set shares alight when the stock market opens this morning but there are doubts as to whether it will continue to keep share prices riding high.
All the measures proposed by Mr Lamont to pull the UK out of the slump — particularly on housing, construction, cars and company tax incentives — are bang on target but there is a strong suspicion that the billions he has pumped in may not be quite enough.
One dealer summed it up adequately.
‘The Chancellor has delivered cough medicine.
But what the patient needs is a strong antibiotic’.
The consensus, however, is that we are moving in the right direction and the further 1% cut in base rates and its knock-on effect on mortgages is the best tonic the country could get.
The UK now has the lowest rates in Europe and inflation is rock bottom.
But shares have been reflecting the new-found confidence for some time.
While the Chancellor was delivering his speech, prices were heading upwards and the FT-SE 100 was nearing its all-time peak of 2737.8.
The tight control on public sector pay is crucial and underlines the fact that the Government intends to practise what it preaches.
My own opinion, however, is that now that the returns on bank savings have plummeted, investors will be searching desperately for new avenues of investment and shares and property will certainly be high on the list.
The CBI gave the new moves a warm welcome.
It said that Lamont had responded to many of its suggestions such as improved investment allowances and export credit arrangements.
This will benefit business directly, as will the abolition of the car tax.
The jobless figure, which has hit nearly 2.8m, should soon be tailing off.
Business failures, which have rocketed to a staggering 76 a day, should also decline.
But you cannot please everyone.
David Kern, NatWest's chief economist, lashed out at the Government for a ‘lack of a coherent framework for monetary policy’.
He said it was disappointing that the Government had not made clear that it will be prepared to stimulate monetary growth by underfunding the Budget deficit.
Paul Walton, of James Capel, complained that the Chancellor did not make big enough increases in spending in the right areas.
‘We thought it was a damp squib.
The stock market will continue to rise but there will be problems next year.
‘There will be an overshoot of about £5bn on the public sector borrowing requirement and this will have to be paid for,’ he said.
Justin Silvertown, UK economist at Daiwa said: ‘The 1% rate cut is highly welcome and broadly in line with expectations.
The growth forecasts slightly modest at 1% and the PSBR is slightly up.
If you add up all the growth measures it is not terribly exciting.’
Andrew Smith, economist at Credit Lyonnais said: ‘The overall market view is that package was in line with expectations.
Since the Chancellor is not playing with taxes there isn't much for the consumer.
‘He has confirmed for business that he wants to promote growth.
The medium to long term outlook is good.
‘The package will get the headlines because he has not done anything nasty.’
What the money men thought of it
THE measures should be enough to push shares to an all-time high.
We now have the lowest rates in Europe and rock bottom inflation.
The Chancellor had a narrow tightrope to walk and he managed to please a variety of people.
It now depends whether housing and industry will take the reins.
The increase in capital allowances is very welcome.
Edmond Warner, Barings
THE City got what it wanted with a 1% cut in interest rates.
This will give a further boost to the economy.
Shoppers will have more in their pockets and it will not cost companies vast sums to borrow for expansion.
Shares should continue to rise.
My worry is that the clamp on public sector pay rises may spark a winter of discontent.
Bob Buckland of NatWest
ALL good news, but I fear that taxes may have to go up next year if the Chancellor misses his projected £244.5bn target on spending.
Shares are near to their record high for the year and could go further.
Paul Turnbull, Smith New Court
BANG on target to stimulate the economy.
It is aimed at specific areas and should get things moving.
The incentives for industry and tax changes are also good news.
All told, business confidence should return next year.
It is a £4bn to £5bn injection that should help.
Simon Knapp, BZW
MR Lamont gets full marks for presentation but overall it won't change a lot of projections for recovery.
It will certainly stabilise affairs but will not galvanise the nation into action.
Kevin Gardiner, Warburgs
Car shares swing into top gear
Clare Stewart
CAR distributors were the main winners in the Chancellor's autumn handout as a morning after the night before mood left the rest of the market flat.
Reversing its gains of Thursday, the FT-SE slipped back 28.9 to 2697.5 as profit taking dominated at the end of the account.
The removal of tax on new cars boosted distributors Evans Halshaw 19p to 208p, with Jessups adding 8p to 81p and Gowrings ahead 4p to 43p.
Profit taking among construction groups wiped out the gains made in the wake of the Chancellor's speech.
Redland slipped 11p to 386p and McAlpine dropped 15p to 120p.
But BICC, helped by the go-ahead for the Jubilee Line, ended 13p higher at 276p.
Plastics group Plysu, still suffering after the resignation of boss Richard Gordon, fell 9p to 234p.
Engineering group Wheway dipped 5p to 7p after a profits warning.
Similar worries at architects YRM to fall 11p to 29p.
Profits go down drain
WATER treatment group Bimec is hovering near the plug-hole after plunging to interim losses of £7.9m.
A 30% fall in turnover is blamed together with £3.7m of exceptional costs after closures and reorganisation.
Warning of the group's problems came in August when it cancelled its dividend.
Chairman Sam Smith has since resigned as have three non-executive directors.
New boss Roy Barber is refocusing the group on its core water and waste treatment activities.
The shares were unchanged at 7½p.
GPG, Ron Brierley's investment company, suspended at 23p in December 1990 after the sale of the group's main business, is to regain its stock market listing.
Profits in the nine months to June 1992 were £3.1m.
Cashpoint
NEW mortgage rates include 8.5% from the Yorkshire Building Society, Abbey National and the West Bromwich Building Society.
HEALTHCHEQUE is a new income protection scheme from the Life Association of Scotland, covering wage earners the self-employed and housewives.
An equity-based pension scheme with a built in protection against inflation has been launched by Legal & General, offering investors the benefits of increases in the FTSE 100 or the changes in the Retail Price Index whichever is the greater.
A BONUS payment for investments left untouched for a year is on offer from Birmingham Midshires Building Society.
A 0.5% bonus is offered to top up savings rates.
Hammer blow for Maxwell
By George Campbell, City Editor
THE pace is hotting up at Sotheby's, the world's top auction house.
The personal wine collection of fraudster Robert Maxwell goes under the hammer on Wednesday and 237 cases of rare wines should fetch over Pounds 40,000.
Coming up for sale on Thursday is John Constable's Harnham Bridge Looking Towards Salisbury Cathedral, with a price tag of £1m plus eight magnificent water colours by Turner which are pitched at about £365,000.
In Geneva, Europe's rich will congregate tomorrow to bid for the jewellery and precious objects belonging to the Princess of Thurn und Taxis of Bavaria.
Highlight is a bejewelled Frederick the Great snuff box (circa 1760) worth £1m.
If you are a gold fanatic, keep a look out for Sotheby's mountain of coins, ingots and doubloons lifted from a shipwreck off Montevideo, Uruguay.
The hoard is valued around £1.9m and makes Humphrey Bogart's Treasure of The Sierra Madre look paltry.
Prices of individual coins start at £650.
A spokesman said: ‘Some are in mint condition, carried across the Andes by mule train 250 years ago.’
If you can't afford that, buy Sotheby's A shares — a bargain at Pounds 7 each.
Insurer takes the risk out of Russian empires
By Cathy Gunn in the City
BRITISH companies seeking new markets get a helping hand today for any projects they fancy setting up in Russia.
With our own economy still struggling along, anything that can boost overseas ventures for UK groups is welcome news.
And Russia is, after all, where the first English joint-stock company, of the sort whose shares we would recognise on the market today, got off the ground.
It was the Muscovy Company, formed by enterprising English merchants in the year 1554 to trade with the country then ruled by Tzar Ivan the Terrible.
It marked the beginning of the London Stock Exchange and an international trading boom for Britain.
Let's hope this new move has a similar effect.
American insurers already reckon there is a $40bn (about £26bn) market for foreign investors brave enough to risk their capital in the old Soviet Union.
This neatly matches the region's external debt and, says David Forrest — underwriting director of the London-based political risk insurer EIGA —‘we have to encourage investors to give it the ability to earn the foreign exchange to repay that debt.’
But UK firms will have to be quick off the mark to benefit.
The new scheme offered from today by EIGA is open to any European company or EC subsidiary of a foreign firm aiming to build up a Russian business empire.
The plan will protect EC-based foreign investors in Russia from political upheavals damaging their business.
It will cover anything from sudden nationalisation to just being deprived of the use of their assets, or a block on repatriating dividends.
EIGA reckons its plan will appeal to UK and European businesses ranging from hoteliers trying to set up in Moscow to oil giants eyeing the vast energy resources of Kazakhsthan.
Normally a company buying insurance against political upheavals, nationalisation or blocks on the repatriation of dividends, is required by its insurer to keep this cover a dark secret from the government of the country in question.
Otherwise it might decide to nationalise the foreign firm's assets on its soil knowing that the company will just be able to claim the compensation anyway.
But, in a ground-breaking move, EIGA has struck a deal that involves the Russian Agency for International Cooperation and Development giving companies buying the cover a letter promising not to pounce.
While this does not rule out the risk of a change of regime there, it does cut down the danger of a simple change of heart by the existing government.
And that means that the insurance premiums should be cheaper — at between 2% and 3% of the capital at risk — than the 3%-plus normally charged by private political risk providers.
EIGA says its plan plugs big gaps in the cover available from EC government agencies for European companies seeking a toe-hold in this potentially attractive and massive new market.
At the moment seven of the 12 EC member countries do not offer their exporters any protection in the old Soviet Union, particularly for short-term projects.
Power giants fading
By Clare Stewart
Laundering is piling up
MONEY laundering in the UK is on the increase, says the Bank of England.
There were 4,000 reports to the National Criminal Intelligence Service last year and in the last five years over £500,000 in cash has been seized.
The process involves concealing proceeds of criminal activity through apparently legitimate channels.
The Bank of England's quarterly bulletin says 5% of disclosures from financial institutions led to prosecutions.
Courts have the power to confiscate cash — usually £10,000 and upwards — if there is a link with drugs trafficking.
It's a Virgin blockbuster
VIRGIN is teaming up with Blockbuster International to set up a chain of international mega-stores.
The new group will sell music and video goods in the US, Australia and Europe.
A Virgin-Blockbuster joint-venture company will own Virgin Retail's stakes in the 15 shops including the flagship Champs Elysees, Paris outlet.
Virgin will take 25% of US stores and a 50% stake in Australian business, with Blockbuster taking the remaining equity.
The venture does not include Britain and Japan.
Virgin boss Richard Branson said: ‘Brand strength will ensure success.’
Steel is hit by £51m loss in dumping row
George Campbell
A DISASTROUS set of results sent British Steel shares into freefall yesterday.
They dived from 49p to an all-time low of 40p as investors voted with their feet.
Fears are now rife that the price could plunge well below 30p by the end of the year.
A dramatic 40% slump in steel prices amid a massive dumping campaign has sent BS spiralling into the red.
Its half year loss emerges at £51m and the figure could easily top £250m by the year-end.
This compares with a first-half profit of £19m and a loss of £55m in 1991–92.
The interim dividend has been axed and the final is also in jeopardy.
Sir Alistair Frame, who took over as chairman from Sir Bob Scholey earlier this year, yesterday took a swipe at state subsidies to European rivals.
He said that market forces were being ‘inhibited by state ownership and government support for producers whose viability was doubtful.’
He called for robust measures against the mainly Japanese producers who dump steel into the EEC.
But observers reckon that it will take at least three years to resolve the situation and by then BS could be virtually bust.
The workforce has been slashed by over 200,000 in the last five years.
Further cuts in the last six months — primarily from the closure of Ravenscraig — have reduced manning levels to about 42,000.
Three years ago it was the world's most profitable producer with profits of £733m.
It was privatised in 1988 when shares were floated at 125p.
They closed down 3p at 46½p.
Fear sparks a new battering
THE new trading account got off to a lousy start with further bloodshed on the back of last week's Autumn statement.
The FT-SE 100 took a fresh battering and at the close £4bn had been wiped off stock values.
Concerns are Government funding, the GATT talks and continuing recession.
A further cut in base rates to 6% is now likely to stay on ice till next year.
The pound lost over two cents against the dollar at $1.52 and was down against the mark.
Electricity shares bucked the trend and rallied, but water sprang a few leaks.
EuroDisney, ahead of Thursday's figures, was in a spin.
The market expects net losses since the opening to be around FF300m (about £37.5m).
Shares shed 58p at 915p.
Nabisco gobbled up
KRAFT General Foods has snapped up the US and Canadian businesses of breakfast cereal giant R J R Nabisco.
Nabisco's ready-to-eat cereal lines include Shredded Wheat and Shreddies.
Philip Morris, which owns Kraft, said the subsidiary will incorporate the Nabisco lines into its own breakfast food array.
The acquisition, which includes a number of international trade marks, is subject to regulatory approval in the US and Canada.
Kingfisher swoops in
KINGFISHER, the retail giant which owns Woolworth, B & Q and Comet is expanding again on the high street.
It is grabbing a share of Britain's £12bn office equipment market via a joint-venture with US group Staples.
A handful of new outlets will be launched next year and if successful, will lead to an even bigger chain.
The pilot scheme will be known as Staples Office Superstores.
Staples has 168 outlets throughout the American Northeast, southern California and central Florida.
THE unbundling of high street group Storehouse got underway yesterday.
It completed the sale of its US Habitat business — Conran Stores Inc — for an undisclosed sum.
The buyer is MTLG  Acqquisition Corp, owned by Marvin Traub, the former boss at Bloomingdales.
Industry giants give Major slow handclap
By George Campbell
JOHN Major's tub-thumping speech at the Guildhall on Monday night went down in the City like a lead balloon.
It smacked of deja vu.
The stock market was in the doldrums at the close yesterday with the FT-SE 100 Index static.
Britain's captains of industry, or at least the handful I spoke to, welcomed the Prime Minister's Dunkirk spirit to kick-start the economy and end the slump but most of the UK's industrial giants have already slashed costs and wages to the bone.
‘He has closed the stable door after the horse has bolted,’ said one dealer.
‘The brakes were slammed on mega boardroom pay awards early this year.’
Multi-millionaire Richard Branson agreed with the move to curb pay but he reckons that this is a negative avenue and a more positive move would be for big UK companies with cash (the likes of Hanson, GEC, etc) to start splashing it about.
Virgin's boss, a millionaire before he was 21, stressed that the multi-nationals should stop laying people off and inject some risk capital into the country.
‘It's jobs, jobs, jobs that matter,’ he said.
‘The big companies should take their cash out of the bank and invest it.
It would boost employment and get things moving.’
Trouble-shooter John Harvey-Jones said: ‘We must re-build our manufacturing base.
It has been severely eroded under Mrs Thatcher and John Major and the result is visible in the slump’.
But one top economist viewed the Government's decision to spotlight manufacturing as another U-turn.
Sir Michael Bishop, chief at Channel 4, said he thought that Mr Major gave a very timely reminder that directors, more than anyone else, have to set an example on pay restraint.
‘Directors should take the rough with the smooth,’ he said.
‘They should be rewarded when things are going well but should take a financial hit when the chips are down.’
Pit jobs can be saved
IT is not too late to save thousands of miners' jobs, says John Baker, boss of British Coal's biggest customer National Power.
But, he admitted yesterday that there were only two ways to save the pits — government subsidies or higher electricity prices.
That means either taxpayers or consumers will have to cough up the cash to make up the difference between expensive British coal and cheaper foreign coal.
As Britain's largest electricity maker, NatPower has to shop around for the cheapest fuel available.
It has to keep its own prices down so that it can compete with other major electricity suppliers.
They include Powergen, Nuclear Electric and French and Scottish generating companies, who are also battling for contracts with the regional electricity companies.
Cost savings, including 1900 job losses, helped boost NatPower's profits by 10% to £201m in the first half to September 27.
But the deepening slump meant a first-time fall in sales.
Demand from industry was 2% lower.
‘That's much worse than it sounds, because, traditionally, industrial demand always grows,’ a spokesman said.
The shares added 2p to 270p after a 10% dividend rise to 3.3p.
Property divi slide
GREAT Portland Estates boss Richard Peskin is warning shareholders to brace themselves for a dividend cut next year.
But the half-time divi is held at 3.4p and, barring a disaster, the year end payout will be a same-again 10p, he said.
Profits in the six months to end-September slipped to £16.24m from £17.52m after the interest bill soared to £20.4m (Pounds 12.84m).
Peskin has been buying property at rock-bottom prices ahead of recovery.
But he is the optimist who doubled his stake in March.
Yesterday the shares fell to 124p, 16p less than he paid for them.
He says that second-half profits will be ‘broadly similar’ to the first half, even though there were no real signs of an upturn in the property market.
Rival hits Rolls
FEARS of cutbacks on airline parts could dent profits at giant Rolls-Royce.
Its shares fell 8p to 101p after US aerospace group United Technologies issued a profit warning due to poor sales at Pratt & Whitney, a direct competitor to RR.
Concern over airline investment could hit forecasts for R-R growth, say analysts.
FT-SE stands still as confidence flags
BUYERS voted with their feet again yesterday after the Prime Minister's speech failed to boost confidence.
The FT-SE 100 Index closed barely changed at 2679.2, clobbered by a further leap in government borrowing and another stiff hike in the jobless figure.
The public sector borrowing requirement for October was £1.78bn, indicating that the gap between revenues and spending is not narrowing.
PSBR for the first seven months hit £20.2bn, up from £8.7bn previously.
Meanwhile, the number of people out of work for more than a year rose by 50,000 in the three months to October.
The total jobless for more than 12 months stands at 956,000, a four-and-a-half year high.
The pound gained against the mark and lost a cent against the dollar.
Disappointing interims knocked British Airways to 248p, down 23p.
Euro Disney, ahead of results tomorrow, lost 35p at 883p.
Capital Radio shed 3p to 132p.
Kwik Save, with figures today, jumped 12p to 750p.
Costain, up 3p at 31p, has sold its 7.5m shares in Great Portland.
Vosper prospers
WARSHIP builder Vosper Thorneycroft has shrugged off peace dividend worries with vigorous exports and a 17% leap in interim profits to £8.3m.
Earnings jumped 15% to 17.8p.
The interim dividend is 4.7p.
Managing director Martin Jay says the company has an order book worth £700m against £30m a year ago, of which only 5% is Ministry of Defence related.
He said that Vosper is thriving in the Middle East with work on a naval base in Kuwait and a warship for Oman.
The shares climbed 9p to 401p.
Fast foods balance price war
Liz Dolan
BUSY housewives buying pizzas and curries to chuck in the microwave saved Hazelwood Foods from a mauling on the fresh meat and veg side.
A savage price war between European fresh food suppliers depressed a first-time contribution from meat group Sutherland in the six months to September.
But demand for ready-made pizzas, sandwiches, ethnic foods and salads more than compensated.
A 7% jump in half-time profits to £23.1m, came alongside news from boss Peter Barr that acquisitions were off the menu.
But shareholders are still warned to expect a short-term debt hike.
The shares brightened 1p to 36p.
Shop sales give shares £5bn boost
BUYERS shrugged off the rain and dived back into the market for bargains yesterday.
A rise in high-street spending gave a mini boost to confidence and this pushed the FT-SE 100 Index through the psychological 2,700 level.
At the end of the session the index had notched up a 25-point gain worth £5bn.
The pound was fairly perky against the dollar, although it slipped a bit against the German mark.
Brighter spending boosted stores shares.
Marks & Spencer climbed 6p to 313p; Kingfisher (Woolies) added 10p to 565p with Next 3p better at 132p.
Storehouse was on the bandwagon, ahead by 6p to 184p.
ICI, up 5p, unveiled the name of its new drugs and chemicals business, but was cagey about precise plans for demerger.
The new division will be called Zeneca and will take in seeds, agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals.
Thorn-EMI was on the skids again, down 14p at 778p, following news of a new Chrysalis music venture headed by former Virgin man Steve Lewis.
Chrysalis added 1p to 57p.
Euro Disney, ahead of today's figures, jumped 17p to 900p.
Satisfactory interims boosted Courtaulds, up 14p at 484p.
A fresh bid from the consortium pitching for ITN helped Thames TV, up 6p at 185p.
Betting giant Ladbroke responded to a £10m upgrading to Pounds 170m of UBS Phillips & Drew's profit forecast.
The shares jumped 8p to 183p.
Unigate fears worst for doorstep pinta
By George Campbell
ONE of Britain's biggest milk distributors gave a veiled warning yesterday that the price of a pint may rocket if problems in the dairy industry are not resolved.
A spokesman for giant Unigate, which delivers to 1½m households via 2,800 milk rounds, expressed concern at proposals to abolish the Milk Marketing Board.
He said that this could lead to ‘a non-statutory monopoly’ and trigger a free-for-all among farmers with the housewife eventually footing the bill.
The aggressive promotion of milk sales by the supermarket giants such as Sainsbury, Tesco, Asda and Safeway, has already rocked the milk float, traditionally the most profitable side of the business for both farmers and dairy groups.
Supermarkets are now selling milk at around 10p a pint cheaper than the standard 38p delivered to the doorstep and this has whipped the cream off doorstep profits and sales.
It has also angered Britain's farmers who reckon they are being ripped off.
The drama is heightened by the fact that the MMB will soon float off its lucrative milk side, Dairy Crest.
The latter will get a stock exchange quote after it is spun off and this could trigger further price rises similar to those seen in electricity, gas and water.
Competition is likely to intensify with the main participants — Northern Dairies, Unigate, the Danish MD foods and the Co-op — all fighting to maintain their market share.
Unigate's midway profits are down from £43m to £42m and the full-year figure is likely to be static at £92m, further reflecting the pressures on the dairy industry.
Welcoming the rise in retail sales figures for October, CIBC economist Nick Parsons warned that there were still more window shoppers than spenders.
RHM gets toasting
BRITAIN's biggest baker, Ranks Hovis McDougal, has emerged from the first half of 1992 much slimmer.
Profits of the Bisto-to-Mr-Kipling-cakes giant have nose-dived from £150m to just over £92m with big bites taken out of both bread and cakes.
The winner in the pack, however, is groceries and food services.
But shareholders' attention is focused elsewhere.
Conglomerate Tompkins has an agreed bid on the table worth £952m and it should be unconditional before Christmas.
It closes on December 7.
Whitbread loses fizz
THE fizz seems to have gone out of brewing giant Whitbread.
Pre-tax profits for the half year to August are flat, only Pounds 500,000 ahead at £143m, and the UK slump has slammed the lid on margins.
Beer profits, led by Boddingtons bitter, jumped 13% to £44.1m and sales at Murphy's Irish stout by 35%.
Analysts expect full-year profits of £250m compared with Pounds 222m.
The ‘A’ shares rose 10p to 431p and the ‘B’added 10p to 1165p.
Raise a glass to Anglian's first
THE housing crisis took the shine off first-time figures from stock market newcomer Anglian, the double-glazing group.
But, despite the slump, profits in the six months to September still grew by a theoretical 5% to £10.26m (true comparisons are impossible post-float).
More work on government projects helped close the gap left by cash-strapped home-owners — not as profitable as kitting out private homes, but not to be sneezed at either.
Boss Bill Hancock says he is ‘pleased with such a solid performance.’
against ‘relentless recessionary pressures.’
The City was pretty chuffed too.
The shares jumped 5p to 215p, 5p above the July offer price.
The second half has got off to a good start, with slightly higher orders for October.
Dramatic reversal
SWINGEING UK premium hikes were one of the major reasons for a dramatic profits turnround by insurance giant Commercial Union in the third quarter of 1992.
A 39% increase in new life assurance business was the other main ingredient in the mix that transformed £14.8m losses to Pounds 19.6m profits in the three months to end-September.
Figures for the full nine months showed a £48.5m turnround to £6.1m profits.
The shares rose 9p to 573p.
US swoop on ink firm
THE Yanks have mopped up London-based printing ink company Usher-Walker.
US Sun Chemical Corporation exploited the weakness of the pound yesterday and snapped it up for just under £15m, or 167.5p a share.
The offer represented a massive 120% premium on the middle market price of 76p so directors did not have to think twice about taking it.
Usher's share shot up 85p to 165p, rewarding shareholders who had held on through thick and thin.
Scrap reactors first plea
By Liz Dolan
POWERGEN has joined rival National Power in a plea to save miners' jobs.
Britain's second biggest electricity supplier, which generates more than a quarter of the nation's electricity, is urging the Government to close down out-of-date nuclear power stations.
By shutting all the ageing Magnox nuclear reactors, demand for coal could be boosted by nearly 25%, it claimed yesterday.
Savage cost controls sparked a 24% increase in Powergen's first-half operating profits to £98m.
This translates into a gain of just 1% pre-tax because heavy capital expenditure swallowed up last time's £18m interest income.
But that is good news — replacing old equipment and beefing up environmental controls is vital, City analysts say.
They reckon investors should hang on to shares in both National Power and Powergen.
‘They're very attractive,’ said one.
‘Both managements are doing all we expect them to.’
Powergen's shares brightened 2p to 273p after a 0.3p interim dividend increase to 3.35p and is on course for a full-year profits hike to £395m (£359m).
Market Report
HOPES of a rally were killed off yesterday by Government figures reflecting a stagnant economy.
UK output slumped for the ninth successive quarter and this left the pound and shares in limbo.
The FT-SE 100 Index was in no man's land and closed with a marginal two-point gain at 2706.2.
Most shares were treading water.
Those that did rally were special situations, such as Cable & Wireless which jumped 7p to 649p after a 7% profits rise at half-way.
Mirror Group Newspapers enjoyed support, up 4p at 83p, buoyed by new boss David Montgomery's cut and thrust management style.
Union Discount scored a leap of 23p to 94p and pundits reckon a bid is imminent.
This helped King & Shaxson, up 5p at 90p.
Cater Allen, in the wake of good profits, jumped 6p to 387p.
Eurotunnel was in demand, closing at 354p, up 8p.
Pringle sweater giant Dawson International climbed 8p to 228p ahead of Tuesday's interim figures.
Cement giant Blue Circle added 2p to 177p, despite a downgrading of full-year profits from £105m to around £75m.
Mickey's magic leap brings a little cheer
By Clare Stewart
A SURPRISE 12p (FF1) dividend from Euro Disney has provided shareholders with an early Christmas box.
The news gave the one time glamour shares a temporary sparkle, rising 25p to 925p before slipping back to 845p.
But there is not too much to cheer about.
The Magic Kingdom is finding the going tough and the resort ran up a £23m loss (FF188m) for the year.
Prospects for 1993 are very mixed and boss Robert Fitzpatrick does not expect to achieve profitability for the entire year.
Euro Disney had 7m visitors in its first six months with the hotels 74% full.
These numbers beat the opening figures at other Disney parks, but with winter ahead the target of 11m for the year is looking a little unlikely.
Profit predictions for 1992 at the time of flotation in 1989 were around £20m.
Since then, while the shares have had a spectacular progress from 707p to a high of over £16 earlier this year, the resort has been burdened by heavy start-up costs, high French interest rates and recession in Europe.
Pressure on the finances has been eased by Euro Disney's deferring its base management fee for 1992 and 1993, due to the Walt Disney Company in America.
In 1992 this saves nearly £14m (FF113m).
New marketing programmes and cost-cutting measures are planned to beef up performance.
Analysts at Paribas are looking for a loss in 1993 of £25.6m (FF210m) including management fees owed to Walt Disney.
Besieged boss puts staff first
By George Campbell
THE 600 workers at adhesives giant Evostick nearly came unstuck yesterday following a surprise takeover bid.
Manufacturer Wassall — where Hanson has an 8% stake — has launched a bid worth £98m for Evode and last night the main concern of the employees in Leicester, Birmingham and Stafford was their jobs.
But boss Andrew Simon galloped to the rescue.
He turned the bid down flat.
Wassall is offering 80p a share cash but the Evode price took off and last night closed at 91p.
Evode has gone through a sticky patch.
Profits last year were more than halved to £7.3m.
Wassall is asking shareholders for £103m to fund the deal via a three for-five rights issue at 150p.
Wassall shares dived from 198p to 183p.
3,500 bank jobs go
THE recession has blown the kilt clean off the Royal Bank of Scotland.
It is slashing its UK retailing workforce by 3,500 over the next five years, a staggering 20% of the 15,000 total.
The news comes ahead of fairly lousy results to be unveiled on December 3.
But don't sell the shares.
The Midland Bank has been mopped up by Hong Kong Shanghai and RBS, down 3p at 187p, could be the next target.
Stores' family triumph
ONCE it was pine cupboards and ethnic rugs, now it is baby clothes and family wear for Storehouse.
Having cast off its struggling Habitat and Richards chains, Storehouse is focusing on BHS and Mothercare.
A strong turnaround at both helped the group back into the black at the half-way stage, ringing up profits of £3.1m against a loss of nearly £14m last time.
The dividend is held at 2.5p.
After a hefty extraordinary charge for disposals and closures, Storehouse showed a £28.3m loss.
Analysts are forecasting £40m for the full year.
Gas defies doubters
PUNDITS who advised the 2m shareholders of British Gas to sell their shares have been caught on the hop.
The energy giant's third quarter results, unveiled yesterday, were disappointing with losses of £342m for the period to September.
But in the last three months the shares have enjoyed a good ride, jumping 40p to nearly 280p.
Hang on to them.
Farm deal lights up the FT-SE
By Clare Stewart
A FLURRY of takeover rumours together with promise of a breakthrough in the GATT talks provided a kickstart to a dull market going nowhere fast.
By late afternoon the FT-SE 100 had made some progress and closed 26.2 up at 2732.4, with news of the GATT deal coming after the end of trading.
Attention focused on the bond market after the Government raised Pounds 1.3bn by selling off part of its debt in BT and the privatised utilities.
The auction was oversubscribed 4.6 times.
Speculation that a bid for tyre and exhaust fitter Kwik Fit was imminent fuelled a 20p rise which later slipped back to 9p, closing at 97p.
Euro Disney had a bumpy ride as the market digested its results, sinking to a low of 813p down 35p.
Thorn EMI was on the buy list ahead of results next week and added 17p at 780p, while transport group Tibbet & Britten was also in demand, gaining 29p at 576p.
Caught off their guard
SHARES in security specialist Gardiner Group plunged to a new low yesterday after it was revealed that assets worth £3.5m have gone astray.
The shares dropped from 15½p to 8½p.
The group uncovered the loss after year-end stocktaking and says it ‘results from the deliberate falsification of the company's records.’
An investigation is underway.
Net assets are now put at £16.2m, but boss Yashar Turgut says the loss ‘will have no material effect on profits.’
Earlier this year Gardiner reported profits of only £6m, well below expectations, because of a financial gaffe — overestimating margins.
Analysts are looking for £2m profits for 1992.
Property group London & Metropolitan cut losses at the half-way stage to £4.4m against £15m last time.
Cashpoint
UP until November 30, Confederation Bank is holding its 8.25% rate on TESSAs.
It offers two options, Tessa with a Plus and Tessa Plus Income.
A £12,000 investment would generate an annual income of £882 for taxpayers.
ABBEY National is offering to meet up to £250 of legal and mortgage valuation fees for customers who are remortgaging or switching to Abbey National.
For existing customers the offer is worth up to £500.
A NEW mortgage deal from Bristol & West offers a rate of 8.5% reducing to 6.5% by April 1994.
Monthly payments on a £40,000 loan would range from £230 to £176.
NEW mortgage deals this week include 7.45% fixed until December 94 from Chelsea Building Society and 8.49% from First Direct.
New boys have easy ride in market
Clare Stewart
THE stock market has been kind to new firms which have recently joined the ranks of public companies.
Despite bumpy market conditions, most of those that joined in September and October have notched up solid gains.
Book publisher Dorling Kindersley has seen the strongest growth.
In the three weeks since coming to the market through a placing and offer at 160p, the shares have risen 73p to 233p.
Close behind is USM stock Tepnel Diagnostics which has added 72p to 192p since September 30.
Fire engine group Trinity has also powered ahead, adding 31p to its 120p entry price, while shares in traditional pub group J D Weatherspoon have also been in demand, adding 13p to 173p since the end of October.
Printing group Linx has improved 18p to 148p in the month since its debut.
Leisure group Vardon which owns the London Dungeon has shown less growth, adding 1p to 46p.
Coach company National Express is the main new issue before Christmas with details expected soon and printing group Hunters Armley is expected in December.
Little green shoots of recovery are stirring
Cathy Gunn
ALL change for the up-line to a rosier future.
A general perception of Britain in continued decline has given way in the past week to a feeling that the economy really is ‘bottoming out’ at last, says David Kern, chief economist of the National Westminster Bank.
To date it is a subtle but important change of mood that, with luck, will grow stronger over the winter — allowing spring to bring those green shoots of recovery that the Treasury and the Chancellor have been banging on about for the last two years.
Kern's view adds substance to anecdotal evidence from some businesses in the 10 days since the last interest rate cut — evidence that suggests the corner is finally in the process of being turned.
Another rate cut would not hurt.
For it is a long corner that could take a good three to six months to complete, Kern warns.
He reckons we are going into it on the last of the downward slope this winter, and then will run along on level ground for the first quarter of 1993.
With the spring we could begin the long slow climb out of the recession.
Kern thinks the UK economy will go on to grow by 0.7% overall in 1993.
Others suggest nearer 0.5%; while the Chancellor is forecasting 1% growth.
Tentative figures for 1994 pencil in further, but modest, growth.
For it will take a while for unemployment to level out and then start falling.
THE weekend's latest realignment of Europe's Exchange Rate Mechanism means that Britain can sit back and look smug.
‘For the first time we're a little bit on the sidelines and in some ways this will make the Government's standpoint a bit stronger,’ reckons Kern.
Pulling out of the ERM in September and letting the pound float away from the rest of the bunch now looks even smarter than it has in the interim — particularly in the light of Sweden's experience.
Though not in the ERM, its currency was pegged to it and in September Sweden toughed out wild currency markets by whacking its interest rates sky-high for just long enough to scare off the cowboys.
But it was not prepared to take the pain of doing it all again and now the krone is floating free in Europe's outer space just like the pound.
Meanwhile, our base rates have come down from 12% (they never officially went to the 15% level announced on Black Wednesday) to 7% and should fall further.
When depends on the Chancellor and the Treasury, who are still scared of fuelling a rise in inflation while hoping, on the other hand, for a rise in house prices.
Since these two tend to go hand in hand, anyone whose home is worth less than the mortgage on it, would welcome a little inflation.
Not to mention a rapid passing on of mortgage cuts to bedraggled flocks of existing homeowners; who are less than thrilled to see the first helping of crumbs go in instant cheap deals to first-time buyers.
Just because the building societies have a backlog of repossessed homes to flog off does not mean the rest of us should be forced to hang on until January for our rate cut.
That is the way to add people on their last gasp to the repossessed list, not reduce it.
Cheery results at Emap
MAGAZINE and newspaper publisher EMAP kicks off the week's results with a healthy half-time increase to £13m, up from £9.8m.
Less cheerful is the news from services group BET where a further slump in profits is likely.
Interim figures are forecast at £40m down from £72m, with a cut in the dividend expected.
The benefits of the Virgin Music acquisition will not be reflected in first-half figures from music and TV group Thorn EMI.
Profits are expected to show little change from last year's Pounds 94m.
Also reporting tomorrow is supermarket group Argyll, owner of Safeway, where six-month profits of more than £200m are expected, up 15%, helped by last year's rights issue.
A lower profits increase will be shown by Kwik Save which reports on Wednesday.
A 9% increase for the year to £111m is expected with the divi up 14% to 16.7p.
Water company results this week promise few surprises.
The best performance is likely from North West Water where a 5% profit rise to £130m at the half-way stage is likely.
Expect flat figures from South West Water and Welsh Water on Thursday.
High street mini boom just round the corner
George Campbell
BRITAIN's retailers will see the start of a mini-boom next year, according to a new report unveiled yesterday.
The Manchester Business School and Cambridge University both reckon that the boom on the high street is just around the corner.
Bigger spending in the shops should begin in the second half of the year, boosted by rocketing disposable income on the back of recent cuts in the mortgage rate.
If they are right, then stores shares should take off again.
They have enjoyed a good run since the general election and a second wave of buying should take the shares higher in the new year.
The short-term outlook on the high street, however, remains gloomy with subdued consumer demand.
With one month to go before Christmas, sales are still slack.
People are still paying off the debt they ran up when they borrowed on the back of roaring house prices in the eighties.
But the housing market will pull out of the recession in the second half of 1993, say the economic pundits.
This confidence is also reflected in a report, Retail Round-up, by top brokers Societe Generale who reckon that clothing is poised for a rally.
They say that strong fashion stories will boost clothing but broader improvement and decisive out-performance in stores is hinged on government policy on the housing market.
Societe Generale (which owns brokers Strauss Turnbull) likes the look of shares in Marks & Spencer, Coats Viyella, Sears, Next, N Brown and Claremont Garments.
Shares like Dixons and Kingfisher (Woolies) will move only when the housing market picks up.
BET takes a nosedive
ONE of Britain's biggest service companies has come to grief with disastrous figures and a crash in its shares.
BET, which deals in laundry to plant hire, saw its half-year profits slump from £71.5m to £40.5m and has slashed its interim dividend from 4.25p to 2p to conserve cash.
Dealers reacted by lopping 20p off the shares which closed at 93p.
American boss John Clark warns that things are grim.
He has already shed more than 40,000 jobs and reduced the number of companies from 170 to 100 in 18 months.
He says that the recession ‘will last at least another year’.
Couple caught in new fixed rate trap face £1,000 bill
George Campbell
THOUSANDS of home owners have been caught in a painful new fixed-interest mortgage trap.
A massive building society advertising campaign earlier this year has lured them into rates of 10% and 11% but since then the cost of borrowing has plunged, and these home owners have come unstuck.
A lot of new fixed-rate mortgages are now as low as 6–7% and Britain's top lenders are charging those who want to convert to these lower rates enormous opting out fees.
The move comes hard on the heels of growing pressure from the Government for banks and building societies to pass on recent rate cuts to home owners to get the economy moving.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is pressing the Bank of England to examine allegations that the big lenders are not fully passing on the cheaper rates.
David Baugh and his wife of Wrexham are a typical example of the new dilemma.
They have had a mortgage with the Abbey National for four years and recently took up the offer of a fixed rate of 10.99% until 1999.
They signed their documents but within three weeks, the Abbey launched a new fixed rate of 8.65% until the year 2000.
They immediately contacted the Abbey's financial adviser at their local branch and asked three basic questions.
1.
Could they take advantage of the new offer? 2.
Switch the mortgage on buying a new house? and 3. could they leave the Abbey and go elsewhere?
The answer to all three questions was Yes, but there was a sting.
They had to pay an opting out fee of £1,167.00, based on the interest to cover the next seven years.
The Baughs checked the original offer letter carefully and they say it did not state clearly that once people have accepted, there was no way out and it certainly did not mention the excessive opt-out figure they were later quoted.
A spokesman for Abbey said: ‘All lenders will charge a redemption fee as they have to pay interest on the money borrowed, even if a customer pays off the mortgage during the fixed rate period.
‘As no one could have foreseen the sharp fall in the base rate after Black Wednesday, it would have been impossible to predict that variable rates and the cost of fixed rate mortgages would have fallen so far.’
Sparkle from glossies
Liz Dolan
GARDENERS, cinemagoers, parents, Nintendo fanatics and New Women are all doing their bit to keep the profits rolling in at Emap, publisher of a huge range of consumer mags and newspapers.
Emap boosted profits by 50% to £14.8m in the six months to October 3, despite flat advertising revenue.
The better-than-expected figures came on the back of a £24m buying spree, which included the £21.5m acquisition of Maxwell's business publications in June.
Successful new titles, draconian cost controls, inflation-busting, cover-price rises and a £1m windfall from the sale of a stake in newspaper group TR Beckett also played their part in the sparkling results, which sent the shares 8p better at 300p.
But falling ad receipts meant lower profits for newspapers and printing.
Emap's fast-growing stable contains some of the best-known names in magazine publishing, including Angling Times, Smash Hits, New Woman and Elle.
The last two are part of a joint-venture set up earlier this month with French publisher Hachette, which also produces Sky.
Boss Robin Miller says the first issue of computer games magazine Nintendo Magazine System sold a massive 150,000-plus copies.
The half-time dividend rises 8% to 2.075p.
Goofy Disney
EURO Disney collapsed another 58p to 755p as the City gave further thought to last week's poor results.
Some claim that Disney should have set up shop in sunny Spain rather than chilly Paris.
The Gatt agreement and hopes of a pre-Christmas rate cut sent the FT-SE 100 12.8 points ahead to a new 2745.2 peak first thing.
But dealers' nerves soon failed and the index fell back to close 9.5 points lower at 2719.7.
Barclays slipped 4p to 351p after confirming 3,000 more job losses.
Thorn EMI, with figures today, shed 5p to 775p.
Taking on big boys
BUDGENS, Londis and a host of smaller supermarket chains are ganging together to beat the big boys at their own game.
Seven chains have set up Today's Central Buying Company to give them similar bulk-buying muscle as Sainsbury and Tesco.
Thirty other chains will also buy via CBC.
Safeway's tasty offering snubbed
Liz Dolan
SAFEWAY stores group Argyll proudly served up top-of-the-range figures yesterday — and was promptly rewarded with a 10p fall in the share price.
Half-time profits 15% higher at £205.1m equalled best City expectations, but left the stock market cold.
City foodstores expert Bill Myers reckons the share price dive reflected a mixture of profit-taking and misunderstandings about underlying growth prospects.
He dismisses fears of a second-half slowdown and is sticking with a year-end profit forecast of £417m (£364.5m).
Safeway, which accounts for 85% of total business, boosted operating profits by 22% to £155.3m.
Boss Sir Alistair Grant admits most of the growth in sales was due to first-time contributions from new stores, though existing stores held up well.
Customers are saving cash at both ends of the spectrum, he says.
The less well-off are doing things like swapping chocolate biscuits for cheaper plain ones; the better-heeled are staying out of restaurants and eating gourmet meals at home instead.
Now Argyll plans to drum up more business with in-store dry cleaners and post offices.
Cut-price chains Presto and Lo-Cost, caught up in a bloody head-to-head battle with discounters like Kwik Save, managed only a small profits increase.
BP Nutrition, the food arm of the UK oil giant, is in talks that could lead to the Sarah Lee Corporation of Chicago acquiring its consumer food group.
Nutrition, based in the Netherlands, employs 2,300 and has a turnover of £190m.
Music buy pays off for Thorn
George Campbell
THE music business that millionaire Richard Branson sold to Thorn EMI for £560m has paid off handsomely for the leisure giant.
It has romped in with profits of £5m since it was acquired from the Virgin airlines boss in June and should make more than Pounds 40m to £50m in the full year.
The rest of the business is also thriving.
Thorn's overall profits jumped 11% to £105.2m at half-way and the full year forecast is a leap from £255m to £330m.
Thames TV made £17m although Rumbelows is still losing money.
Rental and lighting both improved.
Total music profits leapt from £52.3m to £60.6m.
The shares roared from 775p to 796p on the back of an interim dividend lift from 8.6p to 9p.
Pringle loses its tingle
DAWSON International, maker of posh sweater brands Pringle and Ballantyne, shivered in the cold winds of recession in the six months to end-September.
Profits before interest fell by 13% to £17.3m, though a lower interest bill helped slim the pre-tax fall to 4%.
The shares fell 3p to 224p.
NATIONAL Express will be making its stock market debut at 165p a share.
Applications close next Tuesday, December 1, and dealings start on Thursday, December 10.
A quarter of the shares are on offer to the public.
Ring 0800 800434 for a mini prospectus.
Dial a profit
MOBILE phones giant Vodafone gave the City a buzz yesterday with bumper figures.
Midway profits roared from £130m to £160m and the shares jumped 14p to 401p.
The Racal spin-off has connected its 750,000th subscriber and is set to top 1m.
This underpinned the market and FT-SE was firm, four points ahead at 2727.1, a whisker below its all-time peak.
The pound was perky but the Irish punt was shaky ahead of today's election.
A 26% profit setback hit Sims Food, down 16p at 205p.
But Fairline Boats sailed ahead, up 22p at 197p, despite losses.
Christmas hamper group Park Foods added 6p to 172p.
Kalamazoo dipped 3p to 27p after going into the red.
Why now?
Ratner puzzles moneymen
Liz Dolan
GERALD Ratner's dramatic resignation as boss of Britain's biggest jewellers just four weeks before Christmas sent shock waves around the City last night.
‘The biggest question is: Why now?’ asked one City stores expert.
‘Why get rid of the only man in the company who knows anything about selling jewellery in the most important time of the year?
It must mean something very bad indeed has gone wrong in the company and they need to explain it away.’
James McAdam, brought in as chairman by the banks when the company hit the skids earlier this year, knows nothing about retailing, and even less about jewellery.
So, next question: Is Ratners going bust?
This is a last-chance Christmas for the ailing stores group.
If sales slump, the banks — which saved the company from liquidation — will pull the rug, and the receivers will be called in.
Ratners does most of its business in the few short weeks before Christmas.
The shares had just started to recover on faint hopes of a busy festive season.
But the gossip in the trade is that the shops are struggling badly.
Question number three: Will the receivers put the company up for sale?
The answer to this is yes.
Although the business is being bled white by its debts, the shops themselves still have the potential to thrive.
With City backing, someone could get themselves a bargain.
Question number four: Who will buy the company?
An increasing number of people think that could be Gerald Ratner himself.
He will not leave the company empty-handed.
He is thought to have agreed to quit without a fuss in exchange for a year's salary.
This £375,000 pay-off could form the basis of a bid for the UK chain.
And, however badly Ratner appears to have screwed up the company's finances — and public image — some people are said to be still willing to give him financial support.
‘I gather that could be a possibility, said a source close to Ratner last night.’
Ratner's resignation is likely to send the shares through the floor when the market opens today.
But that will not affect the original shareholders.
They have already lost their cash.
The company is now owned by the banks.
Market Report
SHARES were on the skids again yesterday and dealers reckon the rollercoaster ride could last right up to Christmas.
A spate of job losses, profit down-gradings and dividend cuts reflects the depth of the slump and observers feel that the Government may have to slash interest rates by a further 1% to 6%.
The Bundesbank meets this morning, but the chances of a German rate cut are remote.
Germany has big problems with money supply and inflation and is likely to keep borrowing high until they ease off.
The FT-SE 100 lost 17.5 points to 2709.6, a dive of nearly £4bn.
Special situations grabbed the limelight.
Kettering-based computer consultants Pegasus nose-dived 42p to 86p after a boardroom shake-out.
But leather group Hartstone climbed 4p to 200p after a healthy 20% interim profits leap.
ABI Leisure was also in demand, up 6p to 60p after an 11% profits jump.
Brewer Marston Thompson plateaued at 225p after pushing midway profits to £10.07m, up £3m.
Job losses lopped Senior Engineering to 69p, down 4p.
Shoppers do Kwik switch
SLUMP-bashed shoppers are making a bee-line for Kwik Save, Britain's biggest cut-price supermarkets chain.
They shelled out £2.5bn on food, fags and booze last year — 32% more than they did the year before.
And, with one new store opening nearly every week, they are tipped to buy even more in 1992/3.
Expansion costs pegged the profits increase at a more modest 8.8% to £110.6m.
That was roughly in line with City expectations, but the shares slipped back 4p to 748p with the market.
Boss Graeme Seabrook says the group is now attracting wealthier people who do not want to overspend.
And, ‘as more people are forced to look for value, they'll think ‘why the hell bother to pay more?’ when the good times return,’he claims.
Kwik Save is to open on the two Sundays before Christmas.
But Seabrook promises it is a one-off break with Kwik Save's stance against Sunday trading.
Sour note from U.S.
SUGAR giant Tate & Lyle has come unstuck in the US.
A disastrous sugar beet harvest slashed its American contribution and this cut the group's pre-tax total from £230.8m to £189.5m.
Profits in Britain were sweet, rising from £17.3m to £20m.
But shareholders get a bigger dividend.
A final of 8p (7.5p) boosts the total to 12p, up 7%.
The shares jumped 12p to 368p.
Double money
INVESTORS who piled into North West Water when it was floated three years ago are on the crest of a wave.
The shares have since doubled and yesterday's figures confirm the progress.
Britain's second biggest privatised water giant has romped in with pre-tax profits up from £123.7m to £130.7m for the six months to September.
Boss Dennis Grove has kicked out metering and is opting for banding, which takes in the size of the customer's house.
The shares, floated at 240p, dipped 7p to 486p.
Cider deal adds fizz
UPMARKET cider group Merrydown is putting even more fizz into sales of its tasty new brand, Premium Draught Cider.
A new distribution deal with the Gaymer Group means the cider should be on sale in around 1,000 pubs within the next five years, says boss Richard Purdey.
The move follows an ‘excellent’ response to test marketing.
Merrydown has bumped up production facilities to cope with the expected demand.
The shares surged 15p to 213p.
East puffs up profits
THE Russian appetite for Western cigarettes helped tobacco giant Rothmans keep its six-month profits steady at £266m.
Although world sales fell slightly during the year, Eastern Europe bucked the trend with Russia in front of the queue.
The group is expanding in China.
Rothmans's luxury products interests, which stem from a controlling stake in Dunhill, increased operating profits by £1.3m to Pounds 21.8m.
The ‘B’ shares climbed from 598p to 614p.
Shares surge to new peak as slump abates
By George Campbell and Clare Stewart
THE stock market soared to a new all-time high yesterday on hopes that the painful slump could be poised to peter out next year.
A mini-buying stampede pushed the leading FT-SE 100 Index to 2741.8, a jump of 32.2 points as investors piled into the market to snap up bargains.
Stores, breweries, leisure stocks, banks and insurance shares were in the vanguard of the rises and at the close of the trading session a bumper £6bn had flowed in.
The strong upward movement was triggered by a bullish forecast from the CBI — the bosses' union — that the economy will start to emerge gradually from the recession in the Spring of next year.
Underlying inflation, now around the 3.7% mark, is expected to slow but due to the devaluation of the pound UK exports should pick up dramatically because the price of British goods will be much cheaper abroad.
The recent cuts in the mortgage rate — with the cost of borrowing on homes now down to around the 7–8% level — will also fuel a wave of spending in the high street.
However, a weak housing market and further increases in the jobless figure could put a brake on a runaway economy.
The news comes hard on the heels of the Chancellor's kick-start to the economy in the recent Autumn statement.
The cut in car tax and the increase in capital allowances will also help to boost confidence.
Shares to enjoy the new-found surge of optimism included Rank which jumped 19p to 625p and Thorn EMI, up 12p at 816p.
In stores, Kingfisher, the Woolies giant, climbed 12p to 573p, Dixons leapt 6p to 239p and GUS ‘A’ shares zoomed from 1567p to 1585p, a jump of 18p.
Other good performers included Unilever, up 18p at 1057p and tobacco giant BAT with a rise of 16p to 960p.
Shares in the Savoy hotel group charged ahead by 40p to 485p.
Eurotunnel leapt 20p to 368p and Airtours, ahead of Monday's figures, climbed 17p to 248p.
Top analysts reckon that the boom could continue with investors switching their cash from the banks and building societies.
The cuts in base rates have slashed returns to rock bottom levels of around 5% and investors have decided that shares could present a healthier alternative.
Food giant's price fear
By Clare Stewart
THE cost of food in the average shopping trolley is likely to rocket next year, Northern Foods reported yesterday.
All is hinged on the green pound — the exchange rate for agricultural products in the EC — which has been devalued in line with sterling.
This is making food imports more expensive and will clobber the shopper.
The gloomy forecast came from Chris Haskins, chairman of the dairy and chilled food business.
The Eden Vale to Bowyers group sees no immediate end to the recession.
‘We expect the dire trading situation to continue to the end of the financial year if not beyond,’ said Haskins.
Northern Foods is axing 3,000 jobs and closing smaller factories in order to cut group costs.
The benefits of this action would be seen in the group's 1993–4 figures, said Haskins.
Not that shareholders are doing too badly this year.
Profits rose 24% to £68.4m on the back of last year's acquisition of Eden Vale and Express Dairies, with the divi up 5% to 3.4p.
Underlying profit growth excluding the acquisition is put at 8%.
Shares fell 8p to 279p.
A rough ride for Ratners
SHARES in strife-torn Ratners had a roller-coaster ride yesterday.
Speculation of a revenge bid by the jeweller's ousted chief Gerald Ratner sent the price soaring but the shine soon wore off.
After jumping 2½p to 20½p the shares closed at 17p, valuing the group at around £50m.
Top pundits reckon Ratner would need at least £270m to regain control — a figure well out of his reach, according to observers.
He will pick up £375,000 in compensation and his shareholding is worth £136,000.
Water rises
THE nation's taps are still providing a gusher for the water companies.
Welsh and South West Water both romped in with bubbly results and shareholders get bigger dividends.
Operating profits at Welsh jumped 9.3% to £67m, although the rise at South West was pegged at £1.8m to £48.9m.
Both are paying interims of 7.8p.
Welsh is up 9.4% and South West's 9.9%.
Those who bought shares at 240p can also celebrate.
Welsh closed last night at 526p and South West at 499p.
An Andy deal
THE Andy Capp mortgage made its debut yesterday, courtesy of the Woolwich Building Society.
The mortgage is not only capped at 7.25%, it gives free unemployment insurance during the first two years.
A spokesman said: ‘The insurance will cover all mortgage payments for a 12-month period’.
Hotel rise prompts war talk
Clare Stewart
THE market hit a new peak yesterday, rising 18.3 to 2760.1 on continued hopes of economic recovery next year.
Among star performers was the Savoy Hotel where shares soared on the back of speculation that sometime predator Forte group was back.
The death of Sir Hugh Wontner — a key Savoy shareholder and chief opponent of Forte's battle to gain control of the hotel in 1989 — prompted suggestions that a new attack was imminent.
Savoy A shares rose 93p to 578p while Forte was unchanged at 173p.
But a spokesman for Forte said no action was planned.
Forte's current agreement with the Savoy prevents it adding to its stake.
Other strong shares included drugs group SmithKline Beecham, up 12½p at 554½p, though rival Glaxo slipped back 4p to 792p.
Electrical group Wolseley added 18p to 502p, after a broker's recommendation.
Drug profit a real tonic
Clare Stewart
BUMPER nine-month figures at drugs group Medeva helped add sparkle to its shares yesterday, climbing slowly towards its high of 301p earlier this year.
Pre-tax profits soared from £7.8m to £26.1m, pushing shares ahead 3p to 221p.
The group, headed by former Glaxo chief Bernard Taylor, is in the process of acquiring US drug group Armstrong, having bought another American business, International Medication Systems, in July.
The nine-month results reflect the group's move out of lower-margin businesses and the reorganisation of loss-making Evans Kerfoot.
A good performance in the last-quarter was expected, said Taylor.
Analysts forecast year-end profits of £35m upwards.
Cashpoint
FREE unemployment cover for the first two years is available with Citibank's new fixed and capped mortgages.
Rates start at 6.49% on the capped mortgage with a three-year fixed rate at 7.99%.
A SAVINGS scheme linked to the FT-SE 100 index has been launched by Yorkshire Building Society.
Share Index Plus is a five-year account which guarantees a 25% gross if the FT-SE disappoints.
PPP is offering lower cost medical insurance for expatriates from January.
Annual costs for a 30 to 34-year-old are £278 for Europe and £327 global.
NEW fixed mortgage rates include 7.99% for five years from Cheltenham & Gloucester, 7.25% for two years from Nationwide and 7.99% to 1998 from Birmingham Midshires.
High time to make use of low rates
George Campbell, City Editor
MAKING money is all about timing and I reckon that as far as mortgage rates are concerned we are within a whisker of hitting the bottom.
The Halifax withdrew a couple of fixed rates on Friday and replaced them with higher rates.
Do they know something we don't?
Anyone taking out a fixed-rate mortgage now, therefore, could be on a winner.
The recession is nearly over and by mid-1993, rates could be heading up again.
If rates do go lower, it will be by a marginal ½%-1%,; so now could be the time to take the plunge.
I put this theory to Walter Avrili, mortgage expert with John Charcol and he agreed with one proviso.
‘There could be a further cut in 1–2 year fixed-rate deals,’ he said.
‘But the current longer-term 5-year deals with rates of 7–9% look very attractive.’
There are also some bargains for new home owners worried about their jobs.
Nationwide, The Woolwich and Citibank are in the vanguard with capped mortgages with unemployment insurance.
The Bank of Ireland is also unveiling a fixed rate at a rock bottom 5.99% today, fixed till March 1994.
Base rates have crashed from a peak of 15% in 1989 to 7%.
I don't think they can go much lower.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders agrees.
In its latest Mortgage Monthly, Adrian Coles argues that rates are at their lowest for 14 years making this a good time to plunge into home ownership.
VATman threatens our budding entrepreneurs
Cathy Gunn
VAT rules are threatening a valuable scheme that helps people on unemployment and other benefits to get the first foot on the ladder to running their own businesses.
But in an eleventh-hour move late on Friday afternoon — and just hours after a query about the situation from this column — VAT headquarters agreed to consider a new interpretation of the rules.
VAT staff playing it by the book were close to destroying the Enterprise Rehearsal scheme, run by Barfield Enterprise Training Ltd for Barnet Enterprise Trust and Enfield Enterprise Agency.
Barfield feared it would have to close the ER scheme this week — ironically, just as Hertfordshire was inquiring about joining it.
Set up in agreement with the Board of Trade and the Department of Social Security, the ER scheme allows new entrepreneurs to set up in business for three months without losing any state benefits.
This gives them time to see if their idea works or not.
Nearly 300 people have tried it out over the past four years and ‘the success rate is significantly higher than with any other start-your-own-business scheme,’ said Barfield's joint MD Cliff Maxen.
‘Currently we have 35 on it.’
For the first three months Barfield is officially the ER businesses' proprietor and holds any surplus funds they generate.
Thus the would-be entrepreneur can keep drawing benefits, and, if the business fails, they haven't lost out.
If the business is a goer, the entrepreneur moves on to the full Enterprise Allowance system and gets back any surplus funds.
But suddenly the local VATman said that as the money held by Barfield exceeds the VAT threshold, it must pay 17.5% VAT on it — even though each business involved would be under the VAT threshold.
The local VATman's refusal to budge clashed directly with the work of Baroness Denton, the government's small firms minister at the Board of of Trade.
Former rally driver Jean Denton is battling to reduce red tape and bureaucratic burdens on small firms and start-ups.
Maxen wrote to her office seeking help to persuade the VATman to change his mind.
‘It is wonderful to think that someone in a government ministry may be paying attention and trying to help us,’ he said last night.
‘It is in no-one's interest, nor was it intended, that the holding company should have to register for VAT.
‘It makes the scheme more complicated and less popular.
‘We have stopped taking new people on to it, and thought we would have to close it altogether.’
The scheme is not out of the woods yet; and rather than break the law Maxen last week filled in the local VATman's registration form.
But on Friday night news came through that VAT HQ had agreed to study the ER scheme ‘to see if it can be classified as a training activity, which would be VAT exempt, rather than as a business activity,’ Maxen reported.
These matters came to a head in the very week that Baroness Denton launched a £300,000 London Growth Fund to help small firms.
The fund offers cheap loans of up to £5,000, at 2% under base rate, to businesses being started by the unemployed, disabled, ethnic minorities and women; and loans of up to £10,000 to existing small businesses.
It is backed by Midland Bank and the nine London Training & Enterprise Councils.
Scots power ahead
ELECTRICITY, water and food feature large this week, as the utilities reporting season gets underway.
Scottish Power today promises a modest 7% rise to £88m at the halfway stage.
Strong figures are due from Eastern Electricity on Thursday with profits set to rise from £15.4m to £24m, while top-end estimates for Scottish Hydro-Electric are heading for £40m-£50m, up from £27m last year.
Among water groups look for good figures from Yorkshire Water, up 17% to £75m helped by a one-off asset sale.
A small interim rise to profits of £300m is due on Tuesday for food and drink group Allied-Lyons which has just got the go-ahead for the merger of its brewing interests with Carlsberg.
Expect good figures on Wednesday from hotel and brewing group Bass, booking in for profits at around £530m, up 23%., helped by better news on the hotel front.
Heavyweights reporting on Thursday include Grand Metropolitan, where a 1% fall in profits at the year end to £940m is likely.
, though the dividend should rise to 12.3p. reflecting the underlying strength of the business.
Conglomerate Hanson, strongly dependent on recovery in the US market, is unlikely to impress with year-end figures down 17% to £1.09bn., with the dividend rise for the year put at 1% to 11.1p.