

‘Are bitches born or bred?’
Constance asked on the night of her mother's funeral.
She and her Aunt Louise were sitting in her mother's living room, drinking sherry and feeling close, as old friends and allies do.
Listening to the autumn wind moaning across this corner of the sparse Northumberland coastline a few miles south of Berwick-upon-Tweed, where Nora Simpson had lived for all of her married life, their memories of her were vivid.
Constance wasn't thinking only of her mother.
She was looking back over her own life.
Bathed in the bright sun of Italy and glittering with social and commercial success, it seemed to her that it had always been menaced by dark shadows, many of which, Constance sometimes thought, had sprung up almost to punish her for leaving this remote area so early in her adult life.
They were shadows that she could never have imagined when, as a young girl, she had run along the cold sands of Northumberland and watched the east wind flatten and fold the dunes as she dreamed of a bigger, more exciting world beyond — and away from her mother's influence.
She was brought back to the moment by Louise.
‘Oh, darling, I think that's a little harsh.’
Her aunt frowned slightly.
‘Nora was very strong-willed, I know, but I don't think she was a bitch .
She had a lot to contend with.’
‘No, don't misunderstand me,’ Constance went on.
‘I was thinking more of myself than her.
I know I'm a bitch  and I do think Nora had a lot to do with it but I've often thought that it was — you know — in the genes.’'
‘Well’ Louise laughed, ‘you certainly couldn't be mistaken for anything other than Nora Simpson's daughter, there's no doubt about that, but to be fair, my sweet, you've both had a lot to contend with.
You've not had it easy, but bitch is far too unkind.
You've had to be strong to survive — just as poor Nora had to be when your father died, and she was left on her own.’
Constance looked at her aunt — was she blaming her for Nora's lonely last years?
Louise Carter was a woman in her early eighties.
White-haired and with make-up applied in the haphazard way that suggests no great interest in the face rather than a weakening of the critical faculties, Louise was still very much in charge of herself — her appearance, thought and manner.
Constance looked at her fondly.
Louise, who had been her comfort, buffer and rescuer so many times in the past; Louise, who had in so many ways been more of a mother to her than Nora; Louise, who even now had lost none of her vigour and strength of personality.
You'd think that she was still in her sixties, Constance thought approvingly, as Louise took out a cigarette and, crossing her legs decisively, made herself comfortable on the sofa.
‘You were closer to her than anyone,’ Constance continued.
‘Even before I went to Italy and married Ludo I never really knew her.
Actually, she influenced every decision I ever made but I always felt she put a barrier between us.
But I honestly don't know if it was deliberate, or just our chemistry.
I've never understood it — probably because I've never really understood her .’
Constance slipped off her shoes and curled her feet under her.
She was sitting on the opposite side of the grate and Louise Carter thought fleetingly how proud Nora had always been of her daughter even when they had been dramatically at loggerheads and how pleased she would be if she could see her now, in her elegant black dress and silver jewellery.
Yes, my dear, she mused  affectionately, Signora Villanuova you may well now be — and head of a fashion empire — but every attitude you've ever had came from Nora.
She made you strong — and she was no more a bitch than you are.
Sensing that her aunt needed to talk, Constance poured more sherry.
‘I understood her perfectly,’ Louise said as she searched in her bag for her lighter.
‘We were very close, you know.
Much more than just cousins.
I remember when she came from India after your grandmother died.
She looked so strange.
Tall, dark and gawky.
She was very strong-willed.
Couldn't be told anything .
My father used to get so angry at her stubbornness — not at all like me, used to doing what I was told.’
There was a pause as she lit her cigarette.
‘I got a shock yesterday when I went to the mortuary,’ Constance said.
‘I didn't realise that she'd let her hair grow out.
She was quite white.
I couldn't believe my eyes.
And the nails on her right hand were filthy.
I had to clean them.’
‘Darling, how ghastly for you,’ Louise commiserated, remembering how punctilious over her appearance her cousin Nora had always been.
Her sophisticated turnout and stylish overdressing had made her a minor legend in this remote northern district.
‘It was horrible,’ Constance said.
‘I had to lift her hand.
It was so hard and stiff that I was frightened I would break the wrist.
I don't know how I managed it.
I had to bend over, parallel to the body, to get the nail file under the nails.
I was frightened in case anyone came in.
It would have looked so odd.
But I had to do it.
She was always so obsessed with her appearance, I couldn't let her go to her grave in that state…
Her hand was so cold.’
She shuddered at the recollection and continued.
‘Then I combed her hair back.
How wispy and thin it was.’
Louise was silent, then said, ‘Poor Nora.
That's why I was the only one she would allow to see her in hospital.
You know how particular she was about dyeing her hair.
She wouldn't allow anyone else to do it and, of course, with her broken arm after the fall, she couldn't.
She kept saying ‘Oh, the nurses don't matter and the doctors are afraid of me — I'll do it before I come out.’
Actually I preferred her with white hair.’
‘Oh, I agree.
After all, she was seventy-five.
It was about time.
But it was still a shock to see her like that, looking so old and spent.’
Constance hadn't seen her mother since her last visit to England over a year ago.
She had been so busy with her dress house in Rome, coping with her designer, planning for the future and ensuring that everyone in the business was kept happy — each of which seemed a full-time job in itself — that she had hardly had time to spare for her three children, let alone her mother.
Thinking now of the battles she had fought with her own children, especially her daughter, Margharita, she felt a pang of remorse over the woman she had buried a few hours earlier.
Constance had also fought her mother all the way when she was young and her personality was still forming, and then had somehow abandoned her in later life, when the need to fight had gone.
She felt guilty, but she could say with a clear conscience that her business was so demanding that she hardly had time to think of Northumberland although, in truth, as her successes and problems in Italy had increased, there seemed less and less reason to return to Nora.
Her trips to see her mother had of necessity been brief.
After two days even the smallest decision could become an exhausting battle of wills.
The less they saw of each other, Constance had reluctantly accepted over the years, the better friends she and her mother were.
‘She wasn't an easy character to love, you know,’ she went on.
‘Nora was admirable in many ways but no one could call her lovable.’
Louise frowned impatiently as Constance said, ‘I suppose she lacked the maternal instinct.
Rather like me, really.’
She paused.
‘In fact,’ she murmured, ‘she wasn't easy at all— any more than I am.’
‘You never really knew her,’ Louise replied.
‘You're right,’ ' Constance agreed.
‘It's terribly sad but I don't think I ever really loved her, either.
She wouldn't let me somehow.
I needed to when I was a teenager.
I had to face all my problems alone.
She'd let me get half-way close and then she would push me away.
I always felt that she cut me off just as we were becoming closer — and always when I most needed her.’
Louise smiled.
‘That's exactly what she used to say about you.
She always felt that Miss Hatherby meant more to you than she did.’
‘Miss Hatherby certainly influenced me, but not as a mother would.
She was all intellect.
I needed emotional support.
No, Louise, no matter what you say, Nora kept me at arm's length.’
As Constance poured another glass of sherry for her aunt, Louise continued in a softer voice.
‘I was the only one who really knew Nora — I could always tell what she was thinking.
When she was first married, I was the only person she could turn to.
Your father was such a disappointment to her, in so many ways.
He had no imagination.
Poor Will, he was the archetypal country doctor.
So dull.
Dull as his name.
He never had an original idea in his life.
You can't blame him — that's why he was a country doctor.
They're meant to be dull.
It isn't in the nature of doctors to be original or witty or anything .
They have to be reliable, reliably boring .
He was certainly that.
Why they ever married I shall never know.
I suppose she saw him as an escape.’
Louise lit another cigarette.
‘Nora hated work.
She had no money when she came from India, except for a little in bonds, or something, but not enough to live on.
My father had managed to get her a job in a friend's office just off Hatton Garden.
Not much money but things were different in the twenties.
We didn't seem to need so much in those days.
Of course, Nora felt being a typist was below her, and she couldn't bear the people she worked with.
She was determined to get married and get out.
In  those days married women didn't work, so for her it was the ideal solution.
She wouldn't have to be dependent on my father any more and she would be free to live her own life.
Work bored her — it was too predictable.
Your mother had an amazing imagination — that's where yours comes from — she could have done so much better with her life…
‘Anyhow, the problem was that we hardly ever saw any young men, so how on earth could she start courting?
Of course, being the determined woman she was, Nora decided to take the bull by the horns and organise things for herself.
We used to sit in the garden for hours going over her various plans to get married.
She had a new one virtually every day.
I just listened, there was absolutely no possibility of influencing her.
I remember thinking how typical it was of her that she never thought of being wooed.
She was like a huntress — in pursuit, in charge.’
‘She always was,’ Constance murmured to herself.
‘She got the idea from a magazine story, of all things,’ Louise continued, warming to the tale.
‘She decided to go to a hotel — a grand one — and meet a man.
You can't imagine how bold that was in those days.
She decided against seaside hotels like the Metropole at Folkestone or the Imperial at Torquay.
She was shrewd and quite calculating even then.
She felt there would be too many families at the seaside and not enough single men.
She wanted a masculine sort of hotel.
‘So she chose Gleneagles, in Scotland, which was very new then, but already famous for golf.
Nora calculated that there must be lots of single men up there so she decided it was ideal for the ‘manhunt’, as we called it, even though the train fare was a serious consideration.
I remember we went up to Euston together one Saturday morning, very excited, to buy the ticket in advance.
It was a secret — if my parents had known she was going away alone they would have soon put the kybosh on it.
No, she was supposed to be going to stay with a girlfriend from the India days who lived in Perthshire.
Your mother  was always good with money — that's who you get it from.
Will hadn't a clue — he couldn't have cared less!
She worked the whole trip out, to the last farthing.
I remember it vividly.
A room without a bath was forty shillings a night.
Gleneagles was ridiculously expensive in those days — still is, probably.
I remember Nora's first postcard — which she sent in an envelope secretly to my office.
She was so indignant.
Breakfast cost five shillings and dinner, I think, about nine, but she knew that before she went.
What infuriated her was that they charged three shillings for afternoon tea, so she decided to forgo it because she knew the men would still be out on the links.’
Louise chuckled at the recollection.
‘We had a terrible check at Euston.
We had to decide on travelling third or first class.
I'd have just gone third but Nora looked ahead.
She was worried about coming back.
Going up to Scotland no one would know her so she could travel third but coming back, if the young man travelled with her — it never even entered her head that she wouldn't meet one — it could be embarrassing.
It took us two turns through the arch before she decided.
First-class return it would be.
I remember her saying, slightly on the defensive, ‘It's an investment,’ and I thought, It's made her even more determined to succeed.
Money always did that with your mother.
‘Your father had only qualified from Edinburgh a couple of years before.
He was the assistant doctor for the hotel — although a lot of guests brought their own in those days.
Well, you've heard the story of how your mother got soaked on the third tee in a downpour.
Of course, she wouldn't abandon the round.
You know why?
It was Saturday so they had put up the green fee from four and sixpence to seven and six and she couldn't bear to waste the money.
She'd rather have caught pneumonia and died.
As it was, she went down so badly with flu that she had to be confined to her room for the duration.
She was furious .
No wonder she was running a temperature!
I'm sure most of it was caused by temper.
That's when your  father came in.’
Louise chuckled.
‘I remember her card: ‘I am being very attentively cared for by the hotel doctor, William Simpson.’
When he proposed to her on the last night I think she took him because, having been in her room for seven days, she'd met nobody else and couldn't bear to see her investment wasted.’
Both women smiled.
‘Oh, I know,’ said Constance, ‘but it was more than that.
It was a whirlwind affair.
She thought it was romantic.
I'm sure she had fallen in love.’
‘I never understood it,’ Louise reflected.
‘It was so out of character for your father.
He was very cautious — the last person to have a whirlwind anything , let alone romance.’
Thinking of her own marriage, Constance said, ‘Maybe, but I think it was very much in character with my mother.
Not that I'm in any position to pass judgement.’
Nora married William Simpson in November 1927 three scandalously short months after her Gleneagles trip.
Louise's mother was shocked and felt guiltily conscious of failing to take proper care of her brother's daughter, but was glad to have the restless girl off her hands.
To Nora's barely hidden horror William had joined a partnership in Northumberland.
It included a house in the tiny seaside village of Cramer, which clung low to the land in an attempt to avoid the rough seas and wild winds that buffeted the coast for what seemed to Nora most of the year.
‘At first she hated it,’ Louise continued, ‘it seemed so remote and, in the thirties, of course, it was .
And primitive after Surrey — I remember Nora saying she never knew how to dress.
Your mother used to phone me, although trunk calls in those days were only for emergencies.
She used to ring at nine thirty in the morning when Will was in surgery.
If he walked in or the girl came to clean the grate, she'd pretend to be talking to a tradesman: ‘It really was more fat than lean.
We threw away at least half,’ and she'd put the receiver down.
I  don't know what the girl must have thought.
She probably told the whole village that the doctor's wife was always complaining to the local shopkeepers.’
She chuckled.
‘Not that Nora would care.’
Changing track, she went on.
‘Your father wasn't interested in sex — strange for a doctor, really.
He enjoyed a round of golf and playing cricket for the village and that was about it.
Typical of thousands of boring husbands in the thirties.
Nora and I used to say that the war did them all a power of good.
Shocked them out of their complacency, gave them a bit of opposition.
They had to start reacting the way women always have.
Actually,’ she said, warming to her subject, ‘I think the war was a good thing for a lot of men.
Of course, it was too late for your father.
Your mother used to say men are such babies because they haven't had babies.
We've all been through it and we know what pain's about.’
Her voice was becoming sharper.
‘I remember all the fuss when your Uncle Jim was dying of cancer.
My dear, I could hardly keep my patience.
He was always going on about how undignified and painful the examinations were.
I used to think, That's a woman's lot — forever being prodded and poked and looked up by doctors who are total strangers.
Men don't know the half of it.
‘When your Uncle Jim died,’ Louise continued, ‘and I decided to retire up here, it seemed the most natural thing in the world that cousins should want to be close in their widowhood.
I would have liked us to share a house but your mother preferred to be on her own.’
‘She would ,’ Constance said, ‘you know how she needed to rule the roost.
Imagine sharing a kitchen with Nora!’
‘You're right, my darling,’ Louise laughed, ‘it would have been a disaster.’
Suddenly Constance felt she didn't want to hear anything more about the past.
Louise was so animated by now that she seemed to have forgotten that morning's funeral.
Constance glanced at her watch.
It was getting late and her youngest child, Tudor, who had accompanied  her to the funeral, and was now waiting for her in the local hotel, would be growing anxious.
‘Louise, dear, I've just noticed the time.
I ought to run you home.
Tudor and I will stay in the hotel tonight but we'll call in to see you tomorrow.’
‘Of course, darling, I understand,’ said Louise huffily.
‘You must be dead beat with everything — and me going on and on.’
Constance sensed that she had offended her aunt and she felt guilty.
As she slipped her mink coat over her shoulders, she resolved to make up for it next day.
‘You know, darling,’ Louise said, as she was tying her scarf, ‘you're very unfair to yourself and your mother.
Having the courage and determination to live your life the way you want to is not being a bitch .
You both married weak men.
What else could you do but be strong enough to carry them?
The fact that you were weak enough to choose them in the first place is another thing altogether,’ she finished triumphantly.
By the time Constance had dropped off Louise, who was not mollified by being given a lift to her door, it was past six.
She and Tudor were staying at the Black Boar, Chollerton's only hotel.
As she walked into the Percy Bar the sight of her youngest son sitting in the corner raised Constance's spirits.
He stood up as she walked towards him.
‘Was it all right?’ he asked anxiously.
‘You look tired.’
‘Yes, Tudor darling, I am, but it was all right.
It was better for you not to come.
We had a real trip down memory lane, talking about your grandmother as she was years ago.
Louise needed to talk.’
Tudor smiled tentatively.
Years at an English public school, punctuated by all-too-brief holidays in Italy, had made him almost a stranger within his family.
Whereas his brother and sister, Manfredo and Margharita, had been brought up in Italy and educated to be Italians, he  was a hybrid, with a mind trained to be English but emotions entirely Italian.
Constance said, ‘It's a pity you didn't really know Nora.
She was a very special character in so many ways.
I admired the way she took on this part of the world and conquered it.’
Tudor looked puzzled.
‘Oh, Tudor, this is a strange land,’ Constance smiled.
‘Northumberland is far removed from the civilised air of your school in the south, my darling.
Surely you can sense that?’
Tudor moved uncomfortably in his seat and sipped his half pint self-consciously.
He thought that his school was perhaps not quite as civilised as his mother cared to imagine but he remained silent.
‘It is different here, you know,’ Constance continued dreamily.
‘This landscape.
It's so uncompromising with humans.
Picts, Scots, Romans — it's conquered them all.
I never felt entirely at ease here when I was a little girl.
It's such a male landscape.
That's why Nora used to love it.
There was something for her to fight .
I love Italy, as you know, but nowhere has the brooding power of Northumberland.
Nature has an aggression here that stiffens you and makes you strong.
Do you know what I'm talking about?’
‘Yes, I do,’ Tudor replied.
‘I think it's beautiful because it is so spare.
I love the long bare hills with just the odd clump of trees.
It's clean and uncluttered.’
‘Before we return to the south,’ Constance said enthusiastically, ‘I'll show you this county.
I want you to see how it formed my character!
I'll take you to all the places I loved as a girl.
You're old enough to understand now.’
‘Understand?’
‘Yes, Tudor darling, understand why this land is more wonderful than anywhere else in the world and why it is yours, just as much as it is mine.
It is a birthright we share.
I will show you my memories.’
Constance Simpson was an only child.
She was brought up in Cramer, a coastal village a few miles from Dunstanburgh.
Although the village was tiny, her father's practice included a large area of the surrounding countryside as well as parts of Chollerton, the small country town three miles inland where he delivered her, in the Cottage Hospital, on 14 April 1929.
The year is not significant but the month is.
It was a testimony to her parents' efficiency.
They knew how important it was for a baby to have fresh air and sun.
They also knew how dark and long the northern winters could be.
Priding themselves on being modern-minded about such things, they subjected passion to planning and decided to have a spring baby.
The decision paid off.
Constance was born healthy and remained so.
By the time she was nine, she was tall, fair-haired, straight-backed and long-legged.
Although she occasionally looked waif-like, there was a most unchildlike determination to her mouth and a look about her jawline that suggested that she would not be easily deflected from anything she had set her mind to, but otherwise her parents' pride in the perfection of their product was largely justified.
She was an exemplary country lass and pleased her father very much for being so, although her mother was sometimes nervous.
Even at that age, Constance seemed perhaps too self-willed and wild, like the countryside she roamed so freely.
It was the countryside that brought Constance close to  her father.
Idealistic and romantic, Will Simpson responded to the beauty of nature almost as a duty and in strong contrast to his wife who found that it was always too cold and complained that the wind ruined her hair the moment she stepped out of the garden gate.
He had a little book called Blackie's Guide to Flowers of the Wayside , and he and Constance always took it with them on their walks.
They picked the flowers of the hedgerows and every new find had to be identified in Blackie's .
It was Constance's favourite book.
The paper was thick and textured, like felt.
The illustrations were line drawings and she used to colour them in with crayons after each new plant had been correctly named.
She would sit in the surgery in the evenings after the patients had gone and carefully shade in the colours.
She did it for her father and liked to do so in the one part of the house that was totally his.
Constance and Will loved going for walks together.
They walked regardless of the weather: on early spring mornings when the sky was remote and pale as a plover's egg; on stormy autumn afternoons when they felt they could reach up and touch the lowering clouds that covered the land like a bruise; and on frozen winter days when the sky was a white membrane stretched so tight that they could imagine it cracking with the cold.
Constance always remembered the different skies but, in her memory, the colour of the Northumbrian landscape hardly changed with the seasons.
It was always the softest grey-green, with sometimes a haze of yellow at the edges, sometimes a tinge of brown.
Always, as they walked they talked.
Will Simpson was one of the new breed of educated men.
His family background was humble but he had been brought up on the writings of Beatrice and Sidney Webb and the philosophies of George Bernard Shaw.
He burned with a reforming zeal.
Champion of the underdog and believer in the nobility of the common man, he lost no opportunity to teach his daughter the importance of never giving in  or allowing herself to be beaten by lack of courage.
‘Try, Constance!’ he would exhort, when she faltered before jumping a stream or climbing over a hedge.
‘You can do it!
I know you can!
There's nothing to be afraid of.’
His encouragement was always psychological, never physical.
He willed her to overcome the problem — and she did so because she couldn't bear the thought of letting him down.
All through her life, even at moments when her difficulties seemed overwhelming, Constance would remember her father's words declaimed into the vast skies of Northumberland: ‘Never be afraid, Constance.
You can do anything you like, now and for ever.
Nobody can stop you — only yourself.’
Tightly clutching his hand and running to keep up, Constance had believed him.
Years later, she acknowledged the debt she owed him for those early lessons in self-determination.
She and her father were out walking on the day he died.
It was during the Easter holidays.
Nora Simpson had taken the early bus to Chollerton to do her weekend shopping.
Constance had walked to the bus-stop with her.
The seasons are reluctant to let go in the North of England and, although it was early May, Nora wore her winter coat.
It was a deep blue colour and had a matching hat like a tiny trilby, decorated with a feather.
Constance thought that she looked very smart.
She knew Nora thought so too.
By the way her mother fiddled with the handle of her wicker basket Constance could tell that she was longing for the bus to come and take her to Chollerton where her beauty and style might stand some chance of being noticed.
Rightly, Nora considered Cramer a wasteland as far as fashion was concerned.
The wives of the village, who almost always wore black under their ubiquitous pinnies, looked askance at the doctor's wife and her parade of bonny colours.
Constance didn't care — even when her friends made fun of her mother's elegance.
She was proud of how Nora looked and loved to touch the material of her clothes.
She intended to look just as smart when she grew up.
After the cream and brown Bedford bus had trundled away up the road Constance walked back to the house.
She met her father coming out of the surgery.
‘Mummy got off all right, did she?’ he asked her.
‘What are you going to do now?
Very light surgery this morning: I haven't to be in Chollerton until two and I've only got a couple of calls to make.
Fancy a walk?’
They strode down the drive and out of the gate and, once through the village, struck out for the Heights, as the long sea meadows between Cramer and Dunstanburgh were inappropriately called.
To give the walk some point, Will Simpson had decided to call in to see a patient whose son farmed the fields beyond the Heights.
‘I'll only be there for a minute, Constance, to see that things are all right.
You can play with the puppies in the yard.’
To reach the farmhouse they could follow the muddy and pit-marked cart track between the fields or take the short cut across the meadow to the little wooden gate at the side of the garden.
That morning, as it was dry under-foot, Will Simpson decided to take the short cut.
As they climbed over the hedge, he was struck by the beauty of the day; the hedgerows were just coming into leaf and the meadow was dotted with buttercups and daisies.
High above, the birds wheeled and dipped in the wind that blew the clouds across the huge sky.
The field was empty except for a few ewes with young lambs.
They panicked and moved away, complaining, as the two figures walked towards them.
Suddenly their random bleating was joined by the rhythmic thud of drumming hooves.
From the back of a barn three shire horses came thundering out — a stallion and two mares.
Constance and her father stopped as the horses galloped furiously around the edge of the meadow, their enormous hooves kicking up great clods of earth as they went.
The ground shook beneath the weight of their tread.
‘Quick, Constance!’
Will shouted.
‘Run for the gate!’
She looked at her father in fright.
He was white and  his eyes were anxiously watching the three horses, who had now separated.
One of the mares galloped to the far end of the field where she stopped and started to crop.
The other gambolled towards Will and Constance with the stallion by her side.
Their eyes rolled and their manes tossed, as, snorting and whinnying, they tried to bite each other.
The noise of their hooves boomed as they came closer.
Pushed by her father, Constance started to run.
The hoof sounds came nearer, irregular now as the two horses galloped together, rearing their heads and kicking out with their hind legs.
The beasts were almost on top of them.
As Will turned and threw up his arms to head them off, Constance continued running.
The stallion veered away and kicked out in an enormous arc.
His hooves caught Will on the side of the head.
Constance heard the crack of his skull and his cry of pain.
She turned and saw him lying still, face down, as the horses careered away.
Two farm hands came rushing out of the barn and ran across the field to the motionless figure.
She too began to run towards the group huddled over her father's body.
As she stopped a few feet away from them she saw that his cap had been knocked some distance from where he lay and the force of the blow, which had thrown him through the air, had dislodged his fountain pen from his pocket.
Bending to pick it up, Constance saw her father's face framed by a farm worker's legs.
It was grey.
His hair was sticky with blood and a purple bruise was spreading across his temple.
As she stared in terror, she heard one of the men say, ‘He's gone.’
From the day of Will Simpson's death his wife and daughter lived a life incomplete.
For the first few weeks their existence was bedraggled and formless.
Although there was no dramatic change in their circumstances — no fear of eviction or drop in their standard of living — Constance felt rudderless.
As she gazed forlornly at Blackie's , knowing that there would be no more collecting of specimens  and no more colouring in, she felt guilt as well as resentment.
Could she have averted the tragedy?
Should she have stayed with her father?
She sat for hours in her bedroom.
Holding the red Conway Stewart pen she had picked up from the grass, she went over the scene again and again.
Was it somehow her fault?
Had she let him down?
In bed at night, fear attacked her.
What if anything happened to her mother?
As she lay in the dark, listening to the moan of the wind above the crash of the waves, she slowly came to the realisation that, although she had lost her father, his spirit would give her strength to go on without him.
Even so, in her darkest moments, wrong as she knew it to be, Constance could not stop herself thinking, If only it had been Mummy.
Despite her desolation, Nora Simpson was not the sort of woman to be beaten by a twist of fate.
Throughout her life she had been a realist and a coper.
In the evenings when Constance was in bed she sat in her husband's favourite chair and contemplated her lot.
She never once gave way to despair or sentimentality.
She had cried her personal tears before the funeral and that side of her grief was then over.
Her job now was to plan the future.
She spread out the balance sheet of her life rather as if she were playing Patience.
There as no question of marrying again.
There was no need to.
Nora had no intention of having any more children and she was convinced that she and Constance would be better off alone.
It was not that she couldn't contemplate marriage to anyone other than Will.
It was merely that she had learned from her life with him that, like many married women, she didn't really need a husband.
Even Will, she realised, for all his consideration, had subconsciously assumed that she was there solely to support him.
‘Dancing attendance’ was not one of Nora's expressions but she realised now that he was gone that she had done precisely that.
She did not intend to do it again.
From now on, her thoughts and efforts would be entirely for her daughter.
Nora was determined  that the tragedy would impinge as little as possible on Constance's life.
Louise came up for the funeral and stayed on for three weeks to give moral support.
The two women quickly fell into a pattern.
After supper, Louise would leave Nora to herself until the nine o'clock news and then she would join her for a nightcap.
In those days villages like Cramer were silent and empty in the evenings.
In the summer the villagers worked in their back gardens; in the winter, they snuggled indoors and closed the shutters against the wind and cold.
At any time, very little visiting took place and the women were always alone.
One night, ten days after the funeral, as Louise was thinking of going up to bed, Nora began to talk about Constance and her future.
‘I'm determined to make something of her, for poor Will's sake, if nothing else.
I don't want her to end up with the sort of empty life I've got to look forward to.
I want her to be independent.
Able to stand on her own feet.
I want her to be somebody.’
‘I'm sure she will be,’ Louise replied, non-committally.
It was obvious to her that her niece already had the strength and resolution to ensure that she would make something of her life.
‘However,’ she continued, ‘I think it's too early to think about it yet, Nora.
When she gets to the grammar school her bent will come out.’
‘Constance is artistic,’ Nora replied firmly.
‘I intend her to have something to do with the arts.
You know, that's what I should have done.
Not painting, or anything like that, but something creative.
It's in my bones, but I've left it too late to do anything about it.
I'm determined that Constance won't fall into the same trap.’
‘Well,’ said Louise gently, ‘I'm sure that she'll have her own views when the time comes.’
Nora did not reply.
She gazed ahead of her, her mind occupied in speculation.
Four months after Will's death, two things happened that helped Constance forget the past.
War was declared and, more or less at the same time, her mother, who wished to distance her from the rough and ready children at the village school, arranged for her to have piano lessons.
The local gentry were Sir John and Lady Wardley, who lived at Seaton Cramer Hall, a large and dramatically sombre stately pile set in wooded grounds about two miles inland from Cramer.
With them lived Miss Hatherby, Lady Wardley's sister.
She had once studied to be a concert pianist and had been a pupil of Paderewski in Dresden in the summer of 1921.
She now gave piano lessons, on a strictly limited basis, to suitable children.
Her pupils were not entirely decided upon by Miss Hatherby.
They were vetted by Lady Wardley, who prided herself on knowing all the Northumbrian families worth knowing.
Constance was accepted because Nora was a pillar of the Women's Voluntary Service and worked closely with Lady Wardley in the war effort.
Nora found Lady Wardley irritatingly superior but, as her junior in the W.V.S., had to submit to being patronised.
The elevation of Constance was her reward.
Miss Hatherby was not like her sister.
Although perfectly aware of her status in the county, she was not a snob.
She welcomed Constance for her weekly lesson with genuine warmth.
Her influence on the girl was soon considerable and Constance looked forward to her visits to the grim and rambling Gothic building.
The villagers called it The Mansion and viewed it and its formal garden of still and silent yew trees with awe.
Certainly, the house was grim, but Constance found its heavy extravagance rich and romantic.
As she cycled up to the ornate porch she always thought of chivalrous knights attending maidens dressed in high, pointed hats and long sweeping gowns.
Whereas the house was darkly masculine in its Victorian confidence, Miss Hatherby's music room was so light and feminine that it seemed quite out of place in the general heaviness and gloom.
It was a riot of colour and pattern.
The displays of china and silver-framed photographs and the arrangements of feathers and dried flowers would have made the atmosphere claustrophobic if the immense windows had not let in so much light.
Everything in the room seemed to be clothed.
Chairs and sofas wore lace antimacassars; tables had heavy fringed cloths that reached to the floor and even the carpets were covered with rugs.
But the most enchanting thing in the room for Constance, apart from Miss Hatherby herself, was a large bamboo bird cage placed in the fireplace containing two brightly coloured and raucous cockatoos.
As Constance picked her way heavily across the mine-field of the Minuet in G, her faltering efforts were greeted with screams and jeers from the birds who would not be silenced even when Miss Hatherby threw an enormous dust sheet over their cage.
Although it was the size of a pantry, they endlessly clung to the bars and clamoured to be let out.
At the end of one particularly painful lesson, Miss Hatherby did release them and they stalked the room stiffly, pecking at the furniture and flapping their wings, to Constance's great delight.
Her joy changed to alarm when Miss Hatherby said quietly, ‘Come and sit down, Constance.
I want to talk to you.’
Sensing the seriousness in her voice, Constance perched uneasily on the chair Miss Hatherby had indicated.
A nervous lump came to her throat.
‘Why do you wish to learn to play the piano, Constance?’
There was a silence.
Constance had no idea how to answer.
The truth was that she did not especially wish to learn.
She had started the lessons because her mother had insisted and she now continued them because she loved being with Miss Hatherby.
‘I would never discourage enthusiasm, no matter how lacking in talent,’ Miss Hatherby continued, ‘but, my dear, I'm afraid you have neither.’
The tone was gentle but the words were harsh and Constance wanted to cry.
She felt ashamed of being such a failure.
As if she had read her thoughts, Miss Hatherby said, ‘There is nothing to be ashamed of.
The gift of music grows within.
It cannot be grafted on to an alien stem.
We mustn't allow your mother's money to be wasted in this way.
I shall advise her that the lessons should cease.’
‘Oh,’ Constance cried.
‘But what about…’
She stopped.
She had almost said ‘us’.
‘My dear Constance, I am not suggesting that you should no longer visit me.
I merely propose that the charade of music lessons be terminated.’
Trying to make light of it, she added, ‘Why, even the birds think it a joke!
I shall write to your mother.’
The next few days were agony for Constance, as she waited for the letter to arrive.
As she feared, her mother took Miss Hatherby's decision as a social slap in the face and blamed her daughter for wasting an opportunity.
‘I'm sick of your lack of co-operation, my girl,’ she snapped over the breakfast table.
‘How could you let me down like this after all the effort I've made?
I can just imagine how that Wardley cow will be crowing.
Do you never think about anything but yourself?
Don't you imagine I deserve some consideration?
You wouldn't dare behave like this if your father were still alive.’
Constance found her shame turning to anger.
‘What a horrible thing to say!
It isn't my fault.
I've tried — I really have — but I don't have any aptitude for the piano!
Ask Miss Hatherby.
You know how much I've practised.
I can't help it!’
She rushed out of the room and into the garden, determined not to return to the house until her mother had apologised.
The Northumbrian weather let her down.
It seemed that in no time she was forced indoors by huge raindrops that appeared to have come from nowhere.
She slunk in  through the French windows, hoping to creep upstairs unseen.
As she stepped indoors, she heard her mother's voice.
She was in the hall, telephoning.
Constance hovered indecisively.
Her mother was speaking quietly, urgently, but sufficiently clearly for Constance to hear through the closed drawing-room door.
‘But Louise,’ she was saying, ‘I can't imagine how that old maid up at the hall could have got to know.
Who on earth ever talks to Miss Hatherby, for goodness’ sake!
It will be one of the W.V.S. lot, you mark my words, gossiping with that Wardley bitch.
I've told you how they all toady to her.
Someone must have seen me getting out of Philip Stacey's car one night.’
There was a pause.
Constance tiptoed nearer the door.
‘Louise,’ her mother burst out in irritation, ‘I will not be dictated to by that lot up at the Mansion.
I shall have an affair with whoever I like.
No, of course Constance has no idea.
Give me credit for some discretion.’
Constance tiptoed back to the French windows.
Her mind was racing.
What was her mother talking about?
Why had she mentioned Mr Stacey, the antique dealer in the square in Chollerton?
It was over a year since the war had started and, in that time, it had encroached even on remote Cramer.
To Nora's intense annoyance she had been forced to take a lodger who was involved in essential war work.
When she had protested to Lord Wardley, who was chief billeting officer for that part of Northumberland, he had referred her to a minion who, in turn, had taken great pleasure in pointing out that she could, if she preferred, have some evacuees from Gateshead but, either way, her spare room could not remain empty when everyone was required to make a war effort.
Nora had bowed to the inevitable and accepted Mr Laker, a silent and sad Mancunian who worked as an inspector for the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries.
Once a week, Mr Laker travelled to Chollerton to fulfil his night duties as an Air Raid Precaution officer.
He shared a shift with Philip Stacey, the local  antiques dealer, who was exempt on health grounds from active service.
The two men had become friends and Philip Stacey frequently visited Cramer.
Constance remembered the many times she had seen her mother and him alone together either in the village street or at home; she had been uneasily aware of their absorption in each other.
Only half understanding the significance of it, Constance realised as she stood watching the rain that her mother had a secret, separate life in a grown-up world from which she was excluded.
She found it perplexing and wondered how it could have affected her lessons with Miss Hatherby.
The rain began to ease.
Constance ran round the side of the house, and walking into the kitchen, slammed the door loudly behind her.
As she was drying her hair on the kitchen towel, Nora appeared through the dining-room door.
Constance could not look at her mother.
Throwing down the towel, she roughly pushed past her and ran upstairs.
Safely in her room, she fell on her bed and began to cry.
With a comprehension not entirely formed, she knew what the expression ‘having an affair’ meant, though the details of what her mother and Mr Stacey actually did together were hazy.
Whatever it was, Constance knew it was a betrayal of her father's memory as well as being something of which Miss Hatherby could not approve.
Would her mother's actions destroy the only friendship she had left now that her father was dead?
She hated Nora for the double betrayal and swore that she would never forgive her.
It was the first step in the emotional detachment that would dominate her relations with her mother for the rest of her life.
As she lay, tense and isolated in her room, Constance longed for her mother to push open the door and come and talk to her, and tell her that her imaginings were all wrong.
She couldn't bring herself to believe what she had overheard.
Surely her mother and Aunt Louise would never betray her — and her father's memory — so coldly?
Mr Stacey was nobody important, she tried to convince herself.
He was only Mr Laker's friend.
She was imagining things.
Even as the thoughts entered her head, they were dismissed, because she knew that they were false comfort.
So, Constance decided, her friend had banished her because of her mother's behaviour.
The letter must have said that she could not go to the Mansion again.
Overwhelmed by the injustice of it all, she sat up.
Why should she be the victim when she had done nothing wrong?
Indignation gave her courage.
As her tears dried, she began to understand why her mother had reacted so hysterically to Miss Hatherby's decision.
It wasn't because she was angry: it was because she was guilty.
This realisation gave Constance the strength she needed.
She went into the bathroom and rinsed her face in cold water.
Then she went downstairs to find her mother.
Nora was in the kitchen, washing the breakfast dishes.
From the noise she made, it was clear that she was still angry but Constance wasn't frightened.
She knew that she had no reason to feel ashamed.
It was her mother who had done wrong.
She stood in the kitchen doorway.
Sensing her presence, Nora turned.
Her face looked troubled as well as angry.
‘Well, my girl, I hope you're satisfied now you've had your little tantrum,’ she said.
‘If so, perhaps you can tell me what has been going on up at the Hall that has made Miss Hatherby stop your lessons.’
‘Can I see the letter, please?’
Constance asked.
For a moment she thought her mother would refuse but instead she merely said, ‘It's on the hall table.’
The letter was short but perfectly polite.
‘Dear Mrs Simpson,’ Constance read:
Constance has tried so hard at her pianoforte lessons that I know you will share our disappointment at her lack of progress.
After much thought, I have decided that it would be in everyone's interests to terminate the  lessons.
I am sure that you will understand the reasons for this.
Yours sincerely, Mildred Hatherby.
Could Miss Hatherby know of her mother's affair?
Constance wondered.
The letter did seem strange.
After all, she wasn't that bad at playing the piano.
Putting the envelope back on the hall table she went out to the shed for her bike.
In sharp contrast to her mood, the rain had gone and the clouds were breaking up to reveal a blue sky.
Instead of another row with her mother, she had decided that she must get to the bottom of things by going up to the Hall and speaking to Miss Hatherby, and she pedalled as fast as she could.
Constance was startled by Miss Hatherby's appearance when she arrived at the Hall.
She had never seen her in the morning and she knew instinctively that she had made a mistake in arriving without warning.
It wasn't that Miss Hatherby was in a state of undress, had her hair in curlers or anything obviously embarrassing like that.
The silk shawl she draped over her shoulders winter and summer was in place; her mother of pearl brooch was at her neck as it should be and her shoes were shining as immaculately as ever.
But something in her demeanour was not composed to greet the outside world.
She frowned with irritation but spoke with her usual friendliness as, walking round the side of the house, she found Constance propping up her bike against the porch.
‘Constance, my dear.
What are you doing here?
I didn't expect you.’
The tone of the last sentence taught Constance a lesson she never forgot.
It was that disapproval could be conveyed without anger.
She realised that she had imposed on Miss Hatherby's kindness and she blushed for her lack of consideration.
‘Oh!’ she blurted in confusion.
‘I'm so sorry.
I shouldn't have come but…
I'm so frightened.’
She began to cry.
Miss Hatherby was nonplussed.
She had spent a lifetime obeying the rule of her childhood never to give way to her feelings in public, and like many.
members of her class, could not cope with displays of emotion.
‘My dear child, stop!’ she cried in agitation.
‘You mustn't cry.
Good gracious, you're not a baby any more.
Come, sit down and tell me what is the cause of this extraordinary behaviour.’
Again, Constance could sense the disapproval.
She began to feel foolish but she had to talk to somebody and Miss Hatherby was the only person to whom she could turn.
‘Mummy had your letter this morning.
She was so angry.
Not really with me…’ she paused and looked up into Miss Hatherby's troubled face ‘…she felt that you had done it because you didn't approve.’
‘Approve?’
Miss Hatherby asked in bewilderment.
Constance looked down at her feet and, blushing furiously, whispered, ‘Of her gentleman friend.’
It was Miss Hatherby's turn to blush.
More to give herself time to think than because she wished to know, she said to Constance, ‘Perhaps you had better tell me right from the beginning, Constance.’
Only then did Constance realise how little she actually knew.
Her voice squeaking with embarrassment, she told her friend what she had overheard her mother telling Louise.
‘To eavesdrop is an unpardonable thing, Constance,’ Miss Hatherby could not resist saying when she had finished.
Constance was furious.
Was that all she could say?
Why did everyone want to put her in the wrong when she had done nothing to deserve it?
Frustration made her truculent.
‘Is that why you've stopped my lessons?’ she demanded.
We decided to abandon the piano lessons, Constance,’ Miss Hatherby chided, ‘as you well recall, because we knew that progress was not being made.
Your mother is quite mistaken to assume that there is any other motive except the evident fact that you are not musically endowed.
Now,’ she said decisively, ‘you must go back to your mother and make that clear.’
‘But what about me?’
Constance cried in despair.
‘What will happen to me?
What about the man?’
Miss Hatherby was appalled.
Throughout her life she had so successfully controlled her emotions that she was now capable of responding only to the demands of music.
Faced by Constance's distress she felt utterly at sea and didn't know how to help her.
She also found it distasteful to be discussing Nora's lover in this way.
‘Did you know about him?’
Constance almost shouted.
‘Does everybody know but me?’
‘Constance,’ Miss Hatherby reproached her, ‘I have no intention of becoming involved in your mother's business.
I repeat, you must go back to her.
Assure her that you are welcome here always — provided we have made arrangements — and please make her understand that there is no criticism — of anyone — to be inferred from our decision to stop your piano lessons.’
Constance knew that her friend had failed her.
She looked across the terrace to the grim yew trees and thought, That's how they all expect me to be — silent and still.
Well, I won't.
I have as much right to know what's going on as they do.
‘Come and see me on Thursday, as usual, my dear,’ Miss Hatherby said as they walked back across the terrace.
Climbing on her bicycle Constance looked directly at her and repeated the question.
‘Did you know about my mother?’
Miss Hatherby looked down and shook her head before stepping into the house.
Constance felt let down but, more, she was overcome with indignant self-pity as she slowly cycled back along  the drive that linked the Hall to the main road.
The heavy boughs and dark leaves of the copper beech that spread over the drive perfectly suited her mood of despair.
Once she had turned the corner and the house was hidden from view, she jumped off her bike and pushed it through the maze of potholes that pitted the drive as it meandered the half mile to the main gates.
Just before she reached them she found a felled tree.
Sitting down on it, she buried her head in her hands and burst into tears.
She had no idea how long she had been there when a movement in the undergrowth made her look up.
At first, her eyes still full of tears, she couldn't make out the figure.
Then it moved and a man stepped out in front of her.
He was fat and dirty, with cunning eyes deep-set in his face.
He was wearing uniform but his battledress jacket was unbuttoned and his tie was loose.
Constance found him repulsive and she knew immediately that he was dangerous.
She leapt up fearfully and said, ‘What do you want?
Who are you?
This is private land!’
‘Calm yourself, lassie,’ the man replied, taking a step towards her.
Suddenly, before she knew what was happening, he lunged forward and caught her wrist.
Pulling her towards him, he snarled, ‘I think you need something to cheer you up, lassie.’
He pushed her against a tree and began pulling her skirt up over her knees.
Constance struggled and tried to free her arms, but the man was too strong for her.
She screamed as she felt his fingers pulling at her knickers.
Letting go of her hands, the man hit her violently across the face.
‘Shut it and keep it shut,’ he growled.
‘You're going to enjoy this.’
He tried to kiss her, pushing his face into hers.
Wild with fear, Constance opened her mouth and bit his nose so hard that it hurt her teeth.
The man reared back in pain and his hands went up to his face.
For a split second, Constance failed to realise that he had released his grip on her.
The realisation came at the same time to both of them.
As he grabbed at her again she ducked under his  arms and ran towards the gates.
He tried to follow her but fell over her bike.
As she dashed out into the road, where his camouflaged truck was parked, she was relieved that the only thing pursuing her was his curses.
Constance wanted to run home but she knew that she couldn't leave her bike.
Hiding in the hedge a safe distance from the truck, she waited for the man to appear.
Eventually he emerged, limping, through the gates.
He looked up and down the road, saw nothing, climbed into his truck and drove off.
Constance realised that the soldier was not a local man.
She could tell by the insignia of his uniform that he didn't belong to the regiment billeted at the Hall whose tents were visible at the far end of the park when she cycled up to the house.
He must have stopped in order to relieve himself and, hearing her sobs in the silence of the wood, decided to investigate.
She sat in the hedge for a long time.
She felt calm but deeply guilty.
Just as she felt ashamed and somehow responsible for the disgrace of her mother's lover so she felt that the man's attack had been her fault.
Overcome with remorse, she wanted to die.
I'll throw myself in front of the next car that comes, she decided.
Immediately she heard the Chollerton bus trundling towards her.
She scrambled up out of the hedge and reached the roadside just as the bus rolled past.
Furious, she sat down to wait for the next vehicle.
Her mood changed from guilt to defiance.
She determined to show her mother and Miss Hatherby and Aunt Louise.
She imagined the remorse and guilt that would haunt them when she was dead.
Well, it would serve them right for treating her like a baby.
She continued to wait.
The air was silent, the road deserted.
‘Oh,please let something come,’ she begged.
Not a sound or movement answered her plea.
‘It isn't fair.’
Suddenly she heard a car engine in the drive.
It came closer, then stopped.
She heard doors open.
Slowly she walked back towards the gates of the Hall.
She stopped in horror at the sound of Lady Wardley's high querulous voice demanding, ‘Who could have left it there?
Poachers?’
‘Can't say, m'lady.’
Constance recognised the Wardley chauffeur's voice.
‘Well,’ Lady Wardley said, ‘whoever it belongs to is a trespasser.
After you've dropped me, come back and collect the bicycle and take it to the police.
Come, or I shall be late.’
Constance scrambled back into the hedge and hid as the Daimler nosed out of the drive and turned into the main road, away from her, towards Alnwick.
All thought of suicide had been knocked out of her head.
She must get the bike before the car returned.
She ran down the drive.
The man's foot had broken a few spokes and the chain had come off, but there was no other damage.
She pushed the bike out into the road and back to Cramer as quickly as she could.
For days afterwards, she couldn't rid herself of the guilty feeling that, somehow, she had brought the attack upon herself.
She felt unclean and unworthy, rather as she hoped that her mother, in her dark moments, must feel about Mr Stacey — and she never told Nora of the incident.
In fact, she told nobody until many years later, after her mother's death, when she confided in Louise.
Guilt made her try to bury it deep in her subconscious.
Nora never mentioned Philip Stacey but she was certain that Constance had found out and half understood about the liaison.
The knowledge caused her genuine distress and, in the face of Constance's increasing truculence, she turned to Louise for counsel.
‘It isn't that Constance is naughty, or has tantrums,’ she said to her cousin on the telephone, ‘it's as if she has just turned her back on me.
She is so cool and indifferent, so enclosed and private — when she's not openly defiant, that is.
She's built a wall around herself.
I don't know what to do.’
‘Oh, Nora, darling, do think back,’ Louise tried to soothe her.
‘You know what we were like at that age.
Always in a dream, cut off from the world—and forever being dreadfully wounded over the slightest thing.
Surely you remember?
It's perfectly natural.
You're taking it far too seriously.’
‘I feel so lonely,’ Nora replied, ‘so shut out.
I can't bear it.
She's all I have.’
‘Stop worrying; it's only a phase.’
‘She thinks more of that old maid up at the Hall than she does of me, her own mother, I can assure you of that.’
‘Nonsense, darling,’ Louise laughed, but she felt that it might possibly be true.
In fact, it was not.
The idolisation of Miss Hatherby that had so annoyed Nora in the early days of the piano lessons had gone.
Constance still respected her friend and had a certain detached affection for her.
But since her failure to understand and help her over her mother's lover, Constance viewed Miss Hatherby rather as her mother described her: an old maid, unworldly, afraid of emotions and inexperienced in life.
She still admired her education and artistic breadth but had come to realise that these were all Miss Hatherby could share with her.
And, although she was still eager to learn from her, Constance needed more.
Not that it stopped her from gobbling up every cultural titbit dropped before her.
She was a willing ally in Miss Hatherby's ambitious project to educate Constance in the things she felt the girl should know.
In Miss Hatherby's limited view this meant the arts.
The Wardley family collection contained many treasures, including many Pre-Raphaelite paintings, and Miss Hatherby knew them all intimately.
She intended to share her knowledge with her young pupil, who, like a sponge, was ready to absorb everything.
Stalking through the dark rooms she would suddenly stop and point to a fireplace —‘William de Morgan, those tiles.
Remember the name.
Much cleverer man than you would  imagine by that livid green’— and then she would sail on, followed by Constance who, because she had rather liked the green, never forgot the name.
Miss Hatherby showed Constance the treasures of the house.
Together they looked at huge bound tomes which contained drawings by the Wardley ancestors on the Grand Tour —‘Great Uncle Charles, died of pneumonia in Genoa,’ she snorted as she closed his sketchbook and picked up a folio of the architecture of Rome, Naples and the Campagna.
‘Neopolitan mosquitoes are man-eaters, my dear; you cannot imagine how disagreeable they are.’
Together they gazed at the family portraits and Miss Hatherby pointed out the niceties of her forefathers' dress —‘Folk would literally kill for shoe buckles of that quality.
Gone.
All gone now.
God knows where.’
The Wardley family collection contained many treasures and Miss Hatherby knew them all intimately.
Constance loved the pictures, but for her the most enchanting thing in the collection was a group of eighteenth century wax dolls dressed in the height of the day's fashion.
Miss Hatherby explained in her dry, sibilant voice, that they were sent from Paris so that London ladies could know about the latest French fashions and have them copied.
Constance spent hours drawing imaginary clothes for the mannequins and, encouraged by Miss Hatherby and her mother, made them dresses out of scraps of old material Miss Hatherby managed to find tucked away in the corners of Seaton Cramer Hall.
Constance could not believe how beautiful they were.
Their colours and patterns seemed as fresh as the day they were made and she was amazed at their richness compared with the wartime materials she was used to.
She worked very hard to get everything exactly right and would spend hours in her room sewing, unpicking and re-sewing until she felt that the clothes were perfect.
Some of her happiest hours were passed in making these costumes and she found that time flew by — it seemed she  had barely started before her mother was calling for her to have her bath and go to bed.
Often, unable to bear leaving the dress until the next night, Constance would get up after Nora had closed the door and, placing her dressing gown at its foot so that no light would show, spend another hour or two at the work she loved.
Like her mother, Constance was a perfectionist and devoted all her energies and efforts to making something she could show Nora with pride and, more importantly, present to Miss Hatherby with confidence.
Constance loved the days when her friend unpacked the boxes and trunks that contained dresses, shoes and bonnets which were often over a hundred years old.
She adored the delicate materials with their strange names that Miss Hatherby always knew; the quaint shapes and the beautiful, faded colours.
On one occasion they unearthed a blue taffeta ball dress with small bouquets of pink and cream brocade roses.
Miss Hatherby swooped low over it and said, ‘The Honourable Edwina Trevelyan!
Come!’ and, scooping up the dress, carried it through to the winter drawing room.
To Constance's delight, there in the corner by the fireplace was a watercolour of a woman wearing the dress, and she was amazed by the similarity between her friend and the woman in the picture — they shared the same strongly determined mouth — even though Miss Hatherby was old and not pretty like the Honourable Miss Trevelyan, whose brown eyes possessed amazing richness and beauty.
For Constance, whose own home was sparsely furnished and contained no pictures apart from framed photographs of her father in a group of students and her parents' wedding photographs, the walls of Seaton Cramer Hall teemed with interest and life.
Sir John's father had been a friend of Ruskin and the family collection contained several of his watercolours of Venice.
‘All theory, that man,’ Miss Hatherby declared.
‘His drawing is pedestrian — although his mind was not.
But these aren't Venice.
They are a cold, northern intellectual's idea of Venice.’
Then she would start to reminisce.
On days when Miss Hatherby felt expansive and inclined to talk, the whole of Europe, its art and life, were presented to her pupil, without compromise or condescension.
Her reminiscences were a delight to Constance and the things she learned from her friend's rambling monologues stayed with her for life.
Constance cycled home from the Hall with her head in the clouds and her imagination fired with images conjured up by Miss Hatherby's memories.
She could not wait to rush up to her room to read the latest book her friend had lent her — which could be anything from The Stones of Venice to The Prisoner of Zenda .
Although the Wardley collection contained several huge religious paintings from the Renaissance, Miss Hatherby pronounced them ‘doubtful’.
Its real glory was in mid-Victorian and Pre-Raphaelite paintings.
Constance never forgot standing in front of one on the main staircase.
It was full of knights, one of whom was dying in the arms of a fair maiden.
As she looked at the vast and busy canvas, Miss Hatherby sensed she was finding it difficult to take in and said, ‘You know Constance, you cannot look at a painting with the same eyes as you stare down Chollerton High Street.
Nothing as direct as that.
Your eye must take a painting by surprise.
Quarter the canvas and absorb all the details before putting it together again.’
She smiled fondly.
‘That is how to look at pictures.
I do so want you to learn, my dear,’ and, turning away, she half whispered, ‘There is so much pleasure, so much pleasure to be gained by the informed.’
‘There's a portrait up at the Hall of a woman wearing a lovely dress,’ Constance told her mother, as they were both sewing in the drawing room.
‘Blue, with roses.’
‘Who is it?’ her mother asked.
‘The Honourable Miss Trevelyan.
The family live near Hexham somewhere and they have connections going back  to the early nineteenth century,’ Constance said, quoting Miss Hatherby almost verbatim.
‘It must be nice to have pictures of your family going back for years.
All we've got is Daddy when he was a medical student — and your wedding pictures.’
‘We never had the money for such things,’ Nora replied.
There was a sharpness in her tone that made Constance look up.
‘There's no need to get angry,’ she said, ‘I'm only saying.’
‘I've half a mind to stop her going up there,’ Nora told Louise.
‘Filling her head with such nonsense.
She's beginning to think herself far too grand for us.
The Honourable Miss Trevelyan!
When they were swanning around looking pretty, our families were working their fingers to the bone for virtually nothing and now Miss High-and-Mighty thinks we should admire them.
Poor Will would turn in his grave!
Anyhow, I think that Hatherby woman has far too much influence on Constance.’
‘Oh, come, darling,’ Louise replied, taken aback by the injustice of Nora's remark.
‘She has been marvellous for Constance.
Think of how much she's taught her.
She's given her a cultural background for life.
That's a priceless gift.
Do be fair.’
‘She's turned her into a proper little snob!’
Nora retorted.
‘You don't understand how Constance has cut herself off from all her friends.
She lives in her own world and is very secretive.
I don't get to know half of what's going on.
I know it sounds silly but I think Miss Hatherby is too interested in Constance.
What can a woman of her age want with a young girl?’
Louise would have none of it.
She was much more worldly than Nora and, having met Miss Hatherby, dismissed the slur out of hand.
‘Nora, darling!’ she laughed.
‘You're becoming utterly ridiculous.
Miss H. is no more a lesbian than you are, so stop being silly and just thank your lucky stars that she's teaching Constance so much.’
Nora felt ashamed.
‘I just wish Constance would be more open.
You've no idea how secretive she is.
I don't like it.
And,’ she added, determined to have the last word, ‘she is becoming far too toffee-nosed.’
Louise was right about Miss Hatherby.
She was not a lesbian and it was Constance's mind that she wished to possess, not her body.
Despite her remark, Nora knew this perfectly well and was determined not to allow it to happen.
She lost no opportunity to diminish Miss Hatherby in her daughter's eyes and was always ready to ridicule her.
‘Miss Hatherby!
What on earth does she know about real life?’ she would demand when Constance had quoted something her friend had said.
‘I don't wish to criticise your friend but, when all is said and done, what does a half-mad old maid know about anything?
I'm not blaming her, it isn't her fault, locked away up there, miles from anywhere but, I ask you, Constance, what can she possibly know about the realities of life in 1945?
She's living in the past, poor dear.’
Through Miss Hatherby's dolls and pictures, Constance became increasingly interested in her own clothes — and had rows over them with her mother that often reverberated for days.
Nora tried her best to get round the wartime restrictions so that Constance could be well dressed.
In order to do so, she had no hesitation in breaking the law and regularly bought clothing coupons from the village women to supplement the meagre amount allocated to her and Constance by the Board of Trade.
She spent hours unpicking her pre-war frocks in order to remake them for her daughter.
She knew exactly how Constance should be dressed.
Whatever she made was done to suit her taste.
Constance was never consulted.
Coming back early from school one afternoon, she passed the dining-room window and saw her mother cutting something out on the table.
She put her bike away and sauntered into the room.
Nora was deep in  concentration and the sudden appearance of her daughter startled her.
‘What on earth are you doing home at this time?’ she demanded.
‘What are you doing?’
Constance asked, looking with distaste at the pale green material on the table.
‘Well,’ Nora replied angrily, ‘I was trying to give you a little surprise but you've spoiled that now.’
‘Was that it?’
Constance asked, fingering the fabric.
‘More a shock than a surprise.
If you think I'd be seen dead in that you must be mad.
I'd rather walk down the road naked than put that thing on.’
‘What on earth do you mean?’
Nora asked in bewilderment.
Pulling it from the table and scattering pins across the floor, Constance held up the half-finished garment.
‘Mummy!’ she cried.
‘It's a monstrosity!
Surely you can see that!
Not even Miss Hatherby would wear it!
Where on earth did you get that material?’
‘It was one of your father's favourites .
You can't get material like this any more.
I cannot believe that I've cut up the dress he used to love me to wear and all I get for thanks is cheek.
You're becoming utterly spoiled by that wretched woman.
Who do you think you are?’
‘Somebody who has some taste at least,’ Constance replied.
‘Don't you speak to me in that way,’ Nora retorted, ‘or I'll box your ears, you ungrateful girl!’and they were into yet another quarrel.
It rumbled on for the rest of the week.
Constance knew she had been insensitive, and was aware of how much she had hurt her mother.
She even felt that, by her outburst, she had somehow insulted her father's memory.
She wanted to make amends but didn't know how to.
In desperation, she secretly telephoned Louise, something she had never done before.
‘Aunt Louise,’ she said, ‘you understand, don't you?
It isn't anything against Mummy.
It's just that I don't have  the same taste as she does and she always wants me to have what she wants.
I have fashion sense as well, you know.
I'm sixteen.
Don't you think it's time I was allowed to decide what I want to wear for myself?’
‘Of course, darling, but you must be fair.
You know how difficult it is to get your hands on anything these days — and your mother tries so hard to make you look nice.
I always thought that green a very pretty colour.
It suited your mother marvellously.’
‘But that doesn't mean that it suits me , Aunt Louise.
That's the whole problem.
Mummy always thinks she knows best.
And she doesn't — at least not for me.
I have my own ideas but she won't listen.’
‘She will, my dear, I promise , but you must give her a chance.
Things haven't been easy for Nora since your father died.’
Guilt swept over Constance but she felt like saying ‘nor for me’, as Louise went on, ‘Just for me, darling, say you're sorry to your mother and then I'll sort something out.
I promise.
Please !
There's a good girl.’
So Constance did.
The dress was put in a drawer, unfinished but not forgotten about.
It marked a vital staging post on Constance's path to independence and made clear to Nora that she was no longer dealing with a child.
Her daughter was eagerly moving towards womanhood and would not be stopped.
It was inevitable that when Miss Hatherby introduced Constance to the Romantic poets she should fall heavily under the spell of Shelley and Keats.
Unwisely, she repeated to her mother a remark Miss Hatherby had made about Keats in love.
‘Love!’
Nora exploded.
‘I've never heard anything so ridiculous!
A dried-up old spinster like that talking of love!
I don't know which is worse — her drivel or you being daft enough to listen to it!
Wait till you've had some experience before you start talking about love to a silly old virgin, that's my advice, my girl.’
Screaming, ‘How dare you?
How dare you speak to your mother like that?’ she jabbed repeatedly until the sight of blood seeping through Constance's blouse stopped her short.
Her eyes dilated with horror at what she had done.
She embraced her sobbing daughter and clung to her in desperate shame.
‘Your world is too enclosed, darling.
It isn't natural, just the two of you up there alone,’ Louise soothed Nora.
‘She's almost a woman.
You know how difficult it is for two women to live together, especially if they're mother and daughter.
Poor Constance goes to a girls’ school, comes home to her mother and visits a middle-aged woman about twice a week.
And that's her life.
The only man she ever sees is the wretched Mr Laker, to say ‘good morning’ to.
No wonder she's getting difficult.’
Nora wanted to say, ‘It isn't her.
It's me.
I am so jealous and protective of her,’ but, close as she was to Louise, she couldn't bring herself to admit what she saw as the black depths of her failure with her daughter.
Nora viewed her daughter's education at the Hall with ambivalence.
Part of her was proud and delighted that Constance was learning so much but another, darker side was clouded by jealousy.
Now the war was over she seriously thought that the answer might be to move from Cramer altogether.
She toyed with the idea of Yorkshire or even further south but was persuaded by Louise that it would be a mistake to make Constance change schools at that point, just before her School Certificate examination.
Also, she did not wish to leave Philip Stacey, so the idea came to nothing.
Nevertheless, she continued to resent Miss Hatherby's influence as much as she feared it.
She felt control of her daughter slipping from her.
‘Miss Hatherby says that she can write to the principal of her college when I'm in the sixth form and see if they can give me a place,’ Constance said casually when they were sitting on the lawn one afternoon.
‘Really?’ was the cold reply.
‘Is that what you want?
To go to university?
I can't see you being happy ending up like her, a frustrated old academic, reacting to other people's creativity.
I thought you wanted to be a real person, creating, not criticising.’
Her daughter's reply stunned Nora.
‘You have a very limited idea of creativity if you imagine that critics aren't real people.
Think of Hazlitt.’
Nora realised how much ground she had lost to the attitudes of the Hall.
She found the sheer sophistication of Constance's answer staggering, but managed to make a joke of it to Louise.
‘My dear,’ she laughed, ‘talk about out of the mouths of babes and sucklings!
I don't even know who Hazlitt is, let alone what he does!
It's quite obvious I must cancel the Express and start taking The Times .
Isn't it just coming to something when one has to try to keep up with one's daughter?’
Although the war had been over almost two years when Constance celebrated her eighteenth birthday in 1947, life was by no means back to normal.
There were still restrictions on virtually every commodity and everything was in short supply — when it was available at all.
Nora had wanted to take Constance down to Louise in Surrey for her birthday so that it could be a family celebration but she decided to wait until the start of the summer holidays in order that they might spend several weeks there.
It seemed to her that the long war had been a form of imprisonment for the spirit as well as the body.
Not only had travel been impossible, it felt like ages since she had seen any beautiful clothes or touched any rich materials.
She knew that she and Constance both needed a real break in their routine.
She was also determined to spend as much time in dress shops as she possibly could!
She had made up her mind that her delayed birthday present to her daughter was to be a proper, shop-bought frock.
She had been amassing clothing coupons for the  last six months and was determined that Constance would have a magnificent dress from one of the London stores.
The last time Constance had visited London was in 1938.
She and her parents had spent four unforgettable days seeing the Tower of London, the British Museum and as much as her father could pack in without exhausting her.
Young as she was, everything had stayed in her memory — the sights, sounds and smells of the city.
She was so excited to be returning that she was up before dawn and ready for the journey south long before the arrival of the taxi that was to take them to Berwick for the train to King's Cross.
The journey was slow and subject to inexplicable stops in mid-country; although the war in Europe was over, the carriages were still full of men in uniform; there were long queues for the tea trolleys at York and Grantham but Constance arrived in London that evening with her excitement undimmed.
The Underground took them to Waterloo and another train carried them to Woking where they were met by Louise's husband, Jim.
‘You poor darlings!
You must be exhausted !’
Louise cried as Constance and Nora staggered into the hall with their heavy cases.
Suddenly, Constance realised that she actually was very tired — but not too tired to notice with pleasure the warm wood panelling, the Turkey-red stair carpet and the clean smell of polish which all added up to an atmosphere of richness and opulence quite foreign to her mother's sparse house in Northumberland.
She loved her little bedroom.
It had a painted chest of drawers and tiny wardrobe and she fell asleep enjoying their shapes in the fading light.
When she woke the next morning, she found them even more entrancing.
The house was silent and she had no idea of the time but, as it was light, she got up, dressed and went downstairs.
She slipped out into the garden.
Like the house, it was neat, friendly and immaculately kept.
Tall fir trees grew at the bottom by the boundary fence, casting long early-morning shadows across the lawn and the laurel hedges  which enclosed it.
As she walked down the crazy-pavement paths to the lily pond, Constance was struck by the blackbirds hopping around in the sun.
They seemed so much less menacing than the crows that pecked and fought in the newly harvested fields at home.
From that first morning, Constance felt happy in the south.
She loved its warmth and was amazed at its lack of wind.
She was delighted with the high trees, privet and rhododendrons that protected and sheltered the houses.
She sniffed with pleasure the fresh, clinical smell of the Scots pines and the newly creosoted palings.
Surrey was the first landscape she had experienced that could be called feminine.
Its softly rounded and gently coloured contours, dotted with lush trees and russet houses, set comfortably into the landscape like plump and cosy chickens, were in strong contrast to coastal Northumberland which so often looked scoured and rough.
Many years later Constance changed her view of the southern landscape.
For her it became a cloying and pallid countryside, tamed and weakened by man's attempts to prettify nature but, in 1947, she thought it the pleasantest spot in the world and she was delighted to be there.
After only a brief time in this balmy atmosphere, Constance knew that she must stay.
Going to the local shops with her aunt one afternoon, she broached the subject that had been on her mind for days.
‘I love it down here.
I don't want to go back to the north.
Please, Aunt Louise, you must help me.
Can you talk to Mummy for me?’
‘But what do you want to do with your life, my darling?
You must have some sort of a career.
Have you thought of nursing?’
‘Oh, Aunt Louise!
I couldn't bear it!’
‘There's nothing wrong with nursing, Constance,’ Louise replied sharply as they walked into the butcher's.
‘Think of where we would have been without nurses during the war.’
‘I know, but I must do something more creative.
I want to create beautiful things — and I know I could.’
‘Of course you could, my sweet’ Louise replied.
A plan was forming in her head but she was not prepared to make it public yet.
‘But darling, she's only just eighteen,’ Nora said to Louise, ‘and she's not trained for anything.
Who would employ her and how would she hold down a job?
It's awfully generous of you to offer to have her, but I don't want her hanging around, getting under your feet all day.’
‘I think you're being far too pessimistic,’ her cousin replied firmly.
‘Can't you see, my dear?
She's ready.
She must be allowed to spread her wings and open up.
She needs to meet sophisticated young people.’
Afraid that she might have hurt Nora, who was sitting very quietly, Louise added, ‘Of course, she'll miss you but I do think she could stay on for a little longer, to see what might happen.’
Louise had secretly appointed herself champion and orchestrator of Constance's half-articulated hopes for the future.
Much as she loved Nora, she was sufficiently realistic about her cousin to know that whatever was beginning to develop in her niece would be much more likely to come to something if Constance remained with her in Surrey than if she returned to the north.
‘They'll get on each other 's nerves,’ she said to herself, ‘they'll do nothing but fight.
I'm determined that Constance will be given a chance.’
Subtle pressure prevailed.
Nora agreed that Constance could stay in Surrey for another month.
Her agreement was not only a reflection of Louise's powers of persuasion.
It was an acknowledgement of the need for both mother and daughter to have a breathing  space.
The tension and frustration that had built up in the claustrophobic atmosphere of their life in Northumberland had finally spilt over when Louise had taken them both to the West End to buy the birthday dress.
Nora had insisted that they ‘do’ every shop in Oxford Street, starting at Marble Arch, but they had only reached Selfridges when the impracticality of the scheme became obvious.
There simply wasn't enough stock in the shops to give them any real choice.
Nora had been harbouring dreams of pre-war munificence, and she was bitterly disappointed — as became increasingly apparent in her short-tempered exchanges with Constance.
‘I'm afraid stocks are still pathetically low,’ Louise said as they looked at the half dozen dresses that were the only ones the assistant had in Constance's size.
‘You can say that again!’
Nora retorted.
‘They're all horrible in any case,’ Constance murmured, disappointment making her sulky.
‘What on earth do you mean?’ asked her mother aggressively, picking up the nearest dress to hand.
‘What's wrong with this, I'd like to know!’
She tried to hold it up against Constance who pulled away and said loudly, ‘Yellow!
Mummy, you must be mad if you think I would be seen dead in a yellow frock!
I'd be a laughing stock!’
Looking around, anxious in case the assistant had heard, Nora retorted, ‘Don't you take that tone with me, young lady.
How dare you speak to me like that in public!’
‘Don't worry!’
Louise said lightly, ‘the day is yet young!
We've plenty of places to go to yet.
Why don't we abandon the original plan and go straight to Debenham and Freebody, as we're so close.
They've usually got a very good selection.’
Sounding much more confident than she felt, she led mother and daughter from the store.
Louise kept up a flow of bright chatter as they set off for Wigmore Street.
She did not dare stop talking because she knew that Constance wasn't speaking to her mother and that Nora would be unable to resist goading her  daughter with a volley of questions.
Louise realised that Nora wanted a fight in order to clear her growing frustration — and she was determined not to give her the opportunity.
Things began much more successfully at Debenham and Freebody.
The range was wider, as Louise had predicted, although Nora pointed out that the clothes were much ‘pricier’ than elsewhere.
Nora chose a blue cotton dress with lots of tiny buttons covered in maroon imitation silk.
Constance tried it on.
‘Now, you really look very nice in that!’
Nora said, beaming with self-vindication.
‘You'll get years of wear out of it.’
‘It's boring,’ Constance said flatly.
‘Can I try that one, please?’
She pointed to a black and white print dress that the assistant had brought in whilst she was changing into the blue.
‘Far too grown up,’ Nora said crossly.
‘And too dramatic.
You'd be bored with it in no time — and so would everybody else.
Chollerton is a very small town, remember.’
‘I'm not going to be spending the rest of my life in Chollerton, Mummy.’
Constance replied.
‘And you're not having this dress,’ Nora said, bending down to look at the price tag.
‘It's two and a half guineas!’ she hissed at Louise, who could tell that she was genuinely appalled.
‘Then I won't bother with anything,’ Constance said.
‘Come on, Aunt Louise, we're wasting our time here.’
As she turned back to the changing room, Nora caught her arm.
‘Listen to me, young lady,’ she said under her breath, ‘I'm not putting up with any tantrums.
That dress is too old for you, and that is that .’
‘All right,’ Constance replied, breaking from her mother's grip.
‘You and Aunt Louise decide!
Don't bother to ask me!
I only have to wear the damned thing!’
Bursting into tears, she rushed into the changing room.
Nora was mortified.
She could not believe that her daughter would let her down by swearing in public.
‘Wait!’
Louise said, restraining her cousin and following Constance into the changing room.
‘Darling!’ she said, over Constance's sobs, ‘Don't get upset.
Mummy's right.
It is too dramatic.
There's nothing wrong with your taste.
It's a stunning dress but it's meant for a woman with lots of clothes to ring the changes.
Honestly, you would soon be bored to tears with it.’
‘Oh, Aunt Louise, it's always the same.
She always thinks that she knows best.
I'm the one who has to wear it.
What's the point of buying a dress that I don't like, just to please Mummy?’
‘None whatsoever,’ Louise said cheerfully, ‘and that certainly is not what your mother wants.
Of course we'll find one that you like — that we all like.
Now, dry your face and we'll go down Regent Street.
Swan and Edgar are sure to have something.’
And, to everyone's relief, they did.
Louise picked out a pretty little pink dress that nobody could possibly take exception to and so honour was satisfied.
But it was a tense trio that made its way back to Surrey.
When Constance had gone to bed that night, Louise made her suggestion that Nora leave the girl behind for a while longer.
She knew that Nora was sufficiently demoralised to take the idea seriously and agree with little fuss.
Over breakfast on the day following Nora's departure, Louise tried to encourage her niece.
‘So, my darling,’ she said, ‘the big adventure beginneth!
We have one month to prove to your mother that you are a grown up.
How shall we do it?’
Constance went pink — with pleasure and uncertainty.
‘Do you think that she'll let me stay for good?
It would be so marvellous if she would.’
‘Well,’ Louise replied, ‘You know your mother as well as I do.
She certainly won't be happy if she thinks you're  just hanging around down here and not getting anywhere.
That's why we must have a plan.’
She waited expectantly.
Constance blushed even harder as the silence grew.
‘Your mother has always wanted you to do what you want but she will insist that you can only stay here if you have a job.
Any job would do, to begin with.
What about working in a shop?
You know, a shoe shop in Richmond or something like that.’
‘I wouldn't mind a dress shop but I don't think it would be very nice to help people try on shoes all day.’
‘No, you're probably right.
A hat shop would be fun.’
‘Oh!
Aunt Louise!
What a super idea!
That would be lovely!’
‘Wouldn't it.
We'll just have to wait and see.’
Louise had her clothes made for her: not by one of the grand West End couturiers such as Hartnell or Lachasse, whose prices were far beyond her, but by Paul de Levantiére, a Belgian who, because his salon was in unfashionable Chelsea, charged much less.
He had been her dressmaker since the early thirties and they knew each other very well.
He allowed her more freedom of choice than many of his clients who were perhaps a better advertisement for his dressmaking skills.
Although he always sent her out with new clothes that should have made her embody his idea of elegance, he was resigned to the fact that she would return in a version far removed from his original concept.
Louise was, in fact, that curse of the couturier, a woman with a mind of her own and a strongly individual fashion intelligence.
Plump, bespectacled and usually shining with perspiration, Paul de Levantiére would try very hard to be the Grand Couturier with Louise in the fitting room — but he was a gentle man and her firm independence always routed him.
‘Madam Carter will, of course, require grey gloves with this suit,’ he would purr, using his very best couturier's tone.
It was to no avail.
‘Oh, I should not imagine so, Monsieur Paul,’ Louise would say lightly, conscious of the devastation she was about to cause.
‘I absolutely loathe grey gloves, as you well know by now!
They are the height of vulgarity.
How could you suggest such a thing?
Do you want to ruin your beautiful suit?
No, I shall wear brown.
That's what dethis needs.’
And Paul de Levantiére would sigh, turn with a resigned expression to his fitter and ask for the next outfit to be tried on.
Paul de Levantiére adored Louise, as she well knew.
He loved her humour and the fact that she treated him as an equal, although their business was always conducted on the most formal lines.
He was prepared to forgive — and grant favours.
Shortly after  Norah's departure, Louise was fitted for her autumn suits.
She was excited because this was the first time that de Levantiére had followed the New Look that was capturing the world but was still hard to come by in England because of clothes rationing.
Louise loved the huge sweeping skirts and tightly cinched waists.
‘Oh!’ she cried as she twirled around in front of the mirror.
‘It is just so romantic — like before the war!
I feel like an Edwardian princess or something!
I can't tell you how feminine this line makes me feel!’
De Levantiére beamed with pleasure.
He loved working with a woman who understood clothes.
He was even happy to agree when Louise suggested that the buttons on the jacket were not quite right.
As he repositioned the pins, she suddenly decided to take the opportunity to mention Constance and her plans for her.
‘I have this niece,’ she said, ‘who should have a job.
She's very creative.
Do you know any milliners who might need a sales assistant?
She's tall and has a good figure.
Her manner is a little diffident as yet, but she'll soon come out of her shell with the right encouragement.
The money is not so important.
It's the experience she needs.’
Paul Levantiére continued to pin in silence.
He had  heard this request a thousand times.
‘How old is she?’ he asked.
‘Eighteen.’
‘Could you imagine her working here?’
‘Here?’
‘Yes, I am looking for a receptionist.
You know, somebody to answer the phone and post letters.’
Louise was overjoyed with the suggestion.
‘I think she would love to work here, my dear Monsieur de Levantiére — absolutely love it!’
He beamed and wiped his brow with a large white  handkerchief .
‘Why not bring her to next week's fashion show and introduce her to me?’ he suggested.
The salon was small and exceedingly hot.
The air was heavy with perfume and the little gold chairs were jammed tightly together in an attempt to seat everyone.
Constance thought the audience the most elegant crowd of people she had ever seen.
Mainly middle-aged women with their daughters, they all wore hats and gloves; everyone seemed to know everyone else and the chattering and laughter only subsided into an expectant hush after the chief vendeuse had discreetly clapped her hands twice.
The gold satin curtain at the end of the cat walk parted and out stepped Paul de Levantiére.
Smiling at the round of applause from his audience, he took his seat on the front chaise longue and the show began.
Constance leaned forward eagerly.
‘Model number one,’ the vendeuse said, as a mannequin appeared in a slate grey tweed suit, ‘The Pennines’, an informal suit equally at ease for drinks at Claridges or walks in the hills.’
There was a scattering of ragged applause as the model walked slowly through the audience, pausing to undo her jacket.
‘The blouse in pink crepe de chine is fastened by three mother-of-pearl buttons at the neck.’
And so it continued.
Constance was in seventh heaven.
The dresses, the hats, the model girls — everything  appeared perfect to her.
It seemed no time at all until the last model, wearing a mauve duchesse evening dress called ‘Tour d'Eiffel’, had swished back through the gold curtain and Paul de Levantiére was standing to acknowledge the enthusiastic applause.
‘Did you enjoy it, darling?’ asked Louise.
‘It was wonderful !’
Constance replied, her eyes shining with excitement.
As she looked at her niece's radiant face, Louise felt sure that she had been right to approach Monsieur de Levantiére.
Three days later Constance was back in the salon with Louise, gazing in amazement at the transformation.
The elegant chairs and sofas had gone; there was not a flower to be seen and, where the gold curtain had been, there was a very ordinary and rather battered door, through which they were taken to Paul de Levantiére's tiny, chaotic office.
An agreement was quickly reached.
Constance would work for de Levantiére answering the telephone, opening the mail and doing any other chores that arose.
Constance was so thrilled at the idea of working in such a glamorous world that she would have agreed to anything in order to have the job.
She bubbled with excitement on the train down to Surrey.
‘Oh, Aunt Louise, you are marvellous!
I can't wait to start on Monday!
Mr Levantiére really seemed to like me.
He's so nice, I know I'm going to love working there.’
‘Darling, you'll do marvellously.
I know that he took to you and I'm sure you'll learn an awful lot— and you'll meet such interesting people!’ replied Louise, equally thrilled.
Constance was worried about her clothes, but Louise took her on a very practical shopping spree and they bought two simple skirts and three blouses.
‘You can ring the changes but always look businesslike,’ she said brightly.
Although Constance soon learned that life in a couture house was more about hard work than glamour, she loved Maison de Levantiére.
A more sophisticated girl would have realised that her enthusiasm was being ruthlessly exploited as the tasks she was given became broader and more demanding, but Constance happily did everything she was told.
Monsieur de Levantiére smiled benignly, thrilled at the unique combination of willingness, reliability and intelligence that became increasingly apparent in his protege.
Constance had been there just under three weeks when she was called into the fitting room by the vendeuse.
The house model had gone home feeling sick and there were customer appointments.
Constance would have to show a couple of dresses.
She almost fainted with shock, but had already learned that the edicts of the couturier (one of the last true autocrats of the Western world) were not to be questioned.
With a sinking feeling, she went to the dressing room to get ready.
‘There's nothing to it.
Honest, lovey,’ the dresser said as she helped Constance into the first dress.
‘Just look straight ahead and smile.
Then turn around and show the back and that's it.
A kid of ten could do it.’
She stood back and gave Constance an appraising look.
‘There,’ she said approvingly, ‘You look smashing.’
And so it happened.
Constance stepped out wearing her first dress, called ‘Charming Surprise’, a name she never forgot.
Walking forward, face scarlet, legs turned to jelly and arms stiff and awkward, she felt like a marionette, but by the time she had shown the third model, ‘Wicked Lady’, she had begun almost to enjoy herself.
‘I don't know how I managed it,’ Constance told Louise that night, excited and proud of her achievement.
‘It was terrible!
They were all sitting there staring at me and Monsieur de Levantiére said, ‘This is Constance, who has kindly stepped in at the last moment.’
I thought I would die at the start but, actually, once I got into the swing of it all it was rather fun.’
The following day, she was called into Monsieur de Levantiére's office.
He beamed with pleasure as she walked in.
‘Ah,’ he said, ‘The saviour of the House!
Sit down, my dear, I'd like to have a little chat with you.
I noticed how well you did yesterday.’
Constance blushed with pleasure.
‘It was not only that you looked so well in the clothes.
It was the way you showed them.
With intelligence.
Almost as if you understood what was in my mind when I designed them.’
Paul de Levantiére rubbed his pencil up the side of his nose in a thoughtful gesture.
‘Do you like clothes?’ he asked.
‘Oh, yes!’
Constance replied eagerly.
‘Well, liking clothes is not enough.
Any foolish young woman can like clothes.
You have to teach yourself to understand them.
You have a great opportunity here, my dear, if you care to take it.
Learn to observe.
Train your eyes not merely to look but also to see.
Notice our customers.
Some of the most elegant women in London come through these doors.
Understand how they dress.
Taste is inborn, little can be learned without it, but everything can be developed if you have it and the discipline to train your eye.
That is all I need to tell you.’
As Constance walked to the door, he added, ‘Thank you for yesterday.
Tell your aunt that I am very pleased with you.’
Constance could have wept with happiness.
Every Wednesday Louise played bridge with a group of women friends.
Her turn to act as hostess came up a month after Nora had returned to Northumberland.
Constance helped by serving tea and passing sandwiches and cakes.
She was in the kitchen washing up when she heard a car coming up the drive.
To her surprise, a red M.G. swung to a halt below the open kitchen window.
The driver gracefully unwound himself from the low-slung vehicle and stood up, stretching his back, unaware that he was being watched.
He was tall and thin but his most striking feature was his long, softly curling brown hair.
Although he was wearing an old check shirt and dirty cricket flannels that stopped above his ankles, Constance thought him the most elegantly handsome man she had ever seen.
He had a superior air of self-confidence that reminded her of portraits of eighteenth-century land owners striding their acres surrounded by dogs.
Suddenly becoming aware of her gaze, the object of her speculations stopped in mid stretch and moved languidly to the window.
‘Hello’'he said.
‘You're new.
Do you work here?’
‘No, I do knot,’ Constance blushed with indignation.
‘I'm Mrs Carter's niece.
Who are you?’
‘Oh,’ he said, wearily, ‘I've come to collect my mother.
Are they in the drawing room?
I'll go round to the front.’
And he walked away.
Constance was stunned by his arrogance.
‘Cheek!’ she said, in a voice she hoped was loud enough to be heard.
Less than a minute later noise erupted from the drawing room and excited voices drifted down the hall.
Laughing and chattering, Louise walked into the kitchen, holding the young man by the hand.
‘Constance!’ she cried.
‘This is someone I've been longing for you to meet.
Nicky is Mrs Scott Wilson's son.
I've known him since he was a little boy.
He's very naughty and breaks everyone's heart — don't you darling — but we all love him.’
She turned, eyes flashing flirtatiously and pushed back his hair from his forehead.
‘When he's cleaned up a bit, he can look quite presentable,’ she laughed.
Constance stood awkwardly by the sink.
Her aunt's antics embarrassed her and she could feel herself blushing.
‘We're just finishing a rubber, Nicky, my sweet, we won't be long,’ Louise said.
‘Constance, you'll look after Nicky, won't you?
A cup of tea perhaps?’
And she was gone.
There was a silence.
Constance could think of nothing to say.
She could almost feel her head emptying of  thoughts.
It seemed that she stood there for an age before Nicky said, ‘A cup of tea would be rather nice.’
As she made the tea, he stood by the window, gazing across the garden, conscious of her resentment.
‘I'm surprised I haven't heard about you on the grapevine.
How long have you been here?’
‘Three weeks.’
‘God!
I am slipping!
How long are you staying?’
‘I don't know.
It hasn't been decided yet.’
‘Whose decision?
Yours or Louise's?’
Constance was so appalled at his forwardness that she burst out, ‘Don't be cheeky!
Asking personal questions!
Who do you think you are?’
To her fury, he laughed and said, ‘You'll do.’
Standing by the sink, slurping his tea and nibbling a slice of fruit cake, Nicky Scott Wilson continued his questions.
Although flattered by his interest, Constance was not overwhelmed.
By the time Louise returned to the kitchen to tell him that his mother was ready to go home Constance felt that he knew absolutely everything about her, but had revealed nothing of himself.
‘Nicky's such a sweetie, don't you think?’
Louise said, as they were re-arranging the drawing room when everyone had gone.
‘He always reminds me of those marvellous cavaliers, with all that hair.’
‘Or a King Charles Spaniel,’ muttered Constance, puffing as she pushed the sofa against the wall.
Louise stopped, crestfallen.
‘Oh, didn't you like him, darling?
I felt sure that he would be absolutely your cup of tea.
After all, he is quite the most handsome young man in Surrey.’
‘Yes,’ Constance agreed, ‘I'm sure he thinks so, too.’
From the beginning, Constance felt ambivalent about Nicky Scott Wilson.
She found him physically attractive, but his languid, elegant and mannered demeanour irritated her.
It made him seem weak to her robust northern eyes.
Despite his charm and looks, she was determined  not to fall all over him because she sensed immediately that that was what he expected.
Their relationship was characterized by a battle of wills that Constance always made sure to win.
Nicky approached her with the assumption that men are naturally right and it is the role of women to follow their lead.
Constance, whose confidence was growing daily, was not prepared to give in to Nicky's wishes merely because of his sex.
If she felt he was right, then she agreed with him.
If, as happened more frequently, she did not, she let her view be known, even though it almost always led to a quarrel.
Nicky was assured — even worldly — and, in the early stages of their friendship, used his confidence to put Constance in her place — not because of any particular need to bully her but merely because that was how he had always treated his girlfriends.
He assumed that he could come and go as he wanted, without worrying over-much about their opinions or needs.
He worked at Sotheby's and, as Louise gushingly pointed out to Constance after their first meeting, ‘He knows absolutely everybody , darling.
His mother tells me he is out every night at some ‘do’ ' or other.
He's always in great demand.’
‘Well, I don't suppose he'll want to bother with me then,’ Constance replied.
But she did not believe it.
She knew that she had made an impression on Nicky, simply by the way he had looked at her when he and his mother had said goodbye.
Although she had not been prepared for his barrage of questions and had answered them almost truculently, she had made Nicky think twice about her simply because she seemed more direct and independent than most of the girls he knew.
To say that he viewed her as a challenge would be absurd — Nicky Scott Wilson and his type were far too assured to think of life in terms of challenges.
But he did find her sufficiently different to wish he knew her better.
Nevertheless, it was over a week before he contacted Constance.
Even Louise, who had begun by confidently predicting how well he and Constance would get on, had  stopped referring to him.
Constance found Nicky more attractive as the days passed with no word from or of him.
Then, one afternoon, she stepped out of the side entrance of Maison Levantiére to find Nicky standing in the rain, waiting for her.
‘Oh!
Hello,’ she said in surprise.
‘I thought you might fancy a drink,’ he said, without preamble.
‘You must be mad,’ Constance replied.
‘I've just come from work.
My aunt's expecting me.
Anyhow, I'm under-age.
I'm not allowed in pubs.’
‘Oh, I know a private club,’ Nicky replied airily.
‘There isn't any problem.’
‘That's what you think,’ Constance said, starting to walk up the street.
‘I'm on my way home.
I wouldn't dream of being late for Aunt Louise.’
‘A cup of tea?’
Nicky said, catching up with her.
She stopped and faced him.
‘Are you joking?
You pop up out of the blue and expect me to drop everything, just like that.
I'm sorry, Nicky Scott Wilson, but if you want to see me you'd better make proper arrangements.’
‘By appointment only?
Like the Queen?’
Nicky asked, with heavy irony.
‘Yes, if you like,’ Constance replied sharply.
‘I'm not a push-over you know.
Even if your other girl friends are.’
Nicky burst out laughing.
‘You northern girls,’ he said.
‘Talk about blunt!
I like it!’
‘Look,’ Constance said crossly, ‘I'm not standing around getting soaked to the skin, talking to you.
I must go or I'll miss my train.’
Nicky caught her wrist.
‘When can I see you?
I really want to.’
‘Oh, well…
’ Constance was at a loss.
‘Why don't you ring me?’
‘It's for you,’ Louise said, with a conspiratorial smile.
She handed the phone to Constance, who immediately recognised Nicky Scott Wilson's languid voice.
‘Hello,’ he said, without saying who he was.
‘Do you play tennis?
I thought I'd give you a game tonight.
Six o'clock, all right?
Fine.
I'll collect you.’
‘Short and sweet,’ Louise said.
‘He's so full of himself,’ Constance complained.
‘He thinks he can get away with anything.’
‘Boys as handsome as Nicky usually can , darling.’
‘Well, not with me.’
‘Aren't you going?’
Louise asked in alarm.
Constance blushed.
‘Yes.
This time.
But I'm not going to be taken for granted again.
I don't care how handsome he is.’
Nicky was much more impressed by Constance's figure than her skill at tennis.
He could not resist showing off, hitting the ball all over the court and making her run around until she was pink with the effort and furious with herself for getting into such an undignified situation.
Every time she missed the ball — which was most of the time — she became more angry.
Hot, sticky and uncomfortable, she let a particularly easy shot past and angrily threw her racket on the ground.
‘That's it!’ she cried.
‘I've had enough of you making a fool of me, Nicky Scott Wilson!
I'm not playing any more,’ and she stormed off the court, convinced that everyone at the club house was laughing at her.
Nicky caught up with her.
‘Oh, come on, old girl, it's only a game ,’ he said banteringly.
Constance turned on him.
‘I suppose you think you're clever, making me look a fool in front of everyone,’ she cried.
‘Well, I don't.’
Nicky laughed.
‘It isn't funny,’ she said, holding back tears of frustration.
‘Just take me home, please.’
‘Don't take it like that.
It's only a bit of fun.
You did very well.
After all, I am a good player.
What do you expect?’
‘You would be, wouldn't you?
Nicky Scott Wilson is good at everything , isn't he?
Well, see if I care.
Never ask me to play tennis with you again.
Now, take me home please.
As they walked to the car, Nicky tried to slip his arm around her waist.
Constance indignantly moved away, shocked by his forwardness.
‘What's wrong,’ he asked.
‘Afraid I'm going to take advantage of you?’
‘Not at all,’ Constance replied as calmly as she could.
‘It would take more than you to take advantage of me.
Just remember, when I want you to be familiar, I'll let you know.
Until then, keep your hands to yourself.’
If things were not always plain sailing in her developing relationship with Nicky, her days at Maison de Levantiére were an increasing pleasure for Constance.
She could hardly keep her patience if the train was delayed and she arrived late.
The hours flew by and it seemed no time at all until she was back on the train, reliving every moment as she travelled home.
She enjoyed all aspects of life at the salon but, as she was increasingly called upon to show clothes, Constance began to love the opportunities for discreetly showing off.
More important, she found it fascinating to put Monsieur de Levantiére's advice into practice.
She learned the arts of dress and make-up by looking at the clients of the House.
She soon realised that what he had said was true: taste and style were inborn.
The couturier could only give so much.
The crucial ingredient that turned his clothes into something outstandingly elegant always came from the woman wearing them.
Monsieur de Levantiére decided that, as a reward for modelling, Constance could buy at cost two of the previous season's models.
She spent hours in the stockroom, trying everything on so that she could describe each dress to Louise.
Finally, she chose a navy and white spotted silk with a square neckline and a slim draped skirt, and  a grey linen shirtwaister with a full skirt and patch pockets.
They made her feel very sophisticated.
Although she enjoyed the modelling, Constance was at her happiest sitting next to Monsieur de Levantiére in his hot little office, taking notes as he worked on his collection.
He was impressed by her intelligence and, on the few occasions when he asked her opinion, by the growing assurance of her taste.
Very soon, she had become a sort of personal assistant, helping him select fabrics, cost dresses and choose accessories.
Louis was delighted at Constance's progress.
‘Transformed, my darling, absolutely transformed !’ she told Nora over the phone.
‘You'll be proud when you see her.
She's so assured and modern.
And her clothes sense!
She dresses marvellously now.
I think you'll be very impressed indeed.
De Levantiére has had her hair cut and it makes her look very sophisticated.
How wise you were to let her stay, darling.’
Each evening she and Constance would go over the day at Maison de Levantiere, talking about the customers, fitting-room gossip and the new fabric deliveries.
Louise enjoyed it all every bit as much as Constance.
One night, Constance hugged her and said, ‘Thank you for being so marvellous.
Mummy would never have understood like you have.’
‘Oh, I'm sure she would, darling,’ Louise said loyally.
‘But I'm just so glad that you enjoy modelling.
I knew you would.’
‘Oh,’ Constance said, ‘that's alright, but it isn't the best part.
What I love is looking at the designs and helping choose the fabrics—and working out how much to charge!’
‘Does Monsieur Levantiére let you do that?’
Louise asked, impressed.
‘Well, I only write down the figures, really, but I do find it fascinating.’
‘How interesting.
I never imagined that the business side would appeal to you at all.
I thought you would enjoy the glamour.’
‘But that is the glamour,’ Constance replied.
‘In a way.
I mean, it is marvellous wearing Monsieur's beautiful clothes and having my hair done and everything, but modelling is very boring after a while, Aunt Louise, because it is so very easy.’
Louise's face fell.
‘But you've always said you loved it.’
‘Oh, I do ,’ Constance replied hastily.
‘But it is too easy, somehow.
There's nothing to do.
You just walk out, stand and smile.’
She stopped.
She knew that belittling modelling was not being honest.
She loved it.
But she loved the other aspects more.
‘It's difficult to explain.
I feel I'm in charge when I'm helping Monsieur — and that's what I really like.’
Louise smiled.
‘Like mother, like daughter,’ she thought to herself.
Although Constance was proud to be seen with Nicky and loved it when he took her out, she was determined not to be taken for granted.
Their evenings were frequently marred by rows, started by Constance in response to what she saw as slights on Nicky's part.
She was not always right.
Underneath the aloof and patrician air of not being involved with life, Nicky was a warm and open young man.
He was also much more vulnerable than Constance dreamed of, and was frequently hurt by what he saw as her deliberate hostility.
‘I don't understand you northern girls,’ he would say.
Constance, who felt that he had said this a thousand times before, usually shrugged impatiently.
‘It has nothing to do with North or South, Nicky.
It's about self-respect.
Why should girls give in to boys all the time?
You're no better than we are, even if you are stronger.
I don't know why you think you have the right to boss us around.
We have a right to our opinions as well, you know.’
And Nicky would nod unhappily, although he did not really comprehend.
His upbringing, education and training had been based on the assumption that in any situation his class were the natural leaders.
The idea of  bossing anybody around was as alien to him as it was distasteful in his mind.
For him, life was simple.
He decided what he wanted and others — regardless of sex — followed his lead, without needing to be bossed.
‘That's the trouble with Nicky,’ Constance told Louise after she had returned from yet another evening that had ended with a quarrel.
‘He thinks he can do what he wants and the rest of the world should line up behind him and follow.
I won't do it — because I know it's wrong.’
‘Oh dear,’ Louise said, unhappily, ‘I did so hope that you two would make a go of it, but with all the rows I don't really know, I'm sure…’
‘But don't you and Uncle Jim ever disagree?’
‘Yes of course, darling, but you know, each sex has its different strengths.
Men are meant to lead, Constance.’
‘Why?’
Constance demanded, indignantly.
‘Who said so?
It isn't true, Aunt Louise.
Honestly, it isn't true!’
Louise thought how like Nora Constance sounded.
‘Don't you like Nicky?’ she asked.
Constance paused, blushing.
‘Yes I do.
But not when he's taking me for granted.
When he just decides something without even thinking of me, I hate him, I really do!
I'm just as good as he is, even if I didn't go to Eton.’
Louise laughed.
‘Of course you are darling,’ she said, but she was unnerved.
She felt that, even by Nora's standards, Constance was too headstrong for romantic liaisons.
There were times when Constance loved Nicky and times when she hated him, but her overall emotion was liking.
She liked his company.
He was full of inconsequential but amusing chatter and Louise had been right when she said that he knew everybody.
He went to all the openings, parties and dinners that he wanted to and frequently did not see Constance for several days.
To begin with, she did not mind.
She found his sophistication so overwhelming that she needed a space in order to assimilate all the things he was introducing into her life.
Besides, although  she was still finding life at Levantiére exciting, it was also exhausting.
She was perfectly happy most nights to return home, gossip with Aunt Louise, lay out her clothes ready for the next day (which she did religiously, come what may) and then go to bed.
But it was not enough for long.
She felt that the ‘on — off’ nature of their relationship — when he was here today but not tomorrow, or even the next day — was all part of Nicky's habit of taking her for granted.
She determined that she , not he, would decide how often they saw each other and how they would occupy their time together.
Although she was nervous of putting him to the test, she knew that, sooner or later, she must.
She spent hours trying to decide whether or not he loved her.
Was she just convenient?
Did he need her?
Whenever the question of whether or not she needed him popped into her head, Constance conveniently ducked it.
She simply did not know, although deep in her heart she feared that what she felt for Nicky Scott Wilson was not true love.
How could she love someone who considered himself so superior to her?
Sexually, their relationship was frequently charged, but rarely physical.
After his early rebuff at the tennis court Nicky had, if anything, treated Constance with almost too much respect.
At the cinema, under cover of darkness, he put his arm around her tentatively, but was always ready for rejection, and he had only twice kissed her.
Constance could not decide whether or not his diffidence sprang from fear or indifference, and she found it puzzling that someone as confident as Nicky in every other area of his life should be so timid when it came to love.
She finally spoke to Louise.
‘How do you know,really know, when someone loves you, Aunt Louise?’
Louise laughed to cover her embarrassment.
‘Oh!
Good Heavens, Constance!
What a question!
I have no idea.’
‘But you must have,’ Constance pressed.
‘How did you know with Uncle Jim?’
‘Oh, I don't know how , but you just do,’ her aunt replied, blushing.
‘It's just something that happens between two people.
Why do you ask?
Not more problems with Nicky, I hope?’
‘No,’ Constance replied, tentatively.
‘Not problems exactly.
It's just that I don't know if he loves me — or even cares.
He is so funny.
You know how many times he doesn't phone.
And I can't phone him .’
‘Certainly not,’ her aunt agreed.
There was silence.
‘Do you think that you love him ?’
Louise asked, gently.
‘Oh, Aunt Louise, I don't know.
Isn't that awful?’
‘Does he…er…show much affection?’
‘Not really.
He treats me like a sister.’
‘Oh well,’ Louise replied, secretly rather relieved.
‘I should give it time, darling.
It doesn't do to make yourself cheap.
I'm sure that everything will be alright.’
And there she thought it best to let the matter rest.
It was precisely because he was finding Constance more frequently in his thoughts than any other girlfriend that Nicky was so tentative.
He felt differently about her.
When she argued with him — so cogently and logically — he felt proud of her; when he saw her walking towards him — so jaunty and enthusiastic — he was overcome with tenderness.
He liked the fact that she was different from anyone else in his life.
But it bewildered him and, in a sense, made him resentful.
Why should she have this power over him?
Other girls did what he wanted — why couldn't she?
But he knew, deep down, that her attraction was the very fact that she did not.
Like many people for whom life presented no challenges, Nicky Scott Wilson, for all his assurance, was a coward.
He did not want to take life seriously, and he felt his relationship with Constance — and her independence — were forcing him to do so.
The thing that Constance loved perhaps more than anything else about living in the south was the sun.
After the  cold of the north, so frequently scoured by winds and battered by rain, she could not believe how frequently it shone — or how hot it became.
Whereas in Northumberland it rarely lasted for a whole day and almost never appeared on consecutive days, in London and Surrey it seemed to shine uninterrupted for weeks at a time.
Like a cat, Constance luxuriated in its sensual heat.
It gave her a marvellous feeling of having escaped the cold clutches of the north and all her unhappiness there.
She was determined not to return.
‘I always want to live where the sun shines,’ she told Louise.
‘It makes me feel alive.
I can't bear grey skies.’
‘Oh, we get plenty of those as well, you know,’ her aunt laughed.
‘Just wait and see when we get to November.
No sun then, I can tell you!’
Constance smiled.
She was not entirely convinced — surely London could never have weather as dreary as a northern winter?
‘I love it here, Aunt Louise,’ she said, feelingly.
‘I know you do, my darling, and we love having you.
It has all turned out so much better than I dared hope for.’
Constance smiled.
She was not all that sure that things were turning out so well with Nicky, but she was ready to admit that everything else about the south was idyllic.
Sitting in the garden on that warm summer evening, neither woman knew how soon the idyll was to end.
Constance and Nicky had walked for what seemed miles in the heavy air of the beechwood.
The huge trees offered shade from the sun, but their deep sprays of leaves seemed to trap and intensify the heat of the day.
It was swelteringly hot and Constance could feel her dress sticking to her back as she walked.
Brushing past the tall ferns, she noticed that the halo of flies buzzing around her head had increased, and she swatted them angrily as they landed on her face and arms.
They came to a clearing and Nicky slumped on to the  trunk of a felled tree, shaded by the overhanging branches that almost covered the space it had made.
‘God!
I'm so hot!’ he groaned.
‘Let's rest for a minute.’
Constance sat on the stump of the tree, just above Nicky's head.
‘Well, only for a minute,’ she said.
‘The flies are driving me mad.’
She looked down at Nicky, lying perfectly still before her with his eyes closed.
With his fine features and pale face he looked like a carved medieval figure on a tomb, and Constance was overwhelmed by his beauty.
She could see the sweat on the fine hairs above his upper lip.
The air was still and the flies seemed to have gone.
There was no movement except for the tiny spider that was crawling up Nicky's arm.
There was no sound, except the occasional click of a twig falling to the ground.
They both remained totally motionless in the heat.
Constance felt perfectly happy.
Leaning forward, she gently kissed Nicky's forehead.
His eyes jerked open.
‘Nice,’ he smiled.
She leaned over him more closely ana kissed his lips.
Nicky lay perfectly still.
He moaned slightly with pleasure as she kissed him again.
Constance could not help herself.
Overcome by the romance of the setting, she did what she had always promised herself she would not, until Nicky had done so first.
She told him how she felt.
‘I love you,’ she whispered.
‘I know,’ he replied.
Constance sat up, disconcerted.
That was not the reply she had expected.
Nicky rolled off the tree trunk and, offering her his hand, said ‘Come on.
We'd better get back.’
Constance felt hurt and betrayed.
Why was he avoiding saying that he loved her ?
Perhaps he didn't?
Before she could say anything, Nicky had begun to walk away.
When she caught up with him the bombshell came.
‘You know how you are always talking about Miss  Hatherby?’
Nicky asked conversationally.
‘Well, I've been meaning to tell you for ages.
She's my great aunt.’
All thoughts of romance were banished from Constance's head.
She was so shocked by what Nicky had said that she could not believe it.
‘What do you mean?’ she cried, grabbing at his arm to make him stop walking.
‘What on earth do you mean?’
Alarmed by her vehemence, Nicky replied, ‘I've been meaning to tell you for ages.
But the time was never right, somehow.’
‘Meaning to tell me?
Why didn't you tell me straight away?
How could you keep it a secret — after all I've told you?’
Bursting into tears, she turned and ran back through the wood, pushing blindly through the ferns, stumbling, hot and panting, determined to get away from Nicky so that she could try to think straight.
He ran after her, calling her name, but she ignored him and kept running until she reached the road.
She could not believe his secrecy.
When he had caught up with her and gasped, ‘Constance, I'm sorry, I really am sorry,’ she rounded on him.
‘Why did you keep it a secret?’ she cried through her tears.
‘Why ?
You know how much I love Miss Hatherby.
Didn't you think I would want to know?
How could you not tell me?’
Nicky remained silent.
He had not told her initially because he was by no means sure that she would be anything more than just another fling and, in his quest for an easy life, did not want to complicate things by admitting the relationship.
As time had gone by, and Constance's conversation had made clear the depth of her friendship with his great aunt, he had been afraid to tell her, fearing exactly the reaction he had now received.
‘I don't know,’ he whispered.
‘I don't know.
It was silly, I know…’
‘Take me home,’ Constance demanded.
‘Take me home now.’
They drove back in silence.
When they arrived at the gate, Nicky said, ‘Please let me try to explain, Constance’
‘There is nothing to explain,’ she said coldly as she stepped out of the car.
Luckily, her aunt was playing bridge so the house was silent and deserted.
Rushing up to her room, Constance flung herself on the bed and tried to cry.
But she couldn't.
Her mind was racing too fast.
Why had Nicky behaved so extraordinarily?
Surely, it could mean only one thing.
She was nothing to him — just another girl to have fun with but not take into his life.
Well, that may be good enough for other girls, but not for her.
If Nicky Scott Wilson wanted to keep his life secret, that was fine by her; but he needn't expect her to be a part of it, in that case.
Her thoughts were interrupted by Louise calling her name.
‘Constance,’ she cried from the foot of the stairs.
‘Come down quickly.
I have some marvellous news!’
Constance reluctantly slid from her bed.
She went to the bathroom and washed her face in cold water.
Looking at herself in the mirror she saw that her eyes were swollen and her face blotchy.
What would Aunt Louise think?
Louise, however, was in such a state of excitement that initially she did not notice anything wrong.
‘Darling,’ she cried.
‘Such news!
I couldn't wait to get home to tell you.’
Constance stared at her blankly.
Could Louise have heard about Nicky and his deceit?
Surely not.
‘Your uncle has taken a job in Italy,’ Louise said momentously.
‘In Rome!
Can you imagine!
He phoned to tell me that he had it shortly after you and Nicky had left.
Isn't it marvellous?’
Suddenly, she realised the state Constance was in.
‘Darling, whatever is wrong?
You look dreadful.’
Constance burst into tears and rushed into Louise's arms.
‘Oh, Aunt Louise!
It's dreadful!
I've quarrelled with Nicky!‘
Louise rose to the occasion.
Suppressing her excitement at her own news, she was all concern for Constance.
She listened sympathetically as Constance told her of Nicky's revelation.
Shocked as she was, Louise felt it unwise to take sides.
‘Oh, I'm sure there is a perfectly simple explanation.
It's clearly a misunderstanding,’ she said soothingly.
‘Do you think so?’
Constance asked, clinging briefly to a hope she did not really believe in.
‘Of course, darling.
I really shouldn't worry.
He'll be on the phone to you in no time.’
Later, she told Constance all about Jim's new job.
‘The United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation is moving from Quebec and the new headquarters are to be in Rome.
They need all sorts of experts — including lawyers.
Isn't it exciting?
We're going so soon.
I shall never be ready in time.
It's a nightmare!’
‘What about me?’
Constance asked in a quiet voice.
Louise took Constance into her arms.
‘You're coming as well, silly.
That is, if you want to.
How could we abandon you?
I had a long talk with Nora this morning.
I didn't know how you'd feel about leaving Nicky, but after this I suppose…’
What she was saying finally sunk into Constance's confused brain.
‘Oh, Aunt Louise!
How super!’ she screamed.
‘I can't believe it!
I can't believe it!’
Her mind flew to Miss Hatherby.
Once again she heard her friend's voice, ‘Rome…
It is the most human city in the world.’
Suddenly, all thoughts of Nicky forgotten, she was the happiest girl in the world.
Constance heard Louise on the telephone and knew she was talking to Nora.
‘I'm sure that Jim will be able to get her some sort of job but, to begin with, she can treat it like a little holiday, until she sees if she likes it.’
She paused.
‘Oh, yes, that's a good idea.
We'll need a couple of weeks to settle in before she comes.
Anyhow, she will want to say goodbye to everyone in Northumberland.
My dear, it is such a rush…’
Constance thought of Nicky.
Would he phone?
If he did, would she tell him the news?
Her first thought was simply to disappear without telling him anything.
Then she realised that Louise would have already broken the news to the bridge party.
No doubt Mrs Scott Wilson had already told Nicky.
Well, she would wait.
She was determined not to make the first move.
Louise called her to the phone to speak to Nora.
‘Everything's fine, my darling,’ she whispered, giving Constance a little pat as she handed her the telephone.
‘You are a very lucky girl,’ Nora began.
‘And I hope you've said thank you to Aunt Louise properly.
It's a great opportunity and I hope you appreciate it.’
‘Mummy, would you believe it?
Nicky is related to Miss Hatherby.’
There was a silence.
The news did not please Nora.
She felt that the Hatherby influence on Constance in the past had been too great.
In fact, one of the things that had pleased her about her daughter staying in London was that it kept her away from Seaton Cramer Hall.
She did not want the relationship to start up again.
‘Why haven't you told me before?’ she asked.
‘Oh, I kept forgetting,’ Constance lied.
She was not prepared to give her mother the satisfaction of knowing that Nicky had deceived her.
‘Well,’ Nora said, ‘I hope he won't be following you up here when Louise has gone to Italy.
I don't think I could stand any more Hatherby nonsense.’
‘Oh, don't worry,’ Constance replied, confidently ‘He won't.’
As Constance had suspected, Nicky did not have the courage to approach her.
He had heard about Louise's move  and the thought of losing Constance had affected him more than he had imagined possible.
Upset as she was, Constance had no intention of contacting him .
The stale-mate might have continued had Louise not needed to go to Rome to look at apartments and make arrangements.
‘We'll only be away for four nights,’ she explained to Constance.
‘Can you cope here alone, or would you like to go home?’
Constance was far too involved in Maison Levantiére, quite apart from enjoying her freedom from Nora, to want to return to Northumberland.
Besides, she still hoped to hear from Nicky.
‘Oh, I can manage,’ she replied positively, although she was apprehensive of being alone in the house.
‘I've the dog for company.
Don't worry.’
‘Well,’ ' Louise replied, ‘if you're sure…
In any case, I'll have to talk to your mother.’
To everyone's relief, Nora agreed.
Louise lost no time in telling Constance that she did not need to return to Northumberland.
‘Well, my darling.
It's all settled.
You can stay here and look after the place whilst we're gone.
I don't want you to be lonely so I've spoken to Mrs Scott Wilson.
She's invited you to have dinner with them the night we leave.
Nicky will come and collect you.
It's high time you two were friends again.
Perhaps he'll take you out somewhere later in the week.’
‘Oh, Aunt Louise,’ Constance cried, ‘I do wish you hadn't.
I don't want to have Nicky Scott Wilson fussing round me like a wretched nanny while you're away.
I'm perfectly capable of existing without him , you know.’
‘I'm quite sure that you are, Constance,’ Louise retorted.
‘But that is not the point.
Now do co-operate for my sake — or I won't have a moment's peace in Rome.
At least go to dinner.
That won't hurt you.’
Dinner, however, was agony.
After the easygoing ways at Louise's table, she could not believe the stiff formality  at the Scott Wilsons'.
Nicky's parents were much older than Uncle Jim and Aunt Louise.
His father was an ex-general who had retired long before the war, and the life he and his wife led was essentially an upper-class thirties one.
Constance was not experienced enough to appreciate this.
She was surprised that Colonel Scott Wilson wore a dinner jacket.
She was amazed that the food was served by a maid and was appalled at the stiffness and formality of the conversation.
‘Your aunt will find it hard to leave Surrey,’ Mrs Scott Wilson stated.
Constance could think of no intelligent reply.
‘Rome is, of course, so primitive,’ Mrs Scott Wilson continued.
‘Drains,’ her husband said.
‘No drains.
Filthy beggars, the Italians.’
Constance was indignant.
She was sure that Miss Hatherby's view of Rome was the right one, but was frightened to say so.
Nicky shuffled awkwardly.
He was more ill at ease than Constance would have thought possible.
He was also more formal than she had ever seen him, his suit and stiff collar making him look quite different.
He had barely spoken.
Now, he cleared his throat and said, ‘Constance is going to Rome herself.’
‘Unwise,’ his father said.
‘Most unwise for a young girl.
I don't know what the Carters can be thinking of.’
Constance longed to tell him to mind his own business, but she kept silent and forced herself to smile.
Finally the ordeal was over and Nicky drove her home.
‘I'm sorry that you are leaving,’ he said formally.
‘Are you?’
‘Yes.
I'll miss you very much.’
‘Oh, I expect you'll survive,’ Constance said, coolly.
Discouraged by her tone, Nicky hesitated.
‘Can I see you before you go back to Northumberland?’ he asked, at length.
‘Yes.
You know you only have to phone.’
As they drove up to the house Constance thought that it looked very dark and silent.
Stopping the car by the front door, Nicky said, ‘I'd better come in — at least until you get the lights on.’
‘No,’ she said firmly.
‘There's absolutely no need.
But if you'd wait until I switch on the hall light…’
Nicky looked at her.
Even in the dark, she could tell that he was disappointed.
‘Are you sure?’
‘Yes, I'm perfectly all right.’
‘OK,’ he replied.
‘Another time.’
She turned at the door to wave but the car was already in gear and accelerating down the drive.
Though she clearly had made him angry, Constance knew that her decision had been right.
Once indoors, she had a glass of water and began to feel better.
She seemed to lie in bed for a long time before falling asleep.
Seeing Nicky again had been an unsettling experience, for two reasons.
She realised that not having spoken to him for ten days had given her a perspective she had not previously had — a perspective on herself as well as him.
She knew that she did not love him but, more, she knew that despite his sophistication, he was not enough for her.
He lacked a driving force, though Constance was not sophisticated enough to put it that way.
All she felt as she lay in the dark was that Nicky could not satisfy her.
The other revelation was more unsettling.
She had enjoyed watching Nicky longing for encouragement tonight.
Like a little puppy dog, he had waited for a sign that he was forgiven.
She had enjoyed offa  withholding the sign.
For the first time in her life, she felt her power as a woman.
Suddenly, she knew that her aunt's news had come at the perfect time.
She realised that she had become increasingly frustrated and dissatisfied with her life with Nicky…maybe even with Surrey…perhaps even with Maison de Levantière.
As she drifted into sleep, she knew she was ready for Rome.
How long she had slept before the sound woke her she had no idea, but suddenly she was wide awake.
There was a bang on the window.
Constance jerked up in bed clutching her throat in terror.
Someone was throwing gravel at the glass!
Trying not to scream, she sat up and, without putting on the light, looked at the illuminated face of the alarm clock.
It was 12.20.
She sat there for a few seconds, then heard a voice softly calling her name.
Rigid with fear, she remained silent.
The voice came again: ‘Constance.’
She thought quickly.
The noise had definitely come from outside.
Nobody was in the house.
But why wasn't the dog barking?
Was it someone she knew?
Without putting on the light, she slipped out of bed and tiptoed to the window.
‘Constance, stop being such a bore.
Open the window, for God's sake!’
It was Nicky.
She pulled back the curtains and leaned out.
‘What's happened?’ she called.
‘Happened?’ he repeated, gazing up in puzzlement.
‘What do you mean?’
‘What have you come for?’
‘I wanted to see you.’
Her relief released her anger.
‘What do you mean, you wanted to see me?’ she hissed.
‘Do you know what time it is?’
‘Did I give you a fright?’
He grinned.
Constance noticed that he was swaying slightly.
‘You're drunk!’ she said.
‘Nonsense!’
He staggered back and raised his voice.
‘Just a little tipsy.
Let me in.
Want to talk.’
‘Are you mad?
It's gone midnight.’
‘Just a little talk,’ Nicky pleaded.
‘Go home before you wake the neighbours.’
‘Please!’
‘I'm not listening to any more of this,’ and she closed the window and climbed back into bed.
More gravel hit the glass, her name was called more loudly, but she  ignored it and pulled the bedclothes over her head.
The calling continued for a few moments and then, with a cry of ‘bitch’, to her horror, Nicky Scott Wilson began to make the most blood-curdling noise as he bayed her name to the night sky, like a wolf.
Constance was incensed.
Leaping out of bed, she threw the window open and yelled, ‘Stop that noise or you'll wake the neighbours and Aunt Louise will be furious when she hears about it.
Stop it , I say!’
Nicky grinned up at her.
‘Only if you let me in,’ he slurred.
‘Need to talk.
Only five minutes.’
‘You're drunk,’ Constance repeated self-righteously.
‘Go home.
We'll talk tomorrow.’
In reply, Nicky threw back his head and made the dreadful noise again.
To Constance, it seemed even louder than before.
A light went on in the house opposite.
‘Alright,’ she cried.
‘But only for a moment.
Wait until I get dressed — and please be quiet.’
As she struggled into her clothes, she could hear Nicky softly singing ‘Constance, Constance,talk to me, my Constance, or I shall end my life!’ as if he were an opera singer.
Anxious as she was about the neighbours, she couldn't help laughing as she hurried downstairs.
As he stepped into the light from the open door, Constance realised that Nicky was indeed very drunk.
He staggered forward into her arms and almost fell, taking her with him.
Half dragging and half carrying him, she managed to get his inert body into the drawing room and onto the sofa.
Breathless, she straightened up and said fiercely, ‘You can only stay for a minute and then you must promise to go.’
‘Please, Constance,’ Nicky pleaded.
‘Don't send me away.
Can't you see how I feel about you?’
‘You're drunk.
There's no point in talking to you now.
You must go home.’
Nicky slid off the sofa and clung to her legs.
‘Please, please,’ he begged.
Constance tried to stand up.
‘This is ridiculous!’ she cried.
‘Nicky, you must go home!’
All his pleading was in vain.
She was determined.
It took a long time, but she finally got the drunken figure out of the door and closed it firmly behind him.
Leaning against it, she waited for the car to start.
Nothing happened.
She gently opened the door and peeped out.
The light from the hall illuminated the scene.
Nicky was sitting in the driver's seat, sound asleep.
Although she had no experience of drunks, a sixth sense convinced Constance that he would sleep all night.
She tiptoed out with a blanket and tucked it around him.
Looking at his handsome face, she felt a pang for what might have been.
She went back into the house and locked the door behind her.
At dawn she was woken briefly by the sound of the sports car going down the drive.
She did not get out of bed to look.
She knew that Nicky was really nothing to her now.
The next afternoon, Constance was sitting in the garden with the dog when she heard the sound of Nicky's car.
She remained in her deckchair.
He walked across the lawn towards her, sheepishly holding a bunch of yellow roses.
‘Hello,’ he said gently.
‘Are you speaking to me?
I wouldn't blame you if you weren't.’
Constance had never been given flowers before and she beamed with pleasure.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said, ‘I don't know what came over me.
All I wanted to do was talk.
Forgive me for keeping you up all night.
I hope the neighbours didn't complain about all the racket I made.’
‘There's a time and a place,’ she replied.
‘Fancy making all that noise.
And singing as well.’
‘Singing?
What do you mean — singing?’
Although she remembered the words perfectly well, Constance merely said, ‘Oh, nothing, it was just part of your general racket.’
She looked down at the roses.
‘Anyhow,’ she added, ‘If you want to talk, there's plenty of time now.
Go ahead.
I'm not stopping you.’
Nicky looked away.
‘You know, you're quite a cracker.
I'm very keen on you.’
She was silent.
‘Look, why don't we go for a drink tonight and then we'll talk.’
‘I don't see why not,’ she answered, although a little bit of Nora in her made her add, ‘provided you keep sober.’
‘Don't worry, I will,’ he replied ruefully.
‘You're an enigma,’ Nicky said portentously after his fourth drink.
‘What on earth do you mean — an enigma?
There's nothing strange about me.’
‘You're mysterious.
You change.’
‘In what way?’
‘Well,’ ' Nicky slouched back in his chair and lit a cigarette.
‘Half the time you have this little-girl-lost look — like when we walked into this bar tonight — and then suddenly you look all determined and hard.’
‘Hard?’
Constance was affronted.
‘How dare you call me hard?’
Nicky sat up, afraid he had put his foot in it.
‘No, not hard.
That's the wrong word…’
He cast around desperately.
‘Capable.
In charge.
I don't know.
Anyhow, there's something spooky about it.
It suddenly makes you look much older.’
There was nothing that Constance wanted more than to look older and more sophisticated.
She was intrigued.
‘In what way?’
‘I don't know.
It's difficult to say.
You look very businesslike.
as if nothing could beat you once you'd made up your mind.’
‘I'd like to be a businesswoman.’
‘Really?
God, how boring!’
‘I don't think it's boring at all,’ Constance replied, her mood immediately changed by his complacency.
‘You don't understand what it's like for a woman.
It gives you  confidence when you are in charge.
Anyhow, why should men make all the decisions?’
‘Because we're trained to.’
‘I've never heard anything so ridiculous.
It's because you're frightened to let us, in case our decisions are better — which they would be.’
Nicky looked crestfallen but did not dare argue with Constance when she was in this mood.
The time to leave Maison de Levantiére came soon enough.
The farewell was surprisingly emotional.
Constance and Monsieur de Levantiére suddenly realised how much they had come to rely upon each other in the time that she had worked there.
‘Now listen to me, Constance,’ he said.
‘You have talent — real talent.
You're practical and creative and that's a rare combination, believe me.
If you want, you could go far in this business.
Not that I am encouraging you, mind.
I would never do that.
This is a hard and uncertain way of earning a living.
Nothing comes easy in the fashion world, but I'm sure you have what it takes if you fancy trying it some day.’
Constance was lost for words, overwhelmed that her worth had been recognised.
Nora was longing to see the new Constance and proudly show her little around the neighbourhood.
Certainly, she decided, she would take her into Chollerton and maybe even Alnwick — although she would make sure they kept well away from the antique shop.
Constance, on her side, had become sufficiently worldly to know what was expected of her when she returned home.
She knew hat she would be flaunted before the whole of Northumberland if her mother had her way, so, although aware that good form dictated that she should dress down in the country, she took a deep breath and faced the fact that, for their first few outings at least, she would have to wear what Nora called her ‘dressy’ clothes.
In full make-up and wearing the latest style, she felt slightly self-conscious at Chollerton bus station, but was prepared to play the game  for the evident enjoyment it brought her mother.
However, when she went to visit Miss Hatherby, she wore her simplest frock and no make-up, despite her mother's protests.
She felt guilty about Miss Hatherby, having written to her only once, in the first week after her arrival in Surrey.
Her friend greeted her as if she had never been away, so the guilt evaporated and she began to talk about Nicky.
Miss Hatherby smiled.
‘My great-nephew Nicholas!
Fancy your meeting him.
I haven't seen him since he was a baby.
How is he?
I understand that they think very highly of him at Sotheby's.’
‘He's nice,’ Constance said guardedly.
‘He's taken me to lots of places.
He knows everybody.’
‘He would,’ Miss Hatherby chuckled, and they spent the next half hour discussing him.
Talking to her dearest friend about Nicky helped Constance a great deal.
The more she thought about him, the warmer she felt.
She now knew that he could never satisfy her, but was not prepared to dislike him just for that.
She was glad that she was going to Rome as it brought their relationship to an end, cleanly and conclusively.
‘I'll always think of him as a friend,’ she thought.
Then she told Miss Hatherby the news.
‘Rome!’ her friend exclaimed.
‘How thrilling, Constance!
My dear, what discoveries you will make!
Now,’ she leaned forward urgently, ‘promise me that you will use your eyes, your ears and your brain to the maximum.
Be alert to everything, let nothing escape you, and you will soon have a true education for life.
Now promise me that you will be alive out there, Constance.
Alive and alert at all times.’
‘I will, I will, I know I will,’ said Constance, fervently.
As the train trundled out of Paris, Constance snuggled into her corner feeling almost ridiculously happy, proud and capable.
For the first time in her life she was conscious of being independent and in charge.
It was a feeling she liked very much indeed.
It stayed with her throughout the long and endlessly delayed journey across France.
The difficulty in sleeping, the lack of food, even the primitive lavatory, couldn't dim her happiness.
At midnight, twenty-four hours after leaving Calais, she finally arrived in Milan where she had to change trains.
The September night was hot and humid but it did not perturb Constance as she struggled through the crowds of noisy, gesticulating passengers purposefully carrying cardboard boxes, mattresses and crates of chickens down the long platform.
She was delighted with their movements and their language.
She watched with amazement as goats were pushed into guards' vans; she gazed with awe at the rough, dark faces that loomed in front of her out of the steam.
It seemed to her that she had never seen so many people as there were on that platform, waiting for the Rome express to arrive.
She was thankful that Louise had insisted that she travel first class.
When the train pulled in there was a rush for the doors.
People fought to be first on, children were lifted through windows; the scene was frighteningly chaotic.
Constance squeezed her way down the platform looking for the first-class carriages.
Eventually she found them but  couldn't get near — the crowds were as dense further up and, push as she might, she could not make a parting for herself.
She began to panic.
It seemed that the train would pull out leaving her and the hundreds of milling travellers still shoving each other back and forth across the dimly lit platform.
Suddenly Constance became aware of someone tugging at her case.
She turned in panic.
‘Signorina,’ a young man said to her urgently, ‘I'll take it.
You follow me.’
Before she had time to think he had wrenched her case from her and, pushing it in front of him, used the sharp ends as a battering ram to force his way through the crowds.
Constance followed close behind, clutching at his shirt in her terror that they might be separated in the crush.
Jabbed by elbows, trodden on, even spat at by an old man, Constance slowly pushed through the crowd, cleaved for her by her unknown protector.
It took several minutes but they finally boarded the train, fought their way down the corridor and collapsed into the relative calm of a first-class carriage.
As she flopped down in a corner seat, Constance looked at the man pushing her case on to the rack opposite.
She noticed his broad shoulders and muscular back.
As he turned round and smiled at her, she was struck by his looks.
To Constance's English eyes, his skin was so brown he might have been an Indian.
His dark eyes lit up as he grinned and said, in only faintly accented English, ‘We are lucky that the penalties for travelling in a first-class carriage on a third-class ticket are so severe or we would not have got on.’
Constance suddenly felt shy.
For a second, she was tongue-tied.
‘How did you know I was English?’ she asked.
He grinned again, repeated her question and said, ‘You could be nothing else.
You looked like a piece of English lavender surrounded by rough grass.
I knew at once.’
Constance was enchanted.
As he settled into the seat  opposite, he leaned forward and, formally extending his hand, said, ‘Excuse me.
I am Ludovico Castelfranco di Villanuova.
I am delighted to meet you.
Parla Italiano ?
No?
So, have you just arrived?
Tell me.’
Constance felt swamped.
She suddenly realised how tired she was, but she made an effort and told him that she was travelling to Rome to join her aunt and uncle.
‘You have a long journey, signorina,’ her companion told her.
‘The lines are not fully repaired after the war.
We go to Florence via Genoa and La Spezia.
It takes much time.
But you are tired.
You must sleep.
You are safe now.
It might be long before we start.
In Italy these days nothing is certain.’
Constance had been sound asleep for an hour before the double-engined train began to jerk laboriously out of the station, leaving many travellers on the platform to wait who knew how long for the next express.
As her mouth fell innocently open and her body relaxed, Ludovico Castelfranco examined her closely.
He could hardly believe how young and inexperienced she seemed.
There was something vulnerable in her as she slept that contradicted the determination in her face when she was awake.
He thought how very English she looked.
Although he had only caught a glimpse of her blonde head above the milling crowds on the platform, he hadn't even briefly mistaken her for a German or Scandinavian.
As he looked at her, slumped awkwardly in sleep, he tried without success to put his finger on that indefinable something which made this girl so totally English.
Ludovico found her very attractive.
His eyes roved boldly over her sleeping body.
She was wearing a grey dress with a wide skirt.
Her hat was a pale pink straw and her sandals had grey wedge heels.
Everything matched perfectly, even her pink beads.
He noticed that her figure was good and that her legs and ankles were very much better than those of the girls he remembered from his days in London before the war.
He and his friends had always agreed that English women's  legs were the disaster of Europe but, he was pleased to see, this girl's were different.
As the train chugged slowly forward, stopping inexplicably for long periods and even occasionally travelling backwards, Ludovico enjoyed the luxury of being able to examine his travelling companion openly while she slept.
He assessed everything about her, from her clothes and shoes to her luggage and hairstyle.
He knew merely from her appearance, in a way that Italian men always do, that she was a virgin.
The knowledge excited as much as it intrigued him.
Thinking about it and its possible implications, he drifted into a fitful doze, a gentle smile on his face.
When Constance woke up, he was sound asleep and it was her turn to stare.
His chin was resting on his shoulder and his face was in profile to her.
She had never seen such perfect features.
His brow, nose, lips and chin were in exact proportion, like a sculpted Roman head.
His wavy black hair curled behind his ears so thickly that she was reminded of an Ingres portrait of a nobleman she had seen in one of Miss Hatherby's books.
Constance thought Ludovico the most romantic man she had ever seen but what intrigued her most were his luxuriantly long eye-lashes.
On any other than his strongly classical face, they would have looked disturbingly effeminate.
Although she had to admit his lack of height, Constance had noticed that he was muscular.
How old he was she wasn't sure, but he was certainly older than Nicky, she decided, and much more mature.
Constance fell into a second sleep as the train continued on its slow path to Genoa.
She was vaguely conscious of passing through occasional stations but she didn't wake up until a soft shaking of her shoulder gently brought her to life.
She opened her eyes and looked straight into the beautiful face of the Italian.
It was dawn and he pointed to the window.
‘Look,’ he said quietly so that the others in the carriage would not wake.
‘Look.
The Mediterranean.’
Constance looked.
She had never seen anything so ethereal as the scene that slid slowly past her eyes.
The sea was covered with a mist that hovered above its surface, like a cloud.
It was the most delicate shade of creamy blue and out of it floated the masts and superstructures of fishing boats, riding silently at anchor.
The tranquillity and gentleness of the scene reminded her of Japanese paintings.
The mist changed to a warm pink and began to disperse as the sun rose above the horizon.
The surface of the sea became glossy, like copper.
Constance was mesmerised.
Neither she nor Ludovico said a word for many minutes.
Then he pointed to the window on the other side of the carriage.
‘Look,’ he whispered, touching her arm to gain her attention.
Heavily wooded hills climbed high above the railway line, dotted with small villages just beginning to be bathed in the warm light of the rising sun.
Constance was thrilled at her first sight of the red terracotta tiles of Italy, glowing in the morning air as above them the pale blue sky deepened.
‘We will soon be in La Spezia,’ Ludovico said.
At La Spezia, he pushed his way down the crowded corridor, looking for a refreshment trolley.
He was away so long that Constance began to feel nervous.
He finally returned with two chunks of roughly cut bread, a slab of cheese and a tiny tin jug of milk.
‘All I could get,’ he apologised.
Constance was perfectly happy.
She had not eaten since Paris and nothing had ever tasted so good to her as this rough peasant fare.
As the train left La Spezia, she was so enjoying her adventure that she laughed out loud.
It was the beginning of a love affair — with the man and his country.
‘And now,’ he said, ‘you are rested and fed and — how do you English say?— watered, so it is time to learn of each other.’
Constance laughed again and said, ‘I think I am going to love Italy.’
His next remark made her blush.
‘You know,’ he said, leaning across to her and almost whispering, ‘like under your arms.
You English girls are always so smooth and clean.
Italian girls are hairy.
I do not like that hairy.
It smells.’
Constance was deeply embarrassed at the intimate turn the conversation had taken.
It was perfectly obvious that this man had been allowed to get very close to both English and Italian girls and, she decided, had probably known a great many of both.
He's obviously an almighty flirt, she thought.
Despite her embarrassment, it made him seem even more attractive.
It also reassured her: surely no married man — not even an Italian married man — would talk so boldly, almost sexually, to a total stranger?
If Constance thought she was learning things about Ludovico, it was nothing compared with what he was gleaning from her.
His eyes sparkled with delight as her mannerisms and voice reminded him of just how attractive he found Englishwomen.
As her confidence grew, Constance began to talk with animation about her job at Maison de Levantiére, life with Louise and even some of her difficulties with her mother.
Ludovico lay back in his seat and smiled.
Her innocence and enthusiasm captivated him.
As the train was on the final run towards Florence, he leaned forward urgently.
‘Come with me when we get to Florence,’ he said.
‘I want to show you Italy's fairest city.’
After a moment's hesitation, Constance said yes.
On the first day, Ludovico murmured, ‘Constance…
Constanza…you are a Constance.
It is the perfect name for you,’ as they lay on the grass in the Boboli Gardens, sheltering under the trees from the fierce afternoon sun.
Since leaving the train at eleven o'clock that morning, so much had changed in her life that Constance felt dazed.
They had sent a telegram to Louise (Constance could not pluck up the courage to speak to her); Ludovico had telephoned a friend about somewhere for them to stay and  they had eaten what to Constance, used to English food, seemed the most delicious lunch she had ever tasted.
As she lay in the heat, she felt drowsy and at the same time tinglingly alive.
‘Talk to me,’ she said.
‘What do you want me to say, you funny English girl?’ he asked as he rolled over on his stomach and began to tickle her neck with a blade of grass.
‘Tell me about you.’
‘About me?’ he chuckled.
‘OK.
I am Ludovico Castelfranco di Villanuova.
I am twenty-five.
I stand five feet ten inches, I have brown eyes, black hair…all my teeth.’
He paused.
‘You can see how I am, but the parts you cannot see are even better.’
Constance grinned: Ludovico was exactly the way she had always imagined an Italian would be.
as if he had read her thoughts, he said, ‘I am — how do you say?— I am your typical Italian: generous, warm, passionate and very’— he rolled the ‘r’ like a music-hall opera singer —‘very jealous.’
Constance sat up and hugged her knees.
‘How very disagreeable,’ she said.
‘Tell me more.’
‘I am a poor orphan boy.
My father is dead for many years.’
‘Brothers and sisters?’ cried Constance.
He paused, distracted by the interruption.
‘Brothers and sisters?
None.
I am the only child.’
A sadness seemed to cross his face for a second but Constance was barely conscious of it.
‘Your mother?’ she asked.
She was beginning to enjoy herself.
‘Oh,’ he said sadly, ‘she is a sick, lonely woman, as Italian mothers always are.’
‘Where?’
‘Way up in the hills…’
‘The old woman who lived in the hills,’ Constance cried in delight.
Ludovico was not pleased at the interruptions.
‘English  girls always drink too much wine,’ he said with mock severity.
‘Where was I?
Oh, yes, my mother.
My mother is a saint — very religious — very devoted to the memory of my poor father.
She surrounds herself with priests.
She prays all day.
Very Italian; very devout.
I worship her for her piety.’
‘Tell me about your home.’
Alas,’ he joked, pretending to cry, ‘I have no home.
My mother's house up in the hills is so,’ he searched for the word, ‘away…’
‘Remote’ ' Constance corrected.
‘Yes, so remote, that I must live with friends wherever I am — Rome, Naples, even here, in Florence.’
‘Like a gypsy,’ Constance laughed.
‘Exactly,’ he agreed.
Constance searched for something more to ask.
‘Tell me about your loves.’
‘None,’ he lied.
‘I am a scholar gypsy.
I love my books, I love my library.
After that, there is nothing.’
‘Liar,’ she laughed.
‘No, seriously,’ he said.
She put her hands round his neck and pretended to strangle him.
‘Don't tell me all these lies,’ she laughed.
‘Let me go!’ he cried, then he suddenly leaned forward and kissed her.
Constance was not ready for it and rolled away on the grass.
Her mood changed.
‘Why do you lie?’ she asked pensively.
‘All right,’ Ludovico cried, determined that the atmosphere should not be lost, ‘now I tell true.
I have hundreds, no thousands, of girlfriends.
They never leave me alone.
They telephone all day; they run after me in the streets; they bribe my barber for locks of my hair; they make my life unbearable.
And I love them all.’
Sitting up, Constance roared with delight.
‘You are naughty, wicked and bad,’ she cried as she pretended to  hit him over the head.
He ducked the blows, and holding her tight, said, ‘I love you.
Only you.’
The apartment Ludovico took Constance to was at the top of an old palazzo in Via Santo Spirito, a dark street dominated by the cupola of Chiesa Santo Spirito, the vast Renaissance church at the end of the road.
It was tiny and not terribly clean, but it entranced Constance.
Without waiting to be shown, she walked through the primitive kitchen and on to a small balcony perched perilously above the red-tiled roofs of the houses below.
From it, she could see the narrow street and the small square where the traders were dismantling their stalls.
The sounds, the heat, the smell were all marvellous to her.
‘Oh, Ludovico,’ she cried.
‘It's just perfect!
Perfect!
It's exactly how I always imagined Italy would be.’
Ludovico found the area squalid and dirty but he pretended to share her enthusiasm.
Catching her by the arm, he said, ‘Come.
I have something else to show.’
He led her through the kitchen to a darkened room.
Constance could see nothing.
He opened the shutters.
It was a bedroom, containing the largest bed she had ever seen.
It filled the room, leaving only inches on each side between it and the walls.
‘Ecco!’
Ludovico cried theatrically as he gestured towards it.
‘Here it is.
The Matrimoniale — our own double bed!’
The bed was in the worst nineteenth-century taste.
The bedhead was florid and overblown, its shiny walnut carvings reaching almost to the ceiling.
And what carvings!
Madonnas, cherubs, birds, fauns and flowers crowded and pushed each other in a design that defied logic and allowed no place for the eye to rest.
Constance had never seen anything so complicated.
As she gazed at it she became embarrassed.
Ludovico's arm crept round her waist.
She could feel his breath on her neck.
Suddenly she felt shy and nervous.
Gently pulling away, she said in a slightly  strained voice, ‘More!
Show me more.
What else is there to see?’
‘Nothing; this is the apartment.
‘You don't like?’
Ludovico's face puckered with anxiety.
‘I love it,’ she smiled.
‘Now please show me more of marvellous Florence.’
As they rushed, laughing, through the side streets and played hopscotch across the squares, Constance was increasingly aware of time passing.
The thought of the night terrified and thrilled her.
Ludovico's physicality was already overwhelming.
He embraced her in bars without any embarrassment and stole kisses in shop doorways, no matter who was passing by.
His bodily presence seemed to be submerging hers and making them one.
He endlessly touched her, and the physical thrill made her tingle.
But, despite the excitement growing inside her, Constance felt ill at ease.
Her conscience wouldn't let her be happy.
She knew that she must speak to Louise.
When she told Ludovico, he frowned and said, ‘That is not possible, my darling.’
‘Why not?’
‘Telephoning here in Italy is very difficult.
Half the lines are still down since the war.
Don't worry.
She will have the telegram by now.’
Something within Constance strengthened.
She knew she was falling in love with this man; she felt certain that she couldn't resist him; but she also knew that she couldn't treat Louise in this way.
Could not and would not.
She looked Ludovico in the eyes and said, ‘I must, Ludovico — I absolutely must — speak to my aunt before we go back to the flat.’
He looked back at her and knew the strength of her will.
‘Stay here,’ he said and slipped out of the bar.
‘This is the palazzo of a friend of mine.
It is not necessary for you to meet him at the moment — in fact, he is not  here right at this moment — but you may use the telephone.
Give me the number.
I will dial.’
‘Then wait outside, please.’
‘Aunt Louise?
Did you get the telegram?’
‘Constance!
Where on earth are you?
Your uncle and I have been worried to death!
I haven't dared contact your mother!
What are you doing?’
Constance wilted.
She had never heard Louise speak in this tone of voice before.
It was obvious that she was very upset and alarmed.
Trying to keep her voice calm, and almost choking on the tears of guilt that had come to her eyes the moment she heard her aunt speak, Constance said, ‘Oh, Aunt Louise, I've met a boy…no, not really a boy…a young man’— and she began to sob.
There was a silence and then her aunt cried, ‘But what are you doing ?
Where is he taking you?
Why did you get off the train?’
Through her tears, Constance began to tell the dreadful story — and, hearing it with her aunt's ears, she saw that it was indeed dreadful.
It took a long time because Louise kept interrupting with questions that Constance couldn't answer and which seemed irrelevant beside the tremendous fact that Ludovico was waiting for her and she longed to run to him.
‘I don't know what to do,’ Louise wailed.
‘Please don't do anything yet,’ Constance pleaded.
‘I'll ring you in a couple of days.
I am perfectly safe.
He is a gentleman.
I know that no harm will come to me — and so would you if you could only see him.
You'd love him, you honestly would.
Please, Aunt Louise, trust me!’
It was midnight when Ludovico and Constance finally climbed the stairs to the apartment.
They had reached the first landing when Constance stopped.
‘Wait,’ she cried, pulling Ludovico back, ‘I want to count.’
‘Count?’
‘Yes, I want to know how many steps there are to the top.’
She turned and began to run down the stairs.
‘Come!’ she cried.
‘Come back, Constanza!’
Ludovico called.
She took no notice.
Angry that she had defied him and yet delighted at her little-girl behaviour, he reluctantly followed, then, holding her very close, walked her back up the stairs as they counted each step in unison.
‘…ninety-four!’
Constance gasped as they reached the door of the apartment.
‘How do you say that in Italian?’
‘Novantaquattro ’ Ludovico groaned, as he wrestled with the huge lock.
In the half-light from the single landing bulb, he took what seemed to Constance an age to open it.
Finally, he stepped inside, groping for the light switch.
There was no bulb in the hall light.
As Ludovico shuffled into the kitchen, Constance waited fearfully on the landing.
She heard Ludovico stumble, curse and then light a match.
As he came back into the hall, his face irregularly illuminated by its flame, she was overwhelmed by the dramatic beauty of his features.
He disappeared into the bedroom, where the match went out.
‘Oh no!’ he cried.
‘There are no bulbs in any of the lights.
I should have known.
In Italy when people move out they take everything — and I mean everything.
I'm amazed that they have left the fittings!’
‘I don't believe it!’
Constance said.
‘It is true, my darling.
Come.’
He stepped forward and pulled her into the apartment.
Closing the door, he said, ‘There is nothing to do but go immediately to bed.
Follow,’ and, holding her hand, he led her into the bedroom.
Constance was glad of the dark but was pleased, as Ludovico held her tight and started passionately kissing her face and neck, that there was sufficient light from the street for her to see him.
As she was swept up in his passion she forgot everything except her need for him.
He undressed her slowly and with infinite gentleness, as if she were a peach he could  not bear to bruise, and then guided her shaking hands as she undressed him.
She had never touched a naked man before.
Ludovico slowly slid her down his body and she kissed the skin of his torso, excited by its masculine smell.
He straddled his legs, and guiding her head with both hands, tried to make her take him into her mouth.
She pulled away.
‘No!’ she gasped.
‘Yes ,’ he whispered urgently, as he slowly pushed her head down again.
She had no choice.
His firm prick forced her to open her lips and take him into her mouth.
It was the most marvellous feeling Constance had ever experienced.
After a few minutes, he raised her to her feet, and gently pushed her back on the bed.
Immediately, springs began to groan.
The slightest movement caused them to twang and reverberate through the silent apartment.
For all her excitement, Constance could not resist laughing.
As her body began to shake with mirth, Ludovico raised himself up in dismay and cried, ‘What do I do wrong?
Why do you laugh at me?’
‘Not at you, Ludovico,’ she gasped, ‘at us and this ridiculous bed.
Listen to the noise it's making.’
He pulled himself away and sat on the edge of the bed.
She knew he was angry.
‘It's nothing to do with you, Ludovico,’ she said, gently stretching forward to touch him.
He shrugged her off.
‘You laugh!’ he said.
‘How can you laugh at such a moment!
You destroy everything.’
She sat up in horror.
‘Oh!
Ludo, please!
Don't be like that.
Please don't be angry.
I'm sorry.’
‘I am failed.
I am failed as a man.
How can you do this to me?’
‘Oh, Ludo, don't be silly.’
‘Silly!
Silly!
You call silly the most sacred moment between a man and a woman?
Do you say this to your English men?’
Constance smiled in the dark as she thought of the  chaste kisses she had allowed Nicky.
‘There are no English men,’ she whispered.
‘You are the first.’
There was a silence and then he turned.
‘I know, my little virgin.
I know.’
There was something dismissive in his tone that irritated Constance.
‘How do you know?’ she asked indignantly.
‘What have I done wrong?’
‘You laughed,’ he retorted.
Somehow her insecurity changed his mood.
She could see that he was smiling.
‘Look!’ he cried, beginning to bounce up and down.
‘Listen to the noise.
Get used to it.
It will sing its song to the rhythm of our love.
You must enjoy it.
Do not let it distract you again,’ and he pulled her towards him.
His passion was so strong that Constance was overwhelmed.
She heard nothing more than his urgent whisperings, half Italian, half English, his groans and her cries accompanied by the futile protests of the bed as he took her, slowly, confidently and with an expertise she was too inexperienced to appreciate.
Constance lay awake long after Ludovico had fallen into a heavy sleep.
It wasn't just the slight pain that stopped her sleeping, it was also the mental shock of what she had done.
She couldn't imagine why she had behaved as she had.
You don't know him, she thought, desolately.
He might wake up and walk out and you'll never see him again.
She imagined how Nora would react if she knew.
Who is he? she mused.
Is he telling the truth about his ancestors?
Were they really ruling huge areas of land when my family's ambitions were for nothing grander than the next meal and the work to pay for it?
Or was it all a pack of lies to make me give in?
In her heart, she knew that the speculation was unfair.
She had given in because she found him irresistible and, looking at his strong brown back in the first grey light of dawn, she still found him so.
She longed to wake him so that they could make love again but did not dare to because, for all the intimacy of  the previous hours, Constance knew that she was lying next to a virtual stranger.
It was broad daylight when she woke.
It was hot, her skin was clammy and she felt sick.
She rolled over to touch him.
He was not in the bed.
Sitting up, she looked round the bedroom.
He was gone.
Nervously she whispered, ‘Ludo?’
There was no reply.
The apartment was silent, its air of abandonment only emphasised by the cries and noises from the street below.
She knew she was alone.
She slid off the edge of the bed.
The floor tiles were cold but she hardly noticed as she tiptoed to the door and looked into the kitchen.
No note.
None of his clothes left.
Nothing.
She shuffled across the kitchen to the sink.
He's gone! she thought.
He's had his fun and now he's run away.
I'll never see him again.
What will I do?
Leaning on the sink, she began to sob, overcome by the hopelessness of her situation and guilt at her behaviour.
Suddenly, she heard the front door click.
She turned and ran into the hall, already beginning to laugh at her foolishness.
‘Oh, what a shock you gave me,’ she said as the door slowly opened.
A thin, wiry old woman, grey-haired and dressed in black, stepped inside.
‘Buon giorno, signora ,’ she said croakily and began to talk very quickly in Italian.
Constance understood nothing.
Still talking, the woman went into the kitchen and, standing on a chair, screwed a light bulb into the fitting above the table.
‘Signor Ludovico, where is he?’
‘Mi dispiace, signora, non parlo inglese.’
‘Ludovico, Lud-o-vi-co, where is he?’ she cried in desperation.
‘Here he is!’ a voice called in English.
She turned.
To her relief, Ludovico walked in through the open front door, carrying two enormous brown paper bags.
She rushed towards him.
‘Oh, Ludovico!
Thank God.
I didn't know where you were.
I was terrified!’
She tried to kiss him.
‘Wait!
Wait!’ he laughed as he pushed past her into the  kitchen and put the bags on the table.
‘I've just been down to the market.
I thought you would still be asleep.’
Her relief at his return made Constance angry.
‘How could you do such a thing?’ she demanded.
‘Never give me a shock like that again.’
‘No, Constanza,’ Ludovico replied, ‘I did not give you a shock.
You gave it to yourself — because you do not trust me.
If you are to love me you must believe in my honour.
Now, we talk no more of this seriousness.’
Constance cooed with delight as Ludovico unpacked the bags.
Coffee, oranges, apples, fresh warm bread, thick creamy milk — she couldn't believe the luxury of it all.
They ate on the terrace and Constance found it almost as sensual and satisfying an experience as the previous night's love-making.
She sat back in the sun and closed her eyes.
Sensations rushed in: the cries of the traders in the street below them mixed with the screams of the swallows that swished low across the roofs; the dark aroma of the strong coffee mingled with the fresh smell of the bread.
Her dreaming was interrupted by Ludovico who knelt before her and slid his hand between her legs.
She groaned voluptuously at his touch.
He gently pulled her out of the chair and, kissing her, said, ‘Come to bed.’
‘What about the woman?’
‘She has gone.
We are alone.’
He led her into the bedroom, which was glowing with an intense white light like nothing she had ever seen in England.
Without bothering to close the door, Ludovico began to make long and passionate love to her, teaching her how to take and give pleasure in ways she had never dreamed of.
They remained there all day.
On the second day, she wrote Louise a letter that she knew was inadequate but told all that she felt capable of confiding for the moment.
Writing it reinforced her conviction that she had been right to stay in Florence.
Ludovico was the only man she would ever love.
On the same day she discovered the Italian willingness  to make love anywhere.
In her innocence, Constance had always assumed that it was an activity that took place in bed.
When Ludovico came back to the apartment with food for lunch and found her stripped to the waist, washing herself in the cracked kitchen sink, he immediately started making love to her, pushing her back until the taps dug into her.
She was as thrilled by his daring as by his actions.
Apart from anything else, it was only eleven thirty in the morning.
On the third day, Ludovico spoke to the Principe di Savognia, his tennis partner and the owner of the flat they were staying in.
He wanted to discuss this English girl with his oldest friend.
Giancarlo Battista di Savognia had known Ludovico since he was a boy.
After the death of Ludovico's father, Giancarlo had become his closest confidant.
Ludovico had no secrets from him.
He had told him of the English girl on that first day when he had asked for the loan of the flat and permission for Constance to telephone from his palazzo.
Giancarlo had agreed instantly to both requests and then forgotten about them.
It was not particularly unusual for somebody to borrow the flat.
Many of his young friends still lived at home under the watchful eyes of their mothers and needed a place to take their mistresses.
The attic apartment perfectly fitted the bill and was much in demand.
The Principe di Savognia was typical of his class.
Bathed in a delicate self-importance, he held himself in high esteem as the bearer of one of Italy's oldest titles.
He listened, but he did not involve himself in the affairs of his friends, except on the level of gossip.
Ludo's brief romance with an English girl was so run-of-the-mill that it hardly warranted mention at dinner parties, let alone gossip.
However, when Ludovico told him that he wished to marry Constance, that was a different story, worthy of gossip indeed.
Savognia was incredulous.
‘But you know nothing of her,’ he pointed out.
‘You must wait.
It is too soon to think of such things.
Perhaps in a few months’ time it will be different.
Or you may  have moved on by then.’
He looked closely at Ludovico.
His friend, he could tell, was serious.
Nevertheless, he was surprised by the vehemence of his reply.
‘Are you crazy?
Months!
I mean today…tomorrow…before the weekend.’
‘My dear Ludo, what are you talking about?
Have you gone mad, talking of marrying a total stranger — and a foreigner — after five minutes?
What would your mother say?
Besides, you have her already, there is no need.’
As he spoke, he looked at Ludovico, who was furiously plucking at the strings of his racket and gazing at the ground.
Savognia was exceptionally tall for an Italian and stood well above Ludovico.
He took a slight step forward and, taking his friend's chin in his hand, lifted his face so that Ludovico was forced to look up into his eyes.
‘Ludo,’ he said softly.
‘You have been this way before.
Don't be silly about this girl.
It is an infatuation — and one I understand, believe me.
She is foreign and beautiful, I am sure.
You have awakened her to passion and taken her virginity.
It is all very agreeable but please, my dear boy, don't allow yourself to take it seriously.
You can only be hurt if you do — and you will surely hurt her.
Believe me, I know you.
I know your…enthusiasms.
By all means enjoy an autumn romance but do not think of it as anything more than that.’
Ludovico scowled at him, then jerked his head away.
Looking at the ground, he said, ‘You know me better than anyone, Giancarlo, but this you do not understand.’
‘How can I?’ his friend quickly broke in.
‘It is all so new and, in any case, I haven't seen the girl.
In fact,’ he added softly, ‘it is all so new that not even you can know her.’
He was aware that he was infuriating Ludovico by his opposition to the plan but everything he knew about his friend convinced him that the idea of a whirlwind marriage was wrong and could end only in disaster.
Savognia had been brought up in an anglicised fashion.
Looked after by an English nanny, he had frequently  spoken English at home with his parents.
Later, he had spent a year at Cambridge after graduating from the University of Bologna.
He felt that he knew the English character and, although he wouldn't hurt Ludovico by articulating it, he was sure that the sort of English girl who would get off a train and move in with a stranger would very soon be travelling on.
Giancarlo Savognia had always allowed his intellect to rule his emotions.
That is why he underestimated Constance and misunderstood Ludovico.
He could not imagine how an intelligent person (as Ludo insisted this girl was) would behave as Constance had, unless there were some emotional flaw in her.
Giancarlo had never known passion, and had only occasionally felt the pull of lust.
Nevertheless, he felt that intellectually he understood both emotions better than his friend.
When they parted, he was sure that he had given Ludovico serious pause for thought.
He was wrong.
Ludovico went straight to the Via Santo Spirito, strode purposefully through the leafy courtyard, and ran up the broad shallow stairs to the top floor.
He burst into the apartment, woke Constance from her doze, and fell upon her, greedy and desperate to prove to himself that he was right and his friend was wrong.
Constance was overwhelmed by his urgency.
Afterwards, they lay silently together and as he thought of the recent conversation with Giancarlo he slowly ran his finger along her hip-bone and down towards her inner thigh.
For him this was the most beautiful part of her body.
Her flesh was so creamy-white and fine that he could trace the blue veins under it.
The concavity beneath the hip-bone reminded him of a little valley high in the hills of Tuscany or Sicily, bare, smooth and satisfying.
He loved to lie next to her and kiss it and then to stretch flat and look up at her hips.
The gentle curve of her body was like a piece of rock smoothed by the sea.
He marvelled at how soft her skin felt to his touch.
It was of a different, finer, texture than  then his whistle as he crossed the courtyard.
In the silence that followed, she placed her arms over her bare breasts and, pushing them up, bent her head and smelt them.
They still retained the faint aroma of Ludovico's body.
She loved the smell of his flesh and was happy to have it lingering on her.
She lay there rocking gently back and forward, thinking, If that is what he wants…
She felt as if she were floating in limbo, beyond conscience, beyond responsibility and even beyond reality.
But she also knew that he was right.
She wanted to marry him and she could see no reason to delay simply because of religious differences.
Should she tell her mother — and would he tell his?
She decided not, in both cases.
Bald information was all it could be: the statement of a fact, far beyond parental agreement or approval.
Strangely, although Nora was in her mind, Constance realised that she hadn't thought of Nicky since she had left Northumberland.
Golden morning light bathed the apartment as she slipped into a gentle sleep.
When Ludo returned, he found her still dreamily lying on the bed.
He was so angry and frustrated that he hardly noticed she was not yet dressed.
The registry office couldn't marry them at such short notice and they must wait until the following day.
As he paced up and down the narrow kitchen, shouting curses through the bedroom door, Constance smiled.
How emotionally extravagant the Italians are, she thought fondly as, calming down, he returned to bed and gently made love to her.
On the fifth day, they married.
Ludovico was intent on keeping it a secret, so the ceremony was empty and impersonal.
The witnesses were people who worked at the registry office.
Constance felt a pang of sadness as she walked into the building on Ludovico's arm, thinking that no one in the world who cared for them knew what was happening.
The previous night she had spoken again to Louise — an anguished conversation, that ended with her aunt insisting that Nora be told that Constance was not in Rome.
Even to think of Nora was a sort of agony for Constance.
Over the past two days she had managed to convince herself that her mother was a different person from the one she knew.
She had even begun to believe that Nora would understand this grand passion.
Listening to Louise's agitation, Constance was amazed at her own naivete.
Hope had betrayed her into thinking dreams could become reality.
She realised that there would be no light-hearted understanding in Cramer of actions for which she herself could find no easily articulated justification.
‘Oh, my God!’
Louise had cried.
‘Why on earth haven't you phoned her yet?
I don't know what she'll say.
She'll go absolutely demented!
Really, Constance, I can't believe what you've done!
To get off a train with a total stranger…
I really cannot…well, words fail me.
What sort of a man is he?
No, don't tell me!
I don't wish to know.
Now listen to me, Constance, you must phone your mother.
I won't do it for you!’
Constance promised that she would, but she was so afraid of the outcome that she knew she couldn't, not until she and Ludovico had been married and she was beyond her mother's power.
Kissing Ludovico in the cramped registry office, in front of strangers, she wished that her mother, Louise, Miss Hatherby and so many others could have been there with them.
After the ceremony, she and Ludovico went to Chiesa Santo Spirito, at the end of their road, where Ludovico had arranged for them to be blessed, explaining to her that it had no religious significance and did not endanger her non-Catholic soul.
As she stood in the dark chapel, listening to the priest's murmured prayers, the empty, depressed feeling intensified.
When she had lost her virginity four nights earlier, Constance had been elated; but now she felt as she had always understood women did on their bridal night: deeply upset and even slightly resentful at what had happened.
She was coming down to earth.
The romantic fantasy world that she had entered when she left the train with Ludo was dissolving  in the light of reality.
As they walked into the trattoria opposite their palazzo for the wedding breakfast to which nobody had been invited, she shivered slightly.
What did she know of this man who was now her husband, and what was to become of them, two strangers who had begun to be familiar with each other 's bodies but knew nothing of the thoughts and emotions that lay within.
Ludovico called exuberantly for champagne but it was unobtainable, so he settled for a sweet fizzy wine instead.
He wanted to cheer Constance up but it had the opposite effect.
As the courses came and went, she could only toy with her food.
Eventually, Ludovico said, ‘It has been a mistake, no?
You do not wish to be my wife?
I do not please you.’
She looked up, struck by his desolate tone.
His eyes were full of tears.
‘Oh, Ludo,’ she cried, ‘please don't cry.
I couldn't bear it!’
‘I want only you,’ he replied, rubbing his eyes with the back of his hand, ‘but you do not want me.
How could you let me do this to us?
Why didn't you say?
Why, Constanza?
What can we do?
I cannot live without you but marriage without love is insupportable.
Please, please, you must learn to love me!’
Tears were rolling down his cheeks.
To Constance, he looked like a little lost boy.
‘Oh, Ludo, I can't bear to see you cry.
I love you, I really do.
I'm happy that we are married.
It's just that I feel so cheap.
In England registry office weddings are for girls who have got themselves into trouble.
I wish we had waited and done it properly — with our relations and friends.
A real wedding.’
‘No,’ he replied, ‘that wouldn't have worked.
We are married in the only way we can be married, believe me.
That is not the problem.
What I do not understand is why you don't love me.’
‘Ludovico,’ Constance said, placing his hand on the ring on her finger, ‘I love you more than anybody in the  world and I always will.
That's why I wanted something to be proud of.’
Ludovico brightened.
‘But you have something.
You have us.
Are you not proud of us?
We are so young and beautiful.
We make love like no one ever has in the whole world — the whole history of the world — we are better than Antony and Cleopatra,’ his voice began to rise with his spirits, ‘Romeo and Juliet, Paolo and Francesca, Beatrice and Dante,’he was lost for words, ‘better than…better than…
Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers!
Nobody has even been better in bed than Constanza and Ludovico.’
He stood up, grinning, and held his glass high.
‘Ragazzi !’
Boys!’ he shouted to draw the attention of everyone in the trattoria to their table.
‘Ragazzi !
We are the greatest lovers in the world.
Nobody has ever loved as we have!’
There was a great round of applause.
‘And,’ Ludovico cried, ‘we are just married!’
It seemed to Constance that the room exploded with noise.
There was cheering, clapping, stamping on the floor and banging on the tables, as everyone in the restaurant crowded round them.
‘You want family?’
Ludovico shouted above the noise.
‘You got family.
The Italian nation.
They are your family!’ and, to even greater cheers, he kissed her long and hard.
More wine was brought, an accordionist appeared from nowhere and everybody began to sing while she and Ludovico danced their first dance in the hastily cleared space in the middle of the floor.
Then the celebration began.
People crowded in from the streets, everybody danced and sang and drank and laughed.
It was the most marvellous party Constance had ever been to.
As she lay in bed that night, she was unable to sleep for the excitement of it all.
Scenes from the evening flashed before her eyes: the dignity of the old man to whom Ludovico had gently presented her and with whom she had performed a stately dance, delicately held in his wizened old arms; the young men who had made a ring around her and Ludo before lifting them on to their  shoulders and carrying them back to Santo Spirito; the women who had caressed her blonde hair and whispered, ‘Bella!
Bella! che bella ragazza !’
Above all, she recalled the pride and happiness in Ludovico's eyes as they met hers in the swirling crowd.
It had been a marvellous wedding party and it was followed by a wedding night that she knew she would never forget.
Despite the heat, Ludovico's passion had taken her to heights she had not dreamed were possible.
Now, although it was past two, sweat was still running between her breasts and trickling over her stomach.
She silently slid out of bed and stood by the window.
The linen curtain fell inert across it.
There was no breeze to lighten the atmosphere.
Her mood changed suddenly and completely.
Once again, she felt lonely and cast out.
Cool Northumberland seemed so far away.
She began to cry.
She longed to be close to her mother, or talking to Louise or cycling up the drive towards the grim yews of Seaton Cramer Hall and the warm welcome of Miss Hatherby.
When she thought of her old friend, she felt ashamed.
That dignified woman would never have acted as she had: so selfishly and unthinkingly.
I have behaved like a spoilt child wanting its own way, she said to herself.
How am I ever going to tell my mother and Louise?
And how could she keep her shameful marriage from Miss Hatherby?
She thought of the inevitable disdain with which her friend would react to the news that Constance had been seduced into a reckless marriage with a virtual stranger.
She crept back to bed and lay next to her husband, taking care to leave a space between their bodies.
The next day, Constance had regained her equilibrium.
She knew perfectly well that she and Ludo were right for each other.
Happy when they were together, when she was left alone she fretted, missing his presence and the way the light moved round his body as he enthusiastically used every inch of it to express the slightest emotion.
She felt she would never tire of the way Ludo demonstrated each change in his mood.
She already knew his movements  off by heart: the way he rubbed the bridge of his nose when he made fun of her; how his upper lip crinkled as he laughed; his habit of pulling his ear as he made a point he thought important.
Above all, she loved his Italian mannerisms: hands cupped together in a pleading gesture when she was slow to understand something or arms flailing in the air as he enthused about the beauty of Capri, the magnificence of St Peter's — anything, so long as it was Italian.
His Mediterranean vibrancy excited and stimulated her.
She compared him with Nicky.
How could she ever have thought that his negligent self-involvement would be enough for her?
Constance knew the time had come to face the music and speak to Nora.
But she also felt a compulsion to talk to Louise.
She couldn't bear the rift that had come between her and the aunt who had always understood and helped her; who had so many times stood between her and her mother as faithful friend wanting the best for them both and who was now so alienated from her.
She rang her first.
Louise's tone was placatory.
‘Your uncle and I think you should get on a train and come down to us right away, darling,’ she said.
‘If you mean anything to this young man, I'm sure he will understand.
He can come and visit you some time later.’
‘I can't do that, Louise.’
‘Why on earth not?
Is there something wrong with you?
Oh, my God !
He isn't holding you against your will?
Tell me, Constance,for God's sake, why can't you leave ?’
Constance began to whimper.
‘Oh, Aunt Louise, I'm married.’
There was silence at the other end.
Plucking up her courage, Constance took advantage of it and plunged ahead.
‘You don't understand what it's like, Aunt Louise.
He's lovely.
And he loves me.
Oh, Aunt Louise,do try to understand.
I really love him, I really, really do.
I'm so happy.
I can't bear to think of you thinking that he's  bad.
He isn't.
He didn't make me do anything I didn't want to.
I did it because I love him.
I will always love him.’
As she spoke she suddenly realised that the whole thing made sense simply because of that, the only thing that mattered.
Why should she cry?
She wasn't ashamed of Ludovico or her marriage.
She was immediately calmer.
‘I'm all right,’ she said.
‘You and Uncle Jim mustn't worry.
Everything is fine.’
And she knew that it was.
Ludovico was the most beautiful man she had ever seen.
He was the kindest man she had ever met.
He was the most romantic man she had ever known — and the most exciting.
Despite her negligible experience of men before she met him, she was convinced that Ludovico was as near to perfection as any man could be.
Her courage flooded back; but not sufficiently for her to be ready to talk directly to her mother.
‘Aunt Louise, please, please will you talk to Mummy and warn her?’
‘Warn her?’
Louise echoed in alarm.
‘What can I tell her?
You must face the music, darling.
I can't do it for you.
How can I just ring her out of the blue and tell her that her daughter has married the first Italian she's met, without telling any of us?’
‘Well,’ Constance wheedled, ‘tell her I'll be ringing with some news.
You don't need to go further than that.
Please, Louise, just for me?’
In her confusion, she forgot to call her ‘Aunt’ '.
Reluctantly Louise agreed.
Pouring herself a large brandy, she booked a call to Northumberland, hoping that Nora would be out.
For the first time since she arrived in Rome, the connection came up immediately and she could hear Nora's voice, distant but clear, at the other end.
Inevitably, Nora had the whole story within minutes.
Her reaction surprised Louise.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘you know who I blame for all this, don't you?’
Louise was relieved when she went on, ‘Nicky Scott Wilson.
I knew she'd have to find some way of getting over him but I didn't expect anything as drastic as this.’
Her matter-of-fact tone surprised Louise.
‘Constance has done this on the rebound,’ Nora continued.
‘She cannot love this man, no matter what she says.
Good heavens, she only left here a week ago!
How can she possibly know somebody well enough to get married, the little ninny!
Where were they married — a church or a registry office?
How easily can marriages be annulled in Italy?’
Nora's realism and level-headed assessment of the situation made Louise ashamed of her own emotional reaction to the news.
Nora Simpson didn't believe in crying over spilt milk.
She couldn't rail into thin air.
As she sat with a whisky and waited for Constance's call, she listened to the autumn wind tugging at the corners of the austere house.
It drowned the roar of the waves which she knew would be crashing on to the beach in impotent and seemingly endless fury.
She suddenly felt terribly alone and isolated in this remote corner of England.
Whereas summer still lingered in Florence, winter had already taken hold in Cramer.
The night was cold and draughts swept round the room.
Nora thought of Will.
How would he have taken the news of this sneaky, hole-in-the-corner business?
As she sipped the scotch, she reflected that if he were still alive he would no doubt be bringing the full force of his liberal rationalism to bear on the problem right now.
She had to admit that he would almost certainly not see the situation as an unmitigated disaster.
After all, Constance was respectably and correctly married, was she not?
Presumably she loved the man and he loved her.
Dismissing fears that her daughter might have been tricked into a fake marriage by a man determined to ruin her, Nora tried to think more positively, but her brain persistently returned to the appalling question, ‘Why an Italian , for God's sake?’
By the time the call came both women were calm.
Nora was determined not to make a scene; Constance was resolved not to cry.
They both lived up to their intentions.
‘Mummy?’
Constance asked timidly when she heard the voice at the other end.
‘Constance, are you all right?’
The voice sounded reassuringly calm.
‘Mummy, there's nothing to worry about, honestly.’
‘I'll decide that, when I've heard what you have to say for yourself.
You'd better start at the beginning.’
So Constance told her mother everything.
Nora reacted with masterly self-control.
‘Well, Constance,’ she said, ‘I don't know whether you're right or wrong.
It could be as marvellous as you think it will be or it could be a total disaster.
Only time will tell.
All I'll say is that you must be honest and, if it's wrong and this man is a mistake, you must have the courage to tell me.
That is all I ask.’
When Nora had put down the receiver, she thought ruefully, She's a chip off the old block.
Who am I to complain?
I hardly knew Will much better when we were married.
Truth to tell, I made my decision within a week, as well.
It must be a family failing.
And she went to bed thinking of that amazing week at Gleneagles.
Somehow, it made Italy seem less far away and her daughter's behaviour there much less reprehensible.
Although she knew that, at best, her mother's approval was qualified, Constance derived strength from the fact that at least she now knew.
While Ludovico was playing tennis, she sat on the balcony and wrote Nora a letter.
Dear Mummy, I know how disappointed and unhappy you must feel and I know you think I've behaved badly.
I suppose I have but that doesn't make my behaviour wrong.
I'm going to tell you right away that, although I wasn't a virgin when we married, I was until I left the train  with Ludovico.
I could have resisted him until we were married, and I know he would have waited, but it was me who didn't want to wait.
I loved him so much that I knew it would be all right.
I haven't made a mistake.
He is everything I want and will always want.
If you really care about my happiness, you will be pleased at what has happened.
I have never been so happy in my life and I know that it will go on for ever.
When you meet Ludovico I'm sure you'll understand.
You'll love him.
Promise me you won't worry but, especially, promise you won't make up your mind until you see him.
Please try to understand.
love, Constance
‘Giancarlo has invited us for lunch on Sunday, at his villa in Fiesole.
It will be fun.
You will meet lots of my good friends.’
Ludo smiled with delight.
He couldn't wait to show off his bride.
The news of his marriage had spread like wildfire through Florence.
All his friends would be at the Villa Battista to see him and Constance for themselves.
Constance bit her lip.
‘What will I say to them?’ she asked nervously.
‘How many will speak English?’
‘All!
All!’
Ludovico replied flamboyantly.
‘There will be no problem with that, believe me.
Besides, I shall be with you to translate if necessary.
Do not worry.’
He could see that the news had alarmed her.
He took her hands in his.
‘Look, they are my friends.
They will like you.
They want to like you — because they like me.
Be just as you are now and you'll be fine.’
Ludovico had all the confidence of the good-looking young man who knows that his charm and social position make him welcome everywhere.
He had told her he was an only child like her, but Constance knew that being an only child in Italy was different.
There had been nothing solitary about Ludovico's life.
He had rolled through  childhood in a warm cocoon of love provided by endless cousins, uncles, aunts and servants.
Feeling that the world liked him, he liked the world and faced it, relaxed and open.
Constance had been brought up much less extravagantly.
Self-confidence had not been part of her education so, despite her brief period of employment at de Levantiére's, she felt insecure and nervous when she met new people.
The idea of a luncheon party full of unknown Italians rather terrified her.
Ludo's stories about the life he had led convinced her that all his friends would be sophisticated and worldly.
She knew she would be gauche and awkward.
Constance was especially nervous of meeting the women.
She had already noticed on the streets of Florence how pretty the girls were — and how well dressed — and she made up her mind to look just as good.
‘Do you think you can borrow an iron for me?’ she asked, determined to make sure that her appearance would not let Ludovico down.
They went to lunch at Fiesole on a perfect autumn day.
As the taxi climbed away from the city, Constance was enchanted by the morning bells ringing out from all the churches in Florence.
She looked at the Duomo shimmering in the haze below them.
She thought it majestic, dominating the city without overwhelming it.
It has very good manners, she said to herself fancifully.
Although her stomach was churning at the thought of the coming ordeal, she was determined to appear at ease so as not to let Ludo down.
She gazed out of the window, rehearsing conversational gambits.
Ludovico was uncharacteristically silent.
He too was feeling nervous.
It was important to him that his friends should like his wife, especially the two or three who, like Savognia, were close to him.
It was also essential that Constance should learn to like Italians and the Italian life.
He didn't want a wife who stood on the periphery of his existence, always the foreigner, never involved with Italy.
He had seen that happen before in Florence with what some of his friends referred to dismissively as ‘half  marriages’.
He was determined that they would not say that of his.
As they walked down the drive, Constance was surprised at how cool it was under the pines.
Drawing nearer, she could hear the noise of laughter from the terrace.
They walked round the side of the house and her step faltered.
Her nervousness was forgotten.
Spread before her was the whole of Florence.
She had never seen a view so beautiful.
‘Oh!’ she gasped.
‘Ludo, look!’
Although he had marvelled at it many times, Ludovico had never become blase about the stupendous vista from the Villa Battista and its famous terrace that ran the whole length of the low, pale yellow house.
He was delighted at Constance's reaction.
‘Come to the edge,’ he said, grasping her hand excitedly.
He took her to the balustrade.
Before them was a landscape that could have come straight from the brush of Giotto.
Immediately below them were vines, their leaves turning scarlet above the purple grapes.
They gave way to blackened and gnarled olive trees that rhythmically criss-crossed the sweep of the valley.
‘What are those trees?’
Constance asked.
‘Olives.
Older than time.
They are the blood of the Mediterranean,’ Ludovico answered theatrically.
‘Oh, Ludovico, what a romantic place to live,’ she sighed, ‘I'd give anything to have a view like this.’
‘For how long are we to be deprived of the company of the lovely new bride?’ a voice spoke silkily behind them.
They spun round.
Standing a few feet away, with a glass in his hand, was their host.
‘Giancarlo!
Ciao!
Come stai ?
How are you?’
Ludo said delightedly.
‘Benvenuti !
Welcome to you both!’ his friend replied with a slight smile.
‘Let me introduce you to Constanza, my wife,’ Ludo said triumphantly.
‘I am delighted to meet you.’
Giancarlo bowed slightly  as he took Constance's hand and pressed his lips to it.
The formal gesture, chivalrous and yet intimidating, was like a bucket of cold water thrown over Constance's confidence.
She felt her face go hot with embarrassment as he straightened up and gave her a piercing look that took in everything about her appearance.
He had not yet decided whether she would be friend or enemy, so his eyes were distant — and she knew it.
‘You must come and join the others.
They are all eagerly awaiting the guest of honour.’
Giancarlo's smile did not reassure Constance.
She could feel her heart thumping and was sure that people would see its movement beneath her dress.
She knew that at least the dress — given to her by Monsieur de Levantiére as a farewell gift — looked right.
In beige shantung, with a full skirt cinched with a wide belt in grey suede, it was very sophisticated and was made more so by her long grey gloves and tiny grey hat.
It gave her confidence and she felt sure that she could hold her own against the Italian guests.
Her thoughts were interrupted by Giancarlo.
He was talking to her.
‘The vulgar think that Venice is the most romantic city in the world,’ he was saying, ‘but its charms are too obvious.
Florence is much more romantic, but the most beautiful city in Italy is Bologna.
Do you know it, Constanza?’
Constance had barely heard of it but said, with much more confidence than she was feeling, ‘No, but I hope Ludo will take me there soon.’
She looked at Giancarlo.
He was fine-featured and his dress and movements had a fastidiousness that made Ludo's appearance seem almost earthy.
His receding hair exposed a noble curved brow.
His dark eyes were serious but it was his mouth that made Constance hopeful.
It was sensitive and humorous at the same time.
He was wearing a sports coat which had obviously been tailored in London, suede shoes, a striped tie and a beige waistcoat.
He looked as if he had just stepped out of a drawing room in the shires.
Constance thought it extraordinary that this English-looking body could be topped off by such an Italian face.
Somehow, it was as if he were playing a part.
‘Of course,’ he was saying urbanely, ‘the most magnificent cities are in England.
Cambridge, Oxford, York.
So full of chivalry, so…how can I say it?
So confidently upper-class.
They are totally elegant.
Italian cities are so coarse when you lift their skirts.’
He smiled directly at her and she smiled back to hide her slight embarrassment at the sexuality in the comment, knowing that a few weeks earlier she would have blushed at it.
She felt that the remark was an acknowledgement that, young though she was, she would be accepted in Italy as a mature and grown-up woman.
The thought gave her confidence and she managed to relax slightly.
This man would be a friend, she was sure.
She already felt safe in his company as he went on talking effortlessly.
They were now on the terrace proper.
The silence of curiosity descended on the guests as Giancarlo said, ‘Finalmente !
They have arrived!
Ludo never could get out of bed in the morning!’
Everyone laughed.
The tension was eased.
A white-gloved servant came forward with a tray of drinks, which he offered Constance.
‘Signorina,’ he said as he lifted the tray towards her.
‘No, no!
Enzo,’ said Giancarlo, wagging his finger with mock severity.
‘Signora !’
Everyone laughed again.
The ice was broken.
Constance relaxed a little more.
Ludo was right.
These faces, behind the curiosity, were friendly.
As Giancarlo took her round his guests, formally making introductions, Constance knew that she could fit into this world of refinement, privilege and elegance — and that she wanted to.
She coped with the frankly curious looks of the men, one of whom made her blush as he kissed her hand by saying, ‘No wonder Ludo does not get out of bed in the morning.’
She even survived the appraising looks of the women and smiled when she heard one of them say after she had  passed, ‘What beautiful English skin.’
Constance realised why she could hold her own in this elegant crowd: she was different because she was foreign but, more important, admirable because she was British.
‘We must start without Gioella,’ Giancarlo said to his guests, in Italian.
Constance did not understand him but the last word, strangely rhythmic and warm to her ears, stuck in her mind.
Giancarlo took her arm courteously as if he had known her for years, and, followed by his guests, led her out of the sun on the terrace and into the shade at the side of the house.
There, in a raised garden overlooking the drive, and sheltered by umbrella pines, the servants were waiting to serve food at little tables scattered around haphazardly.
Constance had lost Ludo — something she had been dreading on the journey up from Florence — but she was not alarmed.
She and Giancarlo sat at a table with a distinguished-looking woman in her fifties, whose name Constance could not remember but who was referred to by everyone as Contessa, and her son, Pino, who laughed a lot and told Constance anecdotes about the other guests.
Like everyone else, it seemed, he spoke English impeccably.
After a particularly silly piece of gossip, his mother leant forward.
‘Basta, Pino, cattivo ragazzo !
Stop it, you naughty boy!’ she said in a harsh voice which, years later, Constance was to learn was typically Milanese.
The Contessa turned to her with a smile.
‘Signora.
Listen to no more of his nonsense, I beg you!
He will destroy the reputation of everyone in Florence, if he has a chance.’
Pino wriggled flirtatiously and grinned at Constance, who laughed at him.
His mother obviously adored him and merely said with unconvincing sincerity, ‘Now, Pino, mind what I say.’
At that moment, there came a phut-phut-phut from the drive below as a tiny Fiat Topolino chugged towards the house.
There was a lull in the conversation and then somebody said that word ‘Gioella’ again.
Constance detected a change in the atmosphere as Giancarlo excused  himself and walked down the steps to greet his last guest.
The mood was now one of tingling anticipation.
Pino smiled and said, ‘Have you met Gioella yet?’
‘Pino, please!’ his mother said sharply, in a tone that puzzled Constance.
It was severe and almost panicky, she thought.
A lively and rather loud woman's voice could be heard below them in the drive, speaking to Giancarlo in very quick Italian.
Constance had no time to assess the bewildering exchange of tone that the lunch party had taken before Giancarlo was walking towards her with a vivacious woman by his side who was busily blowing kisses and calling ‘Ciao ’ to the tables she passed.
‘Constanza,’ Giancarlo said with all the formality of their first encounter before lunch, ‘allow me to present Signora de Grignano.
Gioella, this is Constanza, Ludovico's English wife.’
Constance looked at Gioella and calculated she must be in her early thirties.
She had thick black hair, cut short, enormous dark eyes that were never still, and large, very scarlet lips.
She was wearing a jade-green dress that Constance realised, from her days at Paul de Levantiére, was exceedingly expensive despite its simplicity, and a pair of tiny gold slippers.
She was the epitome of fashionable glamour and, merely looking at her, Constance felt swamped.
‘How do you do?’
Gioella said, in heavily accented English.
Her voice was deep and had a sardonic, mocking tone that frightened Constance.
She could think of nothing to say.
The tension was broken by Pino.
‘Gioella, you witch!’ he screamed.
‘Where did you get those divine sandals?
They must be Ferragamo!’
‘Naturalmente, tesoro !
Of course, darling!’
Gioella said with a sharp emphasis on the last word.
She looked round the group.
‘Ludo!’ she called, as Ludovico moved towards her.
‘How clever you are to find the perfect English rose of your dreams.
But how naughty of you to pluck her and  set her in a vase that only you see!
Why didn't you invite us to the wedding, you bad man?’
Ludo grinned sheepishly.
‘But you have been in Monte-catini,’ he countered.
‘You couldn't have come in any case.
I know how you would let nothing interrupt the cure.’
The cure?
Constance thought, looking in surprise at this woman who seemed so radiant with health.
Gioella smiled.
‘I can lose a few centimetres from my waist any time, darling!
For this I would most certainly cross oceans, let alone forgo a couple of treatments.
After all, Ludo, darling, who can resist the making of history, no matter how briefly?’
She took his arm with an easy familiarity and, turning away from Constance, led him back to his table saying, ‘Now, you darling man, tell me how such a bizarre thing happened.’
Constance was stunned.
The hostile tone of Gioella's last comment shook her.
Even worse was the way she had been abandoned without a thought by her husband.
She was not sophisticated enough to hide her bewilderment and in order to cover her embarrassment the Contessa said quickly, ‘They are like brother and sister, signora.
They have known each other since they were children.’
Constance watched Ludo and Gioella laughing at some private joke, and hated them both.
Her thoughts were interrupted by Giancarlo.
‘Contessa,’ he was saying, ‘if you will excuse us we will take some lunch.
Come, Constanza.’
Savognia helped Constance to the delicious buffet.
There were lobster, turkey and wild boar salads, wonderful vegetables and mountains of fruit.
Thinking of the austere rations back in Britain, Constance was uneasy at such luxury.
Quite apart from the self-indulgence, she wondered where it all came from.
Was Savognia in the black market?
She smiled at her naivete.
How could he be — he was a prince, wasn't he?
The wine was pink and slightly fizzy.
Constance loved  it and drank freely to keep up her courage.
Gradually, she relaxed sufficiently for Savognia to feel able to leave her and join his other guests.
She slowly walked towards Ludovico and Gioella.
Although she felt like a little girl who had gone into the wrong party room, she was determined that this woman would not keep her away from her husband.
Gioella's eyes flashed with amusement as she pushed a chair towards her and said, ‘Constance, what a very sophisticated dress.
Do come and tell me all about the latest fashions in London.’
It was meant as a challenge, to expose her gaucherie, but Constance grabbed it as a lifeline.
‘Which ones?’ she asked demurely as she ignored the proffered chair and placed herself between Gioella and Ludovico.
‘Are you thinking of Hartnell or Creed — or maybe Stiebel?’
Gioella was immediately alert.
So, she thought, you are not so simple as you look.
You do know something, after all.
‘Actually,’ she replied with a smile, ‘I buy Hardy Amies.
I think he has more French style than the others.’
‘How funny to come to London for French style,’ Constance replied sweetly.
‘Constance was a model, you know, Gioella,’ Ludovico interrupted enthusiastically, unaware of the battle of wills that was developing between the women.
There was a long pause.
Gioella looked Constance up and down and said, ‘Really?
With anyone I would know?’
‘Oh, I shouldn't think so,’ Constance replied.
‘What a delicious lunch this is,’ she went on, changing the subject dramatically in her determination to keep the ball in her court.
‘I really don't know how you Italians do it, so soon after the war.
It isn't like this in England.’
‘How old did you say you were, Constance?’
Gioella asked.
‘Oh,’ Constance blushed, ‘eighteen.’
‘How sweet ,’ Gioella smiled, knowing that she had reasserted herself.
She tweaked Ludovico's ear.
‘Ludo, you are too naughty.
What could you have been thinking of, you bad man?’
Constance wanted to shout, ‘How dare you touch my husband?’ but before she had time to react they were joined by Pino.
‘Ciao,’ he said casually as he sat next to Gioella.
His rehearsed words froze on his lips as he became aware of the tension between the women.
Thinking quickly he said, ‘I love English women in beige.
It goes so well with their pale skin and light hair.
They look like deliciously glamorous mice, don't you agree, Ludo?
Look at Constance.
Isn't she just like a lovely little mouse, so sweet you could eat her?’
Constance blushed as the others laughed.
‘And what about Italian women, Pino?’
Gioella asked.
‘They are very different,’ he replied as he leaned forward and toyed with her necklace.
‘They are from the land of green ginger.
They are strong and powerful, but not to everybody's taste.’
‘They are in the land of green ginger,’ Ludovico said, ‘Italy is that land.
It has everything marvellous within its shores, everything a man could need.’
‘Except the perfect woman,’ Pino interrupted gallantly.
‘She has come from the cool north.’
Gioella impatiently removed his hand from her necklace and, standing up, said, ‘Come, Constance, let us leave these silly men.
When Pino starts talking about his ideal woman we know we're more likely in a fantasy land than a green ginger one.’
Constance was appalled at the thought of being alone with her but rose helplessly as Gioella stretched out her hand.
Casting an agonised glance of appeal at Ludovico, who failed to notice it, she was led off along the terrace, away from the tables and chairs.
‘So, my dear,’ Gioella said, ‘you have fallen for the charms of the most charming man in Florence.’
It was as much a statement as a question.
Constance noticed Gioella's mouth.
Despite its generous proportions, it had a downturning discontented twist as she talked.
She laughed harshly.
‘By marrying him, you will have made enemies of women you do not even know,’ she continued.
‘Ludo was very popular as a bachelor.
It will be interesting to see how his popularity will survive when he appears with a bride.
It will do him good if it slumps a little.
You do not know Italian men yet, my dear, but I can tell you they are all — without exception — unbearably vain.
It starts in the cradle.’
Constance could not fail to detect the bitterness in the voice, belying the smile on the lips.
She didn't know how to reply.
‘Where are you living?’
Gioella asked.
Something in her tone convinced Constance that the answer was already known and she said, ‘Santo Spirito.’
To her surprise, Gioella laughed and said, ‘Really, that's too bad of Ludovico.
Fancy taking you to that tired old love nest.
It's been used a thousand times already, as I gather the bed makes clear.
It's Florence's most famous musical bed.’
She laughed gaily.
‘But I'm. sure you've already found out all about that, if I know Ludo.
He and Carlo…’
She stopped abruptly.
‘Who is that?’
Constance asked.
‘Oh,’ Gioella said dismissively, ‘just someone from the far past.
Nobody, really.
I suppose we should rejoin the others.
Don't you find them terribly provincial after London?
I mean, I adore Florence and the people are delightful but, oh dear, they are so inward-looking.
They know nothing but Florence and, worse, they don't care about anything that's not to do with them and their boringly perfect city.’
‘What is Ferragamo?’
Constance asked Ludovico, as they were going to bed that night.
‘He is a shoemaker here.
Gioella spends a fortune with him.’
He had already told her that Gioella's husband, Signor de Grignano, was a very rich industrialist in Milan who  had managed to treble his already substantial fortune during the war.
He and Gioella lived between Milan and Capri but she was known by everybody in Italy because she was, as Ludovico said, ‘sempre in giro — always moving around’.
She disliked Milan's climate and saw no reason why she should spend all her time in that city merely because her husband needed to be there for business.
‘How old is she?’
Constance asked.
‘Oh, much younger than him,’ Ludo replied, ‘about thirty-three, perhaps.’
‘She is very beautiful and elegant,’ Constance ventured.
‘Yes, I suppose so,’ he answered vaguely.
‘Have you known her long?’
‘Oh, for ever.
Gioella is the sort of person everyone has known for ever.
She's always turning up.’
Like a bad penny, Constance thought viciously, saying nothing.
Her silence surprised Ludovico.
‘Don't you like her?’ he asked.
‘Oh,’ she said, flustered.
‘Yes, of course.
I just find her a little…well, a little hard.
But I'm sure that she's very nice when you get to know her.’
It wasn't true.
From the moment she had met Gioella, Constance had seen a jealousy in her that was frightening.
She knew that she was unhappy that Ludovico had married.
Ludo took Constance in his arms.
‘You don't need to get to know her if you do not wish to.
No one knows her.
She is like a butterfly.
She flits in and out of people's lives and never stays long enough to allow anyone to get to know her.
Anyhow,’ he ended, ‘she is nothing to you.
In fact, she is nothing to us, my darling.
We do not need to worry about Gioella di Grignano.
I don't want to think of her any more.’
Constance couldn't sleep.
The events of the luncheon party swam before her eyes.
She knew that she had been a success and that Ludo was proud of her.
She also knew that, after some initial reservations, Giancarlo had taken  to her.
What concerned her was the strange attitude of Gioella.
Constance felt it was important that she and this woman get on.
Gioella was obviously the centre of the social life of Ludo's circle — probably the whole of Italy's, she thought nervously — and a close friend of Giancarlo as well.
Constance wanted to avoid a confrontation with her.
It was obvious that she hadn't managed that on their first encounter.
Gioella had been irritated by her and, in revenge, had set out to make her feel like a schoolgirl — not only by action and word, but simply by being effortlessly in charge of everyone, with the possible exception of the Principe di Savognia.
Constance could not get out of her mind the careless way Gioella had completely taken over Ludovico, excluding her as if she mattered not at all.
At breakfast the next morning, Constance said, ‘Ludo, I think I must have some new clothes.’
‘Of course,’ he replied enthusiastically.
‘Why don't you speak to Gioella?
She is always so chic.
She knows all the best dressmakers in Italy.
She will advise you.’
Taking advice from Gioella di Grignano was the last thing Constance intended to do, but she replied sweetly, ‘Oh, that isn't necessary.
I will find some shops that suit me.’
There was a pause.
‘But I will need some money.’
Ludovico looked at her sharply.
‘Did you come to Italy without money?’ he asked in surprise.
‘No, of course not, but I didn't bring much.
I was going to stay with my aunt.
I certainly didn't bring enough to buy a new wardrobe — or even a couple of frocks, if it comes to that.’
‘Then you must send to England for some,’ Ludovico replied reasonably, returning to his newspaper.
Constance looked at him in indignation.
She could feel herself going pink.
‘What on earth do you mean?’ she demanded.
‘Aren't you intending to give me a dress allowance?’
Ludovico threw back his head and roared with laughter.
‘What on earth is wrong with you?’ she asked.
‘My darling Constanza,’ he said, ‘I do not have any money.
How can I give you a dress allowance when I cannot even afford to pay the rent on this flat?’
Constance looked at him in bewilderment.
‘What do you mean?’ she asked in a small voice.
‘Exactly what I say, my darling,’ Ludovico replied good-naturedly.
Constance went cold with fear.
‘But how are we going to live?’ she said.
There was silence as they looked at each other across the table.
Constance's bourgeoise terror of being penniless was met by Ludovico's aristocratic disdain for money and the means of acquiring it.
While her eyes glazed with panic, his sparkled ironically.
Their attitudes were so different, they could have come from separate planets.
‘What are we to do?’ she pursued.
‘How can we exist?’
Then, clutching at a straw, ‘What about your job?’
‘Darling, don't be silly,’ he replied indulgently.
‘What's silly about it?’ she demanded shrilly.
‘I don't have a job.’
‘Why not?’
Ludovico folded his newspaper and turned away in exasperation.
‘No Villanuova has ever had a job, that's why,’ he replied as if he were talking to a child.
‘There is no job for people of our class in Italy.
Life is our job.’
Constance had never heard anything so arrogantly decadent.
She was blazing with middle-class righteousness.
‘Well, you'll have to do something ,’ she answered sharply, ‘unless we are to starve to death.’
Ludovico folded his arms and leaned on the table.
His smile irritated her.
It was so complacent.
‘What there is to smile about I can't imagine,’ she cried.
‘You, my darling.
You.’
‘In what way?’ she asked coldly.
‘We are talking about a couple of frocks.
Nothing more  man to be idle.’
Although conscious of how like her mother she sounded she could not help herself.
‘Surely you can find something.’
Ludovico stopped removing her clothes and sat down on the bed.
‘Now listen, my darling,’ he said quietly.
‘I am a Castelfranco di Villanuova.
I do not work.
What you are saying is ridiculous.
It is like an Englishman telling your Princess Margaret to find work as a waitress.
Even if she tried, nobody would employ her — because she is Princess Margaret.
That is exactly the same as people like me in Italy.
So, basta, Constanza.
We talk no more of this foolishness.’
As the plane from London bounced along the runway at Ciampino airport, Nora congratulated herself on not having been sick, even during the bumpy moments as they flew over the Alps.
Looking out of the tiny window, she was disappointed.
She had expected a deep blue Mediterranean sky.
Instead, there was a thick haze on this October morning.
It seemed to her that Rome was as grey as Northumberland and she felt slightly cheated.
But when the door of the aeroplane was opened and the passengers stepped out, she was amazed at how muggy the temperature was.
Smells like thunder, she thought, as she walked across the tarmac.
She had decided to come to Italy knowing that she wouldn't rest until she had seen the situation for herself.
Louise had agreed it was essential that Nora and Constance should meet and that Nora should talk to Ludovico.
Louise was equally anxious to see this man who had had the power to persuade her niece to go against her upbringing and character and behave so recklessly after such a brief acquaintance.
Waiting in the airport she was suddenly aware of Nora striding towards her.
She was impressed by how elegant she looked, and could tell by her cousin's walk that Nora also felt that she was looking good.
Her soft brown wool suit and velvet Vandyke cap perfectly complemented her auburn hair.
She was delighted to be abroad — for the first time in her  life — and pleased to see Louise again.
In the first few minutes of their greetings, the real purpose of Nora's trip was forgotten by them both.
‘My dear, you look marvellous!’
Louise cried.
‘What a wonderful hat.
Where did you get it?’
‘Marshall and Snelgrove,’ Nora replied.
‘I bought it yesterday.
It cost seven guineas but I think it was worth it.
‘That's outrageous!’
Louise laughed with delight.
‘Jim would have a fit.’
As the taxi sped them into Rome, Nora had no chance to look at the view; she was kept busy listening to Louise, who was giving her assessment of the situation.
‘She's obviously perfectly happy.
There's no doubt of that at all.
Jim has made some enquiries through Italian legal colleagues and by all accounts the man does come from a very good family — very good indeed — so at least he hasn't told her a tissue of lies about his background.’
She paused and smiled conspiratorially at Nora.
‘His mother is a princess, my dear.
Imagine!’
Nora was not nearly so impressed by that sort of thing as her cousin but she admitted to herself that it was unlikely a man from such a background would be deceiving Constance.
‘The family is very well known in Italy, apparently,’ Louise continued.
‘Jim says the father is dead and there is some mystery about the mother.
She lives in the depths of the country and is a little eccentric, so they say.
Anyhow, Ludovico —’ she laughed —‘these Italians all have such priceless names my dear-Ludovico is coming down from Florence with Constance.
I insisted.
Of course, Constance has no idea that you'll be here.
She thinks that she's merely bringing him down to meet Jim and me.’
‘Does he have any money?’
Nora interrupted.
‘Oh, I'm sure he does, dear.
After all, he is nobility, when all's said and done.’
Nora felt slightly mollified.
At least her daughter wouldn't starve.