

Review ruled out
Go-ahead is given for towage firm takeover
OFFICE of Fair Trading analysts have given approval to a proposed £52 million takeover bid for Britain's largest harbour towage company, which employs 106 people at Felixstowe.
Executives at Alexandra Towing are now waiting to hear further details of the move, which could be finalised within a few weeks.
Australian maritime company Howard Smith's UK subsidiary has made the bid.
If it proceeds, it will mean the vast majority of towage services along the east and south coasts — from the Humber to Southampton — being run by one company, with Howard Smith controlling a fleet of 67 tugs in 12 ports.
The Office of Fair Trading scrutinised the bid because it might have affected competition in the UK towage industry.
However, the Department of Trade and Industry said OFT decided not to recommend a review by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
Staff at Alexandra Towing's Felixstowe operation, which started in 1963, are awaiting further details.
Howard Smith (UK) Ltd already runs tug activities in Britain.
Its parent company runs tugs, shipping and heavy engineering businesses.
Alexandra Towing — formed in 1833 — has operations at Ipswich, Liverpool, London, Southampton, Swansea, Port Talbot, Barrow, Lowestoft, Great Yarmouth, and Gibraltar, with 46 tugs in total.
At Felixstowe it offers a 24-hour service to some of the world's biggest ships, handling around 6,000 vessel movements a year.
Its five-strong fleet includes £3 million super-power tractor tugs Trimley and Deben .
They meet ships about one-and-a-half miles outside the port.
Most of their work involves Felixstowe-bound vessels, the rest call at Harwich.
MP vows to fight on for BCCI victims
MP Keith Vaz last night vowed the campaign to compensate victims of the BCCI collapse will continue, after emerging from talks with Economic Secretary Anthony Nelson.
The Leicester MP led a delegation representing BCCI victims in more than an hour of talks which are seen as a prelude to a meeting between MPs and Chancellor Norman Lamont on March 23.
Mr Lamont's agreement to a discussion follows a report last week by the Commons Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee which severely criticised the Bank of England.
Record recovery
GRE about-turn after £210m loss
GUARDIAN Royal Exchange yesterday revealed the biggest turnaround in its history, recording a £3 million taxable profit compared with a £210 million pre-tax loss in 1991.
The insurance giant, which is a major employer in Ipswich, said success was achieved by a strong improvement in UK business in the past year.
Chief executive Sid Hopkins said the results represented the biggest year-on-year improvement achieved by the group.
‘It is testimony to the determined and vigorous actions taken during the past two years.
‘Each of the last three quarters has been profitable and results continue to be encouraging.’
He stressed that GRE was back in the black due to significant improvement in its non-life insurance business, particularly in the UK.
The group had reached a stage which provided a sound base for selective expansion.
Worldwide premiums fell, mainly due to the slowdown in the property market, as much of the division's business is mortgage-related.
GRE, which is paying shareholders an unchanged total dividend of 7p per share, saw its investment income last year improve from £268 million to £296 million.
Losses per share were reduced to 0.3p from 21.2p in 1991.
Sid Hopkins — results encouraging.
Nuclear Electric challenged over spending of levy
MONEY handed to Nuclear Electric to pay for future decommissioning work should not be used to finance a Sizewell C power station, environment campaigners claimed yesterday.
Delegates from Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth told a meeting in Manchester hosted by a group of ‘nuclear free’ local authorities that they would be pressing the Government to ensure the money is not diverted for this purpose.
Electricity consumers are paying a levy which goes to Nuclear Electric to help pay for the cost of removal and disposal of radioactive plant when existing nuclear power stations reach the end of their operating lives.
More than £1.2 billion was handed over last year, although the amount is due to decline until 1998 when the levy will be discontinued.
Nuclear Electric has already used some of the levy money to finance the construction of Sizewell B.
Environment groups estimate that about £5 billion will be raised through the levy for Nuclear Electric by 1998.
They believe that no part of the money should be used to finance Sizewell C, proposals for which are still on the drawing board awaiting a decision on whether to apply for planning permission.
Charles Barnett, who attended the Manchester meeting of Nuclear Free Local Authorities as chairman of the Shut Down Sizewell Campaign, said a principle was at stake.
‘Nuclear Electric should keep the money for the purpose it is intended, not divert it to building another uneconomic, unsafe and unwanted power station,’ he added.
Nuclear Electric spokesman, Len Green, said the company's decision to use levy money to help with the cost of constructing Sizewell B was in the best interests of the consumer and this might be the case if the C station went ahead.
‘By using our income in this way, the taxpayer benefits because we do not have to borrow public money via the Treasury,’ he said.
Use of the levy money did not mean there would be no funds for decommissioning.
Equivalent amounts would come from the company's income at the relevant time.
Buyers push prices up
SHARES hit new highs on speculation of a cut in German interest rates at today's Bundesbank meeting.
Buyers got their orders in while shares were relatively cheap.
They would take off in the event of a German cut, which would make lower UK rates more likely.
BP rose following yesterday's announcement that it is selling its 49 per cent stake in a South Australian mine for nearly £300 million.
United Biscuits was one of the few fallers after confirmation that it had sold its Terry's chocolate division to Kraft of the U.S. in a deal worth £220 million.
Cables and construction group BICC jumped as the City approved of its full-year results.
A dramatic recovery in Midland Bank's profits, with a substantial improvement in bad debt provisions, boosted parent company HSBC Holdings.
Last-gasp cash saves Maxwell
Son of tycoon eludes bankruptcy petition
IAN Maxwell staved off the threat of bankruptcy yesterday by handing over £500,000 to Mirror Group pension funds plundered by his father, the late publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell.
As a result of the 11th-hour payment, the High Court dismissed a bankruptcy petition filed by the liquidators of the pension fund company, Bishopsgate Investment Management (BIM), based on a £500,000 interim court judgment obtained against Mr Maxwell in December.
The petition had been listed for hearing by Mr Registrar Scott shortly after 11am.
At about 11.05, Mr Maxwell's solicitors handed a bankers' draft, drawn on Midland Bank, to the liquidators' solicitor Margaret Cole.
‘This will go straight into the fund for the benefit of the pensioners,’ said a delighted Miss Cole, clutching the bankers' draft after the brief hearing.
Mr Maxwell was at court and said through his lawyers: ‘The order for interim payment has been complied with and the petition has been dismissed.’
At last December's High Court hearing, Mr Maxwell, 36, was held to have breached his duty as a director of BIM by signing forms for the transfer of five blocks of shares, worth about £580,000, to Credit Suisse without obtaining an assurance the transfers had been approved by the BIM board.
The judge at that hearing, Mr Justice Chadwick, said it was no answer for Mr Maxwell to say he signed the forms in reliance on the signature of his brother Kevin.
Miss Cole said the liquidators will now pursue their claim for the balance of the £580,000, plus interest bringing the total to more than £600,000.
The liquidators will also ‘consider their position’ in relation to an outstanding £400 million-plus claim brought against Mr Maxwell in their efforts to recover the pension money.
Ian Maxwell
Bank hopeful
Midland optimism
MIDLAND Bank chief executive Brian Pearse noted a glimmer of recovery yesterday when he unveiled a rise in pre-tax profits to £178 million.
He also pledged that Midland did not intend to end free banking for personal customers in credit by introducing new charges.
Profits in 1992 were bolstered by a fall in bad debt provisions to £676 million.
The previous year, when profits were just £36 million, bad debts totalled £903 million.
Mr Pearse also reported the start of ‘glimmers of light’ at branch level.
£3m to safeguard haven
By Richard Cornwell
PURCHASING Orford Ness, the coastal shingle spit once used for atomic weapons research and now a wildlife haven, will cost the National Trust £3.11 million, it was revealed yesterday.
Ministry of Defence officials are willing to sell the 1,548-acre site for £300,000, but the trust has to find nearly £3 million to guarantee the area's future.
The money is needed for staff costs in the years ahead, clearance work, projects to make buildings safe, and long-term maintenance.
County council chiefs believe the project is important both locally and nationally — and propose the authority gives ‘substantial funds’ to help, although it is not yet known how much.
Negotiations between the National Trust and MoD have been taking place for two years and have reached a critical stage.
Trust officials have secured much of the money they need — the £3 million will be set aside in an endowment fund — through the body's own resources, and donations from the Environment Department and Countryside Commission.
However, there is still a shortfall of £500,000 which has to be found before negotiations can be concluded.
Orford Ness is one of Britain's most unusual coastal features.
A nine-mile bleak shingle bank — growing each year — separating Orford from the sea.
Its main use has been military.
It was one of the first air bases in 1915, between the wars was used for gun and bomb testing, and from 1951–71 for atomic weapons research.
Today it is a haven for wildlife.
It features many rare plants, and extensive areas of mudflats, saltmarsh and grassland of botanical and ornithological value, with breeding sites for 8,000 lesser black backed gulls and 2,000 herring gulls.
The trust's aim is to protect Orford Ness in ‘as natural and wild state as practicable’.
Historic buildings would stay but need much work to make them safe, while an ‘ugly legacy’ of derelict property and fences require demolition, a major task.
Public access will be provided, and club-organised fishing and wildfowling.
In a report to the policy committee, county planning officer Edwin Barritt says purchase of the ness for conservation is a long-cherished aim, a very special opportunity and the Trust deserves as much help as possible.
Yesterday the EADT revealed how the Ness is being damaged by four wheel drive enthusiasts who have broken the locks on vehicle barriers to gain access for their cars.
Hopes push shares to a record high
SHARES surged to a record high last night amid growing evidence that Britain is at last poised for economic recovery.
The latest mood of optimism gathered pace as the Prime Minister attacked ‘doom-mongers’ for painting a false picture of a nation in decline.
Mr Major hit out at pessimists who were undermining confidence by talking Britain down through ‘messages of gloom’:
Shortly afterwards:
The stock market powered ahead after a euphoric day in the City on hopes of better times ahead.
The FTSE 100 index soaring 36.3 to a record high of 2918.6, adding about £5 billion to share values
The latest Treasury review of economic progress provided an optimistic picture, with shop sales on an upward trend and overall activity apparently slightly stronger than current official forecasts
Latest house market surveys from the two biggest building societies, the Halifax and Nationwide, provided a ‘cautiously optimistic picture’ with increased activity.
The only gloom was on jobs, but even here the Treasury report pointed out that January's rise in unemployment, which took the toll above three million, was the smallest seasonally-adjusted rise for seven months.
However, concern at the unemployment total was voiced at yesterday afternoon's Confederation of British Industry council meeting.
The CBI, whose recent reports on activity have added to the economic optimism, said the jobless total is unlikely to fall below 2.25 million even when the recovery becomes established.
Full-time working for 356
JOINERY firm Boulton and Paul yesterday announced a return to a five-day week at its manufacturing plant in Lowestoft.
The move results from an increase in sales across all product areas.
The plant, which has a workforce of 356, went on a four-day week in November following a downturn in demand for its joinery products caused by the recession.
The plant manufactures finished components and external doors.
B&P human resources director David Ramsay said the firm was resuming full-time working for the first time in four months, in order to meet greater demand.
‘We sincerely hope that the increased sales we are now seeing will be sustainable, although we must all be aware that the recession remains deep and we are still vulnerable to market conditions.’
Axe to swing at Bull
COMPUTER company Bull is to cut about 3,000 jobs from its 35,000 world-wide workforce.
The French-owned company employs 1,900 people in Britain, mainly at Brentwood, Essex; Hemel Hempstead, Herts; Birmingham and Livingston, Lothian.
Details of the cuts were not available yesterday.
Confidence shaken
German rates letdown hits shares
DRAMATIC losses by Barclays Bank and the announcement by the Bundesbank, the German central bank, that it is not cutting interest rates, shook London stock market confidence yesterday.
Sentiment improved a little, however, as analysts decided that Germany would cut rates later this month.
Barclays apart, the banking sector was generally firmer as Lloyds rose by 7p, NatWest 1p, and Midland parent HSBC 8p.
German rate inaction left many high street retailers weaker as a cut might have influenced UK rates.
Kingfisher, the Woolworth-to-Comet group, fell 14p, Marks & Spencer 4p, and Boots 7p.
Hotels-to-racing group Ladbroke's dramatically reduced profits did not unduly worry the City which approved of its increased dividend payout.
The shares shed just 1p.
A big increase in car sales last month encouraged British Aerospace, the Rover cars-to-defence group, to climb 10p.
Strong institutional support, particularly from the U.S., continued to work wonders for ICI as support grows for its demerger plans.
The shares jumped 17p.
Pessimistic annual report
Ship firm suffers
DFDS profits slump goes on
By Steve Gravenor
A SHIPPING group, whose profits last year dived by nearly a third, has told shareholders to expect an even lower result for 1993.
DFDS chairman Jan Erlund said in his annual report, currency devaluations and the recession will continue to hit the Scandinavian firm's profits.
The company, which has its UK headquarters in Harwich, revealed its net profit figure for 1992 had fallen by £3.5 million to £8.5m.
Mr Erlund described last year's result as ‘reasonable’ considering the difficult economic conditions: ‘The lower results are primarily related to the increasingly adverse economic conditions in Sweden and to the continued slump in Great Britain.’
The devaluation of the pound and the Swedish krone had also contributed to the fall.
This would affect the group, which includes Scandinavian Seaways, DFDS Transport and Tor Line, even more this year.
‘The Swedish devaluation in particular, and to a lesser extent the Norwegian and British devaluation, will affect the DFDS Group even more in 1993, which is therefore expected to be an even more difficult year.
‘The slump on the major markets is expected to continue throughout most of 1993.’
Mr Erlund said the firm had already initiated a number of action plans and streamlining measures but ‘these can only alleviate some of the mentioned negative external conditions’.
Mr Erlund said the firm was ready to take advantage of the market as soon as conditions improved.
A MAN IN CONFUSION
IN AN interview with The Independent newspaper, John Major complained of ‘the inheritance I had when I became Prime Minister.
We had 15 per cent interest rates, inflation just under 11 per cent.
There was no certainty that interest rates wouldn't go up and no certainty inflation wouldn't go up’.
Did this, he was asked yesterday, mean that the economy had not been managed as well as it might have been during the Thatcher years?
No, he said: ‘I was referring to the legacy of the recession that we are now curing and that has now hit every other nation in Europe.’
In the same interview, he was asked what he thought of ‘the Thatcherite idea that the service sector was the thing, that making things was becoming less important to this country’.
He replied: ‘I don't agree with it, I didn't agree with it in the '80s, I was a minority view in the '80s, I am not a minority view now — and anyway I am in a better position to expound my views.’
Did that, he was asked in the House of Commons, mean that he had been out of sympathy with the policies of the Government in which he served in the '80s?
No, he said, he was just disagreeing with a view put to him by the interviewer — just as Lady Thatcher herself would have disagreed with it.
This is all very strange.
Plainly Mr Major could not in 1990 have inherited a ‘legacy of the recession’ which had scarcely begun (and which might not yet be dead).
Equally plainly, he could not before 1990 have been in an anti-Thatcherite minority in the Thatcher Cabinet and at the same time in full accord with the lady herself.
This confusion is typical of the Prime Minister.
He finds it difficult, some times impossible, to make any change of direction in Government without trying to explain that it is not really a change at all and certainly not a change that Lady Thatcher would not personally have approved.
So it is that when Mr Major explains that he has, by devaluing the pound, given British industry an exceptional chance to improve its exports, he insists that ‘this did not come about as a deliberate act of policy’.
It was an accident, but a fortunate one.
Lady Thatcher did not believe in keeping the value of sterling to a level which would help British industry.
Two separate recessions were caused by deliberate overvaluations of the pound and continuous uncertainty was caused by the erratic movements of the currency.
Mr Major asks industry to take heart from the fact that things are quite different now.
Yet when he says that this change is not deliberate, he raises the fear that he might go back to a Thatcherite policy, if and when he has the chance.
Until he is off with the old, he cannot be on with the new.
The extent to which British industry has been damaged in the '80s has been explained by Lord Prior, once a dissident in the Thatcher cabinet, now chairman of GEC.
‘It will require a sustained effort over 20 years to get our manufacturing base back to the levels we want to see.’
Mr Major suggests that this sustained effort should involve industry in ‘fierce competitiveness at the edge of technology’, and he complains that the country has in the past ‘undervalued manual skills, engineering skills’.
This is all very well, but what industry and the country are looking for is not his advice, so much as his commitment to long-term, economic stability, without which the efforts of everybody else will be vain.
More new cars on the road
NEW car sales in February totalled 126,984 — 16.06 per cent ahead of the 109,414 figure for the same month last year, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT).
The encouraging February figure took the total for the first two months of 1993 to 291,923 — nearly 11pc up on the January-February, 1992, figure of 263,096.
Importers' share of the market last month was 53.78pc compared with 54pc in February, 1992.
The figures were cautiously welcomed by the Retail Motor Industry Federation (RMI).
‘The February, 1992, figure was the lowest since 1976, so the underlying improvement in sales is still at a relatively low level,’ RMI director general David Gent said.
The February, 1993, top ten sellers were: 1 Ford Escort, 2 Ford Fiesta, 3 Vauxhall Cavalier, 4 Vauxhall Astra, 5 Ford Sierra, 6 Rover 200 Series, 7 Peugeot 405, 8 Rover Metro, 9 Renault Clio, 10 Nissan Micra.
Labour claimed the figures were a sham and demanded an independent inquiry into the real level of car sales in the UK.
New redundancy blow for jobs blackspot
By Chris Mills
A TOWN with one of the worst unemployment figures in East Anglia has been hit by the loss of 21 more jobs, while 30 posts are being axed by a major drugs firm.
Compulsory redundancies have been made at packaging firm Marchant Manufacturing Co Ltd in Piperell Way, Haverhill — at a time when 10.6 per cent of the town's workers are jobless.
Thirty clerical and secretarial staff are going at Mildenhall pharmaceutical company Schering-Plough as it moves its management team to Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire.
The 80 Suffolk production staff will not be affected.
Yesterday, Marchant boss Philip Marchant said: ‘We have had to batten down the hatches.
We feel 1993 will be a tough year.’
A shift at one of the company's two neighbouring plants had been axed and staff levels on a shift at the other had been cut, he said.
He hoped the cutbacks will help protect the jobs of the remaining 160 workers.
In an official statement, Mr Marchant said: ‘Due to the current competitive trading position within our market we are having to cut prices and offer special deals just to maintain our sales at 1992 levels.’
Schering-Plough managing director Tony Cork said his team was relocating as part of its plans for further growth.
He said: ‘We very much regret that 30 secretarial and clerical staff who will not be moving will receive redundancy notice.
The management is extremely sorry to be leaving Mildenhall and in particular to be losing some of our team.
Forty senior marketing, finance and administration staff will be relocated.’
Company cites market changes
Union concerned over British Gas jobs axe
NALGO has expressed concern at the effect of job losses recently announced by British Gas Eastern.
It says that jobs to go at district offices include 64 at Colchester, and that some 50 posts will be axed at the company's headquarters.
Adrian Longden, NALGO's district officer, said that although times were hard, the company had still made a profit of more than £1 billion in the last financial year.
With staffing already cut to the bone, it was union members who would suffer the effects of these new redundancies, which would also be felt by the economy.
British Gas Eastern spokesman Richard Dymond said of the move: ‘It will not be 280 people going out of the gates.
What we will be doing is not filling vacancies.’
Company profits had fallen by 40 pc this year.
On top of the recession, British Gas had lost a large part of its industrial commercial market as a result of an investigation by the Office of Fair Trading.
Fund launched for arts projects
A NEW fund has been launched to encourage rural communities in a county to develop their own arts projects.
The Suffolk Rural Arts Fund has been launched as the result of a collaboration between Suffolk County Council's arts and libraries committee, Suffolk Acre and the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, and will give grants of between £50 and £500 to encourage rural communities to develop their own high quality arts initiatives.
Six artists and arts administrators, who live and work in rural areas of Suffolk, have been brought together to act as the fund's voluntary advisors.
They will advise on the distribution of the fund's money and act as local contacts, as well as promoting the grants, advising potential applicants and monitoring projects that receive the grants.
In November, 1992, the arts and libraries committee decided to allocate £2,500 of its arts budget for 1993/94 to the creation of the fund.
The Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation agreed to give the fund a grant of £5,000 for 1993/94 and the Eastern Arts Board recently agreed to give it a £2,000 grant.
Ipswich people might soon be able to get their library books from the supermarket.
The committee has agreed to approve negotiations with Ipswich stores to base the Community Mobile Library in a supermarket car park for an experimental evening session.
Enhancement
It is proposed that all suitable supermarkets in the area will be contacted to see if they are interested in having the library based in their car park on a Friday evening.
The committee also approved the temporary enhancement of services to Kesgrave, Martlesham and The Trimleys by using the mobile library in these areas.
These communities currently receive a service from a rural mobile library, and it is intended to enhance the level of service until alternative service provision is made available.
The committee is considering the provision of a new library in Kesgrave, which would serve Grange Farm and parts of Martlesham, as well as Kesgrave itself.
Four information centres set up by the county council in libraries in towns and villages round Suffolk have been praised for their success.
The four information points, in libraries at Beccles, Haverhill, Woodbridge and Newmarket, were opened towards the end of last year, following the success of the Suffolk Connexions information point which opened in St Helen's Street, Ipswich, in 1988.
They were set up to provide local people with county council and community information, and have dealt with enquiries ranging from bus timetables to details of local doctors and dentists.
Committee members praised the points for the work they had done.
British industry is ‘weak'
Call for report to be made public
LABOUR'S trade and industry spokesman Robin Cook yesterday demanded to see a secret Government report that allegedly discloses the ‘shocking’ state of British industry.
He spoke out on the last day of Labour's Scottish conference in Inverness, which ended with the party in better spirits than organisers could have dared hope even a week ago.
The confidential Department of Trade and Industry report cited by Mr Cook came to the conclusion that British industry was fundamentally weak, beset by inferior management and products, and suffering from inadequate investment in new technology.
Mr Cook said the report — made public in The Sunday Times — confirmed Labour's warnings to the Government.
‘We now have fewer factories, fewer machines and fewer workers in manufacturing than a decade ago.
If the Government won't believe us when we tell them the truth, maybe they will now believe the people they paid to give them this report.
‘I will want Parliament to see the report the Government has got.
The taxpayer paid for it and the taxpayer is entitled to know what's in it,’ he said.
Earlier he told the conference that only 4.5 million people were left working in manufacturing industry in Britain.
‘If present trends continue we will have fewer people at work making things than out of work making nothing,’ he declared.
He promised Labour support for Scottish workers fighting to save their jobs — at Albion axle works in Glasgow, Rosyth Dockyard in Fife and the Timex factory in Dundee.
‘We are going to back each of them because we are going to make their fight to keep their jobs our fight to keep Scotland's industry.’
The conference itself was hailed as a great success for Tom Clarke, shadow Scottish secretary.
He said afterwards: ‘It has been one of the most outstanding Scottish conferences I have attended.
The party is in great heart, anxious to fight the Tories, anxious to establish a Scottish Parliament, anxious to fight on broad and better issues like jobs, health, education and to defeat the crazy notion of water privatisation.’
Dockside investment
Export of grain from port bucks national trend
GRAIN exports at Felixstowe Port soared over the past year — in stark contrast to the national cereal cargo trade figures.
Latest export statistics show Britain's grain trade with foreign competitors drastically reduced — while imports are rising.
In particular, the Home-Grown Cereals Authority reports exports of wheat 30 per cent were down on the previous harvest — mostly due to dearer prices.
Most ports showed a decline but Felixstowe's figures showed a different picture — grain trade soaring 122pc to 71,527 tonnes, mainly exports of wheat and barley from East Anglian farms.
This was mainly due to the work of Felixstowe-based Harvest Shipping Services, which has converted a transit shed on the North Quay of the Dock Basin for storage of up to 10,000 tonnes.
The company has also invested £100,000 in mobile equipment and can now loads ships at the rate of 5,000 tonnes a day.
Ipswich's cereal import and exports continue to play a vital role in the dock's success.
In 1991, 722,000 tonnes were exported and last year 668,000, while imports rose from 55,896 to 93,000 tonnes.
HGCA figures for the first half of the 1992–93 season show Ipswich exporting ten per cent of all British wheat.
It was also one of the top three ports for barley, handling 68,000 tonnes — 30,000 up on the previous year.
EXPORT optimism is continuing to grow among British producers, providing further evidence that the planks of recovery are falling into place.
Four out of five manufacturers say export orders have been good or very good over the past three months, according to trade group Trade Indemnity.
More than 50 pc have also increased their number of overseas customers and three-quarters remain optimistic about prospects for the rest of the year.
But the report also confirmed that most of the UK's manufacturing base has had to face rising costs for overseas raw materials as a result of the devaluation of sterling.
One in five report the rise as ‘significant’ and one in two have increased their own prices to cover the extra costs.
Profit margins have generally been squeezed by the higher cost of imports, said Trade Indemnity spokeswoman Barbara Bennett.
HSBC results
Midland owner's profits double
HSBC Holdings, which bought Midland Bank last summer, yesterday reported a near doubling of profits in annual figures which included six months' contribution from the UK clearing bank.
Taxable profits last year were £1.7 billion compared with £880 million in 1991.
But the group's charge for bad and doubtful debts also doubled to £1.185 billion.
Midland accounted for nearly half this provision while most of the remaining increase relates to Olympia & York, the developer of the failed Canary Wharf complex in London's Docklands.
Move
The group, which owns the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, recently moved its head office from the British colony to London.
HSBC chairman Sir William Purves said: ‘Although economic growth in Asia was robust, the continuing recession in several of our major markets made 1992 quite a difficult year and resulted in a significant increase in the level of provisioning.
‘The economy in the U.S. is gradually recovering but economic prospects in the UK and much of the rest of Europe are less encouraging.’
U.S. damage
Insurers expect storm battering
BRITISH insurers are bracing themselves for claims totalling hundred of millions of pounds from the storm-battered U.S.
Lloyd's of London and the big general insurance companies, including General Accident, Royal Insurance and Commercial Union, all face claims.
Lloyd's has already paid £620 million in the wake of Hurricane Andrew, which ripped through the southern states of the U.S. last August.
The weekend storms, which have left at least 111 people dead, are already being described as the worst of the century.
Lloyd's claims are in the reinsurance market where insurance companies offset risks by spreading the claims to secondary insurers.
This market has become sharply more expensive in recent months, which could help limit the Lloyd's exposure to reinsurance claims, a spokesman said.
Among composite insurance companies, General Accident could face the biggest payout, sources said.
Wave of company results
Rise in output nudges market up
THE stock market yesterday stayed a few points in positive territory for most of the session in advance of the Budget and as a wave of company results gave dealers plenty to digest.
Dealing opened in lacklustre mood but managed to edge up thanks largely to a rise in manufacturing output between December and January.
This confirmed the increase in consumer demand since the start of the year.
Among dozens of companies reporting yesterday was speciality chemicals group Laporte which reported a profits slide of ten per cent and saw its shares slip.
In contrast, construction and minerals group English China Clays jumped despite a 25 pc fall in annual profits.
A maintained dividend and upbeat comments from chairman Lord Chilver about prospects in the U.S. market helped confidence.
HSBC Holdings, which bought Midland Bank last summer, cheered shareholders following a near doubling of annual profits and a strong rise in the dividend payout.
A move by catalogue shopping group Argos to close the four pilot stores of its Chesterman Home Furnishers business was well received by shareholders.
Tobacco and insurance giant BAT Industries moved up after signing a joint venture agreement to take over a cigarette manufacturing business in the Ukraine.
Weakness on the Hong Kong stock market affected several stocks with strong business interests in the British colony.
Grass greener for Ransomes
Engineering firm back in the black
SIGNS that the economy might be on the upturn come with another major East Anglian employer back in profit.
Ipswich-based engineers Ransomes, reports Alison Withers, managed to turn a 1991 pre-tax loss of £4.6 million into a 1992 pre-tax profit of £0.9 million.
‘Cost control, improving efficiency and effective cash management continue to be priorities in 1993,’ said group chief executive Bob Dodsworth.
‘These priorities, together with our new products and other marketing initiatives, will continue the progress achieved in 1992.’
The company, which manufactures grass-cutting machinery, increased sales by 10 per cent in the second half of the year ending December 31, 1992, giving an overall rise in sales for the year of 7 pc.
Operating profit grew strongly throughout 1992, producing an 85 pc increase to £11.3 million.
In a preliminary report released yesterday, the company notes a particularly good performance by its commercial division in maintaining sales in Europe and increasing its penetration of the Pacific rim markets.
Ransomes is the third major Ipswich employer to release improved year-end figures for 1992.
Both Guardian Royal Exchange and Willis Corroon have reported substantially improved pre-tax profits for last year.
Ransomes shares yesterday closed at 31p, up 3p on the day.
Ransomes' chief executive Bob Dodsworth
Nissen dealership goes at £300,000
Motor distributor Lex Service has bought the Nissan dealership in York for £300,000.
This gives it a total of six Nissan dealerships.
Figures improve
Factory production up
Surprise jump in output gives Budget boost
STRONGER-than-expected factory production revealed yesterday provided another ray of hope for Chancellor Norman Lamont as he put the final touches to the Budget.
Manufacturing output jumped 0.8 per cent between December and January, confirming the increase in consumer demand since the start of the year.
City economists had predicted a modest 0.2 pc increase in the wake of flat output in December.
It is still too early, however, to predict that recovery is underway in the manufacturing sector.
The Government's preferred three-month measure shows output was unchanged compared with the previous three months, and only 0.5 pc up on a year earlier.
January's sharp improvement was mainly a result of rising output in the metals sector after a long holiday break the previous month.
According to the Central Statistical Office the monthly increase in the manufacturing sector overall was the strongest since February last year, when production bounced 1.4 pc.
But the good news from manufacturers was not reflected in the energy sector, with production falling 3.3 pc on the month.
The decline was due almost entirely to bad weather disrupting production in the North Sea.
Overall industrial production, which includes both the manufacturing and energy sectors, fell 0.3 pc on the month in the wake of weaker energy production.
Mr Lamont will take heart from the manufacturing figures, which could be an early indication that Britain's beleaguered industrial base is climbing out of recession.
He will deliver his third Budget today and his overriding concern is to protect the ‘green shoots’ of economic recovery which have emerged since the beginning of the year.
Economists said the manufacturing figures confirmed the recent growth of green shoots in the economy, but they warned that the trend was still weak.
‘It is a good figure but objectively you have to say the trend remains flat and that we are still bumping along the bottom,’ said John Shepperd, economist with merchant bank SG Warburg.
Business improves
Hotel and inn report rise in tourist trade
TOURISM businesses are bucking the recession with two west Suffolk employers taking on more staff and one of them, a hotel, reporting its busiest February for 20 years.
The Angel Hotel, Bury St Edmunds, has already taken on two extra workers and is seeking four more after a bumper 12 months.
Jobs on offer are aimed at under-25s and include posts for graduates wanted to run the restaurant and assist in the front office.
General manager John Robson said: ‘We have been very busy.
Long-standing staff say February was the busiest they had seen for 20 years.’
American tourist numbers dropped dramatically after the Gulf War but were starting to pick up again, Mr Robson said, partly because of the devalued pound.
Meanwhile, success over the last year has led to the 16th Century Six Bells Inn at Bardwell, near Bury, adding three bedrooms.
Carol Salmon, who runs the inn with her husband Richard, said: ‘We had the planning permission last year but with the recession we thought we should hold on to our money.’
Brisk trade meant they were able to complete the building work earlier this year, bringing their capacity up from 12 to 18 guests.
One extra part-timer has been taken on and another part-timer and one full-time worker are being sought.
U.S. damage
WARY OF INVESTMENT
THERE are now 4.5 million people in the UK engaged in manufacture, according to a report from the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
‘If present trends continue,’ Labour Party spokesman Robin Cook said, ‘we will have fewer people at work making things than we will have really out of work and making nothing.’
This was a shrewd political gibe, but like so many of its kind it entirely missed the point at issue.
For, as the report went on to show, the problem is not that manufacturers employ too few people, but that the few people whom they do employ produce much less than their counterparts elsewhere in the world.
It takes 12 Britons to do the work of nine Germans or of eight Japanese, which suggests that a good many more redundancies will have to be declared before British industry is able to compete on the world markets.
If British industry is not able to compete, of course, there will eventually be no jobs left at all in that sector.
Poor productivity, according to the DTI, is to be blamed partly on bad management of the workforce and partly on lack of investment (which is bad management in another form).
That is the verdict that would be expected from a Government department, but it is not the whole story.
British firms have become wary of investment because of the ‘stop-go’ economic cycle in which British governments have habitually indulged.
The machines which they order in the good times are apt to arrive in the bad times, when the products cannot so easily be sold and when borrowing costs are exceptionally high.
If British managers prefer manpower to machines it is because manpower is easily adjusted to the rapid changes in demand, which are common in this country.
German and Japanese firms, knowing that they can rely on sound and stable government, also know that there is no great risk to them in early mechanisation.
The DTI is probably right in its complaint of poor man-management, for there is much to be learned from the Japanese in the art of inspiring loyalty in the workforce.
There was a remarkable occasion, a few years back, when the Japanese government begged people to take their proper holidays and spend some of the embarrassingly large trade surplus.
Yet even when they see Japanese methods being successfully introduced to this country, British managers are still reluctant to accept that they too could try co-operation with the workforce in place of confrontation.
The old habits, acquired in the industrial revolution, are difficult to break.
Here again, the vagaries of Government policy are at least partly to blame.
For most of the post-war period the economy has been brought to a ‘stop’ every two or three years and managers have had to lay men off.
It would not have been easy to build a good relationship in those circumstances.
Even German management, which has quite rightly been praised for its achievements over the years, has been unable to respond easily to the economic errors of its government.
A high-spending boom followed by bust and recession have severely strained relationships of all kinds.
It is therefore idle for a British government to start telling managers how to run their companies until it has itself learned how to carry out its own duty to maintain a sound and stable currency.
So long as politicians think that they are entitled to manipulate the money supply to win elections, the conditions for a thriving industry will not be obtained.
Airtours fails in bid to buy rival
HOLIDAY company Airtours yesterday failed in its hostile £294 million bid for rival company Owners Abroad, travel industry sources said.
Manchester-based Airtours needed 50 per cent of Owners' shareholders to agree to the deal, but failed to get the necessary votes.
Now, after a battle that has intrigued the City for weeks, Owners will be free to put to its shareholders its originally-proposed link-up with another holiday giant, Thomas Cook.
Owners is the second-biggest UK tour operator and Airtours the third largest.
A joining of the two companies would have created a huge holiday company with about 30pc of the UK market.
The travel industry feared that with the UK market leader — Thomson — having about 31pc of the market, two companies would have controlled more than three-fifths of the market had the Airtours bid succeeded.
Despite this, President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine did not see fit to refer the Airtours bid to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
‘This is good news for the consumer who won't now be getting some massive duopoly,’ a travel industry source said.
Owners, whose holiday brands include Sovereign, Enterprise and Falcon, had sought an alliance with German-owned Thomas Cook to cement its position in the competitive UK market, but fast-growing and highly-profitable Airtours came in with a rival bid to spark off weeks of rhetoric and activity which finally ended yesterday.
‘We are very happy,’ Owners managing director Roger Allard said.
‘A sign of the times' as 20 jobs are axed at two firms
A BUSINESS leader yesterday described a town's double jobs loss blow as ‘symptomatic of the times.’
Two Harwich-based firms, Bernard Uniforms and Mansped, are each to shed ten workers as the recession continues to hit the area.
Mike Doogan, chairman of the town's chamber of trade, said he was bitterly disappointed for those who had been left on the dole.
‘It is obviously very tragic for those involved,’ he said.
‘But I understand with the recession continuing to bite that companies are forced to take cost cutting measures.’
Bernard Uniforms, one of the country's leading uniform manufacturers is to let ten staff go from its workforce of more than 160.
Managing director Derek Walklin said the decision had been taken following a review of staff.
He said those being asked to leave — mainly machinists — were not suited to the industry.
‘It is just a simple business decision,’ he added.
Meanwhile, Mansped — which maintains and repairs lorry trailers at Dovercourt Transit Camp — is being forced to axe ten mechanics.
Spokesman Roger Gibbs said trailers contracted to Vauxhall Motors were now being shipped through Immingham and Purfleet instead of Harwich.
The trailers were now being repaired and maintained elsewhere by Mansped.
Brewers hit out at 5pc duty rise
THE pub and brewery industry, which employs thousands of people in East Anglia, hit out yesterday at the five per cent duty increase on most alcoholic drinks.
Mr Lamont said the total tax on a pint of beer would rise by about 1 1/2p and a bottle of wine by about 5 1/2p.
The duty on cider would rise by 1/2p, but there would be no increase in the duty on spirits.
The Brewers' Society and CAMRA, the Campaign for Real Ale, had mounted a strong campaign against hikes in duty, amid fears of job losses in the industry.
The chairman of the Colchester and District Licensed Victuallers' Association, Malcolm Freund, said the increases would further encourage people to go to the continent to buy alcohol.
‘I think it is diabolical.
He has done nothing whatsoever to help the licensed trade.’
The system was ‘crazy’ and would do nothing to help struggling publicans, he said.
Mr Freund said the rise in duties, together with the increase in VAT and petrol duties, could add between 3p and 5p to a pint of beer and possibly between 15p and 20p to a bottle of wine.
Simon Redman, chairman of Bury St Edmunds-based Greene King, said the price of a pint on the continent was about 35p cheaper than in Britain.
‘It is extremely disappointing.
I think really the Chancellor should recognise the reality.
We are now in a single market,’ he said.
Joint managing director of Ipswich-based Tolly Cobbold Brian Cowie said he was also disappointed.
Britain, he said, had a great pub-going tradition.
‘The higher the tax the more we may become like Europe.
That is, everybody drinking at home, which I think would be very said.’
Southwold-based Adnams shared the disappointment.
Managing director Bernard Segrave-Daly said he had also been hoping the Chancellor would have introduced a duty system which would have helped smaller firms.
The East Anglian director of CAMRA, Paul Ainsworth, said the increases in duty could be the ‘straw that breaks the camel's back’ for some people in the licensed trade.
The rises, he said, were ‘predictable, but nonetheless very disappointing’.
Greene King chairman Simon Redman — disappointed in the outcome for the brewers
Balancing act by Lamont to bring growth
Attempt to square circle, says CBI official
By Henry Creagh
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont delivered what one CBI official called a ‘knife-edge’ Budget yesterday, aimed at balancing nation's books without stifling economic recovery.
Among measures that spelt out economic strategy for the next three years, the biggest shock to householders was the introduction of 17.5 per cent VAT on domestic fuel bills by 1995 with an 8pc rate by April next year.
An extra one per cent on National Insurance Contributions, costing the average taxpayer £200 in one year, is also scheduled for 1994.
Alan West, senior tax manager of accountants Grant Thornton in Suffolk, said that while, generally, tax rates had not been increased because of Budget adjustments, people would have less cash available for spending or saving.
Philip Vining, the Confederation of British Industry's assistant regional director for East Anglia, said the Chancellor had attempted to ‘square the circle’ by seeking to tackle the deficit without endangering recovery.
‘The Chancellor has tried to walk the knife edge.
The real test of this budget is whether economic growth has been achieved.
Confidence is so fragile at this stage that if recovery were to falter, interest rates would have to be reduced further.’
The threat of higher taxes in 1994 might create inflationary pressure in the economy, said Mr Vining.
Other Budget measures include an immediate 5 per cent rise in most duties on drink.
This means 1.5p on a pint of beer, 5.5p on a bottle of wine, but no rise in spirit duty — a move to help the Scotch whisky industry.
The cost of 20 cigarettes is to rise by 10p, four-star petrol by 15p and unleaded petrol by 12p.
On the positive side, the stamp duty threshold on house sales doubles to £60,000 from yesterday, halving the number of transactions liable.
Social security benefits will rise automatically to take account of the VAT rises.
VAT  simplification is likely to cut compliance costs for businesses and the 20p income tax band is to increase to £3,000 by 1995.
Labour leader John Smith attacked Mr Lamont's proposals.
‘The Conservative Party have cynically and ruthlessly betrayed the pledges which they gave the people of this country and they will not be forgiven for it,’ he said.
The 17.5pc VAT rate on fuel bills would push families already ‘on the edge’ into despair.
Measures to reduce unemployment were the country's number one priority, but the measures announced by Mr Lamont were ‘wholly inadequate to deal with the scale of Britain's job crisis.’
—
Mr Norman Lamont takes a sip of his drink — rumoured to be whisky and water — after announcing there would be no rise in the duty on spirits.
Furniture business looks to the future
THE BUDGET gave businesses a confidence boost which could help a Haverhill firm into recovery, its finance director said yesterday.
Chris Wells,above , of Project Office Furniture, said Mr Lamont's tax planning over the next three years and a resolution to reduce public borrowing should settle business nerves.
With more confidence, more people would be looking to invest in capital goods like office furniture, which could only help Project and its 450 Haverhill workforce, he said.
The measures directly affecting the firm were:—
PLUS:
Reductions in export credit savings insurance.
A marginal saving in costs for Project, which is looking to increase its exports.
Tax encouragements to foreign companies setting up UK headquarters.
Project supplies firms like Nissan and Toyota from outlets in Northern England, where it employs an extra 200 staff.
MINUS:
Increase in petrol prices, which will push up Project's transport costs.
Scale charge of £500 for private use of company vans.
Project employees take vans home loaded ready to deliver next morning.
Now they will have to pay more tax for this.
National Insurance.
Increases in National Insurance to 10 pc for employees could mean extending a pay freeze into a second year.
‘The major benefit of the budget will be if it improves confidence.
I think there is a good chance of that,’ said Mr Wells.
Dealers on collision course
Mixed reaction to hike in road fund duty and fuel
CAR dealers were on a collision course over the Chancellor's drive to keep the motoring industry on the road to recovery.
They could not agree if Mr Lamont had made life easier for the motorist — presently snapping up more new cars than last year — or not.
Increases in petrol and road fund duty and initial changes to company car taxation ‘will hit the motorist hard’, according to Wayne Cocker, sales manager at Ford dealers Trigon in Woodbridge.
Welcomed
However, to Peugeot dealer Hugh Howlett, of Howlett of Lavenham, the Chancellor has not ‘over-done anything’.
Most dealers, including Lancaster Garages, which has showrooms in Colchester and Ipswich, welcomed the Chancellor's decision to announce changes to the company car tax system a year in advance.
Next year, he has pledged to increase the present company car taxing scales by 8pc, but from 1995 drivers will pay tax according to the manufacturer's list price for each car.
Tax will be paid on 35pc of that value, with reductions of as much as two-thirds for high business mileage users.
Alan Wiggins, managing director of Carlton Garage, with showrooms in Harwich and Clacton, said this would not adversely affect the average company car user driving a 1.6 Vauxhall Cavalier, but would hit those with more expensive models, thus ‘equalising’ the market.
Mr Wiggins added he would rather have seen road fund duty — raised from £110 to £125 — scrapped and replaced with even more substantial hikes in petrol prices than the 12p a gallon (unleaded) and 15p (leaded) set yesterday.
‘Quite pleased'
Mr Cocker said the increase in road tax ‘had to be expected’, although it was ‘big when you consider inflation’.
Mr Howlett, however, said: ‘I was quite pleased.
I don't think he has over-done anything.’
He had expected a rise in road duty, but was hoping for a clearer differential between diesel and petrol prices.
Alan Wiggins, managing director of Vauxhall dealers Carlton of Clacton
Sales manager Wayne Cocker, of Ford dealers Trigon, Woodbridge
‘Shop jobs would help town'
A MAJOR new out-of-town shops project would ease congestion and boost jobs in a depressed seaside town, a developer claimed yesterday.
Carter Commercial Developments plans to build a 13-acre centre with a supermarket, 550-space car park and a petrol station in the northern outskirts of Clacton.
The company called the public inquiry at Weeley, after Tendring District Council failed to give a decision on the plans in the required time limit.
The scheme is earmarked for the north-west of the Highfield Holiday Park and south of the Gorse Lane link road.
Tendring District Council believes a decision would be premature as the final version of the district plan — the area's blueprint for future development — is not completed.
Roy Vandermeer, representing the company, told planning inspector Michael Culshaw there were many positive reasons why permission should be granted without delay.
He argued the congested roads and lack of parking spaces adversely affected the town's all-important tourist industry by putting off visitors.
And the company stressed a major attraction was the number of jobs created.
‘In a town where unemployment is running at about 20 per cent, the creation of jobs is important in itself,’ he said.
‘There is an urgent need to provide new shops and new jobs as soon as possible.’
Carter Commercial Developments said shoppers in Clacton would benefit from the extra choice.
‘The situation in Clacton is woeful,’ said Mr Vandermeer.
‘Not a single store in Clacton has car parking provided to local authority standards and there are signs of stress even in February.’
He said the access would create no problems as an exit to the new link road had already been negotiated with builders.
The company also plans to landscape the site so it would be hardly visible from Clacton and Little Clacton.
Andrew Kelly, for Tendring District Council, argued a premature decision could prejudice the future development of the area.
The council also claims the scheme goes against some countryside protection policies.
Three other firms have put in developments for the outskirts of the town, including Brook Park, off the A133, which has been included in the draft local plan.
The inquiry, expected to last for four days, continues.
Plans heed advice of small traders
THE Chancellor has taken heed of small businesses by attempting to boost confidence in his Budget yesterday, says Jim Wellerd of North and Mid-Essex Chamber of Trade.
By spreading his proposals over the next three years Norman Lamont sent out the message that he was looking ahead and planning for the future, said Mr Wellerd.
He welcomed simplification of VAT rules which will cut compliance costs for companies, but said the rise in petrol prices would hit delivery and distribution costs for firms.
‘It is disappointing to see that he heeded the whisky lobby but not the wine merchants who must be very disappointed with the rise,’ he said.
Roger Baker of the Suffolk Chamber of Commerce said Mr Lamont had successfully struck the balance between balancing the books and sustaining recovery.
He also welcomed the forward planning nature of the Budget.
‘One thing that industry likes is to be able to foresee the changes in the next few years,’ he said.
Mr Baker said the main area of concern for over the next few years was ‘serious downturn’ in the economies of export markets in Europe and Japan.
NORMAN Lamont yesterday tried to curb Britain's spiralling deficit by presenting the country with a massive fuel bill.
He introduced VAT on domestic fuel and power bills as well as hiking National Insurance contributions by one per cent to avoid estimated Government borrowings of £50 million next year.
But the beleaguered taxpayer has just over 12 months to prepare for the changes — by which time the Chancellor hopes an improved economy will soften the blow.
The VAT on fuel, charged at 8pc next year and 17.5 in 1995, came on top of the expected rise in road tax duty, tobacco and alcohol duty — although the Chancellor's own favourite tipple, whisky, escaped scotch free.
Labour claimed the Budget will leave the average family £8 a week worse off, but Premier John Major disagreed.
Immediately after Mr Lamont sat down, the Prime Minister took the rare step of issuing a brief statement, obviously aimed to pour scorn on those who say his days as Chancellor are numbered.
‘It's the right budget at the right time from the right Chancellor!’ he said, apparently to suggest Mr Lamont will remain in office through the next Cabinet reshuffle, and almost certainly the one after that.
Tory MPs also felt that his performance ensures he lives to fight another day — and beyond.
The City was also happy with the package — but Labour leader John Smith attacked the Conservatives for ‘cynically and ruthlessly betraying’ election pledges that they were the party of lower taxes.
The Chancellor stressed that if the deficit was not tackled then recovery would be jeopardised.
‘I believe that the greatest threat to sustained recovery in Britain will come not from a lack of demand, but from excessive Government borrowing over the medium term.
We have to address that problem now,’ he said.
Other main components of the Budget are:
Freezing income tax personal allowances; widening 20p in pound basic rate by £500 to £2,500 this year and £3,000 in 1994–5.
A £230 million jobs package aimed at helping about 100,000 long-term unemployed to find work.
Increasing the stamp duty threshold on house sales from £30,000 to £60,000.
Enterprise initiative
Final days for half-price consultancy offer to firms
FIRMS have only a week left to apply for an enterprise initiative which pays half their consultancy fees.
From March 24 the Enterprise Initiative Consultancy Scheme (EICS) will only be available at a cut-price rate, because the Department of Trade and Industry are re-directing funds to pay for alternative business packages.
But consultant Neville Bean, of Alembic Management Associates, says some companies might stop providing the service altogether because customer numbers will fall.
‘It is very sad, because the service is badly needed, but it would not be worth our while.’
Since 1989, the DTI has provided 50 per cent funding for firms seeking advice in business planning, marketing, manufacturing, systems, design or quality.
This will now be cut to a third.
Alan Hazlehurst of Ipswich and Suffolk Chamber of Commerce said: ‘It is always a pity when an initiative is taken away, but there is always the hope that it will be replaced with another, equally good initiative.’
Anglian DTI spokeswoman, Sarah Squire, said money taken from the EICS would be used to fund the new One Stop Shop scheme, where Training and Enterprise Councils set up consultancy services at a single location.
Air Corps arrival will help builders
Work worth £50m is planned at base
EAST Anglian building firms are in line for £50 million in contracts when the Army Air Corps moves its operations to RAF Wattisham.
The historic Suffolk air base, home to fighter squadrons of the RAF since 1946, will now house more than 70 helicopters owned by the Army Air Corps, which will begin to move two regiments from Germany next month.
The Army's interim commander at the base, Lieutenant Colonel John Middleditch, yesterday revealed that £50 million has been earmarked by the Government for building and refurbishment work on the base.
Station commander Wing Commander Stewart Blackburn confirmed that most of the work, apart from some specialist fitting out of new hangers, would go to local contractors.
Lt Col Middleditch said the cash to pay for buildings and new infrastructure had been ‘secured'.
Work to be done includes two new hangars, refurbishment of the four existing hangars, new married quarters, security fencing, improvements to gas, electric, water and sewage mains and to other buildings, including extra mess accommodation.
‘It is hoped the consequences of this can be felt by the local labour force,’ he said.
The first to arrive, 3 Regiment, Army Air Corps, will set up at the base next month, with the staggered arrivals ending in 1995 when 4 Regiment, also presently based in Germany, settles in with a battalion of Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers and two Air-Sea Rescue helicopters.
Major Sam Drennan, senior flying instructor in the UK, assured local residents that although 74 helicopters sounded a lot it was the maximum figure and flying was restricted to keep disturbance to a minimum.
Officially the base becomes Wattisham Air Field on July 1 and from that date the Army Air Corps' Gazelle and Lynx helicopters will be restricted to flying from 7 am to 11 pm four days a week and 7 am to 5 pm on Fridays.
Weekend and Bank Holiday air operations will be restricted to arrivals and departures.
He said the base's activities would be quieter than the RAF's fast jets.
Helicopters flew a lot slower than jets and had less of a ‘startle factor’.
He added: ‘We will be doing our utmost to be good neighbours.’
By David Henshall
Redundancy protest
Hundreds of foremen strike at Ford plants
CAR giant Ford was hit yesterday by a strike of hundreds of foremen at two of its leading factories.
Almost 400 workers were involved in the stoppage which could hit production at the giant Dagenham plant in Essex which makes Fiestas and the Transit van factory in Southampton.
The foremen, members of the white-collar Manufacturing Science and Finance union, were protesting over the threat of compulsory redundancies.
Ford told leaders of production workers last week hourly-paid staff would not be made compulsorily redundant, but it did not extend the assurance to white-collar employees.
The company is due to meet MSF leaders next week for talks over job losses, but a union official said foremen at Dagenham and Southampton had been ‘chomping at the bit’ to take industrial action before then.
‘The foremen made it clear they wanted to start pressing buttons on industrial action because the threat of compulsory redundancies is still there,’ said Jim Thomas, chief Ford negotiator for the union.
‘It is offensive of the company to give an assurance to hourly-paid staff, but not extend it to white-collar workers.’
Last week's assurance by the company to production unions was seen as a ‘false dawn’ by white-collar workers and Mr Thomas added: ‘The company is mucking us about.’
Late payment of business debt ignored
THE Forum of Private Business asked for ten gifts from the Chancellor before his Budget and was given half of them.
James Simmons, the organisation's divisional manager for the eastern region, said the loans guarantee scheme, VAT self-assessment, innocent errors in VAT liability, business rates and stamp duty were raised with the Chancellor.
And he had acted on all of them.
Where he fell down was in failing to deliver on late payment of debt, which cost businesses dear.
Mr Simmons said firms waited an average of 81 days for payment from larger companies and public corporations.
Interest
If firms were entitled to automatic interest in the event of late payment, it would help alleviate the stresses they faced.
‘We have a national disease of late payment of debt,’ said Mr Simmons.
Unexpected ray of sun for housing market
Rate of relief is cut to 20pc on mortgages
By Michael Hughes
THROUGH the Budget day gloom, the Chancellor managed to beam an unexpected ray of sun-shine on the housing market.
With it he brought good news to first-time buyers, who could save up to £600 on the purchase of their first home.
However, he blew cold again on home loan borrowers by reducing the rate of mortgage tax relief by five full points.
Among East Anglian property pundits, alarm over what Mr Lamont might be planning for the region's property market turned to relief as it became clear he had no major upsets in store.
‘The Government is pinning its hopes for economic recovery on the housing market, so it wouldn't want to do anything that would snuff it out,’ said Mike Simpson, Suffolk spokesman for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
‘All the same, it is a relief that he is not doing anything further that could upset the delicate balance at this stage.’
From April next year the rate of mortgage interest relief will be reduced from 25 per cent to 20pc, although the existing ceiling of £30,000 will not change.
According to Mr Lamont, at current mortgage rates, no borrower will be more than £10 a month worse off.
‘It is the level of interest rates, not the amount of tax relief, that is the most important determinant of the cost of a mortgage,’ he said.
However, his most welcome move was the raising of the Stamp Duty threshold from £30,000 to £60,000.
This means that homes sold for between £30,000 and £60,000 will no longer be liable for a tax levy of 1pc on the purchase price — a saving of up to £600.
‘This is not only a boost for first-time buyers,’ said Colin Girling, a regional spokesman for the National Association of Estate Agents, ‘but it is a boost for many second-time buyers, as well, now that house prices have come down so much.’
However, Mr Girling admitted that he was disappointed the Chancellor had done nothing to reduce inheritance tax on residential property.
‘Confidence in jobs remains the underlying element that is holding the property market back now,’ he said.
No spectacular changes to boost the region's property market
Budget helps export firm on the road to recovery
THE managing director of Armstrong Pumps, the Colchester-based specialist fluid-handling company, was impressed by the Chancellor's proposals.
George Hay, who employs 49 people at the Stanway-based subsidiary of a Canadian company, said: ‘I feel it is a good budget for business.
‘The Chancellor is steering a careful course and going for steady growth.
It is a very technical budget, but one that is excellent for export business.’
Exports currently account for 37 per cent of turnover at Armstrong Pumps.
The company exports mainly to the Middle East.
Projects under way include providing equipment for the new King Saud University being built in Saudi Arabia.
Upturn
Mr Hay, whose company made a small profit last year, added: ‘For my own business I think I can see faint signs of recovery.
This Budget could mean a small upturn in the economy next year.’
As a board member of Essex Training and Enterprise Council he was pleased at the measures to help train the long term unemployed.
He said: ‘I am pleased to see that this budget recognises that education and training are a high priority in job creation.’
Mr Hay is hoping his firm will achieve a £6 million turnover target for 1993 with the help of this year's budget.
‘For small companies the future looks attractive and there are some excellent opportunities.’
Families ‘lose out as firms get benefit'
Professor Michael Sherer
BUSINESSES will benefit at the expense of families from Norman Lamont's Budget, claimed an analyst last night.
Professor Michael Sherer, of Essex University's department of accounting and financial management, said families faced higher bills following the Chancellor's decision to extend VAT to domestic fuel, over-index excise duties, leave tax thresholds untouched and raise national insurance contributions.
Companies, however, would benefit from the measures he announced: a freeze in business rates and a reduction in advance corporation tax and loan guarantee premiums.
‘He wanted to set out his stall as someone who would balance the books and create a firm financial situation,’ said Professor Sherer.
‘He was looking towards foreign investors and the City.
That is why the emphasis was on steadying the markets.’
The extension of VAT was ‘fairly predictable and he is phasing it in so it does not look quite so bad’.
Future Budgets could see further extensions: ‘He is leaving it open.’
Among the ‘nice things’ announced were measures to alleviate unemployment, said Professor Sherer.
Although modest, they were ‘novel’.
The increase in national insurance gave the Government ‘more freedom for movement next year’, when it was unlikely Mr Lamont would still be Chancellor.
It was significant that Mr Lamont had looked further ahead than is usually the case on Budget day, said Professor Sherer.
This meant the Government would have less to announce at the unified Budget in November, when tax and spending plans will be unveiled together for the first time.
Redundancy costs
Engineering group profits fall £13m after 1,000 lay-offs
THE cost of more than 1,000 redundancies at Simon Engineering last year savaged profits.
Figures out yesterday show the group spent £3.38 million to cover restructuring costs.
The group sold its environmental businesses because of profit and dividend worries.
The workforce has been reduced to some 6,100.
Wage freezes have been brought in across most of the company and some short-time working introduced.
Exceptional costs also provide for losses on a paper mill contract in Jacksonville, Florida.
Taxable profits for 1992 dived to £5.32 million from £18.3 million in the previous 12 months.
Shareholders will not receive a final dividend, reducing the total payout to just 5p from 15.7p in 1991.
International waste management company Attwoods pushed profits ahead more than 11 per cent in the six months to January after a good performance from key sectors of its US business.
Pre-tax profits jumped to £15.5 million against £13.9 million last time with turnover up 16pc from £168.3 million to £195.3 million.
The interim dividend is maintained at 1.75p.
Growth sector
Overseas profits rise by toiletries group
CUSSONS toiletries group Paterson Zochonis reported yesterday that sales of the Imperial Leather brand held up in the UK despite the recession, but the group's products saw strongest growth overseas.
East Africa, Greece and South East Asia all contributed to an 11 per cent rise in pre-tax profits in the half-year to end-November.
Manchester-based Paterson made £12.937 million (£11.627 million previously) and is raising its interim dividend to 2.35p from 2.25p.
Oil companies benefit
Market takes the Budget in its stride
THE market took the Chancellor's Budget in its stride after initially taking fright.
At one stage the FTSE was more than 14 points down in reaction to predictions about Government borrowing.
But by the close of business, with the Chancellor still speaking, it was just 3.1 points down at 2919.3.
Oil companies were the main beneficiaries on news that the Petroleum Revenue Tax is to be cut on existing North Sea oil fields and scrapped on new fields.
Tobacco duty increases hit Rothmans International which fell 16p to 641p.
BAT Industries, which exports most of its cigarettes, was up 17p to 973p.
An air of hesitancy had prevailed for most of the day as the City waited nervously for the Budget.
Thorn EMI was the star performer, surging 13p to 872p thanks to booming U.S. music sales and favourable comments from brokers.
In the construction sector, George Wimpey found itself pushed much deeper into the red to a loss of £112.4 million last year due to falling property values.
However, the company took the sting out of a halved dividend by saying it thought the figures were the low point in its fortunes and the only way to go was up.
Its shares rose 10p to 136p.
Taurus scrapped
City's position not damaged
LONDON'S position as the financial capital of Europe has not been damaged by the abandonment of the Taurus project, Stock Exchange chairman Andrew Hugh Smith claimed yesterday.
Mr Hugh Smith, in his first speech since revealing the scrapping of Taurus, dismissed suggestions that cross-border share dealing business would leave London.
He told an audience at Stockholm's stock exchange: ‘The abandonment of the project enables all concerned to replan accordingly.
In trying to be all things to all men it became over-complex.’
People will have less to spend and invest
CHANCELLOR Norman Lamont produced a neutral 1993 Budget, but people will have less money to spend and invest, according to Alan West, of Suffolk chartered accountants Grant Thornton.
While taxation was not greatly increased for the tax year 1993/4, people will suffer from measures introduced the following year.
VAT on gas and electricity bills in a full year in 1995 could cost at least £130 per annum for average usage, while an extra 1pc on National Insurance contributions could cost an extra £200.
The married couples allowance will be restricted to the 20pc reduced tax band and will cost a higher rate tax payer about £370 per annum.
The 1994 interest relief will be reduced from the 25pc band to the 20pc and could cost up to £125 per annum for a person with a mortgage over £30,000.
Taken as a whole these measures would cost someone on a £30,000 a year salary about £825 of their after tax income.
Low point
Building firm goes £112m into the red
FALLING land and property values and restructuring pushed construction group George Wimpey £112.4 million into the red last year.
Wimpey said it believed the figures, published yesterday, were the low point in its fortunes.
It detected a pick-up in house sales and said it hoped 1993 would prove ‘a springboard for recovery’.
Wimpey's loss before tax compared with a deficit of £16.1 million in 1991.
Provisions weighed in at £113.8 million.
Stripping them out, the company recorded a modest profit of £1.4 million.
Bad news for shareholders is that the dividend for the year is being halved to 5.25p per share.
On the plus side, Wimpey raised more than £300 million on sales.
Combined with cost cutting, that enabled the group to cut its borrowings by £70 million to £136 million.
Revive
Wimpey sold 7,001 homes during the year, compared with 8,061 in 1991.
In the UK the group targeted first-time buyers.
Chief executive Joe Dwyer said: ‘The firmer expectations of economic revival now apparent in the UK and U.S. give me confidence that some of our markets, particularly housing, will see a markedly better trend before the year-end.’
Losses per share after the exceptional provisions worsened to 39.42p from 7.53p.
Wimpey has made provisions against its involvement in the Channel tunnel construction consortium Transmanche Link, which is in a contract dispute with operators Eurotunnel.
But Mr Dwyer refused to put a figure on the provisions.
‘I don't believe in negotiating in public with Alastair Morton (Eurotunnel chairman),’ he said.
On jobs, he predicted an end to the cuts that have taken Wimpey's UK workforce down 30 per cent to under 11,000 in three years.
He believed house prices — the key to recovery in the market — would firm by the end of the year.
Work time lost to disputes drops
THE amount of working time lost in Britain through disputes and stoppages has fallen dramatically, according to figures out yesterday.
Only 34 days were lost per 1,000 employees in 1991, compared with 83 in 1990 and 1,278 in 1984.
Days lost from 1987 to 1991 average 126 per 1,000 employees — a 70 per cent drop against the 1982–86 period, when Britain's record for industrial strikes was among the worst in the Community.
Two other EC countries, Ireland and Italy, also show similar large reductions in comparisons of the same periods.
In stark contrast, strikes and disputes have soared in Greece and Spain, with 939 days lost in Greece from 1987 to 1991, a 72pc rise compared with the previous five years.
Spain's figure of 677 lost days is an 11pc increase, against the general trend.
Throughout the Community, 6.3 million workers took part in industrial disputes in 1991, up more than 30pc against 4.7 million in 1990.
However, the number of working days lost per 1,000 employees fell from 151 to 103.