

Naturalists to aid global birdlife
Reports by John Grant
SUFFOLK and Essex naturalists are to play an important role in the world's first global bird conservation organisation which was launched yesterday.
Wardens of the county's acclaimed bird reserves will be extending their influence on world bird conservation issues by international fieldwork, in which they already have a proud record.
With its headquarters in Cambridge, the new organisation, Birdlife International, was launched simultaneously around the world yesterday.
It will be the leading authority on the status of the world's birds and their habitats and will tackle the global problems they face — at present an alarming one-in-ten species is threatened with extinction.
Birdlife International's UK partner is the RSPB, already Europe's leading wildlife conservation organisation.
The new body will strengthen close links that already exist between RSPB staff and volunteers in East Anglia and their counterparts around the world.
The RSPB has several highly-rated reserves in Suffolk whose wardens have carried out vital research in various countries.
First to help strengthen international co-operation still further following the establishment of the new organisation will be Minsmere bird reserve manager Geoff Welch and his wife Hilary.
They travel to Turkey on March 13 to carry out survey work in the Kizilinmak Delta, on the Black Sea coast, for a Turkish bird conservation body.
They will also help to set up a Turkish sites and species database.
Rob Macklin, warden of the RSPB's North Warren reserve near Aldeburgh, has recently carried out research work on Frigate Island, in the Seychelles, to help conserve the rare magpie robin.
Russell Leavett, warden of the RSPB's Stour Wood and Copperas Bay reserve near Wrabness, has also strengthened the society's international standing, carrying out survey and educational work in Senegal and Ghana.
East Anglian volunteers have also exerted international influence in recent years.
The RSPB's Chelmsford members' group raised £20,000, used to help set up Lipu Giovani, the junior bird conservation body in Italy, in 1988.
Nature
RSPB regional officer Tony Prater said the formation of Birdlife International, which has evolved from the Cambridge-based International Council for Bird Preservation, would have enormous significance for global nature conservation.
‘In many countries outside the UK, bird conservation is still in its infancy.
We need urgently to tackle the problems faced by birds throughout the world.
‘The launch of Birdlife International is a turning point in the history of world bird conservation,’ he said.
Reedbed rescuers preserve habitat
THE RSPB is digging for victory on a massive scale in a battle to save a reedbed which has the potential to be one of East Anglia's finest wildlife areas.
Ironically, the society is having to fight against the forces of nature itself in the bid to stop the reedbed being swallowed by fast-encroaching willows and scrub which would destroy much of the area's significance.
For 40 years the North Warren Fen, between Aldeburgh and Thorpeness, has been succumbing to the advances of dominant vegetation and specialised reedbed bird species such as bittern, bearded tit and marsh harrier have suffered as a result.
Pioneering
Now, North Warren warden Rob Macklin is masterminding a pioneering project.
In the RSPB's biggest-ever reedbed rescue, a mechanical digger is digging out the surface of the entire 55 acres of fen and volunteers are carrying out strenuous scrub clearance.
Mr Macklin said: ‘Over the years the reedbed has dried out and suffered from natural scrub invasion.
It was commercially cut for reeds until the 1950s, which meant it was kept in good order but then cutting stopped and later the River Hundred was straightened because there was so much flooding at Knodishall.
‘That meant the reedbed did not have its build-up of water.
‘It used to be really good for scarce reedbed species but it is so dry now its basic birds are tawny owl and whitethroat and there has got to be something wrong with that.
‘If we take off the reedbed's top 30cm of vegetation — just enough so that we do not kill off the reeds — and put in some new dykes to give a good water flow we will restore the reedbed to its former glory.’
The rescue bid is costing the RSPB £22,000 but, with reedbeds dwindling alarmingly across Europe, the society considers it is money well spent.
Pristine
‘Within five years I would think we will have a pristine reedbed here again.
We have got to be spot on with the depth to which we are digging — too much and the water will be too deep and the reeds will not grow — but I think the new reeds will be good and strong, not the spindly rubbish we are getting as a result of the dry conditions,’ said Mr Macklin.
By 1995 the society plans to have a birdwatching hide, on stilts, overlooking the reedbed.
If the meticulous and demanding rescue work succeeds, birdwatchers using the hide will be in for a treat.
Volunteers for scrub clearance work, which takes place between September and March, can contact Mr Macklin on Snape 688481.
A bittern at its nest — the RSPB's reedbed rescue bid at North Warren Fen aims to provide ideal breeding habitat for this threatened species
Plea for people to report caterpillars
IF YOU have caterpillars still happily chomping away at your over-wintering cabbages and sprouts, then the Suffolk Naturalists' Society would like to know about it.
It already has some reports from Ipswich as that bane of gardening life, the cabbage white butterfly, appears to be adapting to the traditional winter in the region.
County butterfly recorder Steve Piotrowski said: ‘Up to this year it has been virtually unheard of for the species to over-winter in Suffolk.’
Anyone seeing caterpillars on their greens is asked to write to the Suffolk Biological Records Centre, Ipswich Museum, High Street, Ipswich, IP1 3QH.
Pressure group dives in for dolphins
A SPONSORED swim is due to get under way tomorrow at the Walton-on-the-Naze pool to help save dolphins.
The event is being organised by the Walton and Frinton Greenpeace Support Group.
Proceeds go to the environmental group in the fight to save creatures killed in their thousands in nets set to catch tuna.
Seven million dolphins are estimated to have been killed in the eastern tropical area of the Pacific since the 1950s.
Other dolphins are killed for bait and Greenpeace says many thousands perish each year as a result of toxic waste, sewage and oil pollution of our estuaries and seas.
New plan focuses on doomed cliffs
Council in bid to open nature area
A SCHEME has been unveiled to protect and enhance The Naze — one of the region's most beautiful tourist spots.
Official recognition of the importance of the cliff, in danger of eroding away, will give campaigners added weight as they press for greater coastal protection measures.
Tendring District Council hopes to declare open land at The Naze at Walton a local nature reserve, which would enable it to seek by-laws to help manage and protect the site's wildlife.
This follows the success of similar schemes at Holland Haven Country Park and Pickers Ditch, Great Clacton.
Large areas of open space at the Naze, under the control of the council's leisure committee, lie within a Site of Importance to Nature Conservation (SINC).
They also adjoin two sites of Special Scientific Interest and incorporate the small John Weston Nature Reserve to the north-west.
The wider areas of open space to the south and east of the reserve provide a mosaic of habitats, coastal grassland, scrub, bush and rabbit-grazed patches.
Derek Aldrich, who represents Walton on the district council, said he thought the project was an extremely good idea.
‘I really believe any reasonable scheme that will give the Naze extra status and help try to save it is a great thing,’ he said.
‘The area is absolutely beautiful, especially in the summer.’
He was backed by Walton colleague Daphne Hall, who said she could not see how anyone could fail to support it, and felt it was better to have the Naze under a management scheme.
Having lived in Walton for 29 years she has witnessed how much of the cliff has already been lost to the sea.
‘It's a tragedy to see what's happening to it but it's nice to know the council is trying to do something,’ she said.
‘I just wish we had a money tree and we could shake it and produce money to save the Naze.’
A habitat management plan, council officers believe, would protect wildlife and help the council seek funding towards work at the Naze from the Countryside Commission, English Nature and other sources.
The leisure committee will discuss creating the local nature reserve next Wednesday.
Group aiming to highlight loss of woodland
A NEW audio-visual show highlighting the loss of the county's woodland has been launched by the Council for the Protection of Rural Essex.
The slide-talk programme traces the changing face of the local landscape.
Just five per cent of land in Essex is now covered by woodland, compared with an average of ten per cent for the rest of England and a European average of 20 to 30 per cent.
The new slide presentation has been compiled as part of a drive by CPR Essex to encourage the development of more wooded country, so improving wildlife conservation, recreation facilities and the general landscape.
In particular, the group stressed the value of new woodland in screening unsightly developments.
‘Hypocritical’
‘Taking the longer view, a healthy forest industry would save the costs of importing timber and provide employment and business opportunities,’ said CPR Essex spokesman Edward Crowley.
‘In the West we are constantly telling the Third World to save the rain forests — rather hypocritical considering we are not even prepared to replace the tree cover destroyed over the years in Essex.’
Featured in the new audio-visual show are woodland management practices of the past, the problems of management today and the remaining ancient woodlands of Epping, Hatfield and Writtle forests.
Organisations wanting to arrange a showing of the programme should contact CPR Essex on (0277) 226101.
By Robert Gardiner
Sea pheasant is count highlight
IN ORDER to combine with the coastal counts of wildfowl and waders, which are subject to the tide times, we covered the March wildfowl count at Abberton Reservoir on the 7th of the month when, customarily, counting takes place in mid-month.
This early date rather precluded the sighting of a possible early summer migrant, whereas on some previous counts, like last year on March 22, four wheatears appeared on the scene.
In 1990 we found our first chiff-chaff on the count of March 11 and in 1989, two early sand-martins and a solitary wheatear on March 12.
This year's March figure for the duck was somewhat low at just 1,710 birds, but well up in variety with 14 different species — 15 different being the maximum we have recorded, both occasions in December.
Goldeneye actually headed the list of duck at 547, with a very high proportion of drakes, followed by tufted duck at 276 birds and mallard at 267 birds.
From the Birch causeway, a long raft of small duck out on the middle region turned out to be 52 ruddy duck — our highest total for a count at Abberton.
These lively, white-cheeked diving duck with their stiff tails, hence their alternative name, first featured on the wildfowl count at Abberton in September 1980.
Other diving duck, especially the goosander, were well up in number on this March count to total 47, including 20 drakes, with two smew, both ‘red-heads’, to be seen close by from the Birch causeway.
The highlight of this count was another diving duck, a fine drake long-tailed duck, one or two of these normally sea-going duck appearing occasionally at Abberton, usually in March or April.
To see the drake in full breeding plumage is quite rare, the dark brown and white plumage and graceful, curving tail-feathers, some nine inches in length, having given this attractive bird its alternative name of ‘sea pheasant’.
Public access scheme criticised
COUNTRYSIDE enthusiasts are claiming that tens of thousands of pounds have been wasted on a scheme designed to increase public access to the East Anglian countryside.
Payments to farmers and landowners to open up out-of-bounds areas were unnecessary, because many were already public rights of way, according to a survey conducted by members of the Ramblers' Association.
And the few new sites made available through the Countryside Stewardship Access Scheme would be impossible for most people to find, said Douglas Hart, who monitored seven out of the 11 locations in Suffolk.
Peter Dawson, senior countryside officer at the region's Countryside Commission, has admitted problems exist just days after Countryside Minister David Maclean praised the scheme as ‘an effective way of increasing public access’.
‘It's a pilot scheme and there have been mistakes,’ he said.
This year the budget in the region was about £1 million, but only ‘a couple of per cent’ of this was spent on payments to landowners.
However, Mr Hart said the public had been ‘ripped off’.
He found only four or five genuinely new sites.
In many cases a public footpath already existed and it was unclear how much more freedom walkers had gained.
All the Suffolk sites have been designated ‘open access’ but the term covers anything from freedom to roam the entire area to footpath access alone, a CC spokesman said.
Mr Dawson also criticised the lack of directions and signposting to help those who wanted to visit the new sites.
Grid references would only be useful to experts, he said.
A poor advertising campaign, which the CC has promised to rectify this year, meant many people have not even heard of the project.