

Scheme to promote good dog owners
DOG owners in north Essex are being encouraged to become everybody's best friend as part of a new council scheme which was launched yesterday.
Tendring Council's Dog Owners pack has been put together to tackle a range of pooch problems including strays, fouling and dangerous dogs.
An array of pooches and their owners from across the district gathered at Clacton's Vista Road recreation ground to receive the first copies of the pack.
Roy Coulter, director of environmental and technical services, said with more than 12,000 canine residents in the district, the council felt obliged to promote good dog ownership.
‘The vast majority of dog owners are responsible, but it is those few who do not take the necessary responsibility for their dogs that can cause very real problems for everyone.
‘We hope this information pack will show how important it is to be a good owner.’
Tendring Council is one of the forerunners in dog control and advice, having been the first authority in Essex to employ a dog warden and introduce dog control byelaws, added Mr Coulter.
The pack contains maps showing where the four dog control byelaws exist and offers sound advice about owning man's best friend.
It is available from council offices and veterinary surgeons or by telephoning Clacton 425501 extension 3146.
A roving exhibition is planned for the future along with a series of talks to schools and other groups by the council's dog warden.
Ruby helps her master, Chris Robson, get to grips with the Good Dog Owners Pack
‘Penal prep schools' plan
New lock-up centres for young offenders are condemned
Care and discipline regime for 12 to 15-year-olds
Secure training after three imprisonable crimes
Five units proposed each to offer 40 places
PERSISTENT young lawbreakers are to be locked up in tough new training centres under proposals announced by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke yesterday.
He said the Government will change the law so courts can impose a secure training order on 12 to 15-year-olds who have been convicted of three imprisonable crimes and who cannot be dealt with in the community.
The new secure training centres, which could be run by public, private or voluntary groups, will provide ‘high standards of care and discipline’, Mr Clarke said.
Their regime will embrace education and training but also provide the affection often lacking in offenders' homes.
On their release, the teenagers will be supervised until they proved they were no longer a threat to society, he said.
The plan was fiercely condemned by prison reform and crime prevention campaigners and politicians as ‘penal prep schools’.
The Children's Society denounced the proposals, which could cost up to £75 million, as a ‘knee jerk reaction’ given figures suggesting the number of persistent young offenders could be as low as 100.
Mr Clarke said the working plans were for about five units with about 40 places each.
He said: ‘We are bound to face criticism from both sides, from people saying we should be locking up thousands of juvenile offenders and throwing away the key and others throwing up their hands and saying they are like the old approved schools and will be universities of crime.’
But he maintained the new centres will be ‘different from anything that has ever been provided before’.
They would be overseen by social services inspectorate and education inspectors.
But shadow home secretary Tony Blair said: ‘What we need is schools of responsibility, not colleges of crime.’
Howard League for Penal Reform director Frances Crook said Mr Clarke was launching into a ‘profligate and irresponsible policy which will incite juvenile crime when damaged children emerge from his penal prep-schools’.
Prison Reform Trust director Stephen Shaw warned: ‘The graduates from Mr Clarke's mini-prisons will be filling the adult jails for years to come.’
The police welcomed the new secure units but expressed concern that they would not be ready until 1995.
Mr Clarke also stressed the role of schools in combating juvenile crime and demanded more effective treatment of disruptive pupils.
He said the Government was providing £10 million for truancy projects in 74 local education authorities.
Currently, there are no powers to sentence young people under 15 to custody except in the most serious cases.
There will also be an examination of measures needed to deal with girl offenders.
Tory MPs protested the measures may be held up for two years because of delays on the Bill to ratify the Maastricht Treaty.
They are pressing the Prime Minister either to withdraw the Bill or speed it through.
Editorial comment — Page 14
Father protests as payments go astray
A FATHER has complained about the handling of support claims for his mentally handicapped daughters after letters have twice gone astray.
John Everett, of Thurston Lane, Stansfield, near Bury St Edmunds, said he had raised the issue with the Blackpool-based DSS Disability Living Allowance Unit after waiting weeks to have the claims processed.
The office was contacted after disability living allowances were awarded for Emma, eight, and Charmaine, 14, both of whom have learning difficulties and attend the Riverwalk Special School, Bury St Edmunds.
However, Mr Everett said, it had taken two months to obtain the Giro for Emma.
‘I telephoned the Blackpool office up to five times a day and never talked to the same person twice.
I kept getting different answers.
‘Unknown address'
‘Eventually, I was told that their letter had gone to an ‘unknown address’.
Mr Everett said they had forwarded the claim for Charmaine separately and exactly the same problems were occurring.
‘Once again, we have heard that the letter had gone to what they call an unknown address and the matter is still not resolved.’
Mr Everett, who has four children, said the award would help provide extra care for the girls.
The difficulties experienced in dealing with Blackpool made him feel there should be regional departments to make contact easier.
A spokesman for the Blackpool unit which processes applications nationally, blamed a clerical error for material going to the wrong addresses.
‘The mistake has been put right.
The unit accepted it was its fault and has apologised for the delay,’ he said.
Labour of love for Emma
Red Nose Day is with us once again.
This amusing, if not slightly absurd, outward sign of helping others, is the trademark of Comic Relief, whose roving spokeswoman is Emma Freud.
Our reporter ELIZABETH NICE spoke to Emma about her work with the charity.
Emma Freud, roving spokeswoman for Comic Relief, has just crammed 100 interviews and a country-wide tour into three days but still claims to be ‘loving it’.
Emma, 31, grew up in Walberswick, Suffolk, with her four brothers and sisters.
Her mother, Jill, runs the Southwold summer theatre and her father is Sir Clement Freud.
She has been spreading the Comic Relief message since she went to see a Comic Relief project for homeless young people in London two years ago.
‘It was a fatal error,’ she said.
‘The organiser asked me if I wanted to see how the money was spent and since then I've been hooked.’
She now spends half her time working in the Comic Relief office in New Oxford Street, London, when she is not doing her ‘telly stuff.’
For this year's Comic Relief, Emma has written a play with Richard Curtis, writer of Blackadder, and Ronnie Paris.
The Great Comic Relief Vegetable Plot has been sent to all the schools in the country and Emma hopes as many as possible will stage it to raise money for Comic Relief.
The Comic Relief television programme will be on March 12 from 7 pm to 1 am and there will be a different presenter every 45 minutes including Lenny Henry, Dawn French, Jennifer Saunders, Angus Deayton and Ben Elton.
The comedians are involved in Comic Relief projects throughout the year though, Emma said.
‘They are really committed.
They don't just turn up on the night,’ she said.
Since the first Red Nose Day in 1985 £70 million has been raised for projects in Africa and the UK.
‘People still think all the money goes to Africa but a third of the money raised so far has stayed in Britain, with 1,600 Comic Relief projects over here,’ she said.
Emma said the launch of the 4th Red Nose Day had provoked an incredible response.
‘We were a bit nervous about doing it this year because of the recession but we are getting 5,000–7,000 calls every day,’ she said.
She thought maybe the response was due to people needing to cheer themselves up.
‘Perhaps the recession has actually helped us,’ she said.
The aim of Comic Relief was to get people to feel good while helping others, not to make them feel guilty because there were people worse off than them, she said.
Emma Freud — getting people to feel good while helping others
Adults flock to return to classroom
ESSEX University's first day schools this month are proving highly popular.
More than 120 people have signed up for the six courses and a regular programme of similar events is now likely to be organised at the Wivenhoe Park campus, near Colchester.
The university's office of continuing education took over extra-mural adult education in Essex and south Suffolk last September from the universities of London and Cambridge.
The university works in partnership with bodies including the Workers' Educational Association, councils and independent adult education centres.
Sixty-six courses have been held so far and the university has increased the number of students compared with previous years.
The first day schools are on Saturday, March 20, in the main lecture theatre building from 10.30 am to 4.30 pm.
All the tutors are members of the university's panel of extra-mural teachers.
Courses include Wildlife and Conservation in Essex, A History of Victorian Entertainments, The American West — Myth and Reality, Fiction and the Fallen Woman, The Classical Symphony and the Roman Invasion of Britain in AD43.
There is still time to join a course.
Details from the office of continuing education on Colchester (0206) 873030 or 872519 for details of vacancies.
The fee is £10 or £6 for full-time students, the retired or benefit claimants.
Participants must be aged at least 18.
Coaches are being run from Brentwood, Chelmsford, Epping, Loughton and Southend for those attending the day schools.
Survey shows big rise in number of pupil expulsions
By Charlotte Adcock
THE number of pupils being expelled from schools across the region has risen dramatically and experts predict the trend will continue.
According to the latest survey by the BBC, schools have reported a 30 per cent increase in the numbers of youngsters being permanently excluded from schools across the eastern region.
Essex has witnessed a significant increase in pupil exclusions in both primary and secondary schools, but still has one of the lowest rates in the region.
Last year, out of a school population of 220,000, just 113 pupils were permanently expelled.
Education spokesman Mike Barnett said although the exclusion rate was half that of other counties, it was still a matter of serious concern.
There was deep anxiety at the inconsistent pattern across Essex, he said.
‘Our own evidence suggests that a handful of schools are responsible for a majority of exclusions.’
Peter Upton, head of Colne School, Brightlingsea, and an expert on pupil behaviour, warned that the exclusions would continue to rise until the Government stopped blaming schools and recognised the need for a properly resourced and integrated approach to behavioural problems.
‘We're going to see an increase in bullying, exclusions and truancy unless we start tackling the problems at their root.
It's no good looking to schools and expecting them to solve all the problems.’
The latest figures have added another dimension to the national debate now raging over the level of youth crime, social morality and Government plans to crackdown on offenders.
Chief Constable of Essex John Burrow added his voice yesterday when he warned that there was a connection between truancy and crime.
A ‘large proportion of schoolchildren who truant do get into mischief of one sort or another’, he said.
In tomorrow's EADT we report on the latest research findings on pupil behaviour in Essex and why youngsters are being expelled from schools.
Senior lawyers called to circuit
TWO members of a well-known regional chambers have been appointed to the South Eastern court circuit.
John Devaux, who became a Recorder and head of chambers in 1989, has been appointed a circuit judge.
Mr Devaux has been head of chambers at the firm which is soon to drop its name based on the names of partners in favour of the title East Anglian Chambers.
It has branches in Colchester, Ipswich and Norwich, said senior clerk Sean Groom.
‘We were very pleased for him,’ he said.
‘But it's always a bit of a blow to lose a head of chambers.’
Mr Devaux said: ‘I have had 22 happy years at the bar but I'm pleased to be appointed particularly in the area in which I've practised for 14 years now.’
John Akast, an assistant recorder from the same East Anglian chambers and based in Ipswich, has been appointed a Recorder to the South Eastern Circuit.
BBC films brave girl's fight against heart disorder
A BRAVE girl's fight against heart disease is to be featured in a series of programmes on the BBC's Tomorrow's World , starting tonight.
Six-year-old Laura Knights is to undergo pioneering keyhole surgery at Guy's Hospital tomorrow to correct a ‘kink’ in one of her arteries.
The Tomorrow's World team have been following day-to-day life at her Framlingham home and will be filming the operation.
In tonight's programme, Laura and her parents discover whether she is suitable for the surgery, which has only been carried out on a handful of other patients and is still at the experimental stage.
Laura was born with a rare heart defect which prevented enough oxygen getting into her blood.
She underwent open heart surgery in a bid to solve the problem, but now needs an artery widened using the new techniques.
Laura travels down to London with her parents today to undergo tests before tomorrow's 1 pm operation.
She has recovered from a chest infection which affected her last week after two solid days of filming left her exhausted.
The Tomorrow's World team will be showing Laura's progress in two further programmes, on March 10 and 17, featuring the use of catheters — thin tubes which are passed through veins and into the heart.
If Dr Shakell Qureshi and Professor Michael Tynan discover her artery is too narrow, they will attempt to widen it with the metal tubes which will allow the blood to flow more easily into her lungs.
Tomorrow's World is on BBC 1 tonight at 7.30.
Locks are improved in attempt to keep out unwanted visitors
Four-wheel drive enthusiasts ‘ruin nature reserve’
By David Green Environment correspondent
FOUR-wheel drive enthusiasts are being blamed for breaking through a barrier to gain illegal access to a Suffolk ‘island’ which is one of Europe's most important nature reserves.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office said yesterday that padlocks securing a barrier at Orford Ness, former home of a top secret defence establishment, had been severed with bolt cutters on at least two occasions during the past six months.
Now, improved locks are being introduced in a bid to thwart those intent on gaining access with vehicles.
Although known as an island, Orford Ness is a spit of low-lying coastal land which can be approached from the north at all states of the tide.
Several miles long, it is the most important shingle spit in Europe in terms of the vegetation it provides for wildlife, attracting little terns, lesser black-backed gulls and other uncommon birds.
The southern tip is designated as a national nature reserve.
The National Trust is presently negotiating to buy the land from the Ministry of Defence and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) which runs a BBC World Service relay station sited on the ness.
However, unauthorised intrusions are commonplace, the open expanse of land being a favourite playground for four-wheel drive and scrambler bike enthusiasts.
A barrier designed to stop vehicles gaining access to Orford Ness and damaging flood defences and wildlife habitat was put up by the National Rivers Authority last year and is controlled by the FCO.
Suffolk Wildlife Trust director Derek Moore said there had been reports of rabbits and other creatures being shot at by four-wheel drive enthusiasts as the vehicles moved around the ness.
The trust's conservation manager, Dr Charles Beardall, said: ‘Vegetation which has taken centuries to become established is being wiped out in minutes by these vehicles and important bird colonies are being disturbed.’
Assistant county planning officer Alfreda Thistlethwaite said negotiations between the National Trust and Government departments over buying the land were at a crucial stage.
‘We hope that once the land is bought there will be a warden stationed there to help prevent unauthorised access,’ she added.
The gateway to the eight-mile stretch of Orford Ness, the Slaughden Martello Tower
The vehicle barrier at Slaughden which has several times been breached by owners of four-wheel drive trucks
Orphanage boss thanks donors in person
THE director of a Romanian orphanage sent supplies by the lorryload from the people of Sudbury is at last enjoying the chance to say thank you in person.
Dr Lucia Cristescue's orphanage at Brasov, southern Romania, is home to 220 children aged three and under.
Over the past three years it has received 11 visits from the Sudbury-based charity group Christian Cargo.
Shops and companies have also boosted the collections for lorryloads of clothes, blankets, medical equipment, toiletries and toys.
But it is only now Dr Cristescue and her engineer husband Dimitru have managed to obtain visas to visit Britain.
Fund
Their 12-day trip, their first abroad, is being funded by the Sudbury branch of the Business and Professional Women's Club.
Yesterday president Sylvia Byham said the club had originally planned the visit for last year and was delighted it was taking place at last.
Dr Cristescue has toured West Suffolk Hospital's paediatric unit, courtesy of unit manager Miss Joanna Paul, and visited the Hardwicke House surgery, Sudbury.
She said she was very impressed by staffing levels at the hospital and that even a local surgery had computer equipment.
This type of technology is only available in university clinics in Romania.
‘Like all hospitals, we don't have as much money as we would like but generally speaking things for us have been getting better,’ she said.
The Cristescues plan to visit Vanners Silks and Gainsborough's House and tour shops which donated goods to Christian Cargo's Romanian appeal.
Dr Lucia Cristescue and her husband Dimitru, centre, touring Sudbury yesterday with, left, Sylvia Byham and Christian Cargo's Ralph Chandler and, right, David and Pam Windsor
Mahogany trade ‘steeped in death and destruction’
FRIENDS of the Earth members in Essex are to lobby shoppers in an attempt to highlight the death and destruction they claim is involved in the mahogany trade.
In Brazil, FoE says the people who inhabit the rainforests are at risk of being shot by gunmen associated with logging interests.
Even if the mahogany comes from other countries, such as the Philippines, they claim the trade causes serious environmental damage and is often taking place illegally.
On Saturday, the environmental campaigners will be taking to the streets of Colchester to urge furniture buyers to boycott stores which stock products made of mahogany.
‘We are definitely not saying that these stores are in anyway directly involved in the tragic events in Brazil,’ Colchester FoE tropical rainforest campaigner Don Manhire said.
‘However, equally we have to face the fact that almost all imported mahogany comes from Brazil and much of it is being traded illegally.
I am also concerned that most stores have no clear idea where the mahogany originates from.
The average shopper would be horrified to know the terrible story behind the logging of mahogany.
I am sure that consumers would shun mahogany products, especially when there are perfectly good types of wood to choose from.’
Youth groups hit by decision to cut cash subsidies
COUNTY councillors yesterday agreed to stop subsidising some Essex youth groups, including the Brightlingsea Brass Marching Band.
The councillors ratified the decision taken earlier by the education committee.
The band is playing on on a day-to-day basis a spokeswoman said last night.
Until last November the council met 90 per cent of the £4,000 required by the band to rent rehearsal rooms in local schools, but now it has made savings in a bid to inject £10 million into problem areas, such as school meals and uniform grants.
Tom Dale, Liberal Democrat leader on the council, demanded a rethink at yesterday's full council meeting.
He was backed by Labour's George Miles who said: ‘This is not a party political matter, this is a question of whether you are a Philistine or not.’
Education committee chairman Ian Abbey said certain groups, including Guides, Scouts and Boys' and Girls' Brigades, would still receive grants.
Other organisations, including the Woodcraft Folk, religious youth groups and the youth group attached to the Red Cross, would have to apply for funding which would be given at the council's discretion.
Conservative councillor Anthony Stockley spoke against his ruling party when he backed the band and other groups like the majorettes.
‘These groups encourage self-discipline and personal pride,’ said Mr Stockley.
Mr Abbey said the council applauded the existence of such groups, but there was not enough money to fund them all.
Anyone who can help the Brightlingsea Marching Brass Band with premises or cash is asked to contact Mr Brookes on Chelmsford (0245) 287224.
For Round the Houses
Peers back panel plan for child refugees
PEERS last night inflicted a 55-vote defeat on the Government's plans to tighten asylum controls, backing a move to set up a special advisory panel for young refugees.
Voting was 169 to 114, as Liberal Democrat and Labour peers joined rebel Tories to support the change to the controversial Asylum and Immigration Appeals Bill which aims to clamp down on bogus asylum claims and speed genuine applications.
The successful new clause, introduced by former Law Lord Lord Brightman, would require the Home Secretary to establish the panel of children's advisers.
A second new clause setting out the panel's role was approved without a vote.
Lord Brightman urged there should be specialised reception and support arrangements for vulnerable youngsters arriving alone in Britain.
Noise concerns sink petrol station plan
PLANS to build a petrol filling station have been rejected by councillors because of the disturbance it would cause to people living nearby.
Proposals to construct a petrol garage and seven houses on the Anglia Caravans site in Ipswich Road, Colchester, were submitted to Colchester Borough Council's planning committee.
In the planning application the developer indicated that petrol sales would be restricted to the hours of 7 am to 11 pm.
Ray Gamble, councillor for St John's, where the site is situated said: ‘All three councillors oppose the station because we are concerned about disturbance to local residents.
We feel it's bound eventually to be open for 24 hours.’
Members of the committee voted to refuse planning permission for the petrol station and housing development but added they might be willing to consider an application for houses alone.
Pony is saved from death
A REAL life My Little Pony has moved into an Essex animal park after being rescued from appalling conditions and almost certain death.
Jack the tiny Shetland pony weighs in at only a few stones and is just over two-feet tall.
Maureen Taylor from Mistley Park Place Environmental Centre paid £45 at market for Jack and saved him being sold for meat.
However, it will take several hundred pounds in vet bills to restore him to good health.
‘He was in a terrible condition,’ she said.
‘His eyes were all pussy, he had the runs and his fur was all matted up.’
Jack is believed to be about nine months old but is painfully small because of constant neglect, said Mrs Taylor.
‘He doesn't look too bad because of his coat but when you handle him, he is just a bag of bones.’
She believes Jack was probably rounded up off the moors by a dealer who intended to sell him to be fattened up for slaughter.He has now joined hundreds of other animals at the centre who have been rescued.
Maureen Taylor with pony Jack, who was rescued from almost certain death
Row greets rise in prescription fees
Outrage as charges are increased in ‘sneak’ new move
PRESCRIPTION charges are to soar by an inflation-busting 13 per cent to £4.25, the Government announced yesterday.
The 50p increase, almost eight times the level of inflation, sparked a wave of protest and accusations of a ‘tax on the sick’ and ‘rationing by stealth’.
Opposition MPs, doctors' leaders, nurses and pharmacists warned that the rise, with a 5pc increase in dental charges also announced yesterday, would force hard-up patients to do without treatment.
The increase is the 15th since the Conservatives came to power in 1979, when the charge for a prescription was just 20p per item.
Dental
The new charges will come into effect in April.
At the same time people will then be required to pay 80pc towards the cost of a course of dental treatment.
Details of the rises, expected to raise an extra £278 million for the NHS, were revealed by Health Minister Dr Brian Mawhinney in a Commons written reply.
Labour accused the Government of ‘sneaking’ out the announcements which were a ‘kick in the teeth to the people of Britain’.
Pre-prescription payment certificates, and charges for elastic stockings, fabric supports and wigs will also rise by 13pc.
Under the changes, needy and elderly people and those who currently get free prescriptions on medical grounds will remain exempt.
The value of optical vouchers for spectacles, available to children and people on low incomes, will be raised by 2.75pc.
Defending the prescription rises, Dr Mawhinney said 80pc of prescribed items were now dispensed free, more than at any time since prescription charges were re-introduced in 1968.
He claimed the new charges were still ‘significantly less’ than the average total cost of a single prescription item.
But Shadow Health Secretary David Blunkett said the latest rise meant prescription charges had risen 2,100pc since Mrs Thatcher promised to freeze them when she took power.
Liz Lynne, Liberal Democrat health spokeswoman, said: ‘Once again the Government is responding to a crisis with measures that will only harm patients.’
Bid to save special needs school fails
A LAST attempt to save a north-east Essex special needs school failed yesterday.
Roy Smith, Labour member for Clacton West, tried to persuade the whole council to reject plans to close Priory Meadow, at St Osyth.
He said the school offered an excellent service which cannot be quantified in cash terms, the ‘vast increase in truancy and expulsion from schools’ was another argument for keeping the residential school open, he said.
Children were given care and attention 24-hours a day in an environment which would encourage them to lead better lives, he said.
Pat Bolger, Labour member for Tilbury, backed Mr Smith.
He said the county council-run school had been deliberately run down and pupils were being sent elsewhere, leaving just 14 left on the roll.
‘This school should be a centre of excellence,’ he said.
Tory Derek Lamberth said closure plans had been on the agenda for two years.
He said the buildings (the responsibility of the council) were in an appalling state.
‘Problems’
Chris Pearson, Labour member for Colchester, said that was an outrageous stance to take because half the schools in the county were dilapidated.
Councillor Janet Hayward said the children, who have behavioural problems and learning difficulties, could be ‘dealt with more readily at home’.
Junk food girl treated for scurvy
A TEENAGER who existed on a junk food diet developed scurvy, the bane of seamen two centuries ago, it was revealed yesterday.
The 14-year-old, from Northern Ireland, lived on cola, chocolate, hamburgers and crisps.
Her doctor said he had heard of only four or five western teenagers with the disease, caused by a deficiency in vitamin C.
The girl did not eat much fruit and was not keen on vegetables, said Dr Kevin McKenna.
She recovered after vitamin C therapy said the medical journal Clinical and Experimental Dermatology.
IN THE light of the home secretary's decision to introduce new secure training centres for young offenders EMMA HELLYER looks at how they are currently dealt with.
‘Knee-jerk reaction to crime is no help’
JAMES Bulger did not die in vain, we were told at his funeral this week.
When two ten-year-olds allegedly abducted and murdered the toddler, it confirmed the public's deepest suspicions.
Juvenile crime was out of control and the family had irretrievably broken down.
Step forward Kenneth Clarke, with plans to empower courts to send offenders to new secure training centres.
This neat morality tale has horrified Keith Warrilow, justice team manager of Taylor House, in Ipswich.
The proposals are based on a fundamental misunderstanding of juvenile crime, he claims, confusing an exceptional event with the control of persistent crime.
They are a ‘knee-jerk’ response to appease widespread discontent following the murder of two-year-old James.
Most youngsters are arrested for theft — 70 per cent of those on Taylor House rehabilitation schemes — and persistent offending is declining.
Those who call for ‘violent young thugs’ to be locked up should understand a little more and condemn a little less, he says.
But, he insists: ‘We are not wishy-washy social workers and we are not naive.
There are cases where youngsters have to be placed in custody, but they are very, very rare.’
In Suffolk, where police cautioning of the under 17s is one of the highest in the country, 80 per cent keep out of trouble.
This is a significant achievement when figures show 87 per cent of those locked up re-offend.
And in the last two years only three children under 14 have had to be placed in secure accommodation.
Mr Warrilow is critical of the custody lobby.
‘Our philosophy is that juvenile crime is part of growing up.
Those responsible are having problems adapting to adult life and we try to help, to give them the skills they lack and to get them to do something constructive in the community.’
According to social services director, Bill Bulpin: ‘Juvenile crime is decreasing and not increasing, because of diversion schemes, like ‘caution plus’ at Taylor House.’
Working hand-in-hand with the police, the centre tries to help the offender confront his or her actions.
Ten to 17-year-olds are taught to take responsibility for themselves, to understand the effects of their crime on the local community and to compensate their victim.
Symbolically, by writing letters, and directly, with financial payments or by assisting their victim.
One teenager arrested for shoplifting helped the manager by working in his store.
The system only works, however, if the individual co-operates and shows remorse.
It helps too if the victim is prepared to be involved, directly or indirectly.
A decision which can prove therapeutic while providing a home-grown solution for the youngster.
Juveniles who do not respond to ‘mediation and reparation’ are given one-to-one counselling, encouraged to focus on their crime and discover ways of avoiding re-offending.
Taylor House staff are also involved in bail support work, designed to keep teenagers on remand out of prison.
And they work regularly in the courts.
Secure youth unit ruling soon
A GOVERNMENT decision is expected soon on whether Suffolk will gain its first secure unit for young offenders.
The county, which currently has to buy in provision from neighbouring counties, is hoping to acquire a 12-place unit in partnership with Norfolk and Cambridgeshire.
Social services staff have been negotiating with the Department of Health and are expecting a decision to be made in the next couple of weeks.
‘In the present climate, I think people will be under quite a lot of pressure to begin building work as soon as possible when an answer has been given,’ said principle officer for child services, Cliff James.
The unit, to be based at Salters, in Peterborough, would have to be converted to provide mixed accommodation for 12 youngsters.
Currently, it houses six girls.
Provision of some sort would have to be in place by 1995 to comply with the 1991 Criminal Justice Act which requires local authorities to provide secure accommodation for 15 and 16-year-olds on remand.
Over the past two years, Suffolk has had only three offenders under 14 who need to be placed in custody.
In two cases, beds have been bought from other counties and in the third, an outdoor pursuits scheme was used.
Director of Social Services, Bill Bulpin said existing arrangements were inadequate, however.
The new unit will also be available for young people who are a danger to themselves or others.
Like the youth caught trying to pour petrol over his head.
They will be kept in locked bedrooms, but will have access to a dayroom and both counsellors and education specialists.
‘Terror regime’ at hospital unit
Tribunal told of sex assaults on residents
By Christopher Cairns
A REGIME of terror at a hospital for the mentally handicapped was described yesterday at an industrial tribunal.
Residents were sexually assaulted or goaded into assaulting one another, it was alleged, while staff looked on, drinking beer, laughing and ignoring pleas for help.
The grim picture of life in Villa Ten of the Turner Village Hospital, Colchester, was painted by witnesses at the tribunal in which Noel Reid, a charge nurse, is claiming unfair dismissal against the New Possibilities NHS Trust.
Allegations against Mr Reid, of North Station Road, Colchester, and other members of staff were made last March.
Mr Reid, Rico Gopul and Paul Munson, all members of the nursing staff, were suspended but Mr Gopul has since been reinstated.
A disciplinary hearing in June ruled that Mr Reid should be dismissed, largely on the testimony of nursing assistant Ewan Bain.
His allegations against Mr Reid were later backed up by the villa's then deputy charge nurse, Karen Spinner.
Every other member of staff at the now-closed villa was interviewed but all denied any knowledge of ‘inappropriate actions’.
Susan Jiggens, assistant services manager at Turner Village, explained the lack of other testimony.
‘There is a conspiracy of silence in some villas.
At Turner Village you do not talk about what you've seen,’ she said.
She told the Bury St Edmunds tribunal that ‘unpleasant things’ could happen, such as cars being vandalised and implied threats being made.
Mr Bain, who now lives with Miss Spinner, alleges that Mr Reid, who has more than 20 years' service at the hospital, incited a male resident to ‘sort out’ a female resident whenever she became distressed and noisy.
This entailed either groping her or standing in front of her and dropping his trousers.
He also said Mr Reid himself would often grope another male resident who needed help in pulling on his trousers.
Under questioning from Philip Aliker, counsel for Mr Reid, Mr Bain admitted that on the day he complained to management he had been brought to account by nursing colleagues, including Mr Reid, for long periods off work.
The tribunal continues today.
Continued on Page Four
Bishop is to speak on ordination of women
By Duncan Brodie
BISHOP of Chelmsford the Rt Rev John Waine is to speak on draft legislation for the ordination of women at a meeting of the diocesan synod later this week.
He will be telling synod members, drawn from throughout Essex and east London, about proposals which emerged from a meeting of bishops which took place in Manchester in January.
‘Provincial visitors’
It was the first time the bishops had met following last November's historic vote by the Church of England's General Synod in favour of women's ordination as priests.
The bishops discussed some of the implications of the change and issued a number of proposals for further discussion at local level around the country.
One of their proposals is for the appointment of up to three bishops as ‘provincial visitors’, outside the traditional structure of diocesan bishops.
The visitors would act as spokesmen and advisers for clergy who remain opposed to women priests and assist the archbishops in monitoring the arrangements made for them.
Bishop Waine is not opposed in principle to the ordination of women, but did not support last year's legislation because of concern about its provisions for objectors.
Following his address to the diocesan synod at Chelmsford Cathedral on Saturday, members will have the chance to ask questions about the issues raised.
The proposals are also open for discussion at deanery and parish level.
In June, the bishops are due to meet again and are likely to publish more detailed guidance on the new arrangements.
Other items on the agenda for the diocesan synod this week include financial matters and an update on the Decade of Evangelism, looking at where the church has got to in its outreach work.
Key areas
The diocese has just published a new resource handbook,Sharing Faith In The Countryside , which deals with aspects of evangelism in rural areas.
It has been produced in response to the Church of England's national report,Faith In The Countryside , and aims to cover the whole life of the rural church.
The book identifies key areas of the church's witness, all illustrated with examples drawn from the practical experiences of people living in rural parishes.
Copies, costing £7, are available from the diocesan resources centre at 53 New Street, Chelmsford, CM1 1AT.
John Waine — to speak on ordination of women
Judge orders jury to acquit student accused in sex case
A STUDENT was cleared yesterday of an attack on a young Clacton woman.
Assistant Recorder Mr. John Wardlow stopped the trial on the second day of the hearing and directed the jury to acquit Philip O'Connell of indecently assaulting the 19-year-old woman and causing her actual bodily harm.
After hearing legal submissions by defence counsel Mr. Martyn Levett at the end of the prosecution case, Mr. Wardlow said the identification evidence was unsafe and halted the trial.
O'Connell, aged 18, of Croft Road, Clacton, had denied the charges at Chelmsford Crown Court and was discharged.
Miss Stephanie Farrimond, prosecuting, said the woman was attacked after she left the Savoy nightclub, Clacton, on August 1 last year.
She was walking home near Colbayns School when a man approached her and asked the time.
The man then grabbed her around the neck and forced her to the ground.
He held his hand over her mouth and tried to pull down her ski pants.
The woman jabbed her cigarette into the man's face and he loosened his grip.
She began screaming and he punched her in the face and ran off.
Miss Farrimond said police later arrested O'Connell.
He admitted being at the Savoy nightclub that evening but said he had gone home with a friend.
He denied he was responsible for the attack on the girl.
Woman bites sex attacker
A SEX attacker who ran off after his victim fought back and bit him is being hunted by police.
Detectives say the young woman was left badly shaken after the assault and have warned that the incident might have become more serious if it had gone on any longer.
The 23-year-old woman was walking home along Blackthorn Avenue on the Greenstead estate in Colchester at about 11.35 pm on Tuesday when the man grabbed her from behind.
He pulled her to the ground and indecently assaulted her but abandoned the attack after the woman screamed and bit him several times on one hand.
The man ran off towards the nearby Co-op store.
Police are appealing for help from anyone who witnessed the incident or who recognises the attacker from a description given by the victim.
They also plan to contact local doctors and hospitals in case the man sought medical treatment for the bites, although it is not known how serious his injuries were.
The attacker is described as white, aged 26 to 30, about five feet eight inches tall, and of medium build with muscular arms and a large stomach.
He had spiky light brown hair, shaved at the sides and gelled at the back, and was clean shaven.
He was wearing a waist-length possibly leather jacket, pale blue jeans, a light collarless shirt and white trainers.
The woman also noted that he spoke with a distinctive accent, possibly Irish.
Det Insp Jeff Crowther said: ‘This incident could have been worse if it had gone on for any length of time.’
He appealed for information from anyone who had witnessed the incident, particularly people who might have been leaving the nearby Greenstead social club at about the same time.
Det Insp Crowther also urged anyone who thought they might recognise the attacker from the description to contact Colchester police station on (0206) 762212 or call the Essex Crimestoppers line on (0245) 252252.
Callers using the Crimestoppers line do not have to give their name and so can pass on information in confidence.
New curbs on street drinking ruled out
PROPOSALS to stop people drinking in public places in Colchester have been dropped after police said that their existing powers were adequate.
The borough council's policy and finance committee decided there was no need to create a bylaw banning public drinking in the town centre.
This was in accordance with the advice of senior officers, including town clerk John Cobley.
The committee had previously deferred a decision while it sought the views of the police.
Castle ward councillor Henry Spyvee had been particularly concerned about gangs of drunken youths roaming the streets on Saturday afternoons, leaving broken bottles in their wake.
A letter from Superintendent Julian Field assuaged the fears of most members.
While there would always be problems of this nature in town centres, he wrote: ‘I feel bound to say that, in my view, there is no need for the introduction of such a bylaw in Colchester.’
The situation would be reviewed and if it worsened the council would be informed and asked to reconsider the position.
‘I am hopeful that that would not be necessary,’ said Supt Field.
Town comparisons
Councillors were told that the Home Office would need to be sure that the additional bylaws were needed to cope with a specific problem before they could be approved.
Experiments with such regulations had been tried in other towns and cities during the 1980s, but had met little success.
The sole exception was Coventry, a much larger city that was no real comparison with Colchester.
Sharp rise in number of pupils being excluded
By Charlotte Adcock
BULLYING, fighting, assault and verbal abuse account for almost half the exclusions of pupils from Essex schools, the latest report concludes.
A three-year study of exclusion trends in Essex, published yesterday by the county educational psychology service, also suggests, in line with national trends, that the numbers being excluded or expelled have risen dramatically.
The study reveals that the numbers excluded for a fixed short period (up to five days) has almost doubled in the last three years.
Pupils excluded indefinitely (usually for not more than 15 days) has trebled since 1989.
Pupils expelled permanently has also jumped from 73 to 113, in a school population of 220,000.
It also highlights significant regional variations, possibly reflecting a marked difference in schools' approach to discipline.
Schools in mid, north east and north west Essex resort to excluding pupils far less than elsewhere in the county.
Analysis of secondary schools in the south east revealed a minority were responsible for the majority of all exclusions in the area.
Reasons for exclusions ranged from physical abuse on staff, which accounted for 1.2 per cent of cases, to drugs (4pc), theft (5.5pc), ‘unacceptable behaviour’(17pc), verbal abuse to peers (14.9pc), verbal abuse of staff (12pc), and bullying, fighting or assault on peers (30.1pc).
However, the study found no direct link between the level of social disadvantage in a school, as measured by free school meals, and its exclusion rate.
It concludes that the causes of the increase in exclusions are difficult to define.
Essex education officers are concerned that it is becoming increasingly difficult to find an alternative school for excluded pupils and to match up exam courses.
Heads are becoming more reluctant to take on difficult pupils and the LEA has no powers to force an opt-out school to take any, said officer Nigel Hunt.
He points out, however, that Essex has one of the lowest rates of permanent exclusion in the eastern region — Bedfordshire's rate is four times higher — and the LEA has worked to help schools adopt effective pastoral care.
In November, the Government put forward its own possible solutions for discussion, including fining schools and forcing them to publish their exclusion figures.
Peter Upton, head of the Colne School, Brightlingsea, and an expert on bullying, warned the trend would continue unless the Government stopped blaming schools and realized the need for more resources and an integrated approach to the problem.
The whole network of support had failed and the Government had to recognize its share of the responsibility, he said.
‘Increasingly, the fragile and vulnerable do not have the time, energy or resources diverted to them because they're not available in schools.
‘We are identifying children who have needs but we're not providing the resources to solve the problem.
We are waiting until they crash land and that is no good.’
He dismissed the threat of fining schools as arrogant nonsense and wholly inappropriate.
‘It is a form of bullying and a punitive approach.
It is not a solution.’
The reasons for the increase in unacceptable behaviour, he believes, are varied and complex.
More youngsters are finding their own values clashing with a school's social codes, some are picking up contradictory messages from the media and more are coming from broken or damaged families.
Children are also reacting to the pressure on individuals to compete and succeed, he said.
‘Issues of bullying, truancy and exclusions are all linked to the school culture and ethos.
We're seeing that under pressure to compete, to perform against league tables and a market economy.
Where is the time for the caring?
All schools would say caring was important but it is getting squeezed.’
However, Mr Upton said the figures had to be put into perspective.
Most students went through their school life without being excluded and schools regarded this step as a last resort.
‘I do not believe urban barbarism is about to engulf us.
These are real issues but I think we can solve them.
I passionately believe by working as a team we can help young people to lead happy and successful lives,’ he said.
Sponsor monies call by firemen
THE organisers of Colchester's annual fire-swim have sent out an urgent appeal for sponsorship cash still outstanding from last year's event.
A meeting next week will decide how best to distribute the money, which benefits the Fire Brigade National Benevolent Fund, as well as a number of local charities.
So far, October's 17-hour marathon has raised about £1,200, but a spokesman for the organisers said they were still in the region of £2,000–3,000 short of the expected figure.
He urged any groups with monies outstanding to pay them into the event's special bank account as soon as possible, so that a good idea of the final total could be reached.
They should go to the Royal Bank of Scotland, which has a branch in Head Street, Colchester, and fill out a pay slip for account number 11386303, quoting their team reference number.
Anyone who has forgotten this should call Essex Fire and Rescue A Division headquarters on (0206) 574255.
Report leaked
Restructuring plan triggers strike at Ford
CAR giant Ford is considering a major restructuring plan involving tendering out work which would lead to the loss of about 3,000 jobs throughout Europe, including over 1,000 in the UK, according to a confidential report.
News of a company study into general service work led to an unofficial 24-hour strike by 500 workers at the huge factory in Dagenham, Essex yesterday.
The walkout affected the scheduled building of 980 Fiestas.
Boiler workers are believed to be planning a strike today.
An internal management document, marked confidential, gives details of the restructuring plan.
The main area affected is general services, which arranges the transport of components within Dagenham and between other Ford factories.
Over 300 white collar staff would be among the 3,000 workers throughout Europe to lose their jobs under the plan.
Around 1,150 jobs would be lost in the UK, mainly at Dagenham, by the end of the year according to the document, which was leaked to the Press Association.
‘If this is true, I am shocked and horrified that Ford could engage in such subterfuge and chicanery,’ said Jimmy Airlie, chief Ford negotiator for the giant Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union.
A Ford spokesman admitted the existence of an internal document but said it was a ‘background analysis’ ahead of a full study on contracting out work.
Facelift begins at historic wartime buildings
HISTORIC war department buildings in Essex are being restored to their former glory.Jobless volunteers have started clearing overgrowth from around the wartime buildings at Beacon Hill, Harwich, paving the way for full restoration work in the future.The work is being organised by NACRO, the National Association for the Care and Rehabilitation of Offenders, on behalf of the Essex Training and Enterprise Council.Project supervisor Ray Rawlinson said the 18 people working at Beacon Hill were long-term unemployed and did not have criminal records.The buildings date back to the Napoleonic wars were updated during the first and second world wars.
More recently they have been a popular adventure playground for youngsters.
Museum
‘The idea is for them eventually to be restored completely and turned into a working museum,’ said Mr Rawlinson.
However, he said the whole project, which involves a range of authorities from Tendring District Council to English Nature, could take up to ten years to complete.
Mr Rawlinson said NACRO was busy in Harwich and had recently undertaken work to clear up the town's Bobbitt's Hole nature reserve and The Hangings beauty spot.
Other work included decorating and gardening for elderly people, single parents and disabled people.
Chris Summers tidying up the area around the Second World War gun turret site at Harwich
Over-reaction to offending by young
By Duncan Brodie
THE CONTRADICTORY and yet predictable responses of the great and the good to the problem of crime among the young has made depressing reading in the days since the murder of James Bulger.
A senior church leader suggested that offending by young people could be attributed to their sense of lacking ‘a stake in society’.
A senior Government minister replied that people were being given a stake in society by being allowed to buy their council houses.
The exchange represented the worst of both sides — woolly-minded thinking on the one hand and a blinkered response reducing morality to the level of materialism on the other.
At the risk of sounding like the Spitting Image send-up of the Liberal Democrats during last year's General Election campaign, the truth lies somewhere in between.
John Major was right when he said Britain as a nation should be more prepared to condemn crime, but wrong when he suggested we should be less concerned to understand it.
Unemployment and the poverty it brings can never justify criminal behaviour but it does, very often, explain it and the Conservatives' refusal to accept the fact undermines their entire approach to law and order.
Shadow Home Secretary Tony Blair struck a more balanced note when he promised that Labour would be tough on the criminal and on crime itself, although many will doubt whether the party can achieve this.
Both main parties appear to have fallen for the rhetoric about the rising tide of crime among the young despite statistical evidence which plainly suggests that the problem has declined in recent years.
True, there is a hard core of youngsters who are totally beyond the control of their parents or the social services and whose repeated offending poses a serious problem.
However, police statistics suggest that the total number of such cases is barely more than 100 nationally.
More secure accommodation for the most persistent young offenders, both on remand and after conviction, is certainly required, not least to overcome such nonsense as the case of a teenager from Tyne and Wear having to be sent to a unit in Essex.
But, whatever type of regime is decided upon, locking up 12- to 15-year-olds on the scale likely to result from the Government's present proposals is an excessive reaction.
Dog fouling causes major problems
DOG fouling is a major problem on open spaces in the Witham area, according to a council survey.
The findings are due to be discussed at a future meeting of Braintree District Council's community and leisure committee.
Derek Taylor, the council's director of leisure said: ‘Generally the open space areas are well maintained and are free from major defects.
However some areas are bland and could be improved by significant planting schemes, particularly native species of trees, shrubs and hedgerows which would provide long-term environmental benefits.’
Council officers have also been looking at playgrounds in the Witham area.
Mr Taylor said the play areas in Witham were generally better than most others in the district.
‘However play equipment and safety surfacing is required at several sites and fencing of the play areas is a rarity.
Due to the much poorer state of play areas throughout other parts of the district it may be some time before improvements can be achieved.’
The play area survey shows the one at Maldon Road is the best.
However, at Rickstones Road there has been extensive vandalism.
Another play area — at Joseph Gardens, Silver End — suffers from youths congregating at nights causing problems for nearby residents, the survey revealed.
The council has also uncovered problems with open spaces in the Witham area.
At Flora Road, Witham there have been problems with unauthorised parking by travellers.
At the Rickstones playing field the main problem is dogs fouling the soccer pitches.
Dogs also affect the Silver Street playing field and village hall playing field at Silver End.
Reform urged over prescription charges
DOCTORS' leaders in the region have called for a review of the prescription charge system after the Government's announcement that fees are to increase by 50p in April.
The 13 per cent increase, almost eight times the level of inflation, has been roundly condemned by doctors, nurses, pharmacists and opposition MPs.
Suffolk BMA spokesman Dr David Meldrum said: ‘We are worried by anything which makes it more difficult for ill people to get the drugs they need.’
He said the increase to £4.25 would affect about half the population and could lead to some hard-up patients being forced to go without certain treatments.
Dr Meldrum pointed out that there were a number of anomalies in the present system.
For instance, there was no prescription charge for diabetes sufferers although people with cystic fibrosis had to pay the full amount for their drugs.
Essex spokesman Dr John Cormack said there was a definite danger of a ‘poverty trap’ with the present charge system, with some patients not being able to afford their drugs.
‘I think the whole thing needs to be reformed,’ he said.
‘It really should have somebody sensible from the Exchequer to look at it.’
Mick Marven, Colchester and district representative of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society, said there was a danger of patients being forced into making ‘uneducated choices’ of which medicines to pay for.
Ipswich MP Jamie Cann called the increase ‘a total disgrace’.
‘From my point of view, prescription charges have now reached such a level that they can be properly described as a health tax,’ he said.
Ministers are rebuked for failing to face House on rise
HEALTH ministers were rebuked yesterday in the Commons by Speaker Betty Boothroyd for announcing yesterday's 13 per cent rise in prescription charges by way of a written reply instead of facing MPs.
Shadow health secretary David Blunkett protested that the ‘record’ 50p rise should have been announced in an oral statement to the House, giving members the chance to question it.
He complained that the written reply ‘purported to be pursuant to a written answer’ to a Tory MP's question last month, but that the original question ‘did not mention prescription charge rates or increases’.
Miss Boothroyd said: ‘I deprecate the use of the pursuant device by ministers to make written statements such as this without proper notice to the House.’
She said the Commons procedure committee had found the use by ministers of pursuant answers to be ‘inherently undesirable’.
The committee considered the ‘offence’ to be compounded when an answer claimed to be pursuant to an earlier reply ‘but has only the most tenuous link with it,’she said.
Mr Blunkett has protested to Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley about the way the rise was announced.
In a letter to her he said: ‘Not only did you show discourtesy to the House in refusing to make a statement but your use of a ‘pursuant to’ written answer to make this announcement was deplorable.
I fear you were so desperate to hide the size of the increases in charges you were planning behind the Home Secretary's statement (on juvenile crime), that you simply abused the system.
‘It was a move which was discourteous to the House and an abuse of the procedures of the House.’
Unit plans to end drag for smokers
AN ESSEX health promotion unit has lined up several schemes to encourage smokers to take their final puff on national No Smoking Day on March 10.
Essex Rivers Healthcare health promotion unit will be opening its doors on the day and will welcome smokers wanting advice on how to give up the habit.
Former chest physician Dr Howard Williams and Jayne Devonald, the ‘smoking’ health promotion adviser, will be on hand from 11am to 3pm at the Healthy Colchester Information Shop in Trinity Street to give help to anyone wanting to kick the habit.
For people in the Halstead area Dr John Markham, of The Surgery, Kings Road, Halstead, will be running a display throughout the week.
He hopes to organise a stop smoking group soon.
A competition in which schools are asked to write their own smoking education programme using ideas generated by their pupils is being run by health promotion units in Essex.
All schools in the area have been contacted and are developing strategies to deal with teenage smoking.
School heats are being judged throughout March and the final will be held on March 31 in Chelmsford.
Ms Devonald said: ‘The competition will help the young people to say what they want to know about smoking, which will help them and other classes in the school to be better informed about smoking.’
The John Oliver hairdressing salon in Bank Passage, Colchester, is launching its smoke-free policy on No Smoking Day.
It will be the first completely non-smoking salon in the Colchester area for staff and clients.
Resident partner at the salon Ian Watts said the decision to go smoke-free was prompted by concerns for the health of his staff and clients.
He said: ‘I can tell a smoker's hair since it is more dull and lacks the sheen of a non-smoker.
It also affects the colour of your hair as it causes yellowing, especially on blonde or grey hair.’
Street lights petition ‘backs’ protest claims
OPPONENTS of plans to install new street lights in a Constable Country village claim they now have proof their campaign is supported by a majority of residents.
A petition against the lighting scheme, signed by 280 villagers from Stratford St Mary, has been submitted to the parish council.
Members of the Save Stratford Street action group claim the names represent more than 50 per cent of the village — disproving claims that the parish council scheme has majority backing.
Campaigners now hope parish councillors will abandon their scheme for 30 new lights and accept alternative proposals instead.
The council's next meeting, on Monday, is the last before work on installing the first phase of the new lighting in Upper Street is due to start.
Save Stratford Street spokesman Mark Lockett said: ‘The petition is still open and we are adding to it.
But it was always our intention, because of the urgency of the situation, to present the petition to the council as soon as we had passed the 50 per cent mark.
‘Supporters of the parish council scheme have consistently claimed majority support and dismissed the objectives as a vociferous minority.
This proves them wrong on both counts.
We hope the council will now take the opportunity to act in accordance with the wishes of the majority of villagers.’
Parish council chairman Douglas Steward said the petition would be discussed at next week's meeting.
However, he declined to comment on whether the council was likely to change its mind about the scheme.
An alternative lighting plan for the village has been proposed by the Dedham Vale Society, involving a combination of private house lights and a small number of footway lamps.
Strike threat from firemen in pay fight
ANGRY firefighters are warning that strike action is a possibility if a pay row is not resolved soon.
The stark prediction came after hundreds of fire and rescue workers at meetings in Chelmsford and Cambridge on Tuesday night gave overwhelming support to their union's call for action.
Feelings ran high as Fire Brigade Union general secretary Ken Cameron explained why he believed the firemen should down hoses for the first time since 1977 — the only strike in the union's history.
The crucial issue, union reps say, is not so much the imposition of a maximum 1.5 per cent increase in line with the rest of the public sector but the abandonment of the all-party agreement on the fire service pay formula.
This, the main achievement of the action 16 years ago, has set firemen's pay ever since on a level with top semi-skilled workers in the public and private sectors.
John Crust, FBU branch secretary for north-east Essex, said the mood at the gatherings was determined: ‘Members were asked one question at the end of the meeting — if there was a ballot for strike action tomorrow, how would you vote?
The response was 100 per cent positive.’
However, with Britain deep in recession and more than three million unemployed, some people doubt if the firemen can carry the weight of public sympathy as they did in the 1970s.
Not so, says Mr Crust: ‘Even in this environment, if your house is alight you want a fireman there and you want him there in a reasonable length of time.’
Essex Fire and Rescue Service gave a cautious response to the union's defiant stance.
Although professing support for the retention of the pay formula, senior officers hoped industrial action could be avoided.
Crypt wedding will be allowed
MARRIAGES can take place in the House of Commons crypt but only under a special licence for Church of England ceremonies, Leader of the House Tony Newton said yesterday.
He was responding in a Commons written reply following a row over Labour frontbencher Keith Vaz being refused permission to marry his fiancee Maria Fernandes in the 13th Century Church of England crypt chapel.
The couple are Catholic.
In his reply the Commons Leader said that he was now advised it was possible for a marriage to take place in the crypt chapel if the Archbishop of Canterbury provides a licence.
Hint of success gives heart
AFTER a year-and-a-half of letter writing, phone calling and door knocking, there are rumours the campaign to get sleeping policemen in St Olaves Road, Bury St Edmunds, has succeeded.
Not before time, says Babs Hinchliffe, organiser of Sleeping Policemen Or Tragedy (SPOT), the campaign group behind all the stamp licking and hot-air purveying.
‘I was running out of time to do anything else,’ said Ms Hinchliffe, who has heard the safety bumps could be in place by spring.
The SPOT campaign started in November 1991 when, Ms Hinchliffe says, there were 17 accidents involving children, cars and bicycles in a month.
She and other parents wrote to county and district councillors, and the police, asking for sleeping policemen before there was a tragedy.
Since then Ms Hinchliffe has written regular letters to the council, collected a 300-signature petition, and lobbied on doorsteps and at school gates.
County and borough council reactions have varied from sympathetic to dismissive, she said.
Money is the problem, they said.
‘I sometimes thought I got fobbed off, but everybody is out there campaigning and competing for the money,’ said Ms Hinchliffe.
At one stage, residents offered to lay down the sleeping policemen themselves, but the request was turned down.
However, the most difficult part was keeping campaigners interested.
‘An awful lot of people say they want things done but they are reluctant to stand up and be counted,’ she said.
‘Motivating is a problem.
When you are all up and going they are all for it, but then you arrange a meeting and only six people turn up.’
The work load is heavy.
‘I was chasing around, getting petitions signed, writing letters, running round the schools and talking to parents, but I think if you don't pressurize, you are not going to get anywhere,’ she said.
Financing depended on individual fund-raising events.
It all takes more time and effort, but without the money there is no way forward, she said.
But in the end it was worth it.
‘I have heard a whisper it is possible there will be sleeping policemen in the road in April.
That is what we started for.’
Babs Hinchliffe and four-year-old granddaughter Nikki Wilson hope rumours will soon confirm their campaign's success
Brewery has food manual
East Anglian brewers Greene King have launched a manual on food hygiene believed to be the first of its kind in the brewing industry.
It has been designed to complement the in-house training programme already provided by Greene King.
Launched by Geoff Harrison, senior environmental health officer with St Edmundsbury Borough Council, the Standards Manual is the result of close co-operation between environmental health officers and the firm.
The initiative aims at further enhancing already high standards of food hygiene in tenanted houses.
OAPs back to school for lunch
PENSIONERS joined children at Great Bentley Primary School yesterday for lunch — the second such monthly invitation.
The 32 guests enjoyed roast turkey with roast potatoes and other vegetables followed by sponge pudding and custard for which they paid the going rate.
Some of the 70 children helped to serve the food prepared by the school cooks and sat and chatted with their guests.
Headteacher David Darlington said he had decided to ask the elderly to lunch after seeing how many lived by themselves when he was delivering harvest food parcels in the autumn.
He said that pensioners and children enjoyed the monthly get-together.
After last month's lunch, many pensioners had written to him because they were impressed by the children's confidence and manners.
It gave the children another perspective on life, said Mr Darlington.
Mrs Phyllis Lambert burns off the calories after enjoying lunch at Great Bentley Primary School.
Parents’ fight for probe into pesticides and eye tragedy
THE mother and father of a boy born without eyes are joining other parents to fight for the truth behind their son's rare condition possibly linked to pesticides.
They plan to take their campaign to the House of Lords in an attempt to finally get some answers.
Six-year-old Andrew Bourne, of Skyrmans Fee, Frinton, suffers from anophthalmia — he has no eyeballs and is totally blind.
Parents Maggie, 38, and Chris, 40, are now among a growing group who will be pushing the Government to investigate the link between this tragic condition and the use of pesticides.
Recent investigations have indicated pesticides could be the cause after an ‘epidemic’ of sufferers were found in rural Lincolnshire and South Wales.
Mr and Mrs Bourne were told by experts their son's condition was not genetic, and chemicals were commonly used when Mrs Bourne was pregnant.
Chemical compound benomyl, used by farmers, has been indicated as the possible culprit.
American studies have revealed a direct link between benomyl, anophthalmia and other eye defects.
Mrs Bourne has always said if she could prove chemicals were responsible it would make the tragedy easier to bear, as well as ensuring other children did not become needless victims.
She has great hopes of the new self-help group, which is now determined to press the Government to look at the use of the compound.
About 15 families attended the first meeting and all wanted the group to be both a supporting and fighting unit.
One of the first steps will be to organise genetic counselling for all children not yet tested.
If the genetic link is disproved again this will inevitably give parents more weight when they lobby the Government.
Supporting them is Jack Ashley, Labour MP for Stoke-on-Trent.
The founder of the Hearing and Speech Trust, he is a prominent campaigner for the rights of the disabled.
The group wants to try to open an inquiry in the House of Lords, have a full parliamentary debate, and gather evidence from other European countries which still use benomyl.
Inspectorate concerned
Workers hurt in falls
THE Health and Safety Executive in East Anglia says that the number of people falling from heights at work is a ‘cause for concern.’
National figures show that 1.7 million working days were lost in the financial year 1990–91 because of 16,308 non-fatal falls from heights causing injuries to employees.
Estimates for the level of under-reporting suggest that the actual level of injury was three times this number.
Brian Brunswick, principal inspector in charge of the construction group for East Anglia, said the regional HSE was giving priority to falls because the figures in Suffolk, Norfolk and Essex mirrored the national average.
In Essex recently a main contractor was fined £1,500 and a roofing contractor £3,000 after an incident in which roof edge protection had not been provided.
In Norfolk on one large site there have been three serious accidents involving falls from heights, and in Suffolk a case has just been sent to crown court after a man fell through an asbestos roof on a farm.
Mr Brunswick said: ‘Inspectors are instructed to take tough enforcement action where the legislation is not being complied with.’
HSE inspectors in the Chelmsford and Norwich offices were always willing to give advice to contractors in the prevention of falls from heights.
Mansion owner loses gate wrangle
THE owner of an historic Tudor mansion has been ordered to put back cast-iron gates at the entrance to his drive, at a cost of thousands of pounds.
Patrick Phillips has been at loggerheads with the residents of Long Melford over recently-approved plans to divert part of a public footpath which runs along the approach to his Grade I-listed home Kentwell Hall.
Yesterday, however, villagers were celebrating a decision which they hoped would mark the end of another local controversy which has been running for almost eight years.
The row began in 1985 when Mr Phillips was granted permission to resite the gates at the entrance to the mile-long lime avenue nearer to the house.
Babergh District Council also stipulated the gates should be replaced with something similar, a condition which was never met.
The council took out an enforcement notice and Mr Phillips subsequently appealed to the Department of the Environment, which twice sent an officer to inspect the site.
Now, in a letter dismissing his appeal, the DoE inspector insists that a close relationship exists between the hall and the gateway.
‘The gatepiers without replacement gates detract significantly from the special architectural and historic interest of Kentwell as a whole and its setting,’ he says.
Health cash crisis warning
THE growing number of GP fundholders in Essex is draining more than £250,000 a year from the county's medical watchdog.
Now, the Family Health Services Authority has warned that unless it is given more money, prospective fundholders could be discouraged from joining the scheme.
This comes in the wake of a Labour Party survey showing fundholders nationally making profits as high as £100,000 and being given four times the amount non-fundholders are for spending on computers.
As the EADT reported last month, the number of fundholders in Essex is set to soar over the next year.
The existing 13 practices will be joined by 20 others by the start of next month and a further 25 are preparing to take the plunge in a year's time.
That will mean fundholding GPs covering more than 14 per cent of the county's population.
Fundholders and those planning to join the scheme need huge amounts of support from the FHSA in preparing patient lists, accounts, computer back-up and regular monitoring.
Essex FHSA general manager Graham Butland estimates as much as £150,000 in ‘pure management time’ is already spent each year on these tasks.
Speaking in the medical magazine Pulse , Mr Butland says: ‘I have said to the region that if I feel we are unable to support fundholding we do not believe the number should be increased.’
Deputy chief executive of the FHSA, Martin Lawn, said the real drain on resources is in providing up to £300,000 each year to help fundholders computerise their records — money which is presently not refunded by the regional health authority.
Essex BMA spokesman Dr John Cormack said the figures confirm the Government has favoured fundholding practices at the expense of other GPs.
‘Obviously if the FHSAs are paying out all this money on fundholders there is less of a limited pot for other doctors and their patients,’ he said.
If your village is clogged up with fumes, your house is threatened with being sunk under a reservoir or your road vibrates to the tune of ten-ton lorries each night, you might have something to say about it.
But what if you want to change things?
OLIVER MORGAN spoke to four individuals who stood up to be counted.
Getting Government bureaucrats to take local problems seriously has proved a major headache for a group of village campaigners.
Since 1989, the A143 Rickinghall and Botesdale Bypass Action Group has lobbied the Department of Transport and county council to get work on a bypass round the villages under way.
In December, the DoT decided against granting the £5 million needed for the road, which would stretch from nearby Snape Hill to Red Bridge.
Campaigning is a demanding business and it swallows up a lot of time without guaranteeing success, said group secretary George Knowles.
‘It has taken quite a large chunk out of our lives,’ he said.
It all started with a public meeting in 1989 when an action committee was set up.
The ten-member panel prepared a 20-page dossier detailing reasons why a bypass was needed.
The dossier, which said the town centre was clogged up with traffic, polluted by soot and plagued by accidents, was sent to the county council, DoT, and MPs.
The committee has written hundreds of letters to the council and DoT, held six open meetings a year, arranged visits by MP Michael Lord and visited roads minister Kenneth Carlisle in Westminster, said Mr Knowles.
Volunteers have raised money for headed notepaper, travel expenses and visits.
Coffee mornings, ploughman's lunches, demonstrations and protest meetings are the stuff of the day-to-day campaigning money-go-round.
‘I do not resent the time, but I do resent the fact we have not secured anything.
‘It is not a full-time job but you do have to dedicate part of your life to it,’ said Mr Knowles.
‘It is rewarding in a way, if you can get the results.
We have got support from Suffolk County Council.
‘That is one part of it but it can be very depressing if you lose out, like in December.’
The campaigners found some people helpful, others not.
‘We had strong support from the county council, they were very helpful indeed.
‘They came out to our meetings to help us, to encourage us, and they helped us present our case to the Government.
‘The DoT has not given us definite promises and has discouraged us from expecting too much.
‘One felt at times they were not fully taking in how serious our problem was,’ he said.
‘It has certainly taken a great deal of time for myself and the other ten or so members of our committee.
‘We feel very frustrated by the fact we have not achieved any result.
‘I feel the small man has less and less chance of achieving anything because much more power these days is being drawn into central government in Whitehall.’
Action committee chairman Charles Greenhough, left, and secretary George Knowles campaigning to get approval for a start date on the planned Rickinghall and Botesdale bypass.
Pictures by ANDY ABBOTT
Learn to help save lives
COULD you save a life?
This is the question the St John Ambulance brigade is asking as it launches its Breath of Life campaign.
More than 600 people a day die of a heart attack in the UK and many lives are lost because no-one knows what to do in an emergency.
St John Ambulance, sponsored by Barclays Bank, is offering free resuscitation courses in Essex, so every household in the county could have a trained first aider.
Breath of Life courses are being held in Chelmsford at the Marconi Works, New Street, on March 26 at 7.15 pm, March 30 at 7.15 pm, April 4 at 2 pm, April 13 at 7.15 pm and April 16 at 7.15 pm.
Venues
Marconi College, Arbour Lane, Chelmsford, will host courses for 11 to 15-year-olds on March 29 at 6.30 pm and April 5 at 6.30 pm.
Courses will be held at Christ Church, Stoneham Street, Coggeshall, on March 24 at 9.30 am and 8 pm, March 29 at 9.30 am and March 31 at 8 pm.
Other courses in Essex will be held at Grays, Harlow, Pitsea, Southend, Epping and Wickford.
For information about those and the courses in Chelmsford and Coggeshall telephone Breath of Life on freephone (0800) 226226.
Light on the subject
THE LIGHTS will soon go on again in the memorial gardens at Walton on the Naze, following a dispute between Tendring District Council, Frinton and Walton branch of the Royal Air Forces Association, and Walton's Royal British Legion about the cost of floodlighting.
The lights have been off for several months, bringing a protest from the RAFA.
The district council said there was no budget to meet the £900 annual charge for floodlighting the memorials, and someone must accept the cost.
Tony Finnegan-Butler, chairman of Frinton and Walton Town Council, said yesterday he had managed to persuade the district council to switch the lights on again for a period of four hours at a reduced expenditure.
Nancy Wright, RAFA secretary said: ‘I am over the moon with the news.
We have had so much vandalism in the gardens including the removal of the Columbine VC bust.
Floodlighting can only discourage vandalism.’
Protesters defy planners in battle to save field
A GROUP of villagers has taken on planners who want to build on council land used until recently as village playing fields.
The campaigners from Horseheath, near Haverhill, found support from their MP in their battle to stop South Cambridgeshire District Council revoking a licence allowing the village to use the 1.3 acre field so it can build on part of it.
Mike O'Connor, a member of the village community association and a leading campaigner, said the association and Horseheath Parish Council were strongly against the council plans.
The village association committee runs the village hall which stands on the field.
It started campaigning against the council plans when they emerged last year.
Threatened with the loss of the field, it found a local landowner who was willing to give land just outside the village to build on in a ‘land swap’ and approached the council.
The council refused the swap scheme, saying it would not alter village boundaries.
So Mr O'Connor asked MP James Paice to visit the village to see if the villagers had a case.
He said they did but the council stuck firm against the land swap.
Mr O'Connor said the campaign so far had taken a lot of time and effort, with mixed results.
‘Initially everyone was extremely co-operative, but soon we weren't sure whether we had the backing of our district council.
It seemed a bit lukewarm, and we felt we had to go it alone.
‘The MP came out to see what the scare was.
He was the only one who came out.
He fully agreed to enlarging the village,’ said Mr O'Connor.
He said he understood the village needed more housing but said the council had been ‘heavy handed’.
‘I was on the other end of the question for most of my life as a British Telecom customer manager, and I always tried to see the view of the underdog, because there is just a chance he might be right,’ he said.
Villagers unite against flood plan
PETER Tarry's livelihood is under threat.
His home and farmland, upwards of 300 acres, could be submerged along with some 50 other homes if a reservoir at Great Bradley, near Newmarket, is built.
Mr Tarry joined other threatened villagers nearby to form the Residents for Stour Valley Preservation (RSVP), aiming to persuade the National Rivers Authority (NRA) to reconsider its plans.
In January the NRA announced proposals for an alternative site for the reservoir which could save Mr Tarry, who lives in the village of Brinkley, and his neighbours in Carlton and Bradley.
RSVP was formed soon after the NRA announced it was considering building the reservoir in spring 1991.
Concerned villagers held a public meeting and soon attracted residents with skills to offer the campaign, including a solicitor and water engineer.
Backing also came from leading local landowners.
RSVP sent letters to MPs, the National Farmers Union, asking for help in getting the NRA to back down.
Last autumn they met NFU leader David Naish, who gave the group his support.
Mr Tarry said he had devoted a lot of time going to meetings and discussing what to do next.
‘It has been time-consuming, but I feel well-rewarded for our efforts,’ he said.
However, he was not happy with the way the NRA had dealt with the campaign.
‘They have not been very helpful.
For example, it was disappointing to have an NRA meeting called in Newmarket recently without Brinkley Parish being invited.’
He has lived at his Glebe Farm home for more than 30 years but had not relished fighting for its survival.
‘I have not enjoyed campaigning, I have far more enjoyable things to do than try and save my livelihood and my home.
It is very oppressive,’ he said.
Campaigning depended on the group's commitment.
Any rethink by the NRA would be down to the persistence of the members, he said.
‘I think success depends on people getting together and getting committed people to help.
Then taking on the Goliaths is possible.’
Sponsors may name highway junctions
HUNDREDS of new landmarks to help plot journeys through the highways and byways of Essex are soon to emerge with the advent of named roundabouts.
County councillors yesterday gave permission for every roundabout to be given an official identity, if possible that of the name already used locally.
They also voted to allow companies and individuals to sponsor the landscaping and maintenance of roundabouts.
This is unconnected to the naming policy, but roundabouts could obviously become known by whatever company name appears on its billboards.
The decisions came at a meeting of a sub-committee of the highways committee.
The council will not initiate a wholesale naming of roundabouts, but will consider any request to have one named.
Many roundabouts in Essex are traditionally known by whatever pub stands nearby, and some councillors were concerned that names would change whenever the pub changed hands.
It was agreed however that a ‘Red Lion Roundabout’ should remain so named, even if the pub later changed its name to ‘Rose and Crown.’
The name of each roundabout will be placed above advance direction signs only when these have to be taken down for maintenance work, so cutting down on costs.
It is believed that the naming of roundabouts will help navigation and provide an identity for the entrance to built-up areas.
Sponsored roundabout signs will not be allowed if they could cause a traffic hazard.
Woman tells of dismissal by hospital
A CHILDLESS woman was sacked from her job at a private hospital after she took time off to recover from the loss of surrogate twins, it was said.
An industrial tribunal heard that Michelle Mawdsley, 24, was signed off work by her doctor because she was suffering from depression after her sister lost the babies she was carrying for her.
Four weeks later when Mrs Mawdsley returned to her job as a credit controller at Renacres Hall Hospital in Ormskirk, Lancs, she was dismissed for ‘abusing the company's sickness pay scheme.’
The Liverpool tribunal heard that Mrs Mawdsley, of Southport, could not have children and that her sister Kimi had been successfully impregnated with her eggs.
When Kimi lost the babies last April, her sister took four days off.
Mrs Mawdsley then asked administration manager Dave McCreary if she could take two weeks' annual leave and a week's unpaid leave to go on holiday.
This was refused as another member of staff was away.
Mr McCreary told the tribunal: ‘As she was leaving my office, she said: ‘I suppose what I should have done was take the time off sick anyway.
That is what I was going to do’.’
He said Mrs Mawdsley's husband phoned him the following evening to say she had seen her doctor and had been signed off for a month.
He told hospital matron Elizabeth Proffitt and when Mrs Mawdsley did not appear at work the following Monday, she asked their head office for advice.
Mrs Proffitt told the tribunal she was advised to hold a disciplinary hearing and she wrote to Mrs Mawdsley, who did not respond to the letters.
It became clear she was on holiday, and when she returned to work a disciplinary hearing was held and she was sacked.
‘By stating that she would take sick time because her holiday request had been denied, she appeared to be abusing the company sick scheme,’ said Mrs Proffitt.
Mrs Mawdsley, who is claiming unfair dismissal, said she had been ‘suicidal’ over the loss of the babies.
Her counsellor had said she was not fit to be at work.
The case was adjourned until May 4.
Shabby schools pay price for publicity say Labour
THE Government is neglecting crumbling schools in Essex while spending millions of pounds on its own education propaganda, the Labour Party claimed yesterday.
Shadow Education Secretary Ann Taylor accused the Government of cutting back on spending on school repairs but spending £6.8 million — almost three times its original budget — on education publicity.
She said: ‘This Government is always saying it does not have the money to spend on essentials for our children's education.
But this year they are spending more than £6 million on propaganda for their own silly experiments.’
She went on to issue a challenge to parents: ‘The Government is allowing Essex to spend as little as £62 per child for a whole year.
Do you think this is enough to provide safe buildings for children?
What would you rather — your money be invested in buildings or more Government self-promotion?’
Ms Taylor said the Government had failed to invest in schools in Essex.
The county asked to borrow almost £46m for capital projects but had only been allowed to spend £11.64m on school buildings — a cut back of almost 50 per cent on last year's spending.
Councillors have now agreed to top up capital spending on its 700 schools to £15m from council funds.
The county's 22 opt-out schools by contrast have been awarded a total of £5.4m in the latest round of Government capital grants.
Chelmsford Tory MP Simon Burns dismissed Labour's claims as ‘poppycock’.
Capital spending per pupil nationally had risen by 7 per cent in real terms since 1979, he said.
‘The figures must be put into context — it's £6.8m on information out of a total education budget of £9.5 billion.
The rules on how any government spends money on advertising are strictly controlled.
It is not party political propaganda but information for the general public.’
When asked if he thought Essex's capital allocation was adequate, Mr Burns replied: ‘Nothing is ever adequate by definition — everyone wants more money.
What you want to make sure is that with finite resources, each public spending sector gets as much as possible.’
He dismissed suggestions opted-out schools were getting privileged treatment.
‘These are new schools and they have got money for projects they want and need.
My advice to every school is go for grant-maintained status.’
WI members aim to curb dog fouling
WOMEN'S Institute members from across west Suffolk yesterday urged local councils to crack down on dog fouling.
Delegates at the annual meeting of the Suffolk West Federation of Women's Institutes want councils to ensure dog owners use poop-scoops and plastic bags to remove excrement from public areas.
Chairman Sylvia Robinson said most delegates, who met at the Corn Exchange, in Bury St Edmunds, felt strongly about the issue.
They are concerned about the health risk to children and hope local councils will act to improve the situation, she said.
More than 80 women's institutes sent delegates to the day-long annual meeting, said Mrs Robinson.
As well as discussing the dog fouling issue they heard that the federation is planning to compile a book called In Living Memory — based on memories of members from all over Suffolk.
Mrs Robinson said the book is a joint project between the federations from west and east Suffolk.
After lunch the delegates were treated to a talk from Irene Thomas, who is a regular panelist on Radio Four's Round Britain Quiz.
She spoke about her life and at the end of the day she offered to iron out a last minute hitch when the pianist failed to turn up.
Ms Thomas took to the piano and played the National Anthem, which is how the meeting is traditionally rounded off.
A light-hearted moment during the annual meeting of the Suffolk West Federation of Women's Institutes at Bury St Edmunds yesterday 
AIDS GP broke NHS rules
A DOCTOR was allowed to carry on working after telling fellow general practitioners he had contracted AIDS, health officials revealed yesterday.
The practice he worked for in Bolton, Lancashire, did not notify the area health authority or tell patients of his illness.
The doctor, who died last summer, broke health service guidelines when he worked for six shifts in a casualty department without warning the hospital involved, it was claimed.
Bolton Health Authority, which says it learned only on Friday night that the doctor was an AIDS victim, is writing to all 260 patients he treated at the hospital and will make sure they are all contacted and offered counselling and tests if required.
‘Only a handful may have had a minor invasive procedure,’ said Dr Peter Povey, Bolton's director of public health, adding the risk to patients was negligible.
However a special helpline for patients, set up on 0204 390999, received 100 calls in the first couple of hours.
The doctor, who worked in general practice in Bolton from August 1991 to February 1992, is not being named by the authority, and officials are refusing to confirm reports that he was a trainee GP in the West Haughton area of the town.
Nuclear base protest
HUNDREDS of women peace protesters plan to paralyse a top nuclear weapons base with a blockade.
Women from all over the country will stage a mass sit-in at the atomic weapons establishment in Burghfield, Berks, today after a protest outside the gates yesterday.
The peace activists hope to stop a nuclear convoy leaving the base, and say they are prepared to go to jail for their cause.
Women could face health risk from solvents
GOVERNMENT health watchdogs are to carry out a survey of women working in computer microchip factories amid fears they may suffer a higher risk of miscarriage.
The survey, costing £85,000 and taking up to two years to complete, has been prompted by American studies which have led to calls for the banning of some chemicals.
A spokesman for the Health and Safety Executive said: ‘Plans are advanced for the study in the UK, in collaboration with the industry.
The plans are being reviewed to take account of the recent U.S. studies.’
One American investigation reportedly found women working on silicon chips were 40 per cent more likely to miscarry than most women.
The U.S. studies have drawn attention to the use of glycol ethers — solvents used to etch circuits on to silicon wafers.
A 1986 U.S. study found an increased risk to expectant mothers, but this was said to be a small sample, which was followed by two further studies.
MEMBERS of a Rotaract club rolled up their sleeves, donned wellies and spent a morning in a river, to mark the group's 25th birthday.
Eleven Halstead Rotaract members cleaned up part of the River Colne, between the mill and the town's High Street before having a birthday party — in the middle of the flowing water.
Halstead Rotaract treasurer Emma Samms said: ‘We thought we would do something different to mark the 25th anniversary of Rotaract.’
The two hour clean-up produced more than 200 bottles and glasses, two supermarket trolleys, a set of brass weighing scales, a video and a skate board.
‘It was absolutely full of rubbish,’ she said.
After Saturday morning's clean-up the 11 set out a plastic patio table and chairs, and were helped by town mayor Jackie Pell to stage the birthday party in the river.
Members of Halstead Rotaract Club enjoy a tea party after their clean-up
New grading scheme aims to close the gap between pass and fail
It is all change in the world of education again as teachers and pupils prepare for next year's introduction of a new GCSE grading system.
SHARON ASPLIN reports
‘Everyone is so concerned with levels and tests we are in danger of forgetting education.’
Traditionalists sighed when the 11-plus was phased out and held up their hands in horror at the death knell of the O-level.
Now the goalposts are moving again, with the changes to the way its replacement, the GCSE, is being marked.
From summer 1994, 16-year-olds sitting the exam will no longer be graded from A to G. Instead, they will receive a number from ten down to four to show their level of attainment.
But the crux of the change is the end of the grade C, generally accepted as a pass rate.
Grades A and B are being replaced with levels nine and eight respectively and the new Super A will be the equivalent of ten.
But grades C, D and E, instead of becoming numbers seven, six and five are being absorbed into just two numbers, seven and six, thus blurring that distinctive C cut-off point.
The scheme appears to have pleased no-one.
Traditionalists feel it is another move to the unrealistic ‘no-one's a failure, everyone's a winner’ mentality.
Teachers, many of whom agree in principle, are worried the changes are being rushed through without the public, particularly employers, being educated about them.
A spokesman for the School Examinations and Assessment Council, which devises the exam and National Curriculum tests, said the grading change brought the GCSE more into line with National Curriculum tests.
Equating grade C with a pass was just historical, harking back to the days of the O-level, he explained, and the Government was keen to get away once and for all from the pass/fail idea.
‘We are hoping to give children plus points all the time,’ he said.
‘This gives them something to strive for and something they will be proud to take to future employers.’
But he admitted inevitably employers would try to translate the grades and probably pick applicants with higher marks.
Later this year, he said, the Government planned to explain the changes to employers.
But many teachers feel this will be too late to make the public stop comparing them to the O-level system.
Peter Upton, principal of Colne High School, Brightlingsea, is not against the scheme, but is worried about how it will work: ‘When we measure these new levels are we raising the standards or are we lowering them?
Or are we changing the rules altogether?
‘If we are changing them, what will it mean to employers, universities and colleges and how are we going to make sure the system is clear to the students?’ he asked.
Businessmen still referred to the O-level, he said, and it would be difficult to make them understand the new way and ensure all attainment levels, from the beginning of the National Curriculum at the age of seven to the end at 16, were fair and consistent.
‘The trouble is now everyone is so concerned with levels and tests we are in danger of forgetting education,’ he said.
‘The real problem is once again the Government is trying to rush through a complex pattern of assessment without the resources or time to give it the proper foundations.
‘I just want to get it right and make sure I do the best for each of the students in my charge.’
The school's curriculum manager and acting vice-principal, Phil Dean, said there was a lot of uncertainty over the new number seven overlapping the old C and D grades.
Teachers whose fourth-year pupils have already started working towards the 1994 exams, are working blind as it is impossible to know how these levels will be viewed until after the results are published.
Tutor groups will be held at the Colne High School with workshops to explain the changes to parents.
The school also plans to target employers in its area.
Tests are being devised for children with special needs expected to attain lower levels three to one.
The A-level is also being looked at by the School Examinations and Assessment Council, but ideas are in still in the very early stages.
Pupils at Colne High School learn about the new GCSE grading system
Patten warns teachers on boycott of tests
EDUCATION Secretary John Patten yesterday warned teachers threatening to boycott school tests that they risked damaging themselves and their pupils.
He urged the NASUWT, which has said its members will not carry out tests scheduled for this summer, to think again before going through with its ban.
‘If the NASUWT goes ahead with its threats of boycotting all tests at all levels this summer it will be doing terrible damage to children, it will cause enormous distress and concern to parents and it will damage the professional standing and status of teachers,’ he said.
Speaking on Radio 4's World This Weekend he added: ‘Their action would also call into doubt in children's minds just what authority figures are there for.’
He said outright opposition to tests was an ‘ancient attitude’ and appealed to the other main teaching union, the NUT, not to join the boycott.
‘I just hope common sense prevails,’ he said.
‘I can't believe that a trade union like the NASUWT, let alone the NUT, would wish to put children's education at risk, would wish to disturb parents, would wish to affect their own professionalism, would wish to diminish their own standing in the eyes of the children that go to their schools.’
He repeated a pledge that the success of this summer's new English tests will be evaluated by an independent educational research institute whose views will be considered when next year's tests were set.
Claims that the English tests had not been properly prepared were dismissed as being ‘without any validity at all,’ and he stressed the importance of the tests in identifying pupils with reading difficulties at an early age so they could be given extra help.
Earlier, claims that the teachers' boycott was illegal because the National Curriculum and associated testing and assessment was required under the 1988 Education Act the law were vigorously rejected by NASUWT general secretary Nigel de Gruchy.
Scheme to ease traffic danger
WORK should be completed this week on safety measures being put in place on a busy road outside an infants school where a crossing patrol was axed.
Parents protested when highways chiefs proposed to withdraw the lollipop person from outside Fairfield Infants in High Road West, Felixstowe.
They claimed the road was dangerous, and the crossing was reprieved but later axed.
Within a few yards of the school are a filling station, fire station, police HQ, and the entrance to the rail station and Great Eastern Square shopping complex car park.
Work is under way on a £5,000 project to help people cross the road more safely.
Suffolk County Council is building ramped crossing points on either side of the road, plus an island in the centre of the carriageway.
Special paving slabs, which make it easier for blind and partially-sighted pedestrians to distinguish the crossing have been introduced.
Highways officials say position of the crossing point provides the greatest safety benefit to the most vulnerable road users, and maintains free access and exit from the fire station and garage.
It will also narrow the width of the road, reducing vehicle speeds.
GCSE exams are ‘a backward step’
NEW GCSE examinations represent a backward step by right-wing Tories towards the school tests of the 1950s, a union official claims.
Bob Ashford, Essex county secretary for the National Association of Schoolmasters and Union of Women Teachers (NASUWT), is convinced the format of the exam, rather than the way it is marked is the crucial issue.
The vast majority of employers, he said, hardly took GCSE results into account when taking on youngsters, because they often recruited weeks before results came out.
Instead, he believes, they rely on advice from teachers about whether or not an applicant would be compatible.
The significant change, according to Mr Ashford, is the reduction in coursework in the GCSE in favour of the final exam.
When the exam was introduced there was outcry as people realised English in some areas was being marked on 100 per cent course work with no final examination.
‘Now there is a greater unpredictability about the final result,’ he said.
‘These examinations are not going to provide the skills that employers of the 1990s and the 21st century want.
We need to judge thinking ability as opposed to memory recall.’
Mr Ashford said the exams harked back to those of the 1950s when memory was all that mattered and certain sections of right-wing politicians were totally committed to them.
‘I believe education is a right in itself, not merely a means of getting a job.
‘said Mr Ashford.
‘But it is foolish to ignore this important element in preparing for work.’
Doug Pallett —‘people go to school to learn’
Hardliner attacks changes to system
DOUG Pallett, who sits on Essex County Council's education committee, makes no secret of the fact he is an educational hardliner.
And he cannot understand the way the education system in Britain, once admired across the world, has been allowed to rot.
‘People go to school to learn,’ he said, ‘and if they go to school to learn, at the end of the day they have to be marked in such a way that future employers or colleges know what they have achieved.’
If the system changed every five minutes nobody would know what was going on, he said.
‘You will get to a point, if we have not got there already, when exam passes will be meaningless.
We should never have scrapped the O-level and we must certainly keep the A-level.’
Yardstick
He is convinced everybody needs a clear yardstick against which performances can be judged.
He is not against the National Curriculum, and accepts O-levels needed updating, but feels the new system does little to indicate to the ordinary man in the street what is going on.
‘Everybody has different talents and some people can do things and some people cannot,’ he said.
‘Children with no conception of success or failure can be kidded into believing they can do any job.
The damage being done to the education system does not benefit anyone and certainly not the youngsters.’
The latest changes have taken children further and further away from the values of a good British education and have left them ill-equipped to cope in a real world where success or failure mattered, he said.
Probably the worst side of it was the disincentive for children to try.
He asks: why should they work hard to achieve when by working hard and achieving they came out seemingly no better qualified than anyone else?
Calm
‘Teachers have got enough on their plates with all these changes,’ he said.
‘There should be a period of calm to allow some of the earlier changes, most of which I support, to bed in,’ he added.
considered was lacking under previous systems.
Derek Lamberth, vice-chairman of Essex education committee, said councillors would soon be discussing a consultation paper from the Government about the implications of the grading, along with other issues, such as truancy.
He was particularly pleased to see higher achievers being rewarded with a Super A or a 10 mark which would recognise their talents, something which he
Trend continues
Decline in pay rises
PAY increases continued to fall in the three months to the end of February, figures out today show.
The rate of increase slipped to 3 per cent during the period compared with 3.6pc in the three months to the end of January, the Labour Research Department said in a survey of more than 600 settlements.
A year ago the rate of increase was 4.7pc, according to the independent trade union and labour movement group, which covers unions representing 98pc of TUC membership.
Survey of absenteeism
Cost of sickness £13bn
ABSENTEEISM through sickness is costing employers a huge £13 billion a year, according to a survey today.
It shows that companies recording absences manually are likely to have higher incidences of the problem than those keeping computerised records.
The CBI said 166 million working days were lost through sickness in 1992 — with an average per worker in both the public and private sectors of eight days.
Blue collar workers lost ten days a year in manufacturing and services, compared with five days for white collar workers in manufacturing, and six days for those in service industries.
The survey by personnel software house Perco identified unskilled workers as the most likely to go sick.
Seven out of ten companies said absenteeism was concentrated on individuals within that group.
The public sector has the worst record for absenteeism through sickness.
Another survey found that many employers regard staff over the age of 45 as ‘over the hill’.
The survey, by Industrial Relations Services in Equal Opportunities Review, looked at 4,000 job advertisements for evidence of age bias — and found that four out of five asked for applicants to be under 45.
Half gave age limits of 35 or under and in the private sector most gave age preferences.
Health chiefs identify AIDS death doctor
A HEALTH authority last night named the doctor who died from AIDS after working in a group practice and in hospitals.
It was also revealed that Dr Yarab Almahawi, 33, was first identified as HIV positive while working in a hospital casualty department in Northern Ireland.
Dr Almahawi also worked for some months at the Unsworth group practice in Westhoughton, near Bolton, Greater Manchester and as a locum at a local hospital, before his death in May 1992.
The Bolton Area Health Authority was forced to reveal his identity after he was named in local newspapers.
Chief executive Mr Richard Sutherland said the partners at the practice did not know he had worked as a locum at Bolton Royal Infirmary and the doctor had not told the infirmary he was HIV positive.
He said all patients seen by Dr Almahawi at the infirmary had been identified and were being contacted.
‘We stress again that the risk to patients is minimal and there is no evidence that a patient has ever been infected with HIV from a doctor,’ said Mr Sutherland.
Dr Peter Povey, Bolton's director of public health, confirmed that there was no set mechanism to enable different hospitals and medical practices to be told if a doctor was HIV positive.
Dr Wirin Bhatiani, a senior partner with the Unsworth practice, said the doctor worked in the practice as a GP trainee from August 1991 to March 1992.
He had told partners of his HIV status and before he started work advice was taken from his specialists.
Dr Bhatiani said Dr Almahawi did not undertake any surgery with the practice and Department of Health guidelines on doctors with HIV were followed fully.
Dr Almahawi had earlier worked as a junior doctor, assisting in operations in the South Tyrone Hospital, Dungannon, in periods from 1988 to 1990.
After being diagnosed as HIV positive he was transferred to the Craigavon Hospital, Craigavon, Armagh, where he was not involved in any surgery.
A year later he worked for six months for the Eastern Health and Social Services Board in the Belfast area.
South Tyrone hospital, where AIDS doctor Yarab Almahawi was diagnosed to have the disease
Animals left behind as couple moved house, court told
By Stephen McDowell
A COUPLE who caused suffering to their pets by deserting them when they moved house have been banned from keeping animals for five years.
RSPCA inspector Ron Summers visited Clive and Doreen Howard's former home in Swinburn Road, Ipswich, with a housing officer on a hot August day last year and found a rabbit in a polythene-covered hutch.
It had bedding but no food or water and when Mr Summers supplied water it drank without stopping for almost five minutes.
He also found five fish swimming in murky water in an old bathtub.
A council carpenter was called and the men entered the house, said Anthony Owens, prosecuting yesterday at Ipswich Magistrates' Court.
Inside the house Mr Summers found a family of cats shut in the bathroom.
A black female cat sat on the floor while her three kittens squealed in the bath, said Mr Owens.
Empty food dishes were strewn across the floor and two milk bottles were in the bath, one full of solidified milk.
The cats shared their room with an overflowing litter tray.
Mr Owens said that on further investigation the RSPCA officer found a terrapin in a glass tank with no food.
The inspector removed the cats and took them to the RSPCA home in Martlesham.
They have since been rehomed.
When interviewed, Clive Howard said he went every morning to feed the animals, particularly the cats, who were given a free run of the house.
Both Howards, now of Hawke Road, Ipswich, admitted four charges of causing unnecessary suffering to the fish, rabbit, cats and terrapin.
They were not legally represented and declined to mitigate on their own behalf.
They were each fined £50, ordered to pay £75 costs and banned from keeping animals for five years.
High cost and dangers of N-power
Sir,— Doug McRoberts, media relations manager for Nuclear Electric, is either disingenuous or ill-informed in his attacks (EADT, March 11) on David Ridley's well-balanced feature on energy of March 9.
Mr McRoberts omits to tell your readers the following interesting facts:
1: In the U.S. — home of nuclear technology — no new nuclear power stations have been ordered since 1978, principally on grounds of cost.
2: The market share for nuclear electricity in the UK may slightly increase to about 25 per cent in 1995, but it will decline to a mere 1pc by the year 2020 (source: DTI Energy Paper 59, 1992).
3: It is generally accepted that nuclear electricity is everywhere more expensive than other forms of generation when the brushed-aside costs of decommissioning and dealing with its wastes are included, as ultimately they must.
4: The International Atomic Energy Agency has voiced its fears (post-Chernobyl) at the dangerous state of about 50 reactors in Eastern Europe, which nevertheless continue to run.
5: Also, the French government's Directorate for Safety has just expressed grave concern at the recent discovery of radioactive leaks in 50pc of the steel-nickel domes of its PWRs.
This fault has also occurred in German and Swiss PWRs and might be present in PWRs in Sweden, Spain and the Netherlands.
6: According to the House of Commons Energy Committee, the price of PWR-generated electricity will be 6.5p per unit (even with interest on borrowed money during construction omitted), two to three times the cost of fossil-fuel generation.
7: Nirex, the body appointed by the Government to find an underground repository (dump) for intermediate level nuclear waste had admitted it has not solved the problems associated with the migration of radionuclides into the biosphere.
8: As for high level wastes, no-one has demonstrated (can they?) how these wastes can be safely isolated and guarded for the necessary one million years — a geological time span reaching out to our 40,000th generation…
Mr McRoberts, instead of criticising Mr Ridley, would do well to reflect on the House of Commons Energy Committee's judgment on nuclear power: ‘It will never again be possible to take assurances as to the viability of any type of nuclear power on trust.’
CHARLES BARNETT (chairman Shut Down Sizewell Campaign),
Tudor House, Dunwich.
Teachers' boycott ‘breaks the law’
HEAD teachers in Essex will not dismiss staff who boycott National Curriculum tests, despite threatened legal action from right-wing campaigners.
But Suffolk governors, who share hiring and firing responsibilities with their school heads, have refused to rule out disciplinary action.
A hard-line pressure group, the Campaign for Real Education (CRE), says it will take head teachers and governors to court if they fail to take action against ‘obstructive’ members of staff.
But the Essex secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT), Norman Taylor, said: ‘There will not be any dismissals of teachers.
We have a legal responsibility to administer the tests, but if that cannot be done, it will not be done.
‘Our members have a great deal of sympathy with what is being done and they would not encourage tests to be taken by supply teachers or other teachers, especially at primary school level.’
Comment
The National Association of Governors and Managers (NAGM) does not have an Essex branch, but ‘the vast majority of governors will be working alongside teachers’, Mr Taylor said.
Suffolk NAGM secretary Margaret Young said members ‘shared the concerns of teachers’ but would not comment on whether disciplinary action would be taken.
No NAHT representatives were available to clarify the county's position.
CRE chairman, Nick Seaton, has accused the National Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers of acting illegally by instructing its members to boycott all Standard Assessment Tests.
But the union, which has nearly 4,500 teachers in the two counties, says it is acting in accordance with trade union law.
This week it is sending out instructions to members not to administer or mark the tests.
It is not, however, opposed to any other form of assessment in schools.
Suffolk secretary Konrad Machej said: ‘Teachers will be spending more time teaching, which is what parents really want.’
Girl in care ‘worked as a prostitute’
CARE workers at a children's home were unaware that a 15-year-old girl in their charge was going out to work as a prostitute.
Forced by her boyfriend, it is alleged, the girl sold sex for up to £90 a session and there was nothing staff at the Suffolk County Council home could do about it, Ipswich Crown Court was told yesterday.
‘Unfortunately, we cannot do anything about it.
We cannot lock these children up,’ said a care worker.
Judge John Turner, who ordered that the girl should not be identified in media reports, described this situation as ‘terribly strange’.
Mark Ellis, 23, of Burrell Road, Ipswich, denies four charges — causing the girl to become a prostitute, living off her earnings, permitting a flat to be used for unlawful sex and himself having sex with a girl under 16.
Karim Khalil, prosecuting, said the girl met Ellis while she was living in the home.
They struck up a relationship and there came a point at which they were in conversation with prostitutes.
Ellis, who was unemployed and living on benefit, hit upon the idea that the girl should go out to work as a prostitute, it was claimed.
At first her earnings of up to £90 for each sex session were split down the middle with Ellis.
It was alleged that Ellis then became aggressive and started slapping her about, making her reluctant to work as a prostitute.
Later he was not content with half of her earnings and wanted most of it.
She would hide some of the money in her bra.
The court heard that eventually, the police went to a flat and found a tin containing 35 condoms.
When interviewed by police, Ellis claimed he had tried to dissuade the girl from working as a prostitute.
Among those giving evidence were two care workers, who said the girl regularly arrived back to the home in the early hours of the morning and sometimes not at all.
The trial continues today.
Boyfriend denies sex charges
Telling the transplant story from the inside
In the final part of our feature on transplants, EADT reporter David Carter, right, recounts his own personal experience
IT IS now four-and-a-half years since my transplant operations.
At times it still feels like yesterday, otherwise it seems a lifetime away.
I first realised something was drastically wrong during late February-early March 1986.
It was diagnosed eventually as congenital heart failure, though at first doctors thought it was liver failure, but it had also affected the lungs.
After a month's stay at UCH (University College Hospital in Central London) I was transferred to specialist cardiologist Dr Jane Sommerville at the then National Heart Hospital.
It has now moved sites and is part of the Royal Brompton.
In the late summer of 1986 I was told the answer was a transplant.
Dr Sommerville, accompanied by a group of junior doctors (the National Heart was considered a teaching hospital) told me: ‘I was looking at your case notes yesterday evening and I know exactly what the answer is — a transplant.’
The reaction was ‘Oh no, a heart transplant.’
Find yourself making news rather than writing about it — until now I never have written about it.
No, she said, the damage had already been done and what was needed was a heart and lung transplant.
I remember walking out into the bright sunlight of a late summer's day in central London thinking: ‘Oh God, how the hell do I tell people?’
The answer is slowly, one by one.
At the end of 1986 I was put on the waiting list and stopped work.
I was not to work again full time until the end of 1988.
Throughout 1987 the world went on, life carried on, yet I felt I was not part of it.
I could do little without becoming breathless and was unable to walk far.
I became expert at daytime TV quiz shows — there was not much else to do.
As the months drag by you find out who are true friends and who doesn't really give a damn.
This really is the hardest part — waiting.
At the end of 1987 I was again in hospital and was then top priority, according to Magdi Yacoub, or MY, or the Prof, depending on whom you talked to.
The operation did not happen until the end of June that year.
I was in hospital when the desperately hoped-for call came at 10.30 one Monday night.
T hat day they had tried, without success, electric shock treatment to try to get the heart back into normal rhythm.
Since the end of May it had been beating irregularly.
It had meant starting a new drug, heparin, an anti-coagulant administered by self-injection.
The advantage of this is that the effects last only four to six hours, whereas the more common warfarin, used as an anti-coagulant, stays active for 48 hours.
Therefore, if you are likely to have an operation at any minute, heparin it shall be.
The plan had been to leave hospital for a few days, beginning the next day.
Instead, that call arrived.
There was a proviso though, the organs were 90 per cent likely to be a match, size, blood type, tissue type, compatibility, so sleep on it.
The operation was carried out at the National Heart the next day, with the odds improving and I was then transferred to Harefield for five weeks.
I can remember coming to in the intensive care unit at the National Heart.
When I had last been conscious it was June 28 — it was now July.
The room was isolated, with only medical staff completely gowned up and masked allowed in.
Visitors could speak via a telephone connected to an outside wall and they could wave through the glass.
In those three days I think half the nursing staff at the hospital came up to wave.
On the first Monday, everyone from MY to the physiotherapists and even the dentist came to see.
In effect, the transplant hospital, which started out as a centre for wounded Australian troops in the First World War and was then used as a TB sanatorium, exists in its own world, untainted by the big bad world outside.
It's four-and-a-half years on now — Harefield has topped 1,500 transplants and there is a 70 per cent survival rate after five years.
In some ways you remember it every day.
Sometimes it can seem as if it was yesterday.
Other times, it is as if I was writing about someone else.
Lots has happened since June 28, 1988.
There have been spells back in Harefield, particularly last year, but the one true lesson is that life goes on, with the proviso that you take the medication every day — without fail.
Doggy hero is still in need of good home
Report by Guy Campbell Picture by Richard Rackham
A CANINE hero who helped save a dog which was dying from rat poison is now looking for a good home.
Bobby, a male lurcher, provided the dying dog with a crucial blood transfusion at the Fromus veterinary centre in Saxmundham.
The 18-month-old labrador bitch from Peasenhall, seriously ill after eating rat poison, was examined by visiting South African vet Stefan Ferreira.
‘I received a phone call from Stefan at 7.30 in the morning to check if I had a suitable donor for the operation,’ said manager of Canine Rescue, Southwold, Jim Waddington, who looks after Bobby.
‘We took Bobby straight there but it was touch-and-go for two hours.
It's amazing what they can do these days and luckily the sick dog pulled through.
Now I think Bobby deserves a good home,’ he said.
Chief vet at the Fromus surgery Michael Hill said: ‘It is not a common operation because it is often difficult to find a suitable donor dog.
On this occasion we needed a healthy labrador-sized dog and Bobby fitted the bill.’
Mr Ferreira has returned to South Africa since the life-saving operation but Mr Hill praised his ability as a vet.
Mrs Iris Waddington said: ‘Bobby is a very attractive rich brown-coloured dog, is good natured and accepts strangers well.’
She said Canine Rescue re-homed 130 dogs last year and in the past week had found new homes for five dogs.
However, the uncomplaining hero Bobby is without a permanent home.
Anyone who would like further information on Bobby or any other dogs should call Canine Rescue on 0502 75257.
Super-dog Bobby with Jim Waddington at the Canine Rescue Centre
Photocopiers expose those hidden talents
THE photocopier is an essential, if notoriously unreliable, part of office life — but can it produce art?
Of course, says East Anglian artist John Eno-Daynes, who yesterday demonstrated exactly what he meant at the Wilson Marriage Centre, Colchester.
Like the Channel Four programme on Thursday, which explores the secret life of the photocopier, John's workshops showed there is far more to the machine than duplicating documents and jamming the paper.
‘Anybody can do it, it is simple and immediate,’ he said.
‘We can all put photographs, pictures and words together and create some sort of image.’
He said copyart can be  practised by people of differing abilities because it takes little or no skill to produce exciting and impressive images.
John, who works with elderly people with learning difficulties at Turner Village Hospital, Colchester, hopes it will encourage self-confidence and self-exploration.
‘The theme is one of identity and self-image.
The aim is to get people to like themselves more deeply.
Materials
‘These workshops bring in people of mixed physical and mental disabilities, who are usually excluded from these sort of things.
You don't have to draw or paint to be able to do it.’
Turner Village residents and art and community centre workers took part in a morning and afternoon session, working with copiers and materials on loan from Coles Office Products, Chelmsford.
A specially created group piece from the workshops is being exhibited all this week in the Wilson Marriage cafe area.
Ade Barradell, who ran the copyart workshop
Patient works out in gym to win back his strength
By Clare Tucker
AN EX-SERGEANT who has been confined to a wheelchair for more than a year was exercising in a hospital gym this weekend after a life-saving heart transplant operation.
Paul Priestley, 40, of Lindisfarne Road, Bury St Edmunds, had the operation at Papworth Hospital 16 days ago and is progressing very well.
His wife Jennifer said: ‘He is finding he can do things he hasn't done for so long.
Last week he walked upstairs for the first time in three years and just burst into tears.
‘He hasn't exercised for five years and has no muscle tone left but now he is able to exercise in the gym.
We have got a long road ahead but he will get fit because he is so determined.’
Mr Priestley collapsed during a football match with his former regiment, the Army Catering Corps at Aldershot, five years ago.
He was suffering from the heart disease congestive cardiomyopathy which sent his heart soaring from a normal 70 beats per minute to a dangerous 400.
A computerised machine was implanted in his chest last November but Mrs Priestley said it packed up at the end of last month and he was taken into hospital.
On February 27 she was told only a heart transplant would save her husband's life and they would have to wait for a donor.
‘I walked out of the hospital and was going down the path and a nurse came running out and shouted at me to stop.
‘She said ‘You must come back.
We've just had a phone call.
We have found a donor.’
Staff at the hospital had been amazed they had found a donor so quickly and her husband was overwhelmed by the speed of the events.
He should be able to leave hospital in one month.
Mrs Priestley said they did not yet know the identity of the donor but she and her husband would like to express their gratitude to the donor's family.
Paul Priestley and his wife Jennifer at their wedding five years ago, before the illness that led to Paul's transplant operation
USAF on guard
By James Mortlock
SURGEONS at the main USAF base hospital in Europe are tested for the AIDS virus once a year, it emerged yesterday.
All military personnel at Lakenheath are tested, but high-risk medical staff such as dentists are given top priority, said a base spokesman.
The news comes as calls intensify for health staff in the UK to undergo regular HIV/AIDS tests following a series of scares involving doctors.
All medical staff were now tested annually for the virus, said the spokesman.
Those at most risk — both of passing on HIV/AIDS and contracting it — also included gynaecologists, midwives and eye, nose and throat specialists.
Anyone found to be HIV positive was transferred to a USAF base in Texas for further tests, evaluation and counselling.
Any medical personnel found to have the virus were immediately banned from performing surgery which involved working inside the body, said the spokesman.
Any air crew members showing evidence of HIV infection were grounded.
Staff doing jobs which required perfect health would be relocated or have to quit the service.
Individuals serving abroad who were found to have the HIV virus were sent home for tests and then restricted to bases within the U.S.
All victims were allowed to leave the USAF as soon as they tested positive.
‘Personnel can leave without completing their contract.’
Doug Moore, a spokesman for the USAF in Europe, could not reveal whether any military personnel from Lakenheath had tested positive.
However, only four people had been found to be HIV positive during the last two years, he said.
Staff at USAF Lakenheath — guarding against AIDS.
Ambulance HQ cash appeal to be stepped up
A MAJOR appeal for cash to pay for renovation work at a volunteer ambulance brigade's crumbling headquarters is still £7,000 short of its £10,000 target.
However, appeal organisers are hoping to make a start on the much-needed work at the Harwich St John Ambulance building within three months, using money already raised.
Fund-raising efforts, which in five months have netted nearly £3,000, are to be stepped up and businesses are being urged to donate materials.
Work planned includes providing toilets, a new kitchen, reroofing, rewiring and rendering.
A series of weekly car boot sales — starting on March 28 — at the brigade's Barrack Lane site have been organised and other events are planned.
Supt Tony Rozier said the building, which has been in use for more than 20 years, had suffered a string of attacks by vandals and thieves, contributing to its demise.
‘The state it is in at the moment has limited our work a great deal,’ he said.
‘We very much want to get on with the renovating it.’
The Dovercourt branch of the National Association for the Care and Rehabilitation of Offenders has volunteered to carry out the work free of charge and has even joined in raising funds.
NACRO volunteers, who are either former offenders or long-term unemployed, are presently engaged on a number of projects in the town, including restoration work on Beacon Hill fortifications.
Cut in care of elderly feared
By Christopher Cairns and Henry Creagh
SERVICES for the elderly in Suffolk and Essex are threatened by Government reforms that take effect next month, according to council officers and a care provider.
Takare Plc, which owns two homes in Suffolk, has said it can no longer guarantee its ‘bed for life’ pledge to residents.
Meanwhile, a social services manager in Essex has said that a Government grant to fund the new Community Care Act from April 1 is not enough.
Clive Johnstone, group commercial manager of Takare, said: ‘On April 1 the Government will no longer be responsible for paying for nursing home care, so old people requiring financial help will instead have their needs assessed by social workers.
Clearly, local authorities will only have a limited amount of money to spend as opposed to Government support, which is at present guaranteed.’
Mr Johnstone said the group could no longer guarantee a bed for life regardless of whether residents were privately funded or eligible for income support.
However, Suffolk's social services director Bill Bulpin said there was no question of old people having to move from residential care once they were established there.
Suffolk had received £6.5 million of new transfer money from the Government and there was to be no change in the level of funding.
‘The whole point is that the Government wants to give elderly people the opportunity to choose,’ he said.
But Labour councillor Tom Chipperfield said: ‘This is bound to cost more if you think that more old people will choose to remain in their own homes.
Then you have the cost of care visitors, meals on wheels, as well as gardening and decorating.
‘The county council has to make up the remainder but it has already limited the amount it intends to spend.’
Group services manager for North East Essex social services, Robin Rennie, told carers that the £14 million Government grant to fund the Act would lead to shortfalls in the system.
At a meeting at Essex County Hospital he outlined priorities for care, such as cases where patients were in immediate danger or disabled people were involved and the council had a statutory obligation to act.
However, other services geared to improve the quality of life for the elderly or those newly discharged from hospital were unlikely to be funded.
Concern over ward's future
ORGANISERS of a public meeting to discuss the feared closure of a hospital casualty ward have invited the area's top health manager to attend — despite his assurances that the unit is safe.
Dr Alan Davison, chief executive of Essex Rivers Healthcare Trust, has pledged that emergency departments at Harwich and Clacton are safe.
However, health campaigners, who reacted angrily to warnings that the axe could fall, have decided to press ahead with the meeting, saying they cannot trust the healthcare trust.
Health workers, councillors and union leaders are all due to attend the meeting in Dovercourt on March 22 and they want Dr Davison to attend.
One of the organisers, John Tipple, of the Socialist Workers Party, said: ‘We just cannot trust what is being said.
‘Even if they are going to leave our casualty unit alone, it follows that cuts must be made somewhere and we want to know where.’
Dr Davison last week said Harwich and Clacton's casualty departments were safe ‘now and for the foreseeable future.’
Fears about the future of the units arose because North Essex Health Consortium is threatening to cut the trust's budget for the coming financial year.
Even the trust's director of emergency services, Nigel Brayley, warned he may be forced to close either Harwich or Clacton casualty wards if cuts were imposed.
Contract negotiations between the trust and consortium, which pays for patient care in the area, have reached deadlock and are likely to go to arbitration.
But the consortium has now written to GPs in Harwich giving a cast-iron guarantee that the town's hospital and casualty services are safe.
Surgery can work miracles
By James Mortlock
SPECTACULAR and often unexpected results can follow the traumas of open heart surgery.
It is this message that members of the newly-formed west Suffolk Zipper Club want to get across to people who face the agonising prospect of such a serious operation.
Dave Hunt, who has undergone complicated heart bypass surgery, says any heart operation means doctors ‘breaking into your body’.
It is this knowledge, coupled with the fear of being considered too unfit to undergo such a traumatic operation, that makes open heart surgery such an ordeal, say members.
With this in mind, the Zipper Club, which gets its name from the distinctive scar left after surgery, aims to help people before, as well as during and after treatment.
‘If we can show people how quickly they can get back to work or play sport it can be a terrific boost,’ says Peter Morton.
‘Before my operation I couldn't walk 30 yards and now I can work full-time and play 30 holes of golf,’ he said.
It was knowing that surgery could work miracles that helped him overcome fears about the daunting operation.
‘I talked about it with friends and they always knew someone who had been through it who were twice the men they were before,’ said Mr Morton, 59.
Mr Hunt, 56, said contact with people who had undergone similar surgery was essential.
‘A man who walked into my room said ‘That's what you're going to get’, pointing to a raw open scar down his chest, and he said he felt great.’
Before Mr Morton's operation at the world-renowned Papworth Hospital, near Cambridge, he was introduced to a man walking around the ward who had been given a new heart only days before.
The two men agree their chances of survival without open heart surgery were slim.
With today's 99 per cent success rate the future for most open heart surgery patients is rosy.
But Don Ely — whose wife, Joan, decided to have surgery after years of deliberation — said that when an operation was first suggested there was an 80 pc failure rate.
The couple decided against surgery but 15 years later the failure figure had dropped to only 20 pc and they decided to take the plunge.
Mr Ely said the operation changed their lives: ‘It was like the heavens opening up.’
Club members — they have all either undergone open heart surgery themselves or have helped loved ones through the ordeal — display this zest for life which would encourage anyone faced with the same ordeal.
Dennis Younger, chairman, said: ‘Our aim is to provide a social platform so people can meet others who are in the same boat.
It may be that they have just had their operation or they are just about to have it.’
Mr Younger, 68, urged anyone interested in joining the club to contact him on (0284) 700433.
The Zipper Club's full title is the British Cardiac Patients Association.
Priest will continue his fight for murder charge in coma case
Bid to sue doctor is rejected
A PRIEST yesterday vowed to continue his fight to bring a private prosecution for murder against the doctor of Hillsborough victim Tony Bland.
Magistrates threw out his first attempt by refusing to issue a summons.
Father James Morrow, a Roman Catholic priest and pro-life campaigner, emerged from the hearing of his application by magistrates in Bingley, west Yorkshire and said: ‘It is up to me now to pursue the matter in the next court.’
Father Morrow, 58, from Braemar, Aberdeenshire, had made the application alleging that Dr James Howe murdered the 22-year-old Hillsborough disaster victim at the nearby Airedale General Hospital.
Future
Afterwards he said: ‘The magistrates have refused to issue a summons so I will have to go to a higher court.
Dr Howe is the culprit and we must have a conviction on this matter.
I will do everything in the power of the private citizen.’
Father Morrow said he would be shortly lodging the same application at Keighley County Court in the Liverpool fan's home town.
Tony, whose funeral was a week ago, had been in an irreversible coma since the Hillsborough disaster in 1989.
He was allowed to die after the Law Lords confirmed a High Court ruling that doctors could cease feeding him.
He died on March 3.
Father Morrow said he had acted ‘in an attempt to prevent future comatose, disabled and elderly patients from sharing the fate of Tony Bland’.
Supporters
Father Morrow said magistrates told him they had studied the Law Lords' decision to allow feeding tubes to be removed from Tony and felt they could not serve the summons.
Father Morrow was accompanied by about a dozen supporters and pro-life campaigners.
He said if the second stage of his fight to prosecute Dr Howe failed he would take it to the European Court of Human Rights.
Dr Howe shrugged off Father Morrow's threat of a private prosecution.
He said: ‘This was discussed during the hearing at the House of Lords and it was said that if a case was brought the Attorney General would quash it, and that has been confirmed by lawyers.
‘Letters of support have outnumbered any critical or questioning letters by more than 10–1.’
Father James Morrow
Charity aid ‘will be wiped out’
DISAPPOINTED charities were only grudgingly grateful for the estimated £30 million boost to their income announced by the Chancellor yesterday.
It was ‘a spit in the ocean’ which would be wiped out immediately by the increased costs of fuel and transport, they said.
They called instead for VAT rebates.
Charities Tax Reform Group chairman Adrian Randall, referring to Mr Lamont's VAT concessions to the bloodstock industry, asked pointedly: ‘What is more important to this Government, horses or charities?’
LIFE disagrees with priest on Tony Bland case
Magistrates yesterday rejected a request by a priest to issue a murder summons against the doctor involved in the Tony Bland case.
Not everyone in the pro-life movement is behind him, as ANDREA SMITH discovered.
LIFE is a group best known for its anti-abortion stance, but its activities as a pressure group and charity extend into other areas.
In fact, the group offered a bed for Hillsborough disaster victim Tony Bland in a hospital that it is plans to open in Liverpool.
However, it would be a mistake to assume that the group backs the action of Father James Morrow as Tony Golding, chairman of Colchester LIFE group, explained.
He said LIFE did not support direct action either to prevent abortions by camping outside clinics to stop women entering or by bringing prosecutions like that sought by Father Morrow.
He said: ‘The priest is rather drastic in his actions and we in LIFE do not go along with it.’
Mr Golding believed the parents had suffered enough and any attempt to prosecute the doctor should be dropped.
Although he has provoked a strong reaction among a sector of the community where one would have thought his support would have been strongest, Father Morrow is still determined to press on with his case.
After the hearing in Yorkshire yesterday he said would be lodging the same application for a murder charge summons at the county court in the Tony Bland's home town.
Father Morrow said his actions were not connected with Tony Bland's parents' decision to have his feeding tubes removed.
He said he he had acted ‘in an attempt to prevent future coma, disabled and elderly patients suffering the same fate as Tony Bland’.
New guidelines for police
Quality service initiative is ‘crucially important’
By Duncan Brodie
PROCEDURES for dealing sympathetically with the parents of cot death babies are among five sets of guidelines issued to Essex police officers in the first phase of a new quality drive.
Essex Chief Constable John Burrow says the Service Delivery Standards initiative is ‘crucially important’ if the police are to continue to receive the public's trust and co-operation.
Other subjects covered include the treatment of those suspected of crime, handling road accidents involving injury, dealing with victims of racial offences and responding to calls and letters.
The aims of the initiative have been explained to 1,000 officers of all ranks in a series of briefings.
An accompanying information pack stresses: ‘Service Delivery Standards are not just documents of good intentions which can be safely disregarded or cynically ignored.
They refer to all of us and everything we do.’
Mr Burrow said society was becoming more demanding in its expectation of the police, and the entire attitude of individuals could be based on a single experience of meeting an officer.
The service standards could have been just circulated internally, but making them public meant everyone would know what level of service they had a right to expect from the police.
‘This is not something we would like to do, it is something we must do,’ said Mr Burrow.
‘We get few complaints about what we do — it is usually a problem with how we do it.’
He cited the guidelines on cot death as a key example of what the initiative was intended to achieve.
They acknowledge that parents' grief, already compounded by guilt that they might have failed to look after their child, can be made still worse by police behaviour suggesting a crime might have been committed.
Officers' concern to avoid the risk of losing evidence if the death does prove to be homicide can have unintended consequences in the vast majority of cases where death is natural.
‘The homes of parents who have lost a child through a cot death have very quickly become the scene of a possible homicide,’ the document says.
‘Police officers, including detectives and scenes of crime officers, arrive in succession.
Bedding and pillows are seized and photographs are being taken of the home.’
It adds: ‘It is our intention in cases of cot death to place emphasis on support for bereaved parents, as well as meeting the need to establish cause of death.’
If there are obvious grounds for real suspicion, a senior detective will attend in the same way as in the case of any other suspicious death.
However, in most cases officers need not be ‘unduly concerned’ about the risk of missing evidence as unnatural causes of death will be revealed during medical examinations of the child.
‘To safeguard parents' feelings, the small risk of losing potential evidence is worth taking.
You can feel confident that officers pursuing this policy will be fully supported,’ the document concludes.
The Essex police Service Delivery Standards for officers involved in cases of cot death lay down six specific requirements:
Reports of baby deaths will be referred to an officer of the rank of inspector or above who will control and monitor police response.
Only the minimum number of officers necessary will visit homes and parents will always be told what they are doing and why.
Officers will do their best to be compassionate towards parents, for example referring to the dead child by his/her first name and whenever possible a female officer will attend.
Consideration given to follow-up visits by officers, if suitable or helpful.
Baby deaths will always be referred to the local victim Support team, which can in turn bring in specialist help.
Documentation involved will be completed sensitively and swiftly to minimise the later recurrence of stress and anxiety.
John Burrow — first phase of quality drive
No housing list bias for married couples
AN ‘ABHORRENT’ motion calling for married couples to be given preference in a housing waiting list has been thrown out by councillors.
Members of Tendring District Council's housing services committee voted by 12 to one to reject a motion recommending married couples should be awarded 100 extra points in order to move them up the queue for council housing.
However, the committee went further and tabled a motion for next month's full council meeting in which they attacked the motives behind the original motion tabled by newly-elected Tory councillor Philip Vanner.
‘We abhor the principles outlined in this motion,’ the committee's new motion reads.
‘It is in conflict with the duty to allocate housing according to need.’
After the meeting committee chairman Lib-Dem councillor Rosemary Smith described the idea of discriminating in favour of married couples as ‘extreme Right-wing nonsense’.
‘It is none of our business whether they are married or not,’ she said.
‘We are not there to be moral arbiters.’
The length of time they have been waiting for a house or factors such as overcrowding and damp are far more important than marital status, Mrs Smith said.
There are presently 1,128 people on the council's waiting list.
Mr Vanner, not being a member of the committee which met on Monday night, was not able to speak on his motion, but Tory colleague Doug Pallett was the only councillor to support it.
‘Somewhere, some time the moral climate in society coming from the Government downwards needs to be challenged,’ Mr Pallett said after the meeting.
Aim is to set up epilepsy branch
A PUBLIC meeting is due to be staged at The Institute, Bocking End, Braintree, to look into the possibility of setting up a local voluntary branch of the British Epilepsy Association.
The meeting, on March 30 at 7.30 pm, will be aiming to act as a local forum so that people can help each other and the newly-formed branch.
It will also provide advice and information for local people afflicted with epilepsy, their family and friends.
Along with that it will be informing local people about epilepsy to create a greater public understanding of the condition, will raise funds for the association, and represent its aims and objectives at local levels.
VAT on gas and electricity ‘fatal blow’ for elderly
By Russell Cook
THE dramatic rises planned on domestic fuel bills is a ‘fatal blow’ for the elderly, claimed a leading pensioners' campaigner.
Old people, many of them on low incomes and prone to suffering from hypothermia, will be forced to keep warm by staying in bed longer, warned George Newson, the chairman of the Ipswich and District branch of the Suffolk Pensioners' Association.
The biggest shock to house-holders was the introduction of VAT on domestic fuel, including gas and electricity.
Presently it carries no VAT, but from April next year it will be imposed at eight per cent— and soar to 17.5 pc a year later.
The Chancellor announced relief for elderly in the low income bands to help soften the blow, with Social Security benefits rising automatically and income related benefits being uprated.
The tax on fuel is expected to raise about £950 million in 1994–1995 and £2.3 billion for 1995–96, according to Norman Lamont.
‘Sting in tail’
However, Mr Newson branded the plans ‘disastrous’ for pensioners who would struggle to meet the payments.
He was also dismayed by the £15 increase on road tax and petrol rises of 12p on a gallon of unleaded and 15p on four star.
‘There was certainly a sting in the tail and the increase on fuel charges is a fatal blow for pensioners,’ he said.
‘It will be disastrous for many old folk, as the pensions won't go up anywhere near enough to offset the charges.’
He also predicted people would be forced to move out of sheltered housing centres, many of which have centrally controlled heating points.
‘More and more people are struggling to pay these bills even now and this will be the last straw for many of them.
If you cannot keep your home warm you will only have to stay in bed longer,’ he said.
Philosophical
‘Cars are also important for old folk and are essential in the rural parishes of Suffolk — it has almost become a necessity.
An extra £15 is a lot of money for people to find.
The Budget is very unsatisfactory from the pensioner's point of view at a time when we had hoped the Government would be helping us,’ he added.
Meanwhile, John and Iris Bull were philosophical about the Budget.
The couple, of St Ives Close, Kesgrave, feared VAT would be imposed on many essential items.
Their only ‘disappointment’ was the VAT on domestic fuel.
Mr Bull, 75, said he would not have too much difficulty in finding the extra £15 a year to pay for the new road tax fees and would economise on petrol.
However, both he and his 73-year-old wife predicted those increases would be passed on to consumers, with extra charges being made on day-to-day necessities.
‘People on low incomes will be getting some help to pay the fuel bills and all in all it's a Budget that's not as bad as we expected,’ Mr Bull said.
‘We thought the worse and that VAT would be imposed on things like newspapers and reading material, along with children's clothing, but that did not happen.
The only disappointment was the fuel charges.’
George Newson: branded Budget plans disastrous
John and Iris Bull: philosophical about the measures
Dismay at failure to give more help to disabled
CYNTHIA Hirst was disappointed the Budget failed to give substantial help to disabled people.
She was particularly concerned by the large increase in petrol tax, which added 15p to a gallon of four star.
‘The increased levy on petrol will really hurt a lot of disabled people in the countryside who rely on the car for their independence,’ Mrs Hirst, of Smyth Court, Leiston, said.
‘This rise, together with the increase in car tax, will force some disabled people on benefits to seriously limit the number of times they leave the house,’ she said.
The Budget did offer more hope to unemployed disabled people, who will now be given priority in the vocational education initiative and in the Community Action programme.
The Chancellor said in the first nine months of 1992–93 the Employment Service found jobs for 31,000 unemployed disabled people, 25 per cent more than in the same period of 1991–92.
Mrs Hirst, who is the chairman of a local disabled charity group, believed these steps were important, but she thought they did not go far enough.
‘I hoped there would be a rise in benefits for us, but this was not mentioned.
However, a small consolation was the extra help with fuel and power costs after the eight per cent VAT charge,’ she said.
‘Lucky’
In retrospect, she said, the Budget could have been a great deal worse for disabled people considering what issues had been bandied about in the media recently.
‘There has been a lot of talk about taxing invalidity benefit, children's clothes and food which would have drastically affected a lot of people, especially those needing special diets.
Luckily this did not take place.’
Cynthia Hirst: disappointed at lack of help for disabled
Hospice to hold special week for raising money
A HOSPICE which cares for the terminally ill is holding a special fund-raising week.
St Helena Hospice opened in Colchester eight years ago to care for the terminally ill and their families from the North East Essex area.
It could never have opened without generous fund-raisers.
Spokeswoman Wanda Anderson said: ‘There is a danger that because the hospice runs so efficiently people may forget how heavily it relies on public donations and fund-raising.
Remember the chances are you will never need hospice care, but somebody you know will — so please help if you can.’
Hospice Week, held between May 23 and 30 is a concentration of the fund-raising activities and also serves to remind the public of the need for continual funding.
Anyone wishing to organise a fund-raising event should telephone (0206) 574995.
Humanism can offer positive philosophy
Moral code to care for others
By Pat Small
WHEN Marie Haworth's husband was dying of cancer, the couple discussed what sort of funeral he should have.
‘Neither of us believed in God so we didn't want a religious ceremony,’ says Marie, a 60-year-old radiographer from Ipswich.
‘It seemed wrong to have somebody mouthing things which had no meaning for us.’
Funeral directors were unable to suggest a non-religious alternative.
Finally, Marie contacted the British Humanist Association.
They put her in touch with Margaret Nelson, a former teacher from Elmsett.
Margaret, a member of the Suffolk and North Essex Humanists, has conducted about 20 humanist funerals in the past 18 months, despite her own struggles against cancer and the post-viral fatigue syndrome ME.
David's was one of the first she organised, but Marie was impressed with the ceremony.
‘It was much more a celebration of his life than a mourning of his death.
Friends paid tributes; members of his bowls club spoke, as well as commuters who used to travel to London with him.
One of the girls he worked with in the office wrote a humorous poem.
It was the first funeral I had ever been to where there was genuine laughter.
There was sadness, but no gloom.’
Marie chose David's favourite music — brass bands and an excerpt from the ballet Giselle .
‘It was warm and personal and it felt right for him,’ says Marie.
‘Friends, many of them believers, came up afterwards and said it was the most beautiful funeral they had ever been to.
Even my daughter, who is deeply religious, was happy.’
Margaret takes care not to offend religious mourners.
Every ceremony includes a few minutes' silence in which believers can pray.
She aims to create a meaningful, personal tribute to the deceased, using favourite poetry and music and the recollections of family and friends.
Demand has been growing, boosted by media publicity and referrals from local funeral directors, who now know about her.
‘Very few of the deceased are actually humanists.
Most are just non-believers whose families feel a religious ceremony would be inappropriate.’
The humanists also hold baby-naming and wedding ceremonies, although the latter still have to be legalised at a register office.
Margaret, 48, conducted her first wedding recently in Felixstowe.
‘The couple were both atheists,’ she explains.
‘They thought it would be hypocritical to marry in church, but felt a register office wedding on its own would be a bit bleak.’
The ceremony was held in a hotel, complete with flowers, wedding dress and all the trimmings.
The couple composed their own personal vows and chose songs and poetry that symbolised their commitment to each other.
‘It was a beautiful ceremony — the mother was in floods of tears,’ says Margaret.
It was her own fight to overcome breast cancer and the deaths of both her parents within six months of each other which prompted Margaret to become a humanist.
‘A hospital chaplain conducted the funerals of both my parents.
He did a very good job, but it made me think about what would be right for me when I died.’
Margaret had a Presbyterian upbringing, going to church twice on Sundays but lost her faith when she was just 13.
‘I had high moral values, but I could never accept Christian theology.
I always felt religion was responsible for so much that was wrong in the world — religious wars, sexual repression, bigotry.’
When she contacted the humanists two years ago, she found herself deeply in sympathy with their values and beliefs.
‘Humanism is a positive philosophy — it believes human beings have a moral responsibility to care for each other.’
Humanists believe morality comes from within man, not from God.
They believe in the pursuit of human happiness and well-being.
‘If you had to sum up our philosophy in a few words, it would be: ‘Do as you would be done by’,’ says Margaret.
Yet humanism is no soft option.
‘It is quite hard because there are no God-given certainties.
You have to make up your own mind what is right and what is wrong.’
Non-belief in God also means there is no way of shirking collective responsibility for each other and the planet.
‘If you do not believe in an afterlife, you have to sort things out here and now.
You have to be responsible for what you do.’
Bertrand Russell, EM Forster, Einstein — and even Gene Roddenberry, the creator of Star Trek — were all humanists.
Claire Rayner, Peter Ustinov, Ludovic Kennedy, Stephen Fry and George Melly are all high-profile members, yet, despite a membership increase of 40 per cent in the past 18 months, the British Humanist Association has just 2,500 people on its books.
A tiny figure is when you consider up to a third of the population is estimated to have no belief in God.
Margaret Nelson believes schools should give pupils a moral education which does not depend solely on religious belief.
‘If a child's sense of right and wrong is based on religion, what happens if they later reject God?
They no longer have any moral framework.’
The North Essex and Suffolk Humanists have been running a year and have about 20 members.
Marie Haworth joined after her husband's funeral and is now an active member.
The British Humanist Association can be contacted on 071 430 0908 or 0473 658828.
Margaret Nelson at Ipswich Crematorium
Chancellor did nothing for us, say unemployed
Five new measures worth £230m
‘Schemes will help only a fraction of three million people out of work’
NORMAN Lamont was last night accused of failing to deliver the eagerly-awaited ‘Budget for Jobs’— despite giving £230 million to help 100,000 unemployed people find work.
The Chancellor claimed the overall effect of the Budget — which included help for business through far-reaching reforms of the company taxation system — would be to support economic recovery.
In East Anglia, a Conservative MP welcomed the Chancellor's measures, but one of the region's newest members of the dole queue said job prospects remained bleak.
Nationally, union leaders blasted the Government for failing to tackle the jobs crisis and even some reaction from the business sector was muted.
Mr Lamont announced five specific initiatives designed to help those out of work re-enter the jobs market, particularly the long-term unemployed.
The Business Start-Up scheme, which helps the unemployed in launching their own business, will be extended with the creation of 10,000 new places.
A new Education Allowance will be introduced, allowing 30,000 long-term unemployed to join full-time vocational courses without losing benefit entitlement, as they would under current rules.
A new Community Action programme will offer a £10 premium on top of benefits for up to 60,000 long-term jobless joining part-time voluntary work schemes.
Four pilot Workstart schemes will be started, offering financial assistance to employers who take on people who have been long-term unemployed.
Training and Enterprise Councils will be invited to bid for a share of £25 million new funding to run courses designed to tackle unemployment.
Dave Speed, of New Town Road, Colchester, who was made redundant by printers Spottiswoode six weeks ago after 19 years with the firm, said last night: ‘It was certainly not a Budget for jobs which is what I, and others, were hoping for.’
Schemes for the unemployed, such as community work, might be helpful for those involved but would cover only a fraction of the three million people out of work, he said.
Launching a business with redundancy pay carried considerable financial risks, while training would only be of lasting value if there was a real job at the end of it.
‘I think we have lorry drivers being trained as builders and builders being trained as lorry drivers, with no jobs available for either at the end of the day,’ said Mr Speed.
What was needed, but what the Chancellor has failed to provide, was a commitment to major investment in the nation's infrastructure.
Enthusiastic
Schemes promised by Mr Lamont such as the Channel Tunnel link and Crossrail were simply old projects being ‘re-announced’.
Mr Speed, who lives alone, said he did not think the Chancellor's general taxation measures would have a serious affect on his standard of living — but the chances of finding work had not improved either.
Chelmsford MP Simon Burns was enthusiastic about the schemes proposed by the Chancellor for tackling unemployment.
He said the concentration on help for business, especially small firms, improved job prospects and was the best form of help the unemployed could have.
Of the five schemes targeted directly at the unemployed, he particularly welcomed the new Education Allowance and also found the Community Action programme ‘interesting’ although he wants to see further details.
Derisory
TUC general secretary Norman Willis said the Budget would not stop unemployment increasing by half a million this year.
‘All he (the Chancellor) offers the unemployed are derisory schemes that will give small help to 100,000 people.
He is ignoring nine-tenths of the million long-term unemployed.’
Even employers gave a lukewarm response to the jobs proposals.
Roger Young, director-general of the Institute of Management, said allowing 30,000 long-term jobless to take up vocational courses without losing their benefits was a ‘drop in the ocean’.
Dave Speed: ‘This was not a Budget for jobs’
Mental health row lingers
THE future of services for the mentally ill in mid Essex seems to have been decided with plans for a merger with the area's community health NHS trust.
However, many within the Mid Essex Mental Health Services Unit remain deeply unhappy about being refused a merger with the larger hospital trust based at Broomfield in Chelmsford.
‘We are the reluctant bride in this union,’ said one senior manager.
MEMHS, which employs 180 staff and cares for those suffering from mental illness in the district, first applied to become a NHS trust in its own right last year.
After this was refused it proposed a merger with the Mid Essex Hospital Trust with which it works closely.
This, too, was discouraged by the Department of Health and North East Thames Regional Health Authority.
The unit successfully fought off plans to merge with the established North East Essex Mental Health Trust but, until recently, still faced an uncertain future.
Now the Mid Essex Community Health Services Trust, due to come into being on April 1, is proposing to dissolve after just one year and re-form as a combined trust with MEMHS next April.
Community services include district nursing, occupational therapy and health visitors.
‘The timescale is very, very tight,’ said chief executive-designate of community services Margaret Kingston, ‘but we are convinced this is the best way forward for all our patients.’
A spokeswoman for MEMHS welcomed the merger plan which, she said, would help to raise the profile of often over-looked services in the community.
However one senior member of staff, who preferred not to be named, said great bitterness did remain over the regional health authority's veto on a merger with MEHT.
‘We know there are individual trusts with smaller turnovers than ours and mergers with acute services are going on elsewhere in the country,’ he said.
‘It is deplorable that the views of consultants and clinicians here have been simply ignored.’
It is hoped public consultation on the new merger plans will begin this summer.
Man cleared of battery theft
A man was cleared yesterday of stealing a 12-volt battery when the prosecution offered no evidence against him at Chelmsford Crown Court.
John Vass, 43, of Feverills Road, Clacton, had denied a charge of theft.
After school care is priority
FUTURE provision of after school care in the Braintree district is being considered by a steering group, set up after a seminar last November.
The latest move is a meeting of all interested parties at Causeway House, Brain-tree, on March 31 at 10 am.
The steering group is exploring the needs for after school care and is looking at possible locations for schemes.
It aims to set up a network of high quality and affordable playcare provision meeting the district's needs, community resources officer Jan Farrow said.
Representatives on the group include Braintree District Council, community education, children's clubs, social services, the rural community council of Essex, colleges and other community associations.
Research is continuing to set up schemes in Braintree, Halstead, Witham and Coggeshall.
The steering group is looking for volunteers and parents to take part.