

The Reformation
William Tyndale
Translator of the Bible (1494? –1536)
Lord, open the King of England's eyes,
The next in time of those commemorated in the ASB is More's antagonist William Tyndale, who was executed a year after him.
Whilst More suffered for what he refused to say, Tyndale was condemned for the persistent heresy of his writings.
Tyndale was born in a well-to-do family in Gloucestershire in about 1494.
What little is known about his early life before he left England is found mainly in Foxe's Book of Martyrs and in his own writings.
He studied at the University of Oxford at a time when Colet had thrown off the old method of scholastic teaching, which consisted of repeating the comments of previous interpreters of the Bible, and instead, in his lectures on St Paul's Epistles, was explaining their historic background and expounding their spiritual truths.
The teaching of Greek had recently been introduced by Grocyn and Linacre.
Tyndale described the furious reaction of the schoolmen —‘old barking curs, the children of darkness’ who ‘raged in every pulpit’against the new learning.
In about 1516 he moved to Cambridge, where Erasmus had recently introduced the study of Greek and had asserted the supremacy of the Scriptures, ridiculing the theories of the schoolmen and their fantastic systems of interpretation.
In about 1522 Tyndale was ordained and returned to Gloucestershire as chaplain and tutor to the children of Sir John Walsh, a substantial landlord.
Sir John kept a hospitable table and according to Foxe  
Tyndale was denounced as a heretic to the Bishop's Chancellor, who ‘threatened him grievously, reviling and rating him as though he were a dog’.
It was in light of this experience of priests who were barely capable of understanding the Latin Vulgate and Mass, or who juggled with a text and expounded it in such a way as to obscure its original meaning, that Tyndale now decided to translate the New Testament into English ‘because I had perceived by experience, how that it was impossible to establish the lay-people in any truth, except the Scripture were plainly laid before their eyes in their mother-tongue’.
In Anglo-Saxon times portions of the Bible had been translated from Latin into the vernacular.
From about 1100, however, the attitude of Rome towards such translations hardened when the Waldenses appealed to the Bible in support of their attacks on the corruption of the Church.
In England the question of translation was complicated by the fact that between the Norman Conquest and the middle of the fourteenth century French was the language of the ruling class.
Towards the end of the fourteenth century Wycliffe and the Lollards translated the Latin Bible into an English style which was still uncouth and unstandardised.
Printing had not yet been invented and the handwritten copies had a limited circulation.
This was enough, however, to alarm the Church, and in 1408, on the initiative of Archbishop Arundel, the reading of Wycliffe's Bible and the translation of the Bible without approval by a bishop were made offences liable to excommunication and punishment for heresy.
Tyndale therefore moved to London where he sought a post as  chaplain to Tunstall, the Bishop of London, in whose household he hoped to live whilst he made his translation.
The Bishop however informed him that he had no vacancy for a chaplain — a refusal which Tyndale never forgave: in his Preface to the translation of the Five Books of Moses, where he describes the incident, there is a marginal note, ‘Room in my Lord's house for belly-cheer but none to translate the New Testament.’
He found a place for a year in the household of a wealthy London merchant where he started to translate the New Testament; it became clear, however, that there was no possibility of printing it in England, so in 1524 he left for Germany, never to return.
Tyndale's main problem for the rest of his life was to find a base on the Continent where there was a printing press, where its use by him would be tolerated by the authorities, and from which his translations and publications could be sent to England, either through sales at the great annual book fair at Frankfurt or by river and sea, hidden among the goods of friendly merchants.
Tyndale started to print his New Testament in Cologne, helped by a former monk, William Roye.
They were soon denounced to the authorities but escaped with the printed sheets up the Rhine to Worms, where the New Testament was published in 1526.
Germany at this time was in a state of religious ferment, following Luther's declarations in 1518.
Tyndale made his translation from the Greek edition of the New Testament recently published by Erasmus.
He had before him also Erasmus's translation into Latin and that of Luther in German.
He wrote just at the time when English was becoming an established literary language and with a felicity which later caused most of his translation — perhaps 75 per cent— to be retained in the King James Bible, the authorised version for 300 years.
In England Cardinal Wolsey at first found no fault in the book but a convocation of bishops condemned it; Bishop Tunstall preached a sermon against it at Paul's Cross, after which copies were ceremoniously burned.
Tunstall described it as ‘intermingling heretical articles and erroneous opinions, seducing the simple people and attempting by wicked and perverse interpretations to profane the majesty of the Scripture, and craftily abuse the most holy word of God’.
Later Warham, the Archbishop of Canterbury, whilst on a diplomatic visit to Antwerp, bought and destroyed large numbers of copies, to the delight of Tyndale, who used the money to correct and print a new edition.
Apart from the general prohibition, Tyndale's translations, especially the later ones, were found particularly offensive for their belligerent marginal glosses, which often followed those of Luther.
He was also accused of using words which twisted meanings, such as‘congregation’ instead of church, and ‘senior’or ‘elder ‘instead of ‘priest’.
Moreover, he often found the Vulgate in error.
From this time it is hard to follow Tyndale's movements, for he covered his tracks to avoid possible arrest.
He probably spent some time at Wittenberg with Luther.
He passed a year at the new University of Marburg, whose ruler favoured the Reformation and where, in order to proceed to the translation of the Old Testament, Tyndale studied Hebrew, which was not then taught in Oxford or Cambridge.
From time to time he returned to Antwerp to arrange for the shipping of his works to England.
Interspersed with his translation of the books of the Old Testament, which was never completed, were polemical works; for in light of the reception of his New Testament he felt no need to restrain his views either on the English clergy or on the Roman Catholic Church.
In The Parable of the Wicked Mammon he compared the cardinals and bishops with the Scribes and Pharisees.
Much of the book was devoted to exposition of the Lutheran doctrine of justification by faith.
It was condemned by the English bishops, who found twenty-nine heretical propositions in it.
The Obedience of a Christian Man was written to emphasise the supreme authority of the king in the state, and of the Scriptures in the Church.
It was both a defence of translation of the Bible and an assertion of the loyalty of the Reformers to the state.
The Church was attacked for monopolising the positions of state and for its doctrines of purgatory, pilgrimages and worship of saints, all exploited in order to obtain offerings.
The Pope and clergy were criticised for instigating men to refuse full allegiance to the civil power and for being unwilling to submit to the jurisdiction of civil courts.
As for the King, Tyndale asserted that he was above the law and was obliged to account for his actions only to God.
Anne Boleyn gave a copy to Henry VIII, who declared appreciatively, ‘This is a book for me and all Kings.’
The King's good will did not survive Tyndale's next book,The Practice of Prelates , which, in attacking Wolsey and the English clergy, argued that they had influenced the King in his decision to divorce Catherine of Aragon.
This not only showed how out of touch with the English political scene Tyndale was, but illustrated  the honesty or obstinacy which made him feel that he had to declare his opposition to the divorce, although it had been supported by most of the other Reformers.
In the prologues and glosses to his translations of the books of the Old Testament and his commentaries on the Epistles, Tyndale seized every opportunity to belabour the Roman Church.
In the Prologue to the Epistle to St John, for example, there are such marginal comments as ‘The Pope and his shavelings are right antiChrist’, ‘The filthiness of the Pope's doctrine’, ‘The abominable use of the Mass’.
There was one long controversy, however, in which Tyndale was on the defensive and in which his language, though strong, was considerably less rude than that of his opponent.
It has been seen in the last chapter how Bishop Tunstall observed that it was not sufficient to burn the heretics and their works and appealed to Sir Thomas More, the best-known English writer of his time, to write against them.
In 1529 there was thus published A Dialogue of Sir Thomas More, Knight, wherein be treated…veneration and worship of images and relics; praying to Saints and going on pilgrimage; with many other things touching the pestilent sect of Luther and Tyndale .
In this More attacked Tyndale's translation of the New Testament in detail, but did little to clear the clergy of charges of corruption.
Tyndale published an Answer , laboriously defending his translations and quite erroneously describing More as a hireling ‘wanting to get honour, promotion, dignity and money by help of our mitred monsters’.
To this More replied in a confutation of 500,000 words in which Tyndale was no longer described simply as a heretic but as ‘a beast’ discharging ‘a filthy form of blasphemies out of his beastly brutish mouth, a shameful, shameless, unreasonable, railing ribald’.
Insults apart, the kernel of the argument was that, whereas More considered the Scriptures to be committed to the Pope and hierarchy for interpretation, Tyndale believed that they belonged to every Christian, who would be guided in understanding them by the spirit of God.
Whilst More was Chancellor, heretics were sought out, and burned if they would not recant.
Later, however, Thomas Cromwell was sympathetic to the Reformers; indeed the policy which he pursued was that which Tyndale had advocated in The Obedience of a Christian Man —‘One King, one law in the realm: no class of men exempt from the temporal sword’.
Cromwell commissioned  Stephen Vaughan, one of the English envoys in the Low Countries, to seek out Tyndale and persuade him to return to England, hoping perhaps to enlist his pen in support of the new policies.
Vaughan eventually found Tyndale in Antwerp and had several talks with him in a meadow outside the city walls.
Tyndale was nervous, and, when Vaughan offered him the King's promise of safety if he returned to England, he expressed his fear that the promise might be broken on the persuasion of the clergy, who would affirm that promises made with heretics need not be kept.
And yet, he told Vaughan, with tears in his eyes,
Unfortunately it was just at this time that Tyndale's unfavourable comments on the royal divorce came to the King's attention, and Vaughan was sharply told to end the discussions.
Another agent was employed instead to try to apprehend Tyndale, who once more had to disappear underground.
The translation of the Old Testament from the original Hebrew, to which Tyndale returned, required the help of an English-speaking colleague to read the proofs.
A series of English religious exiles worked with him.
The first, George Joye, embarrassed him by publishing crude rhyming couplets about Wolsey which were attributed to Tyndale.
Still worse, Joye took it on himself to revise Tyndale's New Testament without authorisation in an edition which was full of unscholarly amendments.
Later John Frith, a Cambridge graduate, became not only his collaborator but his dearest friend; but Frith was seized whilst on a visit to England and committed to the Tower.
There Tyndale wrote to urge him to avoid any discussion of the Sacraments, but he failed to take this advice and was convicted as a heretic precisely on this question and was burned.
A last letter to him from Tyndale ended, ‘Sir, your wife is well content with the will of God and would not, for her sake, have the glory of God hindered.’
Tyndale may also have been assisted in his translations and proof reading by John Rogers and Miles Coverdale, both of whom continued his work after his death.
However, in the choice of his last collaborator, Henry Philips, he made a fatal mistake.
In 1535 Tyndale produced a revision of his New Testament.
This was almost his last work and was carried out whilst he was the guest of an English merchant, Thomas Poyntz, in the shelter of the English house at Antwerp, where the English merchants were accorded privileges of freedom from arrest on mere suspicion, and from imprisonment without trial.
England under Cromwell and Cranmer was now probably a less dangerous place for the Reformers than the Low Countries.
The Emperor Charles V, whilst compelled to tolerate Protestants within the Empire, compensated for this by treating them with increasing severity within his hereditary dominions.
In 1529 the reading, purchasing or possessing of proscribed books, attendance at any meeting of heretics, disputing about Holy Scripture, and want of respect for the images of God and the saints were all made crimes for which men were to be beheaded, women buried alive, and relapsed heretics burned.
There now appeared in Antwerp a charming young man with an Oxford degree, Henry Philips; he soon won the confidence of the lonely Tyndale, who invited him to dinner and showed him his books.
Philips remains a mysterious character.
He is known to have robbed his father by gambling away funds which had been entrusted to him, and then to have sunk into desperate poverty.
From this he emerged in Antwerp in 1535 with plenty of money and a carefully prepared plan for Tyndale's destruction.
Who was behind Philips is unknown, certainly not the King and Cromwell; more probably one or more of the bishops.
Stokesley, who had succeeded Tunstall as Bishop of London, as well as More, had been known to make special enquires about Tyndale's appearance and movements whenever suspected heretics coming from the Continent were being examined.
Philips arranged with the Procurator-General of the Regent's government in Brussels that he would visit Antwerp at a time when Tyndale's host Poyntz was away.
The officers from Brussels were stationed at the end of a narrow passage leading to the English House.
Philips had no difficulty in luring Tyndale out to dinner.
Foxe describes how ‘Master Tyndale, a man of no great stature’, was courteously persuaded to walk ahead, whilst the tall and comely  Philips behind him pointed over his head ‘so that the officers who sat at the door might see that it was he whom they should take; as the officers that took Master Tyndale afterwards told Poyntz, they pitied to see his simplicity when they took him.’
Tyndale was held as a prisoner in the castle of Vilforde near Brussels for sixteen months.
Poyntz made great efforts to obtain his release and Cromwell was persuaded to send letters to the two leading members of the Council of Brabant on his behalf.
Poyntz carried these letters himself.
When this intervention appeared likely to succeed, the watchful Philips caused Poyntz too to be arrested as a suspected heretic.
Poyntz after several months escaped from jail and fled to England.
No one else tried to help Tyndale.
A commission of magistrates and theologians from the University of Louvain was appointed to examine him in a long-drawn-out process in which translations of his heretical works were prepared by Philips; written charges and rebuttals in Latin passed to and fro between the Commission and Tyndale, followed by oral examinations.
Unfortunately only the letters of the Commission, and not Tyndale's replies, have survived.
But in these papers it is stated that Tyndale headed his written defence, ‘Faith alone justifies before God’, and that among the questions debated were worship of saints, the Sacraments and the authority of the Pope.
There could only be one end to these arguments which were so familiar to him.
Just one letter from Tyndale survives from his long period in prison.
It is written in Latin to someone in authority to ask for warmer clothes and above all for the return of his Hebrew Bible, grammar and dictionary.
It seems that these were received and that he was able to continue his Old Testament translations until the very end, reaching the Book of Jonah.
In August 1536 he was condemned as a heretic, publicly stripped of the vestments of priesthood, and handed over to the secular authorities.
Foxe describes his last moments: ‘He was brought forth to the place of execution, was there tied to the stake, and then strangled by the hangman, and afterwards with fire consumed in the morning at the town of Vilvorde, AD 1536; crying thus at the stake with a fervent zeal and a loud voice: ‘Lord, open the King of England's eyes’.’
This last wish was soon met.
Within a year Matthews' and Coverdale's Bibles, which incorporated and completed Tyndale's translations, received the royal licence.
Within two years Cromwell, in the name of the King, ordered that the Great Bible be provided in every parish church in the land, so that all who wished might come  and read it.
As for Philips, Foxe records that like Judas ‘He not long time after enjoyed the price of innocent blood, but was consumed at last by lice.’
What was Tyndale like as a man?
When he was young and full of the new learning of Oxford and Cambridge he appears arrogant even by his own account.
In middle age he became more patient as he was harried from city to city and lost all his papers in a shipwreck.
As a translator he was modest, exhorting and beseeching those of his readers ‘who are better seen in the Scriptures than I, and have higher gifts of grace to interpret the Scripture’ to correct his work.
Yet he was also obstinate, even perverse; his translations would have been less likely to have been seized by the authorities had they not been accompanied by the contentious marginal comments.
Foxe describes him as ‘very frugal and spare of body, a great student’, and how  In wily subtleties of the world, Foxe continues, he was simple and inexpert.
As Tyndale described himself in a letter to his disciple Frith, ‘God hath made me ill favoured in this world, and without grace in the sight of men, speechless and rude, dull and ill witted.’
He felt his influence therefore to be transmitted entirely through his books, and in these, which were so often destroyed, what he had to say was constantly repeated.
His message was that every Christian had the right to read or hear the word of God in his own language, and was capable of redemption only through belief in that word, rather than by any good works that he or she might do.
At the English Reformation Tyndale naïvely hoped that, after provision had been made for the surplus clergy, the revenues misused by the Church would be devoted to relief of the poor, not to the enrichment of Henry VIII's courtiers.
Christian landlords, he  urged, should be content with their rent and old customs.
‘Let them not take in their commons, neither make parks nor pastures of whole parishes: for God gave the earth to man to inherit not unto sheep and wild deer.’
It is for his Bible and not for his controversial books that Tyndale is commemorated.
When he wrote, the English language was still unformed and had not yet been the vehicle of any great work.
Tyndale ensured that the English Bible should be in a popular and spoken, rather than a literary, language.
The lists of men imprisoned for reading or distributing his New Testament show most of them to have been of quite humble origins — apprentices, tailors, weavers, servants, husbandmen.
Tyndale was always aware of and resigned to his likely fate.
In burning his New Testament, he wrote, they did ‘none other than I looked for: no more shall they do if they burn me also, if it be God's will it shall be so’.
But he had resolved, when he first took up his great task, that, if God spared his life, before many years he would cause the boy that drove the plough to know more of the Scripture than the ignorant parish clergy of his time.
This hope was abundantly fulfilled.
Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, Martyr (1489–1556)
Dying in such a cause, he was to be numbered amongst Christ's martyrs, much more worthy of the name of Saint Thomas of Canterbury than he whom the Pope falsely before did canonize .
John Foxe, 1563
When an attempt is made to set him up as a Saint, it is scarcely possible for any man of good sense who knows the history of his times to preserve his gravity .
T. B. Macaulay, 1843
In the summer of 1529, during an outbreak of the plague in southern England, three men who had been students together at Cambridge found themselves by chance staying in the same house in Waltham.
Stephen Gardiner, who was Secretary to King Henry VIII, and Edward Foxe, the King's Almoner, lodged there in attendance on the King, who had moved out of London.
Thomas Cranmer was living there with two of his pupils until it was safe to return to Cambridge, where he was a Fellow of Jesus College.
Over supper Gardiner and Foxe explained how a few days earlier Cardinal Campeggio, the Papal Legate had refused to take a decision on the King's petition for a divorce from Queen Catherine of Aragon and had transferred the case to Rome.
They described the King's surprise and frustration, for usually the Pope made little difficulty over the annulment of royal marriages.
Quite recently the King of France and the King's own sister, Queen Margaret of Scotland, had been obliged in this way; but now Queen Catherine's uncle, the German Emperor Charles V, held the Pope virtually prisoner in Rome and had compelled him not to agree to Henry's divorce.
Cranmer, with that desire to proffer advice on  affairs of state which often overcomes academics after a good dinner, suggested a new approach; the divines of the English and European universities should be consulted, he urged, for they were just as competent as any cardinals to advise whether in light of the Scriptures it was unlawful for a man to be married to his deceased brother's wife.
Next day, Gardiner and Foxe, pressed by the King for their advice as to how to end his long and tedious suit, told him of their conversation with Cranmer.
‘That man’, cried the King, ‘hath the sow by the right ear.’
Cranmer was summoned to the royal presence and, though protesting his incompetence, was told to stay at the house of the Earl of Wiltshire, Anne Boleyn's father.
There he was to search the Scriptures and the writings of the early Fathers and write a book which would be distributed to the universities and would enable them to give their advice as to whether the Pope had authority to enable a man to marry his deceased brother's wife.
Cranmer was born in 1489 and was thus forty years old when he was precipitated into the world of affairs.
His life had not been particularly eventful or distinguished.
His father was a small Nottinghamshire landlord who was glad for one of his sons to be quartered on the Church.
He studied at Jesus College, Cambridge, of which he became a Fellow.
Before he was ordained, however, he married and had to resign his Fellowship.
He continued to teach in the university until his wife died, when he resumed his Fellowship and took Orders.
From the age of thirty, according to Foxe, he devoted his whole mind to the study of religion and he was a member of a group which included Tyndale, Coverdale and Latimer who met to discuss the writings of Luther and other Reformers at the White Horse Inn in Cambridge.
His insistence as a public examiner that men who aspired to become Bachelors or Doctors of Divinity should show knowledge of the Scriptures rather than of the commentators made him unpopular with the Friars.
He himself was so influenced by Luther that he used to pray for the abolition of the Pope's authority in England.
From the moment of his meeting with the King he was virtually in the royal service.
The book which he wrote was circulated to the English universities and he then became a member of a mission to Italy to press the divorce on the Pope.
The Pope hinted to the mission that much embarrassment could be avoided if the King were to arrange his divorce without consulting Rome.
He also paid Cranmer the compliment of making him a Penitentiary for England.
During the mission Cranmer gave handsome presents from the King to the Italian universities in the hope of their support.
In 1532 he was sent as Ambassador to the German Emperor, nominally to discuss the latter's plan for European action against the Turks, but secretly to explore a possible alliance for England with some of the Protestant German princes.
The visit enabled him to have discussions with German theologians, which confirmed him in his Lutheranism.
Imprudently he married the niece of a prominent German Protestant theologian.
How he expected his career to develop when he contracted this marriage is unclear, but he can hardly have supposed that he would be summoned home by the King when Archbishop Warham died, in order to succeed him as Archbishop of Canterbury.
He started to travel as slowly as possible in the hope that the King would change his mind.
But no delays or protests could be accepted.
Anne Boleyn was pregnant; the King contracted a secret marriage with her and the need for a divorce was urgent to secure a legitimate succession.
The Pope's consent to Cranmer's appointment was obtained.
When he was consecrated, however, Cranmer made a public protestation that any oath which he took acknowledging the authority of the Pope was not intended to be binding if it were against the law of God or the King's prerogatives, nor would it bind him to be less free in reformation of the Church.
A few days after his consecration the new Archbishop conducted a formal enquiry and pronounced, as Convocation had already done, that the King's first marriage was invalid because the Pope had no power to allow him to marry his deceased brother's wife.
When Cranmer became Archbishop, his predecessor Warham had already persuaded Convocation to accept the supremacy of the King as Head of the Church.
The Reformation Parliament had begun its attacks on Church property and lands, and the Annates Act had forbidden payments of Church revenues to Rome.
The Church was thus already dependent on the State.
What was not settled was the form which the national Church would take.
For Cranmer, who headed the party of Reform for the next twenty years, the task seemed hardly begun.
There was a need for a Bible in the English tongue and for a new liturgy in English which would clearly indicate the Church's disbelief in Purgatory, pilgrimages, and in transubstantiation.
A new clergy, no longer celibate, had to be trained to replace the existing parish clergy, whose ignorance and greed had been one of the causes of the deformation.
Worship of  images and Masses for the dead must be excluded.
His great vision was for a reformed English Church to take its place in an international General Council of the protestant countries.
On the other side a conservative party, led by Cranmer's old Cambridge acquaintance Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, though accepting the royal supremacy, wanted as little change as possible from the Roman Catholic order.
Between the two parties stood the King, at heart a conservative but at times favouring the Reform party for reasons of domestic or foreign policy.
Had the conservatives prevailed completely, there could have been a reconciliation with Rome after the death of both Catherine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn in 1536, when the occasion of the dispute was thus ended.
Cranmer's greatest success in Henry's reign was to persuade the King that a copy of the Bible in the English language should be placed in every church.
He chose the translation of Tyndale, where this existed, because it was made from the original Greek and Hebrew, unlike that of Coverdale, which was translated from the Roman Vulgate.
In his preface to the translation he wrote, ‘In the Scriptures be the fat pastures of the soul; therein is no venomous meat, no unwholesome thing; they be the very dainty and pure feeding.’
He rebuked those who refused to read the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue and discouraged others from doing so, as well as those who by inordinate reading, indiscreet speaking, contentious disputing and slander hindered the Word of God.
Though he worked on the new liturgy, he was only able to publish the English Litany in Henry's reign.
He was not responsible for the dissolution of the monasteries, which was handled by Thomas Cromwell, though he heartily approved of this and hoped that the revenues would be used for education, and in particular for education of the new clergy.
He took no share of the Church lands for himself, and his generous entertaining often caused him financial difficulties.
As the King observed, ‘He spendeth, that good man, all that he hath on husbandry.’
He remained at heart a scholar, rising at 5 a.m. each day to keep up with his reading of new books from abroad and often having Continental scholars staying with him, under whose influence he came to have an extreme Reformist attitude to the Mass.
In his early years as Archbishop he succeeded in obtaining the appointment of a number of Reformers as bishops.
In 1540, however, although he strongly opposed them in the House of Lords, the Six Articles of  Religion were passed by parliament, including those on transubstantiation and celibacy of the clergy.
He was particularly vulnerable on the latter point, for he was generally believed to carry his wife around secretly on his travels in a box or coffin.
After the passing of the Six Articles he sent her back to Germany.
His advanced views made him unpopular with many of the clergy.
Some of his own priests at Canterbury denounced him to the King for heresy.
One day when the King was passing down the Thames in his barge, Cranmer, hearing the royal music, came out on Lambeth Bridge to greet him.
The King took him into his barge and cried, ‘Now I know the greatest heretic in Kent’ and showed him the letters from Canterbury.
Cranmer demanded a commission of inquiry; the King appointed him chairman of this commission and entrusted him, despite his protests that this was unfair, with the selection of its other members.
More powerful were his enemies at Court, who had been offended by his attempts to prevent chantry lands being sold to them or by his refusal to grant easy divorces.
On one occasion the King's Council, of which he was a member, ordered him to be committed to the Tower of London whilst charges of teaching heresies were examined.
The King, having word of this in advance, provided him with a signet ring which he showed and which entitled the matter to be transferred to the King's presence, where the accusers were roundly rebuked.
Cranmer's natural inclination was for compromise and mercy.
He sought to save the lives of More and Fisher by suggesting that they be required to subscribe only to an oath to respect the succession, and not to repudiate the authority of Rome.
He persuaded the King not to put his obstinate daughter Mary in the Tower for refusing the oath, though Henry rightly foretold that this kindness would do Cranmer no good.
He boldly wrote to the King in defence of Anne Boleyn, who had been a friend to the Reformers, when she was to be executed on trumped-up charges.
He was completely in the hands of the King, who knew of his secret marriage; yet on the other hand the King was unlikely to proceed against an archbishop whose actions had validated his divorces.
He was almost unique in that the ruthless and suspicious King genuinely liked and trusted him.
Often he would send for Cranmer in the night to reassure him in his religious doubts and difficulties.
It was only Cranmer who was brave enough to confront him with the evidence of the infidelities of the adored young Queen  of his middle age, Catherine Howard.
When the King fell ill he sent for Cranmer and died with his hand in that of the Archbishop.
For all Henry's faults, it was under his rule that the Reformation had been achieved; in his grief Cranmer allowed his beard to grow unshaven for the rest of his life.
In the new reign Cranmer was a senior member of the Council of Regency and was also godfather to the young King Edward VI.
Both the Duke of Somerset, the King's uncle, who became Protector, and the Duke of Northumberland, who succeeded him, were supporters of religious reform, which Cranmer could now advance.
He called for removal of religious images, causing much vandalism in parish churches.
He persuaded Convocation to agree to the marriage of priests.
Altars were replaced by Communion tables.
He taught openly that the Mass was not an oblation and sacrifice but a ‘memory and representation of the sacrifice of the Cross’.
He invited Continental Reformers to visit him and planned with them an international union of protestants.
Above all he was now able to prepare and publish the Prayer Book of 1549 and its revised version of 1552.
These were influenced by the Sarum use and the breviary of Cardinal Quignon, but the differences from Roman Catholic practice were considerable.
Compline and the Four Hours, Prime, Terce, Sext and None, were omitted.
Cranmer was well acquainted with contemporary Continental liturgies and he followed Luther in allowing the congregation a part in each rite or ceremony.
The Anglican Prayer Book, however, was the most conservative of all the liturgies produced by the Reformation.
It provoked the spirit of devotion rather than of debate.
For Luther only truth needed to be considered: Cranmer had to take into account the fact that the majority of the English population were probably still Catholics at heart.
Though Cranmer drew from many sources, it was his own touch which gave the Prayer Book the charm, perfection of form and expression which were to endow the Church of England for centuries with unity, strength and a way to the hearts of men.
Cranmer had no desire to make the Anglican Church national in doctrine and ritual but only in jurisdiction.
His first Prayer Book was influenced by Luther; his second more by Zwingli, in an attempt to make it acceptable to the Continental churches and enable a Reformed General Council to bring the whole of Christendom into a new and scriptural unity.
Cranmer's involvement in affairs of state in the reign of Edward VI was embarrassing, pathetic and finally disastrous.
As the senior member of the Regency Council he had to preside over the disgrace, leading to execution, of his ally and friend Protector Somerset.
He had to acquiesce in the seizure of Church plate and in the appropriation of common lands by the nobility, who enclosed them and put them under pasture.
When the young King was dying, probably of tuberculosis, the protector, Northumberland, persuaded him to leave the throne in his Will to his Protestant cousin Lady Jane Grey, Northumberland's daughter-in-law, instead of to his Catholic half-sister Mary, as prescribed in the Act of Succession of Henry VIII's reign.
Alone in the Council, Cranmer refused to sign the document altering the succession, until finally he yielded to the plea of his dying godson.
Jane Grey's reign lasted nine days.
Cranmer was among the members of the Council who took refuge with her in the Tower and then capitulated to Mary.
A dilemma was posed both for the new Queen and for the Archbishop.
To the Queen, Cranmer was not only detestable as a heretic but odious as the man who had arranged her mother's divorce; he had however been legally consecrated as Archbishop by order of the pope, and only the Pope could hand him over for judgement and punishment by the civil power.
As for Cranmer, he had for twenty-five years insisted on the duty of the subject, in accordance with Scripture, to obey the powers that be, which were of divine origin.
But he found little guidance in Scripture as to how a subject or bishop should behave when his sovereign was determined to undo the Reformation.
He advised his fellow bishops to flee and retired to his palace and his books.
Then a rumour was spread that he had said Mass in the old Roman form at the funeral of Edward VI.
Impetuously he wrote a declaration, which was widely circulated, denying the rumour and asserting that he was ready to prove that the Prayer Book of Edward VI conformed to the commandments of Christ and the practice of the Apostles, whereas the Mass was contrary to that practice and was the work of Satan.
He was now arrested, tried for treason for his support of Jane Grey and condemned to death.
So many members of the Council had also been conspicuous supporters of Jane that only Northumberland was immediately executed.
From prison Cranmer wrote to the Queen asking for her mercy and pardon for his heinous folly in following the Will of Edward VI.
To execute him for treason indeed would have been  little help to the government in its attempt to crush and discredit the Reformation, but they could not proceed against him for heresy in due form until England was reconciled with the Roman Catholic Church.
After the reconciliation, the Queen and her consort, Philip of Spain, denounced Cranmer to the Pope for heresy.
Meanwhile he was held for seventeen months in prison in Oxford, where a debate was staged in which Cranmer and bishops Latimer and Ridley were pitted against selected scholars from Oxford and Cambridge.
Their adversaries were also the judges of the debate and announced that the heretics had been confuted.
After England became reconciled to Rome, Latimer and Ridley were formally tried and convicted of heresy.
Cranmer was summoned to Rome, and, although he was in prison and unable to obey the summons, was excommunicated for contumacy when he did not appear.
He was then tried by a commission, in which both the pope and the Queen were represented, for blasphemy, incontinency, heresy and perjury.
He refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome and in a letter to the Queen made a spirited defence of the repudiation of papal jurisdiction and the adoption of the mother tongue for worship.
After his inevitable conviction Cranmer was brought from prison in Oxford to the University Church of St Mary the Virgin to be formally degraded by the papal commissioners.
He was clothed in the vestments of the Seven Orders of the Church and the insignia of an archbishop, which were then each solemnly stripped from him.
His fingers and nails were scraped to remove the sacred unction; a barber shaved what remained of his tonsure, and he was clad in a poor yeoman beadle's gown.
He was returned to the Bocardo Jail, from whose roof he watched the painful death by burning of Latimer and Ridley.
Now began his series of recantations.
The first four were hardly inconsistent with his career.
In the first and second he recognised the papal authority because the Queen and Parliament had accepted it.
In the third and fourth he promised to submit his books to the Pope and to the next General Council.
In the fourth he declared his belief to be in accord with that of the Catholic Church; he could, of course, privately satisfy himself that this was consistent with his contention that Popery was a corruption of Catholicism.
The Queen had no intention of sparing Cranmer.
He must be used to discredit the English Reformation completely.
For this the recantations were insufficient, and different tactics were now  applied to obtain a much more abject confession.
Cranmer was moved to Wolsey's new college of Christ Church as the guest of the Dean.
Here after living in strict confinement he found himself dining and playing bowls with amiable divines.
They showed him great sympathy.
When dons became involved in worldly affairs, they observed, mistakes were inevitable.
Cranmer could not become an archbishop again, but a return to scholarly life was possible if he would only sign one or two documents as a formality.
Under these inducements and persuasions Cranmer signed his fifth recantation, in which he condemned the whole heresy of Luther and Zwingli and recognised the Pope as Christ's Vicar and Supreme Head of the Church.
He surrendered all he had fought for, accepting even the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and the existence of Purgatory.
Even this did not satisfy the Queen.
In a sixth paper he was made to describe and deplore his own misdeeds in the blackest hues.
‘I have sinned most grievously before Heaven and against the whole realm of England’, he wrote.
‘I have persecuted more furiously than Paul….
I have blasphemed…and did exceeding wrong to King Henry VIII and especially to his wife, Queen Catherine.’
On receiving this, the Queen gave orders for his execution the next day.
For maximum effect he was required to repeat his humiliating confession in public before he was burned.
It was a rainy day in May, so this ceremony was held in St Mary's Church instead of in the open air at the place of execution.
First a sermon was preached by the Provost of Eton, Dr Cole, in which he explained that, although Cranmer had recanted, his life was forfeit in retribution for those of More and Fisher.
Then Cranmer prayed aloud in English.
He commenced to read his last recantation, urging his listeners to fear God and obey the King and Queen.
Then suddenly he diverged from his text:
At this point he was stopped, dragged from the stage and hustled  down Brasenose Lane towards the stake.
As he pressed eagerly forward, his long beard streaming In the wind and rain, two Spanish friars snapped at his heels, still desperately trying to persuade him in Latin to die in the faith; they continued to exhort him at the stake, where, according to Foxe, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, as he held his offending hand in the fire, and died using the words of Stephen: ‘Lord Jesus receive my spirit.’
Contemporary or near-contemporary accounts show Cranmer as a kind and modest man.
He made nothing for himself out of the plunder of the Church lands.
He was so quick to forgive personal insults and injuries that it was said that you only had to injure him in order to have him as a friend for life.
He believed in the established order but found no authority in the Scriptures for a hierarchy of Pope and bishops; in the early Church indeed he found that riches were despised.
He attempted to preserve from what he called the ‘growing appetites of sacrilegious cormorants’ Church revenues which could pay for the education of talented children of poor families.
He also tried to prevent the new grammar schools from being reserved for the sons of the gentry.
He considered that it was his primary duty to be a divine and theologian rather than a political bishop.
New ideas came slowly to him through his studies.
Whenever controversies came, it was observed, he gathered every author who could throw light on them; he saw both sides of a case with more imagination than most of his contemporaries.
He had an absolute belief in the Bible as interpreted by the early Fathers, rather than by the traditions of the medieval Church.
Cranmer shared the Tudor passion for religious uniformity, but was mild in persecution.
Only two heretics were burned in the reign of Edward VI.
He was an impetuous, but not naturally a brave, man and explained that he had lost his audacity through the brutality of an early schoolmaster.
It was his misfortune that what were admirable qualities in a scholar and pastor were defects in a reluctant politician.
King Henry VIII understood this well.
‘What will they do to you after I am gone?’ he exclaimed, and told Cranmer that he should change the crane on his coat of arms to a pelican, for like this bird he would have to give his life for his child, the English Church.
Cranmer's reputation has suffered various vicissitudes.
In Elizabeth's reign there was a Government campaign to glorify his memory, and Foxe devoted 100 pages to him in his Book of Martyrs.
Later he had little attraction for the Caroline Divines or the Oxford Movement, to tease whose members the Martyrs' Memorial at Oxford was built in commemoration of the execution of Cranmer, Latimer and Ridley; the consciences of Newman, Pusey and Keble were exquisitely tom as they tried to decide whether to subscribe and how their subscriptions to the Memorial Fund might be earmarked for the least heretical of the martyrs.
The Evangelicals usually honoured Cranmer, but Macaulay did not, writing, somewhat unfairly, ‘The sanguinary intolerance of a man who then wavered in his Creed excites a loathing to which it is difficult to give vent without calling foul names.’
Recent generations, who have a closer experience of persecutions and of the results of solitary confinement under brutal regimes, have shown more sympathy with Cranmer's weaknesses.
He might have gained a place in the ASB in any case as a representative of the protestant Reformation.
Yet the description of Cranmer in the ASB Calendar as ‘Archbishop of Canterbury and Martyr’ is somewhat inappropriate.
As Archbishop he was indecisive; there were contemporaries who could have provided stouter leadership, as they let him know.
He was also a very reluctant martyr: only when the learnt that he was to be burned in spite of his abject recantations did he withdraw them.
The overwhelming case for his inclusion was neither as Archbishop nor as martyr but as author of the magnificent liturgy which held the Church together during the tribulations of the next century, and above all for his Collects, which Anglicans through four centuries would learn by heart as children and recite when they came to die.
The Middle Way
Richard Hooker
Teacher of the Faith (1553–1600)
I intend a justification of the laws of our ecclesiastical polity.
My meaning is not to provoke any, but rather to satisfy all tender consciences.
When Queen Elizabeth succeeded her sister Mary in 1558, the Anglican form of Church government which was restored in place of that of Rome was by no means firmly based.
The external threat to it of the restoration of Roman Catholicism through foreign invasion was in the long run less serious than that posed by the Puritans from within.
Many of the new bishops and other senior ecclesiastics had been strongly influenced by Calvinism during their exile abroad in Mary's reign.
Parliament several times petitioned the Queen to reform the Church of Catholic abuses.
Even some of the Queen's closest councillors, such as Leicester and Walsingham, had Calvinist sympathies.
That the Church in the form in which it was re-established eventually survived the Puritan onslaught was to a large extent due to the philosophical and historical basis which was provided for it with formidable learning by Richard Hooker.
Hooker was born in Exeter in 1553.
His family seem to have been of limited means, for his father intended to take him out of school at an early age to become an apprentice.
The eagerness with which the boy sought for knowledge, however, so impressed his schoolmaster that he continued to teach him without a fee; then, through Hooker's uncle who was Chamberlain of Exeter, he persuaded John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, to pay for him to study at the latter's old college of Corpus Christi at Oxford.
Here his most influential teacher was John Reynolds, a moderate Puritan.
In 1577 he became a Fellow of the College.
Among his pupils were George Cranmer, great-nephew of the Archbishop, and Edwin Sandys, son of the  Archbishop of York, with both of whom he formed a lasting friendship.
In addition to his College duties he lectured on logic and on Hebrew in the university.
He read deeply in theology, philosophy and law and would often say, ‘God abhors confusion as contrary to his nature’ and ‘that the Scripture was not writ to beget disputations and pride, and opposition to government, but charity and humility, moderation, obedience to authority and peace to mankind’.
During this time he was ordained deacon and priest.
In 1581 he was appointed to preach a sermon at St Paul's Church, London.
The occasion was to have two important consequences.
On the one hand his challenge to Calvin's doctrine of predestination caused a controversy in which he was championed by the Bishop of London, who was later to urge his preferment.
More immediately, according to his biographer, Izaak Walton, he was persuaded by his landlady during this visit to London that he was a man of tender constitution who needed a wife to prolong his life and make it more comfortable; because of his modesty and dim sight, Hooker left the choice to her, and soon found himself married to her daughter.
‘By this marriage’, says Walton, ‘the good man was drawn from the tranquillity of his college, from that garden of piety, of peace and a sweet conversation, into the thorny wilderness of a busy world, into those corroding cares that attend a married priest.’
He became Rector of Drayton Beauchamp in Buckinghamshire.
Here his former pupils, Sandys and Cranmer, found him with the Odes of Horace in his hand, tending his sheep.
When they went into his house, ‘where their best entertainment was his quiet company ‘, his wife continually interrupted their conversation by busying him with domestic duties.
The young men were shocked.
Sandys persuaded his father, the Archbishop of York, that Hooker's scholarship was being wasted as a country parson, and in 1585 he was appointed as Master of the Temple, in London, where it was his duty to minister to the lawyers of the Inns of Court.
Burghley, the Queen's chief minister, had intended that Walter Travers, a leading Puritan divine, should be appointed, but was overruled by the Queen.
Travers, however, continued as a lecturer at the Temple after Hooker became Master, so that‘the forenoon sermon spoke Canterbury, and the afternoon Geneva’.
The main points at issue between Hooker and Travers were predestination and justification by faith.
There was little bitterness on either side in these sermons, but each party brought out all the reasons to prove his adversary's  opinions erroneous.
Eventually Travers was banned by the Archbishop of Canterbury from preaching because he had no licence to do so from the Church of England; the controversy, however, continued in pamphlets.
Hooker tired of the dispute, ‘for’, Walton relates,
This intention was warmly supported by John Whitgift, the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had himself engaged in a spirited controversy with the leading contemporary Puritan theologian Thomas Cartwright.
It was indeed the attacks in Cartwright's books which Hooker was to take as the starting point for his defence of the Church.
He resigned from the Temple; and to provide for the needs of his rapidly increasing family he was appointed as Rector of Boscom and prebendary of Salisbury, with the apparent understanding that he would continue to reside mainly in London, where he could find the books which he required for his great work,Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity .
This became a massive exercise; in Keble's edition it runs to more than 2000 pages.
Of its eight books only five were published in Hooker's lifetime.
The case made by Cartwright, Travers and other Puritan divines was that the Church of England retained many of the errors of Rome.
The Puritans repudiated the whole history of the Church since the time of the Apostles.
They wished to replace the system under which the Church was governed by king, bishops and clergy with one in which there was a separation of Church and State, and in which each congregation would be governed by an elected minister, elders and deacons, holding their commission by positive enactment of the Holy Scriptures.
They attacked the Prayer Book as ‘a Mass book full of abominations, culled out of the Popish dunghill’.
Because they saw the Pope as the Antichrist of the Book of Revelation and the Roman Catholics as apostates, they fiercely attacked all Church of England rites and ceremonies which followed those of Rome, including its  set prayers, its administration of the Sacraments, the use of altars instead of tables, its celebrations of saints' days, its music and its vestments.
All these they wished to sweep away, to be replaced by a form of worship dominated by the sermon and by improvised prayers offered by the minister.
They maintained that there should be nothing in Church doctrine, ceremonies or organisation which could not be justified by texts in the Scriptures.
Hooker was saddened by the arrogance of the Puritans in asserting ‘We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; as for the rest of you, ye are of the world, for the world's pomp and vanity ye speak.’
He foresaw that their success would lead to the overthrow of learning in the universities, the neglect of civil law, and indeed to anarchy.
His approach, however, was conciliatory, quite unlike that of Tyndale and More.
He called on the puritans, as ‘Dear Brethren’,
He was prepared to concede non-essential points of terminology, such as referring to ‘priests’ as ‘presbyters’; his hope was ‘to see controversies end with concord and love on all sides,.
4
He did not assert his claims for the structure and rites and liturgy of the Church of England as highly as did the divines of the next century.
He only maintained that the present forms of Church government which the laws of the land had established were such as‘No law of God nor reason had proved them to do ill.’
On the other hand he suggested that no proof had been brought forward that the forms proposed by the Puritans were founded on any ordinance of Christ.
In book I of the Laws Hooker showed that the Scriptures could not, as the Puritans maintained, provide the only rules for human conduct.
Whilst some things, he wrote, were revealed in the Bible, others ‘were opened by the glorious works of nature’.
For the first time the role of the Church of England was explained as the Via Media Anglicana, a middle way between Rome and Geneva.
Rome taught that the Scriptures were insufficient to contain all truth  which men should know in order to obtain salvation, unless they were accompanied by Roman Catholic tradition.
The Puritans taught that the Scriptures contained the lessons necessary for all human conduct and that any other laws were superfluous and even sinful.
Hooker's position was that, whereas the Scriptures contained the knowledge necessary for salvation, they must be supplemented in daily life by reason.
The erudition acquired in his Oxford years was displayed in copious references to the medieval doctors, to the Church Fathers, and to Plato and Aristotle before them, in order to show that no infallible revelation could dispossess reason from her task of pursuing truth: not only must the Scriptures be interpreted in the light of reason, but the Old Testament must be seen as leading to the New by progressive revelation.
To the doctrine of predestination, Hooker replied that it was the will of a merciful God that all should be saved, and that this was frustrated only by human perversity.
To that of justification by faith he added the corollary that good works were a necessary expression of thanksgiving on the part of a Christian for unmerited justification by a merciful God.
Hooker believed that ‘The Church of Christ can be but one, in heaven and on earth.’
This led him to assert that, in spite of‘the gross and grievous abominations’ of Rome, ‘yet touching those main parts of Christian truth wherein they constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be the family of Jesus Christ’.
The Puritans had declared that Roman Catholics were ‘dogs, swine, unclean beasts, foreigners and strangers from the Church of God’, who ought not to be admitted to its services.
Hooker replied that it was right to admit them to the Church's Communion service, which, when he wrote, they were indeed obliged to attend by law.
God, he said, ‘doth not bind us to dive into men's consciences,.
Roman Catholics ‘should be received with lenity and all meekness, not to quench with delays the feeble smoke of conformity which seemeth to breathe from them, but to build wheresoever there is any foundation’.
The most eloquent and best known part of the Laws is book v, which contains Hooker's defence of the liturgy and rites of the Church of England.
He based his position not only on the writings of the early Fathers and the long practice of the whole Christian Church but on reason and common sense.
‘Visible forms’, he wrote, ‘are to edify, either by understanding, or when by affection the  minds of the congregation are stirred up with that reverence, devotion, attention and due regard which in that case seemeth requisite, especially means which make a deep and strong impression on the eye.’
He described the celebration of saints' days and festivals as manifestations of the ‘splendid outward dignity of our religion, forcible witnesses of ancient truth, provocations to the exercise of all piety, shadows of our endless felicity in heaven…wherein they which cannot be drawn to hearken unto what we teach may only by looking upon that we do, in a manner read whatsoever we believe’.
The set prayers of the Church he defended not only as encouraged by Scripture but because their ‘very form and solemnity helped that imbecility and weakness’ which made individuals ‘much less apt to perform unto God so heavenly a service with such affection of heart and disposition of our souls as is necessary’.
He contrasted the liturgy with the ‘irksome deformities’ of the improvised prayers of the Puritans.
Kneeling at Holy Communion was ‘a sensible witness of minds unfeignedly humbled’; the white surplices of the clergy, so offensive to the Puritans, he described as ‘suiting so fitly with that lightsome affection of joy, wherein God delighteth when his Saints praise him’.
Church music, he said, was ‘both apt as well to quicken the spirits as to allay that which is too eager, sovereign against melancholy and despair, forcible to draw forth tears of devotion…able to move and to moderate all affections’.
In discussing Holy Communion, Hooker turned gladly from theories of transubstantiation to remind his readers of the fundamental truth that ‘The real presence of Christ's most blessed body and blood is not to be sought for in the Sacrament but in the worthy receiving of the Sacrament.
…I wish that men would give themselves to meditate in silence on what we have by the Sacrament, and less to discuss the manner how.’
The last three books of the Laws were published after Hooker's death, based on his drafts and notes; as published they certainly contain omissions and possibly interpolations.
In them Hooker discusses the Presbyterian system of government by church elders, the status of bishops, and the relationship between Church and State.
The institution of bishops he defends as convenient and of long standing, rather than as based on Apostolic succession.
In contrast with the views both of Rome and of the Puritans he emphasises the unity of Church and State.
The supreme authority of the sovereign as secular ruler he qualifies by suggesting that  originally kings received their power by consent of the people.
Similarly, though he defends the royal supremacy in the Church, he observes that in England Church laws require the consent of Parliament and Convocation.
In 1595 Hooker moved from London to become Rector of Bishops Bourne in Kent.
The village was near the main road between Canterbury and Dover.
The fame of Hooker's books and the sanctity of his life became so remarkable that many people would turn off the road to see him.
They found, according to Walton,
On Fridays and other fast-days he would lock himself up in the church for many hours.
He was diligent in visiting the sick and distressed, supposing this to be ‘the fittest time to discover to them those errors to which health and prosperity had blinded them’.
He did his best to discourage lawsuits, urging his parishioners and neighbours to bear with each other 's infirmities and live in love.
Hooker died in 1600 at the age of forty-six after catching cold on a passage by water between Gravesend and Greenwich.
On his deathbed, as he meditated on the number and nature of angels, he was told that his house had been robbed.
He asked, ‘Are my books and written papers safe?’, and, being answered that they were, his reply was ‘Then it matters not, for no other loss can trouble me.’
Alas, they were not safe, and what happened to them has been a matter of considerable argument.
Walton's Life of Hooker relates how his widow allowed Puritan ministers to enter the house and bum the last three books of the Laws , which were already in  complete form.
Recent research suggests that this is untrue.
It would seem that the books were not completed; the drafts came into the hands of Sandys, who destroyed part of book VI because it was ‘too papistical’.
The rest was preserved by Bishop Andrewes.
The remaining part of book VI and book VIII were published in 1648; book VII was only published in 1662 after the restoration of Charles II, when a complete edition of the Laws was edited by the notoriously untrustworthy Bishop Gauden, who asserted the authenticity of the posthumous books.
The moderation with which these dealt with the divine rights and historical origins of kings and bishops were an embarrassment to the High Church and ardently Royalist party which was now in power.
Izaak Walton was therefore commissioned by Sheldon, the Archbishop of Canterbury, to write a Life of Hooker which would not only replace an inaccurate memoir in Gauden's edition, but would generally discredit the later books.
Walton did this with such success that his ‘Life’ appeared at the beginning of all subsequent editions of the Laws .
In his Life of Hooker Walton states that in the original lost manuscripts there was no mention of kings being accountable to the people; and he relates how Charles I, in a discussion with the Parliamentary leader Lord Saye, refused to accept any arguments based on the last three books, because it was doubtful whether they were authentic, although he gladly accepted Hooker's judgements in the first five.
Hooker became much better known, and indeed revered, after his death.
It was James I who gave him the epithet ‘judicious’ and enjoined his son, the future King Charles 1, to study his works.
Charles I in turn commended the Laws to his son, Charles II, as the most important book written next to the Bible.
Later Hooker was to be an inspiration to the Tractarians, an anchor which held many of them within the Church of England when their friends departed for Rome; Keble, in editing Hooker's works, described him as ‘the chief human instrument in the salutary interference of Divine providence’ in the affairs of the English Church.
Richard Bayne in an introduction to the Laws early in the twentieth century declared that Hooker was ‘sincerely and deeply an Evangelical, a Catholic and a rationalist.
Low Churchmen, High Churchmen and Broad Churchmen can all find themselves in him and claim him as Master.’
His prose style, modelled on that of the early Christian Fathers, was to influence that of writers as diverse as Burke, Gibbon and Ruskin.
The charm of his style, the persuasiveness of his appeal to history, the breadth of his understanding, the way in which earnestness is blended with joyfulness in his religion — and all things pervaded by reason and good sense — have won disciples for Hooker in all subsequent generations.
His Laws is still read with pleasure when much that has been written in intervening centuries on the subjects which he treated appears arid, unintelligible, pompous or irrelevant.
Hooker's was a name which could hardly fail to be included on the list of those whom the Church wished to commemorate in 1980.
Lancelot Andrewes
Bishop of Winchester (1555–1626)
Our appeal is to antiquity…we do not innovate .
Lancelot Andrewes to Cardinal Bellarmine
Deliver me from making Gods of Kings!
Lancelot Andrewes,Preces 
Lancelot Andrewes, who was Hooker's contemporary and friend, outlived him by twenty-five years and is usually regarded as his intellectual successor in the history of the Church of England.
Whilst Hooker defended the Church's beliefs and practices in the name of reason, Andrewes went further and boldly asserted that the Anglican Church was part of a Catholic and Universal Church and was maintaining its true traditions which had been corrupted by Rome.
His life was very different from that of Hooker.
Contemporary evidence about it is sparse.
A brief memoir by his secretary, Henry Isaacson, is a catalogue of his virtues rather than an account of his life.
Only a few pages of the funeral sermon preached by John Buckeridge, his successor as Bishop of Ely, deal with Andrewes himself.
He was born in London in 1555, eldest son of a Master of Trinity House, from whom he was to inherit a substantial property.
From his youth, says Bishop Buckeridge, ‘he was totally addicted to the study of good letters’, and at Merchant Taylors School ‘he accounted that time lost that he spent not on his studies, arising at four o'clock in the morning, and studying late into the night’.
Like Hooker, he was saved from becoming an apprentice by his schoolmaster.
He obtained a scholarship to Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, where he laid the foundation of the great learning for which he was later renowned, acquiring knowledge not only of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic and Syriac, but also of fifteen modern languages.
He was ordained and became a Fellow of his College.
There was scarcely a divinity student in Cambridge, says a contemporary, who ‘made not himself a disciple of Mr Andrewes by resorting to his lectures and transcribing his notes, and ever since they have in many hundreds of copies passed from hand to  hand and have been esteemed a very library to young divines’.
In 1586 he was appointed chaplain to the Earl of Huntingdon, President of the Council of the North, where ‘God so blessed his painful preaching and moderate private conference that he converted some of the Roman Catholic priests and many of the laity to the Protestant faith’.
Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth, though himself a Puritan, was so impressed with Andrewes' abilities, which he considered would be wasted in a country parish, that he caused him to be appointed Vicar of St Giles-without-Cripplegate in London, and at the same time prebend of St Paul's Cathedral and chaplain both to the Queen and to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Whilst continuing to hold these positions he was from 1589 to 1605 Master of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge.
The Queen delighted in his preaching and made him Dean of Westminster.
She twice offered him bishoprics, which he refused because he was unwilling to accept the condition that some of the lands of the diocese should be alienated to the Crown.
James I, when he came to the throne in 1603, according to Isaacson ‘admired him beyond all other divines, not only for his transcendent gift in preaching, but for his excellency and solidity in all kinds of learning, selecting him as his choicest instrument, to vindicate his regality against his foul-mouthed adversaries’.
He made him successively Bishop of Chichester, of Ely and of Winchester, as well as Lord Almoner, and a member of the Privy Council.
Early in the reign Andrewes assisted the King in a matter which was particularly important to James, who liked to engage in theological controversy.
After the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 Parliament prescribed an oath of allegiance which denied that the Pope had any authority to release Roman Catholics from their allegiance to the King.
The pope thereupon ruled that such an oath might not be taken by true Catholics; King James replied to the Pope in an anonymous book which, in turn, was answered by Cardinal Bellarmine.
The King now handed over the controversy to Andrewes.
In his massive work Torturi Torti , and in subsequent rejoinders to Bellarmine, written in Latin and corrected by the King, Andrewes made an exhaustive appeal to history in order to refute the Pope's claim to have power to depose monarchs.
The main importance of the controversy in the history of the Church of England was in the opportunity which it gave Andrewes to assert to Rome that ‘Our appeal is to antiquity — yea even the most extreme antiquity.
We do not innovate; it may be we renovate what was customary with those same ancients, but with you has  disappeared in novelties.’
He did not maintain that there should be a return to the precise conditions of the primitive Church, but rather that the Church of England's belief and practice were compatible with them.
‘One canon’, he wrote, ‘reduced to writing by God himself, two testaments, three creeds, four general councils, five centuries and the series of fathers in that period and two after, determine the boundaries of our faith.’
Although often absent from his diocese on the King's business, Andrewes proved a conscientious bishop at a time when many bishops took their duties lightly.
To improve the quality of his clergy, he continually ‘sought through his chaplains and friends to know what hopeful and towardly young wits were at the University.
He would also send for divers eminent men in learning, before they knew why, and entertain them in his house before deciding whether to offer them preferment.’
He was ‘noble in his entertainment and gravely facetious’, once spending £3000 as host to the King.
He was outstanding in charity and compassion, paying for the release of prisoners who were detained for debts and succouring families in time of need, but giving strict charge that they should not acknowledge the source of this help.
His piety was notorious.
Isaacson relates how he spent ‘many hours, yea, and the greatest part of his life, in holy prayers and abundant tears’.
He remained a student throughout his life, gave stipends to foreign scholars such as Grotius and Casaubon, and used to say that anyone who disturbed him before noon was no true scholar.
The three vices which he hated most, according to Isaacson, were usury, simony and sacrilege; and he suffered much through suits brought against him by men to whom he had refused livings.
Andrewes loved ceremonial and used incense in his private chapel, which, said Isaacson, was ‘so decently and reverently adorned that some were so taken with it, that they desired to end their days in the Bishop of Ely's chapel’.
However, as Thomas Fuller noted, ‘He never troubled parish, College or Diocese with pressing other ceremonies upon them than such which he found before his coming thither…content with the enjoying without the injoining on others.’
Similarly, though he insisted on doctrine which he considered essential to the Anglican faith, he did not require conformity on non-essentials, and also believed that there were divine mysteries on which it was idle to speculate.
Speculation indeed he described as the disease of the age; he never preached about predestination.
Besides seeking his help in religious controversies, the King made use of Andrewes' prodigious learning in other ways.
Thus he took part in the conference at Hampton Court which the King summoned in 1604 to discuss the demands of the Puritans for Church reform; his only recorded intervention was to defend the use of the sign of the Cross in baptism by references from the early Fathers.
One outcome of the conference was the new translation, or revision of earlier translations, of the Bible, which resulted in publication of the Authorised Version or King James Bible.
Andrewes was chairman of the committee which was responsible for the books from Genesis to Kings.
Other tasks were less congenial.
He was a member of many government committees.
In matters that concerned human conduct rather than religion he was generous and humane.
When George Abbott, the Archbishop of Canterbury, accidentally shot dead a gamekeeper, Andrewes, as a member of a commission of enquiry, urged his colleagues ‘Brethren, be not too busy to condemn any for uncanonicles according to the strictness thereof, lest we render ourselves in the same condition.’
Later, though he was member of a committee of the House of Lords which obtained a confession from Lord Chancellor Bacon of accepting bribes, he remained Bacon's friend.
On Church matters his attitudes were more stern.
He approved of the burning of Anabaptists.
He accompanied King James on the visit which he made to Scotland to impose episcopacy, and in his sermons there supported him in this venture, which was to have calamitous results for the monarchy in the next reign.
Andrewes' qualities and weaknesses in public life have been commented upon by his later biographers.
He was a capable administrator who restored the finances of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge during his Mastership and carried out substantial structural repairs in each of his dioceses.
On the other hand, despite his public criticism of nepotism, his successive promotion within his dioceses of his incapable brother Roger as vicar, prebendary and chancellor was unfortunate.
His final gift to him of the Mastership of Jesus College, Cambridge, resulted in scandal: Roger Andrewes was compelled to resign because he had embezzled college funds.
Andrewes has also been criticised for abandoning his parish during the plague, and, above all, for his subservience to the King.
Yet, on the main count, his conduct in the divorce proceedings of the Countess of Essex, which even his most devoted admirers considered the one blemish on a saintly life, a defence could be  made.
In brief, in 1615 Andrewes was a member of a commission appointed to consider the request of Lady Essex for an annulment of her marriage on the grounds that it had never been consummated.
She brought the case because she wished to marry the King's favourite, Robert Kerr, Viscount Rochester.
The King put strong pressure on the individual members of the commission to agree to the divorce, and the Archbishop of Canterbury and several other members thereupon withdrew in silent protest before the vote.
Andrewes, however, was among those who remained to pronounce the divorce.
It subsequently emerged that Lady Essex had been administering debilitating potions to her husband and was implicated in the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, who knew too much about this.
The Archbishop then became a popular hero for defying the King in this sordid affair, and those, including Andrewes, who had obliged Lady Essex in the divorce were discredited.
Yet on the basis of the facts available to him Andrewes could be regarded as taking a compassionate line in agreeing to the dissolution of a marriage which was intolerable to both husband and wife and had not been consummated.
It is, however, not on his career at Court or as a bishop or even as a controversialist that Andrewes' place in the history of the Church of England depends, but on his sermons and private prayers, which were published after his death.
T. S. Eliot has described Andrewes' sermons as ‘ranking with the finest English prose of their time, any time’.
Andrewes would prepare these with great care, revising each three times, for, says Buckeridge, ‘he ever misliked often and loose preaching without study of antiquity’.
In preaching at court he concerned himself not with conduct but with theology, proclaiming and elucidating the great facts of the Christian religion, reflecting and meditating on its joyful mysteries.
Throughout King James's reign Andrewes preached before him and the Court almost every year at the great festivals of Christmas, Easter and Whitsun.
The King, who fancied himself as a theologian, greatly admired Andrewes' learning and style; sometimes, indeed, he would sleep with one of his sermons under his pillow.
The sermons were full of puns, conceits and startling antitheses, such as‘Compassion is but passion at rebound’; ‘In some places of the Scripture the lamb may wade, so in others, the elephant may swim’; ‘Christ is no hell cat’; ‘This adoption is the fulness of our option.’
Andrewes would commence by reading out his text both in  the English of the Genevan Bible and in the Latin of the Vulgate and would never lose sight of it, frequently repeating it throughout the sermon.
Eliot observed how he would take a word ‘and squeeze and squeeze it until it yielded a full juice of meaning which we would never suppose any word to possess’.
Sometimes this brought him close to disaster.
A Scottish lord told King James that Andrewes ‘did play with his text as a jackanapes does, who takes up a thing and tosses and plays with it and then takes up another and plays with it.
Here's a pretty thing and there's a pretty thing.’
This critic may have been thinking of a well-known passage in one of the Nativity sermons in which Andrewes keeps up a series of puns in Hebrew, Latin and English for three pages on the word Emmanuel: ‘If it be not Immanu-el, it will be Immanu-hell….
If we have him…we need no more; Immanuel and Immanu-all’, and so on.
Yet there were also passages of extraordinary beauty and rhythm, such as that in another of his Nativity sermons which reflects on the coming of the Three Wise Men and was to inspire Eliot's ‘Journey of the Magi’.
Throughout this there is a play on the Latin words vidimus (‘we saw’),venimus (‘we come or we came’), and veniemus (‘we shall come,).
In addition to these sermons on the principal Holy Days of the Church, Andrewes preached before the King each year on the anniversary of the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot and on that of James's escape whilst King of Scotland from an attempt to murder him by the Earl of Gowrie and his brother.
It would have been better for Andrewes’ literary reputation, and far better for the history of the next reign if he had not done so.
If the Gunpowder Plot had succeeded, Andrewes as Bishop of Ely would have been blown up in the House of Lords together with the King.
It was natural that the sermons should be indignant, but the ferocious exultation in them at the fate of the conspirators is in striking contrast to his usual gentleness.
Ten years after the Gunpowder Plot he still cried from the pulpit, ‘Would they do it by fire?
Into the fire with their bowels before their faces!
Would they make men's bones fly about like chips?
Hew their bones in sunder!
They are not worthy to be among God's works.’
Such passages did little damage, however, compared with those in which again and again he would use these occasions to exalt the status of the King by equating it with that of the kings of Israel.
One of his texts was ‘By me Kings reign’; another was ‘My son, fear thou the Lord and the King and meddle not with them that are given to change.’
He used these to preach that kings are made, and can only be unmade, by God, to whom solely they are responsible; that sedition is opposed no less to God than to the king; that it is a sin not merely to speak evil of the king but even to think evil of him.
‘God and the King’, he proclaimed, ‘are so in a league…as one cannot be enemy to the one, but that he must be to the other.
In his place they sit.
His person they represent.
They are gods.’
These sermons not only strengthened James I in his belief in the Divine Right of Kings but made an even deeper impression on the sombre young Prince Charles, who sat beside him.
When Andrewes died early in the next reign, King Charles commanded that his sermons be published.
There were ninety-six of them, of which eighteen commemorated the Gunpowder Plot and the Gowrie conspiracy.
Andrewes used to carry around with him a small manuscript book in which he found his refuge from the intrigues, the coarseness and the immorality of daily life at the Court of King  James.
When his Preces, or devotions, were published after his death, the printer described ‘the glorious deformity’ of the original, ‘slubbered with his pious hands and watered with his penitential tears’.
It was written in Greek and Latin for his private use and is compiled from the Bible — in particular the Psalms, Gospels and Epistles — as well as from the ancient Eastern and Western liturgies, the Fathers, the medieval authors, the rabbinical writers, and even pagan sources.
All these are appropriated, assimilated and interwoven with Andrewes' own prayers.
Most of the book is arranged in the form of a week of prayer in which for each day there is an order of Adoration, Confession of Sin, a Prayer for Grace, a Confession of Faith and an Intercession.
Through it all, remarks one of its editors, Alexander Whyte, ‘like volcanic rock, thrusting itself up into a harvest field, so does Andrewes' acute and abiding remorse for sin pierce up through his finest and fullest psalms of Thanksgiving’.
There seems no class of men and women, no circumstance of life, that is not embraced in Andrewes' intercessions.
Not only is wisdom sought for Church, King and Court and for all whom Andrewes had educated and ordained, but he asks,
Most often he remembers those in distress, on trial, in exile, in prison or slaves in the galleys.
His was an authoritarian compassion.
He prays that the people ‘seek not to be wise above measure, but may be persuaded by reason, and yield to the authority of superiors’.
So too he asks that he himself may be obedient to the powers which are ordained and be delivered from ‘private interpretation, unhealthy enquiries, and innovation in things sacred’.
And yet the author of so many adulatory sermons preached before James I cries out in these private prayers, ‘Deliver me from making Gods of Kings!’
Although the Preces contain magnificent passages of praise for the beauties and glories of creation, they are overshadowed by those on penitence, whose abjectness at times reaches despair:
There is so much in this strain that some of Andrewes' biographers have tended to suggest that he was tormented by shame for the compromises which he had made with evil at Court and above all for his actions in the Essex divorce.
Some twenty English versions and selections from the Preces appeared between 1648 and 1903.
They have probably been more widely used than any other book in the private devotions of Anglicans.
During the Oxford Movement a translation of the Greek passages by J. H. Newman appeared as one of the Tracts for the Times , and a translation of those from the Latin by J. M. Neale was also published.
The Preces and sermons, together with his controversial works, were to cause Andrewes to become regarded as the leader in time and eminence of the Anglo-Catholic movement.
Andrewes never married.
His habitual silence at Court was probably caused not just by caution and disapproval but by shyness.
Sir John Harington relates, however, how ‘he would walk at certain hours in one of the aisles of St Paul's, that if any came to him for spiritual advice and comfort (as some did though not many) he might impart it to them’.
Whilst he was Dean of Westminster he would devote three or four evenings a week to teaching the older boys of Westminster School: one of them remembered how he also would take the younger ones with him for walks ‘and in that wayfaring leisure had a singular dexterity to fill those narrow vessels with a funnel….
All this he did to boys without any compulsion or correction; nay I never heard him utter so much as a word of austerity among us.’
As a bishop his hospitality was such that ‘his guests would often profess…that his Lordship kept Christmas all the year’.
Andrewes would almost certainly have preferred to have remained at Cambridge as a don, a life for which he was superbly fitted.
It is curious that he is commemorated in the ASB simply as a bishop; for he was seldom if ever present in his diocese during the great Church festivals of the year.
A recent biographer questions his claims to be described as ‘saintly’.
‘A Saint’, he observes,
Writing of Andrewes' public life he concludes, ‘It is a cause of thanksgiving that Andrewes can be convicted of weakness rather than malice, but it is sad that either alternative should have to be attributed to such a man.’
This verdict seems severe.
Had Andrewes remained in Cambridge, his reputation would probably have been unblemished but he would have lacked the stimulus to write the magnificent sermons which he preached at Court; and he would not willingly have engaged in the controversial writing in which for the first time he set out the Anglican Church's position in terms which European scholars could respect; above all his Preces, even had they been written, would not have contained the breadth of experience, and the depth of feeling, based on that experience, which made them treasures of the Church.
George Herbert
Priest, Pastor, Poet (1593–1633)
Perhaps great places and thy praise
Do not so well agree;
How know I if thou should me raise
That I should then raise thee?
Among those small boys from Westminster School who used to accompany Lancelot Andrewes on instructive walks was George Herbert.
Most of what is known about him is derived from a Life by Izaak Walton published in 1670.
Walton had not met him, but interviewed his surviving friends; the Life was written with the object of improving the standards of the clergy of the time by describing a golden age before the Civil War in which the aristocratic Herbert had renounced a brilliant career at university and at Court for the vocation of a country parson.
In his colourful account, however, Walton was not always accurate and was sometimes even inventive.
George Herbert was a member of a family which had come over with William the Conqueror and had a long tradition of service to the Crown.
George's branch of the family had their estates in Wales.
Of his brothers the eldest, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, served as Ambassador to France and was himself a poet.
Two other brothers were killed in the wars in the Low Countries and another was Master of the Revels at Court.
Their father died when George was three years old, and the strongest influence on him, until she died when he was thirty-four, was his mother Magdalene, the patroness of John Donne, who wrote a well-known poem to her: Donne, in preaching her funeral sermon, described how, ‘as her  house was a court in the conversation of the best and an almshouse in feeding the poore, so it was also a hospital in ministering relief to the sick.
The love of doing good, of ministering to the sick was the honey that was spread all over her bread.’
Her charm was such that her second marriage was with a man twenty years her junior, Sir John Danvers.
In Westminster Abbey, next to the School, George Herbert acquired his love of the Church's liturgy and music.
At Trinity College, Cambridge, to which he proceeded, he was a very serious student whose frail health suffered from overwork.
His main diversion was music, which ‘did relieve his drooping spirits, compose his distracted thoughts and raised his weary soul so far above the earth, that it gave him an earnest of the joys of heaven’.
He began to write verses and at the age of seventeen, in sending a sonnet to his mother, declared his resolution that ‘My poor abilities in poetry shall be all and ever consecrated to God's glory.’
As an undergraduate, says Walton, if he had a fault it was ‘that he kept himself retired and at too great a distance with all his inferiors; and his clothes seemed to prove that he put too great a value on his parts and parentage’.
After graduating, he remained at Trinity College as a Fellow and became a praelector, or Reader, in Rhetoric in the University, lecturing on the classical writers to undergraduates in their first year.
In 1620, at the age of twenty-seven, not without some canvassing, he was elected as Public Orator of the University, a post which he joyfully described in a letter to his stepfather, Sir John Danvers, as 
As Public Orator he received King James I on several occasions and declared in one oration that the King's literary style was far superior to that of the ancient classical writers.
The two previous public Orators had become Secretaries of State, and Herbert had ambitions in public life.
He was frequently at Court.
Sir Francis Bacon dedicated a translation of the psalms to him, and Bishop  Andrewes, according to Walton, carried a letter in his bosom which Herbert had written to him about predestination.
In 1624 he obtained leave of absence from the University and served as a Member of Parliament.
Then, according to Walton, his hopes were disappointed by the death in 1624 — 5 of his patrons, the Duke of Richmond and the Marquis of Hamilton, and of the King.
As he wrote later,
Whereas my birth and spirit took
The way that takes the town,
Thou didst betray me to a lingering book
And wrapt me in a gown.
I was entangled in a world of strife
Before I had the power to change my life.
He went into retreat and, says Walton, ‘had many conflicts with himself, whether he should return to the painted pleasures of a court-life or betake himself to a study of divinity and enter into Sacred Orders, to which his dear mother had often persuaded him’.
Walton describes a dramatic scene at Wilton, the seat of the head of the Herbert family, the Earl of Pembroke, when the King and court were there: the Earl offered George the presentation to the living of Bemerton nearby; his expressions of unworthiness to undertake a cure of souls were peremptorily overruled as sinful by Bishop Laud; a tailor was summoned to make his canonical clothes, and he was ordained priest and inducted as Vicar of Bemerton next day.
Later research shows this story to have been unlikely: the Court was not at Wilton at the time and the Earl of Pembroke was not on speaking terms with Laud.
Herbert's decision to take Orders was almost inevitable if a career at Court was not possible.
In Parliament he had been associated with a party which was out of favour with the King, and as Public Orator he had lauded the policy of peace when Charles, then Prince of Wales, was determined to make war on Spain.
He could not legally remain a Fellow of his Cambridge College for longer than seven years without taking Orders.
He suffered from malaria and consumption and needed to move from low-lying Cambridge to a healthier climate.
For whatever reasons, he became Deacon in 1624 and Priest in 1626.
On the death of his mother in 1627 he became financially independent.
He was appointed to two sinecures, one being a share  in the living of Cladinam in Montgomeryshire, and the other the canonry of Lincoln, together with the prebend of Leighton Ecclesia, which he tried in vain to pass on to his friend Nicholas Ferrar.
Though he may never have visited Leighton, he raised a considerable sum of money to repair the church.
It was only for the last three years of his life, from 1630 to 1633, that he served as a country parson, as Vicar of Bemerton in Wiltshire and Canon of Salisbury.
In 1629 he married Jane Danvers, a relative of his stepfather.
‘You are now a minister's wife’, he enjoined her, ‘and must now so far forget your father's house as not to claim a precedence of any of your parishioners.’
They had no children, but three of Herbert's orphaned nieces came to live with them.
Herbert's pride of birth was now transformed into devotion to the service of God.
This was expressed with cheerful humility.
One day, Walton relates, as he was walking to Salisbury to worship in the Cathedral and play music with his friends,
Herbert's daily life at Bemerton can be envisaged from his book The Country Parson (later published as The Priest to the Temple), which he wrote, as he explained, ‘that I may have a mark to aim at’.
A pastor, he said, is the deputy of Christ for the reducing of man to the obedience of God.
He must be very circumspect in avoiding all covetousness, keeping his word, even though it be to his own hindrance, for country people do much esteem their word.
He must avoid drinking because it is the popular vice, and sins make all equal whom they find together.
He must be ‘full of knowledge, even of tillage and pasturage, and through teaching people by what they understand must lead them to what they understand not’.
‘But chief of and top of his knowledge consists in the Holy Scriptures.
There he sucks and lives and finds precepts for life, doctrines for knowledge, examples for illustration and promises for comfort.’
He will also have read the Fathers, Schoolmen and later writers.
He will have studied human nature and desires to be all things to his parish.
He must acquire some knowledge of law and seek to settle disputes between parishioners, having three or four of the ablest men in the parish to hear the cause with him.
He must be a physician, having books of physick and a herbal by him.
His wife must not only train up her children and maids in fear of God but attend to the wounds and sores of parishioners with her own hands.
All in his home are either teachers or learners, or both.
When he prays it is in a voice ‘humble, treatable and slow’; the congregation's responses ‘are to be done not in a huddling, or slobbery fashion, gaping or scratching the head, or spitting in the midst of their answer’.
In his preaching, stories are better than exhortations, ‘for country people are thick and heavy, and need a mountain to kindle them, but stories and sayings they will well remember’.
The country priest is a lover of old customs, if they be good and harmless, and the rather because the country people are much addicted to them.
‘Particularly he loves the procession, in which God is blessed for the fruits of the field and the parish bounds are maintained; in which there is charity in loving, walking together, and mercy in relieving the poor.’
In setting himself such a standard, Herbert sought to fulfil the ambition expressed when he was ordained: ‘Though the iniquity of the late times have made clergymen meanly valued and the sacred name of priest contemptible; yet I will labour to make it honourable, by consecrating all my learning and all my poor abilities to advance the glory of God that gave them.’
Yet he was  not always solemn.
‘Religion’, he said, ‘does not banish mirth, but only moderates and sets rules to it.’
He died at the age of forty of consumption.
He rose from his sickbed on the Sunday before his death to praise God with his viol and lute in his own verses.
My God, my God
My music shall find thee,
And every string
Shall have his attribute to sing.
As he lay dying, Herbert handed a little book to one of his attendants and asked him to deliver it to his dear brother Nicholas Ferrar,
This book was the manuscript of The Temple , the collection of religious verses by which Herbert is mainly remembered.
When Ferrar received it he read it over and over and kissed and embraced it, saying that he could not sufficiently admire it as a rich jewel, and most worthy to be in the hands and hearts of all true Christians that feared God and loved the Church of England.
He arranged for it to be published within a year by the Cambridge University press, overcoming the scruples of the Vice-Chancellor, who objected to the passage
Religion stands on tip toe in our land
Ready to pass to the American strand.
The volume begins with a section called ‘The Church Porch’, which is a series of rather bluff homilies:
Kneeling ne'r spoilt silk stocking: quit thy state;
All equal are within the Church's gate…


Stay at the third glass: if thou lose thy hold
Then art thou modest, and the wine grows bold….
Sum up at night what thou hast done by day
And in the morning, what thou hast to do.
Dress and undress thy soul: mark the decay
And growth of it: if with thy watch that too
Be down, then wind up both: since we shall be
Most surely judged; make thy accounts agree.
But as the reader enters the second and main section, ‘The Church’, the style changes completely and the book becomes the record of a soul's colloquy with God.
In the poems are seen Herbert's struggle with ambition on the one hand and with dejection of spirit on the other.
The fluctuation of emotions between despair and bliss, between agitation and serenity, appears in one of his best-known poems, ‘The Collar’:
I struck the board and cried, No More.
I will abroad.
What?
Shall I ever sign and pine?
My lines and life are free, free as the road….
Is the year only lost to me?
Have I no bays to crown it?
No flowers, no garlands gay?
All blasted?
All wasted?…
But as I raved and grew more fierce and wild
At every word,
Me thoughts I heard one calling ‘Child!’
And I replied, ‘My Lord!
The poems are centred on the two great mysteries of sin and love, reflecting on man as
A wonder, tortured in this space
Between this world and that of Grace
and on his desire to praise God, which is constantly thwarted by a sense of inability and corruption.
They pass through the stages of sin, repentance, faith and prayer.
Sometimes, as in ‘The Temper’, the soul seeks to hide from God:
O rack me not to such a vast extent;
Those distances belong to thee:
The world's too little for thy tent,
A grave too big for me….
O let me, when thy roof my soul hath hid,
O let me roost and nestle there:
Then of a sinner thou art rid
And I of hope and fear.
In the end, after moods of melancholy, rebellion and despair, Herbert finds peace in ‘The Flower’:
And now in age I bud again,
After so many deaths I live and write;
I once more smell the dew and rain
And relish versing: O, my only light,
It cannot be
That I am he
On whom thy tempests fell all night.
The Temple contains poems on all the offices and great occasions of the Church: Holy Communion, Matins and Evensong; Christmas and Easter and Whitsun.
There are others on the features of the little parish church at Bemerton; its monuments, its music and even its chequered floors inspired devotional verses.
The poems are full of imagery of and praise for the Bible:
Not a word or look
I affect to own
But by book
And thy Book alone
Herbert writes, and, in ‘Holy Scriptures’,
O Book, infinite sweetness!
Let my heart
Suck every letter and a honey gain
Precious for any grief and any part
To clear the breast, to mollify all pain.
Like his friend Donne and the other metaphysical poets, however, Herbert also uses metaphors from everyday life, from farming and tenancy, contract and debt, law and medicine; God is seen as architect, artist and craftsman.
Although The Temple is essentially a private dialogue between the soul and God, Herbert was aware of its potential influence on those who might read it:
A verse may find him whom a sermon flies
And turn delight into a sacrifice.
Technically, Herbert's poetry is brilliant in the intricate matching of all kinds of metre to varying moods.
In ‘The Altar’ and in ‘Easter Wings’he even adjusted the length of the lines in order to give the verses the shape of an altar and of a pair of wings.
As described by Walton, Herbert was ‘of a stature inclined to tallness: his body was very straight, and so far from being cumbered with too much flesh, he was lean to an extremity.
His aspect was cheerful and his speech and motion did both declare him a gentleman.’
His brother, Lord Herbert of Cherbury, wrote of him that ‘About Salisbury he was little less than sainted.
He was not exempt from passion and choler, being infirmities to which our race is subject, but that excepted, without reproach in his actions.’
In the forty years after Herbert's death in 1633, 20,000 copies of The Temple were sold — an outstanding success for the period.
It had been reprinted nine times when Walton wrote his Life of Herbert in 1675.
The poems appealed to members of the Church of England by their reverence for holy places, holy offices and seasons; but they were also admired by Puritans and Nonconformists for their praise of the Scriptures and for their portrayal of a soul reasoning with, and even wrestling with, its Maker.
As Richard Baxter wrote in 1681, ‘Herbert speaks to God like one that really believeth in a God, and whose business in the world is most with God.
Heart-work and heaven-work make up his book.’
By the end of the seventeenth century fashions had changed.
Herbert's style was not found sympathetic to the classical tastes of the Augustans.
Dryden has a scornful reference to The Temple :
There thou must wings display and altars raise
And torture one poor word ten thousand ways.
Addison attacked the ‘false wit’ of Herbert and his contemporaries.
Cowper described Herbert's Poems as ‘Gothic and uncouth’.
There was no further edition between 1709 and 1799.
John Wesley, however, greatly admired Herbert and adapted a number of his poems, usually for the worse, as hymns.
In the nineteenth century Herbert's reputation was revived by Coleridge in Britain and by Emerson in America; Ruskin, whose influence on the British reading public was enormous, learned most of The Temple by heart.
‘The code of feeling and law written into these verses’, he wrote in his memoirs,Praeterita , in 1885,
Keble, however, whose own verses were often compared in his lifetime with those of Herbert, spoke of ‘his conceits, which to most readers appear chilling and repellent’.
In the twentieth century the metaphysical poets became widely popular.
Several of Herbert's poems now appeared in hymnals in their original form, and T. S. Eliot, himself much admired in the Church of England, wrote a eulogistic essay on Herbert.
That the latter should be commemorated in the ASB was agreeable to all parties in the Church of England.
This was not only because, in Walton's words, his poems ‘had comforted and raised many disjected and discomposed souls and charmed them into sweet and quiet thoughts’; he was honoured too for his loyalty to the middle way between the excesses of Rome and the austerities of the Puritans, which he expressed with such affection in his poem ‘The British Church’:
I joy, dear mother, when I view
Thy perfect lineaments and hue
Both sweet and bright.
Beauty in thee takes up her place,
And dates her letters from thy face,
When she doth write.


A fine aspect, in fit array,
Neither too mean, nor yet too gay,
Shows who is best.
Outlandish looks may not compare:
For all they either painted are,
Or else undrest.
She on the Hills, which want only
Allureth all in hope to be
By her preferred,
Hath kissed so long her painted shrines,
That ev'n her face by kissing shines,
For her reward.
She in the valley is so shy
Of dressing, that her hair doth lie
About her ears:
While she avoids her neighbours pride
She wholly goes on th'other side
And nothing wears.
But, dearest Mother, what those miss
The mean, thy praise and glory is,
And long may be.
Blessed be God, whose love it was
To double moat thee with his grace,
And none but thee.
Nicholas Ferrar
Deacon, Founder of Little Gidding Community (1592–1637)
He passed the days and nights in heavenly counsels to the family…
Persuading them to adhere to the doctrine of the Church of England, to persevere in that good old way;…for having set up for Primitive Christianity, he counted Popery as well as Puritanism arrant novelty.
Nicholas Ferrar and George Herbert, whose poems he published after his death, had been close friends, writing to each other as ‘Dearest Brother’ ever since they were undergraduates together at Cambridge.
In several ways their lives were similar.
Both surprised contemporaries, who had predicted distinguished careers for them at University and Court, when they retired into obscurity, Herbert as a country parson, Ferrar as a Deacon and leader of a family religious community.
Whereas, however, Walton's brilliant, if imaginative, Life of Herbert was published not long after the poet's death, the manuscript of the somewhat pedestrian Life of Ferrar by his brother John was lost; transcripts of parts of it which survived were only published a 150 years after his death; Nicholas Ferrar's wide popularity is quite recent.
He was born in London in 1592, fifth child of a prosperous East Indian merchant at whose house Hawkins, Drake and Raleigh had been visitors.
There was usually a clergyman in the house; Nicholas was brought up not only on the Bible but on Foxe's account of the martyrdom of his ancestor Bishop Ferrar under Queen Mary.
At an early age he developed a remarkable memory and could recite long passages from the Scriptures by heart.
As a child, his brother relates,
The prayer was answered and, says John, ‘he had all his lifetime after a more than ordinary fear of God and His presence’.
At thirteen he entered Clare Hall, Cambridge, where he was a brilliant and versatile pupil.
His tutor, Dr Lindsell, declared, ‘God keep Nick in a right mind and way, for if he should turn schismatic or heretic, he would make work for all the world.’
After taking his BA, Ferrar specialised in Physic (Medicine).
Like Herbert, however, he suffered from ‘aguish distempers’; his doctor advised that the only chance of saving his life was for him to travel overseas in order to escape from the Cambridge climate and as a respite from his studies.
In 1613, therefore, he gave up his Fellowship and left for the Continent in the suite of the Princess Elizabeth, who had just married the Elector Frederick of the Rhine.
He sent his parents a letter promising that ‘if the good Lord God be merciful unto me and bring me safe home again, I will all the days of my life serve Him in praising His Holy name and exhorting others’.
Although he made such an excellent impression on the journey that it was suggested that he should remain with the Princess as her secretary, he left the royal party at Utrecht.
In Holland he visited the meeting houses of the Anabaptists and Brownists and studied the organisation of the almshouses and the building of warships.
He moved on to Hamburg and Leipzig, where he learnt German.
He not only read widely about German government and trade but worked as an apprentice for a week or two each with painters, weavers, dyers and smiths.
Everywhere he took notes in shorthand.
He went on to Italy, where he spent two years in the study of medicine at Padua University.
The Counter-deformation was now at its height.
Ferrar was living in an atmosphere in which there was a revived interest in austerity, in dignity in public religious observance, and in the interior life of prayer.
This was accompanied  by an emphasis on charitable works such as care of the sick, education of children, and reform of prisons.
He visited Rome briefly, changing his lodgings each night, having heard that the Jesuits were taking an interest in his movements.
He now travelled to Spain in a small English ship which was chased by pirates.
When the crew proposed to surrender, Ferrar persuaded them to fight, ‘firing the most phlegmatic by recounting how our ancestors lorded it over the sea and were renowned over all the world for their naval victories’: they were saved by the arrival on the scene of another vessel.
After further adventures in Spain, Nicholas had a dream in which his family were seen to be in trouble and needing him, so he returned to England, proceeded by a huge crate of the books collected on his travels.
When he arrived back in England after five years abroad, he found his family seriously involved in the problems of the Virginia Company; although he could have returned to Cambridge as a Fellow, or perhaps as a physician, he felt it his duty to replace his aging father on the Court of the Company during its five last unfortunate years, and lived in his parents' house in London.
Attempts to establish a British colony in Virginia had been made by Sir Walter Raleigh in the 1580s.
In 1609 the Virginia Company was founded by Royal Charter to further the enterprise.
Its Treasurer was Sir Edwin Sandys, Hooker's pupil and executor.
The Deputy Treasurer, who was in charge of the Court's books and its daily business, was Nicholas's elder brother John, whom he succeeded in the post in 1622.
The Company's affairs were in a sad condition.
In 1622 the American settlement was almost wiped out in an attack by Indians.
Further, for several years King James I had been strongly hostile to it, because its existence impaired the prospects of a reconciliation with Spain.
He also greatly disliked the puritan and radical Sandys.
Nicholas's experience abroad enabled him to assist the Company in many ways, such as in starting the cultivation of vines and the silk industry, and in sending out skilled artisans from Germany.
The Ferrars also gave considerable attention to planning a college, intended to become the first seat of higher education in North America, as well as a school for Indians, whom it was hoped would be converted to Christianity.
For three years Nicholas conducted a capable but hopeless defence against the King and members of his Council, who were  determined to destroy the Company.
Faced with the demand for surrender of its Charter, the Company's last hope was in a petition to Parliament.
In 1624 Nicholas, together with George Herbert, whose family were also involved, and some hundred other members of the Company, were elected as MPs.
A petition in the Company's favour was presented and accepted by the House of Commons.
Parliament was, however, peremptorily told by the King not to proceed with the matter, because the Company's affairs were being dealt with by the Crown.
In 1624 the Company, fantastically charged with depopulating England by encouraging emigration to America, finally had to acknowledge the loss of its Charter and hand over all its papers to the Privy Council.
In Parliament Ferrar took a leading part with Sandys in the impeachment of one of the Company's principal antagonists, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Middlesex, on charges of bribery and corruption.
He was later filled with remorse for this, saying ‘I would I were assured of pardon for that sin, though on that condition that this right hand were cut off.’
In spite of his opposition, the King and Council had been favourably impressed with Ferrar's ability and judgement.
He was offered the post of clerk to the Privy Council or of Ambassador to Savoy.
Friends invited him to apply for the Readership in Geometry at Gresham's College, and a wealthy London merchant offered him £10,000 to take his daughter in marriage.
Nicholas Ferrar refused all these suggestions, having decided that as soon as he was free to do so he wished to lead a religious life.
First he had to sort out the embarrassed financial affairs of his brother John, which had been neglected by the latter whilst working for the Company.
After a long and difficult series of negotiations Nicholas managed to save the greater part of the estate of his brother, who at one time seemed likely to be ruined.
Then, ‘without acquainting any of his friends, fearing that they might be a hindrance to this determination’, he was ordained Deacon by Bishop Laud.
In a letter to his mother he explained that ‘seeing God had so often heard his most humble petitions, and had delivered him out of many most eminent dangers of soul and body, and had brought his family out of most desperate calamities, he should now seek to serve Him in such a calling’.
Several former members of the Virginia Company offered him livings or chaplaincies.
He thanked them all but told them that ‘his determination was to spend his life and time and talent in his own  family, for whose benefit he had now parted with all his worldly estate among them’.
Nicholas had been living with his widowed mother in London.
He had acquired a strong influence over his brother John in their work for the Company and in saving him from bankruptcy.
He had also become closely attached whilst at Cambridge to the family of his married sister Susanna Collett, who lived nearby and delighted in the entertainment of scholars from the University.
In 1625, after a considerable search, he found what he wanted in the depopulated — indeed almost uninhabited — village of Little Gidding in Huntingdonshire, about three miles from the Great North Road.
Here were a large dilapidated manor house and a church next door which had been turned into a barn.
His mother bought the property in 1625 and the family move into it was hastened by an outbreak of the plague in London.
The family at Little Gidding consisted of Nicholas's mother, his brother John with his second wife, Bathsheba, and their children and step-children, and his sister Susanna with her husband John Collett and their children.
The whole community with their servants numbered about thirty.
After the manor house and church had been cleaned and decorated, the family community settled down to its main object, the pursuit of sanctity through a steady rhythmic routine of prayer.
Their life was centred on the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England.
They rose at 4 a.m. in summer and 5 a.m. in winter, and together attended three daily services in the church: Matins, Evensong and the Litany.
In between, companies of the community would take it in turn on each hour to celebrate Offices in the house.
After a few years, at the suggestion of George Herbert, these observances were continued through the night; members of the community who offered to do so undertook the night watch in pairs which recited the Psalms antiphonally, men and women doing so in separate rooms.
In this way the Psalms were read through every twenty-four hours and the Gospels once a week, so that, as Bishop Hacket noticed, ‘there was no intermission day nor night…they kept sentinel at all hours and seasons to expect the second coming of the Lord Jesus’.
Whilst others were only allowed to keep the night watch once each week, Nicholas undertook it three times.
During the midday meal the older children read edifying passages chosen by Nicholas from religious or secular history.
After supper there was reading of stories and chronicles of journeys and  travels by sea or land and of the discovery of the New World.
A school was established in the former dovecote, where local children as well as those of the family were educated.
Three schoolmasters lived in the house: one taught Latin, one mathematics and one music.
Music indeed was an important part of the life of the community.
There were two organs in the Great Chamber and hymns were often sung.
On Sunday mornings the vicar of the neighbouring parish came to preach in the church, and the servants were enabled to attend, heating the ovens for dinner before they went out.
Communion was celebrated once a month.
Nicholas believed that ‘No man can so much advance his own good and happiness in anything as endeavouring all that in him lies the good and welfare of others; and who doth that daily doth perform the greatest good to himself as he can desire or wish for.’
The community's good works included the maintenance of a dispensary, where the ladies dressed ‘very noisesome sores and wounds’ and applied home-made salves and plasters.
There was free distribution of milk to the poor and broth to the sick in the villages nearby, and an almshouse was established, modelled on those which Nicholas had seen in Holland.
In times of unemployment and distress flax and hemp for spinning were distributed to the villagers.
On Sundays the ‘psalm children’ came from the villages to be heard reciting a psalm which they had learnt by heart during the week.
They were rewarded with a penny and a free meal.
Sometimes the Ferrars were asked also to teach them their Catechisms.
This Nicholas would not allow: for it would be an interference, he maintained, with the duties of parents, godparents and parish priests.
The adults and children of the family also learnt much of the Gospels and Psalms by heart, for, said Nicholas, ‘Who knows how or where he shall be before he dies, suppose blind or in prison, and whether travelling on horseback, on foot or by sea, by reciting these passages he would have heavenly food and medicine with him.’
Nicholas seldom did or said anything in business without repeating a text from the psalms or New Testament for his purpose.
He had a great objection to plays and novels and to romances and poems, but reflected that Our Saviour spoke in parables, and that fables might therefore be admitted in moral discussions.
He disliked the use of extemporary prayers, saying, ‘There needed no other confutation than to take them down in shorthand and shew them afterwards to those men that had been so audacious as to utter them.’
Nicholas served as spiritual director not only to the members of the family, but to an increasing circle of friends and relations who sought his advice by correspondence.
Even within the community he preferred to give his advice in writing.
The community was not enclosed.
Nicholas would go to London from time to time to buy whatever was needed and served on a committee for Virginia.
The girls would sometimes visit their sister Susanna Collett who left the community to marry a clergyman and lived nearby.
‘A mean in all things’, Nicholas used to say, ‘was the only way to effect great things with order and effect’; and he laid great stress on a constant interchange of employments.
The four elder nieces took it in turn each month to serve as housekeeper and keep the accounts.
All the girls were taught embroidery, and the whole family sang and played on musical instruments.
The daughter of a Cambridge bookbinder lived in the house for a year to teach binding and gilding.
Little Gidding became famous for its production of harmonies or concordances.
The first was a harmony of the four Gospels, so arranged that the four books could be read either separately or in one continuous story; each page was illustrated with engravings, and richly bound by the hands of the ladies of Gidding.
King Charles I visited the community in 1633 and afterwards borrowed its Great Concordance of the Gospels, which he said he would return only if another were made for him.
The copy which he was given, superbly bound in crimson leather, still exists in the British Museum.
When the King received it he asked the Ferrars to make a similar Concordance for him of the Books of Chronicles and Kings, so as to present them as a single narrative.
This was the last harmony produced in Nicholas's lifetime.
Some money was earned from the sales of the harmonies.
The farming land was all rented out and the family lived mainly on its produce.
They were not rich.
They had to eat meat sparingly and kept only one horse and one part-time manservant.
An activity which was both instructive and recreational was Gidding's ‘Little Academy’.
The idea came from old Mrs Ferrar, who proposed that from time to time the family should confer on some subject which should ‘tend either to the information or to the excitement of the affections’.
Members of the family, coached by Nicholas, would relate stories from secular histories or the lives of saints.
There was then a general discussion, along lines somewhat reminiscent of the dialogues of Plato, though perhaps Nicholas, who guided and recorded the sessions, had also in mind the  proceedings of the lay oratories which he had visited in Italy.
A favourite subject was the retirement from the world into a monastery of the Emperor Charles V.
Each member of the community was given a name by which he or she was addressed in the Little Academy, representing a quality which they either possessed or sought.
Old Mrs Ferrar was ‘the Mother’; on her death this title passed to Mary Collett.
John was ‘the Guardian’, Mrs Collett ‘the Moderator’, Nicholas ‘the Visitor’, and the Collett sisters were ‘the Chief, the Patient, the Cheerful, and the Affectionate’.
Although members of the community dressed alike, the women in black robes, they were not bound to celibacy.
Children were born at Little Gidding, and the four younger girls all eventually married clergymen.
The two older girls, Mary and Anne Collett, determined to remain virgins and asked the Bishop of Lincoln, John Williams, whose palace was nearby at Buckden, to receive their vows.
He refused to do this, warning them of the wrongfulness and unwisdom of such vows, and that they should learn ‘not to think of human nature above that which it is, a sea of flowings and ebbings, and of all manner of inconstancy’.
Mary and Anna never married, however.
As Mary described their purpose,
Not all the Ferrar family were in sympathy with the objects of Little Gidding.
Two black sheep, Nicholas's brother Richard and John's son Edward, lived dissolutely in London, constantly in debt and writing begging letters.
Nicholas's nephew Thomas Collett, a barrister, and his wife came to Little Gidding in 1628 but after two years found that they had no vocation for its kind of life and returned to London.
Saddest of all is the story of John's wife Bathsheba.
She bitterly resented her husband's domination by his younger brother.
She complained that it was ‘indecent that fellows and wenches should come at such hours as they do’ to get her husband out of bed for the night watches.
She asserted that she had been done out of her rights to the ownership of Mrs Ferrar's London  house, which had been promised to her on the old lady's death.
When she flew into tempers, Nicholas would hand her letters, in one in which he quoted St Paul as saying ‘Wives submit yourselves unto your own husbands as unto the Lord, for the husband is the head of the wife even as Christ is head of the Church.'’
And believe it, dear sister, by this rule you shall be judged in the Last Day.’
She remained miserably at Little Gidding after Nicholas's death, but finally, when John died, she hysterically demanded to leave for London immediately after the funeral; without waiting for the weekly coach she departed uncomfortably in a countryman's wagon.
‘Not hundreds, but thousands’ of people, John Ferrar relates, came to Little Gidding.
Some were clergy who stayed for a week or two.
Some were just curious, and would pretend to have lost their way and hope to be invited to spend a night.
Some were spies, and three Roman Catholic priests came in disguise.
Nicholas received them all himself, saying that ‘It might be hoped that they came for their own good or his own, for he lived to make himself or others better.’
A young barrister, Edward Lenton, in a letter to a friend left a vivid account of such a visit to this ‘reputed nunnery’.
He was received by old Mrs Ferrar and Nicholas, to whom he spoke frankly of how he had heard of ‘their watching and praying at night, of their altar richly decked with plate, tapestry and tapers, of their adoration and genuflections on entering therein, which might savour of superstition and popery’.
Nicholas protested that he ‘verily believed the Pope to be anti-Christ and would pull down a room in his house if he learned that Mass had been celebrated in it’.
He explained that no one in the community took vows and that all their worship was based on the Book of Common Prayer.
When his questioner suggested that the contemplative life was a specious kind of idleness, Nicholas replied that they had ‘found divers perplexities, distractions and almost utter ruin in other callings, but that God hath given them an incredible improvement of their livelihood since their sequestration’.
Lenton found the community ‘extraordinarily well reported of by their neighbours for their liberality to the poor’ and left full of admiration for them.
Nicholas Ferrar died in 1637.
As he was dying, he urged the family to continue in ‘the good old way’ of the primitive Church which they had revived together.
He foresaw evil times for them, and extended all the leaseholds for ten years in the hope that this  would provide some security.
After giving instructions about his place of burial, he required them to go to his study and take out three great hampers of books and burn them, ‘Inasmuch as all the comedies, tragedies, pastorals, etc., heroical poems, love hymns and the like are full of idolatry and especially tend to the overthrow of the Christian religion.’
The community continued for twenty years under the leadership of his brother John after Nicholas's death, with an interruption during the Civil War.
There seems little doubt that Nicholas had intended that, when he was older, John's son Nicholas would be his successor.
It was Nicholas junior who had shared his night watches; his work on the Harmonies shows him to have been a prodigy.
When he was only nineteen, a copy of the Gospel of St John that he had prepared, in which each of the twenty-one chapters was in a different language, was shown to the King.
The latter's delight and enthusiasm were such that he insisted that Nicholas should be sent to study at Oxford University and maintained there at the royal charge; but a month later the youth died, on his twentieth birthday.
His epitaph declared that for him ‘the study of languages was a necessity, History a relaxation, Philosophy a devotion, Mathematics a delight, Music a duty, Theology a vocation’.
The thought inevitably occurs as to whether his studies and the sharing of his uncle's austerities had undermined his health.
The hard times foreseen by Nicholas senior now came.
In 1641 there was distributed to all Members of Parliament an anonymous pamphlet,The Arminian Nunnery .
This was a deliberately scurrilous distortion of the letter which Lenton had written after his visit in 1634, which it purported to reproduce, and described the community as ‘a bridge to popery’.
When the King left London in 1642 to travel north and set up his standard for the Civil War, he visited Little Gidding, together with Prince Rupert and Prince Charles.
He asked to see the images in the church, of which there was so much talk.
When he saw there were none he sighed, ‘What will not malice and slander invent?’
As he left, he asked ‘Pray for my speedy and safe return again.’
He did indeed return, in disguise and as a fugitive, seeking shelter for the night in 1646 when the war was lost.
John Ferrar knew Little Gidding to be too notorious to be safe, and guided him to a private house nearby.
This action, compounded by John's previous assistance in conveying silver from Cambridge University to the King, received savage retribution.
A few months later Parliamentary troops sacked the manor  house and church, lighting a great fire with the wreckage.
John and other members of the family fled abroad, some to Virginia, others to the Continent.
John returned a few years later, but he was now an old man and the moving spirit seems to have been his daughter Virginia, who carried out experiments in the breeding of silkworms at Little Gidding for the benefit of the American colony.
The framework remained, the ordered cycle of worship and the charitable works, though much diminished.
When John and his sister Mary Collett died in 1657, however, most of the original members of the community were dead or dispersed.
His son John, who inherited the house, had no interest in ‘the good old way’ of family worship.
His life was that of the ordinary country gentleman of the period.
Eventually, nobody knows when, the manor house was pulled down.
John Ferrar's Life of Nicholas was not published at the time when it was written and the manuscript disappeared until 1790.
In the eighteenth century what was known of the practices of Little Gidding appealed to William Law.
A more typical reaction in the Age of Enlightenment, however, was that of the topographer Richard Gough, who described Nicholas Ferrar as a ‘useless enthusiast’ who by the austerity of his life ‘rendered the body and mind less fit for the social duties which are the great objects of our existence’.
Wide interest in the Little Gidding experiment was caused by the publication in 1881 of the novel John Inglesant by J. H. Shorthouse.
In it Little Gidding in Nicholas Ferrar's time was lovingly described, with the introduction of an imaginary romance between Mary Collett and the novel's hero.
The book's success was immediate.
Mr Gladstone in Downing Street and the Duke of Connaught, relaxing during the Egyptian campaign of 1882, were photographed reading it.
It fitted excellently with the wave of Anglo-Catholic feeling and nostalgia for the past which was passing over England.
Shorthouse described his book as ‘a philosophic romance, written as a protest on behalf of culture of every kind against fanaticism and superstition in every form, including the fanaticism of work…to exalt the unpopular notion that the end of one's life is not the good of one's neighbour but one's own culture.’
In the 1930s and 1940s several books on the Ferrars appeared which made use of unpublished papers in Cambridge.
These were of special interest to the growing number of people, within and outside the Church of England, who were attracted by ideas and  patterns of community living.
The inclusion of Nicholas Ferrar in the ASB may have been clinched by the popularity within the Church of T. S. Eliot's later works, and in particular of the poem ‘Little Gidding’ in his Four Quartets .
When the Little Gidding community was set up, Nicholas Ferrar declared, ‘Since the great things of the earth vanish and come to nought, let us set our desires and designs where they cannot fail.’
What, in the end it may be asked, did he and his family achieve, good works apart?
How can an austere life of prayer, which was the central purpose of the community, be assessed?
The questions cannot be answered.
As T. S. Eliot reflected in ‘Little Gidding’,
If you came at night, like a broken king,
If you came by day, not knowing what you came for,…
It would always be the same: you would have to put off
Sense and notion.
You are not here to verify,
Instruct yourself, or inform curiosity
Or carry report.
You are here to kneel
Where prayer has been valid.
And prayer is more
Than an order of words, the conscious occupation
Of the praying mind, or the sound of the voice praying.
And what the dead had no speech for, when living,
They can tell you, being dead: the communication
Of the dead is tongued with fire beyond the language
of the living.
Charles I
King, Martyr (1600–1647)
In these two points of preservation of established religion and laws I may (without vanity) turn the reproach of my sufferings…into the honour of a kind of martyrdom .
Charles I to Charles, Prince of Wales, January 1649
The name of King Charles I, which had been excluded from the prayer Book for over 100 years, is one of the most controversial inclusions in the ASB calendar.
The facts of his life are well known.
Born in Dunfermline when his father was still only King of Scotland, he was a sickly child, weak in the joints and with a speech defect.
Through assiduous exercise he came to be strong enough to ride and march with his troops.
He spoke, however, with a stammer which accentuated his natural shyness right up to his trial, when, miraculously, as some of his followers said, it disappeared.
Overshadowed by his brilliant elder brother Henry, he unexpectedly became heir to the thrones of England and Scotland on Henry's death in 1612.
Charles grew up well-read, particularly in theology.
Grave and reserved at the vicious court of his drunken, slobbering but affable father, he at first resented but then became emotionally dependent on the King's ebullient favourite the Duke of Buckingham.
When he succeeded to the throne in 1625, Buckingham became his chief minister.
In the same year he married the King of France's sister, Henrietta Maria; a secret clause in the marriage treaty bound Charles to allow open freedom of worship to English Roman Catholics, a condition which would have been quite unacceptable to Parliament.
Reversing his father's peaceful foreign policies under Buckingham's influence, Charles was soon engaged in an unsuccessful  attempt to capture the Spanish treasure fleet and a humiliating failure to relieve the Huguenots at La Rochelle, who were in rebellion against the Roman Catholic government of France.
At the same time English forces sent to help to restore his brother-in-law to his principality of the Palatinate were all killed or captured.
Obliged to ask parliament for funds for these expeditions and for his other expenses, the King found that, instead of voting him the customs duties for life, as was normal on the monarch s accession, it attempted to impeach Buckingham for corruption and incompetence.
Parliament also complained strongly against the appointment of Arminians, who believed in the doctrine of free will, to important positions in the Church which had previously been held by Calvinists.
The King, who had not forgotten the sermons of Andrewes, told Parliament that ‘Princes are not bound to give account of their actions but to God alone’ and that ‘Parliaments are altogether in my power for their calling, sitting and dissolution; as I find the fruits of them to be good or evil they are to continue or not to be.’
Recalcitrant members were arrested.
Parliament responded with the Petition of Right, demanding that there should be no imprisonment without cause shown and no taxation without Parliamentary consent.
Although the assassination of Buckingham could have provided a fresh start, on the assumption that he had been responsible for the King's policies, there was no redress of grievances.
In 1629 the King dissolved Parliament, castigating its leaders as ‘vipers’, and did not recall it for eleven years.
The period of the King's direct rule was one of peace and prosperity.
Whitehall was now described as the last Renaissance Court in Europe.
Charles acquired a magnificent collection of pictures and became a patron of Rubens and van Dyck as well as of Inigo Jones, who was commissioned not only to build palaces but to write and produce masques at Court.
The imposition of taxes without Parliamentary consent in order to pay for these expensive tastes, as well as for the needs of government, angered the landed classes, who were affected by new forest laws, by the levying of the Ship Money tax and by fines for technical offences.
The King's religious policies, strictly applied by Archbishop Laud, gave offence to the Puritan merchants and artisans.
Laud, in introducing ceremonial and surplices and in removing Communion tables from the body of the church to the chancel, claimed to be restoring the practices of the early Church.
He was, indeed, following in the line of Hooker and Andrewes, but Andrewes, though himself favouring  ritual, had not enforced it on others.
To many members of the Church of England, which for fifty years had been strongly influenced by Calvinism, Laud seemed to be introducing innovations, the most offensive of which was the doctrine that bishops derived their authority from God.
The dislike for Laud and the Arminian bishops was not merely theological.
They were almost all men who had risen from the lower middle or even working class.
The King appointed them to high offices of state, which the aristocracy and landed gentry considered to be their prerogative.
Particular indignation was caused when Laud summoned noblemen and gentlemen before the Court of High Commission, an ecclesiastical body, and fined them for moral offences; there was also wide resentment of his use of the Star Chamber to punish by cropping their ears those who libelled court or bishops.
Laud encouraged the King's high view of his own position by causing Convocation to declare that kings ruled by divine right and that those who resisted them would be damned.
Laud too was the King's evil genius in persuading him to try to enforce the use in Scotland of a prayer book similar to that of the Church of England.
The reaction was virtually a revolt against colonial rule, symbolised through the public signing by Scottish ministers, gentry and nobility of a Solemn League and Covenant to defend ‘the true reformed religion’.
In the two ‘Bishops' Wars’ which followed, Charles was humiliated and in 1640 was obliged to summon the English parliament in order to have funds voted which could be used to pay the invading Scottish army to return home.
The next two years led up to the Civil War.
Parliament wished to insist on its right to control taxation and the armed forces, as well as its own convening and dissolution.
On the religious question it was divided between those who wished to abolish episcopacy and the Book of Common Prayer and those who would have been content to limit the powers of bishops.
The final crisis began when Charles, urged on by the Queen, entered parliament with his armed followers and unsuccessfully attempted to arrest the leaders of the extreme party in the House of Commons.
In response he was threatened by mob violence and obliged to sign an Act of Attainder condemning to death his chief minister, Strafford.
Laud was arrested by Parliament, as were ten other bishops who had protested that the sessions of the House of Lords were illegal because the bishops had been excluded by the mob.
At this stage news came of a revolt of the Irish Catholics  against the Protestant ascendancy, in which thousands of the latter had been slaughtered.
Parliament and King agreed that a militia must be raised to put down the rebellion, but neither would trust its control to the other.
In this deadlock the King, physically menaced and fearing the impeachment of the Queen, who was involved in various army plots against Parliament, left London, never to see it again until his trial.
When he raised his standard at Nottingham he was joined by a number of Members of Parliament who had previously criticised him but now felt that the Parliamentary cause was in the hands of extremists.
The King lost the Civil War of 1642–6 because the Scottish army came to the aid of Parliament on the understanding that a Presbyterian form of Church government would be imposed in England; and because Cromwell's troops were better led and trained than the Royalists.
After his defeat at Naseby the Parliamentarians found and published copies of his letters in which he had requested Roman Catholic troops to be landed from Ireland and from the Continent.
One of the letters from the King was to the Pope, introducing an emissary who was to commit the King to abolish penal laws against Roman Catholics in England, to appoint a Roman Catholic Governor-General of Ireland and to admit Roman Catholic bishops to its Parliament.
Charles's claim to be a martyr must largely depend on what ensued in the period of two and a half years between the end of the First Civil War and his execution.
When the war was seen to be lost, after some vacillation he delivered himself up to the Scottish army at Newark.
The Scottish chaplains spent several months in trying to convert him to Presbyterianism.
When this failed, the Scots withdrew from England, after having their expenses paid by Parliament, in whose hands the King was left.
The ‘sale’ of the King by the Scots was to be likened in the hagiography to that of Christ by Judas Iscariot.
For the next two years the King lived in various places, sometimes treated as a prisoner, sometimes as an honoured guest, but hardly ever able to consult with his most trusted advisers.
The Queen wrote from France urging him to give up his Anglican religion and accept Presbyterianism; for to her as a Roman Catholic, the King remarked, all other religions appeared equally bad.
The rift was now growing between Parliament, which favoured the establishment of Presbyterianism, and the army, which proposed that all forms of Christian worship except Roman  Catholicism should be tolerated.
The difference was exacerbated by Parliament's refusal to pay off the army's arrears of pay.
In the negotiations in which the King now attempted to play off Parliament, Army and Scots against each other, he acted with a degree of duplicity which might have been justified by success; it was disastrous, however, when his intercepted correspondence revealed the irreconcilable offers which he had made and his intention to go back on his agreements.
He first addressed himself to Parliament, to which he proposed that a Presbyterian form of government should be established for a limited period, during which the King and his household would be allowed to use the Book of Common Prayer.
At the end of this time Parliament would make a permanent religious settlement in consultation with a committee of divines who would represent various views.
The militia would temporarily be in the hands of Parliament.
The Army in their Heads of Proposals offered the King terms which he might have been expected to find much more acceptable.
Although they proposed that the coercive power of bishops and ecclesiastics should be abolished, the use of the Book of Common Prayer would be tolerated.
The taking of the Presbyterian Covenant would not be enforced.
Those who had fought for the King would be exempt from penalties if their properties were small.
Others would be fined on a sliding scale according to their resources, and there would be a general reconciliation in which the King would rule with the aid of a Council of State who would have powers to supervise the militia.
Whilst these proposals were still before the King, the army marched on London and expelled the leading Presbyterians from the House of Commons so that it came under the control of the Independents.
With characteristically bad judgement, Charles now turned back to the Scots, with whom he made a secret treaty under which the Solemn League and Covenant would be confirmed by King and Parliament, and presbyterianism would be established in England for a limited period.
The Independent sects as well as‘Arminians’ were to be suppressed, although the King and his household would continue to be allowed to use the Book of Common Prayer.
Under the treaty, a Scottish army would invade England, join up with the King's followers, and then restore the King and impose these arrangements.
In the spring of 1648, when the Second Civil War broke out  in accordance with this plan, many of the principal officers of the Parliamentary Army, furious at the King's conduct in deceiving them and plunging the nation into an unnecessary war, solemnly undertook ‘to call Charles Stuart, that man of blood, to an account for that blood he had shed, and mischief he had done to his utmost, against the Lord's cause and people in these poor nations’.
Then they went off to rout the Scottish and Royalist forces.
When they returned, the Army found the King continuing to hold dilatory discussions with Parliamentary representatives, but his intercepted correspondence showed that he was still trying to stimulate invasions on his behalf from abroad.
In exasperation the Army purged Parliament of all but their own supporters, and caused its Rump to set up a court to try the King for treason against the people of England.
The Court had no legality.
The House of Lords would have nothing to do with it, nor would any senior member of the legal profession.
Of 120 members nominated, forty-seven never sat; of the remainder, twenty-seven did not sign the death warrant.
The King in his last two years, amidst all his unsuccessful negotiations and intrigues, increasingly foresaw his role as a martyr.
‘If I may not die a king I shall die like a gentleman’, he reflected.
‘The chief arms left me’, he wrote in the Eikon Basilike , ‘were those only which the ancient Christians were wont to use against their persecutors, prayers and tears.
These may serve a good man's turn, if not to conquer as a soldier yet to suffer as a martyr.’
At his trial and after it he played his part superbly.
Dressed sombrely in a black suit splendidly contrasted with the Order of St George, he refused to plead, but persistently demanded to know by what authority a small minority of the House of Commons, without any participation of the House of Lords, could bring him to trial.
Three times the court adjourned, and finally, without allowing him to speak further, it condemned him to death for treason against the people.
The troops who lined the streets at his execution kept the spectators out of earshot, but on the platform were two clerks who took down the King's last speech in shorthand and, somewhat surprisingly, it was published in the London newspapers.
‘The people's liberty and freedom’, he said,
As the King ended his speech Bishop Juxon, who was beside him, was disappointed.
‘Though your Majesty's affections may be very well known as to religion,’ he urged, ‘yet it may be expected that you should say something for the world's satisfaction.’
The King thanked him and added that he died a Christian and a member of the Church of England.
‘I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible crown’, he declared, ‘where no disturbance can be.’
As the King s head was struck from his body there was a great groan from the crowd, who were dispersed by the cavalry; some came back to dip their handkerchiefs in the King's blood.
In the following week there appeared on the streets a book called Eikon Basilike [‘The Image of the King']:The Portraiture of His Sacred Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings .
Opposite the title page was a picture of the kneeling King exchanging his royal crown for a crown of thorns.
The book consisted of eighteen chapters; each defended his actions in what purported to be his own words.
In these his differences with his parliaments were reviewed, and each was followed by a prayer which justified his conduct to God.
Every question was considered in light of the King's conscience and of divine precepts.
In this lofty style his enemies were never mentioned by name, only as the sinister and impersonal ‘they’, bent on destruction of Church and State.
It became the most effective political pamphlet in English history.
The success was immediate.
Twenty editions were published in the six weeks following the King's death, and several more even after the book was banned by the Government.
Copies reached almost every Royalist household and many that were not.
The Government asked one of its ablest servants, John Milton, to reply; this he did in his book Eikonoklastes [‘The Image-Breaker'], which spiritedly commenced with the Biblical quotation, ‘As a roaring lion and a raging bear, so is a wicked ruler over a poor people.’
Though he attempted a detailed rebuttal, chapter by chapter, Milton himself had to admit that ‘Some men have by policy accomplished after death that revenge upon their enemies which in life they were not able’, and that ‘they who before hated him for his  high government, nay fought against him with displayed banners in the field, now applaud him for the wisest and most religious prince that lived’.
Without much evidence or even apparent conviction, Milton alleged that the book was a forgery.
The Eikon Basilike was a powerful factor in bringing about the restoration of the King's son in 1660.
But now there was an embarrassing revelation.
Dr John Gauden, who had managed to hold the Deanery of Bocking successively as an Anglican and as a Presbyterian, secretly claimed that ‘This book and figure was wholly and only my making and design’, and demanded his reward.
The proofs which he produced were so convincing that to keep him quiet he was first made Bishop of Exeter and then, when he complained that the diocese's revenues were inadequate for his family, Bishop of Worcester.
The secret was kept until 1690, when evidence became public that both Charles II and James II had stated that Eikon Basilike was ‘none of the King's making, but by Dr Gauden’.
For many years Eikon Basilike remained discredited, and it was only in the middle of the twentieth century that the researches of F. F. Madan finally proved that the book was in fact based on papers written by the King in captivity, copies of which fell into Gauden's hands; and that Gauden had sent the draft of the book to the King and received his comments and corrections before it was published.
The Eikon Basilike can now therefore be regarded as an important source for the King's view of himself as a martyr.7
At the Restoration King Charles II caused 30 January, his father's day of execution, to be proclaimed as an annual day of fasting, for which forms of service for Morning and Evening Prayer, drawn up by Convocation, were annexed to the Book of Common Prayer.
The theme of these was national repentance.
The royal martyr's sufferings were compared with those of Christ, ‘Blessed Lord’, ran the central prayer at Matins,
At Evening Prayer Charles was described as among ‘the greatest of  Kings and best of men’.
The congregation prayed that they might follow ‘the example of his courage and constancy, his meekness and patience and great charity, and may this kingdom be freed from the vengeance of his righteous blood’.
These sentiments were to prove too rich for the Whigs and Liberals who were predominant in the mid nineteenth century.
Macaulay wrote, ‘To represent Charles as a martyr in the cause of episcopacy is absurd…the attachment of Charles to the Church of England was altogether political….’
It was incredible, he continued, that a king who had established the Presbyterian religion in Scotland and was willing to establish the Catholic religion in Ireland should have had insurmountable scruples about the ecclesiastical constitution of England.
Eventually in 1858 Earl Stanhope moved in the House of Lords that the Queen should be petitioned by Parliament to remove from the Prayer Book the services which commemorated not only the death of Charles I but also the accession of Charles II in 1660, the Gunpowder Plot of 1605, and the landing of William of Orange in 1688.
The title of Martyr, he declared, was ‘an utter misnomer and should be reserved for those Christians who rather than renounce their faith had suffered death at the hands of Pagan persecutors’.
The parallels drawn in the services between the sufferings of our Divine Redeemer and those of the ‘Royal Martyr’, he added, were utterly repugnant to feelings of the present day, and the affirmation that King Charles was among ‘the greatest of Kings and best of men’ was now quite unacceptable to many excellent members of the Church.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Sumner, in supporting the motion declared that ‘It is very inexpedient that the people should be invited to offer up prayers and thanksgivings in which their hearts take no concern.
Praise or prayer which does not issue from the heart is a mockery.’
The Bishop of London, Tait, agreed, adding that ‘Any pity called up for the unfortunate Charles I was likely to be dissipated by statements in the services which were so exaggerated that it was likely when read to turn the staunchest Royalist into a parliamentarian.’
The motion was passed through both Lords and Commons without a division.
Thus the service for King Charles the Martyr disappeared from the Book of Common Prayer; at the same time his name was deleted from its calendar, where it had previously appeared on 30 January.
By the end of the nineteenth century romantic conservatism flourished alongside liberalism, and even Queen Victoria had a sentimental regard for the Stuarts.
The Oxford Movement and still  more their successors, the Anglo-Catholics, held the memory of Charles I and Laud in high esteem.
A Society of King Charles the Martyr (SKCM) was formed in 1894, and the Royal Martyr Church Union in 1908.
Since then churches have been named after Charles the Martyr and his claims have sometimes been asserted quite as highly as in 1662.
Thus a recent pamphlet by Father J. M. Charles-Roux, published by the SKCM, states that ‘The destiny of Charles I discloses a singular closeness to that of Moses, David, St John the Baptist or even of our Lord Himself.’
‘A most telling stream of miracles’ is related, and the King is recorded as having prophesied ‘the Satanic horror of all those human rebellions against the Crown which were to rise, no longer in the British Isles, but in America and in France from the end of the XVIII century, and to develop on the Continent as well as in Africa and Asia during the XIX and XX centuries’.
It does not appear that the members of the Liturgical Commission had any great regard for the cult; King Charles I appeared on one list of those to be commemorated but was dropped in the next.
At the final stage, however, his adherents sent in more letters on his behalf than were received in support of any other name.
The private life of Charles I was irreproachable.
He commanded devotion in those who served him, even his jailers.
On the other hand he was indecisive, tended to rely on advisers with stronger characters and erratic judgement, and could be disastrously obstinate in his insistence on his responsibility for his actions to God alone.
His attachment to the Church of England was fervent, despite the embarrassment of marriage to an equally ardent Roman Catholic.
He took great care to have his children brought up as members of his Church, though eventually all three who survived went over to that of their mother.
Much more could, and has, been written about his qualities, but little of this is relevant to his claim to be a martyr — and it should be remembered that this claim was his own and most successful invention.
It was often, and still is, alleged by his devotees that Charles I could have saved his life if he had been willing to abandon his Church.
This is far from clear, for the Army at least was prepared to allow the Church of England to remain in being, with bishops deprived of coercive powers.
The King's own statements, however, show the extent to which his view of the Church was political: ‘It is not the change of Church government which is chiefly aimed at’, he wrote in 1646, ‘(though that were too much) but it is by that pretext  to take away the dependency of the Church from the Crown, which, let me tell you, I hold to be of equal consequence to that of the militia; for people are governed by the pulpit more than the sword in the time of peace.
‘Take it as an infallible maxim’, he wrote to his son, ‘that as the Church can never flourish without the protection of the Crown, so the dependency of the Church is the chiefest support of regal authority.’
In the Eikon Basilike ‘the primitive, apostolical and anciently universal government of the Church by Bishops’ is praised.
Yet it must be remembered that much of the opposition to bishops in Charles's reign arose from their characters and from the use of their powers.
Many of those who had been appointed by James I appeared cynical and mainly interested in their revenues.
Charles's appointments were of better men, but he used Laud, Williams, Juxon and others as his highest secular officials; in that capacity it could hardly be expected that they would not be the subject of the same Parliamentary criticism as were laymen.
It was Charles himself, in his last, disastrous agreement with the Scots, who proposed, however insincerely, the temporary replacement of episcopacy by Presbyterianism as the State religion.
If he was insincere in this, it is none the less ironic that in 1980, when many within the Church of England were suggesting that it would be a more effective body if it were disestablished, his name should have been reintroduced into the Prayer Book as a martyr for the cause of Establishment.
Jeremy Taylor
Bishop of Down and Connor, Pastor, Teacher (1613–1667)
He that is cold and tame in his prayers hath not tasted of the deliciousness of religion or the goodness of God.
There was never any doubt that Jeremy Taylor would be among those commemorated in the ASB.
His writings indeed had a profound effect on others whose names appeared on the list.
John Wesley recollected how when he read Holy Living and Holy Dying at the age of twenty-two ‘instantly I resolved to dedicate all my life to God, all my thoughts and words and actions’.
Keble, a hundred years later, found these books ‘enough to convert any infidel, so gentle in heart and so high in mind, so fervent in zeal and so charitable in judgement’.
He was equally admired by literary critics, such as Southey and De Quincey; Coleridge put him on a level with Shakespeare.
Charles Lamb considered his imagery and knowledge and description of human life and manners the finest in any prose book in the English language.
What is known of his life comes mainly from a memorial sermon preached by his friend and successor as bishop, George Rust, and from his own books.
His writings were sharpened and made more poignant by his troubles.
At first fortune smiled on him: ‘He was tumbled out of his mother's womb into the lap of the muses at Cambridge’, says his contemporary Anthony à Wood.
He was born in 1613, son of a Cambridge barber, probably a superior barber surgeon, for Jeremy wrote that his father was solely responsible for his grounding in grammar and mathematics.
He not only received an excellent education at the recently founded Perse School in Cambridge, but afterwards a bursary from the school enabled him to continue his studies in the University at Caius College.
He was a brilliant scholar who graduated, became a Fellow and was ordained  before he was twenty-one.
Then an extraordinary chance gave the barber's son the connections which he needed for preferment.
His room mate, who was considerably older, was due to preach a sermon at St Paul's Cathedral but fell ill.
Taylor replaced him and, according to Rust, ‘preached to the admiration and astonishment of his auditory; and by his florid and youthful beauty…and sublime and pleasant air made his hearers take him for a young angel’.
The omniscient and all powerful Archbishop Laud sent for him and decided that ‘it was for the advantage of the world that such mighty parts should be afforded better opportunities of study and improvement than a course of constant preaching would allow of’.
Laud, who was Visitor of All Souls College, Oxford, had him made a Fellow there, overruling the objections of the Warden of the College, Gilbert Sheldon, that he was disqualified by being too young and held only a degree from Cambridge.
Simultaneously Taylor became one of the Archbishop's chaplains.
At All Souls he read widely in the Early Fathers.
Three years later, in 1638, Laud arranged for him to become Rector of Uppingham, in Rutland, and a chaplain to King Charles I. It was at this time that Taylor made his first marriage, to the sister of one of his Cambridge pupils.’
When the Civil War broke out, Taylor joined the King at Oxford, carrying with him the manuscript of his first book,Episcopacy Asserted .
This so delighted the King that he asked the University to make him a Doctor of Divinity.
As Uppingham was held by Parliament, Taylor was given a living nearer to Oxford and under control of the Royalists.
Whilst the stipend supported him and his growing family, he probably never resided there but served as a chaplain in the Royal Army; in this capacity he was taken prisoner in 1645 in an attack on Cardigan Castle in Wales.
When he was released he remained in Wales as a private schoolmaster until he became chaplain and tutor to the family of Lord Carbery in his beautiful house, ‘Golden Grove’, in Carmarthenshire.
There, between 1647 and 1655 Taylor wrote the books for which he is best known and kept the flame of his proscribed Church alive under the rule of parliament and Cromwell.
As he reflected on the brutality of what he had seen done in the name of religion in the Civil War, Taylor asked himself, ‘If persons be Christians in their lives and Christians in their profession,…why should I hate such persons whom God loves and who love God, because…they have not the same opinion as I have?’
This led him to write a book which he called A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying, Shewing the Unreasonableness of Prescribing to Other Men's Faith and the Iniquity of Persecuting Different Opinions .
It was one of the earliest books published in England to make a plea for religious toleration.
‘As contrary as cruelty is to mercy, or tyranny to charity,’ he asserted, ‘so is war and bloodshed to the meekness and gentleness of Christian religion.’
Princes, he said, should not persecute discrepant opinions unless they were harmful; all Christians who subscribed to the Apostles' Creed should be tolerated, even Anabaptists, even Roman Catholics, for, though the latter's doctrines were ‘superstructures ill built and worse managed’, ‘yet they keep the foundation; they build upon God in Jesus Christ, they profess the Apostles' Creed’.
The duty of a Christian was ‘to cling to the Creed of the Apostles, and in all other things [make]an honest endeavour to find out what truths we can, and [allow]a charitable and mutual permission to others that disagree from us and our opinions’.
The book reached King Charles I in captivity, and its permissiveness so displeased him that he asked another of his chaplains, Dr Hammond, to refute it.
Taylor's next major work was also an innovation.
The Great Exemplar was the first life of Christ in the English language.
It was a devotional rather than a theological work.
Its purpose, he explained, was to serve ‘that part of theology which is wholly practical; that which makes us wiser because it makes us better’.
‘For I am weary’, he wrote, ‘with rowing up and down in the seas of questions, which the interests of Christendom have commenced, and in many propositions of which I am not certain that I am not deceived.’
Taylor's best-known books, however, are The Rule and Exercises of Holy Living and The Rule and Exercises of Holy Dying .
He wrote the first for Lady Carbery, whose piety he greatly admired, and its sequel in her memory.
Holy Living he described as ‘rules to live under, as though under a physician's hand, to be used like nourishment, that is by a daily care and meditation’.
The rules cover all aspects of daily life, such as the use of time, prayer, and conduct to superiors, inferiors and family.
They teach absolute obedience to the King, who holds his authority from God alone.
In the Introduction Taylor explained that he had committed these rules to a book because many of ‘his brethren in persecution’ were no longer able to seek the advice of Anglican Ministers.
The emphasis is on conduct, on leading the reader ‘on the way to heaven, without  intricating him in the labyrinths and wild turnings of questions and uncertain talkings’.
The standards set are severe.
We must account for every idle word, never talk with anyone or undertake any trifling employment merely to pass the time of day.
The reader is enjoined to avoid all delicacy and niceness in clothing and diet.
Each time the clock strikes the hour he should praise God.
Holy Dying was written under the impact of the death of Lady Carbery as well as that of Taylor's own wife —‘The bundles of cypress which were intended to dress her closet but now come to dress her hearse’.
Taylor always strongly opposed the Roman Catholic insistence on the efficacy of deathbed repentance.
In this book he argued that all life should be a preparation for dying.
‘The precept of dying should be part of the studies of those that live in health; all that a sick or dying man can do is but to exercise those virtues which he before acquired.’
In writing along these lines Taylor was a pioneer, and he reflected, ‘In this affair I was almost forced to walk alone.’
Holy Living and Holy Dying made him famous and went through twenty editions in the next fifty years.
Two other books which he wrote at this time were to cause him serious trouble.
The first was called The Golden Grove — or a Manual of Daily Prayers and Litanies .
‘We must now take care’, he explained in the Introduction, ‘that the young men who were born in captivity may be taught how to worship the God of Israel after the manner of their forefathers, till it shall please God that religion shall return unto the land.’
The book contained a catechism and an exposition of the Apostles' Creed, together with prayers and litanies.
There were also some verses, which most critics have found unrewarding.
It would have appeared a politically harmless work, if it had not contained a violent attack in the Preface on ‘the impertinent and ignorant preachers’ appointed by the Government, ‘who think all religion is a sermon and all sermons ought to be libels against truth and old Governors, and expound chapters that the meaning may never be understood’.
The true protestant religion, he stated boldly, was that taught by the Church of England.
To use such language under Cromwell's government was to court persecution, and Taylor spent some time in the Tower of London as a result.
To take the title of the book from Lord Carbery's residence and to dedicate it to him was tactless in the extreme, for Carbery, as a former Royalist, was forbidden to keep a chaplain or tutor.
Taylor could never return to Golden Grove.
In the same year appeared his next book,Unum Necessarium or The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance.
In this he not only antagonised Calvinists by describing the doctrine of Predestination as cruel and unjust, but even appeared to his friends to be contradicting St Paul and St Augustine in denying that Adam's original sin was transferred to his descendants.
Precepts of holiness, he declared, might just as well be preached to a wolf as to a man, if man were naturally and inevitably wicked.
He had dedicated the book to Bishops Duppa and Warner without their permission; both expressed their indignation.
Taylor seemed surprised at being accused of denying the validity of the Ninth of the Church of England's Articles, that on ‘Original or Birth-Sin’.
He wrote to Sheldon, ‘My folly and forwardness hath wrought my trouble; but yet there was zeal in it, and I thought there was much reason, and I am sure I intended piously, and there are very many that still do think so.’
Adrift from his beloved Golden Grove, he was now very poor.
Released from imprisonment for his writings, he was soon in jail again for debt.
About this time, however, he married as his second wife Joanna Bridges, who has been alleged to have been an illegitimate daughter of Charles I; and he was able to live on her property in Wales.
He found a new patron in John Evelyn, who encouraged him to come to London, where Sheldon also helped him with money.
Here, admired as the author of Holy Living and Holy Dying , he was appointed by a group of Royalists as their chaplain, going from house to house, holding services, baptisms and confessions.
For public services he wrote a Collection of Offices as a substitute for the Book of Common Prayer whose use was illegal.
Among his patrons was Lord Conway, a wealthy Irish peer whose agent he became for the purchase of rare books in London.
Conway, who prudently forbade Taylor to dedicate any of his works to himself, eventually persuaded him to come and live on his estates in Ireland as a ‘lecturer’, which was a more acceptable title to the authorities than ‘chaplain’.
There, at Portmore, Taylor completed what he regarded as his greatest work,Ductor Dubitantium, or The Rule of Conscience in all her General Measures, Serving as a Great Instrument for the Determination of Consciences , This work is a manual of casuistry which occupies over 1300 pages of close print.
Taylor wrote it because he considered that there had been a careless and needless neglect of hearing confessions in the Church of England.
He himself had received letters from all over England, seeking his advice on questions of conscience, and found  that it was unsatisfactory for Anglicans to have to rely on Roman Catholic literature for guidance in such matters.
The book was completed just in time for him to dedicate it to King Charles II at the Restoration.
It has been described as ‘one of the most elephantine of theological works’.
The popularity of Taylor's devotional books, his sufferings for the Church, his piety, engaging manner, and contacts in influential Royalist circles might have been expected to qualify him for high preferment in the restored Church in 1660.
Juxon, the Archbishop of Canterbury, was very old; appointments were largely handled by Sheldon, the Bishop of London, who was soon to succeed him.
Sheldon, though personally friendly, had never considered Taylor sound since the time when he opposed his appointment as a Fellow of All Souls.
He was to describe him as ‘a man of dangerous temper, apt to break out into extravagances’.
Taylor was given a Bishopric, but it was only an Irish one, and in the most difficult part of Ireland, Down and Connor, where Presbyterianism was deeply entrenched.
As a consolation he was also appointed Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College, Dublin.
This was an honorary and part-time position, but it enabled him to do his most effective and lasting work in Ireland, inspiring and helping the provost, after a period of political disruption, to revise the Statutes, establish regulations for degrees, appoint new staff and design new courses.
He was also made a member of the Irish Privy Council.
These honours could not compensate for the misery of his diocesan life.
With the gentry his charm and distinction soon put him on excellent terms.
The Presbyterian ministers who occupied most of the Church's livings, however, even before his arrival set up a committee to draw up a list of the objectionable features in his works; their report, which condemned him as a heretic for denying Original Sin, was sent to the King.
In the meantime they resolved to preach vigorously against bishops and the Prayer Book.
These ministers had mostly either left the west of Scotland because they could not reconcile their consciences to episcopacy when it was restored there, or had come to Ulster to evangelise and serve the Scots settlers.
They had welcomed the Restoration of Charles II, who himself had once signed the Presbyterian Solemn League and Covenant, and in the negotiations which led to the Restoration they believed that they had received assurances that they would retain their benefices.
After the Restoration, however, there was a very different political climate; in 1661 the Irish  Parliament called for the Solemn League and  Covenant to be burnt by the public hangman.
Taylor on taking up his office summoned the clergy of his diocese to a visitation.
The Presbyterians refused to attend this, though some of them met with him privately.
At this meeting the ministers asserted that their form of Church government was established by divine ordinance; Taylor in reply told them that Presbyterians, along with Jesuits, ‘were the greatest enemies to monarchy and most disobedient to Kings’, as shown by the actions of the Assembly of Scotland, and of Calvin, Knox and Buchanan.
There was no inclination to compromise on either side; the Bishop thereupon declared that the thirty-six livings of the Church of Ireland held by the Presbyterian ministers were vacant because they had not been episcopally ordained.
The livings were filled by Englishmen.
Many of the Presbyterian ministers remained in their parishes, however, and conducted their own services.
Some also held field meetings at which they preached against bishops and the Government.
Taylor demanded support from the Government against what he called ‘these Scots spiders’ and ‘intolerable persons’.
He was, he said, threatened with murder; and when he travelled round his diocese he was preceded by a troop of horse which broke up the illegal meetings.
The conduct of the ministers was provocative, but Taylor's treatment of them was more severe than that of his Archbishop, John Bramhall, who when faced with the same situation devised a form of letters, acceptable to the Presbyterians, by which he supplied them with the qualifications which they lacked, so that they were able to retain their livings.
To guard the Church's other flank, Taylor was asked by his colleagues to write a book against Roman Catholicism.
This lengthy work appeared as A Dissuasion from Popery .
In the Preface he described the superstitions of the Irish peasantry and the rigid hold on them of the Roman Catholic priests, who used all means to confine them to the Irish language, lest if they learnt English they might converse with members of the Church of Ireland or attend its services.
Taylor urged that the Irish be made to learn English and he discouraged the study of the Irish language, whereas earlier and wiser bishops had provided for the use of the Bible and prayer Book in the vernacular.
Taylor was not only himself firm with Dissenters, but in a sermon which he preached before the Irish Parliament in 1661 he urged it not  to have too much respect for tender consciences.
He took his text from the First Book of Samuel:
Disobedience he described as ‘the greatest evil in the world’, and he continued,
This obedience was not only due to God but ‘to our superiors, for they are sent by God’.
A more generous side of Taylor was also shown in the sermon, when he referred to Parliament's task of making a political settlement after Ireland's religious and civil wars.
‘You are to give sentence’, he reminded them, ‘in the causes of half a nation….
Whatever ye do, let not the pretence of a different religion make it lawful to oppress any man in his just rights.’
Taylor's last years were unhappy.
Embarrassed by Nonconformists who quoted his earlier writings, in which he had urged religious toleration, he bought up and burned all the copies of The Liberty of Prophesying .
Almost in despair he wrote to Sheldon in 1664 begging to be given an English bishopric:
There was no response.
Some biographers have suggested that the  reason was that the presence of Mrs Taylor, presiding over one of the great English bishops' palaces, would have been an embarrassing reminder of the frailty of her natural father, the Royal Martyr.
It seems more likely that Taylor was correct in attributing it to Sheldon's poor opinion of his judgement.
Three years after he wrote this letter, Jeremy Taylor died of a fever in his diocese at the age of fifty-four.
George Rust, preaching at the funeral service, spoke movingly of his qualities.
‘This great prelate’, he said, ‘had the good humour of a gentleman, the fancy of a poet, the acuteness of a schoolman, the profoundness of a philosopher, the wisdom of a chancellor, the sagacity of a prophet, the reason of an angel and the piety of a saint.’
He described Taylor's ‘gaiety and richness of fancy’, and how his great learning had been coupled with humility and extraordinary piety and kindness to all in need.
Taylor had carried his misfortunes gallantly.
All his sons died before him, as well as his adored first wife.
Imprisonment and poverty never abated that sense of God's goodness which permeated his works.
His ecclesiastical policies in Ireland were to prove disastrous.
He was more than anyone responsible for the loss to his Church of the Scottish settlers and their descendants in the north of Ireland.
Both as Bishop and Vice-Chancellor, his discouragement of the study of the Irish language also deprived the Anglican clergy of the only means of making progress among the peasants of the South.
But writing, he said, was his trade.
As a writer, according to Anthony à Wood, ‘he was esteemed the perfect artist’.
That artistry was expressed above all in his devotional writing and in his sermons.
It is as a writer and ‘rare conductor of souls’, rather than as a bishop, that he may be commemorated.
His devotional works are full of joy; religion, he said, ‘leads us to a huge felicity through pleasant ways’.
He almost defies quotation, for his majestic sentences keep breaking into lengthy metaphors aside, full of wonder at the works of God around him.
This, as he writes about the brevity of human life, he is moved to exclaim, ‘So I have seen a rose newly sprung from the clefts of its hood, and at first it was fair as the morning and full with the dew of heaven as a lamb's fleece’, and he continues to describe its life until ‘it bowed the head and broke its stalk and at night having lost some of its leaves, and all its beauty, it fell into the portion of weeds and outworn faces’.
When he writes of prayer, he compares it with ‘a lark rising from his bed of grass and soaring upwards, singing as he rises, and  hopes to get to heaven and climb above the clouds’, and so the lark continues through clause after clause, buffeted by storms from which it takes refuge, until finally ‘it did rise and sing, as if it had learned music and motion from an angel as he passed sometimes through the air about his ministries here below’.
By nature, and before he went to Ireland, whose problems affected the characters and ruined the careers of many another English administrator before and since, Jeremy Taylor was a very humane man, and it may be appropriate to leave him by quoting a story which was his conclusion to The Liberty of Prophesying :
Protest and Renewal
John Bunyan
Author (1628–1688)
Great sins do draw out great grace.
At first sight it is astonishing that the Alternative Service Book of the Church of England should commemorate someone who was imprisoned for refusing to attend its services, who wrote a treatise against its Prayer Book, and who in his memoirs counted among his sins his reverence for that Church as a child.
The uneducated tinker who was a member of Cromwell's army is a startling contrast to the High Anglicans and the Royal Martyr who precede him.
The clue to his inclusion is his description as ‘author’.
Long after his death The Pilgrim's Progress so universally found its way into the childhood reading of all classes that it came to be regarded as part of the heritage of all Protestant Churches in the English-speaking world.
John Bunyan was born in the village of Elstow, a mile outside Bedford, in 1628.
In his spiritual autobiography,Grace Abounding , he described his descent as ‘of a low and inconsiderable generation, my father's house being of that which is meanest and most despised of all the families in the land’.
This was an exaggeration, in order to emphasise the subsequent goodness of God towards him, for his father owned nine acres of land and left a Will.
Like John after him, he was not so much a tinker as a brazier, a mender and purveyor of household utensils, with a forge beside his cottage.
John learned to read and write at a local school.
Little is known of his early life except for his recollection that at the age of nine or ten he ‘did so offend the Lord that He did scare and terrify me with dreadful visions’, and that he was greatly afflicted at that time with thoughts of the Day of Judgement.
In 1645, when he was sixteen, he was conscripted into the Parliamentary Army whilst it was being reorganised by Cromwell.
He was issued with a ‘Soldier's Catechism’ which asked, ‘What side are you on and for whom do  you fight?’
The reply was, ‘I fight to recover the King out of the hands of a popish malignant company.
I fight in the defence and maintenance of the Protestant religion.’
Sermons, extemporary prayer and psalms were part of Bunyan's military training.
In Grace Abounding nothing is said about his life as a soldier except that it was once preserved by the mercy of God when another man took his place as sentinel during a siege and was killed by a musket bullet.
On his discharge in 1647 he took up his father's trade and shortly afterwards married, being, he relates, ‘poor as poor might be, not having…a dish or spoon between us’.
His wife brought him, however, two books,The Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven by Arthur Dent and The Practice of Piety by Lewis Baxley.
These encouraged him to attend the parish church, where ‘I was so overrun with the spirit of superstition that I adored all things (both the High Place, Priest, Clerk, vestments, service and what else) belonging to the Church.’
His pastimes, which he later came to abhor, included dancing, bell-ringing and games on the village green.
One Sunday, after listening to a sermon in church on the wickedness of Sabbath-breaking, he was playing at tipcat (a predecessor of cricket) when he suddenly heard a voice cry, ‘Wilt thou leave thy sins and go to Heaven, or have thy sins and go to Hell?’
Thus commenced a quest for salvation which lasted six years and in which he was often in a state of great depression.
He would swing from a despairing belief that he was so great a sinner that it was too late to hope to go to Heaven, to elation as he overcame his great vice of swearing and started to read the Bible.
Then once more he would ask himself whether he was among the Elect or whether the Day of Grace might have already come and gone.
He became ‘more loathsome in my own eyes than a toad….
Gladly would I have been in the condition of dog or horse, for I knew they had no soul to perish under the everlasting weights of Hell as mine was like to do.’
One day, as he was pushing his tinker's cart round Bedford, he came across three or four poor women, sitting at a door in the sun, and was struck by the confident way in which they spoke of their salvation.
They took him to John Gifford, minister of an Independent or Baptist congregation in Bedford which the Cromwellian government had installed in an Anglican church.
Gifford was a former Royalist officer, an educated man who had himself experienced a fierce inward struggle in his puritan  conversion.
Bunyan was to be a member of the Bedford Congregation for the rest of his life.
Gifford, though he gave advice from his own experience, told him to take nothing on trust, but ‘to cry mightily unto the Lord that He would convince him of the truth thereof’: he must work out his own salvation.
In his search for conviction that he was one of the Elect, justified by faith, he was helped by coming across an old tattered copy of Luther's Commentary on Galatians.
For a time ‘tumultuous thoughts like masterless Hell hounds did roar and bellow and make a noise within me….
My soul did hang as in a pair of scales, sometimes up and sometimes down, now in peace and anon in terror.’
Eventually he found in the Scriptures, which he scanned daily, texts which satisfied him that he might be saved.
‘Now’, he said, ‘I could have spoken to the very crows that sat upon the ploughed land before me.’
His experience had followed traditional Calvinist lines — first the conviction of sin, then of vocation, or being called by God, followed by justification and the achievement of a saving faith.
New members of the Bedford Congregation were expected to give an account of their spiritual struggle.
Bunyan did this with such fervour that he was asked to preach.
He spoke mainly about original sin and of ‘life by Christ without works’.
‘I preached what I felt, what I smartingly did feel.’
people came from Bedford and the surrounding countryside in their hundreds to hear him.
In 1655 he moved into Bedford.
Shortly afterwards his first wife died, leaving him with four small children.
He married again in 1659.
At the Restoration of Charles II, the church which had been used by the Bedford Congregation was returned to the Church of England and its members had to meet on village greens and in barns.
The King, in the Declaration of Breda, had promised that no man would be molested for differences of religious opinion, so long as he kept the peace.
After his return to England, however, his keenly Anglican Parliament caused the Declaration to be withdrawn.
Bunyan was now one of the first Nonconformists to be arrested for preaching illegally.
He was warned in advance, but, as a former soldier, felt ‘God has chosen me to go on this forlorn hope of preaching his Blessed Gospel in his country, and I should discourage those who are coming after me if I should be afraid and fly.’
The magistrates would have been glad to release him if he had promised to discontinue his preaching.
This he steadfastly refused  to do.
He foresaw ‘the many hardships, miseries and wants that my poor family was like to meet with…should I be taken from them, especially my poor blind child….
I was as a man who was pulling down his house upon the head of his wife and children, yet thought I, I must do it, I must do it.’
‘I have determined’, he said, ‘to suffer even until the moss shall grow on mine eyebrows.’
In the indictment Bunyan was accused, among other things, of ‘devilishly and perniciously abstaining from coming to Church to hear Divine Service’.
At his trial the magistrates urged that the Book of Common Prayer had been used ever since the time of the Apostles.
Bunyan replied that he could find no justification for the Prayer Book in the Scriptures and that its use was an impediment to man in making known his condition to God.
The magistrates told him that he was ignorant, knowing no Greek, and that he made people neglect their calling.
He was initially sentenced to three months in jail; the period was renewed from time to time until 1672.
His wife failed to persuade the judges to include him amongst the prisoners released in the celebrations of the coronation of Charles II, and in her bitterness told them that her husband was being denied justice because he was a tinker and a poor man.
In Bedford County Jail Bunyan supported his family by making long tagged laces.
He preached to and instructed his fellow prisoners.
In the first years he had easy-going jailers.
He could receive visitors and was allowed out of jail from time to time, even occasionally to preach in London.
During this first imprisonment, which lasted from 1660 to 1672, Bunyan published Grace Abounding , which was based on sermons given by him in prison.
It was both a spiritual autobiography and a justification of his right to preach.
Its full title was Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners or a Brief and Faithful delation of the Exceeding Mercy of God in Christ to His Poor Servant, John Bunyan .
It was published, he said, for the support of the weak and tempted people of God, and dedicated ‘to those whom God hath counted him worthy to beget to the Faith, by his Ministry in the Word’.
He also published from prison a number of manuals of conduct and minor treatises.
Although the first part of the Pilgrim's Progress was written during this period of imprisonment, it was not published at the time.
Through his other books however Bunyan had become famous when he was released under Charles II's Act of Indulgence in 1672 and became Pastor of the Bedford Meeting.
He was again  imprisoned in 1677 for six months for failing to attend the Church of England's services, but for the remainder of his life was free, devoting himself to his pastoral duties and his writings.
For several years after his first release Bunyan hesitated whether to publish Pilgrim's Progress .
As he explained in the rhyming preface to the first part, he had written it 
He showed the manuscript to his friends, some of whom criticised its rude style and use of parables.
When he finally decided to publish it in 1678, he defended its form by comparing the tactics of the hunt for souls with the way in which a fowler must whistle to attract birds, and a fisherman must tickle trout before he can clasp them.
The first part of Pilgrim's Progress is an allegory of the spiritual journey which had been described in Grace Abounding .
Christian is Bunyan himself, leaving his wife and children, as he had done when he went to prison, to undertake the pilgrimage to everlasting life: the imagery is taken not only from the Bible but from the chapbooks and folktales which were sold by travelling hawkers in the Bedfordshire villages at the time.
From these are drawn the heroes and knightly characters who are bound to prevail, as God's champions, in mortal combat against giants and monsters.
The symbolism is not hard to follow in terms of Bunyan's own experience.
Giant Despair is the sin against the Holy Ghost; on the other side, ‘Evangelist’, who frequently comes to Christian's rescue, represents the authority of the Bible.
The wicket gate is Christ.
The fiend Apollyon, whom Christian slays, is the Devil, who had whispered blasphemies into Bunyan's ears when he was young.
He drew not only on his spiritual but on his physical experiences.
The burden which Christian carries on his back is the anvil which Bunyan humped through country lanes, encountering, like Christian, floods and mud and dangers of footpads.
Vanity Fair is the annual fair on Elstow village green, with its hucksters and cheap finery and pickpockets.
In the first part Christian, though occasionally he meets companions, is essentially alone, self-centred and preoccupied with his own spiritual problem.
Though he is helped by many, he  helps nobody.
The thread of the story is the successful quest of the individual soul for salvation through justification by faith in Christ.
When the second part was published in 1684, Bunyan was no longer in danger of imprisonment.
He was a respected pastor, already internationally celebrated as the author of the first Pilgrim's Progress .
The second part is therefore much more relaxed and cheerful; the urgency and despair have disappeared.
Christiana's journey with her four children and her friend Mercy to find her husband Christian and the Celestial City has been described by Ronald Knox as not so much a pilgrimage as a walking-tour.
The book is full of good fellowship, worthy characters and music.
Under the protection of the stalwart Mr Greatheart, modelled probably on the ex-officer Pastor Gifford, there never seems much doubt that the party will reach its destination.
The underlying moral of this part of the story seems to be that the Church should welcome all who are sound in doctrine without troubling about differences and minor scruples.
This fellowship does not of course embrace Rome; in Pilgrim's Progress , Christian encounters Giant Pope, old and biting his nails because he cannot get at the pilgrims, and mumbling to them, ‘You will never mend till more of you be burned.’
Christiana's party keep up their spirits on their way by singing hymns.
Two of these were eventually to become favourites in Church of England hymnals —‘He that is down need fear no fall’ and ‘Who would true valour see’; the latter, indeed, is now one of the most widely used hymns in funeral services in the Church.
The success of the Pilgrim's Progress was based not so much upon understanding of its allegories and the doctrines behind them as on the vivid imagery, the fascination of the story and the simple magnificence of the style.
From the bold opening words, in which Christian appears with his Bible in his hand and his great burden on his back, crying, ‘What shall I do’, readers of all denominations and cultures have been entranced by the story right through to the end, when Mr Valiant-for-Truth gives his sword ‘to him that shall succeed me…and as he went, he said, ‘Death where is thy sting?’ and as he went down deeper, he said, ‘Grave where is thy victory?’
So he passed over and the trumpets sounded for him on the other side.’
In Puritan homes in which novels were banned, and in Evangelical homes where they were banned on Sundays, generations of children, often skipping the doctrinal dialogue, have been fascinated and excited to imagine themselves to be Christian and Christiana, never knowing what adventures they will find  around the next corner and confident that there will be a happy ending.
Missionaries found that the book, which has been translated into some 200 languages, had an equal success in Africa, Asia and the Pacific and that the appeal of the story of a pilgrimage was universal.
Bunyan was delighted with the success of Pilgrim's Progress .
In his rhymed introduction to Part II he describes how 
Bunyan wrote many more books, mostly in the last ten years of his life.
Two of them became quite well known.
The Life and Death of Mr Badman is concerned with middle-class morals in a small town such as Bedford.
Mr Badman uses false weights and measures, cheats his debtors through a bogus bankruptcy, and marries an heiress whom he mistreats.
The lack of any redeeming features causes the book to be somewhat unconvincing.
The Holy War is an allegory of the warfare of Satan and the angels, reminiscent of Milton's Paradise Lost , which Bunyan had probably read.
There are some vivid passages reflecting Bunyan's memories of the organisation and conduct of Cromwell's Ironsides, but the complicated plot is hard to follow and the characters are starkly drawn in black and white, as in Mr Badman .
In his later years Bunyan spent much of his time visiting and overseeing nearby congregations, whilst his son worked the forge.
He now became known as Bishop Bunyan and would travel throughout the country preaching, collecting and distributing alms, and settling quarrels among the brethren.
His congregations were mostly small shopkeepers and artisans who respected him not only as a preacher and writer but as a man who had himself worked with his hands.
He had achieved serenity and even wrote a Book of Country Rhymes for Boys and Girls , to give them pleasure, as he said, and ‘to catch them’.
The rhymes are about the frog, the mole, the snail, the cuckoo and other living creatures, illustrated with woodcuts; each poem contains a moral.
In 1687, when James II was trying to conciliate Dissenters in order to win toleration for Catholics, Bunyan was offered a place in a reconstructed Bedford Town Corporation, which he refused.
He did, however, accept the post of honorary chaplain to one of the Lord Mayors of London.
He died in August 1688 through catching cold whilst riding through heavy rain to reconcile a father and son who had quarrelled.
Bunyan's life and work were a fulfilment of Tyndale's dream that his translation of the Bible would reach and transform the humblest ploughboy in the fields.
For him the Bible was a precise historical narrative from which all lessons of conduct could be drawn.
He distrusted mysticism and wrote against the Quakers, whose reliance on an ‘Inner Light’ he considered to be a blasphemous neglect of the Scriptures.
He was a man of single purpose, the saving of souls.
He was not interested in politics or institutions or movements.
Though he had been a soldier in the Parliamentary Army, he often announced his acceptance of the authority of the restored Stuart kings.
Nor was he much concerned with forms of religion.
The Bedford Congregation to which he belonged believed in separation of Church and State and in liberty of conscience.
It was sometimes described as Congregationalist and sometimes as Baptist and did not insist on adult baptism.
‘I would be a Christian,’ Bunyan wrote, ‘but as for those factious titles of Anabaptists, Independent, Presbyterian or the like, I conclude that they come neither from Jerusalem nor Antioch, but Hell or Babylon.’
It is notable that this list did not include the Church of England.
In his treatise I Will Pray with the Spirit he describes that Church's Book of Common Prayer as ‘a mere human invention, which God is so far from owning it that He expressly forbids it, in His most Holy and Blessed Word’.
The story of how after his death Bunyan and the Pilgrim's Progress came to be assimilated by the Church of England is almost as fascinating as that of his life.
In the hundred years after he died, the Pilgrim's Progress found an increasingly wide readership among Nonconformists.
By showing how every soul could make its own way to God, without the mediation of priests or ministers of the educated classes, it helped to give a sense of dignity and individual worth to thousands who were turned off their land by enclosures and absorbed by the Dark Satanic Mills of the Industrial Revolution.
For many it transformed the view of religion from a confused mystery into a practical guide for everyday life.
John  Wesley edited an abridged edition and used it widely to support his sermons.
The Church of England at first remained uninterested, even hostile.
A typical view was expressed in a guide-book to Bedfordshire by the Revd Thomas Cox in 1721: ‘John Bunyan, author of the Pilgrim's progress, and several other little books of an antinomian spirit, too frequently to be met with in the hands of the common people, was, if we mistake not, a brazier of Bedford.’
Nor did Bunyan's literary style appeal to the cultivated classical taste of the Augustan Age.
By the early nineteenth century the attitude of the Establishment to Pilgrim's Progress had greatly changed.
It became a favourite book of the Evangelicals, whose influence was rising in the Church of England; by the 1840s there seemed hardly a Christian nursery in England and Scotland, including that of the Queen, without a copy.
Employers of miserably paid men, women and children in the new factories also welcomed the message in 
At the same time the book became popular for its literary merits with the Romantic Movement, who preferred a naïve and spontaneous style to the studied and artificial manner of the eighteenth century.
Previous editions had been published on cheap paper, crudely printed and illustrated, and aimed at a working-class readership.
In 1830 the poet Southey edited the first high-quality edition, including a substantial biography of Bunyan.
This was the subject of long and enthusiastic review essays by Macaulay and Sir Walter Scott, who noted that Pilgrim's Progress was unique as a book whose popularity had spread upwards from the lower to the upper classes instead of in the other direction.
Bunyan now became a hero in the prevalent Whig and Liberal school of history as a victim in the struggle for conscience and freedom of speech.
In 1853 his whole collected works were published for the first time with an introduction in which the editor, George Offor, hailed them as a weapon in the struggle  against ‘the mighty efforts’ which were then being made ‘to enthral the country in the Satanic yoke of popery or its dark ill-shapen brother Puseyism’.
Some members of the Oxford Movement and Anglo-Catholics viewed the takeover of the nation's nurseries by the Pilgrim's Progress with alarm.
One of the Movement's leaders, the Revd J. M. Neale, therefore rewrote the book in 1853 as The Pilgrim's Progress of John Bunyan for the Use of Children in the English Church.
‘The Editor’, he blandly explained, ‘cannot be called dishonest for making his author speak what he believes, with more knowledge, the author would have said.’
In Neale's version Christian loses his burden not at the Cross but after being dipped in a well, symbolising baptismal regeneration.
The Giant Pope whom he encounters is turned into Giant Mahometan.
A ceremony of Confirmation and of First Communion are inserted in the House Beautiful, and finally, in the most fundamental change, the pilgrims are enabled to cross the river and enter the Heavenly City by virtue of their acts instead of by their faith.
The Broad Church leaders, who hoped that the Church of England would again become a national Church, with which the Nonconformists could be closely associated or into which they might even be absorbed, were as enthusiastic about Bunyan as the Evangelicals.
Dr Thomas Arnold in 1836 described him as a man of incomparably greater genius than any of the Anglican divines and theologians, and to have given a far truer and more edifying picture of Christianity.
The acceptance of Bunyan by the Church of England was notably marked at the ceremonies of the Bedford Bunyan Festival in 1874.
On this occasion the Duke of Bedford, who had paid for a statue of Bunyan to be erected in the town, recollected how Pilgrim's Progress had been the first book given to him as a child.
Earl Cowper, the Deputy Lord Lieutenant of Bedfordshire, ‘expressed the humiliation and shame which he felt when he reflected on his Church's treatment of Bunyan’.
The main address was given by A. P. Stanley, Dean of Westminster and Thomas Arnold's faithful disciple and biographer.
In this he declared that   that the book acts as a religious bond to the whole of English Christendom.
Afterwards 4000 Sunday School children of all denominations sat down together ecumenically to consume a ton and a half of cake; and each was presented with a copy of Pilgrim's Progress .
Punch , whose influence was considerable as the journalistic entertainer of the Establishment, in praising the Duke and Stanley for their initiative, used the occasion to deplore the Church of England's preoccupation with ritualism:
Whilst Bunyan might have rejoiced at being used to belabour the inanities and vanities of the Church of England, it is difficult to know what he would have thought of being commemorated by memorial windows in Elstow parish church and Westminster Abbey.
It is even harder to imagine his reaction, in light of his long imprisonment, to the authoritative comment of The Times on the Bedford Bunyan Festival: ‘No one cares to remember whether the author of the most fascinating allegory that ever struck despair into the souls of imitators was a Dissenter.’
Thomas Ken
Bishop of Bath and Wells (1637–1711)
Our best arguments are holy lives.
The way in which Thomas Ken came to be appointed to his see was as unusual as the occasion of his departure.
In 1681 King Charles II visited Winchester to inspect progress on a palace which Wren was building for him there as a base for hawking and hunting in the Hampshire hills and forests.
The Royal Harbinger went ahead to make arrangements for the King and his Court to be quartered in the Cathedral Close.
The King was to stay in the Deanery, and the modest but elegant house nearby of the bachelor Prebendary Ken appeared a convenient place in which to billet Nell Gwynne, who ranked about third among the King's mistresses.
Ken obstinately and successfully resisted what in effect was a royal command, saying that ‘A woman of ill repute ought not to be endured in the house of a clergyman, least of all that of a royal chaplain.’
Four years later, when the Bishopric of Bath and Wells fell vacant, the King rejected all other suggestions and declared, ‘Who shall have Bath and Wells but that little black fellow who would not give poor Nellie a lodging?’
All through his life, though Ken could be austere and stubborn to a point which provoked exasperation, his evident holiness was so blended with cheerfulness that he seldom lost the admiration and affection of his contemporaries.
He was born in 1637.
His father, a Hertfordshire attorney, died when he was a child and he was brought up by his uncle, Izaak Walton, the author of Lives of Hooker and Herbert and the friend of Nicholas Ferrar.
Ken was educated at Winchester School and then at New College, Oxford, where, together with senior and junior members of the university, he worshipped according to the liturgy of the Church of England in defiance of the laws of the Cromwellian regime.
There he made friends for life in George Hooper and Francis Turner, who became fellow bishops, and with Thomas  Thynne, in whose house he was to spend his long retirement.
On graduating he was ordained, and for a short period was a tutor at New College.
He then occupied a country living for a few years before returning to Winchester as chaplain to the Bishop, George Morley, who was a close friend of Izaak Walton.
It was at Winchester that Ken's austere habits seem to have developed.
He would fast frequently, only take one meal a day, and would rise at one or two o'clock in the morning to pray.
Here too he started to write hymns which he would sing to his own accompaniment on a lute.
Two of them, which he wrote for Winchester College, ‘Awake my soul and with the sun’ and ‘Glory to Thee, my God this night’were to become among the best-known hymns of the Church.
In his early life Ken was suspected by some of his acquaintances of sympathy with Roman Catholicism.
In 1675, however, he accompanied his cousin, Izaak Walton's son, on a grand tour of Europe which included a visit to Rome in a Jubilee Year during which the pilgrims received indulgences in return for their offerings to the papal Treasury.
Experience of the corruption and nepotism of Rome confirmed him in his Anglican allegiance.
In 1679, probably at the suggestion of Bishop Morley, he was appointed to succeed his friend Hooper at The Hague as chaplain to the Princess Mary, the daughter of James, Duke of York, and wife of prince William of Orange.
It was an uncomfortable post.
The Calvinist William had no sympathy with his wife's High Church Anglicanism.
The English Ambassador, Sidney, described Ken as ‘horribly unsatisfied with the Prince’ for his treatment of the Princess.
‘He is resolved to speak with him though he kicks him outdoors.’
The crisis arose eventually over another matter, when Ken exerted successful moral pressure on one of William's Dutch courtiers to marry the Princess's maid of honour whom he had seduced.
The Prince rebuked Ken for his interference and threatened to have him dismissed.
When Ken thereupon resigned, however, William appealed to him to remain, which he did for a further year.
A tiff with his nephew was no disqualification in the eyes of Charles II, who disliked William and his religion; Ken on his return to England was made a chaplain to the King, who would remark ruefully on Sundays, ‘Now I must go and hear little Ken rebuke me for my sins.’
He was celebrated at court for the eloquence of his sermons, and in 1683 Lord Dartmouth, who commanded the large  fleet which was to visit Tangiers and evacuate its garrison, implored him ‘For God's sake, and as I am to answer for the preservation of so many souls as he hath put under my care’, to join the expedition as his chief chaplain.
Pepys, who sailed with Ken in the flagship, describes how he gave ‘a very good sermon on the duty of subjects to their Prince’ and how in Tangiers he preached against the vices of the town and later ‘engaged in very high discourse’with the Governor, the infamous Colonel Kirke, about the excessive liberty of swearing.
The standards of the Royal Chaplain were not those of the Court.
The diarist Evelyn described how at Whitehall in 1685, on the Sunday before Charles II had his fatal stroke, he witnessed ‘the inexpressible luxury and profaneness and forgetfulness of God, as the King sat and toyed with his three concubines whilst his courtiers played at basset with £2,000 of gold on the table’.
Ken, who although he had just been appointed Bishop, was still a Royal Chaplain, remained beside the bed of the dying King for three days and nights, ‘watching at proper intervals to suggest pious and proper thoughts and ejaculations on so serious an occasion’.
His eloquence was somewhat impaired by the presence on the bed of the current mistress, the Roman Catholic Duchess of Portsmouth, but eventually he succeeded in having her removed and in persuading the King to send for the Queen to seek her forgiveness for the wrongs he had done her; the King however kept putting off the administration of the Holy Sacrament, and Ken was removed from the room in Charles's last hours as he was received into the Roman Catholic Church by a priest smuggled into the palace by his brother and successor, James II.
In an address to the Chapter of Wells the new Bishop made the vow which was to cause him so much trouble later: ‘In all solemnity to teach and inculcate allegiance' to the new King ‘both in our discourse and in our example to all your subjects under our care’.
He had hardly moved into his palace before James, Duke of Monmouth, the illegitimate but protestant son of Charles I, returned to claim the throne from the Roman Catholic James II.
The campaign of the rebellion and its complete defeat took place within Ken's diocese.
A large number of rebels were imprisoned in Wells Cathedral and later in the jails of Taunton and Bridgwater, where Ken visited them and ministered to their spiritual and material misery.
Though strongly deploring the rebellion, he wrote to James II to protest against the brutalities of Judge Jeffreys and Colonel  Kirke.
When Monmouth was executed, Ken was sent for to attend him in his last hours.
Ken was effectively a bishop for some five years, during which he showed great zeal for the teaching of the Catechism and the relief of the poor.
His great-nephew described how when at home on Sundays the Bishop would have twelve poor men and women to dine with him in his hall, ‘always endeavouring while he fed their bodies to comfort their spirits by some cheerful discourse, generally mixt with some useful instruction.
And when they had dined, the remainder was divided among them to carry home to their families.’
He planned to establish work centres where labourers who were miserably paid by the tradesmen of Bath would receive an honest wage.
He set up parish schools and to aid his clergy he wrote an exposition of the Church Catechism, called The Practice of Divine Love .
In this he stated his loyalty to the ‘Church of England, whose faith and government and worship are…free from the extremes of irreverence and superstition…and which I firmly believe to be a sound part of the Church universal; and which teaches me charity to those who dissent from me’.
He also issued a little book called Directions for Prayer in the Diocese of Bath and Wells which contained simple prayers to be taught by parents to their children.
He exhorted his readers never to omit the prayers for the Sovereign in the Communion Service, because ‘the county in which they lived was the seat of the late rebellion’ and ‘the tares of sedition have been industriously sown among you and you have the greater reason to pray that you may be firm in your allegiance.
In October 1685 Louis XIV of France revoked the Edict of Nantes, under which the protestants of France had for ninety years enjoyed freedom of worship and full civil rights.
Thousands of Huguenots fled to England from the persecution which followed.
Ken sent a pastoral letter to his clergy asking them to collect money for their relief, and, though his stipend was among the lowest of those of the English bishops, himself contributed £4000.
He even persuaded King James to give grudging support.
To the King indeed, Ken was one of the least unacceptable of the Anglican bishops, and he continued to be invited to preach at court — not, indeed, in the presence of the Roman Catholic king, but in that of his daughter Princess Anne.
In his sermon on passion Sunday in 1687 he spoke of blasphemies, perfidy and superstition in such a way as to be understood to be referring, Evelyn relates, ‘to  the Romish priests and the new religion of the Council of Trent’.
On another occasion his reference to the duty of the Old Testament prophets to  denounce God's judgements to the King and Court was reported to James II, who sent for him and reproached him for the controversial bitterness with which he had spoken.
Ken's reply was that, if His Majesty had not neglected his own duty of being present, his enemies would have missed this opportunity of accusing him.
King James continued in the series of follies which were to lose him his throne, including the consecration of a papal nuncio in St James's Chapel, the replacement of Protestant officers by Catholics in the army, and the creation of an Ecclesiastical Commission with wide and illegal disciplinary powers.
In May 1688 Ken was urgently summoned to London by Sancroft, the Archbishop of Canterbury, to consult with his fellow bishops in response to an Order in Council requiring them to instruct their clergy to read in Church a Declaration of Indulgence; under this, Roman Catholics and Dissenters would no longer be required to subscribe to oaths under the Test Acts.
The Bishops were mostly not opposed to liberty of conscience for Dissenters, the wiser of whom opposed the Declaration, but considered that only Parliament could revoke the Test Acts, so that the Declaration was illegal.
Seven of them, including the Archbishop and Ken, drew up a petition to this effect; the bishops presented it in person to the King, who exclaimed in anger, ‘This is a standard of rebellion.’
Ken is reported as replying, ‘We have two duties to perform, our duty to God and our duty to Your Majesty.
We honour you but we fear God.’
Somehow the petition became public, and in only four churches in London was the Declaration read.
The seven Bishops who had signed the petition were then summoned before the King in Council and charged with publishing a seditious libel.
When the King withdrew, Jeffreys, the Lord Chancellor, told the bishops that they would be prosecuted in the King's Bench and asked them to enter into recognisances to appear in court.
When they stood upon their privilege as peers and refused to do so, he committed them to the Tower of London.
Macaulay has vividly described how huge crowds knelt to receive the Bishops' blessings on their way to the Tower, and how when they were acquitted of sedition by a jury a week later even the King's troops cheered.
On that day the invitation was sent to  William of Orange, James's nephew and son-in-law, in response to which he landed in England to restore its liberties.
The appeal to William was signed by only one bishop, Compton of London, and was not supported by the seven who had been imprisoned in the Tower.
When the Dutch troops landed and passed through Wells, Ken wrote to James to say that he had withdrawn from his palace, taking his carriage horses lest they be commandeered; indeed his previous service at William's court would have caused much embarrassment if he had remained to meet him.
After the flight to France of James II, Ken took part in the Parliamentary Convention which considered the constitutional position; he voted that William and Mary be declared Regents and against the Resolution declaring the throne to be vacant.
When Parliament subsequently required an oath of allegiance to be taken to William and Mary as sovereigns, Ken was among five of the seven bishops who, although they had been imprisoned by James, felt unable to forswear their oath of allegiance to him.
Ken was the most charitable of the non-jurors.
He made it as easy as possible for his clergy to take the oath, and he acknowledged that his friends who did so acted in as good conscience as he had in refusing it.
The non-juror bishops were suspended in 1689; then in 1691 they were evicted from their dioceses.
Ken read a protest from his throne in the Cathedral against the intrusion of his successor, and retired for the rest of his life to Longleat, the home of his Oxford friend Thomas Thynne, Lord Weymouth.
He did indeed now produce a great quantity of religious verse, none of which critics of any period have found of the quality of his two famous early hymns; his long epic poem Edmund has passages of almost embarrassing bathos.
His surviving sermons have commanded more admiration.
Ken took no part in Jacobite plots against William III, but all the non-jurors became very unpopular when England was at war with  France, which supported James's claim to the throne.
In 1696 he was arrested for signing and circulating an appeal for charitable contributions to relieve the extruded clergy.
When summoned before the Privy Council, he defended this as an act of charity, comparable to his relief to the prisoners after Monmouth's rebellion, and was discharged.
Ken hoped that the schism in the Church between those who had taken the oath of allegiance and those who had refused would eventually be settled by the deaths of the latter.
Thus he deplored the action of the former Archbishop Sancroft in consecrating two new bishops, whose names were approved by the exiled James II, in order to maintain the Apostolic Succession among the non-jurors.
After the death both of James and of William 111, Ken accepted Anne as Queen.
His successor at Wells, Bishop Kidder, was killed when the roof of the palace collapsed in the great storm of 1703.
Queen Anne now offered to reinstate Ken in his diocese, but he refused on grounds of infirmity and persuaded his old friend Hooper to accept the position.
After this he no longer signed himself as Bishop of Bath and Wells and he received a pension from the Queen.
He was the last of the non-juror bishops to die, and his acceptance that cession or death gave legitimacy to the new bishops enabled most of the non-jurors to return to communion with the Church, though the extreme minority continued in schism.
In his later years Ken's health was poor.
When he could not sleep, he would rise and write hymns ‘as an anodyne and alleviate of pain’.
‘Teach me to live, that I may dread/The grave as little as my bed’, he had written; in this spirit he carried his shroud in a portmanteau and put it on a few days before his death at Longleat in 1711, which his friends considered to have been advanced by his fasting and mortifications.
He left a Will which places him firmly in the central Anglican tradition:
At his own request he was buried in the nearest church in his former diocese, at Frome, in a tomb without an inscription and surrounded by a rail.
1.
Sir Thomas More, after Hans Holbein (1527)
2.
Thomas Cranmer, portrait by G. Flicke (1546)
3.
Richard Hooker, monument in Church of St Mary the Virgin, Bishopsbourne, Kent (artist unknown)
4.
Lancelot Andrewes, engraving by Simon de Passe (1618)
5.
George Herbert, engraving by R. White (frontispiece to The Temple , 1674)
6.
Nicholas Ferrar, portrait by M. Gheeraerts the Younger (c. 1617)
7.
Charles I, engraving by William Marshall (c. 1649).
The King is seen exchanging an earthly crown for a crown of thorns and looking up towards a heavenly crown
8.
Jeremy Taylor, artist unknown (1637)
9.
John Bunyan, portrait by Thomas Sadler (1684–5)
10.
Thomas Ken, attrib.
F. Scheffer (1700)
11.
John Wesley, portrait by N. Hone (1766)
12. (above ) William Wilberforce portrait by G. Richmond (1833)
13. (right ) Charles Simeon, artist and date unknown, published by W. Mason, Cambridge
14.
John Keble, portrait by G. Richmond (1863)
15.
James Hannington, stained glass window in St Peter's College, Oxford.
Some of the animals which he used to shoot are seen above his head
16.
Josephine butler, portrait by G. Richmond (1851)
17.
‘A Persecuted Bishop’ Edward King, cartoon by Spy in Vanity Fair (1890)
In his lifetime he was widely loved and admired as ‘the seraphic Ken’ even by those who deplored his political stance.
After his death his reputation declined.
Bishop Burnet, whose church-manship and politics were very different, and whose memoirs were widely read in the eighteenth century, described him as 
Whigs considered his scruples over the oath ridiculous and inconsistent: Jacobites and Tories found his final reconciliation with Queen Anne and her Church feeble, if not treacherous.
Ken was rediscovered in the nineteenth century by the Oxford Movement, for whom his idea of the Church of England as part of the Universal Church and his ascetic character had a great appeal.
Keble as a young man enthusiastically planned to edit his works, though on closer acquaintance with them he renounced the project.
His considered assessment was that Ken's narrative verse was ‘often cumbrous’ and his lyric verse ‘not seldom languid and redundant; yet all breathing an angelic spirit interspersed with such pure and bright touches of poetry that a reader will scarcely find it in his heart to criticize him’.
Another of the Tractarian poets, Isaac Williams, reflected pathetically on visiting Ken's tomb, whilst a similar visit by Richard Monckton Milnes, the future Man of Letters Lord Houghton, produced a poem exceeding Ken at his most bathetic and beginning,
Newman in one of the Tracts for the Times drew up a form of service, to be used on the anniversary of Ken's funeral, whose central  message was ‘He gave to Caesar the things that be Caesar's and to God the things that be God's.’
The tomb was now embellished by the Oxford Movement's favourite architect, Butterfield, and a sonorous epitaph was attached.
It was not only the Tractarians who expressed their admiration.
Even Macaulay, who found the non-jurors preposterous, considered that, though Ken had an ‘intellect darkened by many superstitions and prejudices, his moral character sustains a comparison with any in ecclesiastical history and seems to approach, as near as human infirmity permits, to the ideal perfection of Christian virtue’.
Two hundred years after Ken's consecration as a bishop, a monument to him was at last placed in Wells Cathedral.
Bishop William Alexander preached an eulogy which was eloquent but somewhat imprecise about the qualities for which he was celebrated:
Since the literary works to which Ken devoted himself in the long years which followed his brief episcopate were largely unremarkable and unread, the waste of his inspired and inspiring vocation as a bishop has appeared both to contemporary and subsequent critics exasperating; for his scruples about swearing the oath of allegiance to William and Mary were so nearly overcome by his friends that he asked them not to continue their arguments lest he succumb.
Later his doubts revived when the exiled King James was suspected of making over the Kingdom of Ireland to Louis XIV of France.
On the other hand, Ken has been remembered and widely admired, not only by the Oxford Movement and their successors, as the noblest, most saintly and most charitable representative of the  hundreds of Anglican clergy who had grown up under Puritan rule, sustained in their faith by the memory of King Charles the Martyr,; they had come into their own at the Restoration but had later given up comfortable benefices to live in poverty, out of a scrupulous loyalty to a monarch to whose ecclesiastical ambitions they were utterly opposed.
No other episode in the history of the Church of England, a recent historian has written, does it more credit.