

British Trust for Ornithology
Science Behind Conservation
Help make us more efficient — we could prevent their extinction!
In every fight for conservation, the case for the environment must be backed by facts.
Declines in populations, failure to breed, deaths from poison, starvation, or pollution.
Knowledge comes from research.
When it comes to birds, people turn to the British Trust for Ornithology.
Most conservation bodies have used our data at some time.
Many depend upon it to help implement their action for the environment.
The need for accurate information on the environment has increased dramatically in recent years.
So the BTO is creating a new National Centre for Ornithology to meet the needs of today and tomorrow.
But we need your help, to restore our new home in Norfolk, to equip it and to maintain our team of professional ornithologists.
We hope that you will support us in this venture.
Your support is the only hope our birds and their environment have.
IT'S OUR 200TH ANNIVERSARY.
PLEASE GIVE US A PRESENT AND ALL ANIMALS A FUTURE.
200 years ago the founding of The Royal Veterinary College heralded the start of veterinary education in the English speaking world.
Today the specialised and expensive training which demands a minimum of 5 years commitment continues.
A quarter of all UK vets are graduates of the College whilst worldwide former graduates are daily actively involved in the care and welfare of animals.
The Animal Care Trust — ACT — supports the College by raising urgently needed funds to ensure high standards of facilities are maintained, to extend, modernise and equip the RVC's three hospitals and also to provide endowment for professional staff.
Without qualified vets there can be no caring future.
Your support and our training ensures that future.
To make the next 200 years happen we need you to ACT now.
ANIMAL CARE TRUST
Our Charity begins at home —theirs 
WHO DO WE HELP?
As well as keeping our name, we have also retained the same determination, first shown over 90 years ago, to help and care for a very deserving group of people which is generally overlooked by most charities.
They are kindly, educated people many of whom have spent their lives helping others and to whom fate has dealt a cruel, unexpected blow, leaving them bereaved and frightened at a time of approaching frailty.
HOW WE HELP.
Almost always, by helping them stay in their own homes — not only by providing the necessary cash, but also by helping them to obtain all the entitlements to which they are due.
Some people cannot live in their own homes without serious risk, and to them a D.G.A.A. Home will bring safety and comfort.
The D.G.A.A. runs 13 such Homes around the country.
WHY IT'S IMPORTANT WE DO HELP.
With the average age of the population increasing every year, you can appreciate that the assistance given by the D.G.A.A. to improve the quality of life is very much in tune with today's needs.
Please help us with a donation or legacy in our favour.
You could help us through your Will.
For more information do write or 'phone for this excellent illustrated booklet.
THE DISTRESSED GENTLEFOLK'S AID ASSOCIATION
Founded 1897 Patron H.M. Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother
‘SOUTH AFRICA WILL NOT BE TRULY FREE UNTIL THE WOMEN TOO ARE FREE’ delegate to the Malibonlwe Women's Conference, February 1990.
It's now a year since the release of Nelson Mandela and the unbanning of the ANC and other political organisations.
But apartheid is still intact.
•Black women, like all black people in South Africa, do not have the vote.
Worse, they still have no legal, political or human rights.
They have no protection in law against oppression be it exercised by their employers, the state or their menfolk.
•Black women are forced to spend their lives separated from their own children.
They care for the homes and children of the privileged white minority but often have no home of their own.
•Women who fight for justice are still imprisoned.
Evelina de Bruin, 63 years old, one of the Upington 14, is still under sentence of death.
But Black women are fighting back!
They are determined to take their rightful place in a new South Africa.
Through liberation movements, the mass democratic movement, churches trade unions and community organisations they reintensify the struggle against the inhumanity that is apartheid.
On August 9th 1990, South Africa Women's Day, more than 10,000 people attended the relaunch of the ANC Women's League.
‘Women's issues must become a central focus of organisations rather than trail as an afterthought at the end of an agenda’.
Connie September, treasurer of the South African Clothing and Textile Workers' Union, on the demands of the Women's League.
(quoted Anti-Apartheid News October issue, P3 )
The Anti-Apartheid Movement and the women active within it fully support the work of the Women's League and the struggle of Black women for liberation.
The AAM has recently launched an emergency campaign against the violence and repression in apartheid South Africa.
To make our campaigns more effective we urgently need your support.
Join us, and give all you can to help us.
An assured income from Standing Orders is crucial to enable us to react instantly to the rapid changes in South Africa.
Credit card hotline for one off donations —
CENTRAL AMERICA WEEK 91 MARCH 17–24
PEOPLE'S HEALTH, PEOPLES RIGHT — JOIN THE WEEK OF ACTION IN SUPPORT OF THE PEOPLE OF CENTRAL AMERICA.
Good health is a right, not a privilege.
In Central America this right is denied by war, poverty and repression.
Poor people of the region, particularly women, are speaking out against this injustice and organising basic health care in their communities.
During CAW '91:
•hear women from the region discuss the impact on their physical and mental health of war and repression.
•hear health workers from the region discuss health care and how it fits into campaigns for social change.
•attend cultural events, exhibitions, films, music and poetry.
Contact the CAW office for more information on 
Could you abandon her?
In Japan, thousands of animals are discarded every day .
Even this small, sweet-natured pedigree Yorkie, much-loved by her elderly owners!
Unable to find anyone to care for Beru while they were in hospital, they asked a tradesman to leave her in the mountains ‘to die naturally’.
Few Japanese will accept responsibility for ending an animal's life, whatever the circumstances, hence the wholesale abandonment of ‘pets’.
Animals in all stages of misery are turned out on to the streets, left in remote areas, even just left behind after the family holiday.
Fortunately, this tradesman knew one of the JAWS fieldworkers and took Beru to her.
Our fieldworkers are out in all conditions, rescuing bewildered, sick, injured, maimed and terrified animals.
Will you help us to support their compassionate work?
Membership is only £5 p.a.
We would value your support and any help that you can give us.
JAPAN ANIMAL WELFARE SOCIETY
Not so long ago, John Hargreaves had cancer.
If he can run for us, so can you.
Thanks to cancer research, John is now fit and well.
Since his recovery, he's been running for the Cancer Research Campaign.
The CRC depends entirely on voluntary contributions.
Why don't you help by running for us?
Write to us and we'll send you official sponsor forms, a CRC running vest, a fixtures calendar and a discount card worth 15% on selected mail order sportswear.
With the London marathon coming up, there's no better time to start.
Even if you don't win, you'll be helping us beat cancer.
Fighting cancer on all fronts.
JOIN THE RACE TO BEAT CANCER
We all know someone who has cancer or who has died of this dreadful disease.
Discovering new treatments and techniques in the fight against cancer is the aim of the Tenovus research teams.
Will you help raise funds to maintain this important research by getting yourself sponsored each time you enter an event?
Please help yourself and others to combat this killer disease.
TENOVUS FIGHTS CANCER
Barnardos
Keep fit and run for the charity which values your contribution
Make your effort go farthest.
Run for the children and young people who are disabled or disadvantaged.
Call John Girling on  for your free running vest, car sticker, sweatband and sponsor form.
I WANT TO HELP!
1 in every 700 people in the U.K. may have Multiple Sclerosis
ARMS has for 15 years battled against Multiple Sclerosis on behalf of sufferers, their carers and families.
ARMS range of activities includes: ½ million pound Research Programme; Education and Information; Telephone Counselling; Face to Face Counselling; Physiotherapy; Nutritional Advice; Speech Therapy; Continence Advice; Oxygen Therapy; Social Interaction.
A choice of 64 Centres and Support Groups nationwide.
I wish to help ARMS in their fight against Multiple Sclerosis.
Please send me a sponsorship package and free t-shirt as soon as possible.
NSPCC
BY LISTENING HELP US PROTECT CHILDREN
As part of the Society's work to protect children from abuse and neglect a national NSPCC Child Protection Help Line is being launched in the Spring of 1991.
A single national number, free to all callers, will be available to anyone wishing to seek advice or take action on behalf of abused or neglected children.
WILL YOU HELP US RAISE £6 MILLION TO FUND OUR NEW SERVICE?
Please send me a free Running Vest and Sponsor Pack.
GREENPEACE LONDON MARATHON
Against all odds, Greenpeace has brought the plight of the natural world to the attention of caring people.
You can help us even up the odds.
Get sponsored for Greenpeace when you run.
For sponsor forms and information please write to:
OR RING OUR HOTLINE ON: 071–704–8101
Quote the code DS002 to receive a FREE running vest (state M, L or XL).
AGAINST ALL ODDS
The Malcolm Sargent Cancer Fund for Children
Patron H.R.H.
THE PRINCESS OF WALES
The Fund was launched on March 26, 1968 as a lasting and practical memorial to the much-loved British musician whose name it bears.
Over 1000 new cases are accepted by the Fund each year.
Grants are made for warm clothing, heating bills, beds and bedding, nourishing foods, convalescent holidays, etc.
One of our Social Workers has written:
‘Mrs. Young was deeply grateful and delighted by the morale grant for Mark.
When she told him he spent hours studying catalogues and brochures deciding how to spend it.
As Mark has a fascination for all things electrical, he decided on an electronic watch that ‘spoke’ the time.
Despite his overall fatigue and discomfort, Mark wore it proudly and explained and demonstrated how it worked to everyone involved in his care.
I certainly feel it was a great delight to him during the last days of his life.’
All funds raised by runners in sponsored marathons or ‘fun runs’ are gratefully acknowledged and help to provide convalescent holidays, travel expenses and little luxuries for our children.
A red cotton T-shirt or running vest is available at a nominal charge of £1.00 together with sponsorship forms.
Run for Shelter
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE ARE HOMELESS IN BRITAIN and many more live in unhealthy or dangerous conditions.
YOU CAN HELP THEM.
When you run get sponsored for Shelter!
The money you raise will give practical help — and hope — to homeless people.
RUN YOUR MARATHON ON BEHALF OF INTERMEDIATE TECHNOLOGY
Intermediate Technology enables poor people in the Third World to develop and use technologies and methods which give them more control over their lives and which contribute to the long-term development of their communities.
Contact Debbie Smith at Intermediate Technology, for your sponsor form and T-shirt.
CHATSWORTH HOUSE OBSTACLE RACE
CHATSWORTH
SUNDAY MAY 19th 1991
START 19 NOON
Assisted by INPRINTS SCREENPRINTERS and LIONS INTERNATIONAL
•6 miles with obstacles.
•Teams of four.
•Entry fee £4.00 per team member.
•Souvenir to all finishers.
•Prizes to winning teams.
•Family day out with fundraising stalls and the delights of Chatsworth House.
•All proceeds to the British Deaf Sports Council
NATIONAL ASTHMA CAMPAIGN
ON APRIL 21ST, RUN FOR SOMEONE WHO CAN'T.
Taking part in the marathon could be out of the question for many people with asthma.
They have to live with the fear of sudden attacks that leave them struggling to breathe.
And every year asthma kills more than 2,000 people.
That's why we need your help to raise money for urgent medical research.
Send off the coupon for your free T. Shirt and sponsorship form.
And get out there and run for those who can't.
Birthright
Research for healthier babies and healthier women
‘Babies — I'd run a mile’
How often have you heard that said by men and women in their teens and early twenties?
Yet when you have your own baby, it's all so different.
Only then do you understand the heartache of women whose pregnancies end in disaster or those who can't have the baby they want.
Birthright's medical research tries to overcome these problems and many more.
So say thank you for the health of your baby by supporting Birthright when you run.
TORTOISES WANTED CAN YOU HELP?
In fact, it's not just tortoises we want, we'd also love a few hares, a few gorillas and lots of colourful clowns.
In the last London Marathon an equally strange collection of runners gave the One Small Step appeal a great boost.
In 1991, with your support, the appeal could pass its finishing post.
BIG REWARDS!
One Small Step is building a laboratory that will help keep many children from lives spent in a wheelchair…please help to make this possible for our kids and run for them in the next London Marathon.
LONDON MARATHON '91
Run for us, so we can run for them…
By running for Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital Fund you could help support the research desperately needed to save children's lives.
Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital Fund
RUNNING TO HELP REBUILD LIVES
‘A very special, personal kind of care’.
That is what we provide in our residential homes for elderly people.
And in our psychiatric rehabilitation centres for men and women of all ages recovering from mental illness.
Both groups need very special care — yet so often they are the forgotten people in our community.
Loneliness, fragile health and homelessness are just a few of the problems they face without our help.
All our residents receive a very special, personal kind of care.
But we need your help to continue our work.
There is no better way to help people in need than through supporting Care.
Will you please consider running to help us rebuild more lives and show that you, too care?
For further information, sponsorship pack and free T-shirt, please contact: Liz O'Sullivan  
2Care* *Care for the Elderly and Hope for the Hurt Mind
Support Disabled Sports
Help people with disabilities to enjoy participation in their sport by running and raising funds in 1991 for The British Sports Association for The Disabled.
The charity that provides the opportunities and facilities for disabled people to take part in sport.
We need YOUR support to enable us to continue with our work.
Please pledge your support below and we will send you a Running Vest or ‘T’ Shirt and sponsor pack.
HOMES FOR HOMELESS PEOPLE TRUST
We are the only charity that actually houses single homeless people on a national basis.
We have 26 member groups throughout the U.K. working on the frontline of homelessness.
So, every penny that we receive goes towards cost-effective direct provision for the single homeless.
NSE NATIONAL SOCIETY FOR EPILEPSY 1 in 200 has Epilepsy
We provide short term medical assessment and rehabilitation of those newly diagnosed, and long term care if necessary.
We are foremost in research and have an acclaimed information service.
We must raise £1,200 per day to continue our vital work.
Please help us to help them help themselves.
I'D LIKE TO HELP.
I'VE BEEN ACCEPTED FOR London Marathon…(other events)
Please complete form overleaf and we will send you a free vest and sponsorship package.
RUNNING FOR STARLIGHT
The Starlight Foundation grants wishes for critically/chronically and terminally ill children.
We shall soon see our 500th wish come true and are now organising a wish-a-day.
But we need YOUR help to ensure we never say no to any of our ‘special children’.
Please help us.
For free T-shirt and sponsorship form please reply to:
New York could be only 26 miles away
If you run for St. John Ambulance in the 1991 ADT London Marathon
As a runner you'll be familiar with the work of St. John Ambulance volunteers.
YES VOLUNTEERS!
It seems we do such a professional job many people don't realise we are funded by voluntary contributions and not by the Government.
Our ambulances, First Aid Units, uniforms and even our Vaseline is paid for by donations.
So if you have a place in this years ADT London Marathon or indeed any other running event please raise money for St. John Ambulance.
And remember…we can only be there ‘Providing
You Care!’
Win a Trip to the New York Marathon
The runner who raises the most money for St. John Ambulance in the 1991 ADT London Marathon will win a trip to the New York Marathon (including guaranteed entry, return airline ticket, accommodation and transport to and from the Marathon).
Win a Trip in St. John's Hot Air Balloon
Anyone who raises money for St. John Ambulance in the 1991 ADT London Marathon will be entered into a prize draw to win a fantastic trip in our very own hot air balloon.
After all we might as well put all that hot air you produce to some good.
To run for St. John Ambulance simply complete the form below and send it in to our Marathon team.
We'll send you a special St. John running vest and a leaflet giving you hints on fund raising.
Could this be stopped with a Phonecard?
During the last four decades, the natural habitats of Britain's wildlife have been ravaged by modern farming methods, urban sprawl and pollution.
140,000 miles of hedgerow, 95% of traditional hay meadows, 40% of natural woodlands and 60% of wild heathland have all been destroyed.
As a result, the otter, barn owl and red squirrel are now virtually extinct in many parts of the country.
To protect those that remain, The Royal Society for Nature Conservation is running the British Wildlife appeal, chaired by Sir David Attenborough.
The aim is to raise £10 million, and to help with this, British Telecom have donated £100,000 to the appeal.
As well as this donation, British Telecom have produced three special Phonecards depicting the otter, barn own and red squirrel in order to help raise awareness of both the appeal and the plight of British wildlife.
Each Phonecard comes in a special wrapper giving you the information you'll need to add to British Telecom's donation, with the money that's raised going towards protecting the natural habitats of all endangered species in Britain.
These animals cannot speak for themselves.
But, by buying one of these new British Telecom Phonecards, each one of us will have the chance to speak on their behalf.
British TELECOM It's you we answer to 
CONCERNED FOR OUR COUNTRYSIDE?
Help the Woodland Trust protect Britain's heritage.
The Woodland Trust is dedicated to protecting one of the most important features of Britain's heritage — our native broadleaved woodland.
We already care for over 400 woodland areas, and in addition to saving, on average, a wood every week we're planting thousands of trees each year to create new woods.
By joining one of Britain's fastest growing conservation charities you can help conserve and improve Britain's landscape for present and future generations to enjoy.
Membership starts at £8 and you'll receive regular newsletters, a car emblem and a guide to Woodland Trust woods which are free for you to enjoy.
EXCLUSIVE OFFER
Join now and we'll send you a quality reproduction print of a beautiful woodland scene, FREE.
We ask everything of him.
We ask just £6 of you.
Every time a lifeboatman puts to sea, he risks his life.
Becoming one of our members helps reduce those risks.
Because your £6 helps buy him protective clothing and helps us provide him with the best equipped boats.
All of which will make his task safer to undertake.
And as the lifeboats are run entirely on voluntary contributions and membership fees, the £6 you give to us is vital.
For men who never question whether they should go, is £6 too much to ask?
Royal National Lifeboat Institution
40 PAGES OF GIFTS, CLOTHES AND TOYS FROM AROUND THE WORLD
From beautiful alpaca wool jumpers to a handcrafted rocking chair — from puzzles that'll confound to a traditional tribal face mask…
There's no other catalogue quite like the OXFAM Christmas catalogue.
Because no other catalogue offers such exciting gifts from all over the world — at such value for money prices.
And there's a very special offer for you if we receive your request as a result of this notice.
You'll be entitled to a free pack of thirty Christmas cards worth £4.95.
We'll send all the details with the catalogue.
So reserve your OXFAM Christmas catalogue now.
SAVING HISTORIC HOUSES IS NOBLE.
LIVING IN ONE IS SUBLIME.
Dating back to medieval times, Britain's historic houses are one of our greatest treasures.
However, but for the work of Country Houses Association many would have been lost to the nation.
We are a charity dedicated to their preservation.
One of the ways we achieve this is by creating apartments within the houses, based on a monthly charge from £600 per person together with a returnable loan.
Included in the monthly charge are all meals, central heating, hot water, maintenance and cleaning.
For more information simply return the coupon.
COUNTRY HOUSES ASSOCIATION
What's it worth to join the RSPB?
The future of our wild birds and environment is under threat.
Heathlands, hedgerows and woodlands are vanishing.
Moorlands are being destroyed marshes drained, streams cleared and river banks cut back.
Every year, countless agonising deaths occur through the pollution of rivers from factories or oil spillages at sea.
On land, the use of pesticides is endangering both our birds and their food.
What is the RSPB doing about it?
Backed by thorough research, we press for new laws and policies to create a healthier, richer future.
We have established over 100 nature reserves.
We have saved many birds (like the Avocet) from extinction in Britain.
But action costs money.
To continue this vital work, we urgently need your help.
Please help us in the Action for Birds today.
IF YOU CARE, THE RSPB WILL ACT.
CAPTIVITY DRIVES TURTLES UP THE WALL.
This pet turtle will continue walking into the glass until its snout is bloody.
He exists, stressed and traumatised, in complete conflict with his biological program, literally dying to be free.
The Reptile Protection Trust wants to ban the trade in pet turtles.
Money raised would fund our campaign to lobby relevant authorities internationally and engage in public education.
If you would like to help the Trust or find out more, send £2,30 for our fact sheet and booklet, ‘Reptiles: Misunderstood, Mistreated and Mass-Marketed’.
If you want to keep turtles happy, don't keep them at all.
THE REPTILE PROTECTION TRUST
Volunteer Reserve Forces
As a dental assistant, being able to cope with the dangers of the deep has its advantages.
In a crisis, there are two sorts of people: There are those who go into a blind panic.
And those who go into the situation with their eyes wide open because they've been trained how to handle emergencies with calm and confidence.
‘When you start underwater diving, you learn not to jump in without solutions.
What surfaces is your confidence.’
At 18, Wren Karen McCurdy is the first fully qualified female Port Diver in the Royal Naval Reserve.
‘The next thing you gain is the confidence of the other divers on the team.
Their lives depend on you.’
Karen is also a full-time dental assistant.
‘Down amongst the fish, the last thing you do is start flapping.
And this is the last thing you do in the surgery when a patient starts bleeding.
Knowing how to use your head is not a subject you can study for a written exam.
You have to find other ways to develop it.’
Karen thinks this is why she was allowed to take the time of to train.
‘In fact, my boss promoted me.
Now I manage a junior.’
Port Divers carry out underwater surveys of ports, search ships' hulls for mines and help Clearance Divers find and dispose of mines; during the day.
And night.
‘We work in teams.
In the dark we're strung together by a rope.
We talk to one another using an intricate ‘tug-talk’ language.
When you're changing the flow of oxygen from one of your team-mate's tanks, pull the wrong switch and you inflate his suit and he shoots to the surface.
This could kill him.
Not surprisingly, I always pass the dentist the right drill in the surgery.’
In an emergency, the Volunteer Reserve Forces make up one third of Britain's defence strength.
Self-discipline, initiative, responsibility and special skills demand effective training.
And time.
And as an employer, manager or foreman, it needs your nod to allow someone like Karen to take time off to reach the high standards required.
Standards in areas perhaps you wish you had the time to teach employees yourself.
VOLUNTEER RESERVE FORCES.
The truth is, we need them.
MEXICO WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY JUNE 5, 1990.
If We Don't Address The Issue Of Global Ecology, We Won't Have To Worry About The Other Issues.
Carlos Salinas De Gortari President of Mexico
June 5, 1990 is a proud day for Mexico.
On that day the Mexican Government plays host to United Nations' World Environment Day, the purpose of which is to send forth a clear message:
Let us build a better planet for children.
A New Crusade.
It had its beginnings in 1972 with the establishment of the first ‘Conference Of The United Nations On The Environment,’ held in Stockholm.
Its purpose then was to monitor changes in the environment worldwide, and engender popular environmental practices.
The people and Government of Mexico take pride in supporting what came to be known as ‘The Declaration Of Stockholm,’ a key component of which called for declaring the 5th June World Environment Day.
An Optimistic Focus.
World Environment Day will start with a commemorative ceremony in the Palace of Fine Arts with a keynote address by the President of Mexico.
Emphasis will be on achievement already realized in terms of scientific, technological and social contributions to such problems as acid rain, desertification, loss of species, contamination of the oceans, and atmospheric changes.
The point will be made to the world that Mexico stands as a nation for the principle that a healthy environment is essential for the common future of humanity, with particular stress on the quality of life our children will inherit.
Environmental Partnership.
The World Environment Day Honor Committee includes U.N.
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, President George Bush of the United States, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada, President Oscar Arias Chavez of Costa Rica, President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the United Kingdom and many other world leaders.
Sponsors include offices of government, international and domestic environmental organizations and enterprises, youth groups and members of the artistic and cultural community.
These organizations will host forums to discuss local, national and world environmental problems.
Trees mean life.
Trees consume carbon dioxide emitted by coal-fired power stations and other sources.
And carbon dioxide is a major factor in global warming.
That's why, on World Environment Day, a minimum of five million trees will be planted throughout Mexico — as many as possible planted by children.
At the same time a reforestation telethon will be broadcast live via satellite and by radio around the world.
Countdown To The Millennium.
Now, in the twilight of the 20th century, is the time to re-establish our commitment to the earth and embark on a new decade of environmentalism as we count down toward the year 2000.
Capsule Of Hope.
A time capsule containing personal messages of hope for the next generation will be buried during closing ceremonies.
The capsule, designed by Mexico's leading architect, will be sealed until June 5, 2000.
World Environment Day will serve as a symbol of international ecological solidarity by bringing together representative groups who will draft a letter to all the peoples of the world with concrete recommendations for safeguarding the planet.
This event also provides an opportunity to break away from our dependence on fossil fuels and start encouraging an international energy policy that supports alternative energy sources and reduces the threat of contamination.
Initially, your children may not know how successful World Environment Day was.
But eventually, they'll find out for themselves.
FREE CALLS FOR THE TROOPS
AN APPEAL TO BRITISH INDUSTRY ON BEHALF OF THE BRITISH TROOPS IN THE GULF
 Dear Colleague,
I have been considering how we in British industry can help our Forces in the Gulf at this difficult time.
One way is to help them keep in touch with home.
A phone call can really boost morale.
We can give our troops the means to make that call.
That is why Cable & Wireless's subsidiary, Mercury, has recently sent forty payphones for British Forces to use at bases in Saudi Arabia.
Mercury are rushing a further 46 payphones to the Gulf.
It will operate them on a non-profit basis.
British Aerospace, National Westminster Bank and Cable & Wireless have joined together to contribute £1 million to purchase 100,000 Mercurycards for the Ministry of Defence to distribute to British personnel in the Gulf.
I want to take the initiative a step further, which is why I am now appealing for other British companies to join us in providing this help for our troops.
A minimum contribution of £10,000 will buy 1,000 cards.
Each card will pay for two or three short calls or an eight-minute call home.
If you want to contribute, please telephone  for further information.
If your company wishes its name to appear on the cards, this can be arranged.
We are making arrangements with Forces charities for gifts to be treated as charitable donations.
When the crisis is over, any surplus funds will be donated to the Gulf Trust.
I hope you will join us to help maintain the important link between British Forces and their families.
Yours David Young LORD YOUNG OF GRAFFHAM
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION TELEPHONE  
FRIENDS OF JOHN McCARTHY WANTED
John McCarthy has now been held hostage in Beirut for four years.
He's still wanted by his friends and family.
If you'd like to see John released, please complete the form and return it to the Friends of John McCarthy, PO Box 80, London WC1X 8XE.
Architects Benevolent Society
DO YOU KNOW ANYONE WHO NEEDS HELP?
Architects, architectural technicians, or their dependents, who suffer distress or financial difficulty through ill-health, accident, old age or bereavement may well be eligible for assistance by the ABS.
This aid is made possible by donations, legacies and fund-raising activities and the Society is grateful for all such financial aid to enable it to continue its work.
This includes supporting many people in nursing homes by assisting in covering the difference between the state grant and the full amount of the fees, as well as other forms of help.
For example, the Society is often able to give a grant for central heating, which can transform the lives of the old or sick, while a recent case history concerned the elderly widow of an architect who needed a convalescent holiday after a hip operation, when the ABS was able to help her financially.
Anyone who knows of architects, architectural technicians, or their dependents, who are suffering distress from some misfortune could help them by putting them in touch with the ABS at 66 Portland Place London W1N 4AD, telephone .