

It is almost 200 years since Mozart's death.
Join us in celebrating his life.
On the bicentenary of Mozart's death, The Sunday Times and The Times announce the UK's biggest ever Mozart festival.
Encompassing over 200 events and staged right across the country, it gives you the chance to hear over 40 orchestras, opera companies, dance troupes, chamber music ensembles and soloists from all over Britain and Europe.
The music ranges from the familiar to the unknown — from an early opera played in its entirety for the first time to a unique performance of The Messiah where you can actually join in the singing.
There will be concerts for children, a season of historic films about Mozart's life, and an inquest into his death where you, the audience, become the jury.
Full details of this extraordinary Bicentennial Festival will appear in The Sunday Times, together with a superb Life of Mozart partwork series.
THE SUNDAY TIMES
THE TIMES
Mozart BICENTENARY FESTIVAL
WOULD YOU LIKE TO SEE THE BOLSHOI BALLET PERFORM LIVE IN MOSCOW ON NEW YEAR'S EVE?
29 DECEMBER–1 JANUARY FOR ONLY £595
Page & Moy offer you a unique opportunity to see the spectacular Bolshoi Ballet perform Tchaikovsky's Nutcracker at the Bolshoi Theatre on New Year's Eve, as well as take in the sights of one of the world's greatest capitals, Moscow.
Offering fantastic value for money, the price includes:
•New Year's Eve performance of the Nutcracker
•3 nights full board accommodation
•City sightseeing and Kremlin tours
•Traditional horse-drawn ‘Troika’ ride
•Visit to Russian winter festival Izmailov
•Visit to Moscow State Circus
•Return British Airway scheduled flights
•Delay Insurance, airport taxes, services of an experienced tour leader and Intourist guide.
Seeing the Bolshoi Ballet in the great Bolshoi Theatre, performing one of Tchaikovsky's greatest works, is a New Year's Eve experience you'll always remember.
THE DEFINITIVE RECORDINGS ALL NINE BEETHOVEN SYMPHONIES BY HERBERT VON KARAJAN (1908–1989) WITH THE BERLIN PHILHARMONIC
THE COMPLETE COLLECTION ON 6 COMPACT DISCS OR 6 CHROME CASSETTES/7-LP SET ONLY £8.99 plus p&p 
There is not better introduction to discovering the Classical Masterpieces than through the ‘Great Classical Collection’ Club.
Now you can enjoy the ultimate recording of Beethoven's Complete Symphonies, in this unique boxed set — AT AN UNBEATABLE PRICE OF JUST £8.99 plus p&p.
That's a saving of up to £50.
Beethoven's 9 unsurpassed masterpieces
These are essential recordings for all lovers of fine music.
A complete collection of what is possibly the richest music ever composed.
With the perfect combination of composer, conductor, orchestra and recording company.
Plus all the benefits of the latest high technology recording techniques for unsurpassed audio quality.
It's a truly monumental work, at an unbeatable price.
Herbert von Karajan: The greatest exponent of Beethoven
Herbert von Karajan must surely have been the world's greatest conductor.
Here, his prodigious talent and sensitivity have produced a stunning masterpiece which interprets every note as it was written, yet adds a freshness and vitality that are rarely captured on recorded works.
The world famous Berlin Philharmonic
The Berlin Philharmonic is Germany's ‘national’ orchestra and widely acclaimed as one of the most technically brilliant in the world, whose delivery is surely the nearest to musical perfection.
Deutsche Grammophon — Flawless musical sound
Deutsche Grammophon is renowned for the technical perfection of all its recordings.
And in the Beethoven Symphonies, they have captured all the subtleties, the power and the passion of Beethoven with unmatched clarity, precision, depth and balance.
PLUS All the benefits of joining the world's finest music club
This masterly collection of Beethoven symphonies is your introduction to the world's finest classical works, from every major recording label in the world.
Save up to £50
When you accept this superb offer, a saving of up to £50, and agree to buy a minimum of 6 recordings during your first 2 years of your membership (3 per year), you'll also get…
•Generous club discounts…added bonuses…and FREE recordings as the continuing benefits of your membership.
•PLUS a FREE monthly full-colour illustrated Club Magazine with a large selection of classical titles combined with a wide range of popular music to choose from.
From each magazine, our Classical Music Editor will make a top recommendation as your ideal way to build your classical library.
You may accept this choice, make another selection — or none at all if you prefer.
And remember, your only obligation is to buy a total of 6 regular price recordings, a minimum of 3 per year.
Your assurance of quality
All recordings are genuine, manufactured and supplied by the world's leading record companies — and are identical to those you could buy from any leading store.
Each compact disc, cassette or record has been carefully chosen for the quality of its musical content and its recording.
It is our aim to keep you happy throughout your membership with a high level of personal service, and complete confidence that every recording you order through Britannia Music will be to the very highest standards.
FREE 10-DAY HOME TRIAL
The complete Beethoven Symphonies by Karajan is the ideal way to introduce yourself to the world of high quality classical recordings.
To take advantage of this unbeatable offer, simply fill in and post the order form, today.
If after 10 days you are not completely satisfied, simply return the recordings and you will owe nothing.
PLUS THIS EXTRA BONUS OFFER
‘THE ESSENTIAL KARAJAN’ ON CD, DOUBLE LP OR DOUBLE CASSETTE JUST £5.99
The perfect companion to the Beethoven Symphonies.
Over an hour of the world's most popular classical music — from the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra under Herbert von Karajan — specially compiled to celebrate the conductor's 80th birthday.
Recorded by Deutsche Grammophon and including popular classics by these outstanding composers: RAVEL — Bolero, HOLST — The Planets, TCHAIKOVSKY — Nutcracker Suite, BIZET — Carmen, MOZART — Eine Kleine Nachtmusik, GRIEG — Peer Gynt and VIVALDI — Four Seasons.
To take advantage of this extra bonus offer, simply tick the box on your order form.
SEND NO MONEY NOW
HANNOVER MESSE INDUSTRIE 91
THE INNOVATIONS
BEST OF HIGH TECH WORLDWIDE
Everyone is talking about ‘Europe of the future’.
At HANNOVER FAIR Industry the integrated European market has long been a reality.
In 1991 Hannover will focus on the best of high tech from Europe — and the rest of he world.
The trade fair program compromises:•Electrical Engineering and Electronics •MICROTRONIC •ASB — The Power Transmission Fair •Subcontracting •MHI — Assembly, Handling, Industrial Robots •CeMAT — World Centre for Materials Handling Technology •Tools •International Center for Plant Engineering •Research and Technology
The Partner Country in 1991 will be Switzerland.
If you want to profit from the world's most dynamic market, HANNOVER FAIR Industry is a ‘must’ as it provides the impetus for innovations in Europe.
6,000 exhibitors from 40 counties welcome you to the world's key industrial fair in Hannover, Germany.
10th–17th APRIL 1991 HANNOVER MESSE INDUSTRIE 1991 
The key industrial fair
SPITALFIELDS FESTIVAL
Artistic Director: Richard Hickox June 7–22 Christ Church, Spitalfields, London E1 — Hawksmoor's masterpiece
15 Evening and Lunchtime Concerts
A divers range of early, classical and contemporary music including works by Tallis, Beethoven and Birtwhistle.
Highlights…
World premiere Finzi Requiem da Camera, Haydn Creation, London Classical Players, Norrington, Tan, City of London Sinfonia, Hardenberger, Kirkby, Nicola Loud (Young Musician of the Year) and others.
Free Brochure Box Office.
Box Office 
the big picture
The Big Picture is a group of artists committed to providing creative people with a forum for exploration and expressions of their ideas.
We are keen to develop radical new approaches to all forms of art, and are currently looking for like-minded people to become members.
By being a member you can contribute to and draw upon a pool of talented writers, artists, musicians, actors, photographers, and creative types of all kinds.
You will receive the monthly newsletter and discount admission to events produced by The Big Picture.
For more information please write to: John Riches, Producer, The Big Picture, or telephone .
WELSH NATIONAL OPERA
ANOTHER FIRST FOR ONE OF THE COUNTRY'S MOST EXCITING OPERA COMPANIES
ON TOUR SUMMER 1990
THE WORLD PREMIERE OF TORNRAK by John Metcalf with libretto by Michael Wilcox COMMISSIONED BY WELSH NATIONAL OPERA
Set against the wide open spaces of the Canadian Arctic, an Inuit (Eskimo) woman saves the life of a shipwrecked sailor, and returns with him to Britain.
The moving story of their doomed love affair contrasts the beauty, dignity and savagery of Inuit culture with the convention and attitudes of 19th Century Britain.
Composer John Metcalf has introduced haunting native throat singing techniques into his vocal writing to create a score of great lyricism and dramatic intensity, which combines strikingly with the powerful stage images.
Phone Welsh National Opera Marketing on  for brochure, or book direct with the theatre.
Also touring: Otello, The Barber of Seville, Cosi fan tutte
The GREEN SHOW 20–24 June 1990 National Exhibition Centre Birmingham
There's never been a show like this.
The Green Show is about saving frogs.
And dolphins.
And people.
The Green Show covers every aspect of environmental care; from saving the forests to saving the whale; from green supermarkets to solar energy; from housing to health.
The whole is a revolutionary look at more appropriate ways of living.
You obviously have an interest in the world about you and want to play a part in preserving it.
The Green Show is for you.
•Special family rates (and a crèche for the children).
•Features to interest and absorb the whole family.
•Special advance ticket booking discounts.
DON'T MISS IT
BORDERLINES CONFERENCE THEORY AND POLITICS AT THE FRONTIER A Conference at the University of Sussex 2 March 1991
Recent political upheavals in Eastern Europe and the increasing articulation of a European identity are forcing a major rethinking in the politics, history and philosophies of nationality, the nation-state and their boundaries.
The calls for democracy and capitalisation in the post-revolutionary states, alongside the growing prominence of pressure groups as political forces around such issues as the environment, women's demands, anti-racism and demilitarisation, have irreversibly disturbed the political landscape.
They insist in a new and serious appraisal of such ideas as radical liberalism/radical democracy, the community in the nation-state, the changing role of civil society; in short, the form of the political self.
This conference intends to explore these and other related issues from a number of incisive and contentious angles.
The discussion will be held in four panel sessions.
In Association with Marxism Today  
BAYSDAY
The Carnival of Science AT THE SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUMS, LONDON ON SATURDAY 16 MARCH  am —4pm
COME ALONG AND JOIN IN A FUN-PACKED DAY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR ALL AGES
SPECIAL ATTRACTIONS INCLUDE:
•British Gas/Bays Mastermind final
•Practice Problem Solving
•Interactive Exploratory Exhibits
•Appearances by TV personalities
•Presentations, talks and discussions on the latest scientific developments
•BAYS Science and Industry Exhibition
•New Scientist/BAYS Poster Exhibition
BAYS members £2.00; Non-members £2,50; Adults £4.75
For groups, one adult will be given free admission for every 20 young people in the group
Special BAYS membership offer — a special combined fee of £4.50 is available for young people who wish to come to BAYSDAY and join BAYS for the first time
For a registration form please contact: British Association for the Advancement of Science Fortress House, 23 Saville Row, London W1X 1AS.
Tel:
BAYSDAY SPONSORED BY GEC
BOOK EARLY
SCHUMACHER COLLEGE
RUPERT SHELDRAKE AT SCHUMACHER COLLEGE
THE REBIRTH OF NATURE: Examining the Life Sciences
4 April to 17 May
Rupert Sheldrake, author of A New Science of Life and The Rebirth of Nature will lead a residential conference on ideas of nature in modern science.
Also in 1991: Jonathan Porritt, Hazel Henderson, Manfred Max-Neef, Victor Papanek, Theodore Roszak and others.
THE BRICK DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
WHAT'S NEW IN BRICKWORK
A Special One Day Symposium For Engineers And Architects 28th November 1990, Twickenham Conference Centre, Rugby Road, Twickenham
NEW EUROPEAN BRICK STANDARDS
Are We All Talking The Same Language?
NEW THERMAL REGULATION
Just How Hot Is Your Knowledge?
CORBELS, ARCHES AND CURVED BRICKWORK
Is This The Shape Of Things To Come?
WHAT'S NEW IN BRICKWORK
The changes in Codes, Standards and the New Building Regulations are essential material for architects and engineers.
The latest Brick Development Association Symposium will be dealing with the effect these issues will have on the way we use brickwork, courtesy of the most informed and informative speakers in the country.
If you would like to attend this important event, simply fill in the coupon and send to the address below.
Morning coffee, lunch and afternoon tea will be provided.
On registering, as well as full details of the Symposium programme, you will be given a literature pack containing informative booklets such as BS 4729/BS8000 (part 3) and the latest BDA Design Guides.
Because of the demand for seats you are advised to secure your place by responding quickly.
ABS
Planning for success
ABS are the specialist brokers for Professional Indemnity Insurance.
With over thirty years' experience in the market, ABS have developed the expertise to understand — and meet — your exact requirements!
Plan for success.
For Professional Indemnity Insurance contact the Professionals: ABS ABS Insurance Agency Ltd 
THE WINNING EDGE
REDLAND PLASTERBOARD
THE REAL SURPRISE IS, THE WALL IS PLASTERBOARD.
You'd be forgiven for doing a double take.
The elegant panelled wall isn't wood, isn't marble, but plasterboard.
It's Fresco from Redland Plasterboard, a unique, low cost, high quality decorative effect for walls and ceilings in domestic or commercial properties.
The panels, in three sizes, are moulded from our special plasterboard, and can be enhanced by almost any type of painted finish.
Fresco is a completely new development in plasterboard design.
No surprise that it's from Redland.
FRESCO Redland Plasterboard
Liability Alert 25
NOTIFIABLE CIRCUMSTANCES
When advising insurers of circumstances likely to give rise to claims, also advise your accountant.
Each notification could give rise to a demand for the excess sum stated in the policy.
Reserves should be made in your accounts until such matters are resolved.
Some policies require the policy ‘excess’ to be triggered in regard to any costs incurred by insurers, not just as a contribution to final settlement.
Initial legal advice costs under such policies have proved unexpected by some firms not insured via the RIBA policy.
These warnings are issued by RIBA Indemnity Research Ltd to which you are invited to make enquiries relating to professional liability and indemnity insurance.
PILKINGTON
Pilkinsulation takes care of the u values so you can take care of the design
Of all the things filling an architect's mind, the new Building Regulations are probably among the least interesting.
So it's comforting to know that one word is all you need specify in order to meet the new standards: Pilkinsulation.
Pilkinsulation is a well-proven method of energy conservation, and its use reduces the amount of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels.
It is easy to use and adaptable for any building.
This is exemplified by Dritherm — the cavity wall insulation with the 100 year guarantee that's been installed in half a million homes.
The Crown range of Dritherm, Crown Wool, Dry Liner, Cavity Wall Slab and Floor Slab together with the Rocksil range are ideal for floors, walls and roofs.
Pilkinsulation comes form Pilkington Insulation, the UK's foremost manufacturer of top-quality insulation products.
Environmental concerns have resulted in the new Regulations; specifying Pilkinsulation is all you have to do to satisfy them.
Put simply, Pilkinsulation takes a load off your mind.
PILKINGTON Build on our know-how
Redland Bricks
Stubborn, pig-headed, stick-in-the-mud fuddy duddies?
Absolutely.
At Redland we are often seen as big, progressive and up-to-date.
But in one area we take a pride in being stubbornly traditional.
You see we still insist on making our handmade bricks in the same painstaking way we've always made them.
Quaint tools such as cockles, bows, strikes and pages are skilfully welded by our master craftsmen to this day.
Not, we hasten to add, because we're in any way sentimental — merely practical.
It's this commitment to tradition which gives our handmade bricks their subtlety of colour, uniqueness of texture and sheer natural versatility.
One final touch; every single brick has the personal mark of the craftsman who created it.
Redland genuine handmade bricks.
All that's changed over the years are the hands that make them.
Redland Bricks WE NEVER LOSE SIGHT OF YOUR VISION
VEKA
We've flown so high, we had to add another wing.
Over recent years, the unprecedented success and growth of Vekaplast in the U.K. and our programme of continuous commitment to innovation and re-investment has culminated in the construction of a prestigious extension to our premises.
Having set our investment in bricks and mortar, we're now setting our sights on the future .
The new purpose-built accommodation now hosts our Technical Support Team, Computer-Aided Design facilities, Conference suite and Training Workshop.
So, if you're interested in doing business with people who encourage you to spread your wings rather than clip them, why not make a date to come and see ours?
VEKA DON'T STAND STILL
VEKA
Don't stand still.
There's only one thing we don't anticipate doing this forthcoming decade, and that's standing on our laurels.
We never have and never will.
That's why we've become so much more than just plastic extruders.
The unprecedented international growth of the Vekaplast organisation over the past 21 years has enabled us to explore and diversify into
new and exciting markets.
For instance, we are currently creating a big impact in the field of uPVC sheet production.
Foamed, clear or opaque sheet products and polyethylene film bearing the Veka name are being specified by an
increasingly large number of companies within the graphics, display and building industries.
Innovating new products, developing existing ones and a progressive programme of improving quality and services — they're just a few reasons why Veka, and the people who choose Veka, will never stand still.
Rooftec 90
6–8 November 1990 
NATIONAL EXHIBITION CENTRE, BIRMINGHAM an invitation to ARCHITECTS' DAY Wednesday 7 November
Members of the RIBA are being invited by the President of the National Federation of Roofing Contractors to attend Rooftec '90 as the guests of the Federation on Wednesday 7 November, which is being set aside as Architects Day.
They will be entertained to lunch, and refreshments.
The tour of the exhibition will provide an opportunity to talk with major producers on the latest developments in roofing materials, and there will be a technical briefing on the implications for specifiers of the introduction of CEN standards, the Construction Products Directive, quality assurance and guarantees.
More than half the 100 exhibitors have indicated that they will be using Rooftec for the launch of new or updated products, and these will be short-listed for the Federation's coveted ‘Ken Soulsby Innovation Award.’
INTERGLASS
INNOVATION IN CURVED GLASS TECHNOLOGY
•Large or small quantities of curved and toughened glass available in a range of tints.
From 5mm to 19mm thickness and in sizes up to 3650mm long with a maximum developed width of 2130mm.
•The computer controlled furnace insures repeatability of shape, dimensional accuracy and uniform toughening in the shortest possible cycle times.
•Cylindrical curvatures with a minimum radius of 500mm and a minimum tangential angle of 90 degrees are possible.
Regular, irregular, central, one sided or even S shapes are available.
•Superior optical quality and high manufacturing standards to easily satisfy G.G.F. guidelines.
Interglass hold BS 5750/I.S.O. 9002).
Our sales staff would be pleased to discuss your requirements and the many new concepts Interglass are working on towards the year 2000.
Contact us now on .
INTERGLASS
Eternit
Fortunately, not all curtain walls last as long as Eternit.
Eternit curtain walls are attractive, durable and maintenance free.
They come in a beautiful range of high-gloss, semi-gloss and textural finishes.
Not to mention a choice of over 75 colours.
And they all have a life expectance of at least 50 years.
Even the red one.
Eternit.
CLADDING WITH IMAGINATION.
Atlanta Compaq
I know what I need, I think?
You can see how your IT business network should develop.
But there's just too much pressure.
From above, they demand progress.
(Within budgets and timescales, naturally).
From below, they're desperate for help.
And you're in the middle — with a stack of sales brochures all screaming; ‘Me!…
Me!…
No, me!’
With professional support from Atlanta, you can relax.
Throughout your IT project, whether highly specific or totally all-embracing, we have the practical experience and product capability to complement your decision-making process.
From the initial purchase to successful implementation and beyond.
Hardware, peripherals, software, on-site maintenance…we make sure you get the best.
We're an Authorised Compaq Dealer, representing the world's leading manufacturer of industry-standard PC systems, desktops, portables and laptops.
The Compaq PC range delivers outstanding power, performance and versatility.
Software?
We supply comprehensive consultancy, training and support for business packages of all kinds.
Networking?
We're Novell Authorised.
Drop a problem in our lap, and it's no longer your problem — it transforms into our individually tailored solution.
No matter what the project, we're geared up to help you achieve your objectives.
Hard to believe?
Contact us today and we'll start to prove it.
THE SOLUTION SOURCE
ARMITAGE BRICK LIMITED
THE BENEFITS OF OUR SERVICE ARE THERE FOR ALL TO SEE
To have a second opinion on any brickwork project is often welcome.
For it to be expert opinion is invaluable.
Specify Armitage Brick and that is exactly what you have on hand.
At any stage.
In fact, we like nothing better that to get involved as early as possible.
(Before a drawing ever appears on the board, preferably).
To us, brickwork is not simply about size, colour, quantity and delivery.
It is about building relationships.
It is about gaining an understanding, not only of a specific project, but about the way your company works.
Which is why we prefer to work face to face.
And why we always appoint a member of our project team, to responsible for each individual job.
Our experience is thereto draw on whenever you wish.
Our Brickwork Advisory Services Department is geared to respond to your every question.
Using the very latest CAD techniques, we can produce visuals and working drawings for consideration and debate.
And, of course, we're always ready to step out of he background and be with you on site.
To anticipate any difficulties and provide immediate solutions.
Whatever your project, you can see we'll be with you all the way.
BECAUSE BRICKWORK IS ABOUT PEOPLE
BUILD A BETTER LIFE WITH BRICK
CREATION BRICK.
THE ONLY LIMITATION IS YOUR IMAGINATION
Accept the challenge.
Build with brick and discover new dimensions of creativity.
Be original.
Be inventive.
But most of all, let brick be your inspiration.
Composite Panels Ltd
LEADERS BY INNOVATION
Introducing Monoplank
Versatility is the key to the success of Monoplank, the new roof insulation system from Composite Panels Ltd.
As with CPL's other products, Monoplank has quickly established itself as the No.1 choice and is now specified by leading architects throughout the country.
It is utilised in all industrial, commercial and domestic building sectors, where a more traditional concrete, clay or reconstituted slate roof finish is required — either by design, planning legislation or client request.
The product has proved to be stable over the anticipated lifespan of the building and has advantages over alternative methods of roof insulation, namely, energy efficiency, ease of installation and speed of erection.
Contact us today to find out more about Monoplank and why Composite Panels Ltd are Leaders by Innovation.
DORMAN LONG
Lintels designed with you in mind
YOU THE ARCHITECT AND SPECIFIER
Dorman Long steel lintels provide superb, well-hidden strength over spans up to 4650mm.
The unique welded soffit plate design is one of the secrets of their exceptional rigidity.
The complete range of Dorman Long lintels are galvanised after fabrication (especially at the danger points of edges, welds, and internal surfaces), this provides better protection against corrosion and staining.
YOU THE BUILDER
First and foremost, Dorman Long lintels are available where you want them, when you want them — and at the right price.
We can deliver them direct to site in bulk, small quantities, or in house sets.
In use, they're at home in cavity walls, solid walls, single skin walls, and internal walls, whether built in brick, block or stone.
YOU THE CARPENTER.
Continuous blockwork means there is little danger of hitting the lintel with power tools when fitting various fixtures.
YOU THE PLASTERER
Metal mesh — welded, not just clipped — onto the underside of all Dorman Long lintels provides a plaster key for easy applications.
Continuous blockwork minimises the possibility of tell-tale cracking.
YOU THE DECORATOR
Excellent anti-corrosion protection means there is no chance of unsightly staining and the Dorman Long design ensures there will be no mildew forming on the plaster as a result of cold bridging.
DORMAN LONG BRITISH STEEL NARROW STRIP
alifabs
RAINWATER SYSTEMS INVISIBLE FIXINGS.
HIDDEN JOINTS.
Alifabs Ambassador extruded aluminium fascia gutter and rainwater system is the design ideal for both new and existing buildings.
Hidden fixings and jointings enable clean, uninterrupted lines that enhance an external facade.
Available in two designs and sizes, with both square and circular downpipes, it is the only extruded aluminium rainwater system of its type on the market.
Mill finish is standard and polyester coated colours can be supplied to special order.
The big capacity gutter will drain large pitch roof areas extremely effectively, with less frequent downpipes.
The design also allows for an additional deep aluminium box fascia to be fitted, if required, which completely conceals the gutter.
Send now for details.
alifabs FASCIA GUTTER & DOWNPIPE
ALAN BUTCHER ASSOCIATES
ALCLAD
ALCLAD can help you keep a sense of proportion
There are over 400 products in the ALCLAD Classical products range.
Georgian and Tudor style porticos and porches, canopies, columns and cornices, roof turrets and window shutters, dormer and oriel windows, garage doors, balustrades and interior mouldings, all designed to give architects and builders an almost unlimited choice of designs and sizes.
Wherever you use ALCLAD, the magnificent effect is always right out of proportion to the cost.
HUDEVAD
Hudevad Radiators.
The edge and beyond.
Highly efficient and visually satisfying.
That's Hudevad Continuous Perimeter Heating.
Designed primarily for use in commercial buildings, particularly those with a high open-plan content Hudevad CPH Systems come in a variety of options, all of which have the facility for concealing valves and pipework.
•Radiators with matching infill panels.
•Continuous runs of protective panels where low touch temperature is required.
•The latest radiator and panel configuration with accommodation for trunking and other services.
The new 100 Series (100mm high) skirting convector can be floor or wall mounted and is available in a choice of five widths and lengths from 600mm to 6000mm.
Ask for our comprehensive data pack.
Hudevad.
Lateral thinking brings environmental benefits.
HUDEVAD RADIATORS & CONVECTORS
LEIGH'S PAINTS every second counts
Firetex M70/M71, Certifire approved, thin film intumescent coating gives up to 2 hours fire protection for structural steel, when tested to BS.476 Part 21: 1987.
Fast application by airless spray, of relatively low film thicknesses, with minimum disruption to other trades, saves contract time.
Making every second count — not only in fire protection but also in contract performance.
TECHNOLOGY FOR PROTECTION
BURMATEX
WE'VE BEEN THROUGH FIRE AND WATER — AND A LOT MORE — TO BRING YOU CARPETING THAT LEADS IN QUALITY AND VALUE
Burmatex contract carpets and carpet tiles achieve the highest possible ratings in the BSI 4790 Flammability test for floorcoverings and are independently tested for anti-static, colour fastness, castor wheel resistance and durability.
So whatever the intensity of use and type of environment — you can specify Burmatex with total confidence.
As Britain's number-one manufacturer of heavy contract fibre-bonded carpets and carpet tiles we have a continual research and development programme that ensures we stay in tune with the latest production methods, design trends and quality control.
Our wide range of colours and designs open up limitless creative opportunities and offer excellent value for money.
So, it's hardly surprising that Burmatex carpet tiles are specified by many of the UK's leading name offices, retail outlets, banks, building societies, schools, leisure centres and all types of demanding locations.
Why not call  for a copy of the latest edition of our brochure ‘PRACTICAL AND CREATIVE CONTRACT CARPETING’ or to discuss your next project?
Remember, nobody beats Burmatex for quality and value.
Specify Burmatex by name 
BURMATEX Britain's No.1 manufacturer for contract carpeting
BURMATEX IS ANT-STATIC BURMATEX IS FIRE RESISTANT BURMATEX IS COLOUR FAST BURMATEX IS DURABLE
Rockwool
There's one name that's cut out for any thermal, acoustic or fire protection application.
Whatever type of construction you're thinking about, there's a Rockwool product that's specifically engineered for the task.
Wherever you are in the world, that Rockwool product will more than match the specification.
Rockwool is a BS5750:Part II company and products are covered whether the application is thermal, acoustic or fire protection.
So, however much you think you know about the Rockwool product range, think again.
In the last five years alone, for instance, it's trebled.
In terms of versatility and variety, it's got no rival.
And it won't get one either.
Because in the next five years, we'll be doing even more to create even more solutions.
To problems you probably haven't even thought of yet.
But you will.
And there will be a Rockwool product that's simply cut out for it.
Rockwool We're insulation.
Nothing but.
SGO
DECORATIVE GLASS STYLE
If you are looking for something to add the special touch of style to your property, SGO has the answer.
With a wide range of decorative glass options, SGO offers interior design professionals something special plus the advantage of a truly local service.
A network of SGO studios throughout the UK provides you with experienced glass designers to consult on your requirements.
Whether it's a traditional leaded style, sandblasted glass or glittering Diamond Bevelled Glass, SGO's experts will create a design to the very highest quality and standards.
For further information and detail of your nearest studio, contact SGO head office.
DECORATIVE GLASS BY SGO
WE HAVE THE QUALITY YOU NEED FOR YOUR TREESCAPE
As one of the country's leading suppliers of standard and extra heavy trees we are well placed to bring quality confidence to your landscape.
A full range of material is available from shrubs and whips to specimen trees.
Ask for our brochure on the Wykeham Treescape.
CORAL CLEAN-OFF-ZONE
As people walk in…
CORAL CLEAN-OFF-ZONE stops walked-in dirt!
Dirt and moisture are brushed off by the Coral Clean-off-Zone as people walk over it.
A 6m zone stops 90% of walked in dirt, reducing maintenance costs of the floor covering beyond the Coral by 50% and the Coral Clean-off-Zone pays for itself in 6 months.
Coral is a specially developed floor covering incorporating nylon yarns with a special cross section, highly resilient and hard-wearing with a waterproof backing.
Silent Gliss
Vertical integration
For any project using more than 2,000 metres of vertical louvre fabric (around 40 average windows), we can produce soft-to-the-touch FR louvres to the exact colour you require for your scheme.
Simply supply a sample of the colour or BS/RAL reference number and we do the rest.
The louvres will come ready to install on our superb mono-control headrail systems,(which can also be colour-keyed if required).
Custom coloured Verticorama.
A new meaning for vertical integration.
Verticorama CC — a new service from Silent Gliss
Frank Griffiths the IRON age
NEW IN CONCEPT NEW IN DESIGN
We invite you to study the variety individuality and impact of Iron Furniture for today's interiors
From the hills of Fiesole Frank Griffiths brings you a range of iron furniture reflecting the timeless beauty of Italian villas and gardens.
Discover the diversity and striking collection for yourself.
Ring or write for our FREE BROCHURE.
ALAN BUTCHER ASSOCIATES
ALCLAD
ALCLAD Glass Reinforced Gypsum (GRG) cladding and mouldings are used in many of today's most spectacular interior design projects from themed shopping centres to the realization of the world's most spectacular theme parks.
Cost effective ALCLAD GR gives architects complete design freedom.
Its light weight and high tensile strength make it easy to install and wonderfully versatile.
ALCLAD can realize your ideas to the last detail.
INCA
Voyage of discovery.
The ability to build large glass display cabinets without frames opens up a new world of design possibilities.
This is superbly demonstrated at the Power House Museum in Sydney.
Nearer home, Click Systems' award-winning INCA showcase now has the resources of Britain's leading specialist glass group behind it.
To explore this new territory, contact Ron Clegg, Solaglas Limited, Eskdale Road, Winnersh Triangle, Wokingham RG  TY.
Tel..
INCA Showcases from Solaglas
BSB
Three letters every architect should have behind his name.
It can hardly have escaped your notice that the satellite television revolution is now well and truly upon us.
Indeed, it seems that by the year 2000, over 78% of the population will be happily tuned into a whole variety of new channels beamed from above.
Unfortunately, this means that any residential building you design could be littered with satellite dishes in no time at all.
Not a pretty sight, we're sure you'll agree.
Happily, however, it's one you can easily avoid by talking to BSB today.
When you do, we'll explain how our advanced S.M.A.T.V. system means that just one master antenna (only 60cm in diameter) will supply five new quality TV channels to any number of separate dwellings within one building.
How the whole process is cheaper and easier than your probably imagine, and with our state of the art equipment there'll be no danger of having to replace it in years to come.
To find out more, simply clip the coupon below, or ring us on  358.
We'll explain why BSB are three little letters that spell peace of mind.
BSB 5 CHANNEL TV
Marley Roof Tiles
We even test the nail hole.
To some this may seem a trifle over-zealous.
To us, it's second nature.
It's just the way we are.
Fastidious.
From the very start when we scrupulously inspect the raw materials.
Quarries that are chosen not just for convenience, but for geological perfection.
Sand that's measured to ensure the right grain size for maximum strength and exceptional beauty.
When it comes to cement, again we're purists.
So every delivery must be certified for consistent quality.
Punishing accelerated weather tests are performed.
Then we really pile on the pressure.
Over 900 Newtons in this case.
But behind this tough exterior lies a side of Marley that's rarely seen.
Because it's designed that way, with tiles coloured and crafted to live in harmony with both history and local environments.
Not that we neglect the future.
Proof of that is a rigorous R&D programme and a constant reappraisal of production and quality control beyond even the demands of the British Standard licence.
Even so, in the case of nail holes, people are still surprised at just how uncompromising we can be.
But then, after 60 years in the business, we definitely know what you're looking for too.
Marley Roof Tiles
SureSeam
Cost Effective
Low Maintenance
Watertight
Beautiful
But we decided to call it SureSeam
We wanted a name you could remember but because our new secret-fix roofing system has so many advantages we were spoilt for choice.
In the end we kept it simple because that is the essence of SureSeam.
SureSeam is low pitch steel roofing for high integrity buildings.
Perfected by British Steel Profiles to combine cost effectiveness with quality, SureSeam is suitable for new designs or refurbishment.
There's more to a name than meets the eye as you will discover when you send for our brochure.
•Unique floating clip design allows thermal movement.
•For use up to 26 degrees pitch.
•No perforations or joins inside the drip line (up to 14 metres).
•Simple to transport and install.
•High; y cost effective.
•Structurally tested by British Steel to BS5950 (Part ).
•Made from Colourcoat HP200.
•Choice of widths and colours.
•Can last up to 40 years with minimal maintenance.
SureSeam High Integrity Roofing
British Steel Profiles Part of British Steel plc
ROSEMARY
To spice up slate, add a touch of Rosemary.
A new £18,000,000 factory now makes Rosemary clay fittings the fitting fist choice to add beauty to new, re-used or artificial slate.
The lush, unique colours that make Rosemary clay so pleasing to the eye, now also please with fittings featuring precision unmatched by traditional manufacturing methods.
It is a precision which opens new possibilities in adding emphasis to any roof, enabling you to add immeasurably to every roofing effect.
The range comprises plain, angle, capped angle and half round ridge tiles in a choice of traditional red and black colours to suit applications in residential or commercial roofing.
Clay fittings by Rosemary.
Now no matter what you need in clay, there is only one name to specify.
ROSEMARY REDLAND CLAY TILES
Rad capped angle ridge.
Black capped angle ridge.
Black angle ridge.
Red angle ridge.
ANCHOR
Now the arguments against using lightweight man-made slates fall flat
Anchorlite Slate
Ten years of painstaking research, of test and trial, have created a material so advanced that it is unlike anything which has ever been produced before.
A material so light as to be virtually indistinguishable from natural slate.
And yet with flexural and impact strengths comparable to the very highest quality conventional concrete roof tiles.
A substantial, solid, fibre-free material which will not wrap or curl on exposure.
Formed and fashioned into an unique design which represents a thin leading edge whilst maintaining a strong, solid body thickness which belies its exceptionally light weight.
So now, when re-roofing, there's no need for expensive roof surveys, and strengthening.
There's a simple, cost-effective alternative that's freely available and guaranteed for 50 years.
Anchorlite Slate.
It's advanced roof technology.
ANCHOR ROOF TILES
BROHOME
PLAN FOR THE FUTURE
Whatever projects are currently on paper, Brohome can bring them to life.
With a comprehensive range or roofing and cladding products to choose from, you can specify with confidence, confident in the knowledge that the quality is unmatched, the value unsurpassed and delivery will happen on the day it's promised.
So, for everyone who's designing and building today, make Brohome part of your grand design.
Seam-loc…
SIMPLE, SECRET, SEAM-LOC!
A panel.
A clip.
And snap.
The Seam-loc roofing and cladding system is as simple as that.
Simple to install it may be, simplistic it is not.
Seam-loc is a well-proven secret-fix roof and wall cladding system that combines ease of installation with excellent weatherproofing characteristics.
Economic to use, Seam-loc just snaps together without the need for separate sealing trims, powered sealing machines or specialised additional components.
Attractive in appearance, Seam-loc is available in a wide range of colours and coatings on both steel and aluminium and is suitable for use on low roof pitches.
Available in long lengths to avoid end laps, Seam-loc is ideal for both new and refurbishment work and is equally versatile as a wall cladding system.
Seam-loc Secret-fix Roof and Wall Cladding System
PMF BRITISH PRODUCTS BUILDING A BETTER BRITAIN
TAC
TAC Specifier Service — it's Magic!
At TAC we take the services we offer architectural specifiers very seriously indeed, because we know that supplying the best products is not in itself enough.
So we have not let up in our determination to continue to provide additional services.
Services like our dedicated specification selling team, ‘The Swatch Line’ for the despatch of samples by return of post and our design and materials advisory teams.
For even more choice in colours and materials we have added the exciting Harionville range to our own already extensive range of roofing and cladding profiles and accessories, energy efficient composite panels, secret fix products, gutters, purlin and rail systems.
Together they add up to a ‘magical’ mix of people and products to give you, the architectural specifier, extra confidence — extra choice.
TAC Metal Forming Ltd.
A Profile of Quality
AMATEUR ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION
THE TIME: 11 A.M.
THE DATE: 17TH MARCH 1991
THE PLACE: BIRMINGHAM UNIVERSITY
THE EVENT: THE EVOLUTION OF A BRITISH ATHLETICS FEDERATION
ON SUNDAY 17TH MARCH 1991 HISTORY WILL BE MADE WHEN EXTRAORDINARY GENERAL MEETINGS OF THE A.A.A., W.A.A.A., AND B.A.A.B. WILL BRING INTO BEING A BRITISH ATHLETICS FEDERATION AND AN A.A.A. OF ENGLAND.
ROAD RUNNING WILL, ALONG WITH TRACK AND FIELD, CROSS-COUNTRY AND OTHER AREAS OF THE SPORT, HAVE ITS OWN COMMISSION AND WITH ALL CLUBS IN BRITAIN HAVING A VOICE AND A VOTE AT BRITISH ATHLETICS FEDERATION LEVEL YOU WILL HAVE A CHANCE TO VOICE YOUR VIEWS ON HOW ROAD RUNNING IN BRITAIN SHOULD BE RUN IN FUTURE.
MAKE SURE YOUR CLUB HAS A VOICE AND A VOTE IN THIS HISTORIC PROCESS BY BEING PRESENT ON 17TH MARCH.
ISSUED ON BEHALF OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE OF THE AMATEUR ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION
Phuket Marathon — Thailand
July 21, 1991
10 Days 9 Nights Duration
Runners:
7,000 runners from all over the world competed in the 1990 Phuket Marathon and 10km.
Venue:
The beautiful Thai holiday paradise of Phuket gives you the opportunity of combining the holiday of a lifetime with a top class international marathon and 10km.
Course:
The course runs parallel to Karon Beach in the region of Chalon Bay before returning to Phuket in a loose figure of eight.
Weather:
Conservative pacing is required in the warm temperatures and relatively high humidity, although competitors are well catered for with ample sponge and water stations.
Records:
Course record 2:27:58 — Robin Nash (GBR .
Features:
Pre race pasta party and commemorative medal to all participants.
UK approved tour operators:
For details of this event and also running tours to: Sweden, Holland, France, Luxembourg, Majorca, Yugoslavia, the United States and Thailand
Contact:
RUNNERS & COMPANY TOURS  
THE BEAUTY OF WOOD
The International Practical WOODWORKING Exhibition AND CRAFT FAIR
WEMBLEY EXHIBITION HALL — FEBRUARY 21–  OPEN DAILY FROM 10am TO 6pm (5pm ON SUNDAY)
See the exquisite entries to all our competitions.
Enter the world of woodturning, woodcarving, cabinetmaking and marquetry.
Talk to our experts from around the world who will be demonstrating their skills in the beauty of working with wood.
Take in a lecture.
Visit our exclusive Craft Fair.
A great family day out for all at Europe's largest woodworking exhibition.
For further information: Telephone  Sovereign Exhibition Management.
Guide Dogs and wheelchairs are welcome but we regret that pushchairs and dogs are not permitted in the exhibition hall.
ADMISSION:(AT THE DOOR) ADULTS £5.00 SENIOR CITIZENS £3.50 CHILDREN £3.00 (5–16 INCL).
Practical WOODWORKING BRITAIN'S MOST POPULAR WOODWORKING MAGAZINE
NOW IN ITS TENTH YEAR
GALWAY ANGLING FESTIVAL
13TH, 15TH, 17TH MAY '91 PRIZE MONEY £1000* + Pools and Trophies
Exclusive Sponsors: FLANAGAN TRAVEL
To be fished on the prolific waters around Galway this new event promises to establish itself as one of Ireland's best.
Bumper catches are expected as competitors plunder the vast shoals of Roach, Hybrids and Bream.
Weights of over 100 lbs.
have already been caught in matches, and pleasure anglers have taken up to 300 pounds in a day.
The Festival will take place over 3 days on both river and lake venues.
Ideally suited to the match angler, with special events and entertainment also planned to make it a week to remember.
•SUBJECT TO ENTRY 
Flanagan & Sons WORLD TRAVEL