

A PRIVATE VIEWING OF THE GALLERY
GLOUCESTER GREEN OXFORD 1990
INTRODUCTION
This private viewing of The Gallery aims merely to paint a picture — in broadest brushstrokes — of Oxford's most vibrant and cosmopolitan shopping development.
Quite simply, we hope that this portfolio will inspire you to visit and enjoy the specialist mix of quality shops and the entertainment.
Relax over a drink in the wine bar or brasserie, grab a snack ‘al fresco’, or dine in style at the cafés and restaurants.
With a character and ambience all of its own, The Gallery has something for everyone — from food to fashion, art to artefacts, music to mime!
Le Rendezvous
Restaurant •Grill •Brasserie •Terrace •Bar
Before or after the theatre or for that very special occasion.
Classic French and English cuisine by Andre Chavagnon, Chef de Cuisine.
At prices which mean exceptional value for money.
Fully licensed
Open 8.00am to 11.00pm.
Telephone 
BLENDERS
Distinctive Tableware and Cookware
The timeless elegance of Villeroy & Boch china and crystal — an essay in simple luxury
The Gallery
97 Gloucester Green, Oxford Telephone 
Pickwick PAPERS
Confectionery — Tobacco
Greetings Cards
Quality Gifts
The Gallery, 90 Gloucester Green, Oxford, OX2 1DS Tel:
ti'ro
Suit yourself with this year's classic menswear collection
From fabric to cut, the feel can be functional or fluid
Loosen the ties with tradition for an even more casual approach
For ideas right across the spectrum of formality
Ti'ro, The Gallery, Telephone 
Yakitori
JAPANESE CAFE •BAR
Yakitori Japanese Café Bar
Dining out in attractive surroundings at a reasonable price has always been a sought-after concept.
The Food is Japanese
Traditionally Japanese food has been presented as expensive, and reserved for special occasions.
Yakitori plan to change this.
Research shows that once people try Japanese food, they enjoy it!
The Green Factor
For the increasingly health conscious, from weight watchers to environmentalists, Japanese food is ideal, being healthy and nutritious, and will win over the traditional health foods which have a boring and monastic image.
Revitalizing the jaded palate
People are looking for something new, after twenty years of hamburger joints and pizza parlours.
Yakitori is the perfect ‘dining out’ option for the 1990's.
Eating Japanese food has status and ‘status seekers’ are our customers.
We're a good mix of people that set the trends, the ‘see and be seen’ generation…
HARVEYS
Salad and Sandwich Bar Delicatessen
Made to order, sumptuous Salad Bowls with a selection of freshly prepared salads, topped with a filling and dressing of your choice.
Baked granary or white sandwiches, crusty french or pitta bread, served with a filling, crisp mixed salad and dressing of your choice.
Plus a marvellous choice of English and continental foods, handmade chocolates, fresh pasta and sauces to name but a selection.
89 Gloucester Green, Oxford Telephone 
Natural SELECTION HOME ACCESSORIES
WE CARE FOR NATURE'S HABITAT
WE ALSO CARE FOR YOURS
Enter The Natural Selection for a world of difference.
Let us enhance the way you live in as natural a way as possible.
Review what we have found in natural cottons, clays, woods, metals and papers.
We want you to see for yourself the subtlety and awareness that can be wrought from the earth, to give style and grace to your everyday living.
We take the best of natural resources from around the world.
We adapt and cultivate the local talents and craft these skills, to meld the artisan and his world, so that they mix and flow with ours.
The essence of the craftsman will never leave the work.
Whether it is in India from a pit loom, from a potter in the  Philippines or a glass blower in England — the natural resonance rings true.
Take a look at our extravagant collections.
The many coloured durries and rugs (in soft cottons and jutes), the hand embroidered and hand printed designs, the simple mixes and intricate waves, in many colours and sizes.
Natural ranges for the home, from pots, vases and photoframes, to boxes and desk accessories to brighten and lighten all your rooms.
Cards, paper and boxes made from recycled paper to accompany your gifts.
Shelves of wooden toys, oiled or hand painted.
Earrings, bangles and necklaces in sparkling shapes and shades.
Fashionable hand blocked scarves and bags to coordinate.
Not to forget our conservation ranges.
A multi-hued fashion accessory collection, with sales contributing directly to rain forest projects, while our conservation incense sticks allow you to choose a cause close to your heart.
In fact, gifts to enliven you, a friend, family or home; all in one place; all for living with.
The Natural Selection offers a helping hand to extend the spirit of a free world.
We can help you choose natural gifts that are tokens from the earth, whether you are looking for simplicity or sophistication, we have what you want, for the right reasons.
We have designs for living as one with the world.
CULT CLOTHING CO
Say No More
The Gallery
96 Gloucester Green, Oxford
TSUNAMI
Japanese Shop
The Elegance of Japanese Lifestyle
FUTON
FURNITURE & PRINTS
PORCELAIN
COOKWARE
FOODSTUFFS
ARTS & CRAFTS
BOOKS & STATIONERY
CARDS & GIFTWRAP
91 GLOUCESTER GREEN, OXFORD
TELEPHONE 
Branches at: Nottingham, Leicester, Northampton
ONCE A TREE
Fine wood products
Visitors to The Gallery are warmly invited to inspect a world-wide collection of modern and traditional craftsmanship, at Once A Tree.
You'll discover the perfect gift for all occasions, the family heirlooms of tomorrow, and all in the most attractive materials…natural wood.
Naturally warm…naturally beautiful…for drawing room, dining room, nursery…for your family, your friends, and most importantly, yourself.
‘Please touch and enjoy’ is the open invitation on every piece in our showroom…please come and see, touch, enjoy for yourself.
The Gallery
Gloucester Green, Oxford.
Tel:
Shops also at Bath, Cheltenham and Perth.
Join Oxford's Café Society
Beauchamps is a newly opened licensed coffee lounge right in the centre of Oxford.
Tables and chairs available outside.
We look forward to welcoming you.
Beauchamps Coffee Lounge
Beauchamps Coffee Lounge, 93 Gloucester Green, Oxford, OX1 2BU.
Telephone:
NO SMOKING PERMITTED
THE POSTER SHOP
TAKE A CLOSER LOOK INTO POSTER ART
5, GLOUCESTER GREEN, OXFORD
ROWAN
FOR THE BEST SELECTION OF QUALITY KNITTING YARNS, KNITWEAR, KNITTING KITS, TAPESTRY KITS, JEWELLERY AND GIFTS.
102 GLOUCESTER GREEN, OXFORD, OX1 2DF 
A luxury apartment in the heart of Oxford
Oxford, seat of Britain's most renowned University, is both a Royal Cathedral City and a vibrant cultural centre.
It is a city steeped in history and tradition, enriched by its ambience of University life and by majestic medieval and renaissance architecture.
Oxford's innumerable activities both ancient and modern include sophisticated wining and dining, delightful character shops together with all the main retail chains, one of the country's largest theatres, sports and the river Thames.
It is a city at the heart of England, providing excellent communications, and just 50 miles from London.
Gloucester Green, a new development of elegant studio, one and two bedroom luxury apartments, offers the privilege of a home or pied a terre in this prestigious setting.
It combines the delightful atmosphere of an Oxford market square with every modern amenity for comfortable and practical living today.
Features can include car parking, lift, balcony, fitted kitchen, audio entry phone, fitted wardrobes and double glazing.
G.R.E.
Properties Limited, the developer, is a wholly owned yet independent company within the Guardian Royal Exchange Group, one of the United Kingdoms largest insurance companies.
The company is responsible for the management of property investments for several funds within the Group.
The total portfolio exceeds nine hundred million.
With its exceptionally high standards and its NHBC guarantee apartments at Gloucester Green present a wise investment.
The prices range from £88,950 to £175,000.
For a full colour brochure and investment information please contact the selling agents or telephone the on site Show Apartment/Sales Office, open from 10.30 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. every day, tel.
UK , 24 hrs.
Sole Selling Agents
WARMINGHAM ESTATE AGENTS AND VALUERS
68, High Street, Wallingford, Oxfordshire, OX10 0BH TEL:.
Now open two new shop flats
Furnished by Marks & Spencer.
A development by GRE PROPERTIES
EXECUTIVE CLUB
Telephone:
6th August 1990
When it is a Club Europe Drive Ford Granada Scorpio
And it comes with 200 FREE Air Miles courtesy of Hertz
 Dear Mr ,
Book Club Europe Drive at the same time as your flight and you could be driving a luxurious Ford Granada Scorpio for exactly the same price as a Ford Sierra 1.6L.
We've enclosed a special Executive Club Voucher — courtesy of Hertz — which will allow you a complimentary car upgrade.
CLUB EUROPE DRIVE
When you fly Club Europe, you take advantage of a very special service designed to meet the needs of the European Business Traveller.
Club Europe offers a time-efficient and trouble free travel experience in a stylish and comfortable environment.
And now British Airways has joined forces with Hertz to bring you Club Europe Drive: the fly drive service which saves you time once you have landed.
Club Europe Drive is fast and flexible, ensuring you arrive refreshed and relaxed, ready to give your business the edge over your competition.
EXTRA BENEFITS, NOT HIDDEN EXTRAS
With Club Europe Drive, the price you pay includes all major charges.
There are no hidden extras — only additional services, such as a free tank of petrol with compliments from Hertz and —
The ‘Rent it here, leave it there’ service.
Pick up your Hertz car in any of the 15 major cities — and drop off in any other of those cities — at no extra charge.
Not only do you benefit from an excellent service — but there are many other advantages too.
We have enclosed a Club Europe Drive brochure to provide you with full details.
FREE CAR UPGRADE
First, make sure you book Club Europe Drive at the same time as you reserve your Club Europe flight, calling either your dedicated Executive Club Reservation number on , or your travel agent.
Then, when you arrive at your rental location, simply present your Upgrade Voucher with your Executive Club card and Club Europe ticket (or boarding pass) to receive your free upgrade.
This special offer is valid until 31st March 1991.
FREE AIR MILES FOR EACH CAR RENTAL WITH AN EXTRA 100 AIR MILES TO START YOU ON YOUR WAY
Every time you use Club Europe Drive you receive 100 Air Miles.
When you make your first rental, using the Collector Card in the enclosed ‘Frequent Renter’ brochure however, you will receive 200 Air Miles.
Should that first rental be in Italy or Spain, you will gain a special bonus of 400 Air Miles instead.
10% DISCOUNT FOR EXECUTIVE CARD HOLDERS
A major benefit for Executive Club Members of Club Europe Drive is the 10% discount on every rental you make when you fly Club Europe, simply by showing your Executive Club card and quoting your CDP number 709100 at the rental location.
In addition the following discounts are available to you when you use British Airways and Hertz joint Fly Drive programmes:
And, of course, every time you rent a Hertz Car you benefit from Hertz speed, courtesy, efficiency and comfort.
All hallmarks of the British Airways preferred car rental company.
As you can see, Executive Club benefits don't just end at the airport.
When you take advantage of Club Europe Drive, you travel in luxury and style from door to door.
Yours sincerely,
Sally Bouch
Executive Club Manager
P.S. Please remember that the Car Rental Upgrade offer is valid up until 31st March 1991.
PUTTING WOMEN IN THE DRIVING SEAT
Wednesday, 11 July 1990
Welcome to Motorlux Volvo of Oxford's first evening solely for ladies.
Together with Lombard North Central Bank we hope to demonstrate the importance that we both place on lady motorists and of meeting their expectations from a motor dealership.
For far too long now the motor retail business has been viewed as a male dominated world where women have little or no place.
We intend to change all that tonight and hopefully answer many questions you may have about the purchase and maintenance of a motor car.
We, at Motorlux Volvo, recognise that over 35% of all car drivers in Britain are female and their particular motoring requirements are more often than not completely misunderstood by the average dealership.
We are also aware that for the majority of women, a visit to a car showroom or Service Department can be a difficult and sometimes downright unpleasant experience due to indifferent attitudes by some Sales/Service staff who are under the misguided impression that because you are female you know little or nothing about the motor car.
The object of the evening is to demonstrate that we at Motorlux place great emphasis on total customer care regardless of their sex or knowledge of the workings of the modern motor car.
We ask that you use this evening to put any questions about our industry to any of the staff here.
It does not matter how silly you may think they are, if it's something you are unsure about or have wondered why, please let us help.
We have people here tonight from all departments of our dealership — Sales, Finance, Parts and Service, all of whom will be more than pleased to help.
I do hope that you have a very enjoyable evening and an informative one too.
Please also remember that it does not all end this evening.
If any of my staff or myself can be of help with a future motoring need, you only have to pick up the phone or call in and see us and we will ensure your total satisfaction.
Sincerely
Tony Dickinson
Dealer Principal 
The Curiosity Shop
Send to: The Curiosity Shop, Admail 50 Leicester LE5 5DL
 Dear Mrs Davies,
IMMEDIATE REPLY REQUESTED…
YOU COULD WIN UP TO £100,000
Do you realise that by simply replying to this letter, you could be giving yourself a tax free lump sum of up to £100,000.
I urge you Mrs Davies, to read the contents of this letter now, very carefully.
As the attached ‘Ultimate’ Entry Bond confirms, you as the named participant have been awarded Six Exclusive Prize Draw Codes.
Any one of which could win you £50,000 in cash.
All you have to do is return your Entry Bond complete with six codes to us or phone through on  and you could be our lucky winner.
What's more, you may if you reply within 14 days, qualify for an additional £50,000 Early Reply Bonus prize too!
STUDY YOUR DOCUMENTS CAREFULLY — THE SOONER YOU REPLY, THE MORE YOU COULD WIN — THE PRIZE DRAW FUND TOTALS £115,000.
Start by checking the Six Prize Draw Codes on your ‘Ultimate’ Entry Bond against those on your Personal Eligibility Record.
The codes should be identical.
IMPORTANT — 1ST PRIZE PREFERENCE
Should you become our first prize winner, we require to know in advance your first prize preference.
To inform us of your choice, please detach one of the stamps from the panel and affix in the space provided on your Entry Bond.
‘ULTIMATE’ ENTRY BOND.
PRIZE DRAW CHOICE £50,000 CASH
PRIZE DRAW CHOICE MAZDA MX5 Plus £35,000
Next, select your ‘Ultimate’ prize choice by detaching the appropriate stamp and sticking it onto your Entry Bond.
It helps us to know in advance your prize preference should you be our lucky winner.
What's more, there's an additional £50,000 opportunity too.
Rub over the Early Reply bonus seal on your Entry Bond with a coin to find out if you are eligible to be our first £100,000 Double Prize Draw Winner.
To qualify, the 3 digits revealed on your seal must match the first three digits of the Early Reply Bonus code on your Prize Draw Eligibility Record.
Please take care however, any interference with the code will render your Entry Bond void.
If you are not a qualifier for the additional £50,000 don't worry, this does not affect your eligibility to enter the ‘Ultimate’ Prize Draw and win the £50,000 first prize or one of over a thousand other prizes.
If you are a lucky qualifier for the £100,000 Double First Prize Draw — Congratulations!— don't forget you must reply within 14 days.
Why are we offering you the chance of such a fantastic windfall?
Purely because we'd like you to take a look at our Autumn Catalogue, talking of winners, we think this one really is!
There are some fantastic offers we're sure you won't want to miss out on and the good news is that your Prize Draw Entry Bond doubles as your Order Form!
Make the most of this winning opportunity.
Reply right now and the Best of Luck!
Steven Gibbon, Marketing Manager
P.S. Don't forget to detach and keep your Personal Eligibility Record.
BEFORE RETURNING YOUR ‘ULTIMATE’ ENTRY BOND REMEMBER TO…
1.
Check that your six computer codes on your ‘Ultimate’ Entry Bond match those on your Prize Draw Eligibility Record.
2.
Indicate your choice of prize by attaching your Prize Draw Choice Stamp to your Entry Bond.
3.
Rub the Early Reply seal to check your eligibility to win £100,000 double first prize.
4.
Have you looked at your new catalogue, are you aware that your Entry Bond also includes a Priority Order Form?
5.
Detach and keep your Prize Draw Eligibility Record.
THE Flower Fairies YEAR
An enchanting new collection of new porcelain plates celebrates the changing seasons in FLOWER FAIRYLAND!
The land of the Flower Fairies is a miniature world of wonder.
Each and every flower, blossom or berry has its own fairy guardian.
The Flower Fairies were the creation of Cicely Mary Barker over sixty years ago.
Ever since, her wonderful paintings and delightful poems have charmed adults and children the world over.
Now you can watch the seasons changed in The Flower Fairies Year, a brand new collection of twelve porcelain plates featuring Flower Fairies that have never before appeared on plates.
Each season is represented by three delightful plates.
For example:
•In the chill of Winter the Yew Fairy sits dreamily amidst the waxen berries.
•Come Spring and the Wild Cherry Blossom Fairy is surrounded by snowy white petals and fresh young leaves.
Rose Hip Fairy
Scarlet, O scarlet
The Wild Rose Hips!
Here on the hedge-top
This is my song.
Plates shown less than actual size of 8in diameter
Geranium Fairy
There isn't a flower, the wide world through,
That glows with a brighter scarlet hue.
Her name — Geranium — ev'ryone knows:
She's just as happy wherever she grows.
•Summer's sunshine finds the sweet Geranium Fairy sitting beneath her flower's rich blooms.
•And when Autumn's winds blow, the Rose Hip Fairy tends the scarlet fruit in the thorny hedgerow.
Fine porcelain — rimmed with real gold
Each colourful Flower Fairy is beautifully portrayed for you on a high quality porcelain plate and expertly finished with a rim of 22-carat gold.
On the reverse of each plate is Cicely Mary Barker's original poem that she penned for each fairy.
Individually hand-numbered
As befits such a highly desirable collection, each plate is individually hand numbered and accompanied by a Certificate of Authenticity bearing the same number, thus establishing each plate's place in the edition.
Just £19.95 per plate
The Flower Fairies Year will be issued at the rate of one plate every other month.
And at just £19.95 each (plus postage and packing) this is a collecting treat not to be missed.
Our guarantee to you
You order at no risk.
If, for any reason at all, you are unhappy with a plate in this collection, you may return it to us within 30 days for a full refund or replacement.
You may also cancel your subscription at any time.
To subscribe send no money now.
Just fill in the Reservation Application form and return it to us.
Pear Blossom Fairy
See, see, see the blossom
On the Pear Tree shining white!
It will fall like snow, but the pears will grow
For people's and birds' delight.
Start your collection now!
Remember, these twelve artistic masterpieces are now on collectors' plates for the first time.
Demand is likely to be high from Flower Fairy collectors old and new, so please do not hesitate.
Send your Reservation Application now to Danbury Mint,.
The Leisure 200-S
Modern looks to match its modern features.
LEISURE Advanced Kitcheneering
Leisure's reputation for Advanced Kitcheneering — a combination of innovation and quality — is obvious in the stylish design of the Leisure 200-S gas cooker.
To co-ordinate with the modern kitchen, it is finished in dove grey and charcoal with discreet red styling lines and had the full complement of the labour-saving features you demand.
This removable door rack, which can be fitted in two positions, allows food to be more easily checked or turned.
Naturally it is big enough to take casseroles or roasts.
The Leisure oven's special ‘S’ setting means food can be cooked slowly all day or even overnight at a temperature which enhances flavour by retaining the juices.
The choice of five different shelf positions in the zoned ‘Heatflo’ oven gives you the flexibility of cooking several dishes simultaneously, while Leisure's cook 'n' clean oven linings help clean themselves.
Nobody relishes cleaning the grill either, so the non-stick ‘Cleantex’ grill trivet on the Leisure 200-S makes the job far easier.
The eye-level grill with captive locking device leaves you with both hands free to turn hot food safely.
There is also a recess above the grill for warming plates.
In today's compact kitchen, space can be at a premium, so our storage drawer provides easy access to your baking and roasting equipment.
The colour co-ordinated hotplate has been designed to keep cleaning to a minimum.
It is completely sealed so that any accidental spills are contained and easily wiped away, while the double pan supports offer a flush area for easy and safe movement of heavy pans across the hotplate.
The burners are instantly ignited at the touch of a button and the pre-set simmer control allows you to turn the flame low without it going out — ideal for cooking sauces.
The Leisure 200-S offers you the best of modern design with the instant control of modern gas technology with full ignition to the hotplate, oven and grill.
Combined with its up to the minute styling, these justify our claim that the Leisure 200-S offers modern looks to match its modern features.
The Leisure 200
Modern looks.
Traditional values.
LEISURE Advanced Kitcheneering
Leisure's reputation for Advanced Kitcheneering means a stylish combination of high quality finish with the latest in gas technology.
The Leisure 220 embodies this reputation with a mixture of modern styling and traditional values of expert craftsmanship and quality control.
In fact, the Leisure 220 is the perfect marriage of old and new.
One of the best features of modern gas cooking is convenience, so the ‘Heatflo’ oven of the Leisure 220 offers a choice of five shelf positions giving you the flexibility of cooking several different dishes simultaneously.
Leisure's special ‘S’ setting combines modern convenience and traditional slow cooking.
Food can be cooking all day, or even overnight, at a temperature which enhances flavour by retaining the juices.
Convenience is further enhanced by the cook'n'clean oven linings.
The glass door can be hinged left or right to suit your kitchen and there is a storage compartment below the oven.
The time-saving aspect of cooking with gas is highlighted by the useful 60-minute timer cleverly concealed behind a flush-fitting slide-away cover.
Traditional grill cooking is married to efficiency with the easy-clean grill trivet and pan in vitreous enamel.
Being at eye-level, you can easily see what's cooking and the burner lights instantly with the touch of the ignition button.
There's also a handy platewarming recess on the top of the grill canopy.
The stylishly colour co-ordinated hotplate offers the best in gas technology, with three standard and one semi-rapide burners, each igniting instantly at the touch of a button and each with a simmer-stop position, which maintains a steady flame at a low setting.
The hotplate is safe and easy to use — because it's completely sealed and spills are easily wiped away.
The Leisure 220 combines the aesthetic desirability of traditional values incorporated in the specially designed wheat motif, with the best of convenient modern features with full ignition to hotplate, oven and grill, giving you complete and instant control.
Valor VISION DOUBLE OVEN
THE EXTRAORDINARY COOKER
The Valor Vision is no ordinary cooker.
The rich brown enamelled finish with brown glass splash back  give it a distinctive style which certainly isn't ordinary.
And a cooker with a handy second oven for simple weekday meals, or as an extra help with more ambitious meals, is certainly out of the ordinary.
Take a cook's tour round all the Vision's remarkable extras, and you too will agree it's anything but ordinary.
Starting at the top, the Vision's eye level grill is a top performer.
The Thermogrill surface combustion burner gives an even heat over the whole surface, even when it's turned down.
So you won't have to chop and change your chops to make sure they're done evenly.
And it has an outstanding turn down capability.
Two handles make the grill pan easy to use, and it has safety stops which will hold it in place leaving both hands free to turn over.
The non-stick grilling trivet makes this easier too.
There are three grilling positions and the whole grill is surrounded by a safety glass splash guard, the sides of which can be removed for cleaning.
On the grill canopy is the flush grill control knob, and an electronic digital twelve hour clock.
This includes a minute minder facility and provides full automatic control of the main oven.
On either side on top of the canopy is a handy plate warming rack.
A brown glass-fronted splash back gives the Vision a very distinctive appearance, and we've put the oven vent well out of the way behind the grill to avoid dirt traps.
Tucked under the grill is the hotplate light, operated by a switch on the grill canopy, which ensures that your grill and hotplate are always clearly illuminated.
There are four burners on the hotplate, set in two deep, easy to clean spillage wells.
The burners are tough stainless steel with long-lasting vitreous enamelled caps.
Both pan supports are also vitreous enamelled, and designed so that it's easier to slide pans over them.
Like the hotplate, the splash back is edged with painted trims for a flush fit to the wall at the back of this thoughtfully designed cooker.
The Vision's control fascia is so good looking that it will turn on more than just the gas.
The push-turn control knobs are set in a toughened glass panel with high visibility luminous indicator discs, graduated in colour from ‘off’ to ‘full on’behind windows.
The push-turn feature makes the Vision safer if children are around.
At the left hand side of the fascia is a combined twist control for the main oven light, and push button for the mains spark which is used for ignition throughout the cooker.
At the other side is Valors' new unique Touchlok main oven door release, so you can open the main oven door at the touch of a button.
The Vision's two ovens must make all other cookers second best.
Not just for smaller quantities.
For instance, while you use the top oven for a slow cooking casserole, turn the main oven on high for a sponge.
The second oven gives you flexibility.
It's fully thermostatically controlled with traditional gasmark settings and Valor's Slow-set control.
Behind the drop-down door is ample space — enough for a 10lb chicken or 20 fairy cakes.
Of course, it's very economical to run.
There's one chromed shelf with three positions.
The main oven is also thermostatically controlled of course, and features Rotaflo, a system which makes sure the heat gets to every part of your oven.
So everything from a 25lb turkey to a full complement of 50 fairy cakes will be done to a turn.
You can keep and eye on your baking without causing any upsets, because the main oven has a window in the door and an oven light.
There are two chromed shelves and six positions to make use of.
The Vision even comes with two baking sheets and an vitreous enamelled roasting tin and trivet.
Even when you are not cooking, the Vision is designed to help you.
The slide out inner door panel and Valorclean liners fitted as standard take the hard work out of keeping your main oven clean, and if you need to move it you'll find the adjustable rear wheels and lever operated front wheel a great help.
A double oven cooker with all this style and all these features — there's only one word to describe it.
Extraordinary.
The only thing that isn't extraordinary is the name on this excellent cooker.
As you would expect, it's Valor.
EVERYTHING YOU GET WITH AN ORDINARY COOKER, PLUS AN EXTRAORDINARY AMOUNT OF EXTRAS
Valor FREESTYLE
MORE STYLE •LESS MONEY
STYLE
LIFESTYLE
You're looking for a cooker with style.
A cooker that will fit neatly into your modern fitted kitchen.
A cooker with all the features you need to cook great food despite the pressures of your busy life.
You're also looking for value for money.
You'll find all the answers in the Valor Freestyle.
Once you get beyond its up to the minute good looks the first thing you'll notice is that is price tag looks a little out of date.
How can a cooker that looks so good cost so little?
Is it stripped down to basics?
Not a bit of it.
Valor achieve value by modern technology, not by taking out features.
Prove this for yourself by taking a trip round the Freestyle.
Start at the top.
Check out the big centre firing grill.
It springs to life at the turn of a knob and the touch of a button.
Drop down a little and you'll find a hotplate with four burners sealed to prevent spillage seeping underneath and removable supports for easy cleaning.
Each burner has its own simmer setting to put the cook in control, not the cooker.
And all four burners are highly rated.
The modern grey or brown fascia sets off the knobs with colour co-ordinated inserts.
Her is where you'll also find a push button which activates the battery repetitive spark ignition for the whole cooker, grill, hotplate and oven.
Carry on down to the oven and you'll find six shelf positions and enough room for a 25lb turkey and all the trimmings.
You'll also find a Slow-set control which will cook a casserole to perfection while you're out for the day doing something more interesting.
Notice the glass window which lets you see what's happening inside the oven without opening the door.
And if you've better things to do than clean the oven make sure you choose the optional Valorclean liners.
Right at the bottom is a handy storage compartment for all your baking trays, dishes and so on.
And underneath are four skid feet, so you can slide your Freestyle out whenever you want.
The Freestyle.
From Valor.
Modern design plus modern technology.
And good old fashioned value for money.
Valor REVUE
GOOD LOOKING COOKER •GOOD COOKING FEATURES
BLENDS BEAUTIFULLY, WHATEVER YOUR STYLE OF KITCHEN
The Valor Revue is designed to give you the features you need for perfect results in the kitchen.
Without the frills you don't need when you're looking for real economy.
It comes with the incredible value for money you expect from any product that carries the Valor name.
And, as you can see, its attractive styling  slots in beautifully whatever your style of kitchen units.
The Revue comes with a choice of colourways.
White with a grey trim.
Or beige with a brown trim.
But the real beauty of the Valor Revue lies beneath the surface.
To discover that just read on and see what you get for your money.
CHECK WHAT YOU GET FOR YOUR MONEY.
A high level grill which enables you to check your food at a glance.
A reversible grill pan grid which gives you a choice of two cooking levels.
And a centre firing burner that ensures good heat distribution over the cooking surface.
THE VALOR REVUE.
IT CHECKS OUT WHICHEVER WAY YOU LOOK AT IT.
Moving down you'll find a hotplate with two large spillage wells, four sealed burners which are easy to remove and two large removable pan supports which help you slide food from burner to burner.
The whole hotplate is designed for ease of cleaning.
The controls are at waist level with simmer settings on all hotplate burners.
Lighting up the hotplate is simplicity itself with Valor's unique Autolite ignition.
Underneath you'll find an oven big enough for a family-sized turkey.
And Valor's special Slow-set control will cook a casserole to tender perfection while you're out during the day.
Add a set of Valorclean linings (available as an optional extra) and your Revue almost cleans up after itself.
Down at the bottom there's a handy storage compartment to take care of the utensils when you don't need them.
And keep them handy for when you do.
And at floor level the Revue sits on four skid feet.
So it just slides out whenever you need to move it.
Smooth and easy.
The Valor Revue.
Well worth checking out when you're looking for good cooking features in a good value cooker.
Living Ideas…by Allied
Lifestyles differ.
Tastes vary.
Some people love the excitement of the most innovative styles in furnishings; others can only feel at home in settings with a warm traditional feeling or a breath of country air.
Whatever your ideas on style and whatever your budget, you will find what you're looking for at Allied.
And that's a promise.
Allied today has an unbelievable choice of alternative ways to achieve a total look for your home.
Browse through this brochure and you will begin to see what we mean.
We asked our designer to create a series of very different looks using Allied furniture, carpets, fabrics and accessories.
The results are poles apart in terms of character…each room has a distinctive style of its own.
The exciting ‘living ideas’ which follow, however, are only the beginning of the breathtaking choice at Allied.
There are so many other inspirational ideas in every Allied store, just waiting to help you create a beautiful new way of living in your home.
Whilst a quiet revolution in terms of style has taken place at Allied, one thing hasn't changed.
Nobody gives you better value for money.
That's a fact we back up with our famous 60 day, low price guarantee.
FAMILY AFFAIR
Designing a home for a growing family is quite a challenge — selecting a style which will survive through the years, and furniture built to withstand a hectic lifestyle with its beauty intact.
Our suggestion is a classical style — a feeling of elegance which is entirely timeless, combined with solid quality and supreme comfort.
Beginning at ground level, a carpet with an all-time, all-over pattern is clever choice for a ‘Family Affair’ home.
It gives you the warmth you need and keeps its beautiful looks for years to come.
Sumptuous is the only word to describe our designer-selected lounge suite.
In terms of looks as well as comfort.
Its craftsman made upholstery is from the Allied classic range of sculptured moquette in a subtle blend of fresh shades.
In a busy home a cool, understated colour scheme is a sure way of creating a feeling of space.
It works well with a choice of striped fabrics — in this case brocade with a Regency influence.
The master bedroom in a home styled with ‘Family Affair’ in mind should be a luxurious haven.
Flower sprigged fabrics in pastel colours create a relaxing background, whilst dark mahogany toned furniture adds a feeling of rich tradition.
The suite is traditional too in the sense that it's a range of individual pieces which you can add to or divide for separate rooms as your family grows.
With our experience of furnishing family homes we are the first to agree that no two will be alike.
Different ages, different ways of life…reasons enough for the variety of co-ordinated options we have to offer at Allied.
COUNTRY LIVING
Country lovers are not necessarily country dwellers.
Wherever you've chosen to live, if you appreciate the warm, mellow looks of the countryside, this is the housestyle for you.
All it takes to create a sense of country in your home is a little of your imagination and a lot of inspiration from Allied.
Downstairs you'll fall in love with meadow colours — pinks, greens and cream — which fill the room with country air.
The main feature of our ‘Country Living’ lounge is a suite to sink into, upholstered in traditional floral fabric.
Windows are flower-curtained to match, and echoed with a tiny flower design in the carpet.
A practical note here.
Pretty as it looks, the carpet in our picture is particularly hardwearing and very clever at shrugging off stains.
Allied believes that beauty must stay that way.
Which is why we have an enormous range of Stainshield carpets, and knowledgeable staff who are only too happy to give you advice on how to choose a carpet with a carefree, long life.
Imagine dreaming in a beautifully carved bed of rich cherry wood.
Its glowing looks have been favoured by country lovers for generations.
Bedroom furniture with the same warm hue makes use of every possible inch of space (often as restricted in a modern town home as in a country cottage).
Naturally, ‘Country Living’ bed linens are in a pretty, chintzy fabric, and curtains scattered with wayside flowers flutter in the breeze.
The secret of good design is often moderation.
So it is important to mix a few colour keyed plains with florals and detailed designs.
You'll find the effect delightfully refreshing.
To find other views of the ‘Country Living’ housestyle just follow the Allied sign.
ABOUT TOWN
The ‘About Town’ setting has an image of pure elegance.
A confident style in which echoes from the past meet strong modern liens.
The typical town house may well have tall windows — the perfect framework for a luxurious amount of fabric swagged across the top of the windows and gathered back with tasselled cords or tailored tie backs.
To achieve a clever balance between the past and the present our designer chose a simply shaped, comfortable suite with woven upholstery in a traditional pattern inspired by the Victorians love of the east.
Rich, fireside colours add warmth to the room and, of course, they are supremely practical.
To add elegant height to a townstyle bedroom our designer chose furniture with a light finish.
What could be more appropriate than limed wood?
It looks dewy fresh, but it does have overtones of a quieter age, and it's the perfect foil for the earthy tones of the fabric which picks up the exotic theme we used downstairs.
Wherever you use richly patterned prints, keep your carpet choice to plain textures.
Allied's extensive choice of easy-care carpets gives you a tremendous number of plain and textured options for every room in your house.
Yes, plain carpeting from the Allied Stainshield collection is guaranteed suitable for town living.
NEW BEGINNINGS
Simplicity is the keynote of ‘New Beginnings’.
It's a fresh, young style you might use for your first home, or if you want to start anew in your lounge or bedroom.
And it's wonderfully flexible.
A simple understated collection of furniture which will look beautifully at home in any type of setting — modern or traditional.
Downstairs our designer created this example of a ‘New Beginnings’ lounge.
Two button-back Chesterfield-style settees — ever-fresh classics are upholstered in a print with a cool, restrained palate.
Windows are draped with matching curtains, simply suspended on plain wooden poles.
The carpet too provides a plain perfect, single-colour background for an imaginative scattering of rugs to suit your style of living.
Upstairs the theme of stylish simplicity continues.
Honey coloured pine is the natural choice for furniture designed on clean, unassuming lines.
This particular collection is from the Allied free standing range — an ideal choice for ‘New Beginnings,’ because you can add to it over the years.
What's more, when you move house, your bedroom furniture can go along with you.
Of course, these ideas are just a few ways of making a beautiful start at Allied.
There are lots, lots more in our stores.
ROOM AT THE TOP
Furnish your home in this adventurous style and you will be seen as an innovator.
It's a well known fact, however, that good design lasts forever.
So you can expect the geometric pattern lounge carpet to look sharp in years to come.
And, naturally a leather suite is as notable for its longlasting looks as it is for its enduring comfort.
Particularly, if it's from Allied's luxury collection at Allied.
Flair shows in the way you handle colours and fabrics.
Our ‘Room at the Top’ lounge features sloping windows with bold printed curtains suspended on poles and dramatically contrasted with black venetian blinds.
White bedroom furniture, designed on clean, sharp lines and mirrored to create an illusion of space — perhaps a fairly predictable choice for a modern home, especially when you see the impressive use of every inch of storage space.
But what an exciting way of using fabric!
A duvet cover which looks like a contemporary painting, plain bright curtains and the whole effect softened with swooping net drapes.
Simply sensational!
And our designer version of ‘Room at the Top’ is only the beginning.
There are so many other exciting ways of being out in front in innovative housestyles…
Allied's the place for inspiration.
IN CONCLUSION
We hope you have enjoyed browsing through this brochure, and that it's provided you with a little inspiration.
The ten rooms our designer created are only suggestions, of course.
There are far more ideas in store for you at Allied.
By now you will have gathered that our famous range of 3,000 carpet options is just part of the Allied home furnishing collection.
There are curtains, linens, lounge suits, bedrooms, and a luxurious range of top brand beds you must try out to appreciate.
With that amount of choice you may need a helping hand.
It's here.
Allied people know how to help you achieve the right look for your lifestyle.
Please take a look for yourself soon.
You'll be more than welcome.
Allied SELL…
beau duvets
beds
blinds
bunk beds
carpet accessories
continental quilts
curtain rings
curtain tracks
flat sheets
four posters
curtain poles
wardrobes
stools
co-ordinated linens
bedroom furniture
vinyl floor coverings
drawer divans
dressing tables
fabrics
chairs
pillows
sofa beds
feather pillows
feather quilts
fitted mattress covers
fitted sheets
pillows
headboards
lounge suites
mirrors
made-to-measure curtains
occasional tables
pillow cases
quilt covers
curtains
ready made curtains
roller blinds
roller ruffs
tie backs
thermal lined curtains
rugs
underlay
valance sheets
venetian blinds
floor tiles
& CARPETS
Red, white and Cordon Bleu.
STOVES Cookers for Cooks
5,000 bottles of classic French wine to be won.
Stoves.
British Cookers without Equal.
The original Stoves company was founded on 14 February 1920.
From the very beginning its policy was to produce good, sturdy cookers which offered excellent value for money.
They reputation of Stoves' hand-built cookers soon grew, as the company was frequently the first in Europe to develop a direct enamelling process and, later, ‘Everclene’ cookers.
During the Seventies, the company was taken over by Valor.
Recently, however, Stoves has regained its independence.
The original commitment to high quality and reliability has been reinforced, leading to the investment of millions of pounds in new products and new technology.
Stoves conduct exhaustive in-depth research to find out exactly what customers want from their cookers.
Meticulous planning then incorporates these findings into the latest computer-aided designs.
Manufacturing processes which employ the very latest technology ensure high quality products which will give many years of reliable service.
The result is a range of cookers that combine the very best from both the past and the present, continuing the Stoves promise —‘We make cookers for cooks’.
The Valor Classic 2 range has been designed and built by Stoves Ltd with a single priority.
You.
That's what we mean when we say that we make cookers for cooks.
Whatever you cook, from a boiled egg to a Cordon Bleu meal, you'll find the Classic 2 range offers you a versatility and value that's difficult to beat.
Every model is available in brown or white, and each has a sealed hob, easy to clean surfaces and self-clean oven linings, so it's easy to maintain their good looks for years.
Double Oven Cooker.
The Double Oven is the top of our Classic 2 range, the only conventional gas cooker that offers independent thermostatic control on both ovens.
The integral digital clock also doubles as a minute minder for precise cooking and acts as an automatic timer for the main oven.
It's eye-level grill incorporates removable, toughened glass side panels so cleaning isn't a problem.
Waist Level Cooker.
The Classic 2 Waist Level is the latest addition to the range; a slide-in cooker with the smooth lines of a build-in model.
Its easy-to-clean hob fits flush with your work surface and incorporates four evenly rated burners sealed into two deep spillage wells.
Each is capable of fast boil or slow simmer — a common feature across the whole Classic 2 range.
High Level Cooker.
The Classic 2 High Level shares the same eye-level grill as our Classic 2 Double Oven and, like every grill in the Classic 2 range, it works by surface combustion.
This ensures that food is always cooked evenly across the full width of the vitreous enamelled grill-pan, so you can be sure of outstanding results every time you cook.
Slide In Cooker.
Although it's designed to fit flush with your worktops, the compact Slide In has the same huge main oven as our other Classic 2 cookers.
Six different shelf settings allow you to take advantage of the zoned heat and, like all models in the range, it features a vitreous enamelled roasting tin and an air-washed door; one of the coolest, and easiest to clean, of any cooker.
How to enter our Free Draw.
Simply read the questions opposite and decide which of the alternatives, a, b or c, is correct.
You'll find the answers either in this leaflet, or at your British Gas showroom.
5,000 bottles of classic Bordeaux wine to be won.
When you've completed all six questions and filled in your name and address, detach the page and hand it to a sales assistant at your nearest gas showroom.
If your entry is correct, your name will then be entered in our free draw and you could win one of the 2,500 pairs of Mouton Cadet 1988 and Mouton Cadet Blanc Sec 1989, that we're giving away.
RULES.
Only one application per person.
Open to all U.K. residents aged 18 or over, except employees of Stoves Ltd, Baron Philippe de Rothschild s.a., British Gas, or any person or organisation connected with the draw.
The prize fund is 5,000 bottles of wine, comprising of 2,500 sets of Mouton Cadet 1988 and Mouton Cadet Blanc Sec 1989.
A pair of bottles of wine will be awarded to each of the first 2,500 entrants whose names are drawn on 5.11.90.
Damaged, incomplete or defaced entries will be disqualified.
Winners will be notified by post, no later than 19.11.90.
No cash alternative to the prize.
Entry indicates acceptance of the rules.
A list of winners will be available to those sending an S.A.E. to: Promoters; Stoves Ltd,.
Closing date for entries 8.10.90.
Baron Philippe de Rothschild s.a.
French wines, par excellence.
In 1922, when the original Stoves was still a fledgeling company, Baron Philippe de Rothschild also began to make his mark by taking over control of Château Mouton Rothschild.
With determination and foresight, he transformed the ailing estate, choosing men who knew their jobs intimately, combining traditional methods with the introduction of new ideas.
His influence proved to be a great success, but he still  strove to introduce his now famous wines to a greater audience.
This was achieved with Mouton Cadet — a vintage Bordeaux, which was more affordable than the Grand Crus and could therefore be enjoyed by more people.
You can now appreciate the artistry of Baron Philippe de Rothschild s.a. for yourself, courtesy of Stoves.
Simply enter the free draw overleaf and you could win a bottle of Mouton Cadet 1988 and one of the Mouton Cadet Blanc Sec 1989, both firmly established as excellent examples of classic Vintage Bordeaux wine.
In addition, if you buy any Classic 2 cooker before 25th December 1990, we'll give you a special mixed case of six bottles of Mouton Cadet.
NEW WORLD
EXCELLENCE BUILT-IN
TRADITIONAL COOKERS
INTRODUCTION
TRADITIONAL VALUES — ADVANCED DESIGN
It seems that some designers of upright cookers think they can get away with dowdy styling and primitive features.
Not at New World.
There's so much going for the self-contained freestanding format that we've put our best designers to work on our range.
With the result that you've a choice which can get the very best out of your budget, your kitchen and your cooking.
When you examine the range, you'll see that we haven't made changes for change's sake.
So you'll find proven winners like the Sola grill (never bettered) and the Gyroflo oven (smart design that means baking).
But you'll find them graced with looks which would complement a modern apartment or blend in self-confidently with a farmhouse kitchen.
Of course, the good ideas are more than skin deep.
We've positioned the hob, oven and grill so the only thing you'll stretch is your culinary skills.
We've added controls which take full advantage of the instant responsiveness and controllability of gas, so you needn't make a meal out of cooking up a snack.
And we've allowed for the fact that cooking for a family or organising a dinner party may take you away from the cooker when you want the food to go on cooking.
Incidentally we view the cleaning as part of our job not yours, so the burners are completely sealed to the hot plate.
The ovens have Ticene linings which help clean themselves, fitted as standard or as an option.
And throughout we've made the corners rounded and the joints crevice free.
So after you have cooked that meal all that's required from you is a wipe over.
The all-new Debut brings an unheard-of-level of appointment to an affordable cooker; there's even a choice of colours.
The Apex embodies all that's good about freestanding cookers.
Well made.
Handsome.
And packed with good sense features that will help add that special edge to your creations.
The Phase 2 brings you into a new age of cooking.
With classy touches like a large glass window in the oven door, glass sides to the Sola grill and a 60 minute ‘reminder’ buzzer, that's something out of the ordinary.
And for people for whom only the best will do, the magnificent Eclipse has everything…from hob light to an automatic oven timer.
To see how easy it is to make your decision, read on.
You'll discover a whole New World of difference.
GYROFLO OVEN AND SOLA GRILL
SPECIAL FEATURES
SOLA GRILL
The Sola Grill has been unique to New World for over 25 years.
We believe no one has ever come up with better.
It simply uses surface combustion to spread the gas flame uniformly over the entire grilling area to eliminate hot spots and cold corners.
So you won't have to shuffle the chops or the toast, when you could be getting on with the vegetables.
With the wast-level grill, when you slide the grill pan out, it nestles safely into a special recess in the drop-down door.
Once the grill pan has been removed the grill compartment can be used for browning the top of deep dishes like shepherds pie or, when the grill's off, for warming the plates using the heat rising from the oven.
High-level grill models feature plate warming on the shelf below the grill pan and deep dish browning with the grill pan removed.
GAS GYROFLO OVEN
Every cook knows the value of having the facility in an oven where the heat zones are such that different dishes which require different heat can be cooked at the same time.
The gas Gyroflo Oven does just that, it has zoned heat, so you get the benefit of ‘Complete Meal Cookery’.
The difference you get with the Gyroflo Oven is that instead of the usual 5 shelf positions you get 7, each with 25% more usable cooking area per shelf.
So when your neighbour can only manage to bake 32 fairy cakes at the same time you can serve up 50, and it will gobble up a 31lb turkey with ease.
That's a big oven with real flexibility.
FLUSH FITTING
The cookers in this brochure will fit beautifully flush with the cabinetry and worktops of your kitchen.
Gone are the days when the need for air gaps at the side and back of the cooker spoiled the lines of your kitchen.
Whichever cooker you choose, you will find it easy to fit and easy to plan around.
TICENE LININGS
Only New World ovens have Ticene linings.
They actually help to clean themselves as they cook, at NORMAL cooking temperatures.
The advanced technology of Ticene means that any grease splashes which land on the inside of the oven, spread themselves over a large area and burn away at normal cooking temperatures.
Ticene linings are fitted to the sides, back and oven roof on the Phase 2 and Eclipse and are an optional extra on the Debut and Apex.
SEALED HOTPLATE
A New World Hotplate sets a standard out of reach of most.
The hotplate is deep and rounded eliminating grease traps and the four equally rated burners are sealed to the hotplate well so spills can't sleep below.
The ignition electrodes are hidden beneath the burners and stay clean and reliable so even if the milk boils over a quick wipe is all that's needed.
DEBUT
CHANGING COOKERY INTO CREATIVITY
The Debut was designed with a real sense of purpose.
The end result made solid good sense.
You now have the choice to equip your kitchen, whether modern or traditional, with a gas cooker packed with so many benefits, that we know you would previously only have found in cookers that cost far more.
When you cook with the Debut you will realise that such benefits will give you better cooking, an easier time in the kitchen and more time to indulge in the things you enjoy in life.
Wholesome cooking used to mean a whole lot of work…not least of it, reaching up to the grill, and scrubbing away at the oven and hotplate.
Fortunately, while traditional values have hardly changed at the dinner table, cooker design has.
So while we're proud to offer you a capacious oven and a classic waist-level grill in a traditional freestanding cooker, we've added contemporary benefits which make life easier, and a choice of colours — something you'd hardly expect to find in a cooker at this price.
It's such a new level of value for money we've named this cooker the Debut.
And we're proud to introduce its talents.
Battery-powered ignition to all burners saves the nuisance of lighters or matches.
The Gyroflo oven is big, it offers an advance in technology that yields an extra 25% more effective cooking area per shelf.
The Sola grill is different, it grills so evenly, there's been nothing to beat it in 25 years.
A sealed hotplate means spills needn't mean disaster.
And a low contoured rear flue (we call it a medi-back) which does not intrude into the kitchen.
Flush fitting sides mean you get the look of a built in cooker is so desired.
So as you can see not only have we designed a gas cooker which looks impressive in the most modern of kitchens or traditional wooden cabinetry.
We've paid enormous attention to making cookery a treat for you as well as your family, by positively helping you to cook a better meal.
And if the Debut looks stylish too, it can only enhance the look of your kitchen.
APEX
IT'S PERFECTLY PRACTICAL
When we set about designing the new Apex, there was one particular feature around which the cooker was to be built…you .
The way we saw it, practical people need a practical cooker.
Decide on an Apex and within a week you'll be treating it like a good friend.
Easy to get on with, familiar and quite literally you won't know how you managed before, that is of course unless your existing cooker is a New World.
And when you're least expecting those friends or the hungry grandchildren to call round, the Apex will prove most resourceful.
You can slide the grill pan full of their favourite sausages under the high level Sola grill and when it's all cooked and so evenly browned the Apex's large 2 handled grill pan pulls forward and can be either lifted right out, or left to sit safely on the safety stops.
Either way the pan is clear of the grill leaving both hands free to turn or serve the food.
By the way, under the grill pan there's enough space to warm half a dozen plates any time the oven or hob is on.
And with the pan removed the grill is ideal for putting the finishing touches to your shepherds pie.
If their stay however turns out to be a longer one console yourself that the Gyroflo oven is easy to manage and having that extra 25% cooking space per shelf, will give you all the room you'll need for that larger roast and all those extra fairy cakes.
Of course, for more leisurely days, you can make use of the thrifty slow cooking facility, which not only saves on gas, but can help to retain the goodness of the food.
And, free from the stresses of having to clean in all those awkward corners and relaxed in the knowledge that because the Apex is so easy to clean, you will be able to devote all your energies to cooking up something really delicious.
The flush-fitting Apex can fit tidily into a space between your units, without the need for an air gap.
Should you wish to pull it out for cleaning, it slides on thoughtfully designed skid feet.
And to ensure that everything has its place, we've provided a storage compartment beneath the oven, with ample room for the meat tin that is supplied with the Apex.
This compartment has been specially contoured with smooth rounded corners to assist in making cleaning yet again easier.
We have also paid due attention to fashion.
We offer the sparkling white Apex for the pastel, white and cool-coloured interiors.
And the handsome brown Apex for the warm tones of wood finish units.
All in all we think you will find the Apex perfectly practical.
PHASE 2
THE NEXT STAGE OF YOUR COOKING EXPERIENCE
In almost everything it does Phase 2 goes one better.
The Sola grill is a deluxe high level model with glass sides.
The twin handled grill pan pulls forward horizontally to a safety stop position or can be lifted out altogether.
We call it Grill and Serve.
Either way it leaves both hands free to turn or serve the food.
The Gyroflo oven has Ticene linings as standard and the glass door has an in-built viewing panel.
There's a 60 minute ‘minder’ on the grill fascia.
Set it and you can forget about the meal until the buzzer lets you know it's ready and to keep all those pots and pans there's even a large storage compartment which has been specially contoured with smooth rounded corners to make cleaning easier.
There's everything in fact to help you create a better meal more easily.
Needless to say, Phase 2 looks the part.
Finished in beige with contrasting brown on the lower compartments it looks decidedly up market.
But for all its lavish appointments the Phase 2 is designed for economy too.
The Gyroflo oven gives you more cooking space per shelf than most other ovens of the same size, and a slow economical cook facility.
The Sola grill has glass sides to keep the heat where it should be and the sheer controllability of gas means you won't waste energy.
With adjustable height skid feet and flush fitting sides, the Phase 2 fits easily into your kitchen cabinets.
But more importantly, it will fit neatly into your life.
ECLIPSE
IT PUTS OTHER COOKERS IN THE SHADE
There's no substitute for quality.
And where cookers are concerned, it comes out in the quality of the food and the quality of your life.
The Eclipse is designed to help make your cooking better by making the process easier.
As our top-of-the-range freestanding cooker, the Eclipse is furnished with all of the features you'd ever imagine.
A deluxe high level Sola grill with glass side panels to keep the heat in and a ‘grill-and-serve’ position for the grill pan where it's safely supported when pulled out leaving both hands free to turn or serve the food.
A Gyroflo oven with Ticene linings and twin oven lights.
A sealed hotplate with concealed ignition and an automatic oven timer with the time of day clock.
The Eclipse is exceptionally easy to control, with mains electric ignition, a slow cooking facility, a plate warmer (in the grill area) and an oven timer which you can pre-set to switch the oven on and off at times convenient to you (perhaps while you're busy entertaining guests before the meal).
Of course, the Sola grill and Gyroflo oven themselves are inherently more controllable, too.
Which adds up to the Eclipse doing things your way, not vice versa.
And as an Eclipse buyer, we'd expect you to be equally discriminating about the look of your food.
So we've provided a hotplate light as well as twin ovenlights with a viewing panel in the door.
Which means not only can you monitor the progress of the roast or the meringues — you can efficiently avert the slightest risk of disaster.
Below the oven is a large compartment specially contoured with rounded corners to help make cleaning easy.
For all this, the Eclipse is no bulkier than our more modest cookers.
The height is adjustable, and you can flush fit the Eclipse on its adjustable skid feet perfectly into a standard gap in your kitchen units.
With a choice of white and grey, or brown and beige, we've styled the Eclipse to suit the style you dictate.
Not overtly futuristic, yet made to look modern for years to come.
Which is just as well; with all these advantages, you're going to want to hang on to your Eclipse…
PRODUCT SPECIFICATION
Should you encounter difficulty in obtaining items illustrated in this brochure please contact New World.
Our policy is one of constant development and improvement.
Whilst the leaflet is accurate at the date of printing, specification/appearance may be changed in the interest of continued improvement.
These gas appliances are produced to BS5386 Part 3 under BSI Safety Kite Mark Scheme for gas appliances.
Brochures are available for other superb models in our range of Slide-in and Built-in cookers.
These can be obtained from your local supplier or direct from New World.
THE NEW WORLD COOKER HOOD DESIGNED FOR YOU AND YOUR KITCHEN
Just look how the New World cooker hood works for you.
The ideal companion to any New World cooker whether built-in, slide-in or freestanding.
This hood is designed for efficiency and durability in any kitchen and is built from the toughest heat resistant materials and the powerful fan ensure that it will continue to look good and carry on working where other hoods might give up.
And of course all New World hoods are built to the highest British Electrotechnical Approvals Board Safety Specifications, so you can be sure that they will work safely in your kitchen.
EFFICIENT DESIGN
The hood has a powerful three-speed low noise fan that whisks away steam and cooking meals.
Air is either recirculated through a charcoal filter (included in the price) or vents out through an outside wall suing the optional New World Ducting Kit.
And the special pull-forward visor means you can increase the effectiveness of the hood over a greater area.
GOOD LOOKING
The hood is designed to fit in with standard kitchen units or can be fitted on its own over a freestanding cooker and is available in white or brown.
To shed some light on what you're cooking the hood also incorporates a useful hob light.
Installation is made easy by using the fixing kit and simple instruction booklet that is supplied with the hood.
SPECIFICATION
ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENT
240v AC 50Hz fused 3 amps
NOTE: The hood must be positioned at least 700mm above a gas hotplate, 650mm above an electric hotplate and 460mm above a high-level grill.
To get the most efficient results from your cooker hood there is a special New World Ducting Kit for ducting through an external wall or window.
This kit can be obtained or ordered from your supplier.
MOFFAT DISCOVERY
by Parkinson Cowan
Cookability comes clean
MOFFAT DISCOVERY is, quite simply, Britain's most advanced gas cooker.
It is the start of a new generation of gas cookers.
The Discovery is the first ever gas cooker to have a hotplate with ‘Gas Powered Discs’ a revolutionary new concept developed by Moffat that actually places a Disc above the flame to give you the controllability you expect from gas plus an unheard of level of cleanability.
And that's not all.
The rest of the cooker is just as highly advanced: a fully automatic ignition and re-ignition system, a sophisticated but simple-to-use control panel, a high-powered, full-width grill, and a generous, heat-zoned, circulating ‘Cycloheat’ oven.
Never has there been a gas cooker with so many refinements, so many innovations, so much attention to detail as the new Moffat Discovery.
Take your own voyage of Discovery through the following pages and see for yourself — it truly is the most exciting gas cooking discovery of the century.
Britain's most advanced gas cooker.
The ‘Gas Powered Disc’ by Moffat
Gas hotplates on ordinary cookers have hardly changed in decades but there is nothing ordinary about the new Discovery.
We have scrapped all the traditional technology and totally revolutionised gas hotplate cooking.
Out go the conventional pan supports.
In comes the ‘Gas Powered Disc’ the most exciting innovation to happen to gas hotplates ever!
Cookability comes clean
By placing a disc of hard-wearing ‘Ceran’ above the burner, we have created a gas hotplate with the streamlined looks and the easy-clean surfaces that you have demanded.
The heat passes through the ‘Gas Powered Disc’ and around its edges, heating the contents of the pan above.
It is fast, controllable and clean.
What's more, with its automatic ignition system, the Discovery hotplate is exceptionally safe.
When a tap is turned on, the ignition immediately sparks at the burner and keeps on sparkling until the burner is lit.
Should the burner go out for any reason, sparkling recommences until the burner is once again ignited.
This ‘sensing’ system is linked to a lid ‘Shut-Off Valve,’so that if the lid is accidentally closed with a hotplate burner still on, the gas to the hotplate shuts off immediately and stays off whilst the lid is down.
To remind you that a tap has been left on, you can hear the system sparking.
Only when the lid is raised again will the burner that's been left on, relight.
Cleanability
‘Gas Powered Discs’ are made to be hard-wearing.
They are finished in a patterned surface to minimise marking.
Tests by our own Home Economists have shown that the smooth surface makes cleaning easier.
You have the choice of cleaning the Discs in position or removing them to wash in the sink.
Either way, they will retain their good looks.
Should any major spills occur whilst you are cooking, these will collect in the central spillage tray beneath.
The entire hotplate — Discs and all — simply hinges up for you to mop up.
Cookability
Even though the gas flames are shielded, you lose none of the beauty of cooking with gas.
It's still instant, responsive and controllable.
There are three different sized Discs on the Discovery hotplate and three different heat ratings, so your cooking options are exceedingly flexible.
Much of the heat comes from around the edge of the Disc, so for optimum results you select a Disc that is slightly smaller than the pan you are using.
And for the gentlest simmer you have ever seen, you choose a pan that's slightly smaller than the Disc and the heat will spread evenly through the base of the pan.
Controllability
When Moffat were designing the revolutionary ‘Gas Powered Discs’ hotplate, a prime design criterion was to maintain the controllability that gas cooker owners have come to appreciate.
Take a look at the demonstration opposite and you will see we have managed to achieve just that.
Selecting the right sized Disc, we took a pan of milk and we allowed it to heat to the point where it was about to boil over.
When we turned off the gas, the milk immediately stopped boiling and gently subsided back into the pan.
Try that on an electric hob and see what happens.
Black Sophistication
Perhaps it's not surprising that a cooker which has revolutionised gas cooking technology should dare to break with styling convention too.
In ultra-sophisticated black, the Moffat Discovery becomes the high-tech feature in the very latest kitchen designs.
In much the same way as black gives an undeniable panache to performance motor cars and the finest sound systems.
Pure White
In pure white it adds a freshness, cleanliness and unity to a white kitchen that brightens every day.
Both models slide in and out so that you can clean behind.
With its classically simple lines the Discovery will fit your kitchen plans precisely, in a run of units, in a corner or at the end of a peninsular arrangement.
Having decided on all the advantages of cleanability, cookability and controllability your choice is now as simple as black or white.
So advanced, so simple to use
As you would expect of a gas cooker with such an advanced hotplate, the controls of the new Discovery are equally sophisticated.
Press the switch on the fascia and it lights up a new world of controlled cooking.
Each of the four discs has a ‘ladder of light’ above the push-in and turn control knobs.
These raise or lower, level by level, as you raise or lower the flame.
At a glance you know what's on and how high.
Closely co-ordinated with the controls, these ‘ladders’ not only give you a functional, attractive display, they give you a precise setting, too.
All the graphics on the control panel are simple and easily seen, and all the controls have easy-to-understand precision markings.
If you want to grill fast, for instance, turn the control to the large flame symbol; slow, then turn it to the lowest flame symbol.
With Discovery, once you've touched the controls, they obey you completely.
To the right-hand side of this most advanced display is the microprocessor time control.
The digital 24-hour clock, for instance, can be set with one hand.
Using the Setting and Selector knobs you can cook completely automatically, the cooker turning itself on and then off precisely when you want.
You can set it to cook while you're out and come home to a perfectly cooked meal.
There's also a minute minder and alarm to tell you when everything is ready.
And for cooking the tastiest casseroles, there's a special ‘Slow-set’ facility which lets you leave the food to cook itself at a very low temperature over a long period.
High-powered grill
Large, heat-zoned oven
Beneath the control panel is the grill with a generous grill pan large enough to take a family-sized mixed grill.
The grid inside the pan is reversible to give you two cooking heights and there are special shelf extension runners to make it easier to replace the grill pan.
When the grill is not in use, plates and serving dishes can be warmed in the grill compartment when the oven is on.
The oven itself performs perfectly.
With its automatic controls and large capacity, it can cook an entire meal for all the family all on its own.
Unlike most ovens, it has three shelves instead of the usual two.
These are ‘servery-style’ with special ‘stops’to prevent the shelves from being pulled out inadvertently.
This superbly efficient oven is also highly economical to use as you can cook three or more different dishes at the same time.
It is hottest at the top and gradually cooler towards the base.
To save you from stooping, the oven door has a high level handle.
It has a special ‘Shut-tight’ spring-tensioned hinge that does away with the need for a door catch.
Give the door a firm push and you are certain it's well and truly shut.
The door is comprised of not one but two all-glass panels.
This Air-Cooled door is ‘air-washed,’ which means that it si kept at a lower temperature than many other cookers.
Included in this highly efficient oven is an enamelled roasting tin with an ingenious anti-splash, lift-out grid and an enamelled cake tray.
As you would expect, it has oven liners that help to clean themselves.
MOFFAT DISCOVERY
Cookability comes clean
If you've been impressed so far, you'll be pleased to know that there's even more to discover when you see the new Moffat Discovery for yourself.
From top to bottom, this elegant, advanced example of British engineering is a World-beater.
It abounds with stylish design and outstanding innovation:
An ultra-clean hotplate with revolutionary ‘Gas Powered Discs’ designed and developed by Moffat.
A special toughened, smoked glass lid with a ‘Shut-Off Valve’ that immediately shuts off the gas when the lid is closed.
An automatic ignition and re-ignition system to all burners that ‘senses’ when gas is not lit and won't stop sparking until it's certain it has been lit.
An advanced control panel that accurately controls the hotplate and grill and gives precise responses and fully-automatic cooking when you're baking and roasting in the oven.
A high-powered grill that has a healthy appetite for the biggest brunch.
A safe Air-Cooled all-glass ‘air-washed’ oven door with high level handle and spring tensioned hinges that hold the door shut without the need for catches.
The list goes on and on.
The Moffat Discovery has been designed and built to conform to or exceed all relevant British Standards so it is guaranteed to be safe, reliable and engineered to the highest quality.
It is built to meet our own stringent stringent standards and more importantly, to satisfy your own exacting demands.
The Specification for Britain's most advanced gas cooker
EXTERNAL DIMENSIONS
Note that all dimensions are nominal.
Those marked * are adjustable +6.5mm/-4.0mm.
LID/SPLASHBACK
Toughened glass lid with safety device which cuts off gas to Hotplate when lid is closed, with audible warning.
HOTPLATE
4 removable ‘Ceran’ discs above spillage tray.
Hob ratings and Disc Diameter: LHR 2.3kW 145mm; LHF 1.9kW 130mm; RHF 1.9kW 145mm; RHR 3.0kW 175mm.
All burners have automatic ignition and re-ignition.
GRILL
Beneath hotplate in separate compartment.
Large enamel pan with 2 position grid.
High performance burner rated at 3.5kW with automatic ignition and re-ignition.
OVEN
Behind double-glazed ‘air-washed’ glass door with 3 servery shelves in any of 5 positions.
Door has special spring-loaded hinges avoiding the need for catches.
Automatic ignition and re-ignition.
Supplied complete with 4 piece oven liner set, cake tray and enamel meat tin with anti-splash trivet.
Special setting on thermostat caters for slow-cooking.
IGNITION
Fully automatic mains ignition and re-ignition to all burners.
FINISH
Generally black or white, glass and enamel with anodised trims.
CLEARANCES FOR FIXING
GAS SUPPLY
Suitable for natural gas connected by flexible hose (not supplied).
STANDARDS
This appliance is produced to all relevant British Standards, your guarantee of safety, performance, reliability and quality.
This leaflet is accurate at the date of printing but will be superseded and should be disregarded if specifications and/or appearance are changed in the interest of continued improvement.
Yours FREE with your Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN…the Sleep-safe Smoke Alarm .
Every home should have one.
This isn't a glib advertising slogan but a statement of simple truth, because smoke detector alarms can and do save lives.
Properly installed — and full instructions accompany the Sleep-safe Smoke Alarm — a smoke detector will warn you of smouldering in the earliest stages of a fire and give you the vital few minutes that really could make the difference between death and survival.
This essential piece of home equipment can be yours FREE as a DOUBLE PAYOUT policy-holder — a ‘thank you’ gift to you, from us, for your custom, interest and wisdom in choosing Reader's Digest to fulfil your insurance needs.
Features include:
Battery operated — 9-volt battery supplied
Minimal maintenance needed
Push-button testing facility
Five-year warranty against defect
Low-battery signal to warn of the need for replacement
Full owner's manual supplied
Complete with mounting bracket and installation hardware
The Sleep-safe Smoke Alarm protects you and your family simply and safely.
FREE
Protect your family from the horror of a house fire — this Sleep-safe Smoke Alarm is yours FREE with your Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN.
It's estimated that around 700 people die in house fires in Britain each year.
Well over half of those killed are young children or elderly people who are overcome by smoke and fumes while they sleep at night — people whose chances of survival would be drastically improved if only they were able to reach safety in time.
The Sleep-safe Smoke Alarm is designed to give you those precious few minutes in the event of fire, by detecting smoke from fires in their earliest stages and sounding a loud warning signal.
Run on a 9-volt battery (which we'll supply), the Alarm needs little maintenance and is very simple to install.
Fully conforming to British safety and design standards, its features include a low-battery signal, to tell you when the battery needs replacing (which should only be once a year), and it comes complete with a five-year warranty and full instructions on use.
Smoke alarms can cost you between £10 and £15 in the shops, but we're happy to offer you this Sleep-save Smoke Alarm as a FREE GIFT with your Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN.
Remember, even a small fire can fill your home with poisonous smoke in a matter of minutes.
It pays to be prepared — and the Sleep-safe Smoke Alarm can help that preparation at no cost to you!
Personal Itinerary prepared for:
The Directors of Craigendarroch Country Estate have great pleasure in inviting you to a luxury weekend in Royal Deeside.
 Dear Mr Davis,
Imagine a Highland haven far away from the hustle and bustle of the city…a private world where you can pamper yourself in unparalleled luxury…and relax in surroundings of timeless beauty.
This is Craigendarroch…one of the most exclusive holiday retreats in the world.
And it gives me great pleasure to personally invite you and your guest, to spend a luxurious weekend on the Craigendarroch Country Estate, just a few miles from Balmoral in the heart of Royal Deeside.
We will fly you both from Heathrow or Manchester to Aberdeen, where you will find a complimentary car waiting for you, and which is yours for the entire weekend.
Your room in the 4 Star Craigendarroch Hotel will feature every conceivable luxury, and will be reserved in your name for two nights.
In the mornings, you can look forward to a full Scottish Highland breakfast.
You will also be given weekend membership of the exclusive Country Club with its numerous facilities.
And you can enjoy it all for the special inclusive tariff of just £199 for two.
I think you'll find my invitation difficult to resist.
Not just because of the extraordinary value it represents, but because of the unique qualities our auspicious holiday retreat has to offer.
Indeed, so diverse are the pleasures awaiting you at Craigendarroch, I feel a letter alone cannot do justice to them…
That's why I've taken the liberty of preparing and enclosing a suggested Personal Itinerary, which incorporates an abundance of ways you might enjoy your stay with us…
And if, as I'm certain once you visit here, you find you want to come back again, you may be interested to know that there is a way you can share in this magnificent Highland retreat, time after time.
For at Craigendarroch we have more to offer you than a luxurious weekend break.
We have something that could enrich the quality of your life for many years to come…
So before you turn to your itinerary, let me explain a little further.
Nestling in the hillside in the grounds of the Estate are some of the most exclusive holiday homes in the world.
Aesthetically positioned in small clusters, the lodges have been built with one aim in mind.
To provide a discerning few with the ultimate luxury retreat.
Until you see them for yourself, in fact, it's difficult to conceive just how magnificent they really are.
So, as part of your itinerary, and at a time suitable to you, we will show you around these splendid lodges of which Craigendarroch is justifiably proud.
For these are no ordinary holiday homes.
They are time ownership lodge.
And because of the special laws in Scotland, you own your weeks in perpetuity.
They are yours to enjoy for the rest of your life, to give away, rent to friends, or to sell as you choose.
And, of course, you buy only the weeks you want to use at a fraction of the cost of buying the whole property, with all the facilities of the first class Hotel and Country Club at your disposal…
In short, you have your own luxurious retreat situated in perhaps the world's most exclusive location for a commendably affordable price.
I really cannot stress the desirability of this area strongly enough.
Indeed, for generations the Royal Family have had their own secluded haven just a few miles downriver.
From their magnificent setting on the gentle slopes of Craigendarroch Hill, the lodges overlook the enchanted world of the Dee Valley…surely one of the most sublime landscapes in the land.
For me, there is no finer way to appreciate this extraordinary beauty than an early morning spent fly fishing for salmon in the tranquil waters of the Dee, with the sun slowing rising above the mountains and not another soul in sight.
Sheer paradise!
If fishing is not to your taste, Craigendarroch offers the irresistible lure of many more of the world's finest sports…
You can partake in golfing, clay pigeon shooting, stalking, pony trekking, gliding, skiing…and a host of other superlative activities throughout the year.
Space does not permit me to sing their praises too loudly here, but your itinerary has further information on the multitude of sports that abound in this magnificent area.
And whenever you wish to venture beyond the peaceful slumber of the countryside, you'll find that many lively towns and villages with intriguing names are but a short drive away.
For example, picturesque Braemar — home of the Highland Games — is just a short drive from Craigendarroch.
Whilst only an hour's journey away lies the stately city of Aberdeen with its excellent restaurants, theatres and stores altogether a refreshing diversion when you want a brief reminder of city life…before returning to the secluded haven of your own lodge.
Of course, retreating from the trials of the twentieth century existence does not mean one wants to abandon its many creature comforts.
Reassuringly our lavish homes allow you to pamper yourself in the most delightful ways…
From the fully fitted Gaggenau Kitchens, the Bang and Olufsen stereos, television and video, to the opulent Connolly hide leather sofas, no expense has been spared to make these lodges the ultimate in luxurious sophistication.
Gratifyingly, our relentless quest for luxury has been rewarded.
We recently won Resort condominiums International's Premier Award for the ‘Resort of International Distinction’.
I believe that Craigendarroch offers you the best of two equally irresistible worlds.
When you want absolute privacy for yourself and your family, you'll find your lodge a haven of seclusion.
Yet whenever you feel the urge to venture forth into civilisation again — perhaps for a romantic dinner a deux, or a soothing massage in the capable hands of a master masseur — the first class Hotel and adjoining Country Club are but a short walk from your front door.
Consider the handsome facilities they have to offer: Three first class restaurants, each with its own distinct cuisine created by our award-winning chef, two convivial bars with, naturally, impeccable service, a dry ski slope, a fully-equipped trimnasium, a steam room, a heated indoor pool complete with rock formation, squash courts, saunas, beauty salon…the amenities are as numerous as they are varied.
Neither have we overlooked the youngsters — in fact we have created the ‘Acorn Club’ for the sole purpose of entertaining them with exciting excursions and activities while you relax elsewhere.
We even offer a babysitting and Creche facility.
So while you exalt in the delights of the poolside spa bath, you can rest assured that your children are in capable hands.
When you reflect on all these amenities, you may not be entirely surprised to learn that we are the only Scottish hotel to be awarded the Royal Automobile Club's prized Blue Ribbon award for superlative levels of excellence.
But this generous accolade does not mean that we are resting on our laurels.
The Country Club has only recently been expanded to incorporate even more amenities…a delightful children's pool.
And we have more plans for the future to make it the ultimate private leisure club.
Which is surely good news for lodge owners.
You can be assured that these superior standards will continue to be maintained too.
For Craigendarroch is wholly owned by a major public company, Cannon Street Investments P.L.C.
— a company with an excellent growth record.
The commitment of such a large organisation can only ensure that the levels of excellence will always remain outstanding.
There is one more very special advantage to being a lodge owner that I would like to disclose if I may.
Through our affiliation with Resort Condominiums International, you can holiday in over fifteen-hundred exotic locations throughout the world…secure in the knowledge that you will always have your Highland retreat to come home to.
When you consider all the privileges of being a lodge owner — the exquisite luxury, the excellent facilities, nd not least the sheer exclusivity of the location the actual purchasing price may well come as a pleasant surprise.
And we have arranged a special finance scheme with The Royal Bank of Scotland — trustees for the Craigendarroch Estate.
Full written details can be made available on request.
Of course, you are free to make your own arrangements if you prefer.
Whilst your forthcoming weekend will naturally provide you with the ideal opportunity to discover at first hand the delights of owning your own Highland retreat, I can assure you there is absolutely no commitment.
And there is the pleasure of a relaxing Scottish sojourn in the lap of luxury for a mere £199 for two.
Isn't this invitation the perfect opportunity to reward yourself with a little self-indulgence?
I believe the enclosed itinerary will convince you.
Simply complete and return the RSVP to me, and I shall personally reserve your hotel room for you.
If by chance you have already visited Craigendarroch under the terms of this special invitation, I very much regret that we are unable to make the offer a second time.
Should you wish to view our lodges again, however, please do not hesitate to contact me on (03397) 55558 and I will be delighted to make alternative arrangements for you.
It only remains for me to say how much I look forward to welcoming you to the Craigendarroch Country Estate.
Yours sincerely,
CHRIS GORDON Director
The Itinerary
YOUR FIRST AFTERNOON
As your plane touches down in historic Aberdeen, the stress and strain of the city become a distant memory…
Your weekend commences in comfort with a short, relaxing flight into the very heart of Scotland.
Upon arrival at Aberdeen Airport your COMPLIMENTARY CAR will be awaiting you…and will be yours for the entire weekend to use as you please.
To enhance your journey, you'll find a specially prepared road map, detailing the leisurely drive through beautiful countryside to your destination deep in the Highlands.
The scenery en route to Craigendarroch is as spectacular as it is diverse.
Gentle, rolling countryside of wooded glens and tumbledown cottages gradually gives way to a dramatic landscape of magnificent mountains towering above luminous lochs.
Often, the only ‘traffic’ to be found on these winding, quiet roads is a lone tractor unhurriedly going about its daily business…
As your journey takes you into the lush splendour of the Dee Valley, one landmark in particular stands out in a dazzling blaze of colour.
its name is Craigendarroch, Gaelic for ‘THE HILL OF OAKS’ and it heralds the close proximity of your destination…the magnificent Craigendarroch Country Estate set in twenty nine acres of picturesque woodland.
Once the Highland mansion of the Keiller family of Dundee, the 4-star Craigendarroch Hotel has all the charm of an old country house…and prides itself on offering the high standards of yesteryear.
Indeed, it is the only Scottish hotel to have been twice awarded the Royal Automobile Club's prized BLUE RIBBON AWARD for its superlative levels of service, ambience and facilities.
This outstanding hospitality and scrupulous attention to detail is reflected in your luxurious bedroom.
You'll find it wonderfully comfortable, with remote control television, a writing desk, drinks fridge…and all manner of thoughtful touches to make your stay enjoyable and relaxing — from hairdryer and trouser press to fresh Highland flowers.
The view from your room is particularly enchanting.
Why not enjoy a quiet drink there as the sun sets behind the forest class mountainside, and decide at which of our three excellent restaurants you would like to dine?
THE NEXT MORNING
Awake refreshed to the prospect of a hearty Scottish breakfast and a morning of exhilarating outdoor pursuits…
As daylight streams through the large French windows of your room,a new day dawns filled with exciting possibilities.
Over a full Highland breakfast in the Lochnagar Restaurant, you might like to discuss the plans for your day with your guest.
Craigendarroch's information pack — which can be found in your room — is a mine of information on the many activities and placed to see in this fascinatingly diverse area.
With its spectacular sunrises, fresh mountain air and inspiring tranquillity , early morning is the perfect time of day to explore all the outdoor pursuits that abound in Royal Deeside…
The River Dee is internationally renowned for the quality of its salmon fishing.
And the fishing for brown trout on the nearby lochs is equally excellent.
For Golfing enthusiasts, there is the excellent BALLATER GOLF CLUB, just a few minutes away.
Here you can enjoy a round or two surrounded by the magnificent Highlands, with the RIVER DEE winding its way close by.
There's also shooting, stalking, pony trekking, and climbing in the Cairngorms.
Whilst the truly adventurous will wish to pay a visit to the gliding club at nearby Dinnet.
If you like to ski, Craigendarroch has its own private dry ski slope for all year round use, and is within easy reach of two excellent ski resorts during the season.
Of course if you are inclined towards more leisurely pursuits, you'll find that many interesting and beautiful places to explore are but a short drive away.
Craigendarroch is the perfect base for discovering the surrounding countryside with its bustling towns, and picturesque villages.
Amongst them is quaint Braemar, home of the famous Highland games , first held in the 10th century…friendly Ballater, where many of the local shops proudly display the Royal Warrant…and of course the Royal fairy-tale castle of BALMORAL, nestling in the lush pine forests of the Dee Valley which is open May, June and July.
On the quiet road back to Craigendarroch, the Lochnagar Distillery is an enjoyable stopping-off point to see the traditional malt whisky in the making…and perhaps sample a wee dram yourself !
THAT AFTERNOON
After an energetic morning outdoors, indulge yourself in the inner sanctum of the Craigendarroch Country Club…
After hours of exhilarating exercise in the bracing Highland air, what could be more relaxing than the pampered luxury and soothing ambience of the Country Club?
For here, as in everything else, Craigendarroch excels…
Step through the double doors leading from the Hotel and you enter an exclusive world of leisure, set SPECTACULARLY around the warm waters of the 55 foot pool, complete with special rockpool and waterfall features.
Craigendarroch's Country Club offers the irresistible lure of some of Scotland's finest indoor sporting facilities, including two squash courts, snooker room, fully equipped trimnasium, steam room, solarium and sauna.
The poolside spa bath is a particular favourite for easing wearing limbs.
And there is even a heated indoor funpool especially for the children.
For ladies , we have a luxurious health and beauty salon, where our trained beauty therapists and hairdresser will be happy to give you a professional all over body treatment.
To complete your relaxation, why not sink into a comfy sofa in the Country Club bar, indulge in your favourite tipple, and pass a convivial hour or two in the companionable game of backgammon or chess.
IN THE EVENING
Time to reflect on the day's successes over a leisurely dinner, lovingly created by our award-winning chef…
Craigendarroch is proud to offer three FIRST CLASS RESTAURANTS…each with its own unique ambience,exquisite cuisine and impeccable service.
THE OAKS is undoubtedly one of the most outstanding restaurants in Scotland — largely due to the dedication and imagination of Bill Gibb, twice voted Scotland's Chef of the Year .
The menu, which changes every day has the light, inventive touch of cuisine moderne with its insistence on fresh ingredients and delicate sauces.
To complement the delights of the menu, the restaurant decor has been restored to its original country house splendour , with fine china and crystal on every table.
You'll find the service discreet and the ambience impeccable.
Altogether, an enjoyable and memorable occasion to reflect on the highlights of your day.
Another excellent restaurant is THE LOCHNAGAR, which offers unparalleled views of the spectacular Lochnagar Mountain and River Dee.
It is a fitting setting to discover the marvellous local game, the world famous Aberdeen Angus beef, superb seafood from the nearby East Coast, and fine salmon straight from the Dee…all cooked to perfection by our master chef.
As an informal alternative, you might like to visit the Country Club's CAFE JARDIN.
Styled on the popular Parisian boulevard cafes, this delightful family restaurant overlooks the exotic lagoon-style pool.
In a relaxed atmosphere and elegant surroundings, you can take your pick from our extensive menu, which offers everything from delicious light snacks to substantial three-course meals.
To complete your evening, why not adjourn to the oak-panelled luxury of the STUDY.
Here you can browse through the book-lined shelves, catch up with the day's papers, or simply relax with an after-dinner liqueur by the roaring log fire.
THE FOLLOWING MORNING
A pleasant stroll through gently wooden slopes brings you to a small clearing of luxury homes…
After a leisurely breakfast accompanied by the Sunday papers, perhaps you'd like to discover the local beauty spots of which Royal Deeside is justifiably proud.
There are so many to admire…the young river , rushing headlong over the Linn of Dee…salmon leaping up the Falls of Feugh…the austere beauty and grandeur of mountain scenery always surrounds you in this gloriously unspoilt land .
Even closer to home is the enchanting beauty of the Craigendarroch Country Estate.
As your weekend draws to a close, why not revel in the peace and tranquility of a walk through its woods, where the Highlands birds and animals live harmoniously amongst the oak, silver birch and pine trees.
It is within this twenty nine acres of glorious woodland, that Craigendarroch's exclusive lodges can be found.
Here, the beauty of the surroundings is matched only by the LUXURY of the homes themselves.
Built in quality stone and timber, the lodges have a country elegance which blends perfectly with the richly wooded hillside.
Carefully positioned in small clusters on gentle slopes , each lodge has a delightful view of river and mountains, valley and forest.
There are several styles and sizes of lodges to choose from, each designed with the same aim in mind…the ultimate in luxuriousness.
The lodges range from the very spacious Ballater 3 bedroom lodge which sleeps eight, the 2 bedroom Braemar lodge and the Crathie which both sleep six comfortably, the Cairn which sleeps four and the Coire a studio for two.
Each home, from the largest to the smallest, is equipped to the HIGHEST specifications, with careful attention paid to the minutest detail.
The result, as you'll discover for yourself, is a degree of opulence that is quite simply unparalleled .
THE LODGES
At a time to suit you — a personal tour of Craigendarroch's exclusive holiday lodges.
The quality of our lodges is so superb, they really do have to be seen to be appreciated.
So, at a convenient time during your weekend stay, we will give you a personal tour of our exquisite homes.
These remarkable lodges have been designed to provide the most stylish, comfortable and sophisticated homes imaginable.
And as you walk around the spacious interiors you'll discover just how magnificently we've succeeded.
Naturally, all the lodges have their own secluded balcony or patio (complete with patio furniture), and offer outstanding views of the DEE VALLEY and the surrounding hills.
Yet the interior decor, furnishings and fittings offer a level of luxury which is almost as breathtaking as the views…
The new Kappa-float glazing on all the windows, and the exceptionally high quality of insulation, earned the lodges the coveted MEDALLION AWARD for energy saving efficiency.
Our homes are warm and cosy on even the coldest day, and well ventilated during the summer months.
No expense has been spared to make each home the ultimate in luxury.
From the plush Connolly hide leather sofa and chairs in the living room to the Bang and Olufsen stereo, and remote control television complete with video, you're surrounded by the HIGHEST QUALITY.
The inlaid chequerboard top of the coffee table houses all kind of games, including backgammon, chess and Scrabble.
You'll also find a selection of books, from Queen Victoria's Highland journals, to the very latest bestselling thriller.
The dinner table and chairs are elegant yet comfortable, and you can be assured of the finest tableware and crystal for meals at home.
The kitchen itself makes cooking a pleasure .
Most lodges include a microwave and food processor for extra convenience, and we've even included a heated rail for tea towels.
Literally nothing has been overlooked!
All lodges have a useful drying cupboard for wet swimsuits, skiing clothes and fishing gear.
And a cot, mattress and high chair can be made available for toddlers upon request.
(We've even included a baby sitting service!)
Bathrooms in all the lodges are particularly luxurious …but perhaps the ultimate in extravagance is to be found in the larger lodges.
All fittings are gold-plated with marbled surrounds to the double basins, and a whirlpool bath.
There's also a private sauna room where you can relax after a hard day's skiing or walking.
The ultimate finishing touch has to be the ‘champagne’ shower unit that sprinkles you from top to toe with specially aerated bubbly water .
As your personal tour ends and you walk back out into the invigorating mountain air, you will be left with that unmistakable impression of sheer opulence…and the feeling of being very much at home .
A last, lingering look at Craigendarroch's luxury lodges and the promise to return again…
With the unparalleled luxury of the lodges and the delights of a Highland weekend fresh in your mind, perhaps as you prepare to depart, you'll make a secret promise to return again to this special hideaway…as the proud ‘LAIRD’ of your own magnificent Highland home.
For Craigendarroch's lodges are more than just holiday homes.
They are time ownership hopes.
You buy only the week, or weeks you want to use, at a fraction of the cost of purchasing the whole property.
Indeed, the only problem you'll encounter is choosing which weeks to buy…
Every season in Royal Deeside has its special beauty , its particular pleasures and devoted admirers.
There's Spring, with its mild weather and fine salmon fishing…
Summer, with its endlessly long days and grouse shooting…
Autumn, with its blaze of GLORIOUS COLOURS and the pheasant season…
And Winter, with its snow-capped Highlands and the excellent skiing conditions.
Whichever weeks you decide upon, because of Scotland's special legal system, they are your property IN PERPETUITY.
Yours to enjoy for the rest of your life, rent to friends, sell, give away, or even pass on to your children .
Our lodges range from £2,185 to £17,200 depending on the size and the time of year you buy.
When you consider the relentless quest for the luxury that has gone into each and every one, the cost of purchasing such a lodge does not seem excessive.
After all, it has something priceless to offer you.
A share in one of the world's most exclusive holiday retreats…forever .
Reserve your exclusive Highland break now, by completing and returning the R.S.V.P. today.
Approximately one week before departure, we will send you an updated itinerary, incorporating any special requests , together with your travel documents.
We greatly look forward to welcoming you to the Craigendarroch Country Estate.
AT CRAIGENDARROCH, THE MANY SPLENDOURS OF THE HIGHLANDS ARE AT YOUR FINGERTIPS.
ENJOY THE DELICIOUS CUISINE CREATED BY OUR AWARD-WINNING CHEF.
THE RIVER DEE — RENOWNED FOR ITS SUPERB FISHING.
EXPERIENCE THE EXCITEMENT OF A CLAY PIGEON SHOOT.
A SELECTION OF OUTDOOR PURSUITS.
SALMON FISHING, GOLFING, CLAY PIGEON SHOOTING, GROUSE SHOOTING, STALKING, PONY TREKKING, DOWNHILL SKIING, CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING, GLIDING, CLIMBING, RAMBLING, BIRDWATCHING, TROUT FISHING, HORSE RIDING, TOURING, SIGHTSEEING
TAKE A REFRESHING DIP IN THE WARM WATERS OF THE INDOOR SWIMMING POOL.
DISCOVER THE MAGNIFICENT MENU AND UNIQUE AMBIENCE OF THE OAKS RESTAURANT.
THE OAKS HAS BEEN RESTORED TO ITS ORIGINAL COUNTRY HOUSE SPLENDOUR.
EACH PICTURESQUE LODGE BLENDS PERFECTLY WITH THE WOODLAND SURROUNDING.
RELAX IN YOUR OWN PRIVATE SAUNA.
FUTURE GENERATIONS CAN SHARE ALL YOUR PLEASURES OF OWNING AN EXCLUSIVE HIGHLAND RETREAT
FIRST RESPONSE
A Guide to Pregnancy Planning
The decision to start a family is an exciting time for any couple planning a life together.
However, excitement can quickly turn to anxiety when the time it takes to conceive takes longer than originally expected.
CONCEPTION AND FERTILITY
It is only natural that you may begin to worry about possible infertility if conception does not occur immediately.
However, you are not alone.
Problems with conception are quite common.
In a recent survey, only half of the women trying for a baby conceived within six months, while a quarter took up to one year.
Of the remaining quarter, one in five needed a further year to become pregnant.
Even couples who already have children can experience difficulty in conceiving again.
Failure to become pregnant immediately, although distressing and worrying, is therefore not unusual.
It is for this reason that most doctors will not generally accept that couples have a fertility problem until they have been trying to conceive for at the very least a year.
FERTILITY — WHOSE PROBLEM?
Contrary to popular belief, the problem of fertility is not entirely the responsibility of the woman.
One third of fertility problems can be attributed to women, one third to the man and the remaining third, a combination of both partners.
INCREASING YOUR CHANCES OF CONCEIVING
There are many ways in which you can improve your chances of becoming pregnant before you need to involve your doctor.
GENERAL HEALTH
— Firstly, it is a good idea to pay extra attention to your own and your partner's general health and fitness.
— Make sure you are both the appropriate weight for your height as obesity and anorexia can affect both male and female fertility.
— Follow a sensible diet.
Eat lots of unrefined foods such as wholemeal bread, fresh fruit and vegetables.
— If you can, avoid alcohol and smoking (even passive smoking) as it is now known that excessive alcohol consumption, combined with heavy smoking, lowers the number and activity of sperm and may be linked to higher rates of miscarriage. — If you have a condition that requires medical treatment, consult your doctor.
He or she may have to change your medication.
TIMING — OVULATION AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE
Unlike men, who are always fertile, women have a very short period of fertility.
The medical name for the start of this most fertile period is ovulation and occurs when a mature egg is released from the ovaries, ready to be fertilised.
Predicting when ovulation will take place in advance is important when trying for a baby.
This is because the egg can only be fertilised for a short period of time following its release.
Therefore, you are more likely to become pregnant if intercourse occurs at the onset of ovulation.
For most women, ovulation usually takes place once during each menstrual cycle.
The time within the cycle that it occurs, is determined by the length of the cycle.
Menstrual cycles can vary between 22 and 35 days, 28 days being taken as an average, which is why it can be difficult for an individual to be sure when ovulation has occurred.
For those with the average length cycle, ovulation usually takes place approximately 14 days before each next period.
THE CYCLE
The first day of bleeding is considered the first day of the menstrual cycle, when the unfertilised egg and the lining of the womb is shed and discharged.
At the start of each cycle two hormones, Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and Oestrogen, work together to develop and mature an immature egg (ova).
The increasing levels of Oestrogen that occur from day five also prepare the womb for ovulation and a possible fertilised egg.
A third hormone, known as Luteinising Hormone (LH) is responsible for ovulation as it causes the egg to be released.
About one day before ovulation, there is a sharp rise in the amount of Luteinising Hormone in the body (known as the LH surge).
Although the time it takes an egg to travel from the ovary to the womb can be five to eight days, the egg itself can only be fertilised in the first 6–24 hours following ovulation.
After the egg has been released, the empty ‘sack’ it leaves behind in the ovary produces yet another hormone called Progesterone.
This further develops and maintains the lining of the womb for a possible pregnancy.
If fertilisation does not occur, the egg passes through the fallopian tube to the womb, where it dies within two to three days.
After about 14 days, the ovaries stop producing Progesterone.
The resulting sharp drop in its levels causes the lining of the womb, along with the unfertilised egg, to be shed.
This produces the bleeding known as menstrual flow, which lasts for anything from 2 to 6 days.
If on the other hand fertilisation of the egg has occurred and it becomes successfully implanted in the lining of the womb, levels of Progesterone will continue to increase throughout the pregnancy.
The menstrual cycle ceases during pregnancy, the lining of the womb will not  break down and ‘periods’ will generally stop.
PREDICTING OVULATION
A few lucky women can actually tell when they are about to ovulate just by listening to their bodies.
However, for the majority of women, planning intercourse to coincide with ovulation and predicting their most fertile time is easier said than done.
TEMPERATURE METHOD OR BBT MONITORING
Basal body temperature (BBT) is the temperature of the body at complete rest.
Over the course of the monthly cycle, hormonal changes produce slight fluctuations in that temperature, which traditionally, women have used to help them determine if and when ovulation has occurred.
Progesterone has the effect of increasing the body temperature by up to 0.5°C.
As this temperature rise occurs after ovulation has already taken place, it cannot predict ovulation in advance.
It is a method that can be tedious, confusing and not particularly reliable as readings can be made untrustworthy by fluctuations in general health.
CERVICAL MUCUS
Another way of identifying ovulation is checking the consistency of cervical mucus (vaginal discharge).
As ovulation approaches, its usual thick and sticky texture thins out and becomes more elastic.
Although this can be a useful guide to ovulation, you will probably need instruction before you can use it reliably and many women find the whole idea unpleasant.
HOME OVULATION PREDICTION TESTS
Home ovulation prediction tests are a more dependable method of predicting ovulation in advance.
Ovulation prediction tests are not only for those having problems conceiving.
An increasing number of women, perhaps career women in their 30s who have been regular Pill users for several years, may wish to check if they are ovulating before planning the timing of a pregnancy.
The First Response Home Ovulation Prediction Test is one of the most reliable kits available.
Laboratory tests have shown the First Response Ovulation Prediction Test to be over 99% accurate.
The test works by measuring the levels of LH in your urine.
A simple-to-read colour change in the test results indicates the LH surge.
If on your first day of testing you see a colour which is the same or darker than the reference colour given in the test, you should go ahead and have intercourse.
This is likely to be your most fertile day, as it is not unusual to detect your surge on the first day of testing.
However, it is possible that you may have surged before you began testing or that you are about to experience your LH surge.
The First Response Ovulation Prediction Test contains enough material for five days' testing, which is sufficient for about two-thirds of ovulating women to detect their LH surge.
However, since menstrual cycles can be irregular First Response has a refill kit to enable a further three days' tests, which allows nine out of 10 ovulating women to detect their surge.
First Response is the only brand offering a refill kit.
The test and refill are available from Boots and other chemists.
WHEN TO TEST
To begin testing, you will need to determine the approximate length of your cycle.
Count the first day of your most recent period (this is the first day of bleeding even if there are only little spots) as day one.
The length of your cycle is the number of days from day one to the day before your next period.
For example, if you start your period every 23 to 32 days, you should count forward 11 days and begin testing on that day.
Women who have shorter length cycles, 22 days and under, should count forward seven days to begin testing while those with longer length cycles of 33 days or more, should count forward 17 days and begin testing.
PREGNANCY TESTING
Pregnancy testing was as commonplace 4,000 years ago as it is today, although the results were more haphazard and far less reliable.
In ancient Egypt, doctors put wheat and barley seeds into separate cloth purses and then told the woman to ‘pass her water on it every day…
If both sprout she will give birth…
If they do not sprout, she will not give birth at all’.
Thankfully today's woman can expect an easier, faster, reliable method of detecting pregnancy in the privacy of her own home.
EARLY DIAGNOSIS
During the first stages of pregnancy, the growing foetus is extremely vulnerable and so early diagnosis, using a home pregnancy test, can be essential to its health development — especially if you need to improve your health and fitness.
Remember:
Avoid smoking and alcohol.
Take regular but gentle supervised exercise.
Eat a balanced and nutritious diet.
Check with your doctor or pharmacist before taking any drugs during pregnancy.
Avoid X-rays.
First Response Home Pregnancy Test uses the latest in home diagnosis technology.
It is so sensitive (99% accurate in laboratory testing) that an accurate result can be obtained on the first day of a missed period.
It works by detecting the presence of hCG (human Chorionic Gonadotropin) in the urine.
This hormone is produced by the developing embryo within a few days of the egg being fertilised.
The test can be carried out any time of day — there is no need to use the first morning urine — and its results are not affected by medicines such as pain relievers, antibiotics or the contraceptive pill.
Again, a simple colour change in the test will tell you whether or not you are soon to be a mum.
First Response offers a single and double test for the woman more unsure of the dates of her cycle or who wants to double-check her results.
Both the First Response Ovulation Prediction Test and Pregnancy Test have easy to follow, step by step instructions.
HELPLINE
First Response have a freephone help-line, manned by trained advisors, which you can ring on  for more specialist, individual advice on using both tests.
For further help and advice, there are several local and national self-help groups which can offer support and guidance to couples trying without success to start a family.
For some of you, this could be a Chamber of Horrors
The Uninvited Guest In Every Home
However houseproud you are, you're playing unknowing host to the House Dust Mite.
This microscopic relative of the spider lives in house dust, feeding on human and animal skin scales.
And as we shed an average of 1.5 grams of skin per day, there's no shortage of food.
The invisible invaders love dark, humid atmospheres and are found in the greatest numbers in bedrooms, multiplying happily in mattresses, carpets, curtains, upholstery and even children's soft toys.
Where's The Harm?
Like all living creatures because House Dust Mites eat, they also excrete.
But, as it digests its food, the House Dust Mite produces potent allergens in its alimentary canal, which are released in its faecal pellets.
These faecal pellets are about the size of a pollen grain, and like pollen they easily become airborne to be inhaled by humans.
In the case of the House Dust Mite of course, this airborne allergen is produced all year round.
Actomite Destroys The Threat
Actomite is the new solution to a major problem.
Actomite is an easy-to-use, effective, CFC-free spray which destroys House Dust Mites, their larvae and eggs.
Long Lasting Protection
It's impossible to destroy the House Dust Mite population (or prevent reinfestation)completely .
But tests have shown that Actomite is so effective that after treatment the House Dust Mite population is significantly reduced for up to three months.
A Simple, Effective Investment
Each canister of Actomite reliably reduces the threat of House Dust Mites in an average sized room and is especially recommended for use in bedrooms.
Actomite's easy-to-use spray provides lasting protection against House Dust Mites.
If your family are sensitive to House Dust Mites, it makes sense to protect their home with Actomite.
How You Can Help To Fight The Mite
For chronic Asthmatics or sufferers of allergic Rhinitis, ‘avoidance’ measures will also help to minimise the problem of House Dust Mite allergens.
Although Actomite is now available to destroy the House Dust Mite, you can complement its action in a number of ways:
Use only hypo-allergenic, washable pillows, duvets or blankets.
Choose washable curtains and clean regularly.
Vacuum regularly and thoroughly, especially under the bed.
Install a room air-ioniser in the bedroom.
Chooses carpeting with very short, simple pile.
Encase mattresses in zip-up, washable vinyl covers.
House Dust Mites & Asthma
The allergens produced by House Dust Mites have been proven to be dangerous ‘triggers’ especially for Asthma attacks and allergic Rhinitis (nasal congestion without a ‘cold’) and even in cases of Eczema.
So it follows that reducing the number of House Dust Mites in your home could improve the condition of sufferers in your family when sensitivity is a likely problem.
How Can You Avoid Playing Host?
However much you clean your home, it's impossible to be House Dust Mite free.
Even vacuuming thoroughly leaves an estimated 95% of live mites undisturbed.
And of course, mites can be carried in clothing, bags or moveables or even blown through windows to take up residence in your home.
House Dust Mites are a major factor in Asthma, a condition which affects over 2 million people in Britain and over 10% of children.
If you or a member of your family suffers from this common and increasing condition you may wish to find out more about the help and support offered by: The National Asthma Campaign   
10,000 House Dust Mites can inhabit 1 square metre of domestic carpet
House dust contains potent allergens.
ACTOMITE TM Actively Controls House Dust Mites
Vacuuming hardly disturbs live Dust Mite numbers.
House Dust Mites can be blown in through windows.
ALL YOU NEED TO KNOW about THREADWORMS
WHAT ARE THREADWORMS?
Threadworms live in the bowel and around the bottom.
They are tiny white worms about half an inch long which look like ‘threads’ of white cotton — hence the name — threadworms.
ARE THEY HARMFUL?
Threadworms are generally harmless.
They can cause irritation around the bottom, which can be distressing and embarrassing for the sufferer and can be aggravated by scratching.
Threadworms do not usually cause any long term damage.
WHO GETS THREADWORMS?
Anyone.
It does not mean your family or your home are not clean.
HOW COMMON ARE THREADWORMS?
Threadworms are a very common problem, particularly in children.
It is estimated that about 40% of children below the age of 10 years are infected with threadworms, but many may not show the ‘itching’ symptoms.
HOW CAN I TELL IF SOMEONE HAS THREADWORMS?
The most common sign is scratching of the bottom, particularly at night.
This may be associated with disturbed sleep and irritability and so the scratching may not be noticed.
Some sufferers show no signs of infection, in which case it is a question of spotting the tiny white ‘thread-like’ worms in the motions.
WHERE DO THREADWORMS COME FROM?
Threadworms spread by producing large numbers of tiny eggs.
These eggs are so small they cannot be seen with the naked eye.
They are present in house dust; they stick to clothing, carpets, towels and bedlinen; they can also be picked up in garden soil, on unwashed vegetables and salads, or from contact with someone who already has worms.
Because the eggs are so small and so widespread it is easy for them to be swallowed.
When swallowed the eggs pass into the bowel where they hatch into worms.
When mature, the female threadworm lays her eggs around the bottom.
It is this activity which causes the ‘itchy bottom’.
The resulting irritation causes scratching which allows transfer of eggs to the fingers and fingernails.
Eggs can then be easily transferred to the mouth by finger sucking or nail biting, causing reinfection, and spread to other members of the family by direct contact or via food, towels and bedlinen etc.
IMPORTANT NOTE
Threadworms only affect humans, they do not affect pets.
HOW DO I TREAT THREADWORMS?
Threadworms are very easy to treat.
There is now a simple one tablet treatment available from your pharmacy called OVEX TM .
The tablet is orange flavoured, sugar free and chewable so it is suitable for children, although it should not be used for infants under 2 years of age.
A single tablet of OVEX TM will kill threadworms.
However it may not destroy all the eggs, which can cause reinfection.
It is therefore recommended that a second tablet of OVEX TM is taken after 2 weeks.
WHAT ABOUT PREGNANCY?
OVEX TM must not be taken by women who are or think they may be pregnant.
Ask your doctor for advice.
WHO NEEDS TO BE TREATED?
Since threadworms can spread so easily, it is recommended that all the family are treated at the same time.
GENERAL ADVICE FOR THOSE WITH THREADWORMS
Keep nails short.
Avoid nail biting or finger sucking.
Wear pyjamas or underpants in bed.
Bath daily, washing thoroughly around the bottom.
Provide a towel for the exclusive use of each child.
Change clothes and bedlinen regularly.
Since the life cycle of an adult worm can be as long as six weeks it is advisable to continue with these general hygiene measures for six weeks.
DO I NEED TO KEEP MY CHILD OFF SCHOOL?
No, as long as the child is treated and the general hygiene measures outlined above are followed there is no reason to keep a child off school.
HOW CAN I STOP THE PROBLEM COMING BACK?
Threadworm is easily treated but unless the following precautions are taken the problem may recur.
Make sure everyone in the family is treated at the same time.
Scrub fingers and nails with a nail brush after each visit to the toilet and before each meal.
Disinfect the toilet seat, toilet handle or chain, and door handle regularly.
Vacuum and dust bedrooms thoroughly.
WHERE DO I GO FOR FURTHER HELP OR ADVICE REGARDING THREADWORMS?
Your pharmacist or doctor will be able to offer advice and reassurance regarding the treatments available for threadworm.
Eggs swallowed
Female worms migrate to the bottom to lay eggs at night
Scratching the bottom transfers eggs to fingers and from there back to the mouth, or to others either by direct contact or via food, bedlinen etc.
understanding cystitis
understanding health 
a series of free booklets to help you with common health problems
‘Cystitis’ means ‘inflammation of the bladder’.
It is not itself a specific condition with a simple ‘guaranteed’ treatment; because it may have many causes, which can be quite difficult to pinpoint.
The word Cystitis is commonly used to describe a set of symptoms associated with the urinary tract which result in difficulty and pain in urinating.
Who Suffers From Cystitis?
Cystitis in men and children is quite rare, and should always receive medical attention, as there will almost certainly be an underlying disorder which is treatable.
However, in women, Cystitis is one of the most common medical problems today, which affects around half of all women at some time in their lives.
It is most frequently found in sexually active women from their late teens to early thirties and is particularly common in pregnancy, especially during the first few months.
But as a general rule it can happen at any age and time.
Unfortunately it's also common for women to have repeated attacks, often with little or no warning.
On the brighter side, although Cystitis is uncomfortable and even distressing, in most cases, it's more a nuisance than a serious danger to health.
The Classic Signs Of An Attack
Cystitis attacks can ‘come on’ any time of the day or night.
There are not usually any warning signs before the start of symptoms, which themselves may vary in severity from person to person.
If you are a Cystitis sufferer you will recognise the symptoms below.
Hopefully, by the time you have finished reading this booklet you may also recognise some of the factors which trigger your Cystitis.
This will help you to anticipate when and why you are at your most vulnerable and how to help yourself avoid repeated attacks.
The most common symptoms called Cystitis are:
A frequent or constant urge to urinate, which may be so strong you feel you may ‘lose control’, even though you can actually pass no more than a few drops
Darker or ‘stronger’ looking urine than normal, which may also contain traces of blood
An uncomfortable, burning, stinging sensation on passing water
A dull ache or pain in the lower abdomen
Generally feeling unwell, perhaps feeling sick or feverish
Common Causes
Just as the severity of symptoms vary, the causes of Cystitis are not the same for every woman.
If you suffer from repeated Cystitis attacks, your doctor, and perhaps a hospital specialist will need to carry out tests to diagnose your particular problem.
However, there are several well known problem areas.
Bacterial Infection
The reason why so many more women than men suffer from Cystitis is partly explained by the way their bodies are made.
The female urethra, vagina and anus (see diagram) are very close together, plus the female urethra is very short.
So it's very easy for bacteria, which are always present around the anus, to reach the usually bacteria-free urethra and travel up into the bladder where they multiply and irritate the bladder lining.
The bacteria which are usually responsible are called Escherichia coli .
Millions of these live in the bowel, where they help digestion, so it's quite normal for them to be present, and all too easy for them to spread — in fact half of all cases of Cystitis are caused by bacterial infection.
Sex
Cystitis often happens after sexual intercourse.
One reason is that it's so easy to push bacteria into the urethra during sex, the other is that friction due to poor lubrication (common in many women) can cause bruising, triggering an attack.
Cystitis can also be triggered by the bacteria which cause sexually transmitted diseases such as Herpes or Trichomonas .
Irritants
Perfumed soaps, bath foams or oils, talc and vaginal deodorants can all act as irritants to the delicate skin around the vagina and urethra, because of allergy or sensitivity, and act as triggers.
Some women find that this is true of certain foods and drinks too.
For example, strong tea, coffee, alcohol, fruit juice or highly spiced dishes can bring on Cystitis attacks or make them worse.
In other cases, an attack can be linked to another infection, such as Thrush, but it can be as simple as ‘holding on’ too long before going to the lavatory, or wearing tight fitting trousers or underwear — creating the warm, moist atmosphere germs love.
Some cases don't seem to have any physical cause at all, but have been linked to intangible factors such as times of stress, anxiety or depression, although this is quite rare.
When Should You Seek Medical Advice?
Having an attack of Cystitis for the first time can seem rather frightening, but do remember that it is not usually a serious threat to health.
Using the self-help measures described further on should usually relieve or help to prevent an attack.
But always see your doctor if you are worried, and do not delay in consulting him or her if you think any of the points below might apply to you:
Your urine is cloudy or bloody
You have pain either in the lower abdomen (bladder area) or in the lower back
You have an unusually heavy vaginal discharge
You develop a temperature or the pain becomes severe
Your attack has lasted longer than a day or two, despite your self-help, or if you are having repeated attacks
You are or may be pregnant
You think that your Cystitis could be linked to a sexually transmitted disease because, of course, that should be identified and treated
How Can The Professionals Help?
Your doctor may want to carry out an MSU (mid-stream urine) test, to find out whether bacteria are present in your bladder, and if so, which kind.
If your symptoms are severe, he or she may prescribe a course of antibiotics which are designed to kill the bacteria.
If you suffer repeated attacks your doctor may well refer you to a specialist, a gynaecologist or urologist for further tests.
These tests may involve an intravenous pyelogram, which is a special X-ray of the kidneys and bladder, and a cystoscopy in which a tiny telescope is passed up into your bladder for the lining to be examined.
Basically the specialist will be looking for an abnormality in the urinary tract, which, if found, can be treated accordingly.
If, however, this is not the case, the specialist may put you on a long course of low dose antibiotics.
It is worth remembering that even with all the advances in modern medicine, there is not always a ‘miracle cure’ for Cystitis, and attacks may well recur.
Thinking these days includes other ways of ‘treating’ Cystitis — by prevention, which will involve you actively looking at your lifestyle and seeing what you can do to help yourself (pages 12–13).
How You Can Help To Relieve An Attack
1.
Even if an attack begins at night, don't turn over and try to ignore it.
Start trying to help yourself as soon as you feel an attack coming on.
Dealing with Cystitis early gives you a greater chance of clearing it up.
2.
Start drinking plenty of bland liquids such as water, milk, weak tea or orange squash (not orange juice or carbonated drinks), and aim to drink at least eight pints a day.
3.
Try one of the Cystitis treatments which are available from your pharmacy without prescription.
One of these is Cystopurin, which takes the form of a course of six sachets which mix with water to make alkalising drinks.
These drinks work to counteract the acidity of your urine, which will ease the burning sensation on passing water, and also help to stop any bacteria in the bladder from multiplying.
4.
Some women find a cup of strong coffee every hour or so helpful, as it helps them pass more water.
However, others find that coffee aggravates their Cystitis, so you are really the best judge of whether to use this measure or not.
5.
Avoid drinking alcohol or fruit juices.
6.
Go to the lavatory as often as you need to, don't try to ‘hold it in’.
7.
If you are in pain, take one or two mild painkillers.
8.
If possible, try to relax, lie down or put your feet up, until the worst of the symptoms are over.
9.
Try placing a hot water bottle low down on your tummy and another at your back.
This will help you to keep warm and ease the pain.
Preventative Measures To Use Every Day
As we have said, it's not always possible to pin down the exact reason for Cystitis attacks, or why some women suffer so repeatedly.
But there are a number of ‘self-help’ measures you can include in your daily routine, which may help you prevent attacks in future.
1.
Drink at least three to four pints of bland liquid every day, this will keep your bladder ‘flushed’ free of bacteria.
2.
Go to the lavatory when you feel the need, don't try to ‘hang on’, that causes stress to the bladder and may encourage an attack.
3.
Avoid, dilute or try to cut down on liquids or foods which aggravate your Cystitis, such as alcohol, strong tea, coffee, fruit juices or highly spiced dishes.
4.
Always remember to wipe your bottom from front to back, this helps stop bacteria spreading from the anus.
5.
Keep the vaginal area clean, try washing twice a day with plain water or a mild, unperfumed soap.
It's better not to use a flannel, but if you must, keep a separate one.
6.
If you find Cystitis flares up after sex, it's a good idea for both you and your partner to wash the genital area before and after.
Also make sure you pass water before, and as soon as possible afterwards, as this helps flush out any bacteria which may have entered the urethra.
7.
If your vagina feels a little dry during intercourse use a lubricant such as KY Jelly to ease the problem of friction and bruising.
8.
Avoid using antiseptics, perfumed soaps or talc in the vaginal area, and don't use vaginal deodorants.
You may also have to give up bath oils and foams if they are irritating, and in fact showering rather than bathing could prove very helpful.
9.
Try to avoid wearing tight fitting trousers or underwear, especially if they're made from artificial fibres.
Choose cotton underwear with stockings rather than tights, and looser clothes such as skirts instead of trousers.
This helps to prevent the warm, moist atmosphere in which germs flourish, and will also help you to avoid encouraging problems such as Thrush.
Associated Problems
Chronic Urethritis
The more common name for this rather serious sounding disorder used to be ‘honeymoon cystitis’, and as that old nick-name suggests, it is linked with sexual activity.
Women who suffer from this condition notice that after sex, they often get unpleasant symptoms of pain and ‘burning’ when urinating (passing water).
Nowadays, because the symptoms are so similar, it is often lumped together under the general name ‘Cystitis’.
The most important difference is that the symptoms of Chronic Urethritis will only last for a day or two after intercourse.
It is almost always due to bruising of the urethra during sexual intercourse, and only occasionally linked with bacterial infection.
If you think that Chronic Urethritis may be a problem, you can help yourself by taking the following measures: drinking a glass of water before you have intercourse, so that you fill your bladder; making sure that you use a vaginal lubricant and relax as much as possible; and the by remembering to empty your bladder soon after intercourse.
Vaginal Thrush
Unfortunately, the antibiotics which can be so effective against Cystitis can make sufferers vulnerable to getting Thrush.
This is a fungal infection, which occurs when the fungus Candida albicans develops in the vagina.
This fungus is present in the vagina of many women, but is not usually a problem because acids produced by ‘friendly’ bacteria stop it growing.
However, vaginal deodorants, douches, or antibiotics may kill off these bacteria, which gives the thrush spores free rein to multiply.
The main symptoms are a ‘burning’ itch, usually accompanied by a thick, white discharge which may have an unusual smell.
You may also notice pain or soreness during sexual intercourse and find that you want to pass water more often, which may also sting or ‘burn’.
Treatment for Thrush can only be obtained on prescription from your doctor or clinic.
If you know, or think you may be vulnerable to getting Thrush when using antibiotics for Cystitis, do mention this to your doctor, who may well prescribe treatment ‘just in case’.
CYSTOPURIN
FAST AID FOR CYSTITIS
Whenever you feel the burning, stinging signs of cystitis, you need relief — fast.
That's when Cystopurin can help.
Cystopurin is a special low-sodium 48 hour treatment for the symptoms of Cystitis.
Each pack contains six sachets of soluble granules which mix with water to make pleasant citrus flavour drinks.
These get to work quickly, counteracting the acidity of your urine, helping to relieve the burning, stinging pain on passing water.
Beginning the Cystopurin treatment at the first signs of an attack will usually help you feel better within a few hours.
It makes sense to keep Cystopurin at hand, so you can combat Cystitis the moment it starts.
Available from pharmacies without a prescription.
OVER 48 HOURS?
Half of all Cystitis attacks are caused by bacterial infections