

Delicious and Nutritious
A unique NEW way of cooking
SPECIAL OFFER
£1.99
SAVE OVER £13
Discover Healthy Home Cooking free for 10 days…
140 delicious new recipes to make healthy eating a pleasure.
Discover FRESH WAYS WITH VEGETABLES for just £1.99 —your special low price introduction to the unique new series Healthy Home Cooking.
Healthy Home Cooking is the major new series from Time-Life Books that lets you enjoy the very finest foods and healthy, nutritious eating.
Here are specially-created dishes for entertaining — and for everyday cooking.
Recipes with imagination and taste, rich in flavour not unwanted calories or fats.
Healthy Home Cooking is the only series of its kind — and you can savour its unique delights by trying FRESH WAYS WITH VEGETABLES on 10 days FREE home trial at the special low price of just £1.99 (including p&p) instead of £15.24.
Take a fresh look at good food.
Where would good eating be without the colour, variety and flavour of fresh vegetables?
Sweet and Sour Celery…
Baked Asparagus with Pine Nuts and Gruyere…refreshing Cucumber Mousse with Gazpacho Sauce — just three of the 140 delectable dishes in FRESH WAYS WITH VEGETABLES, that will delight all creative cooks.
You'll learn the ingenious techniques that make mouthwatering food nutritious.
For instance, do you know the simple trick that greatly enhances the flavour and colour of vegetables during cooking?
And can you prepare French Fries so that they contain no cholesterol whatsoever?
This exciting volume is packed with useful hints such as these.
Step-by-step techniques, nutritious guidelines and a special microwave section make this the most comprehensive cookbook on vegetables you'll ever read.
Try FRESH WAYS WITH VEGETABLES free for 10 days.
If you decide to keep it, you'll be invoiced for just £1.99 instead of £15.24.
Then you can go on to try other books in the series, at the regular price, all on the same free trial basis.
No commitment — cancel at any time.
Kitchen test FRESH WAYS WITH VEGETABLES Free for 10 days, and SAVE £13.25!
You can try out FRESH WAYS WITH VEGETABLES free for 10 days at the special low price of £1.99 inc. p&p.
Just fill in and send off the Free Trial Card.
We'll send you the book PLUS your free gifts.
So why delay?
Send off now — 140 delicious new recipes are waiting for you.
Your Guarantee from Time-Life Books
Send for Fresh Ways with Vegetables on 10 days free trial.
If you decide to keep it, pay the special low-price invoice enclosed with it.
Then approximately every two months we will send you another book in this series, at the regular price, also on approval.
1.
No risk.
Try each book for 10 days — FREE — before you decide to buy it.
2.
No commitment.
No minimum number of books to buy.
3.
No obligation.
You only keep the books you want.
4.
No strings.
You are free to cancel at any time.
5.
No bother.
Each book is conveniently delivered to you by post.
Time-Life Books is a member of the Association of Mail Order Publishers, and follows the code of conduct laid down to protect you, the customer.
YOUR EXTRA FREE GIFT If you reply within 7 days
Return your Free Trial Card within 7 days, and you'll receive this unique Healthy Home Cooking apron, made from 100% pure cotton.
With a handy front pocket, waist tie and adjustable strap, your apron is beautifully finished in crisp sparkling white and fresh emerald green.
The innovative ideas that make Healthy Home Cooking so special…
•Hundreds of original, flavour-tested recipes,each created especially for this series .
•Each finished dish shown in lavish full-colour photography to take the guesswork out of trying new recipes.
•Calories, cholesterol, fats, protein and sodium counts in a single serving shown for every recipe.
•Recommended Dietary Guidelines appear in each volume so you can regularly check your nutritional intake.
•A special microwave recipe section, so you can take advantage of microwaving's superb time-saving and nutritional benefits.
•Meal planning made simple by a list of suggested accompaniments with each recipe.
•Attractive ways to present your dishes shown on every spread.
•Lie-flat books making recipes easy to follow and wipe clean covers so that stains and marks are easily removed.
•Handy glossary and comprehensive index for quick, simple reference.
•Special editors' notes containing useful hints and tips.
YOUR FREE GIFT
Yours free just for sending off your Free Trial Card — this high quality oven mitt.
It matches the Healthy Home Cooking apron, and is made from fully washable white padded cotton with a practical look for hanging.
Each dish beautifully photographed and tested for success.
In the test kitchens of Time-Life Books, top international chefs and nutritionists have created a totally unique collection of recipes, that satisfy every demand for delicious healthier cooking.
All the recipes have been tested for flavour — as your family and friends will discover to their delight!
Furthermore, each finished dish is shown in lavish full-colour photography, so that you can see exactly how your cooking will look, making these beautiful books sheer pleasure to use.
A taste of things to come.
Health Home Cooking shows you the new way to serve food that's light, tempting and satisfyingly nourishing.
You'll enjoy FRESH WAYS WITH…
POULTRY…
FISH AND SHELLFISH…
SALADS…
FRUITS AND DESSERTS…
BEEF AND VEAL…
PICNICS AND BARBECUES.
Each one is filled with food that's good to eat and good for you — an endless source of creative ideas to inspire you day after day.
Begin your collection by trying VEGETABLES free for 10 days at the special introductory price of just £1.99 (inc. p&p) instead of £15.24.
Return the enclosed free trial invitation today and SAVE £13.25.
Three-Tiered Vegetable Terrine — Page 105
Leek Pie with Potato Swirls — Page 112
Parsley & Chick-Pea Patties with Yoghurt Sauce — Page 53
Celeriac Gratin dusted with Paprika — Page 115
Marbled Carrot & Courgette Soufflé — Page 96
Red & Green Pepper Sauté with Courgettes — Page 71
Lavish colour photographs give numerous tips for tempting presentations.
Step-by-step pictures show how to create delicate phyllo packets of tasty leek and cheese.
Children's BOOK OF THE MONTH Club
Encourage a love of reading that will last a lifetime
All 12 books for £1.99 + p. & p .
In ten years' time you'll know why you were right to send off this coupon.
All 12 books for £1.99 + p. & p .
Children who read well are usually the children who learn easily and succeed at school.
So it's never too early to read to them or with them.
But which books should you buy?
How do you know which of the thousands of children's books published every year are best for your own, individual children?
You want them to enjoy the books that imagination and curiosity thrive on.
But it can be such a hard choice.
Expert help would be useful.
And that's where we come in — with the Children's Book of the Month Club.
Our experienced editors comb the publishers' lists continually for the very best books for children — of all ages.
And, every month, we send members the free Children's Book of the Month Club magazine.
You'll find it full of useful descriptions, information and guidance on a whole range of books…
We'll be offering you activity books, so your children can get involved, developing a whole range of skills as they amuse themselves.
Colouring books help their writing skills…picture books help their reading skills…counting books help them with their numbers.
There are also specially commissioned children's classics and exclusive Learning Together packs — and there's even a selection of entertaining cassettes and ‘talking books’ to vary the stimulus!
They think they're playing.
You know they're learning.
Everyone's happy!
What's more, everything is offered to you at considerably less than publishers' prices — and, in return for these guaranteed savings, we ask only that you buy at least six books in your first year of membership.
MEMBERS MAKE SAVINGS LIKE THESE
These original and authorised edition of twelve Beatrix Potter favourites feature new colour reproductions of the original illustrations and come beautifully presented in the delightful gift boxes, each containing four books.
They can all be yours for only £1.99, plus £1.99 towards postage and packing, as your introduction to this invaluable children's book club.
Try it now and take advantage of this attractive Beatrix Potter books offer.
There's no obligation.
So, start your children off on a lifetime's love of books, a future of eager learning.
Don't waste those precious early years — send off the coupon today.
Box size: 5¾″ × 4¼″.
Pub.
Price £15.96 each.
SAVE £45.89!
All 12 books for £1.99 + p. & p .
Mr Jeremy took a reed pole, and pushed the boat out into open water.
Peter Rabbit escapes from Mr McGregor.
Jemima Puddle-Duck looks for a quiet spot.
The little mice…took notice of the pattern of that wonderful coat.
The book club your children can grow up with.
TOMY
WONDERFUL NEWS FOR EVERYONE WITH A BOUNCING, HUNGRY, INQUISITIVE, SLEEPY, WIDE AWAKE, GURGLING, CHEWING, THIRSTY, SMILING, BABY
A LIST FOR SHOPPING
Tomy's extra special baby care products are packed with innovative features for both you and your baby.
The following retailers carry a full range of Tomy Nursery Products.
Your local independent recommended stockist 
The retailers below have a selected range of Tomy Nursery Products:
Simply call the Tomy Careline and we'll give you the name and address of the store that's nearest you.
A TRAVEL ALL FOR TRAVELLING
The Tomy Travel All is a portable baby bed, changing bag and a changing mat in one easy to carry compact unit.
It's made from a hardwearing fabric and can be wiped clean from the trials and tribulations inflicted on it by the rough and tumble of everyday use.
It's been designed to act as a snug environment for babies up to six months and there are ample pockets for nappies, easy heats and favourite toys.
A MONITOR FOR LISTENING
The Tomy Baby Link Walkabout is a contemporary, compact design that uses FM radio waves for crystal clear monitoring.
It's completely cordless so it goes where you go, and because it operates on both batteries and mains, you're not tied to the nearest plug.
The system is effective to 100 metres so you can simply clip the receiver to your belt or the back of a buggy.
You can't be in touch with your baby 24 hours a day, but with the Baby Link Walkabout you can.
A CRADLE CARRIER FOR CARRYING
The Tomy Cradle Carrier is more than a carrier.
There are in fact three separate carrying positions designed into the one carrier.
In the carrying position your baby has the benefit of a padded head and neck support.
Second, there's a removable outer pouch that provides extra support and protection.
And by altering a few easy to undo buckles, baby can be carried in the cradling position and you can breast feed in privacy.
A DREAM RIDER FOR MOVING
The Tomy Dream Rider represents first class travel for babies.
The seat inside the Dream Rider is adjustable so a good view is always guaranteed.
Adults also come in different shapes and sizes so we've designed a frame that can be altered to suit your height.
A safety harness keeps your offspring secure and snug and there's a padded neck and back support for their comfort and protection.
For your comfort you'll find a padded hip belt with lumbar support, a wide angle stand for easy loading and a removable pouch for toys, nappies and the kitchen sink.
AN EASY HEAT FOR HEATING
Here at last is a practical alternative to thermos flasks, and unnecessary stop overs when you're travelling.
The Tomy Easy Heat Bottle Warmer has been designed to allow you to feed on the move.
The revolutionary ‘heat up’ technology means all you have to do is press a button and fifteen minutes later you'll have a perfectly warmed bottle.
No batteries, no electricity, no thermos flasks, just one portable compact unit that you can use over and over and over again.
Picnics, rambles, boat trips, no problem!
A COSY BOUNCER FOR BOUNCING
The Tomy Cosy Bouncer is a super snug carrier that lets baby travel in style, sleep in comfort and bounce when it wants to.
The dual moulded handles have been designed for easy carrying, interlocking for a secure grip.
The plush padded cover is machine washable and there's a storage compartment for bottles and accessories.
But most importantly the Cosy Bouncer has three easily adjustable positions.
The cradle position for sleeping, the upright position for feeding and last but not least, the bouncing position for doing what all babies love to do.
A CARELINE FOR CALLING
You can call the Tomy Careline anytime between 9:00am to 5.30pm Monday to Friday.
We're not only here to give you advice on any Tomy Nursery Product.
You can also request a free nursery catalogue and find out where the nearest Tomy stockist is in your area.
A FREE BOOK FOR READING
Tomy are giving away completely free a book, by Jane Asher, called ‘Keep Your Baby Safe’, worth £3.95.
Inside you'll find pages of helpful information and advice.
All you have to do is send two bar codes from any two of our nursery products, fill in this coupon and we'll send you a copy of ‘Keep Your Baby Safe’.
A LULLABY LIGHT FOR SLEEPING
The Lullaby Light Show from Tomy is a revolving planetarium of lights featuring different coloured stars and moons, birds and animals, all slowly moving across the walls and ceiling to the soothing strains of Brahms lullaby.
Simply wind it up and watch your baby happily slip off to sleep.
What could be more lovely than that?
TRUST TOMY
WILL YOUR HOME BE A VICTIM OF NEXT YEARS STORMS?
Why end up re-roofing when you can seal and bond from the inside NOW!
The benefits of the RUBERLOK System
Easy Application
If roof refurbishment once meant scaffolding, mess and disruption — not any more.
Ruberlok is applied internally, under the roof, and all the work is carried out by our own operatives.
Lightweight
Although hardwearing, the Ruberlok rigid foam system will only add 2kg/ 2 to the roof, therefore no undue stress is put on the timbers.
Added Strength
Unlike conventional re-roofing, an application of Ruberlok will strengthen the roof structure by reducing the thermal stress and any wind damage.
Problems of nail sickness and loose slates are cured in one quick process.
Insulation
When applied to the underside of the slates/tiles, Ruberlok reduces the heat loss through the roof by 80%.
A warm roof space is created, thus eliminating problems of condensation and burst pipes.
Conservation
Ruberlok is applied internally to the underside of the roof leaving the external appearance unchanged.
Ideal for listed buildings.
Hi-tech — Low Cost
These ‘state of the art’ foam systems offer the ultimate in modern re-roofing techniques.
They carry the Government Class 1 BS476 Part 7 fire ratings and can be installed at a lower cost than conventional re-roofing.
It is approved by the leading national institutions and organisations.
INSURANCE PREMIUMS SET TO ROCKET AFTER WORST STORMS IN HISTORY
Structural damage runs into millions
Incessant rain prolongs storm agony
STORMS WREAK HAVOC
Flying slates cause February mayhem
At your leisure by clothkits
LIFE'S RICH PATTERNS
Clothkits has always stood for quality clothes.
Once upon a time you made them yourself.
No longer, however.
Today our quality clothes are ready to wear, ready to dazzle and ready to order directly from this exciting new leaflet.
Inspired by some of life's strange and wonderful things, this collection takes us into 1991 with a message; Be Bold, Be Colourful, but Be Yourself.
Graceful skirts in an abstract print of watery blues lightened with deep pink and gold.
Elegant floaty dresses flocked with a beautiful array of Paradise Birds.
Slimming flattering skirts in a blend of spice colours and a print of primitive carvings.
Children's leggings and swimsuits in a starfish inspired print.
These items are simply a taste of the things to come in the following pages.
Just as the leaflet itself is a mere taste of Clothkits more elaborate catalogue, which can be ordered by phone or post.
Happy browsing.
To order by phone call .
9.30 am till 7.00 pm.
Please quote G11FO.
You will receive a free catalogue with your order.
Alternatively, for a FREE catalogue only call .
8.30 am till 7.00 pm.
(Answerphone after 7.00 pm).
Please quote G11FO.
Or, write to 
Items in this leaflet are subject to availability.
Paradise Birds
Dress
A stunning dress with a sweetheart neckline and gently gathered skirt.
A back opening fastens with buttons and a wide sash ties at the waist.
Length 124cm. 60% viscose/40% cotton voile, lining: 100% cotton, hand wash only.
Top
A neat fitting top with a flattering neckline and self-covered buttons down the front.
100% cotton jersey, machine washable.
Trousers
A simple pull-on design, full-cut with an elasticated waist, drawstring tie and pockets in the side seams.
60% viscose/40% cotton, hand wash only.
Rucksack
100% cotton canvas.
Bag
100% cotton canvas.
Sunhat
100% cotton canvas.
ATLANTIS BLUES
Blouse
A femininely shaped blouse in crisp white cotton, ties at the back and is self embroidered with a rose design, which extends to the sheer lace collar.
100% cotton poplin, machine washable.
Flared Skirt
A full, panelled skirt falls beautifully from a back-elasticated waistband.
Length 85cm. 60% viscose/40% cotton, hand wash only.
PRIMITIVE SPICE
Long Sleeved T-shirt
A round neck T-shirt in purest cotton for cooler days.
100% cotton jersey, machine washable.
Print Skirt
A flattering line and a slimming cut for a button through skirt, with curved hip pockets.
Unpressed pleats fall from a shaped waistband, elasticated at the sides and featuring a centre belt loops.
Length 81 cm. 100% cotton, machine washable.
Star Attraction
Costume
Shaped to flatter with a low-cut back.
95% cotton/5% elastane, machine washable.
Belt Bag
100% cotton canvas.
Duffle Bag
100% cotton canvas/nylon webbing straps/wipe clean lining.
Baseball Hat
100% cotton canvas.
Star Wishes
T-shirt from £6.95
Featuring a wonderful border print of starfish and seahorses at the front.
100% cotton jersey, machine washable.
Leggings from £7.95
Snug fitting and elasticated at the waist.
95% cotton/5% elastane, machine washable.
Frilled Costume from £7.95
Delightful for toddlers with a high-cut back and appealing frill.
95% cotton/5% elastane, machine washable.
ROSES are PINK
Print Sweatshirt from £9.95
A soft and fleecy sweatshirt with ribbing at neck, cuffs and hem.
65% cotton/35% polyester fleece, machine washable.
Shorts from £7.95
Skirty shorts with a ribbed, elasticated waistband and hip pockets.
100% cotton jersey, machine washable.
Rucksack
100% cotton canvas.
Spice Island
Sweatshirt from £9.95
This rugged sweatshirt is printed with a map charting spice islands in distant seas.
65% cotton/35% polyester fleece, machine washable.
Print Shorts from £4.95
Cool, co-ordinating shorts in spicy shades, have an elasticated waist and pockets in the side seams.
100% cotton, machine washable.
Socks from £1.85
65% cotton/35% nylon, machine washable.
Shirt from £7.95
An exceptional printed shirt with a neat collar and pocket.
100% cotton machine washable.
Trousers from £10.95
Lightweight trousers with a side-elasticated waistband, tabbed belt loops and plenty of pockets — two in the side seams, two patch pockets with buttoned flaps at the back and a third on the trouser leg.
100% cotton, machine washable.
Turn a garden shed into a conservatory…
And we'll give you garden equipment and plant vouchers worth £150
Add a conservatory to your house and you add style, space and value to your home.
But what if you can only afford a garden shed?
You come to us at First National Bank for a loan.
A loan you can afford.
And by getting the money before you buy the conservatory, you'll have all the benefits of buying with cash.
You can call us FREE on  any week day, 9.00am to 9.00pm, for an immediate quote and decision.
Or you can fill in the straightforward application form and everything will be arranged speedily by post.
You can borrow any sum from £7,500 for any purpose including any kind of home improvements and your loan will be secured by a mortgage on your property which means a lower rate of interest and a much longer time to repay .
So, if you take out £7,500 over 180 months your monthly repayment at APR 21.5% variable will be £129.96 — and the total amount payable £23,392.80.
Take out £15,000 or more and you'll benefit from an even lower rate of interest (APR 19.7% variable).
How can we afford to do it?
We may be one of the country's leading consumer banks with group assets excess of £1 billion but we don't ask you to pay for expensive overheads like High Street branches.
We can also afford to give you peace of mind.
For example, if you're under 60 you get free life assurance on the total amount you owe up to £15,000.
There is even a special plan which enables you to insure your repayments — in case of illness, an accident or redundancy — for just a few pounds a month.
And if you need any further incentive, on completion of your loan, we'll give you £150 worth of B&Q vouchers to help fill your home or conservatory with plants and garden equipment.
We'll even give you free glazing insurance for the first 12 months.
Call us or send the application form today.
The information is confidential and you won't pay a penny in arrangement fees.
Your questions answered.
Q What is a First National Bank Loan?
A It is a low interest bank loan designed exclusively for Home Owners.
As a result of inflation and part repayment of mortgages most home owners have a property which is worth far more than they owe on it.
A First National Bank loan enables you to make use of this asset which will provide the security for your loan, whether you own a house, flat, bungalow or cottage.
Q What makes it special?
A First National Bank loan puts valuable cash in your pocket and is an extremely flexible facility which enables you to choose the sum you wish to borrow at a monthly repayment you feel able to manage comfortably.
Q Is my application confidential?
A Yes.
No one will call unless you ask us, and we will not approach your employers for information.
Q Can I apply if I am self-employed?
A Yes — Please indicate on the application form your current net income.
Q Can I get a further advance?
A Yes.
Once your account has been opened and is running satisfactorily, requests for further loans will be considered on the existing account with the minimum of formality.
Q What happens if I die before the loan is repaid?
A If you are under 60 when the advance is made your life is insured at no extra cost.
The amount still outstanding on the loan to a maximum of £15,000 is automatically settled should you die before your 65th birthday.
The loan would not become a burden to your dependents.
Q What happens if I am ill, have an accident or I am made redundant?
A With First National an optional insurance scheme is available to cover your monthly repayments if you are unable to work owing to accident, sickness or redundancy.
This scheme is fully explained in the leaflet ‘Protection for You and Your Family’.
Apply by completing the box at the bottom of the application form.
Q Are there any charges other than interest?
A No.
None whatsoever.
Q What happens if I want to settle early?
A You can do this at any time and will receive a rebate against future charges in accordance with the provisions of the Consumer Credit (Rebate on Early Settlement) Regulations 1983.
Q Can I pay more than the monthly instalment?
A Most certainly and if you do you will be saving money because with First National you are only charged interest on the amount you owe, calculated on a day-to-day basis.
Q What do I do now?
A Just complete the application form overleaf and send it to us Freepost 1, Harrow, Middlesex HA  BR.
Normally we will send you a copy of the Agreement by return.
Once you have signed the original Agreement and returned it to us, your money should be with you within two weeks.
Say you decide to borrow £15,000
You probably already have something special in mind; home extension, extensive redecorations and improvements, garden landscaping…the choice is wide.
Which repayment period will you choose?
With a First National Bank loan you have a wide choice.
Longer loan periods mean your monthly repayments can be correspondingly lower.
Look at the repayment examples overleaf and you'll see what we mean.
FIRST NATIONAL BANK
MICROSOFT SYSTEMS JOURNAL MSJ
As a professional courtesy, you may now receive Microsoft Systems Journal at a  saving of 30% off the regular price.
 Dear Systems Developer:
Imagine, for a moment, that you had a single, reliable, authoritative source you could count on to help you solve many of your software development problems.
— You could get definitive answers to your questions on OS/2, Presentation Manager, Microsoft 
Windows , C, and DOS programming.
— You could have access to the finest minds in the business…men and women with vast development experience, who often literally wrote the book on the topics they specialize in.
With all this expertise, with all this authoritative information at your disposal, I am sure you will be even more productive, more creative, and more effective on the job.
That is precisely what happens when you become a subscriber to Microsoft Systems Journal .
Six times a year,Microsoft Systems Journal brings you timely technical insights and experienced advice on the development topics that interest you the most.
Every issue of MSJ also contains concrete examples of coding techniques you can put to use yourself immediately.
Here are some examples of articles that would help you, as a practical developer, do the best and most efficient job:
•Adding Hypertext-based Help to Your Application Using the Microsoft Help System 
•Enhancing the Presentation Manager User Interface with Formatted Edit Fields 
•Implementing DDE with Presentation Manager Object Windows 
You'll also find articles about the latest versions of Microsoft products for developers.
•OS/2 Version 2.0: Exploiting the 32-bit Architecture of 80386- and 80486-based Systems 
•Microsoft C Version 6.0 Provides an Integrated Development Environment 
•An Introduction to Microsoft Windows 3.0: A Developer's Viewpoint 
There's also coverage of software trends as well as in-depth discussions of hardware.
•Examining Object-Oriented Techniques Using QuickPascal 
•An In-depth Exploration of the PC Keyboard and its Interrupt Service Routines 
•Using the Parallel Port for PC to PC Communications 
These articles were drawn from the most recent issues.
Future issues promise to be even better.
Written, created, and read by the best software engineers in the industry,Microsoft Systems Journal is your personal entree to the inner circle of software development.
Simply complete and return the enclosed Professional Discount Order Form to start your subscription now.
YOU SAVE 30% OFF THE REGULAR PRICE.
This special low rate is available only to you and your fellow developers.
Don't miss this opportunity!
YOUR SATISFACTION IS 100% GUARANTEED.
If, after examining your first issue, you are not 100% satisfied, we'll send you a complete refund with no questions asked.
And if you decide to cancel at a later date, you'll receive a full, and prompt refund on all unmailed issues.
Microsoft Systems Journal .
It's clear.
Comprehensive.
Authoritative.
And it's written 100% for you: the professional developer.
Put us to work for you today!
Sincerely,
Eric Maffei Editor 
Videotronic U.K. Limited
 Dear Communicator,
Whether you use video for corporate promotion, sales promotion or training, Videotronic can provide the ideal presenter to fit your requirements.
The VHS-36 POS is new to the UK market and offers a unique range of benefits.
It is purpose built for use at Point of Sale in a busy retail environment and will give reliable, long lasting operation with the minimum of attention.
For corporate presentations or training, the standard VHS-36 colour TV-video combination offers quality at remarkable prices.
Single units cost just £415 + VAT reducing to £375 + VAT for quantities of 50 units or more.
A larger unit (51 cms) is also available.
Call us today for more details and/or a free demonstration.
Yours faithfully,
JAMES LEAR  
a member of VIDEOTRONIC international group
Videotronic VHS-36 POS
Video for permanent sales promotion at the Point of Sale
The VHS player and monitor combination has proved to be a total success.
These are the qualities which will guarantee long lasting success.
Electronic Auto-Start starts the machine automatically, as soon as power is supplied.
So no handling by the staff is necessary.
Improved sound information thanks to the front speaker location 100 mm with wide frequency range; no unnecessary sound annoyance for other customers or the staff in surrounding areas.
Operating hour counter not resettable and therefore easy to control.
Front cover protection
all manual controls and cassette compartment are covered to prevent adjustment by customers or staff and insures a permanent trouble free presentation.
The Videotronic VHS 36  fulfils all conditions for trouble-free operation.
An added advantage: you don't have to pay any licence fee for this model because there is no T.V. receiver.
Videotronic has been proven worldwide
Videotronic machines are to be found worldwide in a variety of different situations.
It has proved to be of particular benefit to sales people during a sales appointment with a client.
Reliability is the key feature of all Videotronic equipment.
Purchase, Lease, Rent
Videotronic machines combine with very high quality with reasonable prices.
You can decide whether you wish to buy, lease or rent them.
In case of permanent use, purchasing or leasing (normally for 24 or 36 months) is probably the most economic way.
For use limited to a shorter period, the alternative would be to rent the machines.
The quantity and the period for leasing can be perfectly adapted to your needs: whether it is for 10, 100 or 1000 machines (or as many as you need) for 4, 8 or 12 weeks (or as long as it is profitable for you).
Our rental scheme will surely meet your expectations.
And your financial investment remains manageable.
Videofilm
We are always ready to assist and advise in the development of video film for your products and company, where none is available.
Service
Whether you buy, lease or rent the Videotronic, you can make use of our Videotronic Back-up-Service, not only in this country, but also in most European countries.
This includes setting up or removal of the machines as well as maintenance in consumer markets, department stores, do-it-yourself-stores and specialist shops.
Our rental scheme includes insurance of the Videotronic machines against theft and damage.
This can also be granted for machines purchased or leased.
Copies
Our copying department is always available for duplicating videos.
Our Permaplay copies complement our quality videotronic machines to ensure excellent reproduction.
You'll get all of these sales promotion advantages directly you use the leaders in the video market.
Videotronic UK Limited 
a member of VIDEOTRONIC international group
Kaleidoscope SEASONAL SENSATIONS
IMMEDIATE REPLY REQUESTED…
YOU COULD WIN £100,000
 Dear Mrs Davies,
Do you realise that by simply replying to this letter, you could be giving yourself a tax free lump sum of up to £100,000?
I urge you Mrs Davies, to read the contents of this letter now, very carefully.
As the attached Ultimate Entry Bond confirms, you as the names participant have been awarded Six Exclusive Prize Draw Codes.
Any one of which could win you £50,000 in cash.
All you have to do is return your Entry Bond complete with six codes to us, or phone through on (0274) 571611 and you could be our lucky winner.
What's more, if you reply within 14 days, you could qualify for an additional £50,000 Early Reply Bonus prize too!
STUDY YOUR DOCUMENTS CAREFULLY — THE SOONER YOU REPLY, THE MORE YOU COULD WIN — THE PRIZE DRAW FUND TOTALS £115,000.
Start by checking the Six Prize Draw Codes on your Ultimate Entry Bond against those on your Personal Eligibility Record.
The codes should be identical.
IMPORTANT — 1ST PRIZE PREFERENCE
Should you become our first prize winner, we require to know in advance your prize preference.
To inform us of your choice, please detach one of the stamps from the attached panel and affix it to the space provided on your ULTIMATE ENTRY BOND
Next, select your Ultimate prize choice by detaching the appropriate stamp and sticking it onto your Entry Bond.
It helps us to know in advance your prize preference should you be our lucky winner.
What's more, there's an additional £50,000 opportunity too.
Rub over the Early Reply Bonus seal on your Entry Bond with a silver coin to find out if you are eligible to double your potential first prize to £100,000.
To qualify, the 3 digits revealed on your seal must match the first three digits of the Early Reply Bonus code on your Prize Draw Eligibility Record.
Please take care however, any interference with the code will render your Entry Bond void.
If you are not a qualifier for the additional £50,000, don't worry, this does not affect your eligibility to enter the Ultimate Prize Draw and win the £50,000 first prize or one of over a thousand other prizes.
If you are a lucky qualifier for the £100,000 Double First Prize Draw — Congratulations!— don't forget you must reply within 14 days.
Why are we offering you the chance of such a fantastic windfall?
Purely because we'd like you to take a look at our Christmas Catalogue.
Talking of winners, we think this one really is!
There are some fantastic offers we're sure you won't want to miss out on and the good news is that your Prize Draw Entry Bond doubles as your Order Form!
Make the most of this winning opportunity.
Reply right now and the Best of Luck!
John Wallis, Managing Director
P.S. Don't forget to detach and keep your Personal Eligibility Record.
BEFORE RETURNING YOUR ULTIMATE ENTRY BOND REMEMBER TO…
1.
Check that your six computer codes on your Ultimate Entry Bond match those on your Prize Draw Eligibility Record.
2.
Indicate your choice of prize by attaching your Prize Draw Choice Stamp to your Entry Bond.
3.
Rub the Early Reply Bonus Seal to check your eligibility to win the £100,000 double first prize.
4.
Have you looked at your new catalogue, are you aware that your Entry Bond also includes a Priority Order Form?
5.
Detach and keep your Prize Draw Eligibility Record.
IMPORTANT — PLEASE RETAIN
PRIZE DRAW ELIGIBILITY RECORD
To Be Retained By Named Participant
PRIZE DRAW PROMISE
We promise to enter on return of your Entry Bond, all six computer codes into our Ultimate Prize Draw.
Furthermore, if the three numbers beneath the Early Reply Bonus Seal match the first three numbers of your Early Reply Bonus Code, and you reply within 14 days, you will automatically qualify for the chance to double the £50,000 first prize to £100,000.
The winning entry will be selected at random by computer.
OUR PRIZE FUND GUARANTEE
We guarantee that all prize money is held by our bankers on deposit and will be paid to you the participant named overleaf, in the event of one of your exclusive Prize Draw code entries being the winning one.
Finally, if you are a lucky winner, we further guarantee to send you notification of your good fortune and invite you to the official prize giving.
JAN PERRY, Prize Draw Secretary
PREVIOUS KALEIDOSCOPE WINNERS
YOUR NAME COULD BE NEXT ON THE LIST!
ULTIMATE Kaleidoscope £115,000 PRIZE DRAW ENTRY BOND
This is to confirm that
On return of this document, the participant named overleaf, will automatically be registered as an entrant in the Ultimate Prize Draw, with six changes to win the first prize jackpot of £50,000.
In addition, should the three numbers beneath the Early Reply Bonus Seal match the first three numbers of the Early Reply Bonus code, the entrant will also be eligible to win an additional £50,000, should they reply within 14 days, and win first prize.
Rub over the seal overleaf with a silver coin to reveal eligibility to double the first prize value to £100,000
ULTIMATE PRIZE DRAW SUMMARY
OVER 1,000 PRIZES MUST BE WON
PRIZE FUND TOTAL £115,000
1st PRIZE £50,000 CASH OR VAUXHALL CALIBRA PLUS £30,000 PLUS EARLY REPLY CASH BONUS £50,000
Check your eligibility for the Early Reply Bonus.
2nd PRIZE £3,000 CASH
3rd PRIZE £2,000 CASH
PLUS 1,000 PRIZES OF £10
HOW WOULD YOU SPEND £100,000 TAX FREE
As a potential First Prize Draw Winner, it would certainly make sense to consider now exactly what you would do with a £100,000 Tax-Free lump sum.
You could, to celebrate the winning of the First Prize take that world cruise you've always promised yourself…
Buy the Sports Car of your dreams…
Add an extension to your home and still have thousands of pounds left for a rainy day.
IMPORTANT — READ CAREFULLY
To qualify for the ‘Early Reply Bonus’ this Entry Bond must be returned within 14 days by the named participant.
DON'T DELAY, YOU COULD BE OUR NEXT WINNER
ACT NOW!
LAKELAND Plastics 
THE CREATIVE KITCHENWARE COMPANY
New Spring Catalogue Out Now!
A HOST OF IDEAS FOR YOUR KITCHEN AND HOME
Discover our huge collection of innovative ideas and quality products, all designed to make your life that much easier!
Our convenient catalogue service offers
•Prompt Delivery
•Personal attention from our friendly staff
•No-Quibble Money-Back Guarantee of Satisfaction 
DON'T MISS OUR NEW SPRING COLLECTION
SIMPLY COMPLETE THE COUPON BELOW, DETACH, AND POST IT BACK TO US!
Established Over 25 Years
The Creative Kitchenware Catalogue
Whether preparing solo meals, feeding a family, or cooking for your own enjoyment — here's everything you need for superb results!
Our fresh approach to kitchenware includes original ideas in
•Food preparation & storage
•Cooking & baking
•Freezing & preserving
•Entertaining at home
Order from our 64 page catalogue and we'll deliver direct to your door.
For your FREE catalogue complete and return the coupon opposite or dial  Please ask for Dept 115 
Kays ACCOUNT
20% OFF YOUR 1ST ORDER
SHOPPING NOW
HERE'S HOW
We've put it all together just the way you wanted.
Now you can choose the lovely clothes…the labels…the style you have always wanted.
And with Cashback on everything…you get £1 in every £10 you spend back to enjoy.
You'll have your own account…with a simple monthly statement and no paperwork.
You can pay as it suits you…with interest FREE credit, by cash, cheque or credit card.
And you have fast FREE delivery to your door…on 14 days approval, with no-cost, no-trouble returns.
You can telephone 7 days a week to order and we'll take 20% OFF YOUR FIRST ORDER TOO!
So start shopping the new way soon — it says style!
20% OFF YOUR 1ST ORDER
CALL FREE FOR YOUR CATALOGUE NOW ON  QUOTING A39AC
COMPLETE ESSENTIALS
SPECIAL PREVIEW SELECTION
INTRODUCING COMPLETE ESSENTIALS
SPRING INTO SUMMER
Here's a selection of the classic looks to be found in Complete Essentials Spring/Summer 1991 collection.
They are the backbone of any wardrobe.
Stylish, well made clothes that are practical, and always give great value for money.
Many items boast natural fabrics and a vast array of colours to choose from.
Look through these pages and you'll see what we mean.
And if you'd like to see the full collection just tick the box on your order form for the complete Essentials.
THE ESSENTIAL SERVICE
Ordering couldn't be easier.
A simple, local rate call brings the clothes quickly to your door.
Goods are normally dispatched within 24 hours of our receiving your order.
Delivery is free; order lines are staffed around the clock every day of the week and every garment is guaranteed (there's a complete money refund or replacement for everything returned within 14 days).
So why not give us a call!
A
A well cut, classic blazer is an investment in style that should hang in every well-dressed man's wardrobe.
The Essentials one is superbly tailored in pure new wool gaberdine.
Fully lined, it is double breasted and has two jetted pockets with neat flaps.
The buttons have an ‘antique’ finish to add an extra touch of class.
B
Fashionable trousers with inverted front pleats, belt loops and turn-ups.
Although they are undeniably smart they are also very comfortable to wear so we know they will be popular with Essentials men!
C
A rather ladylike, elegant dress in navy crêpe-de-chine with a leafy pattern in ivory.
A button through style with a face-framing collar in delicate lace, it has an elasticated waist, a stiff self-belt and a full, pleated skirt.
A
The tunic is one of the most fashionable shapes around this season.
This one is knitted in a linen-mix yarn which washes well and feels especially soft to touch.
A simple round neck style with wrist length sleeves it makes the perfect foil for a favourite scarf or piece of jewellery.
B
Silky, crêpe-de-chine pleated skirt in a choice of three spotted colourways.
It has sharp, knife pleats falling from a narrow waistband.
LACY SUNDAY AFTERNOON
GORGEOUS CREPE-DE-CHINE
C
Softly pretty crêpe-de-chine blouse to team with a summer skirt.
It is a very feminine, ‘forties’ style with clever shaping at the front and a panel of lace over the bodice which forms a scalloped V-shaped neckline.
A
Crêpe-de-chine T-Top blouse with cap sleeves and a round neck bound in self cloth.
Back neck opening.
B
The print blouse in soft, silky crêpe-de-chine is a button through style with a V-neckline, mock jetted breast pocket and shaped hemline.
It looks really special thanks to a superb print in shades of blue, apple and black on white.
C
The matching skirt falls in full pleats from a comfortable elasticated waistband.
D
Button through dress with an unusual pleated panel emphasising the deep V-neckline.
Fitted to give you a flattering silhouette, with bold accessories it would take you to the smartest occasion in style.
A
It's unashamedly luxurious, beautiful to look at and packs like a dream.
These three clever pieces in silk crêpe-de-chine are designed to mix and match to form the basis of a summer wardrobe that's just as elegant as it is easy to wear.
The vest is simplicity itself, with a scoop neck front and back.
B
The skirt is the sarong shape that's so new for spring and summer.
It is softly pleated at the front, has a neat waistband and fastens with a back zip.
C
The blouse has short dolman sleeves, a fly front fastening and a mock pocket flap on the left breast.
It has a curved hemline and can be worn outside or tucked into a skirt or trousers.
D
Pure cotton sweater with a ‘brick’ pattern hand embroidered in toning shades.
The sweater is a simple, round neck style that looks good with either skirts or trousers.
A
Ramie is a natural, linen-type fibre that gives fabric a most attractive slub finish.
It is present in this waist-skimming button through sun top which has a square neckline, broad shoulder straps and flattering shaping around the bust.
B
An easy, t-shape voile blouse with short sleeves and an unusual horizontal pleat detail.
Made from two layers of voile, it is cool yet not transparent.
C
Longer-length culottes are made from two layers of voile so they have a floaty, sheer effect without being at all see-through.
The culottes are very full and have a comfortable, elasticated waistband.
LAYERS OF VOILE
SHEER WITHOUT SHOW-THROUGH
A
With rich foliage on a black back-ground this short sleeve cotton shirt makes a bold patterned statement with plain trousers or under a suit.
B
The trousers have three gentle pleats on the front, belt loops, two side pockets and one jetted pocket at the back.
STEP INTO THE SUN
C
Beautifully cool, and very feminine sundress with a square neckline and broad shoulder straps.
It buttons through down the back, is fitted to the waist and has a full flowing skirt.
A
When things are a little dull this sweater will soon cheer them up.
It's knitted in cotton and is basically ecru with a bold, striped jacquard design in shades of terracotta, gold, olive and black.
B
When those about you are wilting, you'll keep your cool in our short sleeved linen look shirt.
It has a soft knitted collar and a single breast pocket.
C
The long sleeve shirt is a smart style with a single breast pocket and buttoned cuffs.
Its texture adds fashion appeal and makes it the perfect partner for a summer suit.
A
Casual, short sleeved shirt in pure silk with the fashionable sand-washed finish that feels so luxurious to the touch.
It is generously cut with a soft collar and breast pocket.
B
Fashionably cut trousers with inverted pleats at the waist, a fly front fastening, two side slant pockets, one back hip jetted pocket, belt loops and turn-ups.
Wear them when you want to look smart without feeling over-dressed.
C
Sporty play suit made in silky-soft crêpe-de-chine.
The top is a shirt style with two breast pockets and short sleeves; it has a drawstring at the waist and the shorts are cut full to flatter every figure.
D
For a rather more flamboyant look, a sand-washed pure silk shirt with a foliage print in shades of olive, cream and soft plum.
Generously cut, it has a soft collar, short sleeves and a breast pocket.
A
Chic blouse in a ramie and cotton mix fabric which gives an attractive finish.
The blouse is simply styled with a round neck, breast pocket, six button fastening and short sleeves.
B
The trousers are an elegant, easy-fitting style with a basque shaped waistband and soft pleats at the front.
They have a fly fastening, and two side pockets.
THE POWER OF PRINT
C
Print sleeveless dress with rever collar, soft pleats at waist, and 2″ self belt.
A
New look, pure cotton jersey t-shirt buttons down the front, has three-quarter length sleeves and is shaped at the hem.
It is cleverly elasticated at the back, so you can be sure of a flattering shape.
B
The jacket is a long, single breasted style, fastened with three horn-effect buttons.
It has two patch pockets and is darted at the front to give a neat silhouette.
C
The trousers are an easy to wear style with pleats at the front, angled side seam pockets, fly front fastening and belt loops.
D
This hand embroidered pure cotton knitted natural sweater is brilliantly patterned with abstract motifs.
Bright and very comfortable to wear, it's a perfect summer cover-up.
A
 Men's  stripy yarn dyed crew neck shirt finished with a twin-stitched band at the neck and a breast pocket.
B
The basic crew-neck t-shirt available in eight fashionable colours.
C
Eight colours to choose from in the  ladies' classic crew-neck t-shirt.
C
 Ladies' yarn-dyed, crew-neck striped contrast collar t-shirts in a wealth of colourways, some bright 'n' breezy, others more subtle.
SOMETHING BRIGHT FOR WHEN IT'S BREEZY
A
Simple pure cotton knitted sweater in white, brilliantly patterned with abstract motifs hand embroidered in primary shades of turquoise, gold and orange, just right for a sunny day with a bit of a breeze!
B
Pure cotton vests proved very popular last summer, so here they are again in a new range of seasonal shades.
C
Tailored shorts with front pleats, a tab detail, side pockets and mock-pocket flap at the back.
Finished with narrow turn ups they make a smart alternative to conventional trousers when the temperature rises.
A
Pretty cotton mix cardigan to pop on when there's a cool breeze off the sea.
It's knitted in a lacy stitch and has a sailor collar which is attractively edged in crochet.
B
The matching skirt falls in full, soft pleats from a basque style waistband, elasticated at the back for a comfortable fit.
It fastens with buttons at the front.
C
The t-shirt is a loose style in white, with a fish motif in aqua shades of blue and green.
D
The shorts, printed with the fish motif, are full cut and gathered onto a wide, basque style waistband which is elasticated at the back.
They have a button front fastening and two pockets.
E
The chambray blouse is a simple, sleeveless shirt style with a breast pocket and seams double-stitched in white to emphasise the shape.
F
The matching full shorts are full cut and have a shaped waistband with belt loops, a fly front fastening and two jetted pockets.
A
Bikini in a cotton and elastane fabric that's soft to the touch and very flattering.
The top is a bra-style with a scooped neckline and a low back; the matching pants have an easy, roll-down top and are cut fairly high at the sides to make your legs look longer.
B
Cotton and elastane one-piece suit will please both sun worshippers and serious swimmers.
It has a low, scooped neckline front and back and high-cut sides to flatter your legs.
SUMMER SEA-SUN
C
Snazzy striped boxers, again suitable for sun-bathing or for swimming.
They have an elasticated waist and three pockets and a cotton inner lining.
D
Mens t-shirt in white cotton jersey, generously cut and decorated with a primitive fish motif.
E
For sunning or swimming, plain cotton poplin boxer shorts with an elasticated drawstring waist and three pockets, and cotton lining.
A
The two-tone t-shirt in pure cotton has a double stitched, round neckline, and a print badge.
B
The matching shorts are full cut with an elasticated waistband, two side seam pockets and printed badge.
C
The co-ordinating t-shirt is a loose-cut round neck two-tone style in pure cotton.
D
The straight knee-length shorts have side pockets and an elasticated waist band discreetly decorated with the sport motif.
ESSENTIAL MEASUREMENTS
CHEST/BUST
Measure around the fullest part of chest/bust and across shoulder blades.
HIPS
Measure around the fullest part of the seat.
COAT/DRESS LENGTH
Length from centre back of neck (Where collar seam would be) in straight line.
INSIDE LEG LENGTH
Measure down inside leg  seam of a similar pair of trousers that fit.
ORDERING FROM COMPLETE ESSENTIALS IS SIMPLE
BY PHONE
Credit card holders can call on .
It is a local rate call from anywhere in the country.
Lines are open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
We can immediately reserve your order for you.
BY POST
Post your priority order form with a cheque or postal order to Complete Essentials, Freepost, 139 Clapham Road, London SW  EE.
Do not forget there is no stamp needed.
DELIVERY
The fastest free mail order delivery service in the UK ensures your goods will normally be despatched within 24 hours of our receiving your order.
Should you want to return anything, for any reason, it's no problem.
If you have any queries our team will be happy to help.
Please call them on .
SEASHORE SHELL
The shell suit is such a great idea in sportswear.
The name shell comes from the double layer of material.
It gives the warmth without the bulk and the lightweight material ensures smooth base for the Egyptian influenced pastel patterned print.
The zipped cowl necked top has elasticated waist and cuffs and a zipped pocket (for the locker key?).
The trousers have two zipped side pockets elasticated waist and zip opening cuffs for slipping over those ubiquitous trainers.
Realise the Value of Literary Excellence
CHOOSE ANY 3 BOOKS FROM £1 EACH +p. & p .
The Literary Guild
Definitive Reference, Classic Works, Award Winning Novels, Gardening, Home Design, Science, The Arts, Nature — the entire spectrum of Literature.
YOUR INTRODUCTION STARTS WITH 3 BOOKS FROM £1 EACH +p. & p .
The Literary Guild 
To: The Literary Guild,
Please accept my application and enrol me as a member of The Literary Guild and send me the introductory books whose numbers I have printed in the boxes provided.
If I decide to keep them you will charge me the prices shown here, plus a total of £2.25 towards post and packing.
If I am not completely satisfied, I will return my three books within 10 days, my membership will be cancelled and I will owe nothing.
As a member I do not need to take a book every month.
If I want another book instead of the Editor's Choice (or if I want no book at all), I can say so on the form provided.
I will, however, choose at least four books in my first year's membership.
All books are described in advance in the free monthly ‘Literary Guild Review’ and offered at least 20% below publishers' prices (plus post and packing).
I am over 18 years of age.
Membership of this club limited to one per household.
Overseas send for details.
PLEASE SEND NO MONEY NOW
NO STAMP NEEDED
‘This, books can do…they give new views to life, and teach us how to live.’
— George Crabbe 1754–1832 British Poet
Realise the Value of Literary Excellence
The Literary Guild offers you that value.
Our expert editors select only the finest hardback books from the thousands published each year.
We offer you the entire spectrum of literature.
All are full-length editions.
And we offer books to you as soon as they're published.
Definitive reference, ranging from encyclopedias to special interests.
Classic works loved by generations of discerning readers.
Award-winning novels by bestselling authors.
Gardening.
Home design.
Science.
History.
Arts.
Music.
Antiques.
Nature.
Even children's titles.
Whatever your interests, you always enjoy the widest possible choice.
And you'll save money on every book you buy — never less than 20%, often as much as 40% off publishers' prices.
You can choose at leisure from the free monthly colour magazines and the books are delivered direct to your home.
Join today and benefit from vast choice, convenience and generous savings.
Coming soon are John le Carré's magnificent latest,Secret Pilgrim ; Roy Strong's fascinating Lost Treasures of Britain and the authoritative Oxford Library of English Usage — plus a host of Spring bestsellers all at significant savings.
All we ask is that you take at least four books during your first year's membership from the many hundreds you'll be offered.
After that it's up to you.
So send for your three introductory books now from only £1 each (+£2.25 p. & p.) and examine them FREE at home for 10 days without obligation.
A selection of titles currently on offer to Literary Guild members:
The best paperbacks.
The best prices.
QPD.
SAVE UP TO 40%
OVER 60 BOOKS TO CHOOSE FROM!
Start with any 5 from only 50p each plus p. & p .
To: Quality Paperbacks Direct,
Please accept my application and enrol me into Quality Paperbacks Direct, and send me the five introductory books whose numbers I have printed in the boxes provided.
If I decide to keep them you will charge me the special offer prices only, plus a total of £1.50 towards postage and packing.
If I am not completely satisfied, I will return the books within ten days, my subscription will be cancelled and I will owe nothing.
As a subscriber, I will receive, about every two months, a FREE edition of the book review magazine, from each of which I agree to buy at least one book.
I understand that the minimum length of subscription is for 6 magazines.
If after this time I wish to cancel, I will do so by giving one month's notice in writing.
All books are offered at savings of up to 40% off the publishers' prices.
I am over 18 years of age.
Subscription limited to one per household.
UK subscriptions only.
PLEASE SEND NO MONEY NOW
QPD EXCLUSIVE
As a subscriber to QPD, you will benefit from regular offers of QPD Exclusives and QPD Special Editions.
•Printed on high quality paper, QPD Exclusives and QPD Special Editions are unique paperback editions of best-selling hardback titles.
•They are large format copies, produced to the standards you expect only from hardbacks.
•They are identical in content to the original hardback, but with a durable soft cover and an elegant matt finish.
•QPD Exclusives are offered to you often months in advance of the normal paperback publication date.
review
QPD offers you a wide selection of the most stimulating and interesting paperback reading available.
Our team of expert Editors select the best and latest titles by scanning the lists of the many thousands of titles published each year.
The free QPD Review features hundreds of quality paperbacks to choose from throughout the year — each one is discounted by up to 40% on the Publishers' Price.
Start with any 5 from only 50p each plus p. & p .
The best choice
Only QPD offers you the best and latest quality paperbacks at really competitive prices.
The latest bestsellers in contemporary fiction and literary classics for every collection.
Our offer here gives just a glimpse of the outstanding choice available.
Not just fiction but the definitive reference books on a wide range of interests from Current Issues to the Arts.
Recent titles offered to members include — DICKENS by Peter Ackroyd — RABBIT AT REST by John Updike — POSSESSION by A. S. Byatt — OXFORD BOOK OF HUMOROUS PROSE — LIES OF SILENCE by Brian Moore — and below are just some of the superb exclusive offers you can look forward to as a member.
QPD Exclusives
QPD regularly offers you, exclusively, paperback editions of bestsellers that are currently only available in hardback, saving ££s on the publishers' price and months before they become available in the shops.
These are large format, high quality editions produced to the standards you expect only from hardbacks.
But that's not all because all the books we offer will be cheaper than the publishers' prices — with savings of up to 40% off the books we offer you.
Another saving is that you only pay a single charge for postage no matter how many books you buy.
Start saving now
As your introduction to QPD and the many benefits to come, just choose any 5 of these superb titles starting at only 50p (plus £1.50 postage and packing).
Then approximately every two months we'll send you the free QPD Review with hundreds of quality titles to choose from throughout the year.
All we ask of you in return is to buy at least one book from each of the Reviews and stay with us for a minimum of six issues.
Benefits of QPD
•The offer of quality contemporary and classic titles — all of which are discounted by up to 40% on the publishers' price.
•A wide range of subjects and authors, with a choice of hundreds of titles to choose from throughout the year.
•QPD regularly offers key bestsellers, currently only available in hardback, featured as QPD Exclusive paperbacks, offered to you often months before they become available in the shops.
•QPD is the most efficient and convenient way to choose the books you want, delivered direct to your door.
CEDAR TREE HOUSE
Reference & Professional Literature
STANDARD PERIODICAL DIRECTORY 1990 13th Edition
The largest Authoritative Guide to Periodicals available in N. America — including periodicals, which may originate elsewhere but are distributed in N. America by associate or subsidiary companies of the parent publisher.
The STANDARD PERIODICAL DIRECTORY is by far the most comprehensive directory available for periodicals distributed in N. America.
The new 1990 edition lists a total of more than 75,000 periodicals grouped into 245 categories ranging from Accounting to Zoology.
Readers consulting a specific category will find a complete list of periodicals dealing with that subject.
Listings include helpful annotations, which allow the user to gain an idea of the nature of individual publications.
Publications are indexed by title.
A detailed subject cross-reference is included.
SPD provides, whenever possible, 31 different items of information —
Publication title
Publishing Company
Address
Telephone Number
Editor
Publisher
Advertising Director
Circulation Director
Art Director
Promotion Director
Production Director
Description of Contents
Former Titles
Indexing/Abstracting Services
ISSN Numbers
Book Reviews Accepted
Year Established
Frequency of Publication
Single Copy Price
Circulation Size
Controlled Circulation
Newsstand Circulation
Auditing Org.
Advertising Accepted
Advertising Rate
Printing Method
Av.
Number of Pages
Page Size
Colour or Black and White
Availability of microform, computer tape, on-line
Type of Format.
Users include: Serials Librarian, Reference Librarians, Subscriptions Agents, Marketing/Advertising Agents, P.R.
Consultants, Publishers.
Which of these specialized directories from Oxbridge Communications would solve a reference problem for you?
Each of these four directories is the standard reference source in its field — with the most extensive available listings of titles, and the most detailed information for each title.
At their low cost, there's no reason to be without the directories you need.
Order them now!
STANDARD PERIODICAL DIRECTORY
Your research cannot possibly be complete without the new 1989 edition of the Standard Periodical Directory .
It lists over 70,000 U.S. and Canadian periodicals.
The SPD is the starting point for anyone who wants to learn more about any field, subject or industry — from accounting to zoology.
In tightly organized pages it makes sure a reader can find needed information quickly.
Latest edition, 1990 hard cover, 8 ½″ × 11″, circa 1500 pages,
OXBRIDGE DIRECTORY OF NEWSLETTERS
13,500 U.S. and Canadian newsletters in 168 subject categories, indexed by title, with complete editorial and subscription information.
Published annually.
1989 edition, soft cover, 400 pages, 8 ½″ × 11″ 
DIRECTORY OF THE COLLEGE STUDENT PRESS IN AMERICA
5,000 student newspapers, magazines, and yearbooks on 3,600 campuses with information on advertising and subscription rates, frequency and circulation, publication adviser, annual budget and sources of financing.
Also provides the most complete and accurate list of colleges, with addresses, telephone numbers, names of presidents and student activities directors.
The only directory of its kind.
Soft cover, 8 ⅝″ × 11 ¼″, 300 pages,
NATIONAL DIRECTORY OF MAGAZINES
Most complete information on all large and small U.S. magazines, including an extensive description of publication, staff, advertising rates, circulation size, competitive analysis and salary guide.
A must for anyone concerned with advertising to businesses, government, associations and consumer groups with special interests.
It also unlocks timely information for executives keeping abreast of their professions, medical and scientific personnel updating their reading, public relations people, market research teams, and students preparing reports.
2nd edition, 8 ½″ × 11″, 1,500 pages   
Goblin STEAMATIC
30 Day NO RISK BUY IT AND TRY IT OFFER
Buy a Goblin Steamatic and try it for 30 days.
If you don't like it, send it back to Goblin and your money will be refunded in full.
See back cover for details.
Take a fresh approach
The fresh approach to your household cleaning
Clean, hygienic steam.
It's a powerful force to be reckoned with, and one that ensures a true deep-down clean all around your home.
Goblin has harnessed the power of steam to maximum effect with the Steamatic, a new, versatile machine designed to help you tackle a wide variety of household cleaning problems.
To understand how the Steamatic works, think for a moment how dirt accumulates in the home.
Airborne oils and greases from cooking, footwear or pets are attracted to, and settle on, the fibres of your carpet, the kitchen flooring and the grouting between tiles, making these surfaces look dull and grimy as dirt and dust particles stick to them.
This is where the cleansing power of steam really comes into its own.
The hot steam melts away the sticky oils and greases, releasing the dirt and grime which can either be absorbed by the cotton towel provided or vacuumed up later.
Carpets, tiles and flooring, the Steamatic helps revive all sorts of surfaces leaving them more hygienic, cleaner and brighter.
In this booklet, we've suggested over 50 different cleaning jobs in and around the home which you can tackle with your Steamatic.
Of course, there are many other tasks too for which you'll find the Steamatic is the perfect answer.
Muddy sport shoes, bins and ashtrays, drains, and what about the conservatory or greenhouse?
All can be left hygienically clean with the Steamatic.
WATER
THE IDEAL CLEANING SOLUTION
Forget the solvents and detergents.
Tap water is all the Steamatic needs to operate effectively on practically any household surface, from the floor to the ceiling, from inside the cupboards to the front steps outside.
You'll notice the difference right away as the Steamatic gets to work, removing dirt, grease and grime in next to no time.
ALL THE ACCESSORIES YOU NEED TO LET OFF STEAM
The Steamatic comes complete with a range of accessories, each carefully designed to deal with specific household tasks.
1
Multi purpose brush head
2
Window cleaner squeegee
3
Funnel
4
Towel
5
Crease remover accessory
6
Accessory adaptor
7
Top handle and straight tubes
8
Steam hose
SAFE TO OPERATE
SIMPLE TO USE
The Steamatic works in exactly the same way as a large kettle, building up steam pressure within five or six minutes of being switched on.
Once ready, you'll have enough steam power for up to 50 minutes' worth of cleaning.
A safety thermostat controls the water temperature, so ensuring constant pressure to give a consistent jet of cleansing steam.
To operate, always fill the water tank while the machine is disconnected from the mains socket.
Unscrew the filler cap and pour in up to a maximum of 2.5 pints (1.5 litres) of water, using the funnel provided.
Then, simply fix any one of the cleaning accessories and away you go.
Steam away downstairs
From large carpet areas to those tricky areas which you may have thought impossible to get really clean — the Steamatic enables you to clean them all with the minimum of fuss.
As you probably know, even the cleanest looking carpet is not all that it appears.
During everyday wear and tear, the carpet pile becomes coated with airborne oils and grease from footwear and pets.
Dust particles then stick to these greasy carpet fibres, causing them to sag and fade in colour.
This is especially true where dust and grime collects and in heavy tread areas like the hall, stairs and landing.
Whilst regular vacuuming removes surface dirt, crumbs and dust, it can't get rid of the ground dirt.
This is where the Steamatic can make a noticeable difference.
Its jet of steam neutralises the oils and greases on the carpet fibres, right down to the carpet base.
As a result, dust and pet hairs roll into little balls which can be easily removed by vacuuming.
Use the cotton towel provided and it will absorb this dirt.
In fact, you may well be surprised at just how grubby your ‘clean’ carpet was.
Once you've finished with the Steamatic, allow your carpets to dry for 1–2 hours before giving them a good vacuum to remove any remaining dirt particles.
You'll find your Steamatic is also extremely efficient when it comes to cleaning fiddly places like the areas such as skirting boards, picture rails and behind radiators.
Its cleansing steam power is equally effective for freshening up paintwork or plasterwork on the walls or ceilings.
A word of warning though — only use your Steamatic on paint and plaster that is in good condition.
And while you're in the dining room and sitting room, you can give you fireplace and surround a steamclean and freshen up your sofa and chairs.
But again, do check first to ensure that the fabric can withstand steam and high temperatures, as certain fabrics are not suitable for steam cleaning.
LET THE SUN SHINE IN
Having got all your rooms downstairs looking fresh and clean, don't forget your windows.
Using the Steamatic's window cleaner squeegee accessory, you've no worries about those smears that chemical cleaners always seem to leave behind, however hard you polish.
Once you've finished steam cleaning the windows, simply switch off your Steamatic, swivel the squeegee head around and use it to remove any remaining condensation. you'll notice the sparkling difference immediately.
Downstairs Checklist
Full steam ahead in the kitchen
Almost always in constant use, the kitchen (along with the bathroom) is one of the areas in your home where hygiene and cleanliness are of vital importance.
Unfortunately, it is probably also the most difficult place to keep really clean.
The Steamatic makes all the difference between having a kitchen that looks clean and having one that truly is.
Use the accessory adaptor by itself to help remove those grease spots between the fridge and the cooker, or the cooker and the wall where dust and dirt collect so quickly.
And if you've got tiled surfaces, you'll find the Steamatic's multi purpose brush head ideal for removing hardened particles of grease and grime which no amount of solvents and wipe-clean solutions can shift.
Whether lino, tiles or cushioned flooring, sticky spills and splashes are quickly removed, leaving your kitchen floor looking like new as will the grouting between the tiles.
In fact, all kitchen work surfaces respond well to steam cleaning.
So do the outside of fridges, freezers and cookers, all of which the Steamatic will return to their gleaming former selves.
You can also defrost and clean your fridge and freezer with the Steamatic, making short work of what can often be a long and messy job.
Of course, on cold surfaces, steam condenses into water so use a cloth to wipe away dirt and grease.
A Goblin or AquaVac wet and dry vacuum cleaner can be used to remove excess water and ice, particularly when defrosting fridges and freezers.
Then there are the cupboards and drawers, both inside and out, top and bottom and all the shelves too — areas that are often out of sight and out of mind.
Kitchen Checklist
Steam round them all in no time, using the Steamatic's extension tubes to reach into every nook and cranny.
Finally, what about those things that you know need a good clean, but you'd rather just forget?
Things like the swingbin and dustbin, dust pans, washing bowls, kitchen buckets and even the baby's high chair.
Armed with your Steamatic, you'll be able to clean them, leaving them fresh and hygienic.
HOW AND WHEN TO THROW IN THE TOWEL
Remember, when you want to remove the dirt and grime dislodged by the steam, simply attach the towel to the multi purpose brush head as shown.
Make sure that the wire retainer clips are pressed down firmly to hold the towel in place.
Further packs of towels are available from most major electrical retail outlets or direct from Goblin.
(Part No. 91993).
Steam away upstairs
Just as downstairs, the Steamatic will give all your bedroom carpets a new lease of life, leaving the carpet pile fresh and revitalised, the colour looking brighter.
And on your way upstairs, don't forget the bannisters and those tricky areas in between the rails on your staircase.
Once you've given the carpets a good going over, you can also use the Steamatic to add a sparkle to glass top tables, mirrors and mirrored wardrobe doors.
In fact, why stop there?
Get to the back of the drawers and cupboards — areas which don't often see the light of day.
Another useful tip.
If your windows are prone to condensation and the mould that builds up, use the Steamatic accessory adaptor to loosen the mould with steam and simply wipe it away.
Steam of course, is also the preferred professional method for spot cleaning clothes.
Use the Steamatic's crease remover accessory with the towel to remove greasy marks and creases from your clothes and curtains.
Which incidentally you can clean as they hang at the window.
However, please remember — only use the Steamatic on materials which can withstand high temperatures and steam and do follow manufacturer's instructions.
Upstairs Checklist
Full steam ahead in the Bathroom
The first time you use your Steamatic in the bathroom you could be in for quite a surprise.
No chemical solution — cream, liquid or powder — can give the same gleaming hygienic result on your tiles, your taps, bath, shower, toilet and bidet.
That's because the natural cleaning power of steam cuts through the soapy deposits and the dust particles which stick to them, quickly removing dirt and grime.
What's more, because the Steamatic uses no chemical solutions, it leaves no traces behind.
Every surface really does look fresher and brighter because it has been thoroughly cleaned.
Use the multi purpose brush head together with one of the towels provided to clean tiled surfaces, the bath, shower and the areas that surround them.
Start at the top and work downwards, wiping in horizontal sweeps.
As for those stubborn areas which you may have thought beyond the reach of any cleaner — the stained or mouldy grouting round the back of the basin, the bath and the shower, plugholes and taps — you'll find that the Steamatic's powerful cleaning action makes a tremendous difference.
For best results in tackling these difficult areas, use the accessory adaptor by itself to steam out ground-in dirt and then wipe clean with a dry cloth.
THE LONG AND THE SHORT OF IT
The Steamatic provides you with truly flexible cleaning power.
To get to the top of things, use all the extension tubes.
If you're working within a confined space, simply attach the Steamatic accessory adaptor to the short handle extension.
It couldn't be simpler.
Bathroom Checklist
Steamclean them all, including the kitchen sink
How else can your Steamatic help you get your home and your surroundings really clean?
One obvious area is the garage.
Your car can also benefit from a steamclean, both outside and in.
The Steamatic will quickly clean wheels and tyres and can also be used to freshen up upholstery, but do check manufacturer instructions before you start.
Then there's the caravan.
Use the Steamatic without the extension tubes for maximum manoeuvrability in all those confined areas which can be so difficult to clean really properly.
And if you despair of ever getting the baby's pushchair anywhere near clean, or perhaps those muddy football and rugby boots, just spend five minutes or so on them with the Steamatic.
The results will be nothing short of spectacular.
Use the accessory adaptor by itself with a wallpaper scraper and your Steamatic can also help take the hard work out of wallpaper stripping.
Powerful, effective, versatile and chemical-free, there's no doubt that your Steamatic is the all-round answer to today's household cleaning.
Oddjob List
Letting off steam outside
Steam cleaning can be just as effective outside as in.
In fact, you can use your Steamatic to tackle those tough and often unpleasant jobs that you may have been putting off for ages.
Jobs like cleaning out the dustbins, the drains or perhaps last summer's baked on grime from the barbecue.
Armed with the Steamatic, there's no need to get your hands dirty and the job is done in half the time.
Why scrub the front steps when you can steam them clean?
The same goes for your basement or your cellar and for some of the things you may store there.
Garden furniture will come up looking like new and will last longer too when you look after it with your Steamatic.
Go easy on the deck chairs though and only steam clean them if they are made from cotton or canvas.
NO GARDENER SHOULD BE WITHOUT ONE
And once you've got your Steamatic all set up outside, you can always steam into the greenhouse or the conservatory to remove any mould that has accumulated and clean the glass too.
What's more, if you are a keen gardener, your Steamatic will prove an extremely useful and environmentally friendly way of sterilising flower pots, seed trays and even the soil itself.
CLEANING ROUND THE POOL
If you've a pool or jacuzzi, you certainly won't want to be without your Steamatic when it comes to cleaning all those tiled floor surfaces around the pool.
The Steamatic's powerful cleansing action not only leaves your tiles gleaming.
It kills the germs as well, leaving the whole area clean and hygienic.
Outdoor Oddjob List
Goblin STEAMATIC
30 DAY NO RISK BUY IT AND TRY IT OFFER
The Goblin Steamatic is a fresh approach to household cleaning.
Thousands of people who have bought one wonder how they ever managed without it.
We are certain that you will feel the same and we want you to try a Goblin Steamatic with a special money back guarantee.
HERE'S WHAT YOU DO:—
1.
Buy a Goblin Steamatic from any retailer between 14 March 1991 and 30 April 1991.
Make sure you obtain a receipt with a date on it.
2.
Fill in the yellow registration card and return it to the address shown on the card.
3.
Retain all the original packaging.
4.
Use the Steamatic for up to 30 days — we're sure you will be delighted with it.
5.
If you are not satisfied with it write to use at: Department SPI, Goblin Limited, Cross Green Approach, Leeds LS9 0SX stating where and when the product was purchased, and enclosing the receipt which was supplied with the machine.
6.
We will then send you a reply paid label with a reference number.
You should take the Steamatic, securely re-packaged, to a Post Office and follow the instructions given.
You will not be asked to pay anything.
DO NOT RETURN THE PRODUCT TO THE RETAILER.
7.
When we receive the Goblin Steamatic in good condition, we will send you a cheque for the full purchase price within seven working days.
IMPORTANT •PLEASE READ CAREFULLY
IMPORTANT
Do not overfill the Steamatic tank which holds a maximum 1.5 litres/2.5 pints.
If you do so, the excess hot water will overflow from the accessory adaptor head and may damage carpets or fabrics.
IMPORTANT
When cleaning carpets and tiles always keep the multi-purpose nozzle moving at a steady pace.
Never leave the head stationary in one place while the machine is switched on and producing steam.
IMPORTANT
Not suitable on objects or surfaces which cannot resist the high temperature of steam, e.g. delicate and some man-made materials, velvet, natural fur, plastic, Dralon  etc.
Always follow manufacturers' cleaning instructions for furniture and fabrics.
Where any doubt exists, check carefully on a part of the material where minor marks will not matter.
IMPORTANT
Condensation will occur on cold surfaces and is entirely normal.
IMPORTANT
Due to our policy of continual improvement, product and accessory specifications are subject to change.
SERVICE AND PARTS
Nationwide network of Service Agents, 2 year parts and labour guarantee.
CEO Hughes Aircraft Company
We have a proud history of innovation.
And I'm proud of the way it's helping shape the history of mankind.
Malcolm R. Currie Chairman of the Board & CEO Hughes Aircraft Company
For over 40 years, Hughes Aircraft Company has been a world leader IN defense and space electronics, systems engineering, and satellite communications.
Designing, building, and delivering advanced technology for domestic and foreign governments, the military and commercial customers.
A World Leader
We've been a leader in space communications and space vehicles.
We developed and built the first spacecraft to soft-land on the moon, and the first satellite for geosynchronous orbit.
We also pioneered satellite communications for private business, and have built more than half the communications satellites used in the United States and other Free World countries.
Hughes is a leader in pulse Doppler radar.
We developed the first look-down shoot-down radar system, the first track-while-scan radar for a tactical aircraft, and the first radar system with multi-shot, air-to-air capability.
We revolutionized the air-intercept missile business in the 1950s with the first radar-guided air-to-air missile.
And we developed and built the first air-launched anti-tank missile, as well as the first launch-and-leave imaging infrared homing air-to-surface missile.
In Large-scale, Real-time Command and Control Systems, Hughes air defence systems protect over one billion people in the United States and 22 Other Free World nations.
And we develop and build air traffic control systems, plus ground-based command and control information systems.
Hughes also excels in laser and electro-optical systems.
We built the first working laser, the first high performance thermal imaging system for night-time vision, and the first long wavelength infrared sensor flown into space.
EXPANDING OUR VISION
At Hughes we're continually expanding the frontiers of technology.
And I'm proud to say, whether it's to keep our nation strong, extend the freedom of thought through telecommunications, or expand the industrial horizons, all of us who work at Hughes will continue to expand our vision — to meet tomorrow's need today.
HUGHES
Exploring new worlds through technology.
digital
Why connect computers if you can't connect applications?
The benefits of computer networking are obvious in theory — but so frequently disappointing in practice.
Most enterprises have to choose one of three options.
A system that connects a single vendor's range of products — and which can be adapted more or less to handle other vendors' offerings.
A system not designed by a computer vendor — usually based on a PC Local Area Network, ‘stretched’ somehow to handle larger systems.
A solution custom-built, as considerable expense, promptly out-dated by technology.
So whatever happened to Open Standards?
They're alive and implemented in Digital's Network Application Support (NAS).
What a truly open network means
A truly open network should be designed to handle any hardware, any software, any proprietary operating system.
It needs to be powerful, yet flexible enough to get the most out of the network and provide maximum business benefits.
It needs to make access top information simple, right down to desktop level.
And it needs not only to provide access to files or data, but actually to connect applications running anywhere on the network — and through the application, to connect the minds that are putting the applications to work.
The Digital approach to open networks
Digital uses Open Standards to solve compatibility problems.
Open Standards offer freedom…freedom to get the most from your existing investment, freedom to acquire the latest technology, freedom to choose the system that fits your needs most closely, regardless of vendor.
NAS provides for the integration of applications running on multi-vendor systems, from the desktop to the data centre.
On any screen, any user can call up multiple applications, combine and manipulate text, data or graphics from anywhere on the network.
NAS even allows on-line, real-time automatic updating as source data changes on any system.
NAS connects the minds of people using computers.
See NAS in action
A new video from Digital demonstrates the unique capabilities of NAS.
It's a simple video — but then, Network Application Support is a simple concept.
And it just happens that Digital is the only company to make it work.
Now.
Send the coupon for ‘NAS: a Meeting of Minds’.
Today.
TOSHIBA
Can one company keep watch on the weather and on your unborn child?
Toshiba know how important the health of your unborn child is to you.
Which is why we've developed our Ultra Sound Diagnostic Scanner to offer peace of mind to prospective parents.
And because your own health is just as important, the Ultra Sound Scanner also diagnoses heart and other internal health problems.
But at Toshiba we don't just monitor what's going on inside you; we also keep a watch on what's going on around you.
The Toshiba radar rainfall monitoring system is designed to alert local governments to unexpectedly heavy rainfall, so it gives plenty of advance warning for extra drainage and emergency pumps.
Toshiba's commitment to our society has produced two very different products, both designed to look after you.
As a world leader in LSI technology, Toshiba have the ability to make both possible.
In Touch with Tomorrow
Toshiba
Audi
If you're thinking of buying a new car, allow us to colour your judgement.
Since 1977, Audi cars able to run on unleaded petrol have been widely available.
More recently, we're glad to say, so has the unleaded.
But lead isn't the only life-threatening substance that issues from a car's exhaust.
There's also carbon monoxide (Co), nitrogen oxide (NOx) and unburned hydrocarbons (HC).
For those of us without science degrees, these are the chemicals that contribute to acid rain.
And could, if levels get high enough, descend on us as choking, photochemical smog.
Concerned, our governments decided that all new cars sold in EC countries from 1992 will have to emit 70% less poisonous exhaust gases.
By law.
(A fact that can't fail to affect the resale value of cars bought today that have no emission control.)
Fortunately, we were able to act sooner rather than later.
Our engineers have incorporated a 3-way catalytic converter into an advanced engine design that reduces toxic gases by up to 95%.
And does so without pushing running costs up or dragging performance down.
The truth is that if every car on the road were powered by a similar engine, we could all breathe more easily.
The truth is also that, except for Porsche, we are the only manufacturers building a cat into every car in our range at no extra cost.
So whichever colour Audi you buy, you can rest assured that, at heart, it's green.
VORSPRUNG DURCH TECHNIK
Kepner Tregoe
For the past 25 years leading businesses have done everything by the book.
In simpler times, all that a top manager needed to move an organization forward was a set of rational tools to solve problems and make decisions.
And for three decades we've given our clients a process for better decision making and problem solving up and down the organization.
In fact, more than 10 million managers use our renowned processes — described in The Rational Manager — on a daily basis.
These days, however, assuring future success is more complicated.
Setting a strategy and putting it into action are challenges that can overwhelm even the most effective managers.
That's why we offer you our new book.
It tells how 19 of our clients — including Dow, Fuji Photo, Massey-Ferguson, and the Federal Reserve Bank — have overcome major obstacles to implement winning strategies.
If you're a senior manager dealing with these complex challenges, we'll give you a free copy.
Just send your business card to William Fellows, Kepner-Tregoe, Inc., P.O.
Box 704, Research Road, Princeton, NJ 08542.
Together, we'll write the book for the next century.
Kepner Tregoe The Consulting Company for the Rational Manager
The Croton Aqua Chrono Master
Amazing!
A precision water-resistant chronograph for only %295!
Stylish.
Functional.
Sophisticated.
The chronograph is the timepiece of choice for today's active man-on-the-go.
The Croton Aqua Chrono Master , made by one of America's most distinguished watchmakers, is a world-class precision chronograph for just $295!
An incredible value — loaded with dazzling features usually found only in chronographs costing much more!
Compare for yourself!
The Croton Aqua Chrono Master boasts a state-of-the-art quartz movement housed in a precision machined, brushed stainless steel case that's water resistant to 300 feet, a stopwatch function that tracks to  of a second, and there's even a countdown timer.
The ratcheted, rotating bezel sets the time limits for underwater and other action sports.
A 12-hour alarm sounds off at your command.
The stunning luminous display and thickly padded, genuine leather wristband are the height of fashion in any setting.
Three-year manufacturer's warranty and 30-day money back guarantee .
An incredible value at just $295 (plus $3.50 shipping/handling), payable in 8 convenient monthly credit card instalments of only $37.31 each!
Order yours today!
Call Toll Free: 1–800–759–7253 
Phone orders shipped within 1 to 2 weeks
CITROËN
CITROËN XM.
EUROPEAN CAR OF THE YEAR 1990.
We are all looking forward to one Europe in 1992.
But in 1990 Europe, it seems, is already united; in its praise for the Citroën XM.
For 57 motoring experts from 17 European countries overwhelmingly voted the Citroën XM European Car of the Year 1990.
They appreciated that the XM sets new standards of ride and handling by actually anticipating the road ahead.
Its computerised suspension system monitors road conditions and adjusts the suspension, when your driving demands it, from a luxury saloon ride to sports car handling in 0.05 of a second.
Whilst the XM's suspension guarantees maximum driving pleasure, its leatherbound air-conditioned interior ensures maximum comfort.
So wherever you're driving, the European Car of the Year gives you the best of both worlds.
Model featured XM 3 litre V∘ sei.
All models run on unleaded petrol.
All V6 models are fitted with catalytic convertor.
Car of the Year sponsored by the following publications: Stern, L'Equipe, AM, Sunday Express Magazine, VI Bilagare, Autopista, Auto Visie.
CITROËN.
LA ROUTE MAÎTRISÉE.
Just Desks
London Collection by Just Desks
Just the right blend — Modern Technology with Traditional Elegance
London Collection.
Unique pieces, as you'd expect from Just Desks.
Individually designed and functional to the very last detail.
Hand-crafted from the choicest veneers and finest leather.
Tailor-made to your personal specifications to enhance every environment — from private study to entire office suite.
Ask Just Desks for their expert guidance on matching chairs and sofas, lamps and other accessories to give your interior design just the right ambience.
This might make the decision to buy London Collection seem pretty easy to take…
So why not make things hard for yourself and send for the full Just Desks catalogue or call in at our showrooms and see everything else we can offer you.
VICTOR LEAN MACHINE.
Think vertically from now on.
Victor's latest range of PC's is unique in the world of technology and design.
The star of the new range is, of course, the V386MX.
A tower-block of computer power in miniature (just 12.5″ high and 4.5″ wide) Victor occupies less desk space than any would-be AT system rival.
It's mere size is a step forward in itself.
So, too, is the high-rise appearance and greatly enhanced performance.
But in the end it's what's inside that counts.
The Victor V386MX stands alone and is available for only £1999 (for a powerful 40MB MVGA version).
Astounded or astonished?
That's the effect that Victor usually has on people.
Victor's New Dimensions range includes: V86M — 10MHz 8086 processor starting from £999 for a 20MB MVGA model.
V286M — 12MHz 80268 processor starting from £1799 for a 40MB MVGA model.
V386MX — 16MHz 80386X processor starting from £1999 for a 40 MB MVGA model.
For a demonstration or more information on how Victor can help you shape up for the 90's contact any one of our Victor Authorised Dealers or call Sarah Brown at Victor on .
Victor New Dimensions
Travel Industry Monitor
In the fast moving travel and tourism industry, it is vital to be informed of significant changes in order to take the right business decisions.
Travel Industry Monitor is a new monthly publication from the Economist Intelligence Unit.
It provides industry managers with the incisive analysis and clear interpretation of key developments which they need to stay ahead.
Each month analysis will include:
•Key Markets — travel trends and patterns of behaviour
•Legislation — rulings and policies as they affect both suppliers and consumers
•Specific Market Segments — e.g. business travel, special interest, senior citizens
•Key players — performance of airlines, hotels, tour operators, etc
•Destinations — major and emerging regions
•New Technology — reservation systems and marketing strategies.
In newsletter format, Travel Industry Monitor is for the decision maker who needs up-to-date objective information on important issues, professionally presented in an accessible format.
GUINNESS PLC
Whenever you pack your bags, wherever you set them down, you will never be far from a little bit of home.
Our brands are so ubiquitous, so successful that Guinness PLC is one of Britain's most important overseas earners.
In the same distinguished company as BP, Unilever, British Aerospace and ICI.
In Bangkok you can relax with Johnnie Walker, the world's most popular Scotch.
In Sydney you can lift the world's favourite gin, Gordon's, to your lips.
In New York a Dewar's; in Tokyo a White Horse; in Los Angeles a Tanqueray.
You will find brands from the Guinness portfolio in over 200 countries worldwide.
And don't forget Guinness stout itself.
Over 7,000,000 glasses are downed, in over 120 countries, every single day.
Now there's a pleasant thought.
In the last two years Guinness PLC has acquired a substantial interest in LVMH, France's largest luxury goods company with such famous brands as Moët & Chandon champagne, Hennessy cognac, Louis Vuitton luggage and Christian Dior perfumes.
And now we're also  benefiting from joint ventures with LVMH in Asia Pacific Region, USA and Europe.
And when you return home you will find many enjoyable reminders of your travels in Britain as well.
It's nice to know that a British company is so much at home overseas.
GUINNESS PLC
ROLLS ROYCE
More Power.
More Performance.
1989 was an important year for Rolls-Royce.
Turnover grew to £2962 million (1988 £1973 million) of which NEI contributed £602 million for seven and a half months.
Profit before tax increased by 39% to £233 million (1988 £168 million) and includes £37 million contribution from NEI.
The NEI merger took place on May 15. 35% of turnover in a full year is now expected from products other than aero gas turbines.
NEI is already beginning to benefit from Roll-Royce's unrivalled experience in high technology manufacturing and extensive research investment.
In his comments in future prospects, the Chairman of Rolls-Royce, Lord Tombs of Brailes, said: ‘The prospects for our enlarged Group are encouraging.
Rolls-Royce has a strong order book in aero gas turbines and the prospect of further large orders in a buoyant aircraft market.
NEI plans to be a major beneficiary of the changes in the structure of the UK power industry and its need for further capacity.’
The order book stood at £4.5 billion for the existing Rolls-Royce business at the end of 1989, and NEI orders outstanding approached £900 million, an overall total of approximately £5.4 billion.
Rolls-Royce plc, 65 Buckingham Gate, London SW1E 6AT.
Ingres
How much time can you afford before your database is actually working?
Your company stands or falls on how quickly it can handle information.
No-one knows this better than Ingres.
That's why we've produced a database with development tools that gets new systems up and running in no time.
In a form that suits your business.
Not your database.
And giving you complete access to the information you need.
Whether it's on different operating systems, databases or hardware.
Like ICL, DEC, IBM or UNIX.
Anywhere in the world.
Which also means your current investment in IT is fully protected.
We like to think of our relationship with you as a business partnership.
That's why we help you all the way; from initial development and consultancy to service, training and comprehensive support.
For a down to earth approach to your database problems call .
Keesing's Record of World Events
Keep a track of the facts in a fast moving world
Newspapers are thrown away and reference books soon go out of date.
Keesing's gives you regularly updated, accurate, impartial, political and economic information.
•Every month, a digest of current world news.
•Over a year, factual background reports on every country of the world, international organisations, global issues
News for the 1990s backed up by 60 years of authoritative reporting.
Each issue is fully indexed and cross referenced.
You can also search Keeling's on-line on the Financial Times Profile Information Service.
United Nations Development Programme
Series of Four Volumes
Human Development
Edited by Khadija Haq and Uner Kirdar
Each volume contains valuable contributions by leading development professionals, national and international policy-makers, academicians and private sector executives.
Volume I: HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: THE NEGLECTED DIMENSION
Thirty years of development theory and experience are reviewed, with the conclusion that people have been neglected as the objective of development.
Concrete actions and new initiatives are recommended to restore the human dimension to its central position in development policy-making and planning.
Volume II: HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: ADJUSTMENT AND GROWTH
The high human cost of the 1980 adjustment policies are assessed.
The volume emphasises that adjustment without growth and human development is unacceptable and counter-productive and proposes possible alternatives.
Volume III: MANAGING HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Many new political philosophies diminish the role of the state in human development.
Concrete steps are proposed to put people at the forefront of a resource-constrained environment, with due account of the profound impact of new technologies.
Volume IV: DEVELOPMENT FOR PEOPLE: GOALS AND STRATEGIES FOR THE YEAR 2000
Competitiveness, productivity and management capacity are the key factors in future economic growth.
This volume proposes strategies to meet the challenges of human development for the years ahead.
OECD Publications
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Paris France
A SPECIAL OFFER
RECEIVE THREE ISSUES FOR THE PRICE OF TWO
OECD Economic Studies
If you enter a 1990 subscription to OECD Economic Studies today, we will send you free of charge the special 1989–90 winter issue on ‘Modelling the Effects of Agricultural Policies’.
This special edition of OECD Economic Studies is devoted entirely to applications of economic analysis to agricultural policy questions.
The importance of the issues raised here by various types of assistance and protection to agriculture in virtually all OECD countries should be of interest to a wide range of readers.
This issue comprises an extensive effort to apply economic modelling techniques and other analytical approaches to policy issues in a specific sector.
As such, it represents a case study — illustrating the interdependence of various techniques, and the extent to which it is possible to make progress in quantifying the effects of policies and of policy changes.
This issue provides important experience to developing approaches for examining microeconomic issues in other areas — for example, industrial subsidies, trade policies, and taxation.
Published twice a year, this journal features articles generally in the area of applied macroeconomic and statistical analysis, with an international or cross-country dimension.
Most of the articles derive from papers produced for the OECD's intergovernmental Committees and are written either by members of the OECD Secretariat or by consultants.
Views expressed in OECD Economic Studies are those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect those of the OECD or its Member governments.
Recent articles have dealt with trade liberalisation, population ageing and pensions, revision of the system of national accounts, and deregulation and privatisation in an economy-wide context.
PROFIT FROM THE BOOM IN EMERGING MARKETS
Subscribe to the quarterly Directory of Emerging Market Funds
This quarterly professional investment service tracks more than 130 closed-end and open-end portfolios targeting fast-developing stock markets of Asia, Latin America and Europe:
•Identify the most successful funds,
•Compare fees, expenses and holdings,
•Monitor trends in discounts and premiums with detailed charts,
•Save hundreds of hours of research.
Annual Subscriptions: US$395 for four quarterly issues, plus shipping cost of $75 for non-US subscribers and $25 for US subscribers.
MultiMarket Publications, c/o Kleiman International Consultants 80 Wall Street, Suite 818 New York, NY 10005
International Labour Office Productivity management: A practical handbook by Joseph Prokopenko
‘…offers a new, refreshing approach to productivity: why it is important, and how to manage and measure it…deals in a stimulating way with such productivity programmes as action learning, quality circles, inter-firm comparisons, and business clinics.
Managers, management consultants and those responsible for the development of human resources will find this book a valuable, practical guide to productivity…’
(Journal of European Industrial Training , London, United Kingdom).
A training videocassette based in this book, entitled ‘Quality in the Job’, is available from Guild Sound and Vision Ltd,.
Introduction to work study 3rd (revised) edition
This highly successful bestseller is known throughout the world as the best available introduction to the subject.
‘It is remarkably complete as well as being extremely well presented.
With a wealth of illustration material rarely found in any textbook, it deals exhaustively with its subject…the great classic text in work study.’
(Industrial and Commercial Training , Northampton, United Kingdom) Access/MasterCard/Eurocard and Visa accepted 
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE
German Brief
Change is coming swiftly in Germany.
Walls are tumbling down.
Barriers are being broken.
History is being made.
And business opportunities created.
Frankfurter Algemeine Zeitung GmbH
Informations Dienste
German Brief, a monthly English language news-letter with a four-page weekly news update, is published by the Frankfurter Algemeine Zeitung Informationsdienste, a division of West Germany's most respected daily and business newspapers with over one million readers.
As well as reviewing and commenting on major political and economic events, German Brief keeps its readers informed on likely developments within key sectors of German industry.
German Brief provides subscribers with:
•Facts and figures on such economic developments as exports and imports, balance of trade, consumer trends and inflation rates.
•An exclusive rating system of nine key German industrial sectors showing current levels of activity and forecasts for the coming months.
•Profiles of leading West German companies, and smaller but significant exporters.
•Analysis of the rapidly changing situation in East Germany and its impact on the economy and politics of West Germany.
•Information on trade fairs, conferences and other events well in advance.
•A copy of the German Handbook, a compact business guide which is updated annually.
Even if you have your own intelligence sources, such as an in-house research department, German Brief provides you with a knowledgeable and authoritative insight into the German business scene.
Special offer: Enclose payment with your order and we'll send you an exclusive 40-page report entitled ‘The Financing Systems of German Mortgage Banks’, which gives you an in-depth overview of Germany's mortgage bank system.
Panasonic
It's time to put hi-tech in its place.
And where does high technology belong?
Matsushita Electric thinks you should be the one to decide.
So when we set out to develop our new Panasonic brand AT compatible personal computer, we designed it for maximum versatility.
No desk?
It's light and compact enough to fit comfortably in your lap.
No electricity?
It can run off a rechargeable battery pack.
Tough job?
You've got 32 bits of portable processing performance at your disposal.
This type of product is just one example of what we call ‘Human Electronics’, meaning simply that people come first.
We develop technology that adapts naturally to your lifestyle.
Giving you the freedom to be more creative and productive.
Adding convenience and a little fun.
It all comes back to putting technology in its proper place — wherever you are.
Panasonic Matsushita Electric
Mercedes-Benz
The Mercedes-Benz S-class.
A less opulent version won the 1989 World Sports Car Championship.
There's more common ground between the Mercedes-Benz S-class and the Sauber-Mercedes World Sports Car Champion than meets the eye.
In fact, they're as closely related as their hugely different roles in life allow, each dominating its niche with unanswerable conviction.
UNRIVALLED REFINEMENT
The S-class is a car of unique on-road presence and refinement that continues to define the luxury motoring experience.
It has to do with the perfect fusion of many things: the refinement and effortless muscularity of the six-cylinder and V8 engines; the harmonious balance of the springing and damping; the flawless construction; the quality of interior appointments; the strength of the body shell; the grace of the body line.
The silence.
EXPLOSIVE POWER
Take a purposeful drive in a Sauber-Mercedes, however, and your first response will be a sharp intake of breath.
The rock-hard ride, shattering noise levels and savage cornering powers will probably exhaust you before a single racing lap is complete.
But after such an outing, you'll at least understand why the S-class engine is so reassuringly robust.
Look in each engine bay for the power-plant they share: the racing version delivering explosive performance for up to 24 hours at a time; the S-class working its passage for a lifetime — unobtrusively, powerfully, and with unstinting reliability.
The six-cylinder 300SE offers 130mph-plus autobahn potential and the flagship V  SEL, 156 mph and 0–60 mph in less than 6.9 seconds.
(Manufacturer's figures.)
UNMATCHED EXPERIENCE
The well of motoring experience that Mercedes-Benz draw on is unmatched by any other car manufacturer.
And it's a tradition that sustains the pre-eminence of the seven-car S-class range.
Pity, therefore, the hard-pressed driver of the Sauber-Mercedes.
His car makes room for only the S-class's V8 — not its interior opulence.
ENGINEERED LIKE NO OTHER CAR IN THE WORLD
The Mercedes-Benz S-class is the world's most respected limousine.
NCR
Without Open, Cooperative Computing, workstations become battlestations.
Despite breakneck advances in information technology, it can still be quite a fight to get hold of the precise data you need, when you need it.
The differences between computer systems impose artificial limits upon the information that can be accessed.
Enter NCR and the principle of Open, Cooperative Computing.
OCC is a flexible computing strategy based on open interfaces for hardware, software and networking.
The advantages: far greater connectivity and portability of application between systems, and information and resources that can be shared by everyone who needs them and has authorisation to access them.
The benefits: greatly improved productivity and more effective decision making which will provide your business with an even greater competitive advantage.
Moreover, so that every user feels confident with the system, OCC provides a simple, intuitive user interface which facilitates access to applications and data regardless of where they exist in the enterprise.
By using menus, mice and pointers, NCR makes every ‘industry standard’ software package look and feel alike.
The same is true, whatever kind of PC, workstation or network terminal you happen to choose — from the powerful PC 486 family to the sophisticated Towerview networking X-stations.
Not that we're resting on our laurels.
Tomorrow's OCC systems will combine video, sound, and graphics in a generation of computers the business world has only dreamed about.
To find out more about Open, Cooperative Computing, call NCR on 071–724 400.
You'll never have to battle for information again.
NCR
Open, Cooperative Computing.
The Strategy For Managing Change.
Minster Court
75% of the City's offices are pre-1970.
Can they seriously cope with world markets?
Technologically speaking the City of London is no Tokyo, Hong Kong or even Wall Street.
As one of the world's financial centres, the City's reputation is undisputed.
It employs many of the sharpest minds in Britain.
But overall, it doesn't have the premises to give their talents full reign.
‘Where's the future?’
The first purpose-built offices in the Square Mile were designed around 150 years ago.
They were built to house legions of men with scratching quills.
(Conditions were well and truly Dickensian.)
Many of those buildings are still in use today.
The refurbishers have been in and out over the generations.
But essentially, the time in which they were built is a world apart from the time we live in.
‘Is twenty years really too old?’
Yes it is.
Even in those days, the architects never had to consider the word processor, the microcomputer, the fax machine.
And they certainly never considered the stress that world markets would put on staff in the Nineties and beyond.
‘In the City's heart; a new hub and oasis?’
In the heart of the City, one of the most adventurous projects in many decades is now coming to completion.
Minster Court covers the entire block between Mincing Lane and Mark Lane.
Whilst it complements the architecture of its surroundings there is nothing else like it within the Square Mile.
It comprises three buildings.
The largest, some 295,000 sq ft has already been let to the London Underwriting Centre.
In the other two buildings, premises are available in units from 7,000 to 200,000 sq ft.
Designed to become the new hub of the City, the layout and technology of Minster Court foresees the demands of the world markets well into the 21st century.
It has also been planned with the understanding that people are among the most valuable assets that any firm or corporation has.
From the top floors you can be inspired by the panoramic views across the City and from all the floors you, can look out onto a vast covered court.
Here.
there will be cafes, restaurants and wine bars to provide much needed facilities for this huge project.
Everything, in fact, which it seemed almost impossible to find in one place in the City before.
Richard Ellis are handling Minster Court on behalf of the Prudential.
Contact Roger Lister on .
MINSTER COURT, COVERING AN ENTIRE BLOCK IN THE HEART OF THE CITY.
RHÔNE-POULENC
WELCOME TO A WORLD OF PERFORMANCE, CHALLENGE AND SAFETY.
Polyester and polyamide yarns and fibres with ever-greater performance for competition suits as soft to the touch as they are resistant.
High-tech materials that boost equipment quality and safety.
Through our advanced technology MERYL and SETILA microfibres, Rhône-Poulenc helps to bring about a world of greater comfort and performance.
intel
You know what it's like: sitting in front of your PC, wasting time while it calculates a complex spreadsheet, draws your graphs or searches the database.
Or when you're waiting to go into a meeting and your secretary is still finishing your presentation because the PC is so slow.
The answer is simple — speed up your PC with a Math CoProcessor from Intel.
The Intel Math CoProcessor will accelerate the performance of more than four hundred of the most popular software packages by up to five times and virtually all PC's already have a socket for one of these chips.
Remember: Time is money, your money.
The Intel Math CoProcessor, developed and built by Intel, the architect of the microprocessor.
THE SWISS BANK GOLD INGOT WATCH
Exclusive!
A distinguished new watch from Switzerland.
Featuring an official, solid 24kt gold ingot issued by the world famous Swiss Bank Corporation.
Solid 24kt gold.
Gleaming.
Precious.
Its power inspires success, its presence proves it.
Now, it's the ultimate accent of distinction for a precision timepiece.
This classic watch radiates the power of gold in its purest form: .999 fine.
In a solid one gram 24kt gold ingot, issued by the prestigious Swiss Bank Corporation.
Swiss Precision and Quality.
One of Switzerland's finest private watchmakers has crafted this timepiece exclusively for the Danbury Mint.
The precise Swiss quartz movement assures lasting accuracy.
The strap is genuine leather and the showerproof watchcase is electroplated with a full three microns of 22kt gold.
Easy to acquire.
The Swiss Bank Gold Ingot Watch costs just $195 plus $3 shipping and handling, payable in five convenient monthly instalments of $39.60 each if you pay by credit card.
If you are not completely satisfied, return it within 30 days for replacement or refund.
Return the reservation application today!
Audi
The two luxury cars that are capturing the German imagination.
There they were.
West and East Germany's finest.
Poignantly standing along a stretch of the fast-disappearing Berlin Wall.
Throughout the day, a steady stream of East Germans came along to sit in it, admire it, wonder at it, touch it — the latest Trabant 601 de-luxe, that is.
The £40,000 with of high technology next to it may just as well have come from another world as another country.
Curiously, the two cars have striking similarities.
For example, the Trabant's bodywork is a combination of cotton and plastic, which renders it rustproof.
The new Audi V8 too, has a rust-proofed body, although Audi has opted for more substantial galvanised steel instead.
And, by zinc galvanizing all the bare metal, Audi is able to offer a 10 year guarantee against rusting, which should see you nicely into the next millennium.
The Trabant features a new 1100cc environmentally friendlier engine.
(In comparison to the old 2-stroke power plant, which ran on a combination of petrol and oil.)
The engineers at Audi, too, have cast an eye to the environment.
As with all Audi models, the V8 comes with the latest 3-way catalytic converter technology as standard, which reduces toxic pollutants by up to 95%.
For the past six years they've spent time perfecting the revolutionary 3.6 litre, 32 valve, V8 engine.
This is arguably the quietest, smoothest, most advanced engine in any saloon today.
When it comes to luxury fitting both cars have their share.
The Trabant, for example, boasts textile floor covering and a two-tone horn.
Standard equipment on the V8 includes quattro four-wheel drive with electronic automatic transmission, ABS, cruise-control, climate control air-conditioning, leather upholstery, on-board computer and six-speaker stereo system.
Not forgetting Audi's unique Procon-Ten safety system.
This pre-tensions the seat belts and pulls the steering column away from the driver in the event of a frontal impact.
Apparently none of this means too much to the East Germans at the moment, but we're sure it's just another barrier that they'll soon surmount.
HEWLETT PACKARD
Make your weekly report as good as your annual report.
The Hewlett-Packard guide to quality output.
It's not been a particularly good week.
You're at your terminal making those last adjustments to the spreadsheets.
Making the graphs that little bit neater.
Now only one thing can make the report look better.
An HP Laserjet.
Its whisper-quiet action can produce up to eight pages of publication quality text, graphics and transparencies a minute.
Fully compatible with all leading software, the HP LaserJet can handle even the most sophisticated word-processing packages.
So by the time you've played around with type sizes, switched fonts and merged text with graphics the whole document is beginning to take on a whole new look.
In no time at all you've got a professional looking report that would do justice to a public company, let alone a sales manager.
And even those moderate figures look great.
So next time you've got something important to say, make sure you print it on an HP LaserJet.
For full details contact Hewlett-Packard Marcom Operations Europe, PO Box 529, 1180 AM, Amstelveen, The Netherlands.
HEWLETT PACKARD.
THE POSSIBILITY MADE REALITY.
KLM
Most airlines are satisfied when they meet their standards.
Then KLM sets new ones.
At KLM, we're always improving to keep pace with your higher level of expectations.
Which means more than adding new destinations to our worldwide network and advanced aircraft to our fleet.
New: meal service in Royal Class features sumptuous season specialties served in fine china and crisp linen cloths.
Accompanied by wines from the best vineyards.
And you can freshen up after dinner with the amenities of a comfort pack.
New: wider seats are being installed in our European Business Class, comfortably spaced 2 by 3.
We removed a seat per row, making room for five abreast on our B737s (completed by end of June).
And seven on our A310s (completed by mid September).
We also added a permanent partition for more privacy.
Still more news includes monitors for more viewing pleasure on most of our B747s, plus ITN News to keep you informed as you cross continents.
In fact, you can expect a lot of good news from KLM as we continue to meet your expectations.
Test us, try us, fly us.
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines The Reliable Airline
CORUM
Maîtres Artisans d'Horlogerie
SUISSE
The Admiral's Cup — simply one of the most distinctive and elegant sports watches in the world.
Admiral's Cup with enamelled nautical pennants marking the hours.
Registered model, water resistant.
18 ct gold/or steel and gold, for ladies and men.
ALFA ROMEO
ALFA 164.
A CLASS OF ITS OWN.
Born from Alfa Romeo's remarkable heritage of superb performance and incomparable handling, the new Alfa 164 is quite simply an extraordinary sports saloon.
Styled by Pininfarina, the 164's sporty profile has one of the best aerodynamic ratings in its category: CX 0.30.
To give it increased speed, but with better stability and fuel consumption.
The 3-litre V-6 model has a power plant which develops 192 horsepower, producing quite an exceptional torque of 25 kg/m at 4,000 rpm.
More than sufficient to ensure spectacular acceleration, even in high gear.
Top speed is over 230 kph.
(Automatic transmission is also available).
The 2-litre Twin Spark version develops 148 HP, a torque of 19 kg/m at 4,000 rpp, and has a top speed of over 210 koh.
The interior of the 164, constructed from elegant materials and designed with obsessive attention to detail, is as luxurious as it is spacious.
Active safety features such as ABS and Alfa Romeo's legendary road-holding ability combine security with performance, to give a unique driving experience.
And the world over there are Alfa Romeo dealers who share a passion for fine cars and the highly refined technical skills that go into them.
The Alfa 164.
Extraordinary.
From every point of view.
The European
Now, you'll have a much better focus on Europe.
Europe's first national weekend newspaper.
64 pages, every Friday throughout Europe.
The European
You can't be one without it.
Managing Directors
Personnel Managers
Business International offers you:
BI/COL — THE EXECUTIVE COST OF LIVING SURVEY 1990
An indispensable report for companies transferring their executives from one major city to another throughout the world.
If you are:•Locating a new European office
•Opening a sales office in the Far East
•Expanding operations in the Middle East
•Or need to reassess your expatriate compensation packages
The sound knowledge of local living costs obtained from BI/COL will help provide the key to achieving the right renumeration package.
The Easton Press
Own one of these leather-bound books for only $4.95…the price of a paperback!
THE 100 GREATEST BOOKS EVER WRITTEN
The finest edition you can find of Moby Dick is the great Easton Press leather-bound edition.
Now you can have this luxurious book (a wonderful value at its regular price of $36.50) for the price of a paperback — only $4.95 — with no obligation to buy any other book.
You can keep Moby Dick for $4.95 forever!.
Why is The Easton Press making this, dare we say it, whale of a deal?
Because we think you'll be delighted and astonished when you see the quality of your first Easton Press leather-bound edition.
When you feel the quality of the leather, and hold the heft of the book.
When you look at the beauty of the binding, and see the gleam of the 22kt gold inlaid on the spine!
Frankly, we are hoping you will be so taken with this first volume that you will want to own additional leather-bound editions from The 100 Greatest Books Ever Written.
But you are under no obligation to do so.
Replace those paperbacks and forgotten bestsellers with leather-bound classics!
There's a time in your life when you will want to replace your paperbacks and forgotten best sellers with a library of beautiful and important books.
That's what a great library is all about…books so magnificent that they are your pride and joy…a statement about you.
And a library of leather-bound books is the best of all.
Each book bound in genuine leather with accents of 22kt gold.
Real Value!
The books in this collection are a genuine value, not cheap reprints.
Not poor-quality editions in imitation leather.
Easton Press editions are the real thing.
Real leather editions of the finest quality.
Heirloom books elegantly bound and printed on acid-free paper so they will last for generations.
Yet the cost is not expensive.
For little more than the price of ordinary-looking hardcover books you can own these extraordinary editions — books that are admired and collected in 131 countries around the world.
Books that you will be proud to display in your home — forever!
Classics by Brontë.
Dickens.
Dostoyevsky.
Shakespeare.
Twain.
Who remembers most of yesterday's best sellers?
You can be sure the world will never forget the works of Shakespeare.
Milton.
Dostoyevsky.
Dickens.
Tolstoy.
Twain.
These are the greatest authors of all time — represented here by their greatest works!
(We include a list of all the titles with your $4.95 book: you then get to choose which books you want to receive!)
Each volume is custom-bound for you.
You don't see luxurious leather-bound books in most homes, which is all the more reason you'll be proud to see them in yours!
Nor do you see these Easton Press leather editions for sale in bookstores.
They are made available directly to you — with no bookstore mark-up and no distribution excesses.
This is what lets us keep the price low and the quality high.
Superior craftsmanship and materials go into each Easton Press edition.
Premium-quality leather.
Acid-neutral paper.
Gilded page ends.
Satin ribbon page markers.
Moiré fabric endsheets.
Superb illustrations.
Hubbed spines accented with precious 22kt gold.
At $4.95 you have nothing to lose!
Own Moby Dick for $4.95.
For the price of a paperback, own this luxurious edition outright.
Then, whether you buy anything further is entirely up to you.
Obviously, you get this book for a fraction of what it costs us to make.
We do so in confidence that you will be truly impressed.
To take us up on this unusual opportunity, simply call us, toll free, at the number shown, or mail the reservation application below.
The Easton Press
Books shown smaller than actual size.
A strategy for the Ecu
What role can the Ecu play in the movement towards the economic and monetary union of Europe?
This unique report, based on a comprehensive survey of companies and financial institutions within the EC, proposes a strategy and timetable for the implementation of the Ecu as a tool for achieving monetary union in Europe.
The report has been prepared by Ernst & Young and the National Institute of Economic and Social Research on behalf of the Association for the Monetary Union of Europe.
Available from the Economists' Bookshop using this order form:
NEW EUROPE
Is Europe News to You?
You can NOW secure the only complete political, economic and business panorama from the single source used by governments, bankers and strategic planners.
NEW EUROPE, alone, will equip you with the pointers and analysis you need for success.
Send NOW for a FREE sample issue to: Lettres (UK) Ltd, Department ZA02, 61 Old Street, London EC1V 9HX.
Tel:.
Fax:
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE
World Labour Report 1989.
Volume 4
In this volume the impact of the adjustment process in the 1980s on the employment conditions of public service employees are examined.
Various ways in which employment conditions are determined, ranging from unilateral determination by the government to collective bargaining are reviewed, as well as measures that can help productivity.
Volume 1:
Covers employment, incomes and wages, social security, and the impact of information technology.
Volume 2:
Covers industrial relations, trade unions and employers' organisations, basic labour rights, training, working conditions and women workers.
Volume 3:
Deals with the issue ‘Incomes from work: between equity and efficiency’ in developing and industrialised countries, and illustrates trends in employment, labour relations, training and social security.
Take advantage of saving 25% by ordering all 4 volumes at the price of only £52.80.
Eurocard/MasterCard/Access and Visa accepted.
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE
Directory of Foreign Trade Organizations in Eastern Europe
‘With over 1300 entries, this is the largest print list of Eastern European businesses available…’— Library Journal
•Includes Import/Export listings for Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania and the USSR
•Second Edition
•Price: $125.00 (plus $12.50 shipping outside US)
•Send check or money order to: International Trade Press 2 Townsend St.,
2–304 San Francisco, CA 94107 (in California add 6 ½%; sales tax)
PORSCHE
ABOUT DRIVING A PORSCHE
It tends to find its rightful owner.
PORSCHE DRIVING IN ITS PUREST FORM
SCHOTT
Accurate thermometers were exclusive to nature until Otto Schott came along.
In winter you can look out of the window and tell it's 2°C outside.
How?
Because the crocuses are coming into bloom.
Crocuses are plants that nature has provided with a biological thermometer.
It's very accurate, reacting to temperature differences of as little as 0.5°C.
As the weather gets warmer the flowers open.
But when the temperature drops, they close again.
But ever since Otto Schott invented thermometer glass it's been possible to measure temperature differences to an accuracy of one thousandth of a degree Celsius.
It was his development of special thermometer glass with glass capillaries containing liquid that made such accurate measurement feasible.
The glass used up to that time had had a very poor ‘memory’.
Repeated warming and cooling resulted in varying readings.
With Otto Schott's glass that became a thing of the past.
Nowadays thousands of different types of thermometer in use in science and industry are based on the principles he laid down.
Thermometer glass is just another example of Schott's development work.
Advanced technology cannot operate without special glass.
The Schott Group manufactures 50,000 special glass products.
It has 50 production units worldwide, representation in more than 100 countries, an annual turnover of more than £780 million, and 17,000 employees.
If you'd like to know more about special glass and the Schott Group, write to Schott Glass Ltd.,.
SCHOTT
No. 1 in Europe for Special Glass.
Citroën Fleet
ANYTHING LESS IS A COMPROMISE.
The opulent comfort of a limousine on a long motorway journey…
Or the taut handling of a sports saloon on winding country lanes…
Why make your executives compromise when they can enjoy driving both?
Without changing cars.
Provided that the car in question is the Citroën XM.
Thanks to Citroën's mastery of suspension technology, the XM's computer-controlled system reacts automatically to different road conditions and the way you drive.
In ‘comfort’ mode, it provides the softer ride associated with luxury cars; in ‘sport’setting, it adopts a firmer, more dynamic character.
In short, the Citroën XM benefits from having the most advanced suspension system to be found on any production car.
A dazzling performance is ensured through a range of five engines that includes 2 litre carburettor and 2 litre injection units…as well as the world's first multi-valve diesel.
There's also the smooth effortless power of a refined 3 litre V6, and the sheer excitement of its 24 valve counterpart.
With the environment in mind, all petrol engines run on unleaded fuel (Diesel, of course, is lead free).
Moreover, a catalytic converter is standard on all V6 models and available on 2 litre injection XMs.
Finally, as prices range from £15,190 to £26,910 it represents superb value for such a high specification.
What's more, for an executive car the cost of ownership is exceptionally low.
Proof that the XM performs just as admirably on the financial side as it does on the road.
Any kind of road.
Citroën XM THE SHAPE OF TECHNOLOGY
AMSTRAD
IT'S PASSED THE TOUGHEST TEST OF ALL.
Open up the System Box, and you might be looking at an IBM.
(PC PLUS MAGAZINE)
When it comes to the Amstrad PC3386SX for once the experts all agree.
Good looks, fast moves and ferociously competitive prices.
(WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER MAGAZINE)
And no wonder.
The high standard of specification speaks for itself.
One of the fastest SX's we've ever looked at.
(WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER MAGAZINE)
The Intel 386sx TM processor runs at 20Mhz making it one of the fastest SX's on the market.
What's more there's a full 1 Mb of RAM expandable up to a massive 16Mb.
The PC3386SX has 5 expansion slots and room to add extra floppy disc drives, hard drives and tape streamers.
All models have enhanced VGA graphics with a choice of 12″ monochrome, 14″ colour or 14″ high resolution colour monitors.
A sparkling performer.
(PC PLUS MAGAZINE)
They come with high density 3½ 1.44Mb floppy disc drive and 40Mb fast access hard drive.
It's a safe, reliable and well engineered bit of hardware…at an excellent price.
(PERSONAL COMPUTER WORLD MAGAZINE)
And all have a highly integrated design built within a robust metal cabinet.
These prices will give headaches to most other PC makers from IBM downwards.
(WHAT PERSONAL COMPUTER MAGAZINE)
The Amstrad PC3386SX starts from as little as £1399+VAT (the PC3286 with 16Mhz 80286 CPU starts from £749+VAT).
We think you'll agree with ‘What Micro?’
Magazine: ‘This is the one to buy.’
VAUXHALL
IF IT HAS TWO ENGINES, WHERE'S THE OTHER ONE?
It really doesn't matter where you look.
You'll come away convinced the new Senator CD has just one engine.
A 3.0 litre, 24 valve power plant in the usual place, under the bonnet.
Few people guess the truth.
That what in fact seems to be a traditional straight six is in fact two engines in on.
The transformation takes place at 4000 revs.
Below this a valve closes, dividing the airflow to the engine so that it runs as two separate three cylinder units.
Then, once the revs increase above 4000, the valve opens to link all six air intakes and turn the separate units back into a straight six engine.
The reason for this double act becomes obvious the minute you set off.
A touch of the throttle delivers the power.
Instead of building slowly, it's available at all speeds and in each gear.
This well-mannered verve lets you top 60 mph in 8.8 seconds without a murmur of complaint from the engine.
The handling is equally effortless.
A new 5-link rear suspension system stabilises the car, helping you to stay in control even in an emergency.
Having made such strides with the engine and suspension, we added further touches of refinement inside and out.
There's more wood and leather on the restyled centre console.
We've fitted a compact disc player and protected it with a new security system.
This monitors nine separate areas of the car and immobilises it if someone tries to break in.
The boot now boasts a spoiler.
And below that, the rear lights are even smarter than before.
You'll be able to spot the changes without any other trouble at all.
Which is more than can be said for the other engine.
SENATOR CD 24v.
VAUXHALL
Once driven, forever smitten.
Rover 820 Si
TAX AVOIDANCE.
THE INSIDE STORY.
Far be it from us to condone tax evasion.
But we believe that company car drivers should be able to enjoy the finer things in life without being taxed to the hilt.
Which brings us to the 1991 Rover 800 Series.
In particular, the Rover 820 Si 16v.
Available as both saloon and fastback, the Rover 820 Si 16v is designed to beat the system on two counts.
For a start, it slips under the 2 litre tax threshold.
It also falls short of the cut-off figure of £19,250.
Together, that amounts to an annual tax saving of up to £1,000, compared to cars in a higher tax bracket.
It would wrong, however, to assume that the Rover 820 Si 16v had been assembled by a team of accountants.
Settle behind the soft-grip steering wheel and savour the atmosphere.
There's polished burr walnut everywhere you look.
Electric windows front and rear.
A ventilation system that's capable of changing the cabin air three times a minute.
You'll find power steering, electric sunroof, alarm and infra-red remote door locking.
Less expected, perhaps, are details like variable lumbar support and a footrest.
While you relax in Rover comfort, the merest touch of your right foot will release a surge of power from the 140 PS engine.
‘Peppy, willing and responsive,’ was the verdict of Why Car?
Indeed, the multi-point injected engine powers the car from 0 to 60 at a rate that leaves many of its larger-engined rivals behinds.
And the moral of the story?
By avoiding tax, you can enjoy power and luxury in equal measure.
ROVER 820 Si
fiat tempra
The Uno, the best selling small car in Europe.
The Tipo, Car of the Year 1989.
And now, the Tempra.
A sleek executive saloon that's built to last.
Though it won't be hanging around.
With a choice of engines from 1.4 up to a twin cam, fuel injected 1.8.
And an amazingly aerodynamic body.
(Cd. 0.28.)
In fact, wind offers the Tempra less resistance than any other car in its class, including the Cavalier and Sierra.
Resistance to the elements is also in the Fiat's favour.
Every inch of its exterior metal is galvanised against corrosion.
Whilst the interior allows you to sit in the lap of luxury.
Fingertip controls, plush upholstery and hush.
Not forgetting class leading interior width, giving you more room to spread out.
Which all goes to show why the Fiat Tempra, from £9,215, is a lifetime ahead of the competition.
For further information, and details of our comprehensive aftercare package, dial .
FIAT
DESIGNED FOR LIFE
For sale: Breathing space.
All manufacturers are feeling the squeeze.
Even at the best of times, you have to move faster to cope with quick-changing market forces.
But there is a way to reduce the pressure these problems place on your bottom line.
MAAPICS/DB is IBM's brand new computerised manufacturing and process management system.
It has been developed by responding to the needs of 13,000 customers over 11 years.
So it is in effect, already tried and tested.
It will give your business quicker reflexes by speeding up the whole production process, from planning to delivery.
Incorporating state-of-the-art facilities in a modular form, it will support the latest techniques, from JIT implementation to Electronic Data Interchange.
In particular, your customers will benefit from MAAPICS/DB.
Better quality control through improved traceability is just one aspect which will enhance the service your company offers and therefore sharpen the competitive edge of your business.
In short, MAAPICS/DB can save you money.
In purchasing costs, stock holding and direct production costs.
Call Mark Bignell at the IBM National Enquiry Centre on  for more information.
And get the most valuable commodity of all.
Breathing space.
IBM
‘I think, therefore IBM.’
COOLELECTRIC
Are you sure you can live through another summer without air conditioning?
Computers, faxes and photocopiers generate heat waves of their own.
When Mother Nature does the same, the modern office becomes unbearable.
Fit electric air conditioning and, though we can't promise you control over the elements, we can promise you a more comfortable, efficient working environment.
Fax for the facts
170– .
Ask for the facts on electric air conditioning.
COOL ELECTRIC
mazda
What inspired that rebellious poet called Rimbaud?
What drove him to reach into the innermost part of his soul in search of the undiscovered?
It allowed him to take words that already existed and yet express himself in a completely new way.
Some creators are brave enough to realise their dreams without compromise.
It is men like this who created the MX-5 in 1989.
By ignoring the rules they are constantly reshaping the future.
Even now they are realising a new dream.
They work for Mazda.
On the road to civilisation.
Mazda SINCE 1920
WordPerfect
WordPerfect Software.
The Complete Works.
In many great collections, you can tell that all the items are related, by the way they share the same style of presentation.
The works of WordPerfect are no exception.
WordPerfect word processing software handles both the written word and graphic interpretation with ease.
With a built-in UK dictionary & thesaurus, and easily defined page layouts, WordPerfect allows even the beginner to produce professional letters and reports.
You can choose your typeface, integrate text with graphics, and manipulate graphic images on the screen at the touch of a key.
And, of course, using WordPerfect's Preview feature, you can display an entire page — or even two facing pages — of text and graphics together, exactly as they would appear when printed.
Add to that the vast number of different computer systems for which WordPerfect is available — IBM PC, Mac, DEC VAX, OS/2, and Unix, with Windows under development, and complete file compatibility between all these environments,— it's hardly surprising that WordPerfect is the most popular word processing software in the world.
WordPerfect Corporation offers a host of other software products, including spreadsheets, graphics, databases, and office automation.
Not to mention our highly regarded free customer support service which is always on hand should you need advice or assistance.
To find out more about what WordPerfect can offer your organisation, just fill in the coupon below, and return it to us, or 'phone (0932) 850505 anytime.
WordPerfect software.
We offer you the complete works.
WordPerfect UNITED KINGDOM
graphite
Your unequal advantage…
In today's fast moving business environment, you need to be in control, to be able to take decisions quickly and with confidence.
The management of information becomes an art, master it and it becomes your unequal advantage.
The business world is one of constant change, and your business to be successful must be able to accommodate change without penalty.
If you are tired of high technology resulting in high cost, may we suggest a possible alternative scenario; the new Graphite Micro Series, a range of microcomputers which will bring true performance and flexibility to your business computing.
Using state of the art passive backplane technology, Graphite Micro Series systems become truly modular.
Each of the system's important components,(video and processor) are mounted on separate plug-in cards making upgrading and maintenance easier and more cost-effective.
Graphite are the first manufacturer to offer the ability for processor and video upgrade throughout the range, from 286, through 386 to 486-based systems.
There are three sizes of chassis, the small footprint Micro 1, the expandable Micro 2 and the flexible mini tower, Micro 3.
Whatever your business needs there is a Graphite Micro Series solution.
A solution which will grow with your business, not in spite of it.
SYSTEM UPGRADE POLICY
When you purchase any Micro Series system, you will be able to upgrade the processor to any available processor in the Graphite Micro Series range,(e.g. from a 286–12Mhz to a 286–20Mhz or even any of the superfast 386 and 486 processors), within 18 months of your original purchase for the price difference between the new and existing processor.
ONE YEAR ON SITE MAINTENANCE
All Graphite Micro Series Systems are supplied with one year's On Site maintenance free of charge.
For more information on the Graphite Micro Series call FREE today on  
graphite MICROSYSTEMS PLC
Your Unequal Advantage…
SANYO
Mr. Edmonds has been talking to himself for years…now everyone listens
Sanyo dictation machines make ‘talking to yourself’ good business sense.
Ideas, memos, letters, can all be recorded anywhere.
No fuss, no hassle.
Sanyo's range of hand-held Dictation Systems are your ‘pocket-sized P.A.’ Easy to use and there when you want them.
They are available with voice-activated recording facility — so they only tape when you talk.
Or with tie-clip mike for the businessman on the move.
So if your time is valuable start talking to Sanyo now…
SANYO DICTATION
IF YOU ARE TALKING DICTATION TALK TO SANYO ON 
star micronics
Believe it or not Vladimir makes the same business decisions as you.
It is hard to imagine a business environment more different than Vladimir's Russia.
But business is business wherever you are.
And Perestroika has meant so many changes — even the introduction of the latest computerised office technology.
Star Micronics now exports printers to Russia.
They are the same machines used everywhere else in the world.
And they do the same job.
Because, although Vladimir's environment is different, his essential business need to communicate isn't.
So he wants a printer which gives quality results, is easy to use,— and can be relied upon.
And like everyone else, he needs to watch the Roubles.
All Start products are designed and produced with this philosophy.
So you will find them all over the world.
Printers designed for people, not machines.
star micronics.
OKI
HIGH impact OKI colour…
LOW impact OKI price…
For the spectrum of office graphics applications, you can't beat OKI colour printers for superb quality output.
With full, vivid colour, every model in OKI's comprehensive range is as affordable as it is versatile and reliable.
As one of the UK's leading manufacturers of dot matrix printers, OKI's own innovative technology combines the most advanced features with the highest specification.
Backed by the dedicated support, after sales service and maintenance expertise of the OKI Premier Dealer network, OKI colour printers leave the competition firmly in the shade.
Computer printers — OKI is the word
TO FIND OUT HOW OKI CAN COLOUR YOUR WORLD…
CALL  NOW OR COMPLETE THE COUPON FOR YOUR FREE PRINTER GUIDE AND INFORMATION PACK.
STETSASONIC
Remixed by Norman Cook
All profits from this record go to The Anti-Apartheid Movement and The Africa Fund 
GO BEAT
Marxism Today
Everything I know about ethics I learnt on the football field
Albert Camus, goalkeeper, author of ‘The Outsider’
Here ref, what would you do if I called you a plonker?
Paul Gascoigne, philosopher, author of ‘Gazza, daft as a brush’
Marxism Today
ALWAYS ON THE BALL
LONDON'S GUIDE
CITY LIMITS MAGAZINE won't shield you from the truth 
every tuesday £1
mosquito
Amazing Facts No. 7.
Cycling
London's most up-to-date professional bike shop is a workers' co-operative.
Ring now for a copy of the new Mosquito Bikes 1990 catalogue showing our exciting range of quality accessories and clothing; with articles for the cyclist on touring, wheelbuilding, safety and how to upgrade your bike plus an interview with Thomas Eisl, our mountain bike racing star.
This rally is a right riveting read…mosquito
THE THIRD WAY
Communism has been rejected.
Capitalism is not as good as it claims.
Is there a third way which combines the efficiency of the market with the values of socialism?
Read ‘Economic Power’ by David Simmons.
NEW STATESMAN & SOCIETY
SUBSCRIBE NOW AND RECEIVE UP TO EIGHT BOOKS ABSOLUTELY FREE
This unique offer is open to all new subscribers.
You can choose from the list of five newly published books below, each selected from the list of Hutchinson Radius, one of the UK's leading publishers.
Take out a 1 year subscription to New Statesman & Society and you will receive one book of your choice absolutely free.
Subscribe for two years and get three books.
Take a 3 year subscription and you will receive all five of these books.
Plus every new subscriber receives another three free books — a total worth over £80.
1.
WONDERFUL LIFE
by Stephen Jay Gould tells the extraordinary story of the Burgess shale fossils.
Over 500 million years ago lived creatures more fantastic and varied than those found on earth today.
At first regarded as curiosities, they are now revolutionising our views on how life developed.
2.
COLD WAR, THIRD WORLD
by Fred Halliday is a brilliant analysis of the new turns in superpower politics in the Bush-Gorbachev era.
It offers a striking balance sheet of a decade of conflict in the Third World and locates it within the broader pattern of US-Soviet relations.
3.
EUROPE, EUROPE
is an extraordinary travel book which tells of Hans Magnus Enzensberger's forays into a continent.
Avoiding the big European states, and ignoring Cold War political boundaries, Germany's leading poet discovers a continent of countries out of step with history and with each other.
He captures the peculiar oddity of each of them, and evokes their cities, their bars and their cultures.
4.
WHAT I CAME TO SAY
is perhaps the most personal selection of Raymond Williams's work, including his picture of Cambridge University from the viewpoint of a Welsh, working-class student before the war; his vivid cameo of F R Leavis; reflections on his contemporaries, and on writers who were important to him — among them Solzhenitsyn, Lukacs and Brecht; and his sharp judgements on subjects as varied as Monty Python, the Falklands War and classical Latin.
5.
THE VANISHED LIBRARY
by Luciano Canfora was the winner of the Latina prize in 1987.
This most unusual book tells the intriguing story of e library of Alexandria which was one of the wonders of the Ancient World and still fascinates Western culture over 2000 years later.
Plus
In addition every subscriber will receive two books by NSS' own Duncan Campbell —The Unsinkable Aircraft Carrier , an analysis of US military power in Britain and War Plan UK , the secret truth about Britain's ‘Civil Defence’— together with a copy of An Owl in a Sack Troubles No Man , the latest compilation of winners of the NSS Weekend Competition.
SUBSCRIBE NOW FOR THIS UNIQUE OFFER
CENTRAL BOOKS
THE LATEST IN ARMCHAIR TRAVEL FROM CENTRAL BOOKS…
THREE DAYS IN MOSCOW
A guide specially written for tourists planning a short stay in Moscow.
Focusing on historical, cultural and contemporary landmarks it is an excellent introduction to one of the most fascinating cities in the world.
Carefully structured to cater for all tastes in tourism it allows for those who like to follow strict schedules as well as providing easy reference points for the more adventurous.
Originally available in 1979, this completely revised version incorporates suggestions from earlier readers.
It comes complete with a handy phrase-book. maps, and guides to local travel, restaurants and entertainment, as well as an array of colour illustration and photographs in a durable hardback format.
MOSCOW METRO — PHOTOGUIDE
A full-colour guide to the world famous Moscow Metro.
Constructed in the 30s the metro has over 200 KM of track, 138 stations and transports over 7 million passengers daily.
Its stations are richly decorated with sculptures, mosaics and stained glass, the work of some of the country's finest architects and artists.
This full-colour guide covers all aspects of the Metro's layout and history and a comprehensive map of the system.
MOSCOW — LENINGRAD — KIEV
A guide that covers three of the Soviet Union's largest cities, packed with maps, colour illustrations and information on the history, architecture and key sites of these glorious cities.
TOURIST ATTRACTIONS IN ARMENIA
A unique document and guide to a region of the Soviet Union that has captured the imagination and interest of the world.
This colourful book is an introduction to the geography and history of the region and its people.
AVAILABLE FROM CENTRAL BOOKS 37 GRAY'S INN ROAD WC1 OR BY MAIL ORDER
FROM 
EAST EUROPEAN REPORTER
The pioneering post-Communist transition to democracy makes the Reporter indispensable.
Miklos Haraszti
Free at last to determine their own futures, the people of Central and Eastern Europe face difficult choices.
East European reporter was founded in 1985 to provide current information about the countries of the then Eastern Bloc, and a platform for the independent opposition groups and initiatives engaged in transforming them.
Its honorary editors — who include Vaclav Havel, Adam Michnik and Janos Kis — spent some fifty years in prison before becoming the leaders of parties and nations.
Now East European Reporter, a quarterly journal, continues to allow Central and East Europeans to speak for themselves, through essays, interviews, debates and documents essential for the understanding of day-to-day developments.
Their choice is difficult.
To stay informed, yours is easier.
The future of Eastern Europe requires that we do not substitute new ‘unquestionable’ doctrines for the old.
Therefore we need an uninterrupted discussion about our experiences and ideas for tomorrow.
The East European Reporter represents one of the forums needed for such a discussion.
Adam Michnik
Western specialists have long felt the need for a journal which attempts regularly to describe and analyse developments in East Central European countries in a comparative framework…
East European Reporter is a pioneering attempt to tackle this vital task.
Timothy Garton Ash
Please send cheque for £19 (£32 Institutions) annual subscription to four issues, made payable to East European Reporter, to: Tel.
THE INTERNATIONALE
BILLY BRAGG EXPLORES THE ROOTS OF POLITICAL POP
Wearing his wire cutters on his sleeve, Billy Bragg re-writes The Internationale, recording it with a brass band and choir from South Wales — teams up with Dick Gaughan to restore The Red Flag to its original tune — and sings a song in Spanish!
THE INTERNATIONALE
A NEW LP OF 7 POLITICAL SONGS FOR ALL OCCASIONS
The Women's Press Bookclub
NEW BOOKS
NEW CATALOGUE
Now membership to The Women's Press Bookclub brings you, not only discount books from major publishers, but also interviews, booknews, listings and prizes, featured regularly in our new catalogue.
Join The Women's Press Bookclub as an annual member on the coupon below and receive a free copy of Not A Man To Match Her: A Feminist View of Britain's First Woman Prime Minister by Wendy Webster (The Women's Press, £6.95).
When Saturday Comes
Become the centre of attention
Subscribe to a different pint of view this summer.
When Saturday Comes is Britain's leading alternative football magazine, and its next 12 humorous, nostalgic, yet incisive monthly issues can be yours for the almost insignificant fee of £11 (including postage).
RADICAL CHEEK!
PROMETHEUS BOOKS
TROTSKY
Memoir and Critique
Albert Goltzer
A compatriot of Leon Trotsky recounts his early days in the Communist party and critically  analyses Trotsky's political role in Bolshevism.
A noteworthy contribution to an understanding of 20th-century political history.
Kirkus Reviews
HOLY HORRORS
An Illustrated History of Religious Murder and Madness
James A. Haught
Chronicles the grim spectrum of religious persecution from ancient times to the present.
The antique woodcuts, etchings, and contemporary photographs that illustrate the book are at once gruesome and riveting.
An unsettling account of the dark side of religion.
Charleston Gazette
ON THE BARRICADES
Religion and Free Inquiry in Conflict
edited by Robert Basil, Mary Beth Gehrman, and Tim Madigan
This volume collects the best of Free Inquiry magazine: startling exposés of faith-healing and televangelism; articles on atheism and unbelief, religion, politics and the courts, biblical criticism, sex, ethics, secular vs. religious humanism, and more.
A LIFETIME OF DISSENT
Corliss Lamont
A collection of essays presenting views on civil liberties, human rights, freedom of choice, the philosophy of humanism, international peace, the tragedies of war, and rational solutions to some of today's most pressing global dilemmas.
Highly recommended.
Choice
Also available:
IN THE UNITED KINGDON Order by mail or telephone from: Eddington Hook Ltd.,.
Telephone  VISA or MasterCard accepted or order through any good bookshop.
Catalogues available on request
Radical Books from Cambridge
Nations and Nationalism
Programme, Myth, Reality
E. J. Hobsbawm
A fascinating and challenging work, by internationally renowned Marxist historian E. J. Hobsbawm, tracing the history of nations and nationalism over the last two centuries and dispelling much of the myth that surrounds modern nationalism.
Contingency, Irony and Solidarity
Richard Rorty
It is one of the most interesting books I have ever read…not because Rorty is claiming to have discovered the Truth but because he has written a fine description of our confusion and of our capacity to create our own selves.
Collets
ONE WAY TICKET TO DEMOCRACY
SOVIET SCENE 1989
This 1989 survey of pieces from Soviet newspapers and journals provides a fascinating view of Soviet society
Angus Macqueen, THE INDEPENDENT
The volumes are the best available references for an understanding of what is in motion in the Soviet Union
William Pomeroy ANGLO-SOVIET JOURNAL
Collets
Starving in Silence
A Report on Famine and Censorship
•Can Famine occur in a county with a Free Press?
•Is Censorship , rather than Natural Disasters, the major cause of Death from Starvation?
•Is Freedom of Information more vital than food aid in relieving Famine?
‘Starving in Silence’ makes fascinating reading for anyone interested in understanding the way in which famines develop and the mechanisms of censorship.
‘Starving in Silence’, £3.95, available from ARTICLE 19,, Tel:.
NEW STATESMAN & SOCIETY the intelligent opposition
stimulating
radical
wide ranging
a marvellous read
an invaluable source of information and background reading
AND get a book of your choice absolutely free
If you are a student you can subscribe to NSS for a massive discount on the normal price.
A six months subscription costs just £20, one year £38 and two years only £70 — savings of over 50% on the cover price.
In addition, if you subscribe for one year or more you can receive one of the books listed below — absolutely free.
Just take your pick.
ONE YEAR SUBSCRIPTION gets you either : 1.
Rough Guide to Paris the inns and outs of the Cité, or
2.
Rough Guide to Amsterdam ditto for Dutch treat.
TWO YEARS SUBSCRIPTION gets you one of:
3.
Halliwell's Film Guide the definitive guide to the movies.
4.
Sociology by Anthony Giddens the text book for the nineties.
A must for the serious student
5.
A Gramsci Reader, edited by David Forgacs a collection from the works of the 20th century's most influential Marxist thinker.
Postscript
The best in books at greatly reduced prices
Postscript is not a book club.
There is no obligation to buy any books over a period of time.
We simply publish catalogues six times a year, packed with quality books at bargain prices.
You are free to choose the best in books from the worlds of literature, history, cinema, women's studies, art, politics and social sciences.
There are hundreds more book bargains in our new catalogue.
Send for it now 
Marxism Today
10 REASONS FOR SUBSCRIBING TO MARXISM TODAY THIS MONTH
Save £10
We are offering YOU a full TWELVE MONTH SUBSCRIPTION to Marxism Today for ONLY £13 
Manchester University Press
NEW FROM MANCHESTER UNIVERSITY PRESS
Bolshevik visions, 2nd ed.
WILLIAM G ROSENGERG ed
First phase of the cultural revolution in the Soviet Union
Part 1: The culture of a new society: ethics, gender, the family, law, and problems of tradition.
Part 2: Creating Soviet cultural forms: art, architecture, music, film and the new tasks of education This revised two-part collection of writings by prominent early Soviet critics and theorists, allows us to see the diversity of opinion among the revolution's visionaries.
Mill and Marx
Individual liberty and the roads to freedom
In this fresh, comparative reassessment of the theories of John Stuart Mill and Karl Marx on human freedom Smart asks why liberalism and marxism should remain mutually exclusive.
Lives of the Left
Our acclaimed series includes original and accessible biographies of leading figures in the European and North American socialist and labour movements.
…absolutely first-class as an introduction to the subjects.
The House Magazine
George Lansbury
JONATHAN SCHNEER Schneer provides an assessment of Lansbury's career that combines a thematic analysis of his political significance, with a sensitive portrayal of Lansbury's personal reactions to his varying political fortunes.
Details of biographies of other leading figures including John Reed, J.A.
Hobson, Tom Mann, Daniel de Leon and many more are available.
For more information, contact Deborah Smith at: Manchester UNIVERSITY PRESS Oxford Road Manchester
OUTLOOK
Style meets substance
What is the future for radical magazines?
Some media pundits say there isn't one…
We say read OUTLOOK
OUTLOOK takes the format of a style magazine but leaves out the hype and trivia.
We take the substance of radical and green politics but we avoid the party lines.
And with no financial paymasters we avoid the compromises.
Whether we're covering Bananarama's latest career move or state terrorism in Italy, we can promise the coverage and reporting you need to keep in touch.
In OUTLOOK alternative culture is mainstream
At just 90p a copy OUTLOOK is the best read around
CARDEN PUBLICATIONS LTD
As Professor Fred Halliday of the London School of Economics points out above, The Gulf Region is so crucial to us all and yet so very volatile.
This book is the most up-to-date and comprehensive volume on the whole region.
It is a must for everyone with strategic, economic and political interests in the Arab Gulf.
It is also a must for anyone who wants a better understanding of, and comment on the events that are reported daily in the World's Press.
After the War: Iraq, Iran and the Arab Gulf
Edited by Charles Davies, Centre for Arab Gulf Studies, University of Exeter, UK Foreword by Sir Anthony Parsons
As news from the Gulf continues to dominate the headlines and speculation on the future of the region is rife, there is a real need for an understanding of the factors and players involved.
This book addresses that need and as the Independent said :
clearly a serious attempt to consider the underlying geopolitical patterns in the region…the book provides a clear background to the dangerous daily news.
The Independent, 11th August, 1990 
CARDEN PUBLICATIONS LTD
SCHOTT
Nature has produced nothing like Zerodur.
When it comes to inventiveness, nature is hard to beat.
To take minerals alone would be enough to fill any human inventor with envy.
Pencil lead is a simple material.
Yet nature turns it into diamond, the hardest mineral in the world.
Nature has produced stones that show us what the earth's magnetic field has looked like for millions of years.
There are stones that float on water.
Others that can generate an electric charge.
Geologists are aware of the existence of 2000 or more minerals with an amazing variety of properties.
But there's one thing you won't find in nature.
It's a material that doesn't expand at all as the temperature goes up.
This is a gap that's filled by ‘Zerodur’, a glass ceramic designed by Schott.
It has a 70% crystal content and it doesn't alter its shape or size one iota.
Even when the temperature varies by as much as 800°C or more.
It's proving indispensable to the aviation industry and to astronomers.
In fact the ESO (European Southern Observatory) has ordered four ‘Zerodur’ mirror carriers, each 8.2 metres in diameter, for the world's largest telescope.
But, to come down to earth again, Schott's glass ceramics are just as much at home in the kitchen, where extremes of temperature leave our ‘Ceran’ hobs cold.
Glass ceramics are just one example of Schott's development work.
Advanced technology cannot operated without special glass.
The Schott Group manufactures 50,000 special glass products.
It has 50 production units worldwide, representation in more than 100 countries, an annual turnover of more than £780 million, and 17,000 employees.
If you'd like to know more about special glass and the Schott Group, write to Schott Glass Ltd., Dept N 28, Drummond Road, Stafford ST  EL.
SCHOTT No. 1 in Europe for Special Glass
1.
‘Zerodur’ is a glass ceramic by Schott that doesn't expand or contract one iota.
Even when subjected to temperature variations of as much as 800°C or more.
1.
‘Zerodur’; zero expansion.
2.
Pumice: floats on water.
3.
Tourmaline: produces an electric charge.
4.
Serpentine: resists heat.
5.
Beryl: formerly used for spectacle lenses 6.
Heulandite: a molecular sieve.
7.
Azurite: painters used to use it as a pigment.
8.
Graphite: an extremely soft form of carbon.
9.
Diamond: the hardest mineral, another form of carbon.
10.
Granite: the hardest rock.
11.
Magnetite: a natural magnet.
12.
Grossular: highly symmetrical crystals.
13.
Mica: composed of thin, heat resistant layers.
14.
Autunite: fluoresces under ultraviolet light.
15.
Opal: one of the most beautiful minerals.
16.
Natural glass.
17.
Calcite: very high birefringence. 18.
Ulexite: a rigid image guide.
new scientist
New Scientist cuts the cost of education
As a science teacher you will know that New Scientist is essential reading for students.
By providing a weekly update on all that's new in science and technology in a non-technical everyday language it helps to fill the gaps between textbooks and the latest developments.
But did you know that your students are also entitled to a special 42% discount through the New Scientist School Subscription Scheme?
With a minimum of 5 copies, each student pays just 75p per issue instead of the usual price of £1.30.
And if you place an order for 10 copies or more, you will receive a free copy to use as a teaching aid.
Introduce your students to New Scientist, it's an invaluable supplement to the science curriculum and there's no cost to your school.
To find out more or to place an order, return the coupon or ring the number below.
C-Stat
A new version of Oxstat
Simply the best way to analyse your data
C-Sat brings a new look to the popular statistics package Oxstat.
Fast, inexpensive and reliable, C-Stat is capable of reducing statistics to simple terms without sacrificing power or range features.
All basic statistical tests.
•New user interface with menus and spreadsheet style operation •LogFile provides a complete record of your analysis •Program comes on one disk •Easy data input — direct or from file •Up to 50,000 cells in one table •Fast analysis •Requires no programming skills — you select all tests, variables and ranges from menus
Introductory price: £145 (plus VAT) Oxstat upgrade price: £55 (plus VAT) IBM PC or compatible
Simple to use and requires no expertise at all.
New Scientist
Jandel
THIS STUNNING PACKAGE EXCELS AT SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL GRAPHICS.
INFOWORLD January 8, 1990
SigmaPlot 4.0.
The world's finest PC software for the production of publication-quality scientific charts and graphs…on your own IBM or compatible personal computer.
Used by over 20,000 scientists
SigmaPlot is the software choice worldwide for creating graphics for scientific papers and poster sessions.
It was selected ‘Editor's Choice’ by PC Magazine for its outstanding output.
And INFOWORLD recently called Version 4.0 ‘the nest graphics package for the complex technical graphs wanted by most scientists and engineers.’
Designed by scientists for scientists.
Easy-to-use pull-down menu interface
Direct data input from Lotus 123 and ASCII files
Automatic error-bars, confidence intervals and quality-control lines
Wide range of specialized scales and graphs
Sophisticated non-linear curve fitting
Full mathematical transformation language
Huge data worksheet
Exports graphs into WordPerfect 5.0, Microsoft Word, Pagemaker, Ventura Publisher and others
Extremely high-quality output
Affordable and fully supported
SigmaPlot 4.0 is well within reach of any research facility.
And, like all Jandel products, SigmaPlot 4.0 come with a moneyback guarantee and the full technical support of jandel's experts.
Call today for a free brochure.
Jandel SCIENTIFIC Microcomputer Tools for the Scientist
new scientist
Beat the queue.
Subscribe to New Scientist.
More than half a million people in Britain alone read New Scientist every week.
Which is hardly surprising when you consider the wealth of intriguing stories that appear inside every issue.
Take our article on the latest Japanese gimmick, for instance, It's an electronic notebook with ‘revolutionary image input function’.
In other words, rather than using a notepad and pen, you have the privilege of paying £100 for a piece of complicated electronics that does the same thing.
Meanwhile in Brownsville, Texas, townsfolk anxiously await an invasion no amount of six-shooters can repel — the coming of a particularly nasty strain of killer bee, whose sting is nearly ten times more deadly than the ‘common or garden’ variety.
And in Israel, scientists have discovered a new way of producing an anti-clotting agent for use during surgery — simply by milking the ordinary leech.
With articles like these (not to mention the more serious side of science and technology), it's no wonder people are queuing up to buy New Scientists.
Which is why we're offering all our readers a chance to subscribe to New Scientist.
Take out an introductory subscription for one year.
Or save more than £21 on two years of New Scientist, or over £53 on a three year subscription.
Why not save money — and jump the queue today.
Just clip the coupon below.
FREE MEMBERSHIP TO THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION WHEN YOU SUBSCRIBE
Save up to 25% on a subscription
new scientist poster
THE OZONE SCREEN — THE FACTS AND THE DANGERS
This full-colour poster explores one of today's most vital issues
Scientists are now finding that the ozone layer is disappearing over Northern Europe and the Arctic, thereby weakening our protection against solar ultra-violet radiation and raising the danger of skin cancer.
The world is at last waking up to the dangers threatening us all.
The poster explains what is happening and how, and shows dramatic NASA pictures of the Antarctic hole as well as illustrations of the affected region over the northern hemisphere.
The text summarises the conclusive evidence that man-made CFC's are responsible for the damage.
This highly topical addition to New Scientist's range of posters is available at £3.25, including postage and packing (overseas readers add £1.00).
Complete the form below and send it with your cheque or PO to John Denton Services, Unit 13, Thornham Grove, Stratford, London E15 1DN.
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
teuco
Shower Sauna — clouds of well-being
Steam.
To dilate the pores, purify the skin and tone the muscle.
Steam to relax the body, to refresh the mind, to renew your energy.
Then shower —‘Acqua Fredda’, cold spray to tone and give elasticity to the skin and bring you down to earth.
That's the Teuco sauna experience and you can have it in your own home — the sauna takes as little as one square metre of space.
From the touch sensitive computer panel you can pre-set your sauna to automatically start the next day, and you can choose from a selection of five climate temperatures, you also have the added luxury of an AM/FM radio to listen to, there's a digital clock and heater and there's container system to add fresh herbs for richer and more exciting steam.
Teuco saunas are fully approved and guaranteed, they include many safety features and the most sophisticated equipment, such as a ‘Self Diagnosis’ fault system.
This displays the fault digitally on the control panel.
Its refined and elegant design will enhance any bathroom to give the ultimate luxury of a sauna/shower in your own home.
TEUCO IS A DIVISION OF THE GUZZINI GROUP OF COMPANIES
Kawneer Europe
IMAGINE THE POSSIBILITIES.
INSIDE AND OUT.
Kawneer's new Designer Pivot makes perfect sense.
The latest addition to our successful twin-colour Designer Range of Tilturn and Casement windows offers endless colour combinations, inside and out.
Now you have the freedom to specify beautiful interiors and, at the same time, appropriate exteriors.
This rebated, dry glazed pivot offers improved weather resistance, single handed operation (so they're easy to get to grips with), and guarantees improved thermal efficiency in commercial, industrial and residential buildings.
What's more, since we have control (under British Standard 5750) of complete production, you can be assured of our quality.
From raw billet to fabricated product.
For further information on the Designer Range, please call the Marketing Department on .
Kawneer EUROPE ARCHITECTURAL ALUMINIUM SYSTEMS
ATO
Millions will be entertained in this spectacular sphere.
Their future is protected by KYNAR 500.
Is yours??
To appreciate the true scope of the world's largest sphere, you need to know in full the properties of KYNAR 500 PVF 2 .
Anchored to a glacial mound in Stockholm and visible for miles in all directions, the Globe demanded a coating that was dazzling, durable and able to withstand the harsh Scandinavian winters.
The Globe's 22,500 square metres of custom-made aluminium panels are finished in a gleaming white KYNAR 500 based coating specially designed to enhance and protect.
With the help of KYNAR 500, Stockholm's Globe will be our contribution to performers and spectators for generations.
Remember, your buildings deserve KYNAR 500.
KYNAR 500: protecting our future.
Stockholm Globe Arena, Sweden.
THE CLAY ROOFING TILE COUNCIL
Improve your surroundings
The clay tiles that surround this text are just a taste of the wealth of colours, forms and textures that await you.
Consider their versatility; their ability to blend happily with traditional surroundings or to lend extra character to a prestige project, with rich colours that brighten the most sombre scene — colours that mellow with time.
In an age when we feel more and more the need to be in harmony with our environment, it makes sense to surround yourself with the infinite variety and beauty of today's clay tiles, so sophisticated in their simplicity.
The Clay Roofing Tile Council offers you a free technical advisory service on any aspect of the use of clay tiles.
Send now for a Tile Information Pack.
It will show you how far our technology has advanced in the last few years.
Keymer
AGE CANNOT WITHER HER NOR CUSTOM STALE HER INFINITE VARIETY
Since time immemorial, Roman hand crafting building techniques have excited the imagination.
Some people went to far as to disguise themselves as pillars in the community to tale a closer loot at the secrets of tile production.
Today's Keymer hand made clay tiles use similar hand production methods.
And our competitors are still envious of our unique techniques — handed down for generations to last a lifetime.
Each Keymer clay tile is a work of art, guaranteed one of a kind by the handprint of its maker.
And once in place as a complete Keymer roof, the tile really comes into its own.
Whatever the weather, Keymers stay in place looking good, improving with age.
Every roof has an individual character — so you can be sure of an investment that; s lovely to look at as well as adding to the value of your building.
The variety of roofs in infinite.
What's more, keymers are readily available.
But be quick — like Cleopatra, we're much sought after.
Keymer Hand made for generation.
To last a lifetime.
Sarna
SARNA gives you more for less
Sarna's Sarnafil single ply roofing membrane gives protection to match — and beat — the best of the conventional three layer and high performance systems available today.
Guaranteed for ten years, Sarnafil is the high technology, high performance roof of tomorrow.
On the Continent Sarna can already point to 25 year old installations which are still perfectly watertight — in conditions far more severe than those encountered in the UK.
Sarnafil consists of a reinforced PVC membrane which is resistant to water, weather, UV degradation and chemical attack.
Laps are thermally fused using specially developed welding machinery and all installations are carried out by trained technicians.
So installation always trouble-free, clean, easy and fast.
And that all means lower installation costs.
So we can justly say Sarnafil gives you more — for less
THE SARNA SERVICE
And Sarna's striving for excellence extends far beyond simply supplying a technologically advanced product.
Service is paramount in our philosophy.
So when you specify Sarnafil you can immediately call on the resources of one of the world's most forward looking polymer engineering companies.
Product selection, specification, installation and final inspection are all overseen by highly trained personnel to give a 100% guarantee of product reliability and satisfaction.
For a full product information pack please circle the reader service number or ring our technical department on .
The most complicated detailing can be formed on site and Sarnafil's real flexibility means that it can be used where conventional products would fail or be totally impractical.
SANDTOFT
I Wish There Was A Clay Plain Tile To Match Clay Pantiles…
Now your wish has been granted.
Because Sandtoft are producing the very first machine made clay plain tile to match the Humberside pantile.
Perfectly.
So at last you can specify profiled and plain tiles together.
Appropriately, called the Humber, this new tile is ideal for matching a pantiled main roof with plain tile porches, dormers and cladding.
Plus the plain tile eave coursing so often seen with pantile roofs in the North East.
Each tile is cross-cambered to create an attractive ripple effect when laid.
They have bevelled edges to reduce on-site damage and make it easier to work with.
Plus a recess above the nibs allows the tiles to be stacked virtually flat.
Which makes them easier to carry.
There's no mystery, no magic.
It's all down to Sandtoft experience and expertise.
If you're still not convinced, seeing is believing.
Send for full details of the Humber range today.
We think you'll agree — you couldn't wish for a better match.
HUMBER CLAY PLAIN TILE SANDTOFT ROOF TILES
Transplastix
From Concept to Completion
Transplastix — specialists is spaceglazing — provides a complete package tailored to meet individual requirements.
Its wide choice of materials, colour options and designs gives architects the freedom to combine visual appeal with optimal natural light transmission in the design of new or refurbished buildings.
From concept through to completion, Transplastix employs only the most skilled of techniques and technicians.
Its in-house design and production teams, equipped with the latest in CAD technology, translate architects' specifications into spaceglazing systems of the highest quality.
Investment in technical improvement, stringent quality control and meticulous supervision from design through to installation ensures a professional completion of each job, on time, every time.
•Complete package includes design, manufacture and installation.
•Applications include leisure and shopping centres, walkways, porticos, schools, hospitals, civic buildings, airports and office blocks in the public and commercial sectors.
•Design and production teams equipped with CAD technology.
•All design and fabrication facilities under one roof, including curving and thermoforming of glass and polycarbonate and production of structural steelwork and fixings.
•Faceted glazing available in glass, and vertical and curved glazing available in glass and polycarbonate.
•Glazing materials include clear and tinted polycarbonate and toughened, wired, laminated and tinted glass.
•Smoke-venting systems fitted as standard.
•Optional pre-set temperature and rain-sensor systems.
•All structures comply with BS6262 and current building and fire regulations.
For more information on an integrated spaceglazing service that takes you from concept to completion, call Transplastix on  or fill in and send the coupon below.
Transplastix Leaders in Light
TUDOR ROOF TILE CO.
LIMITED
Manufacturers of ‘HANDMADE CLAY ROOF TILES’ Strength and Water Absorption to strength and Frost Test to BS 402…1990
Supplied with a full range of fittings; Ornamentals, Oasts and Kent Pegs (10 × 6), Flat and Cross Cambered.
Available in Red, Medium and Dark Antique.
Accepted in sensitive areas and regarded by the most discerning specifiers as the finest handmade tile on the market.
Restoration of the roof of their laboratory at Wisley, a Grade II listed building, with TUDOR HAND MADE CLAY ROOF TILES.
Tiles supplied by Coleman Roofing Supplies of Milford on Surrey, and roof tiling by M.G. Dixon Roofing Contractor of Guildford.
APEX GUTTER SYSTEMS LIMITED
APEX
the solution to all your rainwater problems
GRP ALUMINIUM PRESSED STEEL
This architect specified radiused gutter proved extremely difficult for the builder to obtain, until the problem was solved by Apex after being able to fabricate the specification requirement
An example of how Apex specially reproduced a gutter system to maintain the character of the existing building by fabricating moulds using original, damaged cast iron gutters to reproduce an exact replica
Part of a 65 metre long valley gutter relined with the Apex GRP In-Situ System at Messrs Prestige of Burnley, Lancs.
Typical on-site installation of a continuous aluminium seamless parapet gutter system with no inconvenience to the building owner
Extremely long lengths of gutter for Austin Rover on its ‘Flight Shed’ building at Longbridge are shown after relining with an in situ GRP gutter lining system without disturbing the existing gutters and also maintaining their full flow capacity
Monarflex
First for Quality
High Performance Vapour Barrier System
The Finest range of reinforced and foil surfaced Vapour Barriers and Breather Membranes, coupled with Monobon Vapour Barrier Sealant, produce a vapour proofing system, that is SETTING NEW STANDARDS in Industrial, Commercial and Public Sector roofing.
Suitable for most types of insulated roofing systems including steel and aluminium profiled sheeting and single ply membranes.
HAMILTON Building Products
ROOF PROTECTION & INSULATION…
IS A WALKOVER
•Protect waterproofing •Increase roof insulation •Provide non-slip pedestrian surface
Profile non-slip promenade roof tiles from Hamilton Building Products protect and insulate flat roofs in one simple installation.
They are manufactured in a choice of colours and can be spot bonded in cold bitumen or other adhesive, or loose laid.
Ideal for roof patios, balconies and walkways at both residential and commercial premises.
Contact us today.
PRO-TILE INSULATED PROMENADE ROOF TILES
Bostwick
Turning Industrial Door Design Into Reality
Constructed from the optimum materials available to an unsurpassed standard of engineering, the Bostwick range of industrial doors and shutters incorporate many unique ‘patented’ features that enhance their durability and operational efficiency.
PRIMA SLATE
WANIT
THE SLATE OF THE ART IS BACK…
WITH A NEW NAME!
INTENSELY COLOURED SURFACE
THOROUGH-COLOUR PIGMENTATION
ACRYLIC COATED
UNIFORM COLOUR
INDEPENDENTLY TESTED
PERFECTLY PACKED
INTERLEAVED WITH BROWN PAPER
SHRINK WRAPPED IN HANDS
WEST GERMAN QUALITY
ASBESTOS FREE
OPTION OF REPRO, SIMULATED SLATE SURFACE
ALUMASC
ALUMASC.
THE NATURAL CHOICE FOR RAINWATER SYSTEMS.
LONG LIFE
Alumasc Systems are superbly engineered by a British company which has over 40 years experience.
The aluminium is corrosion resistant, giving it a long life and our systems are made to BS 2997 and are mostly BBA approved.
COLOUR
Alumasc Systems offer the highest standard and can be supplied in plain finish or in ten standard polyester powder coatings, plus many other special colours to order.
They also have high impact resistance, offering unbeatable value, quality and performance.
LIGHTWEIGHT
Alumasc Aluminium Rainwater Systems are the lightweight and economical answer to effective rainwater disposal.
They're ⅓ the weight of cast iron, yet incredibly strong and durable.
CHOICE
Alumasc have a large selection of standard guttering profiles and will make special shapes and profiles to order, so there's one to suit almost any building.
A nationwide sales force and technical services support can help with any application.
So when you're thinking about the solution to your guttering problems — Choose Alumasc.
ALUMASC BUILDING PRODUCTS DIVISION
EUROCOM ENTERPRISE LIMITED
UGINOX TERNE COATED STAINLESS
A ROOFING WHICH MATURES WITH THE BUILDING
Uginox is Europe's leading terne (lead/tin) coated stainless steel.
Produced by Ugine, the world's largest stainless steel producer, since 1970, its attractive lead-like weathered appearance and long maintenance free life have made it very successful, and since then over 5 million square metres have been used in roofing and cladding applications.
Uginox is lightweight, vandal resistant and can be laid in long lengths, eliminating the need for cross joints.
It is backed by a £15 million insurance warranty covering product liability on defective material, damage to property and consequential losses.
THE KAMI ROOFING SYSTEM
RIDGE TO EAVES TILE SHEETS — UP TO 7 METRES: TERRA PLEGEL GRANULATED FINISH ON GALVANISED STEEL OR VILLA TILE MATT PAINT FINISH ON ALUMINIUM 
STYLISH TRADITIONAL PANTILE DESIGN
LONG LIFE — MINIMUM MAINTENANCE
FAST AND EASY TO FIX
HIGH SECURITY FIXINGS
VERY STRONG — RESISTANT TO FOOT TRAFFIC DAMAGE
SUITABLE FOR PITCHES DOWN TO 10 DEGREES
DIRECTLY AVAILABLE FROM UK STOCKS
CAN BE FIXED BY DLO'S OR CONTRACTORS
COMPLEMENTARY RANGE OF MATCHING ACCESSORIES
Quality Swedish Roofing Products
Suitable for
RE-ROOFING OF NON-TRADITIONAL HOUSING
OVER-ROOFING OF ASBESTOS, FELT ETC
FLAT PITCH CONVERSIONS
NEW BUILD INDUSTRIAL & RESIDENTIAL
VULCANITE
REFLECT ON THIS
The problems leading to flat roof failure are well-known — blistering, wrinkling, cracking, splitting etc. too often lead to accelerated ageing and subsequent failure.
Amongst the major causes of these problems are temperature changes, thermal movement, moisture and U.V. and infra-red exposure.
By specifying one of Vulcanite's unique Solar Reflective roof finishes you can eradicate these problems at a stroke.
The formula, exclusive to Vulcanite, involves the top side being finished with pre-oxidised, solar reflective aluminium chips.
Available in both torch-on and traditional pour and roll guises, Vulcanite S.R. Roofings have all the advantages and more of the usual methods of protecting exposed surfaces — shippings, paints and pavings for instance— without any of their inherent problems, such as blocked outlets, loss of reflectance, continual maintenance, increased weight and cost.
On reflection, by keeping more heat off the roof and in the building, good-looking Vulcanite S.R. Roofings offer you such significant economic, performance and aesthetic benefits, it's a wonder nobody thought of the idea before!
For more details please contact…
VULCANITE
ANMAC
Shaping the future in GRP
Anmac are leaders in the field of custom moulding GRP.
With our specialist design engineering experience developed over thirty years we have shaped creative architectural designs into structural and decorative finishes.
Lightweight, durable GRP today enhances prestigious buildings worldwide.
Our team of Design Engineers, operating from our modern purpose built factory are available to shape your ideas into future reality.
To find out more contact Alan Mellor on  or fax .
Or send for our brochure.
TRUSTSPAN TIMBER ROOFS
Trustspan turn roof ideas into reality
Trustspan produce trussed rafters to make any kind of roof work.
We have the design engineering skills — and the computer aided drawing resources — to produce the optimum configurations for any size and shape of roof.
The manufacturing facilities — conforming fully to the TRADA quality assurance scheme — to produce results quickly and accurately.
On a total responsibility package we will survey, measure up, agree the design and dimensions, and guarantee its fit .
Talk to our specialists about your roof design needs.
DESIGN MANUFACTURE DELIVERY
The single service that takes care of everything
W P Metals Ltd.
Finish your roof in Style…with all the trimmings from WP
Finish your roof in real style — with all the trimmings from WP Metals.
Rainwater goods, coping roof edge trims and ventilators — in fact, everything you will ever need for the perfect job.
Smoothline rainwater goods, robust, and available in a range of attractive colours and finishes.
Copings in aluminium and mild steel, designed for a lifetime of service.
Roof trims in GRP and Aluminium, the solution for all roof edge problems.
Breather vents that are lightweight and easy to install
BW INDUSTRIES
PLASTISOL & PVF BSC COLORCOAT
Superior service with the shortest lead ties
Send for our latest catalogue and price list showing our comprehensive range of profiles and ancillary products from British Steel including: Outer Profiles with matching liners, Curved Eaves and Corners, Flashings, Trims and Rainwater goods.
A complete service for the construction industry.
Jacksons
Promote the image — protect the property
BARBICAN FENCING
A fencing system with the classic elegance of iron railings and none of the weak points of conventional steel fencing.
BARBICAN is for those who demand high prestige plus top security.
Palings are welded through rails, with no rivets, no visible joints or bolts.
BARBICAN fencing in galvanized steel is easily erected, maintenance free, and also available with plastic coating in black or green or any colour for the longer run.
Comes in four standard heights — 1.25, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5M.
Matching BARBICAN GATES, single, double leaf or sliding, are available for either manual or electrical operation.
Only Jacksons — Britain's leading suppliers of fine fencing — supply BARBICAN, the fencing to choose whenever you want security handled with style.
Send today! only from Jacksons 
FENCING WITH A FUTURE
Clear Span Ltd
Light Engineering with a clear advantage
Wherever your plans call for light, space and shape, Clear Span have the experience and the skills to turn the design into sparkling Reality.
Clear Span are Britain's most famous manufacturers and erectors of commercial aluminium glasshouses, floral halls and pool enclosures.
Today, using our standard Components and techniques, we can work to your plans or our own designs, to produce the most attractive and economical structures.
Have a word with us, discuss your plans, ring or write for a meeting with our Technical Designer.
From the ornate splendour of a Victorian style conservatory, to the stunning simplicity of a modern atrium roof, our standard components offer surprising versatility.
CLIPFIX 750
Even architects won't get a hole in one
If you want a leakproof roof, the last thing you do is put holes in it.
That's why European Profiles developed Clipfix 750, a secret fix system which dispenses with the need for through-fastening when attaching roof cladding sheets.
You won't get a hole in one, nor will you have water in your building.
Clipfix 750 not only outperforms through-fastening, but other secret fix systems as well, particularly where low pitches are involved.
•Unique positive clamping of the underlap rib with patented galvanised steel clips and spring engagement ensures panels stay in place whatever the weather.
•The 750mm cover width — the widest available — minimises side laps and significantly improves fixing time, cutting labour costs.
•Z55 tensile quality steel combined with a 47mm deep ribbed profile configuration gives excellent spanning characteristics and minimises ponding even at pitches as low as 1½£°
•A zinc layer of 350g/m 2 , 25% thicker than the commercial standard gives extra corrosion resistance.
•Suitable for use in conjunction with European Profiles' Insulation systems, thus providing leak proof membrane combined with insulation to meet current Building Regulations.
Manufactured from PVC Plastisol precoated galvanised steel, available in a wide range of colours.
CLIPFIX 750 SECRET FIX ROOFING SYSTEM
European Profiles Limited
BRITISH CLADDING AT ITS BEST
RANDOM ACCESS
A RANDOM Guide to Nature's Architects
No 18 THE BEAVER (Castor Canadensis)
When nature has provided you with a highly efficient set of incisors capable of cutting down more than 100 trees in one season, and an overriding instinct to build complex dams up to 4,000 ft. long and 12 ft. high, you can regard yourself as one of her senior architects and master builders.
The Beaver's complex design structures not only create artificial lakes and ponds, but can even change the natural course of rivers.
This obsession with changing its environment sometimes causes the Beaver to fall foul of local authorities, particularly when the end result obstructs the migratory routes of Salmon or leads to the flooding of woodlands and highways.
These architectural and building skills have taken the Beaver about 35 million years to evolve.
For species that cannot afford to spend million of years perfecting their architectural designs, RANDOM ACCESS can provide a range of CAD systems which certainly add creativity as well as speed to the design process.
One species with whom CAD systems from Random Access are proving particularly popular is the ‘Architectus Progressus’.
The economy, versatility and ease of use of these systems has proved to be of real benefit in designing their domestic and commercial structures.
For a free demonstration of what a RANDOM ACCESS CAD system can do for you or for your practice please complete the coupon below or call us on .
RANDOM ACCESS COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN
Random Access — the Art and Science of Architectural Design
Taywood Data Graphics
Captivating Technology
DATA, whether textual or graphic, is your most precious asset.
Capturing this data for all time, in the most effective and exploitable form, is the speciality of Taywood Data Graphics.
Using the very latest hardware and software, together with proven, flow-line techniques and adherence to the highest quality standards, our experienced teams are ready to solve your data capture problems.
metra
We think you should think about: ZINC let us spell out the reasons why:
Most roofing problems can be solved with it
Environmentally friendly
Traditional appearance from a modern material
In stock at competitive prices
Zinc, one of the best known protections against corrosion
Increasing in popularity throughout Europe
Not a temptation to vandals
Complete technical service supports it
This not only spells out just a few of the advantages of zinc but also the name of the leading rolled zinc available in the UK
Full details, good stocks, and sound technical advice are available from: metra Non-Ferrous Metals Ltd.
FERMACELL
Why do all plasterboards secretly want to be a FERMACELL gypsum-fibreboard?
The fact is, plasterboards are facing a knockout when competing against FERMACELL gypsum-fibreboards.
Then, no other packs the technical punch of our boards.
You can count on it.
And count the competition out.
The heavy-weight champion in loadbearing. 50 kilos can be hung on a screw fastening into FERMACELL with a rawlplug.
Equivalent plasterboards break under the strain.
FERMACELL ensures effective soundproofing of up to R'w 57 dB.
A very sound investment compared to plasterboards of the same thickness.
More fire-resistance.
FERMACELL not only meets BS 476, Part 22, but also has longer built-in reserves than its direct competitors.
Problem-free jointing.
With FERMACELL, you don't have to fool with special tools.
And there's no taping to be out of joint — as with plasterboards.
There are no ‘wets’ in our range.
Even when splashed, FERMACELL retains its original stability once dry.
Ideal for rooms with changing humidity, e.g. bathrooms.
Easy and stable mounting.
Nails.
staples and screws can be driven within 10 mm of the outer edge of FERMACELL.
A crumbling thought for the competition.
If you're looking for solid strength, easy handling and workability, fire-, sound- and moisture-prevention, FERMACELL has it all in one.
Call us.
And you won't have to call the ring doctor.
The number one and only Gypsum-Fibreboard fermacell
Well Made in Germany
RHEINZINK
Architecture with RHEINZINK
The durable and aesthetic solution.
RHEINZINK — Titanium Zinc for Roofing and Wall Cladding.
The buildings of the Benedictine abbey of Königsmünster in Mescede had become too small, with the result that the abbey, was ‘only just’ able to function.
The new layout is determined by three main ideas:
•the paths of daily life and work: of these, the newly laid-out path extends from the old building as far as the workshops;
•the path from ‘the outside to the inside’: from the daily route to the chapel and the church and back to the refectory;
•a new spiritual focus — the chapel.
In contrast to the monasteries of the Middle Ages and the Baroque period as well as the 1930's concept originally intended for execution the new abbey is not designed as an enclosed, homogenous complex.
Landscape, pasture, workplaces and cemetery are all incorporated and can be experienced from the abbey garden.
The fixed, space-defining elements are strongly built of solid masonry, like houses in a town, and are linked by paths formed with steel, glass and lightweight titanium zinc (RHEINZINK) cladding.
The structural design, details and choice of materials were entirely subordinated to the design and viewed in a symbolic context:
•masonry represents a protecting envelope and fixed places;
•steel, glass and titanium zinc (RHEINZINK) stand for openness and movement.
RHEINZINK
Robertson.
TRISOMET
FOAM-INSULATED ROOF & WALL PANELS ARE NOW TOTALLY CFC FREE AND, IN LINE WITH THE NEW BUILDING REGULATIONS, TRISOMET FOAM PRODUCTS HAVE A ‘U’ VALUE OF 0.45
Many specifiers already know the advantages of using Trisomet composite roof and wall panel.
In addition to being a cost-effective cladding solution, Trisomet is also aesthetically pleasing, having a crisp, clear, outer profile with a choice of 14 standard colours.
Many claims are now being made about the environment, some true, many exaggerated.
We can, and do claim that the introduction of CFC-FREE Trisomet confirms Robertson as market leaders in the manufacture of the finest quality composite insulated building panels.
Another Major Development from Robertson
L&B SKYLIGHTS
The Superior Skylight System…from Lord & Burnham
Total capability: design, fabrication and erection of the complete package 
Improved visual appearance over conventional glazing approaches, with lower leak potential.
Developed in North America to the highest specification and standards.
All joints and interfaces are air and vapour sealed providing a RAIN SCREEN pressure equalisation system.
Large clear span skylights to standard and non-standard configuration.
A comprehensive manual of Standard Details is available on request for the Architect and Engineer.
FORGET WAKIIHURI AND ELLIOTT.
THIS IS THE HARDEST PERSON YOU'LL EVER RUN AGAINST.
When you hit the road this is the man you have to beat.
John Loudon McAdam (1756–1836), inventor of the modern road surface which still bears his name: ‘Tarmacadam ’.
And when you run against him you'd better wear the right protection.
Asics Gel — the most advanced cushioning system in the world.
As worn by Asics athletes Douglas Wakiihuri and Peter Elliott, two of the world's greatest runners.
Made from the latest in Polymer technology Asics Gel has the unique ability to absorb vertical impact forces and disperse them on a horizontal plane.
Forces that can be up to five times your body weight on each stride.
Over long distances this adds up to thousands of pounds of pressure on your limbs and joints.
So strategically placed Asics Gel can significantly reduce the stress and shock of a run.
Minimising injury and maximising performance.
And because only a small amount of Gel absorbs a large amount of shock, low profile mid-soles can be used with no loss of cushioning.
Making all Asics shoes lighter, less bulky and keeping the foot closer to the ground for extra stability.
So next time you hit the road make sure it doesn't hit back.
Protect yourself with Asics Gel.
The Asics A6 Gel.
Featuring the most advanced cushioning system in the world.
A SOUND MIND IN A SOUND BODY
SOLE DISTRIBUTOR OLYMPIAN SPORTS UK.
THE SWEAT SHOP
RUNAID FEED BOTTLE:
A handy moulded plastic bottle that fits easily over the hand.
It holds 4 fl ozs, and enables you to drink conveniently on long runs.
Price £1.99.
DANSEZ MINIMAL BOUNCE BRA:
Our most popular selling sports bra.
Made from 45% cotton, 45% polyester and 10% lycra.
This flattering, cupless sports bra holds the bust snugly against the chest.
RON HILL TRACKSTERS:
The original most popular training trousers.
Made from 100% nylon these trousers have an elasticated & tie-cord waistband + stirrup legs.
CONVERSE T-SHIRT:
Made in Portugal from 100% cotton.
These excellent quality T-shirts have a two colour print on the front.
Excellent value at this reduced price.
Colours: Black or Purple.
WERE £11.99, NOW ONLY £7.99.
CASIO SDW SPORTS WATCH:
In our opinion the best sportswatch on the market.
Features include: Stopwatch — from th sec to 9 hrs 59 min 59.99 secs. 30 lap memory, countdown alarm that may be set to the second, pre-set split times for accurate analysis of race pace.
Water resistant to 50m.
Daily Alarm.
NORMAL PRICE £27.99, OUR PRICE £25.99.
SUB 4 LONG SLEEVED SHIRT:
Exclusive to ‘The Sweat Shop’.
Made from 100% cotton.
These excellent long sleeve shirts have a four colour print on the front.
TRIATHLON LOG:
New to the UK market, this excellent diary can be started at any time of the year.
Features include: achievement chart with monthly goals, pacing tables and weekly mileage charts for swimming, cycling and running.
It also contains a record of races and also distance & metric conversions plus many useful tips.
Price £6.99.
RON HILL VILOFT GLOVES:
Made from 50% polyester/50% viscose, these are our most popular running gloves.
Ideal for cold winter runs.
SWEAT SHOP LONG SLEEVED SHIRT:
Made from 100% cotton, these excellent quality long sleeved shirts have a six colour print on the front and a small badge printed on the back.
SUB 4 ARTEX THERMAL LONG SLEEVED SHIRT:
Made in Ireland, from 58% cotton/43% polypropylene.
These excellent tops wick the sweat away from your body.
They feature an extendable cuff that can roll over the hand forming a glove.
RIDGE RUNNER RUCKSACK:
The most popular rucksack we sell and in our opinion the best on the market.
An elasticated compression strap prevents the contents moving around and two chest straps, attached to the shoulder straps, keep the sack firmly on your back.
Additional features include reflective tape safety buckles and its capacity is 24 litres.
FRANK SHORTER JOGSUIT:
Made in Portugal from 65% cotton/35% polyester.
These excellent jogsuits are outstanding value for money at a greatly reduced price.
The sweatshirts have a large logo print on the front.
The trouser waistband is elasticated with a draw string.
There are two side trouser pockets.
FRANK SHORTER BUM BAG:
Made from 100% water proof nylon, these top quality bum bags have two zippered compartments and a wide waistband with a quick release safety buckle.
Excellent value at this reduced price.
Colour: Black/Yellow.
WERE £7.99, NOW ONLY £4.99.
BROOKS COOLMAX RUNNING SOCK:
Made in Ireland from 75% coolmax/15% nylon/10% elastic.
These excellent socks will wick away the sweat to keep your feet dry and comfortable.
101%
HE NEVER GIVES ANYTHING LESS OR WEARS ANYTHING ELSE.
PUMA
LIGHTWEIGHT SPIKES, SUEDETTE AND NYLON UPPERS, FLEXIBLE RUBBER SOLE UNIT WITH LIGHTWEIGHT NYLON SPIKE PLATE KEEPS YOU ONE STEP AHEAD.
MIRAGE II.
IN THE LONG RUN IT'S MORE COMFORTABLE.
RUSSELL ATHLETIC HAS SET THE PACE IN CLASSIC AMERICAN SPORTSWEAR SINCE 1902.
WHICH MUST MAKE US ONE OF THE LONGEST RUNNING NAMES IN THE RUNNING BUSINESS.
WE MAKE FINE QUALITY HIGH PERFORMANCE CLOTHING FOR ALL KINDS OF PROFESSIONAL ATHLETES.
AND WHETHER YOU'RE TRAINING OR COMPETING THERE'S A WHOLE RANGE OF HIGH COTTON SWEATS AND JOGGING PANTS TO CHOOSE FROM.
PLUS EXTRA COOL ‘T’ SHIRTS AND SHORTS FROM OUR SPRING LIGHTWEIGHT COLLECTION.
EVERYTHING WE MAKE IS DESIGNED TO WITHSTAND THE STRESS AND STRAIN OF REAL PHYSICAL EXERTION.
SO AS YOU GET READY FOR THE BIG DAY TRY WEARING RUSSELL.
THEN YOU'LL START AS YOU MEAN TO FINISH.
IN ABSOLUTE COMFORT.
GET THE FEEL OF IT.
PERFECTION at PRO PERFORMANCE SHOES
See the incredible Fusion and the 1991 Brooks collection at your nearest Pro-Performance store now.
For your Pro-Performance store phone  
BROOKS SPORTS
Free Brooks sports bag with every Brooks purchase at all Pro-Performance stores whilst stocks last
If you're seriously into running there's only one watch.
If you hot foot it whatever the weather, there's only one watch that can stand the pace.
The Casio STR 1000, not only offers you superb styling and unrivalled precision to  sec, but also includes functions invaluable to your sport.
Perhaps the most invaluable feature is the unique cable control that allows you to activate the stopwatch from a tailored finger grip.
The 100 hr. stopwatch features 5 lap/split time and total time memories, 5 target times and an auto-start function.
In addition all the functions of the  sec. stopwatch are complemented by audible signals.
Casio.
Precisely what you're looking for in a watch.
CASIO
FASTRAX RUNNING LINES
SELLING CLUB VESTS…
EVERY WEEK, EVERY DAY, EVERY HOUR…
EVERYWHERE!
LARGE RANGE OF COLOURS
AS YOU CAN SEE CLUBS THROUGHOUT THE U.K. ARE CHOOSING FASTRAX FOR QUALITY CLUB VESTS.
WE USE THE LATEST LIGHTWEIGHT ‘DRIRUN’ MESH IN 11 COLOURS OR SOLID POLYESTER IN 17 COLOURS TO PRODUCE YOUR DESIGN, WHETHER HOOPS, DIAGONALS, PANELS OR PLAIN.
PRICES FROM AS LOW AS £5.
FOR ‘SPECIALS’ MINIMUM ORDER IS ONLY 12 IN TOTAL NO LESS THAN 4 PER SIZE HOWEVER THERE IS 
NO MINIMUM ORDER ON STOCK VESTS!
WHY NOT PRINT IT?
WHY NOT HAVE YOUR VEST INDIVIDUALISED WITH YOUR OWN CLUB NAME OR LOGO, FROM 80p PER PRINT, USING OUR QUALITY FLOCK PRINTING SYSTEM?
MOST POPULAR PRINT SIZE BEING 9″ × 3″; SET UP £25 — PAYABLE ONCE ONLY.
LOOK SMART AND COMPLETE THE SET IN FASTRAX UNISEX SHORTS IN COLOURS TO MATCH VESTS FROM £6.50, OR LYCRA KNICKERS.
WE CAN PERFORM ‘MIRACLES’ BUT AVERAGE DELIVERY IS 3 WEEKS ON VESTS TO ORDER.
So whether you are a club, university, college, school or business please do not hesitate to ring or write describing your needs for pricelists, a quote or samples.
JUST ASK FOR JO FRICKER OR TERRY LONERGAN; THEY'LL BE PLEASED TO ADVICE YOU!
SALETIME
SAUCONY TRAINING PANTS
Two-Way stretch fabric, reflective patch, Colours black/red, Air Force blue/yellow, or turquoise/white, plus not illustrated navy/white, black/white or royal/yellow 
TINLEY 4 PANEL TRI-SHORT
Quick drying polypropylene terry pad for swim, bike, run.
Draw string elasticated waist, gripped elastic legs.
Colours all over print jade, ocean or hot pink, or alternating solid and ‘strings’ print panels.
DERBY 1990 SWEATSHIRTS
Surplus souvenir merchandise from ESAA Track and Field Championships, colours navy, red, white, royal, usual price £11.95, sale £6.95
ADIDAS TORSION TRAINING SHOES ZX1020
BROOKS
BROOKS AXIOM TRAINING SHOES
Featuring the Kinetic Wedge only sizes UK 5 
Brooks Chariot CC
Brooks Backpacks,
usual £8.95, £4.50
Brooks Shorts,
2 colour style or single colour style 
Most colours available, state first and second choice.
Brooks Lycra Tights
Brooks ‘Active’ Rainsuits,
colour charcoal/red/black, sizes S, M, L & LX, usual £29.99, sale £18 or 2 suits for £30 
Reebok
Reebok Extasy ERS
Features energy return system, full size range 6–12 inc ½ sizes, usual £69.95, sale £39.95
World Class Spike
— A world-class racing shoe for cross country and track.
In nylon/synthetic suede with a lightweight skeletal spike plate for extra flexibility.
A low profile EVA midsole provides cushioning, and a flat polyurethane insole offers comfort and support.
BOURNESPORTS
IT HITS YOU EVERY TIME YOU TAKE A STEP.
You're getting fit and feeling good.
What you won't feel are shock waves blasting through your body.
Every time your foot hits the floor.
Bowing your legs.
Compressing your spine.
Even bouncing the base of your brain about half a millimetre.
Very unhealthy.
It's called ‘impact energy’.
The equivalent force on your body of a 30mph car crash.
Every time your foot hits the floor.
And no matter how fit you are, you're just as susceptible to the same long-term damage as the average couch potato.
Remedy?
Sorbothane shock-absorbing insoles, which soak up 94.7% of impact shock.
Sorbothane never packs down.
Or loses its unique load bearing power.
Also self-sterilising to discourage you know what.
Interested?
Then clip the coupon to see the full range of essential Sorbothane sports equipment.
Specially developed to protect your entire body.
Whatever your sport or activity may be.
The sooner I see the Sorbothane range of protective sports equipment, the better I'm going to feel.
SORBOTHANE PROTECTS YOU BODY AND SOLE
Some people lease high performance vehicles.
Others lace them.
Perhaps you've seen it subduing the curves of the Route de Vins in Burgundy.
Or making light work of the Mall in London.
It's not a car.
It's a shoe: the New Balance NBX850, a high performance vehicle for people who run.
It cushions and cradles your feet with some of the most technologically advanced equipment available: a 3-Density C-CAP midsole and counter reinforcer.
And it does so while providing a perfect fit.
Like all New Balance shoes, the NBX850 comes in a variety of widths.
Its most significant attribute, however, is this: the NBX850 belongs to New Balance's exclusive Lightweight Performance Series.
Which means it offers all of our legendary durability and support, but at a weight markedly less than all comparable competitive shoes.
Were it a car, such praise would necessitate a test drive.
In the NBX850's case, we recommend a test run.
new balance
A more intelligent approach to building shoes
BILL RODGERS at Run and Become Become and Run
 MEN'S BASIC SHORTS AND TEAM VESTS
BASIC SHORTS: 100% Nylon tricot with inner brief, inside key pocket and four needle waist band.
TEAM VESTS: Polycotton minimesh with tricot nylon panel at front.
 MEN'S CRINKLE SPLIT SHORTS (AND VESTS)
Made from Crinkle Antron Nylon which offers a laundered look with a hint of sparkle.
Durable and quick drying.
Nylon inner brief.
Overlap side split.
N.B. Matching vests available (not shown); similar to  women's (see below)
 MEN'S OVERLAP SHORTS AND RACING VESTS
OVERLAP SHORTS: 100% nylon tricot with inner brief, inside key pocket and side seam overlap for maximum freedom.
RACING VESTS: Polytech open mesh with Nylon tricot chest panel.
 MEN'S SPORT SHORTS
Leisure shorts in Crinkle Antron Nylon.
Outside drawcord.
Mesh lined pockets.
Nylon inner brief.
 MEN'S AND WOMEN'S SUPPLEX SILK SHORTS
Made from Super lightweight supplex with the feel of silk.
Very comfortable and fast drying.
Nylon inner brief,(women's have cotton panel).
Inside key pocket.
WOMEN'S BASIC SHORTS AND TEAM VESTS
BASIC SHORTS: 100% Nylon tricot with cotton panel inner brief, inside key pocket.
TEAM VESTS: Polycotton mini mesh with double layer tricot panel at front.
WOMEN'S CRINKLE SPLIT SHORTS AND VESTS
SHORTS: Crinkle Antron Nylon, inner nylon brief with cotton panel, overlap side split for freedom of movement.
VESTS: Polycotton mesh with Crinkle Antron Nylon contrast panels.
WOMEN'S SPORT SHORTS
Leisure shorts in Crinkle Nylon Antron which offers a laundered look with a hint of sparkle.
Outside drawcord.
Mesh lined pockets.
Nylon inner brief.
WOMEN'S LAZER FREEDOM SHORTS AND VESTS
SHORTS: Double layer Nylon tricot with lazer tricot side panels, polycotton inner brief, inside key pocket.
VESTS: Polycotton interlock with lazer tricot side stripes.
Colours: Shorts will be white/lazer turquoise and black/lazer pink not as shown.
Vests: White/pink and white/turquoise as shown.
Propulsion Technology
THE PRINCIPLE
BROOKS FUSION.
STORES AND RELEASES ENERGY TO HELP YOU RUN FASTER
Carbon fibre technology has taken pole vaulting to heights unimaginable only a few years ago.
The principle behind such performance is that of energy being harnessed to realise dynamic propulsion.
If only a running shoe could utilise carbon technology in this way.
Well it can.
And it's the key feature of Brooks revolutionary new FUSION shoe.
The secret of the FUSION's Propulsion System is a full length carbon fibre plate positioned between the outsole and the midsole.
During the mid phases of running stride, the carbon plate contracts, just like a vaulters bent pole, to collect and store energy.
Then, as the foot begins its toe-off phase, the stored energy is released to spring the runner forward — thereby realising maximum speed potential.
THE EXPONENT
With the FUSION also incorporating Hydroflow custom cushioning and the famous Rollbar for motion control, Brooks have crafted the most sophisticated performance shoe ever.
Brooks FUSION.
Taking running technology to new heights.
FOR YOUR NEAREST FUSION STOCKIST, CALL FREE ON  
Just like a vaulter's carbon fibre pole, FUSION conserves and then re-distributes energy — for stunning propulsion effect.
THE NEW STATE OF THE ART
Q. What is the new state of the ART?
A. Motion Control B. Shock Absorption C. Energy Return D. All of the above
How ART (Anatomical Rebound Technology) Works
As a runner initiates foot strike, the ART system automatically adjusts to the ground forces.
Simply put, the greater the impact, the more the trampoline absorbs, rebounds and the heel counter cradles…maximum cushioning, maximum control and maximum comfort!
ART is another innovation created by Jerry Turner's continuing drive to integrate the three most important elements required by you the athlete:Motion control, Maximum Shock Absorption and Energy Return .
ART's breakthrough design combines his famous Anatomical Cradle and ZO 2 sockliner for a new level of total performance.
So if you want the maximum in performance and protection, discover TURNTEC ART.
SOCKLINER ZO 2 SHOCK ABSORBER **HYTREL TRAMPOLINE MIDSOLE MIDSOLE CHAMBER OUTSOLE OUTSOLE WINDOW **HYTREL TRAMPOLINE MIDSOLE CHAMBER AREA OUTSOLE WINDOW MOTION CONTROL DEVICE
1st is first 2nd is nowhere
Saucony Get Serious
THE BEST SHOES AT THE BEST PRICES
REEBOK CONCORDE:
Reebok's current top of the range running shoe, is now being discontinued, hence we can bring you this excellent offer.
Designed for the normal runner who wants a light responsive training shoe, or for the heavier runner who wants a shoe for running marathons, the Concorde has Reebok's exclusive ‘Hexalite’ cushioning system in the heel and forefoot.
Further cushioning is provided by the ‘Hi-elvaloy’ midsole, which is a mixture of compression moulded E.V.A.
and P.U.
ensuring that the shoe is lightweight, yet retains its cushioning.
The upper is made from man-made suede and nylon, with hytrel straps at the forefoot for increased support.
The sole unit is made from carbon rubber and additional features include a cut down achilles heel tab, variable width lacing and slip lasting.
An excellent shoe especially at this price.
REEBOK ENDEAVOUR:
Designed for the heavier runner or the runner with a pronation problem, the Endeavour is a stable training shoe with a studded outersole, suitable for the road or country.
Reebok's exclusive ‘Energy Return Tubes’ together with a ‘Hi-elvaloy’midsole, give responsive long lasting cushioning.
The studded outersole, which is extended under the arch, the thermoplastic heel counter and the hytril straps at the rearfoot give good stability.
The upper is made from breathable nylon mesh with man-made leather reinforcements.
Additional features include: combination lasting for forefoot flexibility and rearfoot control; variable lacing for a customised fit and a notched achilles heel tab.
REEBOK PB800 SPIKE:
Reebok's entry level spike which is suitable for all distances from 800m to 10,000m.
Shock absorption is provided by the E.V.A.
heel wedge, while the grip is supplied by the removable seven spike spike-plate.
The lightweight upper is made from synthetic suede and nylon and the support is given by the thermoplastic heel counter.
The PB800 is ideal for the athlete who wants a spike that can also be used on the country.
SAUCONY ARROW:
An excellent training shoe for the runner with a normal foot plant, who likes a very cushioned ride.
The shock absorption is provided by the single density compression moulded E.V.A.
midsole, together with the outersole, which is blown rubber at the forefoot and carbon rubber at the heel.
Stability and Energy Return is provided by Saucony's exclusive ‘torsion rigidity bar’ which is made of Hytrel plastic and Kevlar.
The upper is made from nylon mesh and a synthetic leather, with hytrel support straps at the forefoot.
Additional features include: an external heel counter, variable width lacing and full slip lasting for optimum flexibility.
ASICS GEL 101:
One of the most popular shoes last year.
The Gel 101 offers an excellent mixture of shock absorption and support.
A dual density compression moulded E.V.A.
midsole with a ‘Gel’ pad in the heel offers good cushioning.
The shoe has a blown rubber outer sole with a carbon rubber heel pad.
The external heel counter and harder section of the midsole on the medial side of the shoes inhibits over pronation.
Excellent value at this reduced price.
THE SWEAT SHOP
We're good sports at the Sweat Shop
life in the fast lane
SUB-FOURS BY SUB 4
Combining the style of California with the technology of Switzerland, Sub Fours by Sub 4 are the training revolution of the '90's.
Styling like this deserves only the best materials and so Sub 4 have chosen fabric containing Atrex by Arova of Switzerland.
Atrex is a texturised multifilament polypropylene yarn which insures you can run dry…
As they say themselves:
ATREX (Damit Sie sich wohl fühlen In Ihrer Haupt.)
(And do you know, they are right, it is as comfortable as your own skin!)
SUB 4  harness the wind 
Don't be an April Fool…
by missing out on our superb range of specialist footwear and clothing 
Ealing Sports Centre
BEATEN BY A BLISTER!
SPENCO* BLISTER KITS for the prevention and treatment of blisters, containing:
•Corn & Blister Padding cut into oval pieces to protect and cushion the bony areas.
•2nd Skin Gel in handy squares to absorb pressure and promote healing.
•Adhesive Knit to hold the 2nd skin in place and reduce friction.
A SPENCO* BLISTER KIT in your sports bag could make all the difference to your game.
* Registered trade mark of Spenco Medical Corp.
STICK WITH IT
BEAT BLISTERS WITH COMPEED
The pain of competition is tough enough without blisters.
And up to now, you've had to quit or grin and bear it.
But at last there's a remedy: Compeed's revolutionary new dressings.
Their design means they protect you while you play.
The unique micro-thin padding acts just like an extra soft layer of skin.
At the same time, they actually create the ultimate healing condition, by absorbing fluid from the wound, keeping it clean and dry.
They're waterproof, too, and stay on through vigorous activity.
So next time you get a blister, don't stop the game — stop the pain.
Look out for the handy size packs in good chemists and sports shops.
ARE YOU REALLY FIT?
Sports and Fitness Assessment Ltd. offer:
THE RUNNERS ASSESSMENT
What is your real fitness?
What is your maximum running capacity?
We predict race times and offer recommendations for improvement.
Heart rate measurement and breath by breath analysis of oxygen consumption (the only exact method — compare our competitors) are carried out whilst running on a treadmill.
Lung function and % body fat are also measured.
Calculations are made of your peak running speed, maximum oxygen uptake, ideal training speed, running efficiency, anaerobic threshold and anticipated running times for races from one mile to marathon.
NATURE'S HEAT bottled by Oak
A muscle rub which produces heat without chemicals?
Most muscle rubs use a variety of chemicals to produce a superficial heat.
Oaks Therapeutic Sports Oil uses a special mixture of natural elements which create heat by friction, warming the muscles and joints far deeper than conventional rubs.
Sports oil comes in a tough recyclable container, is non greasy and ‘smells great’—BICYCLE, JAN '91 
ATTENTION ALL RUNNERS
DO YOU WANT TO IMPROVE YOUR ABDOMINALS?
A concise, easy to read and follow booklet that will unlock all the myths and get your stomach into the best shape of your life!
A series of 10 minute routines will not only make you look and feel in better shape but supplement your fitness.
‘The Good Abdominal Guide’ £5.95 (incl. p&p)
Cheques and POs made payable to:
‘Your Fitness is my Business’
NO SWEAT
PERTEX.
THE FULLY BREATHABLE, LIGHTWEIGHT FABRIC FOR ALL-SEASON COMFORT
Pertex is a quite amazing microfilament nylon fabric.
It has a smooth, soft feel to the skin, is fully breathable, windproof and easy care.
Lightweight athletic garments made from Pertex are, therefore, always comfortable to wear — whether there's a chill in the air, or even if the sun is shining.
Only from Ron Hill Sports, Breeze weathersuits and shorts are available in a choice of stunning Pertex colourways, for all-year round performance.
See the Breeze ranges now at all Ron Hill stockists and take the sweat out of your running.
PLEASE TELEPHONE OR WRITE FOR A FREE CATALOGUE OF ALL OUR PRODUCTS
RON HILL LEADING BY DESIGN
WHEN YOU'RE BROUGHT UP ON A DIET OF HINES, VIREN AND YIFTER, A VIEW FROM SHELL SUIT FITS PERFECTLY.
THIS MAN IS WEARING A VIEW FROM SHELL SUIT.
LIKE ALL VIEW FROM SPORTSWEAR, IT IS MADE USING THE VERY LATEST IN SPORTS SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY.
BUT THAT'S NOT THE ONLY REASON IT FITS HIM PERFECTLY.
FOR THAT WE MUST THANK HIS DIET.
BECAUSE VIEW FROM IS A NEW RANGE OF SPORTSWEAR FOR PEOPLE REARED ON THE HEROICS OF LYNN DAVIES, MARY RAND AND DAVID HEMERY.
PEOPLE WHO SAT OPEN-MOUTHED AT THE SIGHT OF BEAMON AND FOSBURY, WHO SHARED THE JOY OF KEINO AND THE AGONY OF RYAN.
PEOPLE WHO WISHED THAT FOR TEN PRECIOUS SECONDS THEY COULD HAVE THE LEGS OF VALERY BORZOV.
PEOPLE WHO STUFFED RADIOS UNDER THEIR PILLOWS AND LISTENED TO NIGHT TIME COMMENTARIES FROM ANOTHER HEMISPHERE.
PEOPLE WHO GREW UP, NOURISHED BY SPORT.
JUST LIKE YOU, ME AND THE MAN IN THE PHOTOGRAPH.
VIEW FROM.
SPORTSWEAR FOR PEOPLE WHO'VE GROWN UP WITH SPORT.
OLYMPUS SPORT
MIZUNO
THE POWERHOUSE
Few people would deny that Carl Lewis is a dedicated human powerhouse, a master of technique and controlled power.
And what is it that transmits this expertise and gives that extra edge in performance?
Mizuno high performance running shoes.
Now, that same technology is available to everyone.
From the committed runner to the occasional jogger, there's a Mizuno running shoe to suit all abilities that gives everybody the benefit of Mizuno Transpower — a remarkable energy conversion system that absorbs damaging shock and produces extra forward movement.
Latest additions to the Mizuno range, Controller Mens and Ladies models feature Transpower Power Paks.
These are interchangeable heel implants for protection in training or extra lift in competition — simply by switching the implant.
The choice is yours.
Such technology is the product of a company with roots that go back a long way in the history of sportswear.
Today, Mizuno maintain a Worldwide Advisory Staff — over 200 of the World's top sportspeople — advise and help Mizuno develop the very best sportswear that technology and experience can make possible.
So whatever level of runner you are you can't do better than get into the Mizuno powerhouse.
Ask to see the Mizuno range of running shoes and our 1991 catalogue at your specialist sports shop.
CONTOUR FIT SOCKLINER
‘SORBOTHANE’ SHOCK ABSORPTION COMPOUND
‘H2’ SUPER REBOUND COMPOUND
POWER PAK EXCHANGE CAVITY MOULDED OUTSOLE TRAINING COMPETITION
Transpower, Mizuno's unique energy conversion compound absorbs initial impact shock whilst converting it into positive forward movement.
Power Pak, is the latest development in the Transpower system and allows you to use it to your best advantage.
MIZUNO THE WORLD OF SPORTS
The re-distribution of power.
Another revolutionary idea from Porsche.
Call them idealistic, radical, even headstrong.
Porsche engineers have overthrown conventional thinking and built an all-wheel drive car to shake the world: the 911 Carrera 4.
Derived from the legendary 959, tested at Le Mans, twice victorious in the gruelling Paris-Dakar Rally, the Carrera 4 arrives at your local Porsche Centre with a four wheel drive system that is revolutionary, to say the least.
In contrast to the established systems which simply distribute torque equally between the front and rear wheels, our good engineers have made sure that power on the Carrera 4 is delivered 31% to the front wheels and 69% to the rear.
Thus the unique driving characteristics of a 911 are preserved.
To ensure that Porsche drivers enjoy greater response and surer handling, the engineers also decided to use electronic sensors to monitor each wheel.
Should any of the wheels slip, the sensor informs a microprocessor which instructs one of two differentials to redistribute engine power to the axle of the appropriate wheel.
(Clearly, this is a very disciplined revolution.)
And in the event that traction is lost at either end of the car, 100% of the drive power can be automatically transferred to the opposite set of wheels.
Of course, in their pursuit of power, Porsche engineers could hardly overlook the engine.
Appropriately, the Carrera 4 is fitted with the classic Porsche ‘boxer’ flat six, the most powerful, normally aspirated engine ever put in a production 911.
Automatically retractable spoiler.
A stainless steel 3-way catalytic converter.
Porsche-developed ABS.
Progressive power-assisted steering.
The Carrera 4 is bristling with revolutionary ideas.
So: Drivers of the world unite!
You have nothing to lose but your monotony.
The 911 Carrera 4, £54,166 at 1st September 1990.
For more details contact your Official Porsche Centre in Yellow Pages.
Alternatively, send your business card to Customer Relations, Porsche Cars Great Britain Limited, Freepost,.
Tel:.
PORSCHE DRIVING IN ITS PUREST FORM
POOLEY'S FLIGHT GUIDE
THE UK'S DEFINITIVE FLIGHT GUIDE
1991 AVAILABLE 25th FEBRUARY PRICE £17.50 & £2 P&P
1991 CORRECTED TO 14th JAN '91
ALL RELEVANT AIRFIELD INFORMATION ON ONE PAGE OR FACING PAGES
Giving information and landing diagrams of all Civil and Military Aerodromes, Helipads, Private Landing Fields, Gliding Sites, Pre-Flight Planning, Met., Radio Frequencies, Navigation Aids, MATZ, LARS, Cross Channel Procedures, Controlled Airspace, Landing Fees and other relevant information for the General Aviation Pilot.
AIRNOTE SERVICE
The 1991 Edition Posted to your home address includes amendments to all aerodrome and airspace information plus:
POOLEY'S UK AND IRELAND PLANNING CHART 1991.
POOLEY'S UK AND IRELAND COM/NAV FREQ SUPPLEMENT.
DON'T FLY WITHOUT YOUR POOLEY'S!
1991 UK AND IRELAND FLIGHT GUIDE & AIRNOTE SERVICE £26 inc P&P
ATLANTIC BRIDGE AVIATION
Your Gateway to American Aviation
NEW FOR 1991!
Atlantic Bridge is pleased to announce both a major upgrade of USA facilities as well as a change of location to Atlanta, Georgia.
Arrangements have been made with Epps Aviation to provide a variety of services including training, sales and engineering support.
The Epps family have been involved with aviation since 1907 and Epps Aviation has been established in Atlanta since 1965.
AIRCRAFT SALES
The general aviation marketplace in the USA is both massive and highly competitive.
ABA has the necessary resource and expertise on both sides of the Atlantic in order to ensure the delivery of top quality aircraft to the UK to our customers' specification.
AMERICAN ‘N-REG’ AIRCRAFT OWNERSHIP
We can supply an N-Reg aircraft with a trust set up and included in the price in order to allow legal ownership in the UK/Europe.
FLIGHT TRAINING AT ONE OF THE USA'S TOP SCHOOLS
Epps operates under FAA part 141 and has full visa approval.
PPL, CPL, IR, ATPL, Aerobatic, Multi and more.
There are many ‘Low price Guaranteed’ courses available in the USA about which we reserve judgment.
Our emphasis is firmly on quality.
The long term benefits gained from superior instruction are invaluable and provide a genuine advantage to your flying skills when operating an aeroplane either privately or professionally.
OTHER SERVICES
Aircraft delivery, parts supply, touring & engineering appraisal 
For further details please call our UK office
transair pilot shop
Pilot's Lightweight Flying Jacket
The perfect jacket for flying — Takes the bite out of the wind while you are preflighting your aircraft, yet it's lightweight and comfortable in the cockpit.
Made in the UK to our own design from 100% cotton with a fully lined nylon interior.
Features epaulettes, an inside pocket, two side pockets and a pencil holder on the left sleeve.
Handsome embroidered gold pilot wings complete this fine Pilot's jacket.
Machine washable.
Available in sizes 36–48.
9934 Lightweight Flying Jacket…£36.95
A-2 U.S.A.A.F. Leather Pilot's Jacket
Since the dark days of WWII, the A-2 flight jacket has been one of the military pilot's closest friends.
Today, it's synonymous with aviation and makes a bold statement wherever you go.
This A-2 jacket is designed to exacting Army Air Corp standards and is upgraded from the original horsehide to luxurious goatskin leather.
Original features include narrow epaulettes, snap front pockets, collar snaps, leather hanging loop, hook and eye neck closure and underarm eyelets for ventilation.
The zipper and snaps are solid brass.
The bi-directional knitted wool on the cuffs and waistband resist stretching and pilling, while keeping out the wind.
Side entry hand warmer pockets and a durable nylon lining make this an ideal three season garment.
You won't find a higher quality A-2 anywhere.
In our experience, the A-2 runs slightly small.
If in doubt, please order the next larger size.
Available in brown, sizes 36″—48″.
2990 A-2 Leather Pilot's Jacket…£169.00
CREDIT CARD ORDERS or catalogue requests CALL 
STEARMAN ON A BUDGET
Few historic aircraft offer better investment potential and practical ownership opportunity than the Boeing Stearman.
Built in greater numbers than any other biplane in the western world, these lovely old machines combine classic good looks with safe and affordable flying characteristics to produce a unique and highly desirable alternative to other forms of capital appreciation.
Now there exists the real possibility to acquire these aircraft with the added benefit of an instalment purchase plan.
Eastern Stearman are able to completely rebuild a basic airframe, fit new wings, a re-lifed engine and finish it to individual specification and colour scheme.
The completed aircraft will be in factory new condition.
A deposit with order to cover the cost of the basic airframe is followed by further increments to suit personal budgets until the aircraft is complete and airworthy.
Alternatively the basic restored airframe and engine components can be supplied part finished allowing the owner to perform final assembly and painting.
We are an organisation specialising in Stearmans and have wide experience of restoring and operating them at our Norfolk base.
Call now or write for further details of this unusual offer.
Jim Avis, Eastern Stearman  
GORE-TEX Fabric
MAKES DRIVING IN THE RAIN A LOT MORE PLEASANT
The world's best golfers rely on their equipment as much as their skill.
Which is why the majority of golf pros insist on GORE-TEX fabric.
It gives them total protection against rain and wind, without weight or bulk, while remaining breathable so that their perspiration isn't trapped inside.
And now golfwear containing GORE-TEX fabric comes with an unprecedented 3 year guarantee of its superior performance.
A promise which ensures that every garment — and not just the fabric, is totally waterproof for your complete protection and comfort in any weather.
When the garment you choose carries the GORE-TEX fabric label, you know it's guaranteed to keep you dry.
The secret of GORE-TEX fabrics lies in a unique protective membrane with around 9 billion pores per square inch; too small for water to pass through, but large enough to allow perspiration vapour to escape.
That's why GORE-TEX fabrics are waterproof, windproof and breathable.
GORE-TEX Guaranteed to keep you dry
It test drives you.
It has one of the most powerful engines of its type in the world.
It delivers 211 brake horsepower.
And according to Autocar & Motor, it will reach 60 from a standing start in a mere six seconds.
Clearly, the Porsche 944 S2 is not a car for people who like to sit uninvolved behind the steering wheel.
In truth, the most impressive thing about this performance car is the way it enhances the performance of its driver.
Do you relish the prospect of the open road?
The S2's Transaxle driveline system will enhance your pleasure.
It has near perfect 50:50 front to rear weight distribution, giving the S2 a level of control that prompted one eminent motoring magazine to hail it as possibly ‘the best handling road car that Porsche has ever made’.
The S2 provides high torque throughout the rev range, allowing you to apply confident bursts of speed when overtaking, its ‘ground effect’ technology tightening the car's grip on the road as you're accelerating.
Hands-on drivers will also enjoy getting their hands on the 944 S2's progressive power-steering system.
It allows you to have a firmer feel for the road at higher speeds without giving up power assistance when, regrettably, it comes time to park the car.
Of course, there are times when a greater sense of control does more than simply enhance the driving experience.
The S2's ABS brakes have internally ventilated discs that won't lock.
So even with the brake pedal to the floor on wet roads, you can still retain steering control.
Which may indeed save your life.
And, lastly, the S2's galvanized bodyshell is guaranteed a full ten years against corrosion.
Ensuring that you'll always enjoy seeing the car as much as you enjoy driving it.
Assuming, of course, you'll want to get out of the 944 S2 once in a while and take a look.
The 944 S2, £35,682 at 1st September 1990.
For details contact your Official Porsche Centre listed in Yellow Pages.
Alternatively, send your business card to Customer Relations, Porsche Cars Great Britain Limited, Freepost, Tel:.
PORSCHE DRIVING IN ITS PUREST FORM
THE FACTS SWING IN OUR FAVOUR
FACT
Throughout the 1989 Yonex National Long Driving Competition, the Yonex A.D.X. range out-hit its competitors by, on average, 18.5 yards.
The event took place at Copt Heath Gold Club, Solihull.
FACT
At the heart of the A.D.X. 200 is a clubhead which is 15% larger than traditional woods which gives a 20% larger sweet spot.
Yonex increased the length of the shaft of its A.D.X. 200 by 1¾ inches giving an average of 11.7% greater distance with each shot.
The longer shaft creates a greater swing arc, more clubhead speed and subsequent increase in power without sacrificing good control.
FACT
With a sweet spot that is 15% larger than traditional irons, an aerodynamically designed back and a sole that is 80% wider than in steel-headed irons, the A.D.X. 200 irons give an easy swing which translates into greater distance and more accuracy.
The pairing of the Yonex graphite construction with its aerodynamic design allows you to generate an outstanding trajectory.
An A.D.X. long iron plays like a short iron from a traditional set of clubs.
There will be less bounce and roll with your A.D.X. irons, allowing your ball to land softly on the green even when hitting long irons.
YONEX Japan's No. 1 in graphite clubs
POWER PRECISION PRESTIGE
From the front, few small cars are as attractive as our new Polo.
From the back, though, we're tempted to say no small car is as attractive as our new Polo.
Because no other small cars come with a catalytic converter as standard.
An advanced ‘three-way’ catalyst at that.
One capable of reducing by more than 90% the trio of toxic pollutants in exhaust.
It may not be perfect but it's 90% more perfect than no ‘cat’ at all.
That said, you may be wondering what sort of effect this has on the Polo's performance.
Wonder not.
Thanks to the introduction of fuel injection, it's well up to speed.
The brakes are now servo.
So stopping suddenly gives you even less of a start.
And not least, the uprated suspension makes for even nimbler handling and an even smoother ride.
All in all, you could say our new Polo leaves the competition behind.
But very little else.
The new catalytic Polo.
Golf's most priceless book isn't in a museum.
SAVE £25 ON A SELECTED SOLGOLF HOLIDAY
When you book a selected golf holiday in the 1991 Solgolf brochure (one of Britain's leading golf holiday companies) as a Golf Plus club member you will automatically receive £25 discount on your holiday invoice.
SAVE UP TO 20% ON BRITAIN'S BEST GOLF MAGAZINES
As a Golf Plus Club Member you can enjoy up to a 20% discount on a year's subscription to Britain's best golf magazines bringing you the best pictures and best coverage of your favourite game.
SAVE £15 ON THE INTERNATIONALLY ACCLAIMED KITBAG
The Golf Bag with its own built-in trolley.
Ideal on and off the course.
Indispensable for the travelling golfer.
And many, many more offers in every book.
SAVE £25 ON A SET OF THE NEW PETRON TPX IRONS
Your members' vouchers include a free computer test of your clubs at any of the Petron Swing Analysis Centres situated around Britain.
And if you purchase a set of the new Petron TPX Clubs through your club Pro., as a Golf Plus Club member you'll receive a £25 discount.
SAVE 10% ON A COUNTRY CLUB HOTEL WEEKEND
Spend a weekend for two at any of the superb Country Club Hotels, most sited on their own golf courses around the country and as a Golf Plus Club Member your bill will be reduced by 10%.
SAVE 10% ON THE DAVID LEADBETTER VIDEO
The Golf Plus Club has its own Book and Video service and members receive a generous 10% discount on any book or video in their list, including the highly successful David Leadbetter video.
THE GOLF PLUS CLUB MEMBERS' BOOK OF PRIVILEGE VOUCHERS WORTH OVER £100
When you join the Golf Plus Club, as a member you are presented with a free book of privilege vouchers that offer substantial discounts on a whole range of golf products and services.
Use them all and you can enjoy savings of over £100, a valuable contribution to the cost of your game.
And membership brings many additional privileges like your own colour magazine, Golf clinics with Mark James, golf competitions and overseas trips, special rates for golf insurance and of course your own personalised PGA approved Credit Card (subject to status) for all golf purchases such as equipment, lessons, holidays and most importantly your annual golf club subscription.
BACK PROBLEMS?
TRY THE FRANK HARVEY BACK SUPPORT BELT
Designed specifically for golfers, THE FRANK HARVEY SUPPORT BELT has an internal orthopaedic cushion which will enable you to play with more comfort.
Hand-made in soft leather, with an easy to use non-buckle fastening technique, the belt comes in three colours, red, white and black, and is only £39.99.
Please state your waist size and make your cheques payable to: FRANK HARVEY AND Co. and send to: FRANK HARVEY AND Co.
Please allow 21 days for delivery.
THE FRANK HARVEY BACK SUPPORT
GUL TAKES THE STRAIN
Gul Sportopaedic Supports — specially designed for professional athletes, dedicated amateurs and active sportspeople everywhere — provide necessary aid and protection to weakened or strained muscles and joints during periods of training or competition.
Gul Sportopaedic Supports come in a wide range of sizes and colours.
For stockists ring .
Half-time.
And only 532 goals to go.
And 93 penalties.
And 56 sendings off.
And 247 spectacular saves, all from the '89 –'90; League Season.
For kick offs, there's the excitement of Goals Galore, Saves Galore and The Race For The Championship at £9.99 each.
Then, at £11.99 each, every First Division Club's own story of last season.
Dribble down to your local video stockist for your official Football League videos.
ALL 1ST DIVISION CLUB VIDEOS INCLUDING SPURS, EVERTON & CHELSEA
AVAILABLE AT WOOLWORTHS, WH SMITH, OUR PRICE, HMV, VIRGIN, OLYMPUS SPORTS AND ALL GOOD VIDEO RETAILERS.
DAVIES Angling 
would like to announce an amazing special offer on Shimano Beastmaster reels.
These reels have been tried and tested by ourselves in Kenya and as a result many of the top game fishing boats in Kenya are now using them.
The Beastmasters specifications are: Dual capacity capability, double strike drag, 2-speed gear system and pre-set drag programmer.
LIMITED NUMBERS OF THESE REELS WILL BE AVAILABLE AND DELIVERY WILL NOT BE UNTIL 11TH MARCH 1991.
TO ENSURE YOU GET YOUR REEL SEND US A £20 REFUNDABLE DEPOSIT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE.
'90 WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP VIDEO
The Only Championship Video approved by Dick Clegg (England Team Manager)
This unique video shows all the build up to the World Angling Championship in 1990, the practice sessions, discussions, the work which ensures that England remain at the top of the world.
You can feel the tension, the disappointment, the joy.
See the world's finest anglers fishing for the ultimate prize.
•Essential viewing for all serious match anglers.
•For every angler who's ever fished a match (Club, Open or Team).
You can see THE MATCH.
•If you can't get to a World Championship this video is the next best.
To Order send cheques to: DSB Promotions, 207 Carr House Road, Doncaster DN  DR.
Only £14.95 P&P £1.00 or order on Visa or Access.
WHERE THE NEW 900S FITS IN.
The 'plane in the middle is the new Saab 900S.
True, it shares the familiar 900 body shape but it's the new thinking behind the radically different engine that sets it apart.
The ‘S’ has an ingenious power plant, what we call a light pressure turbo.
It's more powerful than the regular injection models, but not quite as powerful as the full-blown turbos.
Yet the ‘S’ is more than capable of flying, kicking out as it does an impressive 145bhp.
The flexibility of the engine and the very nature in which the power is delivered mean far fewer gear changes are required, making this machine eminently suitable for town driving.
It's also much quieter and even better behaved, by that we mean it burns cleaner with less exhaust emissions.
Making a clean break is easier too; critical acceleration between 40–60 mph and 50–70 mph can be matched by very few cars indeed.
Making overtaking safer and less fraught.
As with all Saabs the 900S is aircraft inspired.
Fashioned by aerospace not fashion.
Its body shape means it is one of the most stable road vehicles in crosswinds.
An ergonomically designed cockpit, with instrumentation and controls logically zoned, make for error-free readings of any situation.
Whilst orthopaedically designed seating and sophisticated ventilation help keep the driver alert and in control, even on the most fatiguing of journeys.
(The 900 is already universally recognised as one of the world's safest cars, but that's hardly surprising knowing how stringent the safety standards are in the aircraft industry.)
The 900S is available as a 3 door, 5 door or 3 door Aero as featured above.
Now you know where the 900S fits in, why not fit in a test flight soon.
THE 900S RANGE STARTS FROM £15,495.
CAR SHOWN 900S AERO £16,495.
PRICES CORRECT AT PRESS DATE EXCLUDE DELIVERY, ROAD TAX AND PLATES.
EXPORT TAX-FREE SALES:.
SAAB AIRCRAFT INSPIRED
WITH 0% FINANCE ON THE NEW METRO, WHAT MORE COULD WE ADD?
HOW ABOUT, ‘THE SMOOTHEST RIDE, QUIETEST POWERTRAIN, SHARPEST HANDLING, BEST ROADHOLDING AND FIRMEST BRAKES.’
CAR MAGAZINE, JUNE 90.
The new Metro has been universally acclaimed by the motoring press.
From the revolutionary new Rover ‘K’ series aluminium engine to the technically superior interconnected suspension, they say the car is a ‘revelation’.
We agree.
But rather than offer more praise, we would like to offer something else.
0% finance and a host of other attractive, flexible finance schemes.
Call into your nearest showroom.
Your Rover Dealer will show you the car that's impressed the press so much.
And the best ways of paying for it.
THE NEW METRO WITH ROVER ENGINEERING
IS YOUR FORD-VV CARB GIVING YOU GRIEF?
REPLACE IT NOW!
FOR AROUND £92 + VAT
REPLACEMENT CARBURETTOR KITS FOR FORD-VV/IV AND VAUXHALL-VARAJET INSTALLATIONS
Available for Ford Fiesta 950, 1.1, 1.3, Escort/Orion 1.1, 1.3, 1.6, Cortina 1.3, 1.6, Capri 1.6, Sierra 1.6 and Transit 1.6, 2.0 — All originally fitted with VV carburettors.
Also available for Vauxhall Astra 1.3 and Cavalier 1.3 originally fitted with a Varajet carburettor.
•Greatly-improved starting, idling, acceleration, economy and general running with up to 4bhp more at the wheels.
Performance with economy!
•Quickly and easily fitted without specialised tools or knowledge.
Produced in Italy and specially adapted for the U.K. market.
Tens of thousands already sold!
•No extra charges.
All necessary parts supplied including gaskets, piping, clips, adaptors for the existing inlet manifold and original airfilter, new manual choke assembly (where needed) and full instructions.
•Usual superior Dellorto quality and finish ensures longer life, reliability and low running costs.
Full range of spare parts and service kits available through dealer network.
Accept no substitutes — insist on Dellorto quality!
Reliable and trouble free running for many years ahead!
•Supplied and fitted by an extensive network of carburettor specialists or by your local tune-Up technician or you can fit it quite easily yourself without special tools in about an hour.
No ignition resetting is needed.
Telephone for details of your nearest stockist.
DELLORTO CONTACT DEVELOPMENTS (DELLORTO UK CONCESSIONAIRES)
THE NEW PEUGEOT 605.
RELAX AS THE WORLD FLIES BY.
What does it take to build a car that is both relaxing to drive, yet can make the world fly by?
A car that combines the comfort of a luxury car with the handling of a sports car?
A lot more than just fitting it with leather, walnut and air conditioning.
In fact, it's taken 4 years and £600 million to create to the new Peugeot 605 range.
First, we built a factory, with a paint shop so clean no particle of dust more than 5 thousandths of a millimetre thick can get inside.
And where every body panel is precisely positioned according to a computer model consisting of 12,000 reference points.
We created a revolutionary 24 valve, 3 litre V6 engine with a variable length inlet manifold, enabling the engine to breathe deeper as it goes faster.
This extends its optimum torque curve, making it smooth and refined in town, yet a free revving performance engine on the open road.
Then we designed one of the most sophisticated suspension systems fitted to a production car.
It adjusts itself to road conditions, switching each shock absorber from firm to soft in just 150 milliseconds.
This suspension can absorb a bump so quickly that the driver hardly senses it, yet it still keeps him in perfect control of the car.
And finally, we've even revolutionized the way your 605 is cared for, by creating Lioncare Gold.
As well as giving you all the benefits of AA Relay, it makes servicing your car a more relaxing experience.
For instance, we'll pick up and return your car, or even lend you another Peugeot whilst yours is being serviced.
All 605s are fitted with a three-way catalytic converter, anti-lock braking system and an ultrasonic alarm as standard.
If you'd like more information on the seven car 605 range, call  for a free information pack.
Or even better, visit your Peugeot dealer and take a test drive in the new Peugeot 605.
Then you can relax as the world flies by.
RELAX AS THE WORLD FLIES BY
PEUGEOT 605 THE LION GOES FROM STRENGTH TO STRENGTH
THE 200 MPH PORSCHE 959.
A PRETTY NIPPY SET OF WHEELS.
THE WORLD'S MOST ADVANCED SPORTS CAR IS FITTED WITH THE WORLD'S MOST ADVANCED TYRES.
DEVELOPED BY DUNLOP.
‘VAUXHALL'S STUNNING START TO THE NINETIES.’
A nanny became a Princess.
A Boomtown Rat became an Honorary Knight.
And, to cap it all, Wimbledon won the Cup.
We've just emerged, pinching ourselves, from a decade when we got rather used to the unexpected.
But in the motor industry, the 'eighties saved their biggest surprise until the very end.
Last year, Vauxhall unveiled a car called Calibra.
Those present — the press at previews and the public at the major European motor shows — couldn't have been less prepared for what they saw.
Because it's not every day, not even every decade, that a new car appears which bucks so many trends and owes so little to prevailing thinking.
And because this simply wasn't the type of car that Vauxhall was supposed to make.
Sleek, dramatic good looks were supposed to be the exclusive property of the more fashionable marques.
Yet Calibra beat all-comers (including Ferrari and Mercedes) to win the Autocar & Motor Design of the Year Award.
(One Judge even going so far as to say, ‘In ten years' time, 1989 may well be seen as the year when Vauxhall redefined the sports coupé.’)
Technical innovation was supposed to be a Bavarian speciality.
Yet here was Vauxhall with the astonishing Cd figure of 0.26, making it the most aerodynamic production car in the world.
And, as a result, giving it better driving stability, reduced fuel consumption and lower noise levels.
Calibra had its UK launch on June 10th.
A fully emission-controlled engine, including electronic management and catalytic converter, is standard on both 8 and 16 valve models, as is ABS.
The finer points of performance and specification (finer being the operative word) should be left to our dealers.
They've already given Calibra pride of place in their showrooms.
And while they're telling you about it, take a close look at the finest four-seater coupé of the 'nineties.
It's going to make an awful lot of cars look, well, just a bit 'eighties.
VAUXHALL Once driven, forever smitten.
Immerse your hand in iced water for five minutes.
Now you'll begin to understand why we've developed Castrol GTX2.
As your circulation slows, your fingers very quickly become numb and lifeless.
Extreme cold can have a similarly devastating affect on a car's engine.
And that's truer than ever today, when even an ordinary family saloon is powered by a highly sophisticated engine that depends on the right lubrication to perform at its best.
That's why we're introducing Castrol GTX2.
Developed in close co-operation with leading car manufacturers, it's a highly refined 10w/40 multigrade — specially designed to meet the new challenges of the 1990s.
Cold starting will never strike a chill in your heart again.
Even at -25°C (when an ordinary oil would be thick and immobile) Castrol GTX2 reaches every component that needs protection within seconds of you turning the key.
And its exceptional flexibility makes it equally comfortable coping with the scorching heat generated by modern engines.
What's more, Castrol GTX2 has been specially formulated to prolong the life of catalytic converters (soon to become mandatory).
All of which means that changing to Castrol GTX2 should give you a rather warm and pleasant feeling.
The liquid engineers
A modern classic.
What makes a car a classic?
Must it follow fashion or be above it?
Should it be outrageously new or timeless?
In the new Ford Orion you'll find the answer.
The classic lines of its exterior conceal a combination of microchip technology and decades of Ford experience.
In particular, it boasts a longer wheelbase and new twist-beam suspension which produces a smoother ride and better handling.
The Orion is also noticeably quieter, thanks to improvements like flush-fitted doors and glass and a sleeker shape all round.
For the first time you can have electronic anti-lock brakes across the whole range, and on certain models you can specify refinements such as power steering, air conditioning and a CD player.
The Orion is designed for those people who believe that luggage belongs in the boot.
In this case a boot with a generous 490 litres of storage space.
*
From the moment you sit back in the Orion's roomy interior, you'll know how it feels to drive a classic car.
Test drive one soon.
We predict that the classic look is going to become remarkably fashionable this year.
For the address of your nearest dealer please contact the Ford Information Service Free on .
* Measured using the VDA method.
The new Ford Orion.
SLIMLINE POCKETPHONE
Only £99 plus VAT
UK's LOWEST PRICES!
Standard Charges — ½ Minute Billing — Offer subject to status
We are prohibited from mentioning the manufacturer's name/model in the ‘National Press’— however, we can state that the list price of this slimline, state-of-the-art handportable cellphone is £1,695!
Call our hotline NOW for a full information pack which explains how to obtain this AMAZING UNREPEATABLE OFFER!
Airflor Communications Limited
PETROMIZER UK LTD
WILL CUT YOUR FUEL COSTS
HOW IT WORKS
PETROMIZER subjects the molecules to a magnetic field.
This reduces surface tension allowing a better oxygen mixture therefore making the fuel easier to burn.
THE EFFECTS
1.
Increases Horsepower.
2.
Reduces Hydrocarbons.
3.
Reduces Carbon monoxide.
4.
Increased MPG.
FITS ANY COMBUSTION ENGINE
PETROMIZER will fit any combustion engine.
Use on cars, boats, lorries or household generators.
IMPROVED PERFORMANCE
PETROMIZER has been tested by the Clayton Manufacturing Co, a category 1 EPA approved laboratory.
The result was that the test vehicles horsepower was increased by 11%.
EASY TO INSTALL
With the supplied DIY kit, PETROMIZER can be installed into any engine in seconds.
AND IT COSTS ONLY £49 + VAT TRADE ENQUIRIES WELCOME
1.
Olson Engineering Co.
Approved by the State of California No.
HD-100.
2.
Clayton Manufacturing Co.
Increases Horsepower by 11%.
3.
Southwest Research Inst.
Increases MPG by 17%.
4.
‘A Fuel Saver That Works!’
Trucks & Vans Magazine.
Nov '82 
TOP QUALITY U.S.A. GARMENTS 50% COTTON 50% POLYESTER SILK-SCREENED FULL COLOUR DESIGN ONTO RED OR YELLOW SHIRTS
T SHIRTS
Printed Front: Full colour (as above).
Back: black prancing horse and ‘Ferrari Formula One’ wording.
Crew neck short sleeve style in red or yellow.
SWEATSHIRTS
Printed Front: Full colour (as above).
Back: black prancing horse and ‘Ferrari Formula One’ wording.
Crew neck long sleeved, heavy fleece lined in red or yellow.
GOLF SHIRTS
Printed on back: black prancing horse and ‘Ferrari Formula One’ wording.
3 button neck with collar.
BASEBALL CAPS
£5.99.
Fully adjustable (fits all headsizes).
Full colour design on front (as above) available in red or yellow.
RACING JACKETS
Full colour design on breast front (as above).
Back: black prancing horse and ‘Ferrari Formula One’ wording.
Padded Jacket with Zip front, elasticated cuffs and waistband.
Outside pockets.
Available in red.
BRASS BUCKLES
An individually cast solid brass buckle featuring ‘Ferrari’ wording and prancing horse with a genuine black hide belt 1½ wide for only £14.99 complete.
ALL GARMENTS ARE DOUBLE STITCHED FOR STRENGTH — COMPLETELY MACHINE WASHABLE AND FULLY GUARANTEED.
Please send your order details, together with a cheque or postal order to —
Please allow up to 28 days delivery.
— Thank you.
FACT
Despite elaborate alarm systems, nearly 400,000 vehicles were stolen last year.
FACT
33%, by value, of vehicles stolen were never recovered.
FACT
Now you can get your own back.
With Autoseeker fitted you only have to make one simple phone call and Autoseeker's advanced technology does the rest.
It will contact your vehicle and remotely, initiate a chain of events which will ultimately bring the vehicle to a halt, enabling recovery.
A coded signal activates a 120db siren and the vehicle's indicators flash alternately.
A voice synthesiser continuously speaks to the unauthorised driver warning that Autoseeker has been activated, the police alerted and that the vehicle will be automatically disabled within minutes.
Autoseeker speaks to the thief — the facts speak for themselves.
AUTOSEEKER
WE ALSO CHECK THE HEADLIGHTS.
Before a used BMW earns its seal of approval, it comes under the eagle eyes of BMW's technicians.
From the filament in the fog lamps right down to the washers on the wipers.
Such a standard of care ensures an Approved Used BMW is in perfect running order.
And as you'd expect, every car is covered by an extensive warranty which provides emergency assistance.
Wherever you might venture in Europe.
All of which could put the thought of buying an ordinary used BMW in a very different light.
BMW Approved Used Cars
GENUINE TOYOTA PARTS ARE NOT EXPENSIVE.
OTHER MAKES COULD COST YOU MORE!
DEDICATED TO PERFECTION
We all like to save money but should we be governed by cost alone?
No.
After all, when you decided to buy a Toyota, you recognised the attributes that have made us one of the worlds foremost manufacturers and our cars such good quality and value.
So, when it comes to replacement parts, why settle for second best?
With Toyota it is quality that counts.
Quality of material.
Quality of finish.
Quality of fit.
Quality of warranty.
Quality with value.
Take our exhausts for example.
They carry a 3 year ‘no quibble’ guarantee, yet still compare favourably in price with their quick fit counterparts.
Toyota Genuine Replacement Parts are all made to the same exacting standards as those fitted to your car from new.
So, when the time comes and you need to replace a part on your Toyota, buy the real thing.
Buy only genuine Toyota Parts.
Genuine Toyota Parts.
The best parts at the right price.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE With the Personal Touch 
TOYOTA
SWAN PERFORMANCE AND BEAUTY — IN A CRUISING FORMULA
Designed by Nautor's house naval architect, German Frers, the new 55 has all the beauty, performance and reliability you would expect from a Swan, yet has been designed to satisfy the needs of the cruising sailor.
Unencumbered by rating rules, the Swan 55 has a voluminous hull, shallow draft and sufficient sheer and freeboard for dry and comfortable cruising, yet her modern bulb keel, fast Frers' underbody and large sail area ensure unparalleled performance.
She has a spacious interior with full headroom throughout, room for ancillary cruising equipment and ample stowage space, while her deep bilges allow generous fuel and water tankage for long distance cruising.
The two interior layouts, one for family cruising, the other with additional skipper's cabin forward, include deep lockers and shelves in every cabin, full length hanging lockers, provision for the installation of T.V. and entertainment systems, even a washing machine can be accommodated.
The walk-in engine room provides easy servicing of the generator, electrical equipment and 116 hp diesel.
On deck, commitment to cruising continues — a vast centre cockpit offers comfort, security and generous stowage areas.
The recessed anchor windlass, spacious lazarette and large chain and fender lockers mean a safe and uncluttered deck.
The efficient rig is designed for short-handed sailing with most controls led back to the cockpit and features mast-mounted halyard winches for easy operation.
SEE THE NEW SWAN 55 AT PARIS AND LONDON BOATSHOWS.
NAUTOR's SWAN 55
Baltic Yachts
Some things are better than others.
The Baltic 52.
Qualities like these are never out of fashion.
Performance
Sleek hull lines and powerful, easily-handled rigs give today's Moodys sparkling, sure-footed performance whatever the conditions.
Comfort
Style, spaciousness and luxury are established hallmarks of the Moody performance yacht.
Imaginative, practical design makes the optimum use of space, as well as creating a charm and elegance that's a pure cruising delight.
Confidence
Moody's most enduring quality is proven dependability.
Backed by nearly 200 years experience and boatbuilding tradition, a Moody is above all a boat you know you can trust.
Moody Performance Cruisers 
THE MOODY GROUP
LONDON BOAT SHOW STAND 44A
Complete Navigation
Come and see the new GPS receiver unveiled at London Boat Show Stand No.
C262
QUALITY * SAFETY * RELIABILITY * ACCURACY
Quality, safety, reliability, accuracy — all four are essential features of navigation.
It is these features which have enabled the R.N.L.I.
to fit ap navigators as the sole navigation receiver on every inshore and offshore lifeboat.
You can benefit from this same technology no matter how large or small your vessel.
There is, in the ap navigator range, a receiver offering unrivalled simplicity and clarity at a price or level of complexity that will suit your requirement.
The range includes:
Decca-ap4
is available in two versions, the Popular or Standard.
Both have a full 3 year warranty and can be mounted externally for ease of use and feature a one-touch man overboard key.
Decca-ap5
is available in three versions — Cruising, Dual System and Professional.
All have NMEA outputs for autopilot and plotter connection.
The Dual System and Professional have NMEA input connection for instrument systems and to the GPS Black Box.
The Professional offers Decca LOP's and when connected to GPS, lat/long-LOP conversion.
GPS-Black Box.
This is a six channel receiver which is operated through the ap5 DS or Professional.
GPS—
This stand-alone receiver is the latest addition to the ap range and can be seen for the first time at the London Boat Show.
PHILIPS
ap navigator Complete Navigation from AMPRO
Moody Performance Cruisers 
Moody — an exceptional range of performance cruising yachts, firmly established as class leaders, combining style and luxury with a superb sailing performance and easy handling.
And now from Britain's largest boatbuilder comes the Eclipse range of deck saloon yachts.
Craft of a new concept which combine the pleasures of easy sailing with the convenience of motor cruising.
Buying and caring for your new boat couldn't be easier when you are dealing with Marine Secol.
Whether your choice is traditional sailing with Moody or motor sailing with Eclipse you are guaranteed an unrivalled after sales service.
Moody and Eclipse — built by Marine Projects and distributed by Marine Secol, Britain's largest and most caring dealer.
MARINE SECOL MOODY & ECLIPSE DISTRIBUTOR
THE WORLD'S YOUR OYSTER
OYSTER 68 Setting New Standards 
THE OYSTER 68 COMBINES ELEGANCE, PERFORMANCE AND COMFORT THAT HAS WON SUPPORT FROM CRUISING YACHTSMEN AROUND THE WORLD.
IN TWO SEASONS NINE OWNERS FROM FIVE COUNTRIES HAVE PROVED HER INTERNATIONAL APPEAL.
THE DECK LAYOUT HAS BEEN DESIGNED TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF MODERN SAIL HANDLING EQUIPMENT SO SHE IS EASY TO MANAGE.
UNDER SAIL THE 68 PERFORMS WELL, 68–07 ‘PRUDENCE’ BUILT FOR BRITAIN'S FORMER AMERICAS CUP CHALLENGER GRAHAM WALKER, RECENTLY LOGGED A DAYS RUN OF 227 MILES, WHILST UNDER POWER 200 MILE DAYS ARE THE NORM WITH RANGE TO MATCH.
SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESS AND INEVITABLY THE NEW 1991 OYSTER 68'S WILL BENEFIT FROM REFINEMENTS THAT CAN ONLY BE ACHIEVED THROUGH DEVELOPMENT OF AN ESTABLISHED CLASS.
WE CONTINUE TO OFFER A CHOICE OF EQUIPMENT, INTERIOR STYLING AND LAYOUT SO THAT MORE THAN EVER THE OYSTER 68 OFFERS MANY OF THE BENEFITS OF A COMMISSIONED ‘ONE OFF’, BUT WITH LESS RISK, EXPENSE AND WITH PREDICTABLE STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE QUALITY.
TOO LARGE FOR LONDON THE OYSTER 68 WILL BE DISPLAYED FOR THE FIRST TIME AT DUSSELDORF AND MIAMI.
THE DUSSELDORF YACHT HAS A SPECTACULAR ANDREW WINCH INTERIOR WHOSE THEME CAN BE REPEATED ON ANOTHER 68 OR ANY OF OUR LARGER MODELS.
ALL OYSTER YACHTS ARE OFFERED ON A FIXED PRICE AND ‘OYSTERLOAN’ OUR SUBSIDISED INTEREST FINANCE SCHEME MAY BE AVAILABLE.
THE OYSTER RANGE INCLUDES 14 MODERN DESIGNS FROM 37 TO 68 FEET ALL LINKED IN THE PURSUIT OF EXCELLENCE BY A COMMON THEME OF QUALITY AND ATTENTION TO DETAIL.
OYSTER YACHTS HAVE INTERNATIONAL APPEAL, PROVEN BY OUR QUEENS AWARD FOR EXPORT ACHIEVEMENT 1990, THE ONLY MARINE INDUSTRY COMPANY SO HONOURED.
IF YOU ARE IN THE MARKET FOR A QUALITY YACHT WE INVITE YOU TO LET US SHOW YOU HOW WE CAN MAKE THE WORLD YOUR OYSTER.
Carefree CRUISING
EASI-STOW MAINSAIL
The Easi-Stow heralds a quiet cruising revolution.
Inspired by Hood's unrivalled experience of shorthanded multihull sailing, this fully-battened sail retains a better shape over a wider wind range than conventional mainsail.
High quality, tightly woven fabric is used, with Hood's renowned soft finish for easy handling and long life.
And it flakes quietly, effortlessly, over the boom.
1 FULL LENGTH BATTENS — hollow to reduce weight and heeling 
2 AEROFOIL SHAPE remains constant for greater efficiency 
3 REEFING & STOWING are safer and flogging is reduced 
4 EASI-JACKS guide the sail neatly on top of the boom, flake by flake; no need for extra crew 
5 EASILY INSTALLED — pad eye and fixings (supplied) attach the Easi-Jacks to the mast 
The versatile Easi-Stow is suitable for a wide variety of yachts, from minis to 140 ft superyachts.
A computer-controlled laser system ensures ultra-precise cutting.
Best of all, it's made by Hood.
Add a new dimension to carefree cruising.
Post the coupon for more information today.
Hood's EASI-STOW — the ultimate in performance and efficiency.
HOOD Much more than fast
Now that the R40X and R20X have taken the radar world by storm, it's time for a little more radar excitement…the R10X Radar.
With its incredibly small, lightweight radome, the R10X is the most compact as well as the most economical, full-featured radar ever offered.
This powerful 7-inch radar has range scales from ⅛ to 16 nm.
The amazing ⅛-nm range — a feature simply not found on most other radars — gives you the close-up detail needed to navigate narrow channels, rivers or inlets.
•Patented Waypoint Navigation feature displays bearing, distance and time-to-go readouts, plus graphic steering guidance, when interfaced with Loran, GPS, Satnav, or Decca Navigator having proper outputs
•Low-noise front-end receiver
•8-level video quantisation
•2X zoom •2VRMs •2 EBLs
•66%  centring 
•In/out guard zone alarm plus memory
•Easy-to-use rotary controls
•Optional flush mounting kit
To see how easy it is to upgrade your boat with the world's finest radar performance, visit your local dealer or call our 24-hour Brochure Line:.
RAYTHEON MARINE SALES AND SERVICE COMPANY
RAYSTAR 590 GPS with PLOTTER
Another winner from those who gave you the world's best-selling commercial GPS navigator.
The moment you turn it on, you know that RAYSTAR 590 is an incredible GPS Navigator.
A self-checking computer sequence immediately verifies that all systems are working.
Then, on-screen menus automatically direct every operation.
Switch instantly between dynamic graphic plotter displays and alpha-numeric presentations.
Assign names and/or symbols, as well as numbers, to up to 500 waypoints, to identify their location or purpose.
At your command, our unique GPS Man Overboard feature immediately goes into a special plot mode which continuously gives range and bearing back to the location at which it was activated.
Other great GPS features include constant tracking of up to 5 available satellites, steering guidance, 7 plotter ranges with 8 plot intervals, instant event mark memory, multiple route planning, alarms, stopwatch, clock and timer.
For more information about the world's most versatile GPS receiver, see your local Raytheon dealer or call our 24-hour Brochure Line:(0279) 626316.
FIRST S. NEVER WAS SPEED SO SWEET.
A POWERFUL RIG SIMPLY SET UP FOR PERFORMANCE WITH IDEAS FROM THE RACING CIRCUIT MATCHED WITH A DOUBLE LUFF GENOA REEFING SYSTEM.
THE FIRST S YACHTS ARE REAL ENDURANCE ATHLETES.
MINIMUM WETTED SURFACE.
HIGH RIGHTING MOMENT…
THE FIRST S YACHTS ARE INSPIRED AND INNOVATIVE YACHTS.
SHEER BEAUTY THAT WILL FASCINATE FROM COWES TO PLYMOUTH TO NEWPORT R.I. ENTER THE WORLD OF WALNUT, SATIN FINISHED ALUMINIUM AND POLISHED MARBLE ON BOARD A FIRST S. MATERIALS CHOSEN FOR THEIR LOOKS AND SUITABILITY FOR THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT.
THE SCIENCE OF JEAN BERRET, THE INSPIRATION OF PHILIPPE STARCH, THE MARK OF BENETEAU.
BÉNÉTEAU Lead by choice
Exclusive offer to Yachting World readers: Official Whitbread videos from Beckmann Home Video
Whitbread Round the World Race 1989/90
Using TVS top quality footage, the highlights of the Whitbread the world's longest and most gruelling of offshore races are compiled in the 130 minute long tape.
See our big red cruising home to win six consecutive legs and the joy of her Kiwi skipper Peter Blake who had finally won the Whitbread after 17 years and four previous attempts, and the disappointment of the Rothmans and Merit teams who had constantly locked horns for second place during the nine month voyage.
See the success of Tracy Edwards and the all-girl Maiden team and the plight of Fazisi, the Russian maxi, whose American skipper Skip Novak took over the reins when Russian skipper Alexi Gryschenko committed suicide.
And see the lexicon of disasters from The Card dismasting in Auckland to Martella's capsize off Argentina.
Price £24.95.
The Maiden Voyage
Tracy Edwards' story captured the imagination of the world's media and earned her an MBE, as well as the respect of her doubting colleagues in the male-dominated world of the Whitbread.
The Maiden Voyage charts the course of Tracy's campaign from her previous Whitbread trip as cook for a leg on board both Norsk Data and NZI Enterprize, to her purchase of old Disque d'Or — and the ensuring financial crisis — to the race itself.
Join in the sense of achievement as Maiden crosses the finish line off Southampton.
Made using the excellent footage, this hour-long video follows the exploits of the Whitbread's first women's team.
Price £12.95.
FOR THOSE WHO APPRECIATE THE TRUE BRILLIANCE OF A NEW STAR.
THE SUN ODYSSEY 34, A MODERN CRUISER FOR THE 90's.
Daniel Andrieu's experience in designing successful racing boats is evident from the elegant profile of the hull and deck, the elliptical keel and fine torpedo-shaped ballast.
Designed with many refreshing new design characteristics, the Sun Odyssey 34 is capable of achieving 8 knots in 15 knots of wind.
The deck layout integrates as far as possible all functions, with all the control lines led unobtrusively to self-tailing winches via channels on the deck.
The shrouds have been kept inboard, making access easy.
The vast cockpit features the luxury of teak-finished surfaces.
The yacht provides exceptional cruising comfort for a crew of 4 or 6.
A special feature of the boat is the extensive galley which rivals most domestic kitchens.
The finish and colours are bright and airy, giving an atmosphere which is both exciting and relaxing.
The Sun Odyssey 34 is part of a new range of Jeanneau yachts which is designed to provide luxury and comfort in hulls capable of excellent performance.
The other yachts in the range are the 31, 36, 39, 42, 44 and the 51.
There is also the Sun Fast range (31, 39, 41) where the accent is rather more on out-and-out performance.
The Sun Way range (21, 25, 27, 28) has a special appeal to newcomers to sailing.
SUN ODYSSEY 34, THE LUXURIOUS 34-FOOTER FROM THE SUN ODYSSEY RANGE.
STYLED BY ANDREW WINCH
JEANNEAU.
FOLLOW THE STAR.
We talked at length about the new sails.
He was a quiet man but his searching questions about our design technique and the weight and construction of the cloth suggested a sound knowledge of sails.
He said he mostly cruised now — although he had done several Fastnets and a few Ton-Cups some years ago.
Family commitments now meant that he just did the occasional Cowes Week and Club Race.
He listened to our reasons for selecting the cloth, our design philosophy and our assurances that his sails would be hand finished to his specific requirements.
He said that was fine and that he knew that the sails would be as good as the last suit that we had made for him.
Could we send the finished sails to his yacht in Taahuku Bay in the Marquesas?
He said he hoped to get the boat back for Cowes Week.
Ratsey & Lapthorn Sailmakers Cowes England 
A Continuous Family Sailmaking Tradition since 1790
Traditional values for the cruising yachtsman
Gib'Sea
Boats built to time-honoured standards of quality, for yachtsmen who are serious about sailing and require superior performance from a cruising yacht.
Robust and reliable, Gib'Sea yachts impress those who know with their straightforward design, sturdy construction and excellent finish.
The Gib'Sea family of yachts allow you to move up to a larger craft as your requirements progress — you can select from the comprehensive range, 24′ to 52′, while remaining loyal to a marque you can trust.
caravela yachts
CRUISING WITH GIB'SEA 37′
CONCORDIA CUSTOM YACHTS INC.
Concordia is a name steeped in the seaworthy tradition of sailing yachts.
Craftsmanship continues in Padanaram with the same beauty and grace that originated over half a century ago, combining high technology design and materials.
Here, skilled boat-builders produced 3 recent first place winners in the Bermuda Race and the overall winner of the Chicago Mac.
Firmly established as a class, the majority of our yawls built 40 to 50 years ago are still sailing.
The finest American and European designers commission Concordia to build their custom yachts.
Among the world class designers providing inventive and important current sailing technology for us are Sparkman & Stephens in the U.S. and Judel/Vrolijk in Europe.
Our new line of 46′, 53′ and 65′ IMS designs are custom fitted to the owner's individual personality.
Call or write for the Concordia Custom Yacht Design brochure.
Learn more about custom and semi-custom yachts for the knowledgeable sailor and the yacht you intend to sail.
Take the lead!
Get out in front with Harken furling — the ultimate headsail handling system.
Designed and engineered to give total control and safety from the cockpit, with reefing aerodynamic foils to avoid spoiling the flow of your genoa.
Specially cut sails are not essential, as when reefed the sail is shaped by the bearing system.
No other units outperform them year after year — even in the roughest conditions.
HARKEN YACHT EQUIPMENT
One can have success and the elegance to remain discreet.
Perhaps you know my name.
Unfortunately if you are a bit inquisitive, I would prefer to talk about my Dynamique rather than about myself or my success.
People tell me that she looks like me: elegant while concealing an active disposition behind a refined behaviour.
But what truly makes my Dynamique even more attractive is this other comparison: in the last ten years and without a lot of fanfare Dynamique has become the reference point in terms of creativeness and reliability…always one step ahead of the others.
Ten years ago I started my business.
Surprising isn't it?
The Perfect Place To Tie Up All Your Berthing Arrangements
Gillingham Marina has come of age.
Improved and expanded since opening in the early 70's the marina has matured into a real alternative to the South Coast.
With the original tidal basin completely refurbished and the new locked basin fully operational, its standing among the best has been recognised by the award of 5 Gold Anchors, the only marina on the South East or East Coasts to receive this top rating.
Gillingham marina offers top grade facilities without the South Coast price tag.
Write or telephone for details, then come to see for yourselves.
SEE US ON STAND 45D AT THE LONDON BOAT SHOW
Diamond Sailmakers.
Who wants to be second?
Once again we've supplied the sails for a long list of medal winners.
Here are 1990's highlights from Diamond.
Hood Yacht Systems
PEDIGREE, EXPERTISE & PRECISION ENGINEERING.
Words that have in the last fifteen years or so, become synonymous with the name of Hood Yacht Systems.
The company, founded by Ted Hood, has perfected the concept of efficient furling and reefing systems linked to the finest and most aesthetic masts and rigs in the world.
That unrivalled reputation is supported with plants in both the United Kingdom and the United States where Stoway Masts (in-mast furling), Stobooms (in-boom furling) and Seafurls (manual and hydraulic headsail furling systems) are manufactured and assembled, backed up by our network of agents in Europe and across the world.
Our expertise is recognised by boat builders and owners and has led to a constant flow of prestigious projects for yachts from the yards of Camper & Nicholson, Valdettaro, Oyster, Palmer Johnson and Jankel Schooners.
Attention to detail and our high level of engineering integrity has been recognised by the top yacht designers and has led to constant involvement in rigs for all yacht projects from seventy to three hundred feet.
If you are considering a new boat or retrofit rig you'll want to know more, just write, phone or fax for our product literature, to arrange a meeting or to organise a tender.
Georgiana.
A 92′ sloop by Camper & Nicholson.
SWAN 65 KETCH
This Sparkman & Stephens design is perhaps the most famous of all Swans.
Built in 1983 and winner of Nautor's prestigious Elegancy Trophy for the best turned out yacht.
This yacht is only 7 years old and one of the latest built Swan 65.
She is in original and perfect condition.
Has been very lightly used by one owner (c. 2 months a year and no charter).
Fully equipped with VHF, SSB, Radar, Loran, SatNav, B+G computerised instruments and Nagrafax weatherfax, Volvo Turbo 120hp engine, shorepower, teak deck, Reckmann furling system, generator, 140 litre per hour water maker, air compressor for diving bottles, full sail inventory with 14 sails, sun awnings, Navtec hydraulically controlled rig, Neco autopilot, all Lewmar winches are oversized and selftailing, Lewmar grinder with Lewmar 90ST winches and a new Lofrans Titan anchor winch recessed under deck, make this yacht with her ketch rig and mast mounted halyard winches easily handled by two, dispenses with the need of an imposing crew.
The proven yacht is very fast under sail or power.
Three double cabins, each with WC and shower, crew forward, together with spaciousness and room for ancillary cruising equipment and ample stowage space, make her ideal for around the world cruise or Caribbean/Mediterranean chartering.
Seriously for sale For complete information contact: Tel: INT  after 7pm or weekends.
Such a breeze to fit, they've caused a storm:
NEW
It's taken the most advanced microprocessor technology available today to create a range of instruments that at long last combine absolute accuracy and reliability with…simplicity!
The simplest to install and the simplest to operate.
That's the new Compact II series from VDO.
And when you see the features of each instrument, and hear the prices, you'll soon see why they've caused such a storm…
VDO COMPACT SOUNDER
Microprocessor controlled with statistical program for interference screening.
Includes depth under keel (m. or ft.) adjustable navigation alarm, anchor watch alarm, depth tendency indicator, m/ft change-over switch.
Programmable shallow depth alarm and adjustable keel depth.
Optional retractable sensor now available.
VDO COMPACT COMPASS
The fluxgate compass with automatic deviation control — built in.
Other features include adjustable variation, steering indicator, three settings for damping and a low voltage alarm.
VDO COMPACT LOG
Microprocessor controlled with digital display showing distance and speed.
All functions can be recalled by a touch of a button: speed total distance, trip distance, average speed, variations, dynamic trim, adjustable damping, distance and speed calibration.
Retractable transducer.
VDO COMPACT WIND
Microprocessor controlled with digital display showing wind angle and speed.
Functions include apparent wind angle, apparent wind speed, adjustable damping, programmable wind alarm, course setting in relation to wind direction and record of peak wind speed.
NEW ESCALES
The Escale, the latest in a long line of successful and stylish models from Prout Catamarans, incorporates the latest thinking in hull, keel and rig designs.
Her high volume hulls and exceptional load carrying capabilities, offer no compromise on performance, with fast tacking and unmatched windward ability.
The new low aspect ratio keels have been specially designed to give the maximum lift to windward as well as allowing the boat to creep into shallow lagoons and creeks where she can dry out without any difficulty thus opening up previously unexplored regions throughout the world.
She is designed to be handled by a minimum crew and her huge Mediterranean-style cockpit is both comfortable and secure.
She is available with a three or four double cabin layout with the option of two or three heads and is built with a 5 year hull guarantee, using the latest moulding and construction techniques incorporating bi-directional materials, isothalic gelcoats and resins with carbon fibre or Kevlar at high stress areas.
Prout have over forty years of experience in design and construction of catamarans and as one would expect, superb attention has been paid to even the smallest detail making her comfortable and workable.
This is the Rolls Royce of cruising catamarans, capable of world cruising in perfect comfort.
If you want to find out about the better side of cruising catamarans, phone for details.
WE'VE IMPROVED ON PERFECTION
Prout CATAMARANS
So simple!…
strong and safe…safer sailing
PELICAN ADJUSTER
Forged in high-resistance stainless steel the Wichard pelican-adjuster enables quick and easy attachment of the baby stay, which is necessary if your boat has a furling system.
A unique mechanism, incorporated within the wheel and made in cupro-nickel, ensures perfect tensioning.
Light and compact, it can be easily stored.
Safely stowed against the mast or along the stays, it is always ready for instant use.
FOR ADVANCE WEATHER DATA!
PC WEATHERFAX —the best FAX system now even better in NEW Version 5 
Receive LIVE weather data direct to your PC by facsimile transmission, from anywhere in the world.
Save literally hundreds of pounds — the only other way you can get live weather charts of this quality is from a dedicated weatherfax receiver costing around £2000!
Simply connect your IBM compatible PC or laptop to a shortwave radio with upper side band switch.
PC WEATHERFAX V5 gives you everything else: software, interface cable, tutorial cassette and expanded manual containing a complete worldwide facsimile broadcast schedule — all for just £119.95!
•Worldwide broadcasts •Charts shown on screen
•Auto-receive function •Print & save options
RECOMMENDED SHORTWAVE RADIOS
Lowe Electronics HF225 — Very high quality British-made SW radio covering entire fax range.
Receives crisp facsimile charts & even news agency pictures.
£425.95.
Grundig Satellit 500 — excellent all-round SW radio which receives good facsimile charts.
£299.95.
YOU CAN TAKE THE NEW LITTLE HARBOR 58 ALMOST ANYWHERE
A gunkhole is defined as ‘a nearly unnavigable shallow cove or inlet.’
For those of us for whom gunkholing is a passion, they might as well add ‘compelling,’‘beautiful,’ or ‘breathtaking.’
We are addressing this desire to explore with the introduction of the new Little Harbor 58, an innovative yacht with a draft of just 4′ 10″.
Its underwater design is a refinement of the ‘pure  centerboard ’ concept that has proven to be so fast and seaworthy on the race course in Ted Hood's series of Robins .
The new 58 beautifully manifests the Hood theory that displacement yachts with reduced wetted surface behave better over a wider range of conditions.
They are unaffected by the weight attendant to luxurious living quarters which are built to the highest standards.
When it's your turn to contemplate your ultimate yacht, and you're considering a Little Harbor on the basis of hull design, appearance, construction, finish, attention to details, and performance, ask one more question.
‘Can she take me gunkholing?’
Give us a call at the yard.
The 58 can accommodate almost any reasonable option.
SEE THE NEW 58 AT THE MIAMI INTERNATIONAL SAILBOAT SHOW FEB 14–20
Little Harbor is actively building eight designs (42′, 44′, 46′, 50′, 52′, 54′, 58′, and 63′) with infinite custom possibilities.
Musto M1 & M2.
The Ultimate Seaboots.
Musto Boots are not just boots.
They are precision engineered to provide the vital levels of grip and prolonged comfort that are an essential part of safety and performance at sea.
Developed and tested in a rigorous programme of long-distance sailing, Musto believe that the M1 and M2 have been the subject of more intensive research than any other seaboots.
M1 MUSTO YACHT BOOTS
The logical yacht boot at a very reasonable price.
Soft PVC construction resists cracking.
Special sole improves non-slip.
One-piece moulding precludes leaks and provides extra strength.
Quick drying lining.
The M1 sole gives a sure footing even when water is lying on deck.
M2 HIGH PERFORMANCE BOOTS
Developed for offshore and ocean sailing.
Ultra light and durable due to monocoque construction.
Ultra-violet resistant, so won't crack.
New wide-tread sole gives a superb grip.
Injected polyurethane foam construction makes boots warm in cold conditions and cool in hot weather.
Can be worn with or without the Boot Liner.
The deeper configuration of the M2 tread pattern, combined with a soft, thick sole, provides unheard of comfort and safety.
M2 HIGH PERFORMANCE BOOT LINERS
Deep pile knitted fabric liner, specially designed for the M2 boot.
Firm sole and fold-over top ensure it always stays in place.
RUBBER ANKLE SEALS
Designed to seal the gap between the boot and trouser bottom.
Prevents wet feet when working on the foredeck or on the lee rail in rough weather.
Available from all good yacht chandlers
MUSTO The Best Protection in the World 
Mini Dimensions — Maxi Performance
SHIPMATE
RS5500 GPS RECEIVER
•Small, splashproof control/display unit.
•Tuck-away ‘Black Box’, 5 channel multiplex receiver.
•Optional dual control unit capability.
•200 waypoint facility.
RS2100 CHARTPLOT
•8″ high resolution display.
•Detailed, worldwide chart coverage.
•Automatic ground track presentation.
•NMEA 0180 autopilot output.
RS8100 MARINE VHF R/T
•All international channels, UK marina channels, US channels and 130 private channel capability.
•Dual watch
•Weatherproof functional handset and loudspeaker.
•Multi and selective channel scanning.
•Type approved to MPT 1251.
BRAND NEW HORIZONS
1991 marks a dramatic new era for Icom, already world renowned for their range of highly popular and professional communication radios, Icom are now very proud to announce two exciting new products to complement their existing range; the MR-40 marine radar and the VP-21 colour chart plotter.
MR-40 Features:
•User friendly.
•One-touch operation.
•NMEA inputs for lat/long position on screen.
•Input from suitable fluxgate for North-up mode.
•11–40 volt DC operation.
•360° or sectored guard zone alarm.
VP-21 Features:
•Easy to use.
•Seven colour high resolution display.
•Large waypoint, event, route and track memory.
•NMEA inputs and output.
•Able to steer to waypoint.
•ROM charts to admiralty standard.
For more information and your local Icom dealer post to:
Icom handheld and mobile radios on VHF and HF, SSB are also available
Bavaria.
Luxury.
The accommodation of any Bavaria yacht exudes luxury.
Aft double owners cabins are featured throughout the range from 31 foot to 43 foot — as an alternative to twin doubles in most cases.
Each yacht has at least one spacious bathroom complete with vanity unit, mirror and electric shower option.
Galleys are fitted with twin sink units, twin burner hob and oven units, insulated ice boxes and a pressurised water supply.
Cabins are finished in fine Mahogany, upholstered in a choice of Dralon fabrics, stowage is extensive but inconspicuous, fittings are of the highest quality.
On deck, teak laid decks and cockpits, Lewmar winches and stainless steel hardware, a wardrobe of sails by North, roller headsail reefing and a transom bathing platform with ladder and shower.
All for a remarkably small outlay.
All Bavarias are built to Germanscher Lloyd standards, have a built-in anti-osmosis barrier and come with a 5 year hull guarantee.
Isn't it time you investigated the best value in today's yachting market for the discerning cruising family or club racer.
Opal marine
KOS 1991
Kos was one of the first female yachting photographers in the UK and through her desire to find new angles on yacht racing pictures she attained her initial breakthrough (and a little notoriety) from masthead shots of 12 meters at the 1983 America's Cup.
The ensuing publicity brought in commissions from all areas as Kos's reputation grew and her work became widely known.
For 1991 Kos has got together with Champagne Mumm, sponsors of world class yachting, to produce the first official IYRU calendar and a limited edition signed by Kos herself are available now through mail order.
An all colour production with 13 pictures, this A2 (420 x 594mm) calendar features some of Kos's best work to date and is printed on high quality art paper.
For unrivalled expertise in Super-Yacht charter
Cavendish White Castlemain are leaders in the field of private motor and sailing yacht charter with full crew.
Call for our full colour yacht charter brochure and comprehensive tariff.
We have yachts based in The Mediterranean, Caribbean, Pacific and Indonesia 
EXPERIENCE
Experience yacht charter and any other way to relax pales in comparison.
Experience the luxury of truly choosing your own menus, your own destination, your own way of life.
Yachting Partners manage many of the world's finest yachts, power or sail.
All it takes is attention to detail, a sound knowledge of the yachts, and their crews, and above all…experience.
YACHTING PARTNERS International 
You have a WEATHERFAX
Up-to-date frequencies, of course.
Resulting from our systematical radio monitoring work around the clock all over the world.
All radiofacsimile stations transmitting meteorological information are covered with complete schedules giving the exact time of transmission and the contents of the various charts.
93 stations are listed on 380 frequencies.
300 sample charts show you what can be recorded from longwave and shortwave radiofax stations.
Forget that totally outdated stuff which is published as a neglected annex to the instruction manual of your weatherfax recorder.
Does it list Diego Garcia on 20302 kHz?
Guam on 19858?
Catania on 9050?
Melbourne on 20469?
San Francisco on 22527?
No?
That's just it!
We have published our international radio books for 20 years.
The 10th edition of our GUIDE TO FACSIMILE STATIONS has 400 pages and costs DEM 50 or GBP 19 or USD 33.
The price includes airmail postage to everywhere in the world.
Payment can be by cheque, cash or International Money Order.
Dealer inquiries welcome — discount rates and pro forma invoices on request.
Please mail your order to:
Klingenfuss Publications  
We have the FREQUENCIES
NAUTOR'S SWAN BROKERAGE
WITHIN YOUR REACH
Quality build is an integral part of long life and has always been the source of Nautor's success.
New or old, that quality and inherent style live on.
If wanting that luxury, but are unable to buy your Swan new, then through our international network of twenty-two offices you can find those same endearing features in pre-owned Swans.
Pride of Swan ownership means a pre-owned Swan is a well cared for Swan.
Unlike so many others, a Swan stands the tests of time well.
The looks, the comfort, the smoothness of systems, the very fabric of ultimate sailing endures.
Our official brokerage network knows which boats are for sale worldwide and can help find exactly the right Swan for you.
Having found your Swan, compare the costs and the returns on that investment, with those of lesser boats you could buy new.
Consider which will last longer — which will hold its value better — the answer is apparent the first time you step on board the Swan.
A Swan, pre-owned or new, is an investment in prestige, it will give you pride in performance and membership of an exclusive worldwide club.
Whilst that new boat you might have bought lies unnoticed amid the masses in the marina, your Swan will be the envy of others.
But then a Swan is the boat to appreciate.
SWAN 46 PROFILE
The Swan 46, with close to 90 hulls completed, is one of the most successful Swans ever.
An exciting yacht that fulfils everyone's expectations, she is stylish, luxurious and very fast.
She has also gained an awesome reputation in racing.
Throughout its production, prospective 46 owners have been offered varied combinations of up to five rig and keel options and three accommodation layouts, therefore ensuring the brokerage buyer tremendous choice in the specification of his pre-owned 46.
Naval architect, German Frers, achieved a rare harmony of design which is combined with unmatched standards of Nautor engineering in the Swan 46 — The result is a perfect blend of elegance, practicality and speed.
The highly functional arrangement of equipment on the low-profile deck, the thorough and efficient utilisation of space below — all are testimony to Nautor's legendary attention to detail.
So, whether family cruising, club racing, or competing in an International Rolex Swan Regatta, there is a Swan 46 that will suit your requirements.
And, with every item in the yacht, from the smallest fitting, to the rigging and hull itself, built to the highest quality — the yacht is a credit to designer, builder and owner alike.
Experience the atmosphere and feelings that are yours when you own and sail the superlative Swan 46.
SWAN OFFICIAL BROKERAGE NETWORK
SWAN BROKERAGE
FINLAND
SWAN 44 (1973):
This boat has had a general re-fit 1988–1989 — new teak deck, awlgripped hull and mast, new engine, heater, fridge, instruments, nav.
equipment, sails.
SWAN 46/077 EL DAMIRO (1989):
A well equipped 3-cabin version in first class condition.
Additional companionway from cockpit to aft cabin.
New sails.
Lying Mallorca.
SWAN 43 (1986):
Specially equipped for cruising in arctic waters.
Lying Finland.
SWAN 41 (1976):
Very well equipped.
This boat is lying in the Bay of Biscay.
All above boats lying Finland unless specified 
SWEDEN/NORWAY
SWAN 47/052 ‘RAINBOW’:
This yacht is immaculate, and most definitely one of the finest available at present.
The owner has spared no money or effort in keeping everything up to class A1 condition.
B/G navigational equipment.
Comprehensive sail-wardrobe.
Our comment: A beautiful Swan, looking its best!
SWAN 46/010 (1984):
Having undergone complete refurbishing this vessel can only be described as ‘resplendant’.
Up-graded interior to the highest possible standard.
Galley recently fitted with new Alpes Inox stove, fridge, deep-freeze etc.
B/G electronics, Nav-sat, VHF, etc. etc. the list is too long to mention.
Location: West Coast of Sweden.
Our comment: As ‘new’ yacht, very reasonably priced.
SWAN 46/018 ‘PER GYNT’:
Stowaway mast/furling headstay.
Very little used, high standard of equipment.
Launched in 1984.
Our comment: One of the nicest looking early examples of this most popular Swan!
SWAN 46/053 ‘CARISSIMA’:
Extensively equipped, including stowaway mast/furling headstay, full electronics, delivered new to her present owner in 1986.
Our comment: Value for money!
Apart from the above selection, we have other fine SWAN yachts in stock.
We welcome your enquiries.
SWITZERLAND/AUSTRIA
SWAN 57/015 ‘JOHANNA’:
British Flag, launched in 1980, perfectly equipped, new generator, Perkins Diesel.
The interior of this beautiful yacht has been up-graded in 1987 by Nautor in Finland.
This yacht spends the whole year in the Caribbean.
Part owner-ship is possible.
Shares in the Swiss Charter Organisation available through purchase of this outstanding Swan.
GERMANY
SWAN 651:
Launched in 1988, very well maintained and extensively equipped.
Perfect condition, stowaway mast, hydraulic furling system.
SWAN 61:
A very unique Swan — the only Swan ever built with a sauna in the forecabin!
This yacht is extensively equipped for world-wide cruising.
SWAN 53:
With shallow draft bulb keel (draft 2.20 m) and 3-spreader rig.
She was launched in 1990 and is extensively equipped for cruising and racing.
In case of serious offers the owner will sell.
SWAN 46 (1985):
Teak deck, B&G instruments, extensively equipped, good condition, 8 sails.
Lying Baltic Sea.
SWAN 43:
Built in 1977; teak deck; nearly all winches are Lewmar self-tailing, mainsail and furling genoa from 1987; radar, VHF-telephone, SSB, log and speedo, B&G wind instruments, autopilot; extensively equipped.
NAUTOR 43 D (1978):
Teak deck, B&G wind instruments, Horsa log and speedo, VHF, radar, autopilot, extensively equipped, mainsail, 2 genoas, jib, storm jib and blister.
Good condition.
SWAN 411:
Built in 1978, teak deck, furling system (Reckmann), additional entrance in aft cabin, burglar alarm, AP-navigator; extensively equipped.
SWAN 411:
Launched in 1977, teak deck, all sails in good condition, extensively equipped with electronics, perfect condition.
Lying North Germany.
SWAN 38:
1976, teak deck, B&G instruments, AP-navigator III including repeater, VHF, extensively equipped, 12 sails, good condition.
Lying Baltic Sea.
This is only a few of the Swan Yachts that we have available in Germany.
SPAIN
PALMA DE MALLORCA:
The centre of Mediterranean brokerage, where we can offer you an UNBEATABLE selection of pre-owned SWAN yachts, whether you are looking for a classic Sparkman & Stephens or the latest German Frers design.
WE HAVE THE SELECTION
THE CHOICE IS YOURS
U.K.
SWAN 65/038 ‘BIG EASY’:
Completed in 1985, was the first Swan 65 to incorporate Nautor's modern construction and systems technology.
Equipped for fast and comfortable cruising, her deck equipment includes 22 self tailing winches with electric push button primaries.
Rondal hydraulic forestay furling, full battened mainsail with lazyjacks and eleven Hood sails.
Her interior layout benefits from an improved aft cabin layout, a ‘custom’ saloon with emphasis on cruising comfort.
Domestic equipment is run off a new generator and includes a water maker, water purifier, ice maker and microwave.
Comprehensive navigation and communication equipment complement the entertainment systems.
With her dark blue hull, and red and white coach stripes, Big Easy is good to look at and a delight to sail.
SWAN 65/030 sloop ‘JAGUAR’:
Launched in 1979, Jaguar's first eight years were spent on the West Coast of the States.
Since then she has cruised and Regatta raced in the Mediterranean and the West Indies.
Recently refurbished including hull and deck.
Awlgrip paint job, decks, upholstery and varnish work.
Updated electronics include Furuno radar, Loran, Icom SSB RT and VHF and other new equipment — Reckmann forestay furling, four new sails, Zodiac tender, plus 15 and 40 h.p. outboards.
Comfortable accommodation in 3 double cabins plus saloon and fo'c'sle is enhanced by dual fridge/freezer systems, microwave, Onan generator.
Jaguar's appearance and condition belie her age and we believe she is the only Swan 65 sloop in the market.
SWAN 44/107 ‘KWA NGEMA’(1990):
Without doubt the most successful of the new Frers 44s on the Solent CHS circuit, culminating in a resounding win in the Round the Island Race — the first time a Swan has taken the coveted Gold Roman Bowl.
Originally built for cruiser/racing with dual fridge/freezer systems, shore power/battery charger, anchor windlass, radar, autopilot etc.
She has also been optimised for racing with a Kevlar sail wardrobe.
Dynema running rigging, powerful winches, Fredriksen deck hardware, B&G 690, Raytheon GPS and Cetrek chart plotter.
Price now reduced for speedy sale.
SWAN 391/020 ‘ECLIPSE’(1983):
Another high performance Swan which has been constantly improved and upgraded.
Winner of the Swan European Regatta in 1989 and a highly creditable 6th overall in the competitive Swan World Cup this year and consistently in the frame in UK waters, this well maintained 40-footer is as docile on Channel cruises as she is dynamic on the race course.
Competitively priced for a quick sale.
SWAN 43/128 ‘ROSSO DIABLO’(1990):
Mainly equipped for cruising, she numbers Reckman forestay furling, anchor windlass, upgraded primary winches, fully battened mainsail and autopilot among her shorthanded attributes, while creature comforts have been enhanced by the addition of deepfreeze, shore power/battery charger, second head/shower forward, T.V., video and stereo system, leather upholstery.
Immaculate.
SWAN 43/123 (1988):
Specifically built for two handed cruising, this 43 still retains a powerful turn of speed when passage making.
She is equipped with Reckmann forestay and in-mast furling systems, all controllable from the cockpit.
Her 1.7m draft keel is a great boon for shoal draft cruising, and she is otherwise well equipped above and below deck, always well maintained, she is seriously for sale at a sensible price.
SWAN 46 ‘CHASTANET’(1984):
A well cared for example of this evergreen Frers design, benefiting from regular refits and upgrades, ‘Chastanet’ is comprehensively equipped for warm weather cruising and has always been in the running on the race course.
Recent new equipments include sails, forestay furling, watermaker and updated electronics.
UNITED STATES
SWAN 59 ‘MARSHA B’(1986):
Unique interior layout with owner's stateroom forward of the mast, complete with stall shower, vanity area, ample hanging lockers, queen size ‘walk-around’ berth.
Two guest cabins with separate heads/shower aft.
Air conditioned/heat.
Furling mast, electric winches.
Very comfortable boat, available for inspection at our docks in Miami.
SWAN 51 ‘JALPARI’(1982):
Deep keel version in excellent condition.
Latest in electronics, new sail inventory 1990, new coffee grinder system ready to race or cruise.
Only four stateroom layout 51 on the market.
Priced to sell quickly.
SWAN 76 ‘LEONORE’(1980):
The perfect large cruising yacht.
Extremely well balanced and fast off-shore.
Exhaustive re-furbishing completed at the end of '90.
Large owner's accommodations and three guest staterooms with private head/shower.
Extensive work area, galley and crew quarters forward.
Walk-in engine room.
Excellent buy in U.S. dollars.
Located in Caribbean.
SWAN 391 ‘EPATANT’(1984):
The most sought after and competitive of the smaller Swans.
Equipped for racing, ready to go for this season.
Beautifully maintained, only one season in salt water.
Located in Great Lakes.
SWAN 44 ‘PICKPOCKET’(1973):
Tall rig.
New engine '90, epoxy bottom, teak decks in excellent condition.
Harken roller furling, extensive sail wardrobe, B&G 390 system, electronics new in '88.
Interior without blemish, beautifully maintained.
Call Newport office for brochure.
SWAN 42 ‘SWANSONG’(1984):
There cannot be another 42 with so little use, this boat is in as new condition.
Rarely used for day sailing in New England during the summer months and ‘winterized’ for most of the year.
Fairly priced.
LÜRSSEN YACHTS
38 meter Diaship, built in aluminium, launched in 1987 at Heesen Shipyard, Holland.
Her two Deutz engines with 1670 HP each give her a comfortable cruising speed of 14 kn with a range of  miles.
EXTASEA A offers a lot of volume for her size.
The owner's cabin is situated on the main deck and four double guest cabins are on the lower deck, each of them fully equipped and with bathrooms ensuite.
Her main salon is impressively large and decently decorated in lacquer and leather.
On the upper deck aft from the wheelhouse she has a little lounge with a sauna.
Her endless list of extras include a helipad on the boatdeck and several other features that one would not expect on a boat of her size.
As the owner wants a larger yacht, EXTASEA A is seriously on the market.
Central agent.
23 meter displacement yacht, built in steel in 1983, completely overhauled in 1989 incl. new awlgrip paintjob and teak deck.
2 caterpillar 490 HP each give her a speed of 11 kn cruising with a range of  miles.
Sleeps owner and 6 guests in 4 double cabins.
Fully equipped and lots of extras.
Interesting price.
Owners agent.
23 meter Falcon, built 1989 in GRP, powered by 2 ×  HP MAN engines giving a top speed of 28 kn.
Full electronics and many extras.
4 double cabins with ensuite bathrooms + 2 crew.
Beautiful interior of root wood.
Better than new and excellent opportunity as owner wants a bigger boat.
Central agent.
21 meter aluminium SY, built 1984 at von Heesen in Holland, hightech design with exceptional sailing performance.
Lifting keel, bowthruster, 280 HP Mercedes engine, hydr.
Rondal furling rig.
3 double cabins, dining salon + decksalon with inner steering position.
Exceptional condition and best buy in this size, age and quality.
Central agent.
36 meter Baglietto, built 1988 in Aluminium.
2 × 2000 HP MTU engines giving her a top speed of 29 kn. 4 double cabins plus crew accommodation.
Owner's private study and large salon.
Spacious sundeck.
A light interior in combination with pastel colours gives her a warm, mediterranean atmosphere.
Full electronics including a SatCom.
Best boat of this kind on the market and better than new.
Owners agent.
JONGERT
DUTCH QUALITY CUSTOM-BUILT IN ALUMINIUM AND STEEL.
RENARD DE LA MER
The Jongert 18d has a spacious cockpit and a large enclosed decksaloon with navigator's station and all-around visibility.
She is an ideal sailing-yacht for family cruising providing superb comfort with a truly competitive performance.
The accommodation has been exclusively designed and is a fine example of Jongert's famous joinery work.
The impressive main saloon in the stern has a bar and a pantry has ample room for more than ten people.
Long lines of windows in the hull and a large window in the transom provide plenty of natural light in the stern saloon and the cabins.
The walls are covered with light alcantara to accentuate the bright atmosphere of the interior.
A Jongert yacht offers a legendary standard of comfort and is an unmatched and enduring investment.
Each brokerage Jongert is covered by a six-month shipyard guarantee and is backed by our comprehensive and reliable after sales service.
Hatteras of California
Nautor is famous for producing some of the highest quality fibreglass yachts in the world.
The integrity of Swan construction has been proven in numerous circumnavigations.
TIGRIS is unique among the Swan 76's being the only sunken deckhouse model with a centerboard.
In '86/'87 she underwent an extensive refit which improved the yacht both aesthetically and functionally.
Her light and airy teak interior has four staterooms, each with a private head, plus crew cabin.
Her teak decks were replaced in '88 and the exterior was totally refinished in '90.
Other highlights include a Mercedes engine, Hundested variable pitch propeller, new Northern Lights generator ('90) and hydraulic headsail furlers and primary winches.
This highly detailed yacht has been maintained to perfection and is for sale at less than half her replacement cost.
For complete specifications contact DOUG FREDERICKS, exclusive agent.
Designed by Ted Hood and built by the industry leader in fibreglass yacht construction, Hatteras Yachts,DORADO is a very capable world cruiser.
Her comfortable interior arrangement provides three staterooms aft of the main saloon, each with a private head.
The crew's cabin and dinette are forward.
Under power the twin GM 4–71's afford additional maneuverability and reliability.
Under sail the yacht can be enjoyed from behind the wheel in the spacious cockpit, or when the weather gets nasty there is a second steering station with complete instrumentation and controls under the dodger.
Short-handed sailing is accommodated by electric furling on the Hood Stoway mast, Sea Furl headsail, and electric Lewmar sheet winches.
Among DORADO'S other features are (2) 20kW generators, air-conditioning and reverse cycle heat, and a watermaker.
To obtain a  color brochure call or fax the yacht exclusive agent, DOUG FREDERICKS.
‘REBEL’
A SWAN 53 in absolutely mint condition and very little sailed.
Only used for daysailing and never chartered.
Always winter-stored in heated warehouse.
The boat has a full racing spec. but has been raced very little.
The specification includes racing mast, racing keel and 11 Milar/Kevlar sails in new condition.
She is without a doubt one of the finest SWAN 53's ever built, and is particularly suitable for the keen sailor.
She has also got a substantial cruising specification which includes, Watermaker, Heating to all cabins, Generator, Icemaker, Burglar alarm, TV-Video-CD player, sep.
stereo in all cabins, Microwave oven, B & G Hercules 390 Pack and Echosounder, Sailor VHF, Raytheon Radar, Shipmate Radio Navigator and Shipmate Sat Navigator, GPS Navigator and Colour Plotter (new from 1990).
NECO Autopilot, Hydraulic roller Furling and a lot, lot more.
Lying in Gothenburg.
Priced to sell.
ARDELL YACHT AND SHIP BROKERS
CUSTOM C&C 62′ OPEN PILOTHOUSE KETCH
‘Pegaso’ is the finest custom built world cruiser, the ultimate for short handed sailing in maximum comfort and luxury.
Her power, speed and reliability are unsurpassed.
From each helm station, two separate hydraulic systems drive two separate autopilots.
Walk-in engine room, Cat power, two Onan generators, transatlantic range under power.
Electric winches and roller furling headsails.
All systems doubled or backed up.
Reinforced hull for protection against logs, ice or grounding.
‘Pegaso’ is in mint condition, with dark blue awlgrip hull.
Offered for sale by its original owner.
SWAN INTERNATIONAL AS YACHT BROKERAGE * MANAGEMENT * CHARTER * CONSULTANTS * INSURANCE
SPECIALIZING IN SWAN AND OTHER EXCLUSIVE SAILING YACHTS
SWAN 61 TOP LADY — FOR CHARTER AND SALE
SWAN 61 TOP LADY,
Delivered autumn 1986, she was especially built for comfortable cruising.
Her extensive equipment includes: Scheel keel, electrical winches, hydraulic rollerfurling mast, Reckman headstay and inner forestay rollerfurling.
Radar/Plotter, SSB, Sat.nav, Decca, Loran C. Autopilot, VHF, Brookes & Gatehouse Hercules, TV/VCR.
Onan Generator, dishwasher, icemaker, garbage compactor, etc.
She is fully equipped for the most demanding owner.
TOP LADY is at present en route to the Mediterranean.
She can be sold with a complete charter management, and is the ultimate cruising choice for both charter guests and owners.
Owner's Central agent.
SWAN 59, ‘SASSY’(1985),
well known from both the Caribbean and the Mediterranean charter market is now for sale, fully equipped for both racing and cruising.
The yacht is very well equipped and extremely well maintained by a crew of 3.
The fact that ‘Sassy’ is part of a running charter concept should make her interesting for clients with both business and pleasure in mind.
SWAN 46 3-cabin version.
Delivered last year, this yacht is one of only two available 3-cabin versions of this popular German Frers designed SWAN.
She is fully equipped with hydraulic stoway mast and headstay, electrical winches, B&G Hydra, SSB, radar, VHF, HIFI, etc.
A superb SWAN which has only been used for private cruising in the Med.
Lying West Med.
SWAN CARISSIMA,
Launched summer 1986, CARISSIMA is one of the latest SWAN 46 available.
She has been well taken care of by one of our professional crews, and offers a great chance to achieve one of these popular yachts.
Her inventory includes rollerfurling mast, headstay, electric winches, windlass, Brookes & Gatehouse Hercules, SSB, VHF, Sat.nav, Radar, Hi-fi/TV, etc.
Her interior layout offers two double cabins with en-suite toilets/showers, and one pilot berth in the main saloon.
She is laying in Scandinavia.
Price recently reduced.
Owner's central agent.
SWAN 59 LADY ASLAUG,
Built 1987, but not delivered.
A unique chance to get a superb example of the popular SWAN 59.
Due to certain personal circumstances, this yacht has never been delivered, and is actually new.
Her inventory includes racing rig, furling headstay, Navtec hydraulics, additional aft entrance, Full B&G, VHF, SSB, Furuno radar, Satnav, Decca, Weatherfax, autopilot, watermaker, air-conditioning in Owners cabin, Stereo/TV/VHS, 7 new sails by NORTH, and lots more.
Priced to sell.
Lying Finland.
SWAN 47 TORITA,
Built 1984, she is one of the latest examples of this S&S design.
Crew maintained since new, she is now offered for sale.
Lying Turkey.
SWAN 371 TOPAZ, 1982.
A very well maintained example of this popular SWAN.
She has been in private use in Scandinavia only, and is very well equipped.
Her inventory includes new engine (1987), full electronics, and 11 sails.
Norwegian VAT paid.
Lying Oslo.
IN ADDITION FROM OUR BROKERAGE LIST WE CAN MENTION: SWAN 48, SWAN 51, SWAN 53, SWAN 65, SWAN 651.
WE ALSO OFFER A LARGE RANGE OF CREWED YACHTS FOR CHARTER IN THE MED, CARIBBEAN, SCANDINAVIA, SINGAPORE AND AUSTRALIA.
PLEASE CONTACT US FOR FURTHER INFORMATION.
WOODS & OVIATT INC.
‘PRINCESS TINA’
130′ AMELS MOTOR YACHT, 1988
Certainly one of the most exciting yachts available in this range, ‘Princess Tina’ carries the Amels/Diana pedigree.
All aluminium, and powered with 12 cylinder MTU's, you will be overwhelmed with every facet of this ocean going vessel.
The full width owners (main deck) and VIP guest stateroom (lower deck) rival each other in respect to overall comfort and appeal.
The two remaining guest suites are equally luxurious.
Nothing has been overlooked, from the massive flybridge and jacuzzi, to the sky lounge and the joining aft seating and boat deck, to the main salon and lower aft deck.
For the most demanding buyer, ‘Princess Tina’ is readily accessible, currently berthed in the Bahamas.
‘MOTIVATION’
118′ BROWARD MOTOR YACHT, 1988
A triumph of design and refined style, this outstanding yacht features not only stunning accommodations, but incorporates some of the most advanced communications ever placed in a private motor yacht.
Powered by 1050 HP Caterpillar 3212 diesels, with an extensive equipment list, this yacht has virtually every system, featuring multiple back ups, which includes 2 Furuno radars, 2 Northstar Lorans, and 2–1200 GPD watermakers.
Luxurious accommodations for an owner's party of eight in four spacious suites, each with entertainment centres.
In addition, there is a ‘unique’ dive room, sky lounge/pilothouse, numerous sun lounges and main salon with formal dining.
An excellent value.
‘EXCELLENCE’
127′ FEADSHIP MOTOR YACHT, 1986
Along with the Feadship legacy of quality and refinement, the ‘Excellence’ is further enhanced by it's cockpit.
Commissioned in May of 1986, this vessel has distinguished herself in both the U.S. and European cruising circuits.
The original owner played a vital role in the most versatile design and layout features.
Fine ash furnishings and an elegant/contemporary theme are consistent throughout this spacious yacht with it's five double staterooms.
Detroit Diesel powered, trans-Atlantic range.
All the proper electronic and recreational aids await your inspection aboard this spectacular offering.
Currently located in the Caribbean.
Please call for complete particulars.
‘MILA III’
89′ CUSTOM MOTOR YACHT, 1989
Built at the Dutch ship yard, Hessen Shipyards B.V. this exquisite yacht offers accommodations for seven in three tastefully decorated suites, with crew accommodations for four.
The main deck features a most generous main salon and dining forward with seating for eight.
A true credit of the integrity of this vessel is her trans-Atlantic passage this past year.
‘Mila III’ is powered with MTU 6V395TB93 diesels, 2–40 KW Northern Lights generator sets, and cruises at a comfortable 17 knots.
Navigational and communications equipment includes Furuno radar, 2 Magnovox Transit Sat Navigators, Furuno weatherfax, Northstar Loran, and C Plath Gyro A/P, along with Village Maker Watermaker and stabilizers enabling long range cruising to be a pleasure.
Always maintained to the highest marine standards, ABS certified.
Your first Port of call.
CHANNEL YACHT BROKERS
INTERNATIONAL BOAT SHOW — STAND No. 8C
Make Channel Yacht Brokers your first port of call at the International Boat Show — and you'll find that buying or selling a boat is plain sailing.
Where else can you have immediate access to details of over 1,500 sail and power boats, internationally, at the touch of a button?
Or call on the services of a nationwide network of professionals, dedicated to identifying the craft — or prospective purchaser — of your choice?
We'll chart your progress every step of the way, from initial enquiry to transfer of title.
Make it easy on yourself, visit us at the International Boat Show this year — or call your nearest Channel Yacht Brokers office now.
WEBSTER ASSOCIATES YACHT MARKETING & CONSULTING YACHT CHARTERS & BROKERAGE WORLDWIDE
ENCHANTA
67′ Abeking & Rasmussen Steel Yawl
A fine example of superb German craftsmanship, this yacht's design is timeless; her flush teak deck gives you excellent working or lounging space.
A unique oval aft cockpit is dry and protected when sailing and is an excellent area for dining in port.
The layout below allows the owner to live in a high degree of comfort.
ENCHANTA has proven herself, having sailed in most of the oceans of the world and has performed admirably, whether for long distance cruising, day sailing, or corporate entertaining.
Call for  color brochure.
GIFT HORSE
1984 Fibreglass Ocean 60′ Modern Schooner
GIFT HORSE is without a doubt the finest Ocean 60.
Not only is she in excellent condition, but her lovely teak decks and customized interior put her head and shoulders above her sisters.
The immense strength of the British built Ocean 60's construction is well known and the design has proven itself with circumnavigations, very successful charter operations and shorthanded family cruising.
Her owner's full width cabin, plus four equal guest cabins give her a unique and pleasing layout.
Call for  color brochure.
SIEMENS Solar Panels for Yachtsmen
Solar Panels are increasingly popular in yachts as a battery support device.
One small panel can prevent batteries in unattended yachts from going flat due to natural drain.
In most cases a panel will trickle charge the batteries so efficiently that, after a period of idleness, the batteries are well charged, and ready for a cold engine start.
We provide a comprehensive range of sizes to suit every yacht specification for leisure use or for the longest of passages.
SEE PAGES 56–63, WIND GENERATOR & SOLAR PANELS EQUIPMENT REVIEW FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ON THIS TECHNOLOGY
Fischer PANDA GENERATORS
Built to the Fischer ‘Panda’ principle with superb mini-diesel engines and zero maintenance brushless alternators, our 100% water-cooled generators are the ultimate for smooth running and quiet operation.
Designed specifically for craft where space and weight are critical, Panda generators are ideal for tropical climates running up to 40°C cooler than conventional models.
Outputs from 4, 6, 8, 12, 15 and now 20kW, according to selection and complete with remote start, acoustic capsule, water and fuel pumps, all Panda generators are smaller than you would think possible — Panda 4 measures only 51×37×51cm and even the mighty Panda 20 is just 94×45×66cm.
Panda generators — the concept of power on board.
ALAN MORGAN YACHTING
Absolute attention to fine design, quality of build, detailing and craftsmanship, plus a total commitment to our clients requirements, have, over 18 years given Alan Morgan Yachting a well earned and worthy pedigree.
With the experience of a long and close association with world class designers, notably German Frers, we have developed a superb range of graceful and seakindly ocean cruising yachts with an emphasis on style and effortless performance.
Additionally, we are further advancing our powerful and acclaimed ‘Ranger’ series of planing motor yachts, with their spacious accommodation, exceptional seakeeping qualities and capable of speeds of up to 30 knots.
Not surprisingly, this expertise allows us to undertake project management, world wide, of the design, co-ordination and build of beautiful custom yachts to the highest specifications.
At Alan Morgan we constantly strive for excellence in design, build, finish and performance, at a realistic cost, with our clients in mind.
Man Overboard?
We'll Get Back To You.
The World's Most Advanced Cockpit Autopilots.
The prospect is a nightmare.
You're storming along and one of the crew, momentarily off guard, disappears overboard.
Before you know it you've lost sight of him, fast though your reaction might be.
However, you have some remarkable equipment on board.
Navico Instruments, Autopilot, and Hand Programmer.
Quick as a flash you push the MOB button on the hand programmer.
The range from, and bearing to, your man over board is instantly displayed and continuously updated.
It will guide you back with amazing accuracy.
Safety at sea takes on a new meaning when you sail with Navico.
Sailing does too.
NAVICO
MY PENTAX GIVES ME PERFECT PICTURES EVEN WITHOUT FILM.
Using one of our cameras isn't the only way to get great pictures.
You'll see equally impressive results with a pair of Pentax binoculars.
We've introduced three new models altogether.
All of which have been precision engineered to last a lifetime.
They're called UCF's, PCF's and DCF's.
And although they don't sound that dissimilar, they are in fact very different.
Take the UCF's, pictured in the middle.
These are ideal for a wide range of interests, both in and out of doors.
But being so compact, they're particularly useful for improving your view at events like concerts and the opera.
(Unless of course you're watching Pavarotti, in which case, you won't need them.)
The two larger models, on the other hand, are more suited to sporting events and wildlife observation.
Both are covered in tough, shock-resistant rubber.
And both have been designed to enable you to hold them for long periods of time.
So even if you're waiting for a sloth to move, you'll never get tired.
To look through the range for yourself, visit your local Pentax dealer or write to Pentax UK Ltd.
Pentax House, South Hill Ave.
South Harrow, Middx.
HA  LT.
Whether it's landscapes or portraits you want, you can always be sure of getting perfect enlargements.
Even without film.
PENTAX BINOCULARS
CITROËN ADVERTISEMENT FEATURE 
In Pursuit Of The PEAKS
We'd started out far too late, the weather was dreadful and the route unfamiliar.
Yet, as we turned off the Buxton Road and into Ashford-in-the-Water, we found ourselves back on schedule and completely relaxed.
We were fortunate enough to have the loan of a new Citroën BX 4×4 Estate for our weekend trip which, with its sure-footed permanent 4-wheel drive, impeccable road manners and self-levelling suspension, had taken everything in its stride,— including, thanks to its optional electronic ABS braking system, stopping quickly and safely when we suddenly encountered a 5 mile tail back in a contra-flow on the M1.
Thus, safe and composed, we arrived in the very heart of Derbyshire's beautiful and historic Peak District, looking forward to our three day stay and in plenty of time for dinner.
Night one — On the banks of the Wye
After a meal which bore sumptuous witness to the Riverside Country House Hotel's reputation for reasonably priced and lovingly prepared local game and produce, we soaked in the charming 17th Century atmosphere and began to plan the first of our walks.
It was no easy task.
Ashford-in-the-Water sits precisely on the line which divides the limestone plateau of the so-called White Peak from the upland moors and the valleys to the North.
With so much within easy reach, we were clearly spoilt for choice and decided to sleep on it.
Still undecided, we breakfasted early and, having packed our walking gear into the Citroën (though with up to 64 cubic feet of space accessed through a hatch that opens practically down to ankle level, packing is hardly the word), we drove off.
Day one — Heading for the heights
The day was fresh and clear and our first panoramic view over the Wye from Monsal Head was literally breathtaking.
The Derbyshire Dales are justly famous for their beauty.
Many feature spectacular limestone cliffs of the sort that rock climbers find irresistible.
Others nestle more gently around small meandering streams.
Alas, we couldn't visit them all.
So, after lunching at one of the excellent local inns, we contented ourselves with making a wide sweep South to the River Dove and back up to the Derwent,— stopping at Castleton which, with its show caves and fluorspar (Blue John stone) mines shouldn't be missed and at Eyam which was so badly ravaged by the pestilence of 1665/6 that it is still known as The Plague Village.
Finally we turned back past Haddon Hall, a magnificent medieval country house and reputedly the finest of its kind in Britain.
It was a wonderful drive on an afternoon balmy enough to warrant lowering the electric windows and we cruised along to Mahler's music playing on the six speaker sound system, through some of the most beautiful countryside we have ever seen.
Day two — Under sweeping skies
On the second day, as we set off to walk over one of the high gritstone moors towards Kinder Scout, a sudden squall made us pleased at our foresight in bringing our Sprayway Torridon jackets along.
Quite how the Gore-tex fabric manages to be completely waterproof and yet allows body moisture to escape, I simply can't fathom.
But it does so very effectively, so we were smart and snug and weatherproof as we went on to enjoy the most exhilarating walk of the entire weekend.
Although much of the Dark Peak, as these Northerly uplands are called, is very exposed, it is also full of famous beauty spots.
So many, in fact, that even with our road hungry Citroën we couldn't possibly have sampled the complete menu in the available time.
But we saw enough to be grateful that so much is being done to protect and conserve this rich heritage and, driving on lead free petrol, we felt comfortable knowing that we were doing our bit.
Remote though this area can be, even the minor roads are generally good, although once we had to switch the Citroën's self-levelling suspension to ‘high’ to increase ground clearance through a ford.
And soon afterwards we were grateful for its responsive power steering and generous reserves of torque (perfect for those 1:5 hills) to take the climb up Winnat's Pass with ease.
That evening we looked back on the day with our fellow guests whose interests — from birdwatching to archaeology, cave-exploring to gliding — reflected the enormous variety of activities catered for across the region.
Day three — A last look round and a temporary farewell
We had decided that our last day would be spent sampling one of the many activities which the hotel offered to arrange.
We had originally intended to try our hand at clay pigeon shooting or perhaps even gliding, but our time was running out and there was still so much we wanted to see.
So we set off for a last look round.
We began at Bakewell, the central town of the Peaks, where we visited the 14th Century church to see its celebrated collection of mediaeval monuments, did some souvenir shopping and couldn't resist a genuine Bakewell Pudding before going on to nearby Chatsworth, the ‘Palace of the Peak’.
The BX 4×4 Estate, yesterday a safari vehicle, became today a Grand Tourer as we made our farewell circuit through picturesque villages and bustling market towns until we arrived at the old spa resort of Buxton, said to be the highest town in England, where we had reluctantly to admit that it was time to head for home.
But we'll be back and next time, after the impressive performance of this car, it will be in a Citroën BX 4×4 Estate of our own.
THE AWARD WINNING CITROËN BY RANGE
14 Saloon models including the BX GTi 4×4 from £7,840 to £14,971.
6 Estate models from £10,243 to £13,428.
Wide range of engines including the 90hp Turbo Diesel and the 160hp 16 Valve petrol engine.
Models available with catalytic convertor.
Up to 51.4 cubic feet of luggage space for Saloons and 64.0 cubic feet for Estates.
For more information and details of your nearest Citroën dealer phone  free of charge, quoting reference NTZ101.
Would you like a long weekend in the country courtesy of Citroën?
Turn over for details?
TAKE OFF FOR A LONG WEEKEND WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF CITROËN
And win one of 10 TOURACTION one-week holidays for two in Southern Brittany or one of 30 Sprayway Torridon jackets worth £125.
Just by taking a test drive in any model from the award-winning Citroën BX range at your local Citroën dealer you can book yourself and your partner into one of over 300 superb hotels in England and France (including the Riverside Country House Hotel in Ashford-in-the-Water, as featured) for a 3-day break courtesy of Citroën.
Not only this, you will also be entered into a free prize draw to win one of 10 one-week holidays for two in France or one of 30 Sprayway Torridon Gore-Tex jackets worth £125.
All you have to do is call  free of charge for details of your local Citroën dealer and arrange to take your test drive before 31st December 1990.
IMPORTANT: When you take your test drive, take the invitation coupon below with you, which your Citroën dealer must stamp, date and sign.
After you have taken your test drive, send your completed test drive invitation to the Freepost address shown to receive your Free Room UK brochure (incorporating your 3-day break voucher).
You will also be entered into the draw.
The Free Room UK 3-day break courtesy of Citroën.
The Free Room UK scheme incorporates over 300 quality hotels in the UK and France plus a wide range of Country Manor Hotels such as the Riverside Country House Hotel.
You will receive a colour brochure which details all the hotels and their sports and leisure facilities.
Your 3-day break voucher for two is incorporated in this brochure; this entitles you to stay for three nights free of charge, when you pay for breakfast and dinner at your chosen hotel.
(An average cost for this is shown for each hotel in the brochure.)
Win one of 10 TOURACTION one-week holidays for two in Port Du Crouesty, Southern Brittany, worth £700.
Citroën have combined with Touraction, France Patrimoine and Locavacances to offer these superb one-week holidays for two incorporating a programme of activities in two of the most beautiful and historic locations in Southern Brittany.
The winners will fly on a scheduled Air France service from Heathrow to Nantes on 13th April 1991.
The first night will be spent at the stunning Abbaye de Villeneuve, an historic Abbey used by an order of Cistercian Monks.
Dating back to the 18th Century the main house has been converted from the former guest quarters.
Dinner in the superb restaurant will be provided and after breakfast you will have time to explore the area which is in the Muscadet region.
At the end of day two you will transfer to Les Jardins du Crouesty.
Situated above the Port of Crouesty this resort is ideally placed for enjoying the famous seafood and the surrounding sandy beaches and areas of interest.
You will stay in spacious and well-appointed self catering studios for the remaining 6 nights and a programme of ½ day tours organised by the Port du Crouesty will be incorporated, featuring:
•Guided tour of the Presquille de Rhuys
•Guided tour of the Old Town of Vannes
•Boating trip on the Gulf of Morbihan.
During the stay a welcome drink and an evening meal will be hosted by the Port du Crouesty Tourist Office.
The trip will be accompanied throughout by a Touraction representative.
A warm and welcoming place, Southern Brittany provides a wealth of places to explore for the remaining time before flying back to England on 20 April 1991.
Or one of 30 Sprayway Torridon jackets worth £125.
Sprayway are renowned specialists in garments for active people whose leisure pursuits take them outdoors and into extreme conditions.
The Torridon jacket is rugged, totally windproof and features the famous Gore-Tex fabric which allows body moisture to escape but does not allow water in, keeping you dry in all conditions.
The Abbaye De Villeneuve is one of the exclusive listed buildings offered by France Patrimoine Historic Hotels Group, specialists in a wide range of theme weekends and tours of areas of historic interest in France.
For further details phone .
Les Jardins du Crouesty is just one of the many superb resorts offered by Touraction, specialists in activity holidays to France.
Room with a view!
Over the years motor caravanning has given us a completely new view of the world.
We've visited so many wonderful places and seen so many marvellous sights.
From the Scottish highlands to Camargue and North Africa.
And we've made so many new friends.
That's the beauty of motor caravanning.
We're able to travel in style to wherever we want, when we want to and at our own pace.
For a weekend or for months at a time.
It's the perfect way to discover the true nature of a country and its people.
Far away from overpriced hotels and overcrowded tourist areas.
Motor caravans really do have all the comforts of home.
Heating, beds, fully equipped kitchens, spacious dining areas, toilets and even showers.
These days there are a range of sizes, specifications and prices to suit nearly every requirement.
And driving a motor caravan is a real pleasure with more than enough power to keep on going.
From the highest mountain pass to the busiest city centre.
And reliability is no problem because they are based on tried and trusted vehicles from manufacturers such as Volkswagen, Talbot, Fiat, Mercedes, Renault, Ford and Bedford.
Buying the motor caravan that was just right for us was easy too.
We just had to look for the Motor Caravan Construction Code symbol.
The assurance that a motor caravan has been built to the latest international standards.
Standards that have been set by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.
Motor Caravanning really has been our window to the world.
It could be yours.
MOTOR CARAVANNING
Drive away to Freedom!
adverts from The National Trust
THE NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM
From John Gould's ‘Birds of Great Britain’ of 1862–73
‘The Robin’
Of all the images of the season of winter, none is more evocative than the chirpy Robin.
And here, for the first time ever on a decorative plate by Coalport, a pair of lively Robins pay tribute to the works of one of the most respected bird illustrators of all time.
John Gould is recognised as one of the masters of ornithological illustration.
‘The Robin’ was originally created in 1862, and is one of 367 rare colour plates now held at The Natural History Museum, London.
A delicate process of lithography brings out the richness of the bird's colouring on Coalport's finest bone china.
And as a finishing touch, the edge of each plate is hand-decorated with a gleaming rim of 22 carat gold.
‘The Robin’ is available only by direct subscription from this advertisement.
It is strictly limited to 15,000, and each plate is individually numbered on the reverse.
Inspect ‘The Robin’ at home, without obligation, for 28 days.
To place your order by telephone, call  anytime, including weekends quoting reference no: 41-A-ROB.
A Numbered, Limited Edition
Crafted by Coalport
edged by hand in 22 carat gold
Plate shown here smaller than actual size of 8″ diameter.
BEDTIME BLISS
How well do you sleep at night?
Do you sleep soundly the moment your head touches the pillow, or do you lie awake, tossing and turning, trying to get to sleep?
This totally new type of underblanket will immediately improve the quality of your sleep.
We all know how beautiful and soft a sheepskin rug can be.
So imagine how luxurious it must feel to sleep on one.
Well that's exactly what you're doing when you sleep on a Sherpa Underblanket made from pure New Zealand Long Tufted lambswool.
This is because the bottom sheet of your bed will be floating on a deep cushion of fleecy lambswool that will give you the most restful, satisfying and sound sleep of your life.
Fully Tested
The therapeutic effect of sleeping on lambswool underblankets are now well known.
Sherpa Underblankets are widely used in N.H.S. hospitals to relieve painful hips, shoulders, elbows, neck and knees.
Anyone who suffers from rheumatism, arthritis, backache, cramp or sore joints would feel immediate relief.
It also greatly improved blood circulation which in turn helps to induce peaceful, deep, relaxing sleep.
Lambswool is a natural insulator and always feels warm to touch so you'll stay much warmer on cold frosty nights.
But because lambswool ‘breathes’ it will also keep you cool in summer.
You'll also sweat less in bed as air is circulating all round the body.
Top Quality Fleece
The secret of Sherpa Underblanket lies in the unique quality of the wool.
It comes only from pure bred New Zealand Southdown lambs.
Their fleece is renowned by experts to be the springiest and softest in the world.
One of the drawbacks with other wools is that they will not ‘spring’ back into shape after a nights sleep.
But the fleece on a Sherpa Underblanket always ‘springs’ right back into it's full height — even after years of use.
There are lots of underblankets on the market but only the Sherpa uses such top quality lambswool.
Long Tufted Process
The Sherpa Underblanket is made by a unique process known as Long Tufted Slither Knitting.
This recreates a soft lambswool fleece onto a cotton backing material.
It enables the blanket to be machine washed just like any other blanket.
A tightly packed fleece pile is produced which does not compress under weight.
This gives the underblanket that unique long shaggy natural look and creates the ‘floating on air’ feeling which gently cushions your whole body.
Easy To Fit
Just slip the Sherpa onto your mattress and under the sheet.
It's held snugly in place by elasticated tapes.
It can also be used on top of an electric blanket although you'll soon discover that because of the natural thermal qualities of lambswool fleece you'll be using your electric blanket much less.
10 Nights Free Trial
There is of course only one way to prove how good the Sherpa Underblanket really is.
Sleep on it — and see for yourself.
That's why we're inviting you to try one on your bed for 10 nights.
If by then you're not completely hooked (We know you will be!) then we insist that you send it back to us for an immediate full refund.
Plus we will pay your costs of returning the product.
We can't possibly be fairer than that.
We know we've got a superb quality product that's why we're happy to risk our money to prove it.
Save 40%
You'll be saving money when you buy your Sherpa Underblanket direct from us.
Our prices are 40% less than major department stores selling similar lambswool underblankets.
So we urge you now to place your order by post or by phone.
We guarantee you will sleep more soundly, more peacefully, more comfortably than you've ever done before.
These underblankets are MACHINE WASHABLE  
One third of your life is spent in bed so why not treat yourself to the very best lambswool underblanket in the world.
NOW ALSO IN A COT/BUGGY SIZE FOR YOUNGSTERS
The Unique Long Tufted Slither Knitting process creates an exceptionally deep shaggy natural pile.
Family Name Origin
DISPLAY WITH PRIDE IN YOUR HOME OR OFFICE
This scroll is a true record of your surname origins, even people with what may appear to be common names will find the research informative and interesting, and a talking point within family and friends.
Since the 16th century people have been puzzling and researching into the origins of names.
Our scrolls embody both the original findings and the up-to-date assessments, and detail the following information —
1 The original nationality, sometimes going back to the dawn of history.
Was it Ancient British, Gaul, Goth, Viking, Spanish, Russian, etc?
2 The original meaning.
Was it job descriptive, or locational, or even a nickname?
Did you know that an ‘Engineer’ was originally an operator of Roman Siege Engines!
3 The earliest spelling record that we can find, with where appropriate, other variant spellings showing the historical links.
These spellings are sometimes very different from today.
4 The first recorded date in history, which maybe the British Domesday Book of 1086, or the Crusader Lists, or possibly the 16th century Huguenot register.
5 The ruler of the country of origin, or where this is uncertain, the Pope or the Holy Roman Emperor up to 1086.
Superbly printed on quality parchmarque paper, with a traditional heraldic border in full colour, this scroll is an asset to any home or office.
As this is a personalised service, please allow six weeks for delivery.
Should delivery be delayed we undertake to inform you as quickly as possible.
Unframed size 10″ × 8″.
An original Birthday, Anniversary or Xmas gift.
For researching more than one name please attach letter.
WARRANTY: Name Origin Research undertake to research any surname and to provide such information as is available by proven research.
In the event of no satisfactory records being found, your money will be refunded.
DOES SITTING MAKE YOUR BACK ACHE?
Are the hours you spend travelling, at work or away from the only chair that suits you made a misery because of BACK AND SCIATIC PAIN?
Cushions and pads may help for a while but they will never convert a seat or chair that is bad for your back into one which gives you comfort and relief.
And that is what you are looking for.
BACKFRIEND is the first to be selected for the Design Centre and is now exported to 17 countries.
•It supports the whole spine and in this way takes the load off your lower back
•The seat-base ensures that the curve of the back rest is always at the right height
•It is adjustable for height and can be set at any angle you choose
•Available in a choice of 7 colours
•It is light, portable and you can use it anywhere to make any seat or chair comfortable
•From a medical, orthopaedic and ergonomic point of view it is unrivalled
WHAT IS MORE:
•You can have it for a 14 day HOME TRIAL
•It comes with a 5 year guarantee
•No sales people will call 
SNUGGLE VETERINARY BEDDING
A comfortable healthy bed all year for your best friend.
NOW there is a brand new alternative to those traditional dog beds — the superior luxury of this beautiful Snuggle Veterinary Bedding.
Dense 1″ deep hygienic polyester pile bedding is firmly anchored onto a slip resistant backing using a unique patented ‘lock-on understitching’ process.
This creates a bed for your pet that is as soft as down yet always springs back into shape after use.
Young puppies in particular love this beautifully soft yet supportive fleecy pile.
Furthermore, as the design allows liquids to drain straight through the fabric, they keep warm and dry too — free from damp and draughts.
Adult pets will appreciate the ‘floating-on-a-cloud’ sensation that this bed creates and those aching, rheumatic joints in older pets will be eased and relaxed by the warmth and support that this new Snuggle now provides.
Also ideal for use in car when travelling with pets.
Machine washable and can be tumble dried WITHOUT shrinkage or damage to the pile.
If you love your pet — treat it to the same supportive comfort that you demand from your bed for your own good night's sleep!
Can also be used with traditional dog beds or cat baskets.
Money refunded if you (and your pet) are not 100% satisfied.
Allow 21 days for despatch.
GREAT NEWS FOR ALL DOG LOVERS
Used among professional pet care specialists and breeders for the resting and sleeping of pets.
Dense 1″ deep hygienic polyester pile bedding
Can also be used with traditional dog beds or cat baskets
IF TOYOTAS ARE SUCH GOOD QUALITY, HOW COME THE PARTS AREN'T MORE EXPENSIVE?
Before you settle for less than the genuine article, compare the price.
You'll be in for a pleasant surprise.
Genuine Toyota parts are priced very competitively compared to non-genuine parts — sometimes, the real thing even costs less!
But only the genuine Toyota part is designed and engineered to the same high standards of quality as the original equipment.
It will fit first time and perform exactly to specification.
Your Toyota is a sophisticated piece of machinery; to fit non-genuine parts is to compromise its design integrity.
Non-genuine parts may look the same, but they can cause problems of poor fit, inferior quality and limited durability.
All genuine Toyota parts carry a 12-month unlimited mileage warranty.
Some, like exhausts and shock absorbers, even carry a 3-year no-quibble warranty — inclusive of labour, when the part is fitted by an approved Toyota dealer.
The point is, Toyota means value as well as quality.
To make sure your Toyota continues to give reliable, economical and safe service, fit only genuine Toyota parts — you'll find it less expensive in the long run.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE With the Personal Touch TOYOTA
A TOUCH OF INDIVIDUALITY BETRAYS A WHOLE PERSONALITY.
Casually she let her scarf drift to the ground.
She knew it.
He was hooked.
He recognised them at once.
Wheels in light aluminium, five spokes.
Conceived exclusively for the Mercedes range and signed Duchatelet.
State of the art technology in 15″ 16″ and 17″.
CARAT BY DUCHATELET
100% MORE NOTICEABLE.
THE PANASONIC VZ303.
Why should ears get all of the fun?
This one from Panasonic looks as good as it sounds.
It's got 100 watts of wellie.
Can control a boot mounted CD autochanger.
It has a serious graphic equaliser, full logic cassette deck and an all-singing all-dancing spectrum analyser.
If you want to be seen as well as heard, search out the VZ303.
It shouldn't be too difficult to track down.
Panasonic Car Audio
30% MORE POWERFUL.
THE PANASONIC V10.
You get more sound per pound with Panasonic.
At 4 × 22 watts, the V10 has a third more oomph than almost anything at the price.
Its brother, the V20 has an even mightier 25 watts per channel.
Both are infinitely expandable.
Both feature a portable CD input, dual colour illumination, Dolby B and tape search.
And they both have moulded fumble-free buttons.
But even the buttons don't feel as good as the music.
Panasonic Car Audio
There's only one excuse for not buying Genuine Porsche Parts.
Not owning a Porsche.
When is a Porsche not a Porsche?
When it isn't fitted with Genuine Porsche Parts.
Sadly, this is a fact a lot of drivers seem to forget when they buy replacement parts.
But they soon remember.
Because non-Porsche parts are often of a lower quality than the real thing.
That's why at an Official Porsche Centre, you'll find 3,000 parts that have been specially made to fit the exact model and year of your car.
And even if your Centre doesn't have the part you need, if they order it from our National Parts Centre before 3.30pm, provided it's in stock, it will be delivered to any Centre in the mainland by 10.30am the next day.
So if you own a Porsche, buy Genuine Porsche Parts.
And you won't have to make excuses.
For more information and the address of your nearest Centre, send your business card to Room 5, Customer Relations, Porsche Cars Great Britain Limited, Freepost,.
PORSCHE GENUINE PARTS
‘THE BEST SMALL CAR IN THE WORLD.’
AUTOCAR & MOTOR, 17 OCT. 1990
(AND FROM ONLY £99.02 PER MONTH.)
The new Metro has been universally acclaimed by the motoring press.
They say it delivers the kind of ride and first rate handling normally associated with larger cars.
Autocar simply puts is another way, calling it the best small car in the world.
We agree, and when you've put the new Rover ‘K’ series engine through its paces, and experienced the technically superior interconnected suspension, you'll agree too.
Just to make sure that nothing stops you from having the best, we've arranged some excellent flexible finance schemes.
Repayments start as low as £99.02 per month, with our new Tailored Payments Plan, the ideal combination of low deposit and low monthly repayments.
For details call into your local Rover Dealer or ring us free on  .
THE NEW METRO
Great quotes.
Auto Express did not mince its words: ‘It's difficult to see how much more Ford could have done to improve a car that was already very good.’
The Daily Express was equally enthusiastic: ‘…glides over bumps like a mini-limousine’.
And The Observer said: ‘…the new Escort is quite transformed’.
Good news indeed.
And now there's even more.
Great quote.
We have a series of finance plans right across the Escort range.
The interest rate is 4.9% (9.5% APR) with a 50% deposit, 7.9% (15.3% APR) with a 33% deposit and 8.9% (17.0% APR) with a 20% deposit, These plans are available from Ford Credit until April 2nd.
Furthermore, Ford's new Price Protection plan means that the price you pay is the same as the price on your order, as long as you are prepared to accept delivery within three months and, in any event, as soon as your car is available.
Your dealer has full details of the plan.
For a written quotation, visit your Ford dealer today.
When you see what's on offer, we're sure you'll be left speechless.
Escort.
Ford 
ALFA ROMEO 164.0 CLOVERLEAF.
GRAN TURISMO.
IT'S WHAT GT USED TO MEAN.
THE NEW £26,720 ALFA ROMEO 164.0 CLOVERLEAF.
Before there were ‘Tourists’, there was touring.
Touring meant travelling in style, breaking free from the herd.
Asserting your independence.
And if you did it with real panache, and with a sense of luxury, it was called Gran Turismo.
A whole class of cars were created for this concept.
Motoring journalists were reminded of the values that GT used to stand for when reviewing the 164.0 Cloverleaf.
Values that many car manufacturers seem to have forgotten.
‘You won't ignore this car, nor will BMW and Mercedes.’
So wrote a journalist, reviewing the Cloverleaf for Autocar and Motor.
He went on to predict that many drivers would be ‘seduced’ by ‘the purity of Pininfarina's elegant lines.’
This is not surprising.
It is a beautiful car.
The 164 Cloverleaf has been uprated to 200bhp, delivering 0 to 60 mph in 7.5 seconds and a top speed of 147 mph (where permitted).
Our reviewer found an operatic sensuality in the tone of the engine, describing it as ‘…perhaps the most mellifluous soundtrack a production saloon can produce’.
Naturally, the interior of the Cloverleaf lives up to its elegant exterior, with air conditioning, electrically powered leather seats, electric windows and sunroof, six speaker CD system and power steering, all standard equipment.
And the ear is not the only sensitive part of the human anatomy which Cloverleaf is designed to appeal to.
The refined chassis is complemented by advanced suspension damping system which reacts in one five thousandth of a second to information from six sensors within the car, ensuring the perfect balance of comfort and security whatever the driving conditions.
So if you're thinking of embarking on a Grand Tour, there are worse places to start.
The Alfa Romeo 164 range starts from £16,435 for the 164.0 Twin Spark.
The 164.0 V6 is £21,270.
ALFA ROMEO
A RACE APART
Once again, our GTi is about to be left standing.
The pleasures of driving our GTi are equalled only by the irritations.
Heaven knows why, but numerous other GTi drivers seem to see us as some kind of personal challenge.
Curious really.
You'd think that since we invented the category, they would be grateful.
Well, appreciative at least.
Besides, it isn't even as if our Golf were the fastest of GTi's.
Either on the road.
Or the production line.
What can it be then?
Surely they can't begrudge us for being a tad sharper round the bends?
Or a shade more solid on the straight?
Or a mite more forgiving in a tight spot?
Alright, we might be excessively attentive when it comes to the fit and feel of things.
But is that any reason for tetchiness?
Baffling.
And likely, we suspect, to remain so.
Perhaps best to let it go at that.
Golf GTi
THE NEW SIGN FOR CREATIVITY IN CAR DESIGN.
THE NEW CELICA.
THE SHAPE OF THE NINETIES.
The idea was to wrap the height of high technology in a shape you will never forget.
The results speak for themselves.
The new Celica GT-Four looks like no other sports coupé and goes like no other sports coupé.
The turbocharged 16 valve engine produces 201 bhp.
The new ‘TORSEN’ differential ensures that all the power is delivered to the wheels directly in proportion to grip, giving you sure-footed security in all road conditions.
The Celica GT-Four is only one example of the spirit of creativity and innovation at Toyota.
You will be seeing more of our vision on roads all over the world, wherever you see the new Toyota logo.
For the address of your nearest dealer please call .
All new Toyotas come with a free 3 year or 60,000 mile warranty.
The vehicle illustrated does not accurately reflect UK specification.
Please consult your Toyota Dealer.
‘TORSEN’ is the trade mark of ZEXEL-GLEASON USA, INC.
BUILD MUSCLES FAST
YOU CAN BUILD A FANTASTIC POWER PACKED BODY IN ONLY 12 WEEKS!
NEW!
Fastest and best way to build muscles and strength without weights — EVER!
SCIENTIFICALLY PROVEN.
Just 20 minutes daily in the privacy of your home will develop an amazing physique.
MUSCLE DYNAMICS is a new bodybuilding system based on principles developed after years of exhaustive research.
It is a total exercise programme involving the very latest scientific breakthroughs in the field of muscular development.
It is the fastest, most effective way to build muscles in existence.
NOTICEABLE RESULTS IN 28 DAYS GUARANTEED
Send for exciting FREE information pack today
BEFORE YOU PUT A USED SAAB TO THE TEST, WE DO!
Before any of the officially appointed Dealers below sell you a Saab Approved used Car it will have undergone a stringent 40 Point Check and Service by dedicated Saab-trained Technicians using factory approved equipment and only genuine Saab parts.
These Approved Dealers will all provide a unique and professional hand-over procedure followed by a free 600 Miles Inspection — just to make sure you are completely satisfied with your new purchase.
And for peace of mind, a full 12 months Safeguard and Mechanical insurance will be included in the price.
What's more, all Saabs manufactured since October 1984 run on unleaded petrol without modification, so helping the environment and cutting petrol costs.
So put a Saab to the test — only from an Approved Used Saab Dealer.
TO DISCUSS YOUR PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS PHONE YOUR DEALER TODAY.