

New Beginnings
Students in the era of reform
OVERVIEW
The death of Chairman Mao led to a brief power vacuum because this one man had dominated Chinese politics for over three decades.
There were no clear constitutional or democratic procedures for political succession.
The arrest of the ‘Gang of Four’ in October 1976 eliminated them from the power struggle.
Deng Xiaoping, the moderniser, had survived several purges and was now able to rise to power and take centre stage.
Following on from the former Premier Zhou Enlai, Deng began an ambitious programme of economic reforms.
These inspired the Chinese people and within a few years, there had been major efforts to move away from the centralised, planned economic system which was typical of communist regimes.
Allowing small farmers in the countryside to be responsible for their own plots of land and to sell any surplus above the state quota on the free market and the encouragement of small-scale private enterprises in urban areas brought about great changes in Chinese society.
It appeared that China had ‘changed face’.
Students, swept along on a wave of optimism, were not alone in their desires for political changes to match those taking place in the economic sphere.
They placed their hopes on the ‘little man from Sichuan’.
Deng, however, showed very early on that he remained loyal to Marxist-Leninist-Maoist thought and the centrality of the party.
The so-called ‘fifth modernisation’, democratisation, appeared to be on the agenda, but groups of student activists soon discovered that this was fraught with difficulty and contradiction.
THE RISE OF DENG XIAOPING, THE PROMISE OF REFORM AND THE DENIAL OF DEMOCRACY
Mao Zedong had apparently selected his successor, Hua Guofeng, from the favoured few still eligible for political power.
Much was made of a  note addressed to Hua stating, ‘with you in charge, I'm at ease’, in an effort to legitimise his succession.
It was Hua who gave the order for Jiang Qing and her associates to be arrested along with many of their supporters.
Mao's widow had been eager to assume the leadership of the CCP, a prospect not welcomed among the party faithful and the general population.
But even with this threat eliminated, Hua's reign was to be short-lived.
Deng Xiaoping had been out of circulation since being accused of provoking the Tiananmen Incident.
This was only a temporary setback to the Long March veteran who had survived a number of purges over previous decades when ‘redness’ was valued more than ‘expertise’.
Deng's developmentalist stance had not always endeared him to Mao, but had aligned him to some extent with Premier Zhou, who also saw overly radical, leftist policies as a threat to China's economic and social development.
Zhou had shielded Deng from the extremists when ‘class struggle’ was predominant rather than economic development.
Other valuable people were beyond saving, however, as the party was purged of the so-called ‘capitalist roaders’ during the Cultural Revolution.
Liu Shaoqi, for example, had been more of a moderniser like Deng, suggesting that too much emphasis on leftist policies harmed China's future.
He had died as a result of being labelled a ‘capitalist roader’ and ‘revisionist’, although he was later posthumously rehabilitated and praised by the Party.
Deng Xiaoping managed to stay alive and did not wish to wait for his own death before being given any credit.
He wanted to contribute actively to governing the country once more and have influence in policy making.
By biding his time in the immediate aftermath of Mao's death, he could prepare for a rise to power in the CCP.
Hua Guofeng's unswerving loyalty to Mao became a liability as the ‘great helmsman's’ career was reassessed in a more objective and critical light.
The blame for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution could all be placed onto the ‘Gang of Four’.
Hua's policy of the ‘two whatevers’, i.e. to (1) resolutely uphold whatever decisions Mao had made and (2) carry out whatever the Chairman had instructed, were to cause him some difficulties in a changing political environment.
During the two years from the end of 1976 to the end of 1978, Deng became an increasingly popular candidate for Party leadership as support for Hua Guofeng evaporated.
Hua's reluctance to admit that Mao had made mistakes contrasted with Deng's hints regarding the fallibility of the former supreme leader.
Drawing on support from leading Party members, such as Zhao Ziyang and Hu Yaobang and his popular appeal among the people, Deng was eventually formally restored to his government posts in July  1977.
He was able to address the Eleventh Party Congress in August that year and emphasised the need for ‘less empty talk and more hard work’(quoted in Benewick and Wingrove 1988: 14).
The programme of ‘Four Modernisations’, originally proposed by Deng's former ally Premier Zhou Enlai in 1975, was revived and adopted as a priority in the new Party Constitution in 1977.
This bolstered Deng's own position and as Gardner writes, ‘Deng lost little time in directing his efforts to the pursuit of modernisation’(Benewick and Wingrove: 14).
Training scientific and technical personnel, i.e. ‘experts’, was given priority, which had important implications for the education system and students within it.
The revival by the Party of an old Mao maxim, ‘Seeking from facts’, also allowed for more flexibility in the political sphere and rejection of political dogma.
Hua's ‘two whatevers’ policy seemed doomed as the important article, ‘Practice is the Sole Criterion for Testing Truth’, was published in May 1978.
Deng closely aligned himself with this stance.
The Third Plenum of the Eleventh Central Party Committee in December 1978 endorsed these ideological shifts.
This meeting is often viewed as a turning point in contemporary Chinese history, conveniently marking the beginning of Deng's leadership and reformist policies.
‘China was henceforth to focus its attention on ‘socialist modernisation’’(Benewick and Wingrove: 17).
Both the new leader and the modernisation programme had previously been on the political scene, but at the end of the 1970s they appeared to be in a much stronger position than ever before.
Economic revitalisation and improvements in the people's living standards were put forward as major goals rather than‘class struggle’.
But how far would the reform programme be extended beyond the economic sphere?
The prospect of democratisation was suggested once again but Deng had already hinted at his commitment to the traditional version of democracy practised by the Communist Party.
Whether the central role of the party and concentration of power at the top of the political hierarchy would be changed as reforms were carried out remained to be seen.
The Chinese people watched eagerly for signs of what developments were to take place in China's political life.
One important signal had already been given with the reversal of the ‘Tiananmen Incident’ verdict.
The Communist Youth League magazine,Zhongguo Qingnian , was published for the first time since the outbreak of the Cultural Revolution in September 1978.
It contained an article positively evaluating the demonstrators as ‘heroes’ rather than as ‘hooligans’.
In the complex, indirect manner of Chinese politics, this piece confirmed that the ultra-leftist policies were over and a new  political era had begun.
Deng Xiaoping was by implication cleared of ‘provoking’ the disturbances which accompanied the mourning for Zhou Enlai.
The magazine's young audience and other groups seized this opportunity for more open debate about politics in modern China.
Discussion on the nature and forms of democracy and how it could be introduced into China was revived.
The debate went onto the streets in what became known as the ‘Democracy Wall’ movement.
Like its namesake in Prague a decade before, the ‘Beijing Spring’ as it was also referred to, had unfortunate consequences.
The main activity centred on a large wall at Xidan crossroads in the centre of the capital.
Poems from the ‘April Fifth’ movement of 1976 had been posted there during 1978.
The official reversal of the ‘Tiananmen verdict’ furthered the belief that it was now acceptable for citizens to voice their own views on the events surrounding ‘April Fifth’.
Calls were made for people considered wrongfully imprisoned to be released.
These included the authors of the ‘Li Yi Zhe’ document, a 20,000 character dazibao which had been posted in Guangzhou on 10 November 1984, some four years before ‘Democracy Wall’.
The poster had achieved a reputation comparable to the ‘Whither China?’ essay previously discussed.
The three authors, all former Red Guards (Li Yi Zhe was their collective pen name) had been arrested for expressing their radical views in ‘On Socialist Democracy and the Legal System’, although at first Deng Xiaoping and Zhao Ziyang had suggested that they supported the main ideas of the poster.
It can be seen as another outburst of dissatisfaction about the direction taken by the Cultural Revolution and the failure to eliminate what they saw as the rise of a ‘Soviet Union type of privileged class’(Brodsgaard 1981: 753).
The Chinese state, it was argued, was a rehearsal for ‘social fascism’ and capitalist restoration was always a possibility without real reform.
A truly socialist legal system and democracy complete with free speech and free media were called for.
The ‘Li Yi Zhe’ document was circulated outside Guangzhou and fed an underground debate about China's political system.
The sense of liberation engendered when the Tiananmen verdict was reversed led sympathisers of the Li Yi Zhe group to bring calls for their release out into the open.
Various dazibao were put on the Xidan wall, which became a public noticeboard.
Posters were the main form of communication because of the lack of a direct channel between the party leaders and the people.
In a country where the media is state controlled and acts as a mouthpiece for the Party, putting up posters was one of the few forms of communication and free expression.
‘Democracy Wall’ soon became a  popular venue for those with grievances and a focus for the dissent that had been growing under the surface for years.
It cannot be described as a student-led movement, starting as it did on a wall located on a busy shopping street, rather than on one of the capital's many campuses.
‘Democracy Wall’ immediately attracted a wide cross-section of people.
Many of the poster writers were former students, the older generation of educated youth who had returned from the countryside.
They criticised the leaders who had deprived them of proper schooling and their adolescent years.
Left to languish on the farms, elements of ‘rusticated’ youth had returned illegally to the cities, without the necessary residence permits (hukou).
This official document assists the authorities in keeping a check on population movements since no-one is supposed to alter their place of residence without permission.
Moving illegally, without hukou , means the migrant is not entitled to ration tickets and housing, also they lose other citizen rights.
The young people who returned illegally to the cities felt there was little left to lose.
By speaking out at ‘Democracy Wall’ they were addressing the injustices of previous political campaigns as well as calling for political reform.
Younger students did participate but they were less represented.
For them, the change in leadership and the promise of reform opened up opportunities denied to the Red Guard generation and they did not want to jeopardise them by becoming too involved in a politically orientated movement.
Higher education had only just resumed with some semblance of normality after the disruption of the previous decade.
There had been a rush to take part when the national college entrance examination was restored in 1977.
Academic ability was to count for more than ‘redness’ and class background, offering a ‘new dawn’(ZGQN 1988 (1): 2) for China's youth.
According to official figures, in what was described as ‘higher education fever’, between February and October 1978 ten million applied to take the examination and 500,000 were successfully enrolled.
Fresh-faced middle-school graduates and ‘older youth’ clamoured for a chance to become part of China's educated elite, with the prospect of an important role in the modernisation programme and adequate rewards for their skills.
‘I never dared to dream I'd have the chance to go to university, said one teacher in his early thirties, remembering his youth in the countryside.
‘It seemed quite pointless to hope once I was sent to the farm.
But when I heard about the examination being restored, I just wanted to try.
It was hard but I succeeded.
I was really lucky to have that chance for higher education.’
His story was not unusual among the xiafang (students sent to the countryside), who  found themselves competing with teenagers for college places.
Hundreds of candidates were chasing every vacancy in higher education and were ready to take any place offered.
They first had to pass the all-important examination.
Many were disappointed in their aspirations.
For older youth, this would heighten their existing sense of unfairness in the way their own government had treated them, adding to their discontent.
Unofficial journals and pamphlets proliferated during the winter of 1978, often produced in spite of great difficulties and personal risk.
‘Democracy Wall’ became a meeting place for members of the ‘lost generation’.
Alongside demands for political reform were specific complaints about individual miscarriages of justice.
It was argued that if a proper socialist legal system existed in China these cases would probably never have happened, or if they did, there would be official channels of redress.
There was thus a combination of personal case-history and more general political commentary.
Later campaigns would exhibit a similar mix of individual concerns and social issues.
‘Democracy Wall’ relayed the message to the authorities that political reform was needed in order to avoid  reoccurrences of damaging leftist campaigns.
Brodsgaard, in his analysis of the ‘Beijing Spring’, writes that the majority of posters publicised individual cases of wrongful imprisonment, execution, inappropriate class-labels and other detrimental treatment received at the hands of party organisations.
Relatives of both survivors and dead victims of the Cultural Revolution and the anti-rightist campaign of 1957 journeyed to the capital.
They insisted on the rehabilitation of their relatives and friends, joining the growing numbers gathering daily around the Xidan wall.
Its influence spread beyond Beijing.
In other cities, notably Shanghai with its large number of educated youth returned from the countryside, there were similar expressions of grievances.
Some people stood up to make speeches and there were rallies and demonstrations calling for greater freedoms and human rights over the winter months.
Elements within the party leadership voiced concern at these developments, but others appeared to encourage the people to speak out, notably Deng Xiaoping.
He was held in respect by some of the participants Who had confidence in his ability to correct many of the injustices and set the country on the path to substantial reform in all areas.
By early 1979, the movement was becoming an expression of popular dissent in the major cities.
There were large audiences for the underground journals, like April Fifth Forum, Masses Reference News , and Enlightenment , produced by various pro-democracy groups.
Some of the authors were former activists imprisoned after the Tiananmen  Incident who made contacts while in detention and maintained them after being released.
Others were dissatisfied rusticated youth and unemployed urban workers with Red Guard backgrounds.
Their publications soon sold out, providing an alternative to the state-run media.
By February 1979, writes Brodsgaard, ‘the underground journals were in full bloom.
There were gatherings in the parks where young people read their poetry and sang and danced to the music of guitars’(Brodsgaard 1981: 770).
These were unhealthy developments according to the hardliners Yang Shangkun and Bo Yibo, recently restored to political activity after the Party's Third Plenary Session in December 1978.
They feared the decline of the Party itself and another lapse into da luan , as during the Cultural Revolution, still fresh in their minds.
There were indeed some pro-democracy activists who openly expressed the idea of abolishing the leading role of the party and dismantling the state machinery in favour of creating more democratic structures.
They advocated some form of participatory democracy with free elections and a multi-party system.
Some views expressed at this time were not dissimilar to those of the ‘Li Yi Zhe’ document, whose authors were released in February 1979.
The leading party officials, however, were not about to relinquish their power and allow centralised authority to disintegrate.
Any other form of government in socialist China was out of the question.
The ‘abolitionists’(Brodsgaard 1981: 770) were therefore on a collision course with the Long March veterans.
Events in Shanghai increased the anxiety of the party elders.
Groups of illegally returned ‘sent to the country’ youth tried to draw attention to their plight with a series of sit-ins and demonstrations.
Joined by unemployed youths, their behaviour was labelled as ‘riotous’ by the local authorities who forbade putting up posters and other activities liable to ‘disturb public order’.
In a speech on 16 March at a closed meeting of high-ranking cadres, Deng Xiaoping indicated a general crackdown on the pro-democracy movement might take place.
He said the activities had ‘gone too far’ and such behaviour was not in the interest of ‘stability, unity and the four modemisations’.
Upholding the ‘four fundamental principles’ of Chinese communism, that is adhering to the socialist road, the dictatorship of the proletariat, the leadership of the Communist Party and Marxist-Leninist-Maoist thought, had to take precedence over the ‘four great freedoms’of being able to speak out freely, air views fully, hold debates and write large character posters.
As during previous eras, pre- and post-liberation the rights of the individual were to be sacrificed for the sake of maintaining social stability and avoiding da luan .
The constitutional rights of the people which exist on paper were  withheld for the sake of national unity.
On 5 April, two years after the Tiananmen Incident, the People's Daily carried an editorial emphasising this message, partly as a warning as well as for information.
One of the leading ‘Democracy Wall’ activists, Wei Jingsheng, had already responded to the hardening attitude of Deng and his supporters, during late March.
He dared to criticise the leader outright.
Wei had already become well-known for his outspokenness and his document calling for the ‘fifth modernisation’ was circulated widely.
In a special edition of the underground journal Exploration , he referred to Deng as a ‘dictator’, who was ‘no longer worthy of people's trust and support’(Brodsgaard 1981: 771).
This was tantamount to sedition.
Wei Jingsheng was arrested on 29 March and later sentenced to fifteen years' hard labour.
Other pro-democracy activists were also rounded up during the following months.
Wei's severe sentence shocked many people; he had become a dissident almost overnight and few believed he had ‘passed on state secrets to foreign powers’, as accused at his trial.
He was obviously serving as an example.
It also showed that Deng Xiaoping despite his intention to reform China's economic structure, was not going to give any ground politically.
He would not accept the ‘fifth modernisation’.
Xidan Wall was made inaccessible to the public during the summer months and new civic restrictions instituted on putting up dazibao.
An official ‘democracy wall’ in another part of the city did not have the same appeal as the original and even that was closed down in September 1980.
The ‘four great freedoms’ were suspended so that public meetings and rallies could not take place.
Some of the journals continued for a while until their organisers were arrested.
There could be no channels of communication outside state control.
Little could be done to help those like Wei Jingsheng.
People threw themselves into their own lives, working hard to ‘realise the four modernisations’, according to official propaganda.
The older student activists were disillusioned once again.
Their attempts to bring about political change first of all through breakaway Red Guard factions, then with ‘Democracy Wall’ had led to repression.
The rising generation of students were more optimistic about the future and did not carry the emotional burdens of the Cultural Revolution.
Most had some bad memories of the ‘ten black years’ but had not been scarred.
That would come after ten years of Deng's reforms failed to meet the expectations they had created.
The calls for democracy in the meantime shifted back to the campuses.
THE ELECTION OF 1980
At institutions of higher education across the country, young (and not so young) hopefuls settled down to study, conscious of the shortcomings within the Chinese political system but prepared to do their best for national reconstruction.
Strong elements of patriotism remained a characteristic feature of Chinese youth.
The impact of ‘Democracy Wall’ had heightened expectations for genuine change, however, which were soon to bring many students temporarily out of the classrooms.
In 1980, local elections were to be held, implementing the ‘Gengshen Reforms’, which allowed for a small but significant element of democratisation at the local level.
These elections were the first to be held for offices above the lowest administrative level since China became a republic in 1911 and the fist nationwide elections for People's Congresses since the outset of the Cultural Revolution.
They were bound to attract wide attention, especially among the 1.14 million students enrolled in China's 675 colleges in 1980 (Nathan 1985: 207).
At Fudan University in Shanghai, a number of students held an election ‘campaign’, giving speeches, distributing details about themselves and generally trying to rally support from prospective voters.
The university authorities encouraged this novel development and three students were eventually elected to the county congress.
In some Shanghai factories, once a ‘hotbed’ of radicalism, there were demands for independent trade unions along the lines of Solidarity in Poland, news of which had reached the Chinese people.
Beijing University was not to be outdone, naturally, by its Shanghai colleagues.
A document was produced there by one of the candidates containing concrete proposals for the democratisation of the local elections, including a request for free facilities to assist in the production of campaign materials.
Other campuses throughout the country caught the ‘election fever’.
Putting up posters and shouting slogans about democracy had done little in the past to achieve the students' goal but in 1980, some believed that substantial change could be achieved if the limited opportunities presented by the Gengshen reforms were seized.
The overriding power, however, still lay with the party-dominated local election committees.
Generally, they did not agree with the style of campaigning witnessed on several major campuses, which they viewed as attempts to copy the ‘bourgeois’ elections of capitalist countries.
These conflicting ideas between party committees and student campaigners nearly led to confrontation at Beida, where the student elected to the local congress was denied his seat.
In November, the lively, open and somewhat controversial manner of the election campaign was seen by the Beida authorities as too ‘western’.
The eighteen candidates, mostly pro-democracy activists, organised public debates and forums which were packed with interested observers and participants.
All sorts of questions and issues were covered, far exceeding what the official election committee felt was in order.
The candidates, while not openly supporting dissidents like Wei Jingsheng, nevertheless all favoured democratic reform and expressed only cautious optimism about the Deng-led regime.
They went too far in their zeal for election campaigns along western lines and the elections were declared invalid by the authorities.
Open conflict was narrowly avoided.
At Hunan Teachers' College in Changsha, the situation worsened.
Several of the older students with records of political activism, started campaigning for the local elections in September.
Their critical comments about Marxism-Leninism led them into confrontation with the college authorities, who failed to bring the students back into line.
Posters appeared all over the campus, which is in Mao's home town, criticising the officials for their interference and treatment of the democratically selected candidates.
The students were visibly annoyed by their actions, including attempts to rally support for a more ‘suitable’ candidate, i.e. officially nominated.
Stern warnings broadcast over the student public-address system in the evening of 8 October exacerbated the situation.
Thousands of students left their dormitories, enraged by the attitude of the authorities over election procedures and their refusal to permit change.
One central issue here concerned an important aspect of democratic elections in the West, which is the free selection of candidates before actual voting takes place.
In China, this was not standard practice.
At the higher levels of government, candidates are usually selected by the top leaders themselves, another element of ‘top down’ power, making the actual election process little more than a ‘rubber stamping’exercise.
Also, in elections for positions in the National People's Congress, for example, there is often only one candidate for a post, thus unanimous selection is the norm.
Given this system of ‘democracy’, grassroots feelings and preferences have no place.
The students, especially the older ones, in the 1980 elections, wanted to change this set-up and introduce real choice at the local level, as one step towards democratisation.
The party authorities in charge of the campuses, however, did not feel they could allow these radical developments to take place.
Thus the clashes.
In Hunan on the night of 8 October, students marched to the  provincial party headquarters to register their complaints about the handling of the elections at the Teachers' College.
Shouting ‘Long live democracy’ and singing the ‘Internationale’, they were in some ways evoking the spirit of ‘May Fourth’and paving the way for others to take in following years.
Their own spontaneously appointed stewards kept the demonstration orderly and on arrival at their destination they won a partial victory.
The local cadres recognised their protest as legal and an investigation team was sent to the college to see if their complaints had any substance.
The victory was short-lived.
After a few days, the investigators ruled in favour of the college authorities.
Another demonstration was called and when the provincial officials refused negotiations, a group of nearly one hundred students began a hunger strike on 14 October.
A boycott of classes also began in support of the hunger strikers.
The crisis escalated.
Activists quickly arranged for publicity material to be sent out so that news of the Changsha situation reached other major cities as well as the outside world.
The official media were unlikely to discuss this issue.
The cold and dishevelled hunger strikers gave speeches and ‘many people wept as they spoke’(Nathan 1985: 216) which further stirred up emotions.
Pledges of support came from other institutions of higher education and there were reports of demonstrations and boycotts elsewhere.
As the crisis came to a head, however, the hunger strikers were persuaded to call off their action before anyone became seriously ill by promises of further investigations into their allegations of ‘undemocratic’ practices at the college.
The eventual outcome was not favourable to the students who had taken politics into their own hands and tried to realise democratic practices at the local level.
Taking the Gengshen Reforms as a sign that political reform was acceptable, they had tried to conduct campaigns along the lines of those in the western world, of which they had some limited knowledge.
They took things too far.
One of the prominent candidates and activists at the Hunan Teachers' College was eventually arrested and sent for three years to a ‘re-education through labour’ camp.
Another left for the USA with his American wife and did not return.
The graduate assignments the following year were reportedly very disappointing, with a disproportionate number being sent to rural areas.
The 1980 elections failed to secure democratically chosen representatives for the students at the local level in Changsha as elsewhere.
Demoralisation rather than democratisation was the immediate result.
Deng Xiaoping made much of this, comparing western-style  democracy unfavourably to Chinese socialist democracy.
After the resolution of the Changsha crisis, he warned against ‘bourgeois liberalisation’ and stressed the need for more ideological work in the colleges.
Many students had strayed from the socialist path and needed to be reminded of the superiority of the socialist system.
A pattern of events was established which would be observed several times throughout the 1980s: a degree of liberalisation, student activism, then the ‘anti-bourgeois’ backlash.
A flood of media items discussing the problems of youth in general, and students in particular , appeared.
The political system was not to blame, but the young people themselves who misunderstood the ‘realities’ of the Chinese situation.
They were naive and easily misled by western ideas, especially since the ‘open door’ policy had allowed foreign ideas to enter China.
In the eyes of the Long March veterans, young people were easily duped by the enemies of socialism and needed to be watched carefully.
This patronising attitude of the party authorities towards the young generation of China's intelligentsia only further alienated young people from the party and from socialism.
A minority of activists were labelled as ‘counter-revolutionaries’ and learnt the severity of the party's disapproval.
As Carol Lee Hamrin soberly reminds us, ‘anti-regime dissidents continue to find room only in the prisons and workcamps’(Goldman et al .
1987:276).
Calls for democracy along western lines with a multi-party system, free choice of candidates and free elections were not tolerated by the old party leaders, Who clung to centralised ‘socialist democracy’.
Students, feeling it their duty to point out the shortcomings of policies and personalities in Chinese politics, exercised their traditional custom of remonstrating several times throughout Deng's decade of reform.
Each time the demands for democratic reforms to accompany economic ones were ignored.
The official attempts to persuade and coerce through propaganda, ideological work and threats contained the problems but never resolved them.
The mounting grievances glimpsed during 1979 and 1980 would eventually erupt in Spring 1989.
There were clear signals, then, from the beginning of his time in power, that Deng would not tolerate serious dissent.
OPEN DOORS, CLOSED MINDS
To avoid a recurrence of the problems experienced in 1980, the electoral law was revised and constitutional amendments made in 1982.
No room was left for the sort of ‘campaigning’ witnessed on the campuses, so that in future the procedures could go ahead smoothly under the party's oversight.
Bureaucratic measures could to some extent control  behaviour which did not conform to pre-defied socialist standards.
But the ‘open door’ policy attracted many ‘unsavoury’foreign imports to China which were more difficult to curb.
‘Make foreign things work for China’, ran one slogan but it recognised that ‘flies and pests’ would come in through the open door as well as fresh air to revitalise the stuffy atmosphere in China.
Distinguishing between the good and bad in foreign cultures needed to be carried out thoroughly and those vulnerable to temptation, particularly students in contact with foreigners and western ideas, had to be protected.
In reality it was impossible to control the exchange of information and ideas between the newly arriving westerners and young Chinese intellectuals.
Slogans alone would not work.
The government soon found itself taking an ambivalent stance towards the waiguoren (foreigners).
They were welcome for what they could help China to achieve in practical terms, but their politics and social attitudes were reviled.
There were also splits in the party ranks on this issue.
The more conservative sceptics of reform would have gladly closed the door on the outside, non-communist world.
The pro-reformers were more aware of the necessity of obtaining modern technology, assistance and financial aid to realise the four modernisations.
The ambiguities and divisions were clear during the euphemistically termed ‘spiritual pollution’ campaign (jingshen wuran yundong ) of 1983, when the party elders attempted to keep out the ‘flies’they had set free in Chinese society.
In the past China had been plundered by westerners eager to exploit large markets and in doing so they brought the nation to its knees.
The contemporary open door was to be for the benefit of the Chinese, not their disadvantage.
By doing business, inviting foreign experts to work and teach inside China and opening up the country to the world, progress seemed certain.
Relationships with foreigners, according to the official line, were to be friendly and co-operative, but based on the contribution they could make to China's modernisation drive.
The authorities, however, could not draw the line between official and unofficial contacts and aspects of ‘pollution’ were noted soon after the open-door policy took effect.
In earlier periods, ‘foreign devils’ brought with them more than just strange clothes and hairstyles but social and political doctrines as well.
Why should their modern-day counterparts be any different?
Students were a group already singled out for special attention in the effort to keep out the ‘bourgeois liberalism’ which had influenced their predecessors at the turn of the century.
Young intellectuals eager for knowledge, progress and a better future, were bound to be impressed by new solutions to the problems facing contemporary China.
The  capitalist ‘wind’ blowing from the west would also bring pornography, promiscuity and other unhealthy trends destructive to the socialist morality of China.
It was to repel these undesirable side-effects of the open-door policy that the ‘spiritual pollution’ campaign was started in the winter of 1983.
It probably also served the function of reuniting the party against a common threat.
In some ways a continuation of the drive against bourgeois liberalism which began after the 1980 elections, it mobilised the media, the CYL and other official agencies in efforts to stamp out undesirable imports.
Political thought and social behaviour were to be scrutinised for signs of excessive westernisation by cadres in educational institutions, workplaces and homes.
Students had to attend special political classes to remind them of socialist values, the four basic principles and other tenets of Marxist-Leninist-Maoist thought.
A brake was applied to the speed of reform.
Deng Xiaoping hoped that this would satisfy conservative critics wary of reform and keep in check any unhealthy tendencies among the younger generation.
Intellectuals were perturbed by this turnaround and students, previously urged to ‘emancipate their minds’ from the fetters of dogma, found themselves once again facing the same old political rhetoric and slogans of former times.
‘Firmly adhere to the socialist road’ was back in fashion with the party at centre stage.
To ‘love the motherland’ was to embrace wholeheartedly the doctrines of the leadership, even if they were slightly contradictory.
Having a western hairstyle or bourgeois political beliefs would attract criticism.
The modernisation programme was set back, with China reverting to the policies of class struggle in a diluted form.
Fears of a revival of the Cultural Revolution were borne out in some local areas where over-zealous and ‘leftist’ oriented cadres interpreted the words of the Party directives too literally, trying to eliminate anything new which had come about since the open-door policy was introduced.
One young teacher working in a more conservative college spoke to me of this period with some amusement.
‘It wasn't funny at the time, of course, because young people were really getting into trouble for being too westernised’, she told me.
‘I was severely criticised because my hair was too long and loose, apparently reflecting a loose bourgeois morality!
I was also accused of running after foreigners.
It wasn't true.’
Apart from personal attacks, overseas materials in the English language departments were also scrutinised.
‘We had to destroy our copy of Gone with the Wind , criticised as decadent and encouraging sexual promiscuity.
Many things were lost in the name of socialist purity.
It was quite ridiculous.’
It was also quite dangerous.
With provincial officials acting in such an enthusiastic manner, the country was once more on the road to chaos.
‘Anti bourgeois liberalism’ read widely as anti anything since the end of the Cultural Revolution, could have brought back policies which the pragmatists in the government had hoped were gone forever.
Consequently, as stories reached the capital of excessive clampdowns and criticisms, the leadership were unnerved and had to halt the campaign before it got out of hand.
The success of the modernisation drive was called into question as was the security of party leaders who supported the developmentalist line.
Positions might have been changed and the precarious political balance upset by any intensification of the spiritual pollution campaign.
It was therefore diluted instead and phased out during 1984, although in some areas, over-zealous cadres were still busy checking bourgeois tendencies well into 1985.
The campaign can be viewed as part of the pattern in contemporary Chinese politics suggested earlier: it was the inevitable backlash against a certain degree of liberalisation.
It would be halted only temporarily.
It was clear that the Party under Deng still had the ultimate control over defining what constituted ‘socialist morality’ and democratisation; even ‘opening up’in the political sphere was not a priority.
The limits of liberalisation were set by the faction within the party which held power.
Economic reforms, however, were set to continue.
Since 1979, after the changes in party policies had been accepted by the Third Plenum of the CCP, a number of important measures had been taken.
The main trends could be seen in efforts to reduce the role of the state in economic life; to introduce elements of ‘free market forces’ into previously regulated rural and urban enterprises; to reduce wastage, inefficiency and ‘red tape’and to promote the ‘entrepreneurial’spirit in order to raise production levels and ultimately living standards across China.
Reforms began in selected rural areas, with the introduction of the ‘responsibility system’ by Zhao Ziyang, at that time a close associate of Deng.
Individual families could farm plots of land leased from the state and sell any surpluses in local markets.
This implied the eventual disbanding of the rural ‘communes’ which had been an essential part of Mao s agricultural policy.
Farmers were free to use their own initiative more and had an incentive to increase crop-yields, i.e. profits.
The initial successes were impressive.
According to Blecher, ‘Per capita grain production grew at an average annual rate of 3.7 per cent from 1978 to 1984, compared to 1.2 per cent during the previous thirteen years’(Benewick and Wingrove 1988: 100).
Production of other crops also rose substantially — the important oil-bearing crops saw a rise of 13.8 per cent during this period.
These achievements were highly  praised in the Chinese media and people could see the results for themselves in some localities with more agricultural produce on sale.
So-called ‘ten thousand yuan households’, referring to the high incomes some farmers were now obtaining, were well-publicised and instead of being labelled as ‘capitalist exploiters’ were held up as models for emulation in the changing rural economic environment.
There were problems with these changes, however, right from the start: not everybody could ‘get rich quick’.
There were growing inequalities between households, villages and regions.
In less fertile and inaccessible regions, introducing free market forces and removing state subsidies brought poverty instead of wealth.
The sudden reversal of former Maoist policies was not welcome everywhere and there were limits to the productive capacity of the small plots of land being leased.
The advantages, however, seemed to outweigh the disadvantages in the initial period of reform.
As the People's Republic of China celebrated its thirty-fifth anniversary in 1984, the prospects for continued agricultural improvement looked good.
By the end of the reform decade, though, this situation had changed.
The early success and popularity of rural reforms encouraged the introduction of economic change in urban areas.
There were moves towards decentralisation of state-run enterprises.
Large factories were made accountable for their own production, profits and losses.
Small businesses were encouraged, which brought a rapid proliferation of small privately-owned restaurants and shops on the city streets.
Between 1981 and 1985, gross industrial output grew by 12 per cent a year (Benewick and Wingrove 1988: 118).
Modern light industries grew faster than the traditional heavy industry.
The state's former virtual monopoly of enterprises was reduced with the expansion of the private sector.
In retailing, for example, the state's share fell from over 90 per cent to just over 50.
The modernisers in the party saw such developments as necessary.
Certainly there was more choice for ‘consumers’; this itself was a reformation in ideology.
But once again problems were recognised, which would only grow worse if not checked.
Profiteering price-hikes, and worsening inequalities between different social groups were the problems which beset Deng's reform programme.
Ministers like Zhao Ziyang and Hu Yaobang, themselves committed to extending reform and making China a richer, modern nation, were given the responsibility for easing the difficulties.
This task would later prove too great for both men.
All these changes were giving China the appearance of ‘turning capitalist’.
The leadership strongly denied this was the case; reforms were part of the modernisation drive towards ‘socialism with Chinese  characteristics’(Zhongguo tese ).
I never met any students who could define what this slogan meant, but usually it brought a look of amusement to their faces.
‘It's just a slogan.
I don't think even the leaders know what it means’, I was often told.
More significantly the direction of change was viewed suspiciously by young intellectuals who had hoped for the realisation of the ‘fifth modernisation’.
‘We have the worst aspects of capitalism developing in China like vast inequalities, corruption and profiteering, but none of the good things such as democracy.
The outcome can't be good’, one student told me in 1984.
Leaving aside the unsettled question of political liberalisation, it cannot be denied that much has been achieved since Deng Xiaoping took over the Party leadership.
By 1984, five years into reform and the open-door policy, the lives of millions of Chinese people had changed greatly.
On the streets, the drab appearance of the Mao years was becoming brighter, especially in the main cities.
People wore different clothes, shopped in privately-owned shops and were able to talk with the thousands of foreigners living, working in or touring China.
Substantial parts of the urban population were better off in material terms and there had been changes in attitudes.
During the Cultural Revolution, for example, a woman could be severely beaten for attempting to adorn herself in any way and ‘running after bourgeois ways’.
In 1984, queues formed outside privately-run hairdressers for the latest fashion in ‘perms’.
In the smaller, less accessible towns (many regions were still officially closed to foreigners in 1984), one could catch a glimpse of what China was like before reforms and bulldozers moved in.
Luxury hotels, tower-blocks of flats and foreigners were noticeable by their absence compared to the main cities.
Locals were wary of any outsiders and cautious about change.
Students dreaded being assigned to these small towns where there were few opportunities to develop their talents or lead an interesting life.
Most young intellectuals preferred to go to large cities like Beijing and Shanghai after graduation where reforms had made life noticeably more modern.
My first introduction to China and its frustrated young intellectuals was in a small town, a cultural ‘backwater’, still in the throes of a ‘spiritual pollution’ campaign which was largely abandoned elsewhere.
The town was ‘backward’ compared to the big cities, but according to local Party officials it would soon catch up.
In their smart western-style suits and ties (just like the trend-setting party secretary Hu Yaobang) they spoke English, the language of the open-door policy.
Appointed more for their academic qualifications and skills than sound political credentials, the new breed of young, educated officials intended to bring their old-fashioned city up to date.
Assurances that a new era was underway were made at a civic banquet to celebrate the thirty-fifth anniversary of the People's Republic.
This optimism was shared to some extent by students, especially those learning technical subjects.
Their skills were in demand as China struggled to adapt itself to the age of new technology.
They were hoping to have some choice about their future occupation after graduation.
The graduate assignment system, in operation since the 1950s, usually placed young people according to national plan and local demands.
It was efficient in that most graduates were placed and unemployment rare.
The responsibility for students to find their own jobs was minimised.
Work units submitted the numbers of new employees required each year and the state officials sent them along.
The problems were immense, however, as students had no opportunity to select their own profession or place of work.
‘We are just hammered into place’, I was told.
‘We all dread the day assignments come out.
And it's usually for life’, a group of graduating students told me.
Economic reform, however, offered the prospect of correcting the system's numerous drawbacks.
With the new-found emphasis on efficiency and profitability, the inflexible system had to change.
People with different skills and training were to be allocated to places where these could be fully utilised, unlike before.
Cases of unsuitable placements were common, but there was very little to be done once the assignment had gone ahead.
Students had high expectations for their future with the renewed emphasis on ‘expertise’ rather than‘redness’.
Those without a technical or scientific background were less enthusiastic, being more destined for lower status posts like teaching.
Divisions among different groups of students were clear; they were not a homogeneous group but differentiated along the lines of study area, social origins, gender and so on.
These sources of differences affected their overall view of the reform programme since some were set to gain more than others.
The interesting point, however, is that divisions within the student body would become less significant as conditions for all students deteriorated throughout the reform decade and optimism gave way to despair.
They also shared a sense of growing frustration with the lack of political reform and democratisation.
During the noisy thirty-fifth anniversary celebrations, when Deng Xiaoping and his reform programme were at the peak of their popularity, few voices of dissent could be heard.
But they were there.
Several students told me of their plans to go abroad to live because the party would never release its tight grip over people's lives.
Liberalisation in the economic sphere was not enough to satisfy their demands.
They  wanted political reform and more freedom.
Some reminded me of Wei Jingsheng, in his fifth year of solitary confinement for daring to speak out and discuss the ‘fifth modernisation’.
Democracy was still an idea in the minds of China's students but their leaders had other priorities.
The door was open but minds, it seemed, remained closed.
‘Deepening the divide’
Student dissatisfaction and demonstrations
OVERVIEW
The material circumstances of life for most students in China failed to improve as economic reforms were extended and strengthened.
Their social position also appeared to suffer a decline as education entered a period of crisis.
Increasing dissatisfaction among both teachers and students led them frequently to ask the question, ‘Why study at all?’, with some justification.
Although it was usually specific issues which drove groups of students to write dazibao and hold demonstrations, as in the mid-1980s, the more general themes of democracy, free speech and human rights were also present.
Educated youth were fed propaganda about their leading role in the reform programme, but this contrasted starkly with the realities of everyday life.
They were being used to test the limits of reform, also to resolve factional struggles within the leadership, especially between the ‘reformers’ and ‘conservatives’.
But they were not just pawns in the political game: students had their own ideas which will be addressed in this chapter on Chinese students in mid-1980s.
THE REALITIES OF STUDENT LIFE IN THE 1980S: MORE DESPAIR THAN PRIVILEGE?
Tournebise and Macdonald in their comprehensive account of student life and protests in China during the 1980s, raise this important question of ‘privilege or despair’ among the young intellectuals.
In a number of ways they are an elite group who have reached the pinnacle of academic achievement by securing one of the scarce places in one of the 1,054 institutions of higher education.
Since the re-instatement of the nationwide college entrance examinations in 1977 and the reversal of ‘leftist’ educational policies which stressed class background and political  suitability rather than academic ability, competition had been very keen, as we have already indicated.
In spite of the expansion of higher education through the provision of extra places and additional institutions, the demand was still far greater than the supply.
Between 1978 and 1982, for example, 117 institutions were added to the tertiary sector, but as Cleverley writes, ‘growth in higher education is still far from meeting national needs’(Cleverley 1985: 245).
Data on the proportion of college-aged young people at universities and colleges differ slightly because of the accuracy of statistics available at any one time, the definitions of the group in question and the types of course and institutions included.
Thus we have a proportion as low as 1.6 per cent of the age group studying in higher education in 1979 (Gasper 1989: 9), compared to a higher but more vague ‘less than five per cent’ given by Ethridge in 1988 (Ethridge 1988: 193).
Tournebise and Macdonald writing in 1987, state that of the 19 to 24-year-old age group, only 3 per cent would have the chance to acquire a place in higher education.
Whichever figure is accepted, it can be seen that they are uniformly low at below 5 per cent, even in more recent years.
This proportion contrasts with that for developed nations such as the USA, where 35 per cent of young people attend college (Tournebise and Macdonald 1987: 47).
But even other relatively poor, developing countries fare better than the PRC.
India, for example, when measured in terms of the proportion of students in higher education per 10,000 of the population comes out at 58.4 in 1982, compared to only 11.4 in China (Cleverley 1986: 245).
Consequently, secondary-school pupils in China have only a limited opportunity to go into higher education and in this sense, those who do make it can be viewed as a privileged elite.
When compared to their peers who fail to pass the entrance examinations, they have the prospect of a better life: four or more years at university (rather than waiting to be assigned to low-skilled, often low-paid work) and the likelihood on graduation of a secure post in the state bureaucracy.
There were also opportunities for overseas travel related to study and meeting foreigners for those attending the larger universities and colleges in the major cities.
Young people who finish their education after secondary school often viewed their contemporaries in higher education with envy.
The competition for places leaves many candidates exhausted after ‘cramming’ for the examinations and many are disappointed.
In 1987, for example, 2,275,000 senior middle school pupils sat the examinations but only 617,000 were subsequently enrolled in the tertiary sector (Ethridge 1988: 193).
During the Cultural Revolution, Mao had attempted to eliminate  this ‘new elite’, largely made up of the children of urban intellectuals and well-placed party officials.
His drive towards restructuring higher education along egalitarian lines opened up the colleges to those from less privileged ‘proletarian’ backgrounds and those who showed the correct political disposition.
Susan Shirk describes this as an attempt to create a ‘virtuocracy’ based on Maoist criteria in contrast to a meritocracy.
The abolition of examinations, shortening the length of courses and open criticism of teachers and academic knowledge, among other features of the Cultural Revolution period, led to disruption and chaos rather than Mao's goal of an egalitarian higher education system.
By the mid-1980s, the leftist policies had been reversed and China was operating more meritocratic principles for selecting those entering the educational elite, yet the social make-up of the successful few did not reflect the totality of the whole society.
As before the Cultural Revolution, the children from intellectual and professional backgrounds were once more over-represented.
As Hooper wrote in 1985, ‘China's current educational system is proving to be a highly elitist one.
Students at…university, especially the top universities, come overwhelmingly from privileged urban backgrounds’(Hooper 1985: 55).
Parental encouragement and pressure, access to books and other educational materials, useful personal contacts and influence with party organisations, among other reasons, are usually cited for the rapid return to this preponderance of urban, intellectual youth in higher education.
Children from rural areas are less likely to complete secondary education, let alone apply for university places, and comparing literacy rates between rural and urban areas can be illuminating here.
The measured total literacy rate in Beijing, 1981, was 85 per cent compared to 53.8 per cent in the poverty-stricken province of Anhui and 52.1 per cent in the southern province of Guizhou.
When the dimension of gender is added, we can see even greater disadvantage and inequality for females.
Taking the same places given above, the female rates fall to 77.7, 35.9 and 32.6 per cent respectively (PRC Population Data Sheet, Beijing University 1987).
Young people in rural areas can expect little more than basic primary school education and the girls may not even receive that.
The prospect of a university education must appear as an unattainable dream: some are successful but these are exceptional cases.
Children from China's fifty-five minority groups are also at a disadvantage in the competition for higher education places, according to Cleverley.
They have to learn the dominant language, Mandarin, and adopt many of the cultural values of the majority Han Chinese in order to make progress in education.
In Beijing there is a Minorities Institute  where approximately 3,000 students from minority backgrounds pursue various courses of higher education.
Back in the regions they come from, such as Xinjiang and Tibet, conditions are ‘backward’ and often terribly poor.
Therefore, viewing university students as an elite is justified in many ways when considering the low proportion who can enter this group and the usually predictable social backgrounds of the successful candidates.
But the ‘despair’ element is also strongly noticeable.
Tournebise and Macdonald believe that the actual conditions of higher education lead to a sense of desperation among the student population which, when added to other grievances such as lack of political reform in contemporary China, create potentially explosive situations.
Student protests in 1984, 1985 and 1986, documented by these two authors, were partly symptomatic of these underlying problems and the ‘privilege — despair’ dilemma.
In December 1984, after the excitement of the thirty-fifth anniversary celebrations had died down, students at Beijing University took part in small-scale, localised protests.
An official decision by the authorities to switch off electricity to student dormitories at 11 p.m. led to unrest on campus.
The authorities had intended to encourage an ‘early to bed, early to rise’ regime as well as to save electricity, which is always in short supply in China.
The students felt it was another infringement of their already limited freedom and disliked the highhanded manner in which it was carried out.
This unpopular decision added another item to the growing list of complaints about the living and study environment at one of China's top universities.
Over a thousand students left their dormitories and protested outside the campus administrative building by putting up posters and calling for the resignation of key officials who had little understanding or sympathy with their plight.
In one sense, the ‘lights out’ issue at Beida was the last straw; when added to other grievances, it drove the students to risk punishment and protest.
They were having serious problems with food, to cite one example.
The urban economic reforms had led to price increases in basic foodstuffs and the introduction of private enterprise in the university canteens.
With the state no longer fixing the price of many basic foodstuffs and the introduction of the profit motive, the cost of eating rose, yet the quality of food deteriorated.
Varied and nutritional meals were becoming prohibitively priced for large sections of the student body who had to survive on steamed buns, noodles and low-quality meat and vegetables, and that too usually in very small quantities.
Student allowances are often provided by the parents, themselves often low-paid intellectuals  and by the mid-1980s, income could hardly keep pace with price rises.
Students increasingly complained that they could not afford to eat properly.
Government promises of higher expenditure on education and a greater commitment to improving the life of students and intellectuals after the ravages of the Cultural Revolution had hardly changed the typical campus environment.
The Beida students in 1984 were keen to point this out.
Although ‘privileged’ to be studying at this top-level university, living conditions were spartan.
China's urban areas are extremely overcrowded and students are not spared from this reality.
Housed six or seven, sometimes eight to a room in draughty dormitories, there is little chance for quiet study or privacy.
A student's bed becomes their territory, covered not only with quilts but books and papers.
Switching off the lights at 11 p.m. would deny many of them their private study-time.
Noisy, dark and usually reeking with the smells wafting from the ‘squat’ toilets and the piles of half-rotten food which students attempt to cook for themselves to save money, the campus dormitories are uncomfortable places to live and study.
They are also unhealthy.
In the regions immediately south of the Huanghe (Yellow River) there is no heating available due to fuel shortages.
In major cities like Shanghai, Wuhan and Nanjing, where hundreds of colleges are located, winter temperatures can fall below freezing.
Students have nowhere warm to complete their assignments and other work.
‘We have to wear more clothes.
We are used to it’, I was often told but their susceptibility to colds and other illnesses indicated otherwise.
The low-quality food also exacerbated their poor health.
Considered as a ‘privileged elite’, university students were put in a paradoxical situation.
Tournebise and Macdonald describe university life in China as a ‘profound deception’(op. cit: 46).
Compared to their rural counterparts and unemployed urban youth, students had definite advantages but many felt disappointed with the realities of higher education in the 1980s after the optimistic language of the early reform years.
Even Beida students felt disappointed.
They had heating in their classrooms and dormitories, and therefore were more fortunate than their southern colleagues.
Apart from food and the ‘lights out’ issue, why else should they protest on those cold nights in December 1984?
There was some dissatisfaction with the curriculum, which had hardly been touched by the modernisation drive.
Education had been labelled by some leading party members as the ‘fifth modernisation’(not democracy as political activists insisted), yet the lessons remained traditional.
Innovation and experimentation in the classroom, both in educational content and teaching methods, were discussed but there  were few examples to be seen in practice.
What the students learned was ‘dry as dust and stagnant as pond water’, one young man told me about his studies.
Modernisation of the curriculum and teaching methods would, of course, have involved more financial investment which was hard to find.
Ethridge writes that although expenditure on education increased during the 1980s, ‘the increase in enrolment has been such that the average per-pupil expenditure actually decreased’.
(Ethridge: 181) The damage caused by the Cultural Revolution, destruction of books for example, was also costly to repair and swallowed up some of the funds.
Any increases in spending on education were seen as insufficient by staff and students alike at major universities.
The universities looked run-down and neglected in sharp contrast to new luxury hotels being built with foreign loans and technology in the large cities.
The students felt left behind, living in relative poverty while businessmen,getihu , were becoming rich often at the expense of the weaker groups in society.
They felt there should be some safeguards to protect less well-off people who lived, like themselves, on fixed, low incomes, from the excesses of profiteering and corruption.
These negative trends were becoming more common as people ‘looked towards money’ rather than socialist moral values, a situation the party leaders regretted but seemed unable to control.
Students were experiencing a sense of decline, both in terms of material and social positions, a form of downward social mobility.
Young people with little education but the right connections or boldness could make more money selling goods like watermelons on the street than they could hope to earn after graduation.
As the gap between the rich and the poor was perceived to be widening, students felt this was bad for them and the country as a whole.
‘Knowledge is useless’, was a familiar sentiment expressed by downhearted young people.
Those in more technical areas had a greater sense of optimism because they would leave university with practical training.
Even these students, however, were dismayed by their living and study conditions.
There was also the contentious issue of discipline, which affected all the students.
Discipline regulations were considered too strict, with few individual rights and freedoms.
Students could be expelled on the slightest pretext and their behaviour was closely observed by class monitors and other officials.
Detailed files were kept on every student which could help determine what sort of assignment they received upon graduation.
One mistake could have a profound effect later on.
But this monitoring was for many students inconsistent with their future leading roles in Chinese industry, commerce and society in general.
They were treated like children, not young adults and the 11 p.m. rule imposed on  the Beida students without consultation was symptomatic of the authorities' attitude towards them.
Tired of this paternalistic and oppressive regime, Beida students aired their complaints over several evenings in mid-December.
Students at the nearby People's University (Renda) joined in by chanting, beating their tin wash-basins and foodbowls and setting off firecrackers to make a lot of commotion.
It looked likely that the protest would spread to other campuses in the university quarter and even spill out onto the streets of the Haidian district.
The authorities promised to look into the complaints in order to defuse the situation.
The protests subsided but there was little improvement afterwards.
Some of those who participated in the December unrest at Beida were expelled early in 1985 for ‘lax study habits and ‘bourgeois thought and lifestyle’(FBIS China Report 19. 3. 1985: 61).
Officials denied that the 249 students were dismissed because of the demonstrations, but the two events seemed inextricably linked.
Colleges and universities were advised to strengthen discipline, already considered too strict by many students, and step up ideological work.
Warnings were given about the consequences of this sort of behaviour as there was a localised backlash against the Beijing students.
Work-study was presented as a means of solving some of the student problems.
Taking on part-time jobs could help pay their way without relying totally on parents and the state for financial support.
It would also keep students busy in their free time, keeping ‘bourgeois liberalism’ at bay.
With more ideological education and propaganda, it was hoped the students could be kept in line.
But the authorities could not control their minds and many were becoming increasingly disillusioned with developments in contemporary China.
The ‘lights out’ issue in December 1984 was just the tip of the iceberg.
A small-scale survey conducted among 300 undergraduates in Shanghai in early 1985 found pessimism about the government's measures to improve the political and material status of Chinese intellectuals.
Twenty-six per cent had no confidence in the ongoing reforms.
Overall, however, students had a strong sense of duty to help China develop into a powerful, modern country, but they were uncertain as to how they could contribute given the constraints placed on them.
Twenty per cent saw western concepts of democracy and freedom as useful to China, an indication that this issue had not been forgotten.
Many other surveys were conducted at this time, employing the newly re-established social science departments, which had been inactive for over two decades.
The government was keen to know more about the quarter of a billion youths in the population and the less than five per cent attending higher education institutions.
As a social group, youth was  viewed increasingly as a ‘problem’.
Finding out more information had definite policy implications during this stage of transition into ‘Chinese-style socialism’.
The old style, however, persisted.
Party elders were concerned that the younger generation of intellectuals took no interest in Marxist-Leninist-Maoist thought and were neglecting their political studies.
A vice-principal of a teachers' university probably spoke on behalf of many party members in positions of responsibility when he said that some young comrades lacked the ‘backbone of Marxism-Leninism’, especially those studying liberal arts subjects.
Nor did they have sufficient ‘team spirit’, being overly individualistic and concerned with themselves rather than the collective good.
These unhealthy trends needed to be corrected, he warned, and students firmly guided away from the false ideals of bourgeois liberalism.
The socialist road had to be adhered to, even though that itself was changing with the ultimate destination now uncertain.
The older ‘rusticated’ youth from the Cultural Revolution period continued to cause anxiety for the authorities.
Thousands were still eking out an existence in China's desolate border regions, their sacrifices and hardships almost forgotten in the new era of reform.
Many of them wanted to return to their city homes, but government would not permit this mass relocation of older, educated youth.
Severe overcrowding in the urban areas was usually cited as the reason for keeping them in the countryside, but there were probably underlying political motives.
These people had been highly politicised during the ‘ten years of chaos’ and could infect the younger generation, already causing some problems, with their negative attitudes and ideas.
A heightening of the students' sense of political awareness was to be avoided.
It was declared the best policy was for the ‘sent down’ youth to remain where they were so that they could make their valuable contribution to the motherland on the ‘agricultural front’, as in previous decades.
A group of over 300 former Beijing students, unhappy with their enforced exile, travelled to the capital and staged a sit-in demonstration outside the city hall in June 1985, demanding the right to return home.
They were persuaded after a few days to go back to far-off Shaanxi province and continue to do their duty in their ‘adopted rural home’.
The sadness and disappointment of this lost generation must have been a  salutary warning to younger students not to follow the party unquestioningly, otherwise they too could have their lives wasted.
No one could doubt, however, the students' patriotism, an apparently enduring characteristic right across the generations.
The older, rusticated students were moved by appeals to their sense of national  duty (as well as by threats), while the younger students wished to revive anti-Japanese feeling because of what they perceived as the ‘second Japanese invasion’.
Their patriotic zeal developed into demonstrations originating at Beida in September 1985.
There had already been a violent expression of xenophobic sentiment earlier in the year when China's football team failed to qualify for the World Cup.
Their defeat by Hong Kong in May sparked off serious disturbances in the streets of Beijing, with Japanese cars and taxis being overturned and foreigners attacked.
They were quickly brought under control, however, and the ‘hooligan element’ accused of inciting the ‘riot’arrested.
Although this behaviour was widely condemned and probably few, if any, students took part, the nationalistic sentiments and feelings of frustration with the condition of modern China were not isolated phenomena.
Scores of students I spoke with at that time suffered hurt pride that socialist China, supposedly superior to capitalist states, could be defeated by its small neighbour (and soon to be returned) Hong Kong.
The government had to handle these sentiments with extreme caution.
Taking students' minds off China's economic and social problems through nationalistic emotions directed against foreigners was acceptable up to a point.
But the open-door policy had to remain intact, thus overseas trading and business partners like Japan could not be unduly offended.
The more conservative-minded members of the leadership probably saw the students' anti-Japanese protests as a way of criticising the ‘reformist’ faction.
They may have openly encouraged the students, according to Gittings.
A typically ambiguous attitude towards foreigners manifested itself at this point.
Former enemies of the nation were welcome for their hard currency, new technology and to some extent their social and political ideas.
But, as in the past, the students were concerned at the prospect of foreign domination through trade and financial deals, the modern-day manifestation of imperialism.
The Japanese were particularly disliked because of their past record in China.
Beijing University students fifty years before had dared to protest against the first Japanese invasion and Chiang Kaishek's apparent complicity in their designs in what become known as the ‘December Ninth’ movement.
The 1985 demonstrations were triggered off by Japan's intention to commemorate the ‘Mukden Incident’ of 1931, which marked the beginning of their annexation of north-east China.
There was also controversy raging about their attempt to rewrite the account of the fall of Chiang's former capital, usually referred to as ‘the rape of Nanking’.
Thousands perished, but the Japanese wished to play down the extent of the atrocities committed by their soldiers.
The Chinese government had themselves complained about this attempt to  ‘falsify history’.
The students in this respect were merely showing support for the official position and expressing their patriotism, but they went too far in their protest action.
The first demonstration took place on 18 September, with calls for a boycott of Japanese goods and slogans attacking their large trading partner.
Highly suspicious of Japan's motives, the students referred to their militarism and ability to bring China to its knees as they did in the 1930s.
They put up dazibao accusing the government of ‘selling its soul’ with the open-door policy and doing business with anyone, irrespective of their past behaviour in China.
These remarks were highly embarrassing for the government and brought out the different opinions within the party on the open-door policy.
Other issues were raised such as the practice of banning Chinese from western hotels in the major cities unless they were on official business or actually accompanying foreigners.
This ‘mini-apartheid’ was reminiscent of the colonial era, when parts of China were out of bounds to its own people.
The much-quoted example of the parks in colonial Shanghai with their noticeboards reading ‘No dogs or Chinese allowed’, is pertinent here.
Students did not want to suffer such humiliation even though the new policies were implemented by their government for the betterment of the nation.
Students in other cities quickly followed the lead of their Beijing counterparts.
In Xian, a similar demonstration was reported lasting for three days with some violence.
Unrest was recorded in Shanghai and Chengdu.
The students were rapidly becoming the most vocal critics of reform as it was being implemented by the government led by Deng Xiaoping.
It seemed as if the younger generation did not trust the judgement of the leadership.
The students in the 1980s were also concerned with the fate of China and their own future security.
This was all very worrying for the reformers in the government who though applauding the young people's sense of nationalistic duty rejected their misgivings about the open-door policy.
The September demonstrations appeared very much like a single-issue movement, but I would argue that other concerns were raised, including the lack of political reform in China.
Their international position would improve, it was suggested, if there were some form of democracy.
After all, Japan had democratic structures and procedures, as well as a far higher standard of living for most of its people.
At the end of the Second World War, Japan and China were both rundown but China had become the poor neighbour, a condition the students were not satisfied to accept without questions.
It was the questioning aspect of the developing student campaign that most concerned the  government.
The protest had to be contained and drawn to some form of conclusion without any further loss of face or foreign investment.
With the fiftieth anniversary of the historic ‘December Ninth’ approaching, students were laying plans for large-scale rallies to remind the government of their traditional role as remonstrators and revolutionaries.
Official moves to placate the students with promises that their complaints would be looked into eventually succeeded.
The December demonstrations were called off and order on the campuses was restored, but the underlying issues and grievances remained.
It was predictable that another important single issue could bring the students back out of their classrooms and onto the streets.
The reformers in the government temporarily won a truce, between themselves and the students as well as with the conservatives.
It was an uneasy truce, however, with clear signs of tension persisting.
One indication of the deep-seated level of dissent followed soon after the anti-Japanese student protests.
Fang Lizhi, a leading astrophysicist noted for his frequent outspoken comments on the Chinese political system was invited to speak to electronics students at Beida on 4 November 1985.
These students, like Fang himself, were part of the technocratic elite referred to earlier, but their better prospects and opportunities apparently failed to compensate for other sources of discontent.
According to Kelly, Fang's speech, ‘displayed all the features which were to lead to his purge in 1987’(Kelly 1987: 133).
He was already renowned for his view that ‘democracy is something to be struggled for, not conferred from above’, and as Kelly points out, this doctrine was voiced during the September protests.
Fang told the electronics students that a better intellectual environment would also have to be fought for, with intellectuals taking matters more into their own hands.
He was certainly not one of the ‘tame’ scholars and did not expect the young people to be so.
His November speech was applauded loudly.
He declared that ‘discipline, order, morality and civilisation are on a higher level out there than in China’(Kelly 1987: 133).
His comments inspired the students, but placed him on the list of suspicious intellectuals.
He knew this as did other ‘leading lights’ who spoke out against the regime such as Liu Binyan and Wang Ruowang.
Fang appeared prepared to sacrifice his privileges as part of the technical intelligentsia to speak out; otherwise, he believed ‘education will remain a master-apprentice affair’(Kelly 1987: 134).
His stress on original ideas and individual contributions to the country were a form of patriotic loyalty not in line with what the party laid down.
The Beida students were receptive to his ideas, but the leadership were more antagonistic.
Fang would play an  important role in the next round of student demonstrations at the end of 1986.
Meanwhile 1985 ended with unrest among students from the Uighur ethnic minority.
About 800 held a demonstration in Tiananmen Square in mid-December to protest against nuclear testing in their homeland of Xinjiang province in the extreme north-west of China.
In Shanghai a little later, about one hundred Uighurs held a similar protest.
Nuclear testing was one issue.
They were generally concerned about the treatment of their minority by the Han majority.
Being mostly Muslim and with a Central Asian cultural background, the Uighurs had been incorporated into China in the nineteenth century (Xinjiang was formerly known as Turkestan).
In the mid-1980s the Uighur students called for independence from China, as the Tibetans have been doing for decades.
Urumqi (Urumchi), the capital of Xinjiang province, saw thousands of students take to the streets in large demonstrations at the end of the year.
The situation in the remoter regions was tense.
It appeared that students all over China were on edge and quite willing to express their numerous grievances, encouraged by leading intellectuals and various ‘factions’ within the party itself.
A SECOND ‘HUNDRED FLOWER’ MOVEMENT AND THE WINTER OF DISCONTENT
The demonstrations at the end of 1985 brought about a degree of response, although the authorities did not address the main issues raised by the students.
The students were, as Kelly tells us, becoming ‘a medium of public opinion in their own right’(Kelly 1987: 140).
Other people were taking note of what they had to say, including sections of the leadership.
Hu Yaobang, General Secretary of the Communist Party, and Premier Zhao Ziyang were known to be enthusiastic about pressing ahead with further restructuring of the economy and initiating change in other areas of Chinese society.
They believed success could win over the students and other intellectuals.
The more conservative party members were less convinced of the need to transform China into a market-oriented system with all that would entail.
Deng Xiaoping as paramount leader, although officially only carrying out his duties as the Chairman of the Military Affairs Commission, was caught in the middle, trying to maintain a balance between factions in the party which he denied existed.
His own popularity had declined amongst the Chinese people and he was seen as too old and unwell for the job.
(He was already 81 and had cancer.)
It was rumoured that 71-year-old Hu  Yaobang, Deng's long-standing protégé was impatient for his mentor to step down so that he could firmly take the political reins and strengthen the embattled reformist position.
It was against this uncertain political backdrop that the cycle of relaxation and repression in political and intellectual life began again.
With the reformers gaining the upper hand, 1986 heralded a new start in the reform programme aimed at tapping the reserves of knowledge and skill possessed by the educated elite in order to boost the flagging economy.
The idea of introducing a degree of democratisation in the political sphere, put on the ‘back burner’ since 1980, was advanced again in the slightly more relaxed and optimistic atmosphere of the new year.
It seemed likely that a second ‘hundred flowers’ movement was in the offing, thirty years after the original one had ended in disaster for thousands of Chinese intellectuals.
Times had changed, people were reminded.
The open-door policy was set to continue and China was no longer governed by one all-powerful dictator, but in theory at least, by the ‘collective leadership’ of the CPC.
Class struggle had been replaced by the modernisation drive.
Intellectuals were needed to play their role not just in the technical sphere but in many fields of expertise if China was going to build a materially prosperous as well as socialist civilisation.
Impatient for change, the intellectuals took the lead in criticism of the party, their dissent having, according to Kelly, ‘few precedents in recent Chinese history.
The Shanghai-based World Economic Herald (Shijie Jingji Daobao ), a new and controversial journal, published a number of articles by leading pro-reform intellectuals insisting on the need for greater freedom and ‘ideological relaxation’(Wang Ruowang cited in Kelly 1987: 135).
Rather than being suppressed, these articles found support in the more mainstream and consequently more orthodox (party) newspapers such as Renmin Ribao and Guangming Ribao .
This rather unusual development may have been due to the influence of Hu Yaobang in the Ministry of Propaganda or to a younger generation of journalists who demanded more honesty in their reporting.
Either way, relaxation of media control encouraged further intellectual debate about the problems facing China and alternative solutions to the ones offered by Marxism-Leninism.
There is usually a big ‘but’, however in these cycles of liberalisation.
This contemporary ‘Double Hundred’ did not have Chairman Mao waiting to apprehend dissidents but there were numerous other antagonists among the ‘conservative’camp.
It was also true that the reformers were more interested in what practical achievements could be made by a period of liberalisation.
According to Saich, ‘The main reason  for this renewed willingness to talk about reform was the fear among many that the economic reforms were in danger of reaching an impasse’(Saich 1985: 29).
If a certain opening up of the political life could reinvigorate the economy, that would be sufficient justification for adding a new dimension to ‘socialism with Chinese characteristics’.
Liberalisation and democratisation were not so much of intrinsic value as of practical value for the reformist-minded leadership.
This pragmatism would later conflict with those intellectuals and students who thought political reform was desirable in its own right.
There was a clear link with past practices of fitting the ideology to the needs of the state rather than its constituent members.
A few leading officials believed that free speech, human rights and other concepts embraced by the term ‘democracy’ were honourable in themselves, but mostly it appeared that support for democracy was based on promoting economic progress.
Believing in democracy for its own sake does not seem to be characteristic of Chinese political thought, past or present.
Dissenting voices, however, were beginning to suggest otherwise, including young scholars who were tired of ‘autocracy’.
The danger of going too far was always present right from the start of the renewed intellectual ‘blooming and contending’.
As in the past, the students would be the ones to go over the brink, encouraged and inspired by the ‘freer’ intellectual environment of 1986.
The open debate in the media had, according to the intellectual Ding Wang (cited in Kelly 1987: 139), stimulated the students to more reflection on contemporary society.
In this sense, the intellectual ‘counter elite’ were a catalyst of the demonstrations which broke out at the end of the year.
The students' own deteriorating conditions and increasing awareness of problems experienced by other social groups also played a role.
Food, discipline, standards of living, the curriculum, educational facilities, study opportunities and employment prospects were all examined and found wanting by increasing numbers of students.
Some were more fortunate than others and conditions were not totally uniform throughout the country.
Science and technology institutes tended to receive more investment than the liberal arts colleges.
I saw several brand new technical institutes, complete with Japanese-equipped language laboratories, which no-one knew how to use, and libraries stacked with scientific books.
At the Sixth Plenum of the Twelfth Party Central Committee in September 1986, the leading members of the Politbureau, such as Zhao Ziyang and Hu Yaobang, put forward their views about the effects of continuing to ‘open up’ intellectual debate and introduce political reforms.
The conservative opposition managed to prevent any real  discussion of political change.
Saich tells how instead of debating planned reforms, the Plenum ‘passed a resolution on the needs to improve work in the ideological and cultural spheres, issues identified with those who wish to limit political reform’(Saich 1988: 30).
Commentators such as Kelly see this meeting as a ‘watershed’ where the reformers lost their case.
Their opponents linked the negative phenomena in Chinese society with ‘bourgeois contamination’, as they had done so in the ‘spiritual pollution’ campaign.
It would only be a matter of time, analysts warned, before a conservative backlash would begin with the usual repressive measures against bourgeois liberalism.
Hu Yaobang apparently lost the patronage of Deng Xiaoping at this time and for him too the future looked uncertain as China's supreme ruler moved towards the conservative side.
Official reports of the Plenum indicated changing allegiances and the victory of those suspicious of reform.
Intellectuals who had been encouraged to ‘bloom’ temporarily knew that the ‘harvest reckoning’(Kelly 1987: 127) would follow.
Students were perturbed that their new-found ‘freedom’ to express themselves was to be revoked by the old men running the country.
They had not only been active in discussion among themselves, but had become a source of commentary about the state of the nation.
They had come to relish their small but growing role as political and social observers, invoking the spirit of ‘May Fourth’.
They wanted more reforms, not less, and an active role to play in helping the country rid itself of social ills.
Excessive inequalities and corruption were two targets of criticism and the students were ready to speak out.
The largest spontaneous demonstrations since the Cultural Revolution erupted not, as usual, on the Beijing campuses but in the provincial universities.
A number of isolated events occurred throughout November and December which culminated in massive displays of ‘student power’ on the streets of major cities.
While not solely triggered by political concerns, they all eventually focused on the need for reform and the lack of democratisation.
Details of some of the disturbances were reported by foreign journalists, who were able to see for themselves what was happening.
Other actions may have gone unreported.
China is a vast country and communications are often difficult.
News of some of the events did spread to other districts and had a ‘knock-on’ effect, with students acting in solidarity.
But some of the protests were unrelated and their coincidental timing indicates shared feelings of frustration and resentment among the student population, who were extremely sensitive to official party moves.
The warning given by conservative CPC member Peng Zhen in November to those who desired bourgeois democracy ‘as if the moonlight of capitalist society were brighter than  our sun’(Saich 1988: 31), probably did little to endear the students to the orthodox party leaders.
One of the early scenes of trouble was in Changsha, where students in 1980 protested about the lack of democracy in local elections.
In 1986, there were initially small-scale disturbances caused by the forcible eviction of a professor employed by the Teaching College from his accommodation on the Hunan University campus.
This was seen as victimisation of intellectuals, already suffering in the changed economic circumstances of modern China.
In Shanghai at the Teachers' University, new regulations issued on 10 November made it obligatory for students to do physical exercises before classes.
This was formerly standard practice but had lapsed in recent years.
Students openly expressed their opposition to these orders.
In the following days, many dazibao were posted complaining about the low-quality, high-priced canteen food as well as the reinstitution of physical exercise.
If the college authorities were concerned about the students' health, it was suggested that they should take action to improve their average daily diet.
The real reason for the compulsory exercise, some students believed, was to further intrude into their free time in an already highly regimented day.
More freedom of speech and independence would reduce the power of high-handed officials to dictate to the students how they should live.
Canteen food was the initial cause of demonstrations at Shanxi University in Taiyuan, northern China and also at Jinan, the capital of Shandong province.
Over in Xian, it was reported that two postgraduates of the Northwestern University were assaulted by the children of a well-placed professor.
Friends of the victims demonstrated on the streets, calling for action against the culprits, who had abused their power.
The protest in Jinan involved a hunger strike, started on 18 November, and several days later a march through the streets by students, calling on the provincial authorities to listen to their complaints.
These were not just about food, but the lack of official concern about declining living and study conditions.
Democracy was also raised as an important issue.
The Beijing Review carried an article accusing Professor Fang Lizhi of the National Science and Technology University in Hefei of provoking these troubles with ‘inflammatory’ speeches made at several universities in November.
He had, the article claimed, described the students as a ‘progressive force for democracy’(Tournebise and Macdonald 1987: 78).
Fang would later contest the truth of some of these statements, although he was a self-acknowledged critic of the party leadership.
At that time, he was still a Party member, believing it could be reformed  from within.
There is little doubt that his outspoken views had some effect on the students, and he was a convenient ‘scapegoat’ for the authorities to blame for the disturbances.
They would not accept that the students could act spontaneously and have their own views outside of the party's direction.
The factions within the leadership also used the demonstrations to further their own ends in the ongoing struggle for supremacy in the party hierarchy.
Such isolated incidents of student unrest rapidly became a mass movement.
On 4 December, several hundred students at Fang's university in Hefei held a demonstration as part of their campaign to organise a boycott of the campus canteens.
Also on the agenda at this time were the elections for the local People's Assembly and the imminent anniversary of the 1935 anti-Japanese student movement.
Thus there was a combination of potentially explosive contributory factors.
The students criticised the official methods of selecting candidates as in 1980, claiming it was totally undemocratic.
The authorities then appeared to back down, accepting the students' own nominees.
Feeling euphoric at having won this ‘victory’, they decided to extend their actions in a campaign to bring about more liberty and democracy in other areas of social life.
As the important date of ‘December Ninth’ drew near, the atmosphere in Hefei was tense, a city already marked as a potential centre of trouble because of Professor Fang Lizhi.
Now it became a ‘hotbed’ of student protest as thousands went onto the streets, carrying banners and shouting slogans like ‘Long live democracy’, ‘Down with despotism’, and ‘No modernisation without democratisation’, a direct reference to the words of imprisoned Wei Jingsheng.
Wuhan, a large industrial city on the Changjiang River was next to see students march in defiance of the local authorities.
Complaints about food and living conditions mingled with calls for free speech, a free press and democracy.
Reform, the young protesters stressed, was good but should be extended into the political sphere, as their predecessors had demanded many times before.
Students in Nanjing, further down the river, soon jammed the streets, supporting their colleagues elsewhere.
In other major cities, students came out to voice their grievances, worries and hopes about reform.
There were inconsistencies in their views, the students having inherited some of the contradictions of the past.
They were, however, strongly patriotic in outlook.
But as posters went up on campuses in the populous city of Shanghai, the situation became more critical and was fraught with behind-the-scenes manoeuvring.
The student demonstrations were ‘clear evidence’, according to the conservatives, of the undesirability of unleashing capitalistic-style  market forces in Chinese society.
‘Great chaos’ loomed large, they warned.
Deng had to act to defuse the conservative challenge but also rein in the reformers.
He did so by using the students.
Rather than condemn them, he offered implicit support in the columns of the People's Daily (11. 12. 1986), declaring that political reform was the rightful concern of the masses.
Since everyone wanted reform the students could not be ruled out of order.
It was necessary to be both ‘bold and prudent’, a phrase which played a large role in the student movement that winter.
By putting ‘boldness’ before ‘prudence’, Deng was seen to be wearing his reformist hat, a blow to the more cautious-minded in the party leadership.
Many students felt Deng was on their side, for they were not politically sophisticated enough to realise that he was using their movement to attack his opponents and thereby strengthen his own position.
Like the ‘Democracy Wall’ activists, they would learn that Deng Xiaoping, the survivor, was on his own side.
But for the month of December, the students felt that they were riding a well-placed political movement.
The foreign media were very interested in these events.
The ‘Voice of America’ radio station, popular among young Chinese, broadcast news of students blockading the train station in Wuhan.
Telephone lines to the city were jammed and messages of support flowed in from other student bodies.
The official media carried no details of the demonstrations, but made announcements about proposed reforms in the electoral code.
This should have satisfied the students, but it was too little, too late; a course of action had been set into motion which was difficult to reverse.
The authorities, hoping to contain the situation, appeared almost paralysed by the students' actions.
They were not prepared for the thousands of young people demonstrating on the streets, apparently with Deng's blessing.
The centre of activity by mid-December was Shanghai, where students listened eagerly to the VOA reports about Wuhan and elsewhere.
An open letter written by a group of Hefei students calling for solidarity was passed around the campuses, as well as tapes of Fang Lizhi's Shanghai speech, outlining the need for democracy and the importance of intellectual development in China.
Several small incidents, one revolving around a pop concert, incited more students into action.
The local party leader in Shanghai, Jiang Zemin, attempted to deter the first demonstration by personally addressing thousands of students at the Jiaotong campus on 19 December, Jiang was a technocrat and moderniser whose future success in the party seemed certain.
His meeting with the students, however, did not achieve its aim.
There was good deal of heckling and questions thrown at him about the nature of  democracy, free speech and freedom of the press.
His mainly orthodox replies did little to satisfy the young audience.
‘Why had the 1980 Constitution abolished the right to put up posters?’
‘Why couldn't people select their own mayor and other local officials?’, students asked angrily.
The mayor continued his address, but he did not have the right answers.
After the meeting, six to seven thousand students marched on the streets, reaching People's Square (Renmin Guangchang) in the centre of the crowded city before proceeding towards the municipal government offices.
They shouted ‘Long live democracy!’, and sang the by-now familiar ‘Internationale’.
Attempts by police to halt their progress and warnings from the authorities did not deter the students, who continued their demonstrations over several days.
An eyewitness told me of her surprise, when emerging from the Peace Hotel (Heping Fandian) on the Bund, at being confronted by a ‘mass of bodies, wave upon wave of students, marching down Nanjing Road in unison and chanting slogans.
They took up the whole of the street and nothing could move until this sea of humanity had passed by.’
Traffic was halted and people could not get to work, a point emphasised by the authorities in their condemnation of the protests.
There seemed little support for the students from the workers at this time, who were more concerned with their own problems than abstract calls for democracy.
The students appealed to Deng to assist them in their struggle, maintaining that he was the father of reform.
He did not come forward on their behalf.
Elsewhere in China there were demonstrations, but Beijing was uncharacteristically quiet.
Students there were either not concerned or just waiting to see what happened next before becoming involved.
The authorities feared the spread of disorder to the capital, but the Beijing students took a backseat role while their Shanghai counterparts held the world's attention.
The ‘movement’ seemed to lack organisation or clear direction as the end of the year drew close.
Large-scale demonstrations were difficult to sustain and there was an increasing risk of confrontation with the authorities.
After they had virtually controlled the city for nearly a week, the Shanghai students scaled down their actions.
It was left to the capital's campuses to take up the baton.
They did so but not before their counterparts in Tianjin to the south east of Beijing had their turn.
On 24 December a number of dazibao appeared at Tianjin and Nankai universities supporting the Shanghai students.
One poster criticised local students for being ‘late’ to wake up to the realities.
‘We have forgotten the duty which history has compelled us to carry out.
We must wake up the masses and found a truly democratic and free society’(Tournebise and Macdonald 1987: 106), read the message, with clear links to students in the past and future.
It was signed by the ‘Statue of Liberty’.
Later that day, approximately 3,000 students gathered at ‘Tianda’, Tianjin University from where they set out for the city centre shouting the familiar slogans of the movement.
When the demonstrators reached the municipal government offices, there were some scuffles with a public security unit waiting for the students.
The incident was filmed, as others had been, so that student leaders could be later identified.
The outcome of this demonstration is unclear because little information was passed on and most foreigners were busy with their Christmas celebrations.
Reliable sources, according to Tournebise and Macdonald, claimed that the Tianjin students were the only ones during the ‘winter of discontent’ to experience serious confrontations with the police and receive violent injuries.
The official media claim that nothing happened.
The posters at Tianjin displayed the most open hostility to the communist regime.
They were highly critical of leaders who acted in despotic, feudalistic and corrupt ways.
The protest in Tianjin was perhaps yet another indication of things to come over two years later when respect for the Party had declined still further and Deng Xiaoping had little support left among young intellectuals.
Meanwhile, Beijing students were on the move.
On 23 December several thousands marched from Oinghua University to nearby Beida, calling for independent student organisations.
There was some feeling that Beijing had been left behind while the rest of the country had marched for democracy.
Beida was slow to become involved, but their ultimate participation completed the final link in the nationwide protest.
An article in the People's Daily on 25 December describing dazibao and demonstrations as quite ‘undemocratic’ and causing chaos similar to the Cultural Revolution angered students.
To make such a parallel was an insult to these young people who considered themselves more sophisticated than the Red Guard generation.
The China Youth newspaper also ran an article calling for moderation, written by the well-known academic Professor Fei Xiaotong.
He stressed that democratic reform could not be achieved overnight but would take time.
Prudence as opposed to boldness now seemed the keyword.
Fei advised the students to cease their actions and work quietly for reform.
Just in case they did not heed these articles, the Beijing Public Security Bureau issued the ‘Ten Article Regulations’ on 26 December in an effort to deter student protests.
Public marches and rallies were banned in the city centre, including Tiananmen Square and the road to the airport.
Putting up posters was illegal.
Anyone wishing to organise  a rally had to seek permission five days beforehand, giving the numbers of participants, purpose and route.
The regulations were intended to prevent the sort of scenes witnessed in Shanghai which had been broadcast across the world.
They failed.
The students were enraged at these new rules and on 29 December a crowd of between two and three thousand from several Beijing campuses openly defied the authorities by holding a demonstration in the university quarter.
The intention was to march onto Tiananmen, but they never reached there on this occasion.
The People's Daily , attributing the disturbances to a small group of ‘hooligans’, said that all ‘enemies of the people’ had to be punished.
The conspiracy theory was revived in the media.
The students could not be said to be responsible for their own actions and thoughts.
The language used was familiar, but the explanations were not acceptable to the Beijing students.
Preparations were made for an ‘assault’ on Tiananmen Square, over fifteen kilometres away from the university district.
The aim was to celebrate the arrival of a new year in the heart of capital and draw further attention to their movement.
The situation was tense with appeals and threats to students not to go ahead with their march.
Police were waiting on the streets and the square was turned into a dangerous, slippery ‘ice rink’ as water was sprayed over the hallowed ground in an effort to deter the demonstrators.
These measures may have unsettled the crowds gathering on the campuses but did not stop them.
Braving freezing temperatures, the bitter Beijing wind and threats from the authorities, thousands reached the square in the early hours of New Year's Day.
There was a temporary sit-in on the icy ground by euphoric students, chanting and singing pro-democracy slogans and the ‘Internationale’.
On the steps of the Great Hall of the People and under the portrait of Chairman Mao, thousands voiced their disapproval of the government which would not allow the freedoms they desired.
The police on duty could do little to stop them and, losing patience with the situation, arrested over twenty students.
This further provoked the students, who resumed their march along Changan Avenue, halting the early morning traffic and disrupting the centre of Beijing.
The year 1987 had arrived on a high note, but possibly a dangerous one.
Returning to the campuses in a state of excitement, they sensed victory over the authorities, but had to secure the release of their arrested colleagues.
They planned a ‘second Long March’(Tournebise and Macdonald 1987: 119) with around 5,000 prepared to join in.
The preparations were halted by the news that the arrested students had been released.
Jubilant, most gave up the idea of protesting in the freezing temperatures again, but approximately 1,000 persisted with  their plan.
Outside the gates of Zhongnanhai, where China's top leaders reside, they shouted for political reform and democracy.
Once at the square, they sat down by the Monument to the People's Heroes in the early hours of a bitterly cold Beijing morning.
When special buses provided by the universities arrived to take them back to the campuses, most took up the offer.
The cold and tired students had made their point.
At the universities, the released students were treated like heroes and paraded around triumphantly in scenes probably akin to 1935, when arrested students from ‘December Ninth’ were set free.
The students had called the authorities' bluff with their protests and shown solidarity across the country.
The roar of a student movement had been heard again in China but there was little to gain, it was believed, by further mass demonstrations.
The pro-democracy student demonstrations subsided, but the issues raised had not been addressed or resolved by the party.
The leaders would have the final say in the winter of discontent.
THE ANTI-BOURGEOIS BACKLASH
On 4 January illegal posters appeared at Beida appealing to Deng Xiaoping to reinstate the basic right of putting up large character posters, which had been banned by the ‘Ten Articles’.
There was no other channel of communication since the state-controlled media would not give the students a hearing.
The authorities, however, reacted predictably.
A campaign against ‘bourgeois liberalism’ was launched with exemplary action against some of the ‘troublemakers’.
Several ‘workers’ were arrested and accused of inciting the students and ‘poisoning their minds’.
Students objected to being portrayed as naive, immature and easily-led innocents.
In a ceremony designed to attract publicity and express their anger about the official media, students in Beijing burned copies of the People's Daily , the Beijing Daily , the Red Flag and some other journals on 5 January.
This provoked further criticism from official quarters with more comparisons with the ‘bad old days’ of the Cultural Revolution.
Students could not win a fair hearing it seemed, but they did not pursue the matter any further at this time.
The semester was coming to an end and there were important examinations to pass.
The final act of the winter of discontent had been played by the students.
The government, however, had only just begun their punitive measures against excessive liberalism.
Deng Xiaoping, it was stated, had never supported demonstrations since these were a disorderly and unsocialist method of making a point.
The young people had been misinformed and misled.
The Party had to be cleansed of those who had  stirred up the students and caused trouble.
Obvious victims were people like Fang Lizhi, who was dismissed from his post as vice-president of the Science and Technology University in Hefei, on 12 January.
Several days later he was expelled from the party.
It was claimed that he repeatedly called for the ‘total westernisation of China’ and incited people to ‘change the true colour of the party’(China Now , Winter 1986/87: 6).
Other leading intellectuals were also told to leave the party and their job.
The ‘harvest reckoning’ referred to earlier by Kelly, came near the end of the winter.
Perhaps the most dramatic fall from grace was the case of Hu Yaobang.
He had not been seen in public since 29 December, an indication that he was in trouble.
Rumours of his imminent eclipse were confirmed on 16 January when Hu's resignation was announced.
He had committed ‘grave errors’ in political decisions and strayed from the socialist road.
Ill health was also given as another reason for his resignation, but there was no doubt the student demonstrations, which he had failed to control, had caused his final disgrace.
Deng now had good reasons for losing his former close colleague and fellow reformer.
The students were partly to blame, it was implied, but they did not intend to cause his demise and would not forget Hu Yaobang.
Intellectuals young and old were apprehensive, wondering how far the conservative backlash would extend.
The ‘blooming’ of 1986 had turned into the ‘weeding’of 1987, thirty years after Mao Zedong's campaign against ‘rightist’intellectuals.
Young people were dismayed at the trouble the demonstrations had caused.
Democracy was further away than ever as censorship and propaganda were intensified.
Strict adherence to the ‘four basic principles’ and the socialist road were stressed once again.
The official messages and the students' despair which resulted were familiar to those of previous periods of liberalisation and backlash.
There were signs of hope, however.
Zhao Ziyang was appointed to take over Hu Yaobang's former post, signifying that reform was not over.
Sixty-nine-year-old Zhao, described as a ‘classic moderniser’, had pioneered economic reforms in the rural areas starting in 1978.
The early successes of the ‘responsibility system’ had helped to make Deng, Zhao's mentor, a popular figure.
The introduction of economic reforms in urban areas also bore Zhao's hallmark and he was committed to reform and the open-door policy.
He advised caution in the anti-bourgeois backlash, recognising the damage it could cause to the already frail economy.
With Zhao as Deng's new ‘favoured son’, political analysts felt the anti-liberalism campaign would be short-lived.
There had to be punishments, however, not just in the party but in the student body, before the campaign could be concluded.
A few students were arrested and there was little chance of their being treated with the ‘human rights’ demanded during the December demonstrations.
The case of Lin Jie in Tianjin is one we know about.
He was accused of passing on ‘state secrets’ to the Agence France Presse reporter Lawrence Macdonald, whose account of the student protests has been referred to several occasions.
Macdonald was himself expelled from the country, while Lin Jie was imprisoned for his alleged ‘treason’.
His was an extreme example, but the Chinese state has other ways of punishing its wayward, educated youth.
Political study classes, considered as a boring waste of time' by many students, were intensified and large doses of Communist ideology had to be learned by rote.
Some students identified from police videos were expelled from their colleges.
Others were sent for spells of ‘re-education’ in the countryside, but the easiest way for the state to gain its revenge was through the graduate assignment system.
The end of the academic year in 1987 brought many disappointments for graduating students.
According to reports, large numbers were allocated to rural and border regions where conditions would be hard and opportunities to develop their talents scarce.
Official bodies insisted that these disproportionate ‘difficult’ placements had nothing to do with the demonstrations and Chinese students were ‘happy to serve wherever the motherland needs them’.
Visiting a number of campuses throughout China at graduation time, I found the official explanations difficult to accept.
There was a general atmosphere of despondence after the euphoria earlier in the year.
‘The demonstrations were mostly started by first- and second-year students’, I was told several times, ‘but the government are punishing the graduates.
We are being made an example of’.
The scenes I witnessed and conversations I had with students supported the idea that the graduates were the ‘victims’ of the conservatives' anger.
One bright young man who some years before had been a ‘star’ pupil, and assured of a successful career in technology said he had ruined his chances by joining the demonstrations.
He told me his motives were purely patriotic; he loved his country and was worried about its future.
For daring to speak out, he was assigned to a menial post unrelated to his speciality and skills.
This was extremely unfortunate for him and the nation which needed his sort of talent and enthusiasm.
His disappointment was by no means an isolated example.
He was being sacrificed along with hundreds of others for the sake of an ideological principle.
On another campus, I saw a young woman crying uncontrollably.
When asked what the problem was, her friends told me she had just been assigned to teach in a distant, rural middle school.
Far from home, with low pay and poor conditions, I wondered how this frail girl would survive.
‘We are all disappointed’, I was told.
Their fate had been sealed, irrespective of participation in the winter demonstrations and there was nothing they could do about it.
The articles I read in Zhongguo Qingnian about the brightest graduates turning down good jobs to volunteer for rural middle schools had a hollow ring to them.
The government's efforts to wipe out bourgeois liberalism abated during the summer of 1987 but many had suffered, from Hu Yaobang at the top to graduating students at the bottom.
Leading intellectuals had been purged but were treated more leniently than in the past.
Few suffered physical degradation and hardships.
(Hu Yaobang and his family, for example, were allowed to carry on living in the privileged conditions of Zhongnanhai and Fang Lizhi was still allowed to travel abroad.)
The student demands for democratic rights and freedoms had not been achieved, but China was not plunged into an extremist political campaign.
Perhaps things had really changed and progress in human rights had been made.
But the instability of the political structures and other weaknesses were obvious in the struggles between the factions within the party.
Deng Xiaoping remained the supreme leader, but his popularity had slipped further.
What would happen when he died?
The emphasis shifted gradually back to reform.
In this uncertain political environment, the less than five per cent of the 19- to 24-year-old group, the ‘privileged elite’ who attended institutions of higher education, returned to their studies.
New students were aware of 1987's punitive assignments.
Would they take that as a lesson and conform to the party's expectations of educated youth?
The following academic year would prove decisive.
Dilemmas and diversions
Student strategies at the end of the reform decade
OVERVIEW
As the reform decade drew to a close, China appeared to be approaching a crisis situation, with rising inflation, food shortages, official corruption and other economic and social problems becoming more apparent.
As Chan writes, ‘the reforms had begun turning sour in people's minds by the mid-1980s’(Chan 1989: 68).
Intellectuals initiated a number of urgent debates about the state of the nation in an effort to find the root cause of the difficulties and propose new solutions.
The ‘Heshang’(‘River Elegy’) television series broadcast in June 1988 was an example of intellectual exploration whose conclusions caused controversy among party and non-party members and called into question how far criticisms of official policy could extend.
Although 1988 was characterised by a freer, more open intellectual atmosphere, it was clear that the Party still held ultimate authority and would not tolerate criticism that bordered on political dissent.
Students actively participated in these discussions, but also sought solutions to their own personal problems arising from their socio-economic position.
Applying Shirk's concept of ‘adaptive behaviour’(Shirk 1982: 5), their enthusiasm for a number of major student ‘tides’ such as going abroad to study, doing business and having love affairs, can be viewed as strategies for escaping from the depressing reality of everyday life in contemporary China.
After analysis, these strategies will be seen as having their own associated difficulties.
The student generation of the late 1980s was attempting to improve their position and find forms of diversion as well as being concerned about the underlying social problems which beset China in the period immediately before the outbreak of the ‘patriotic democratic movement’.
ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOUR OR ESCAPISM?
THE MAJOR STUDENT ‘TIDES’ OF 1988
Shirk's work, already alluded to, focused on the ways high school students in the 1960s pursued their own objectives within a highly politicised social setting.
She claims that the systematic patterns of individual behaviour were explicable as, ‘personal attempts to increase benefits and reduce costs in an environment where the rewards and penalties associated with various actions are established by regime policies’(Shirk 1982: 5).
This does not assume, she claims, that people are always completely conscious of their efforts or that they clearly articulate the reasons for trends of common behaviour.
The task of the social scientist is to try and make some sense of any observable patterns and the motivations, whether unspoken or not, behind them.
This perspective is also useful when examining patterns of behaviour among university students in the late 1980s.
A number of student ‘tides’ were underway which can be seen as forms of adaptive behaviour or strategies for improving their social position, either temporarily or on a more permanent basis.
These ‘tides’ can also be viewed as forms of diversion, even escapism, as the problems of the reform programme became more difficult to contain.
The chuguo chao (going abroad tide) was an example, causing concern among the authorities because of the increasing numbers of young intellectuals taking part and more importantly, failing to return.
A reference to the Chinese word ‘chao’ is necessary here.
The common translation is ‘tide’, as employed here, but ‘craze’ is also used and sometimes ‘chao’is substituted by ‘re’, also translated as ‘craze, or ‘rush’.
Referring to these social phenomena as student ‘crazes’ detracts from their seriousness, but it is necessary to be aware of the different words, their translations and colloquial usage in the contemporary setting.
A Chinese social scientist studying student behaviour told me that since the demonstrations at the end of 1986, many had become less interested in education.
‘Each year seems to bring a new craze, anything but study’, he continued, as I was told of the ‘talking about reform’ craze in 1985, before the student unrest; that of democracy in 1986; falling in love in 1987; and in 1988 the preoccupation with ‘doing business’.
What was clear from my own research and experience was that all of these ‘crazes’ or student ‘tides’, along with a few others, existed side by side in 1988.
They had all become part of campus life but the chuguo chao , the ‘going abroad tide’, was probably the most noticeable and was certainly a ‘hot topic’(translated from the Chinese ‘redian’) among students.
Going abroad to study usually involved extremely complicated and difficult procedures.
Success required dogged determination, academic ability, money, plenty of patience for dealing with the state bureaucracy and some useful contacts or ‘guanxi’, i.e. connections with people in positions of responsibility who could help, which was becoming an increasingly important way of getting things done in China.
The competition was fierce and only a few could obtain the valuable passports, visas and tickets to leave the confines of China.
The motives appeared to be mixture of low living standards in China, the prospect of personal advancement and gain overseas and also patriotic sentiments.
Many prospective overseas students told me they wished to return to China to help the nation in the modernisation drive, but they may stay away ‘a long time’ before doing so.
There were some contradictions in their stated motives just as in a previous ‘chuguo chao’.
The following comment could be just as easily applied to the 1980s as to earlier this century.
‘In this particular decade an unusual movement took place…the great exodus of Chinese youths, the flower of the nation, to foreign countries with the fixed determination to learn what the world has to teach’(Wang 1928: 61).
Dissatisfaction and despair regarding domestic crises were strong motivating factors on both occasions as young intellectuals sought solutions to personal and national problems outside of China or as Wang wrote, ‘looked eagerly to the west for the magic which would solve the problems of their country’(Wang 1928: 60).
The original overseas trend had a slow beginning because the Chinese at that time were very wary of anything foreign.
The intrusion of foreigners onto Chinese soil in itself was difficult to accept; to send the youth of China to the lands of the ‘foreign devils’ as the Chinese referred to them, was almost unthinkable.
It was also an ‘unfillial’ thing for a Chinese son to do.
The first known Chinese student to go abroad was Yung Wing, who in 1847 went to the USA.
He persuaded the government to allow a group of students to be sent to the USA in 1872, but they were recalled for fear they might become ‘too gay (morally loose) or western’(Wang 1928: 44), a comment which would not be out of place in more recent times.
But by the turn of the century, the trickle had become a tide.
In 1898, only six known Chinese were studying in America; by 1922 there was 2,600, while in Japan there was an estimated 15,000 by the 1920s.
Great Britain and other European countries were also receiving Chinese students motivated by similar reasons as their 1980s counterparts.
The doors of the country had been opened and the outside world beckoned.
Most scholars viewed the acquisition of advanced knowledge and  skills across a wide spectrum of academic fields as extremely beneficial once taken back to China.
By doing this, they could fulfil their special duty as intellectuals, making an important contribution to the nation.
Such motivations took students to colleges throughout the world to learn military science, railway engineering, medicine, etc., at the beginning of the century just as contemporary liuxuesheng (overseas students) learn about computers and technology at American universities.
Patriotism, however, was tempered to varying degrees by the personal considerations as already stated.
I was frequently told of the necessity for study overseas in order to do anything worthwhile in the academic field because facilities in China were so ‘backward’.
Talented people could not advance themselves and their position, let alone make a worthwhile contribution to their field.
‘We only waste our time here’, was the common complaint of those who were aware of what prestigious western universities had to offer.
Their heightened expectations for educational progress had not been realised because of low investment and poor management.
Unsatisfactory living conditions, poor salaries and low status were also frequently mentioned as justifications for abandoning China, temporarily or more permanently.
Chan makes the point that in recent times academics have fared better than the average urban worker.
‘Among the eight occupational groups in the civil service pay-scale, academics rank second highest, after state-organ officials’(Chan 1989: 71).
Yet average figures often cover up cases of hardship and even if in real terms salaries for some academics appear generous, others feel disadvantaged and discontent.
Chan acknowledges that the state is ‘reluctant’ to raise salaries by substantial amounts.
The young intellectuals, i.e. those still in full-time study or newly-appointed to their posts, were worse off than their seniors and saw going abroad as a way out.
According to a number of articles which appeared in a special series devoted to the ‘chuguo chao’ in Guangming Ribao early in 1988, young intellectuals generally felt oppressed by their circumstances.
Some had nowhere to live apart from crowded dormitory rooms, even after getting married.
Housing was hard to obtain, good accommodation almost impossible.
Salaries were not keeping up with the rate of inflation, which in the cities was estimated to be running at 20 per cent.
A Far Eastern Economic Review article in June 1988 quotes a ‘disgruntled’ intellectual: ‘Fifteen years ago there was a saying, ‘the more knowledge, the more reactionary’, but now people say, ‘the more you study, the poorer you are’’(FEER 16. 6. 88: 34).
This summed up the view of many: in previous decades intellectuals were frequently punished for being  politically ‘reactionary’, i.e. rightists.
Now that label had gone but they were relatively poor and worse off materially.
The rise of the money motive served only to devalue knowledge even further.
Teachers and students perceived themselves to be a low-status group, looked upon with increasing scorn by other sections of society, whatever the absolute figures for incomes and position were measured to be.
Having to take on part-time jobs or ‘moonlighting’, was not viewed by academics as an acceptable solution to their problems.
These negative trends were discussed in the Guangming Ribao series and in other newspapers.
The authorities expressed their concern but promises to improve conditions seemed only konghua ,(empty words).
For younger students, the complaints of their older colleagues were all too evident.
‘I don't want to struggle all my life for nothing.
If I can get out, things are bound to better’, a young man told me.
His view was fairly typical of his generation.
There were elements of what the Chinese call the ‘green-eye disease’, and the ‘moon being rounder’, what we would describe as the ‘grass being greener’.
Idealised versions of life in the USA, for example, were often presented to me by young people who had watched many films and television programmes, as well as talking with foreigners.
‘Life is good there for anyone who works hard’, I was told by students intending to go to the USA.
The students may have been naive about the realities of life abroad, but they wanted to see for themselves what life was like elsewhere rather than being told by party officials and foreigners.
As the students in the major urban areas became more familiar with foreign teachers, their desire for overseas travel increased.
Some candidates for overseas study told me in all honesty that the acquisition of consumer durables, the modern-day trappings of success, was the main motivation for their efforts, although they also hoped to help the ‘motherland’ in the process.
It is difficult for them to buy foreign goods because of the large sums of money involved, usually in foreign exchange, and the necessity of good connections.
By going abroad and eking out their scholarships, the successful candidates could save money for buying televisions, cassette players and other items.
Some Chinese students abroad will scrimp and save every penny, not wishing to spend any more than absolutely necessary.
For them, this would perhaps be a unique opportunity to make some money.
This again reflects social trends in Chinese society: the poor living conditions of the young intellectuals and the increasing concern with material rather than political or ideological matters.
Did any of these would-be overseas students wish to leave for political reasons?
In the broad sense of the term ‘political’, the answer must be in the affirmative, but it would be difficult to describe these  intellectuals as ‘dissidents’, Many have, in fact, refused to accept this label; it has overtones of being unpatriotic.
Disillusionment with Marxism-Leninism and the party's continued centralised control over the political sphere were causing a sense of dismay as well as confusion among young intellectuals.
But it is difficult to equate their negative feelings about politics in China with the desire to go abroad.
Few young people I spoke to put politics first, as the main reason for the ‘brain drain'.
Their ambivalent attitudes were described in a number of social science surveys as a ‘clash of values’ rather than dissidence.
Any expressions of the desire for democracy in China were usually inspired by their patriotism and their wish to improve the nation's standing rather than to over-throw the system.
It is, of course, highly unlikely that anyone who diverged too far from the Party's orthodoxy would even reach the TOEFL examination room let alone be awarded a government scholarship.
Any serious opponents of the system would end up in prison.
This is not to say that no one who has left China since 1980 has had dissident tendencies, but they would probably keep these concealed before being allowed out.
Some Chinese students did set up pro-democracy groups overseas on a very small scale and took some risks in doing so, facing possible arrest and imprisonment on their return to China.
These political activists, however, were in the minority.
Most Chinese students overseas put their education first and politics second.
The events in Beijing during early June 1989 may have changed this situation in a number of important ways, as will be discussed in the final chapter.
Living abroad would naturally influence young scholars, as in the case of their nineteenth-century predecessors, causing further disillusionment with the political order back home.
Political considerations may have made them less inclined to return to China, but it was generally not a major reason for leaving in the first place.
Many of the students I spoke With in China wanted political freedom, but were not prepared to become compulsory exiles.
Once again, 1989 may have altered this, but the queues to go abroad grew longer throughout 1988.
The first stage in the procedure to apply for study abroad is to learn a foreign language, preferably English.
The ‘English craze’ was a concomitant part of the ‘chuguo chao’and was increasingly noticeable throughout the 1980s.
A recognised level of proficiency had to be attained, usually tested by the TOEFL examination.
According to figures given in the Guangming Ribao , when the examination was first held in Beijing in 1981, there were 285 candidates.
In 1983, this had risen to 2,500 in 1985, 8,000 candidates registered; and in 1987, an estimated  26,000 people applied (GMRB 22. 2. 1988).
Test centres exist in other major cities as well, consequently the total figures for TOEFL candidates on a national basis would be far higher.
Not all of those who want to apply can do so because of various regulations and procedures.
(These have since been tightened as a result of the events in June 1989).
Of those who take the tests, few score high enough marks to enable them to apply for assistance from their own government or overseas institutions.
I have seen queues of students, many of them learning English through ‘self-study’ forming outside the test centres in Beijing just in order to gain an entry form for the next sitting of the TOEFL examination.
On several occasions, there were slight public-order disturbances as people pushed and shoved to the front to get a form before they were all gone.
If they were successful at this stage, they would then have to find the fee.
In 1988, this was over $US 40, payable in this currency only and not the equivalent in Chinese ‘people's money’(renminbi ), which is approximately one month's salary for a young teacher.
Finding a foreigner to change money with was one way of obtaining the necessary dollars or changing money on the black market, a very expensive option.
There were always hundreds of students asking their foreign teachers for this ‘favour’ to get them over the first hurdle of the going abroad process.
It was difficult to refuse and thereby block their chances, but helping one student set a precedent; any foreigners were plunged into moral dilemmas by their students who wanted help to go abroad.
This sometimes went further than raising the TOEFL entry fee and involved putting up guarantees for thousands of dollars for candidates.
Those who found the fee then had to cram for the multiple-choice examination, learning words and grammatical phrases even native speakers would find difficult.
Foreign teachers of English often joked that they could not pass TOEFL, but for the Chinese students it was no laughing matter.
While engaged in this intensive study of a narrow range of the English language, the students had little time for anything else.
I often found it necessary to reprimand students for learning their TOEFL words during classes.
But I had to accept that this examination was far more important to them.
‘TOEFL is the key for going abroad’, I was frequently reminded.
Groups of students complained about their Chinese teachers failing to conduct lessons properly because of their preoccupation with TOEFL.
People would stop and ask foreigners in the streets to explain obscure phrases.
At times it seemed as if most of the students and young teachers were preparing for TOEFL and the major topic of conversation was ‘going abroad’.
Success in the examination did not secure by itself a study position abroad, but it was  the minimum requirement.
It was also obvious that other aspects of their education, employment, and even family life were suffering because of the ‘going abroad craze’.
More worrying for the government, however, were the large numbers of liuxuesheng who once out of the country failed to come back.
It is impossible to give exact figures for non-returners for a number of reasons.
Some may change their status from ‘visiting scholar’ with a year's stay to Ph.D.
candidate and plan to go back at some uncertain time in the future.
They overstay their time, but may not be genuine non-returners.
Others are impossible to locate and drop out of the statistics in due course; therefore accurate figures are difficult to obtain.
The State Education Commission does have records of those sent abroad by the state and those who return, but has incomplete data on self-financing or sifei students.
Informed sources state that there is always a large percentage of those due to return in any one year who failed to do so.
I was quoted 80 per cent by a source within the State Education Commission.
It is more difficult to keep track on those sifei students who left in increasing numbers in the mid-1980s.
Out of approximately one hundred prospective overseas students I spoke with, the majority said they had little intention of returning to China unless conditions improved in all aspects of life in the near future, but they were vague about what they would do overseas once their initial period of advanced education was complete.
The incidence of high rates of non-returners is borne out in a Far Eastern Economic Review report which suggested that out of the 50,000 scholars sent abroad since 1978, at the start of the reform decade, only 20,000 have returned.
Out of the self-financing students, ‘virtually no one in this category has yet returned’(FEER 1.
6. 1988: 33).
In another category of younger, government-sponsored students working towards postgraduate degrees, only 200 to 300 out of 12,000 have returned home.
Some may have plans to return later rather than sooner.
The impact of the Tiananmen massacre is bound to be detrimental in this respect.
It is almost inevitable that many would stay away, even disallowing for the events of 1989, but China needs experts in all fields of knowledge.
This brain drain' must have been viewed by the authorities as acute, otherwise there would not have been so much coverage of the issue in the media.
Concern about the plight of young intellectuals was mixed with promises of improvements.
Meanwhile the regulations applying to overseas study were tightened, especially for the USA, where the largest numbers of young Chinese overstayed their official visit.
Those deemed to have ‘immigrant tendencies’(the phrase used by the Chinese officials) such as single people' or those married but without children or people  with close relatives already settled abroad were simply refused passports even if everything else had been arranged.
I knew of young people who would rush into marriages, even parenthood, in order to further their passport and visa applications, such was their desperation to get out.
Visa restrictions brought in by foreign governments in co-operation with the Chinese authorities in March and April of 1988 did little to reduce the queues of hopefuls in the embassy districts of Beijing and Shanghai.
Waiting day after day, many said they would ‘keep trying’ because it was their only hope.
The goal was becoming more difficult to reach but the ‘tide’ continued.
Returning to the perspective of ‘adaptive behaviour’ discussed earlier, we can call into question the extent to which going abroad can legitimately be viewed as a student strategy for maximizing opportunities in China when by necessity it implied turning away from the ‘motherland’in favour of foreign countries.
Leaving behind low living standards and poor conditions in work and study seems more like rejection than adaptation.
My own investigations, however, suggest that the option of going abroad, open only to several thousand young Chinese intellectuals each year, is a strategy of maximizing opportunities and benefits.
Although it appears as a contradiction, just like some of the stated motives of those leaving, I believe it is a form of adaptive behaviour.
These young intellectuals in the TOEFL examination queues are seeking overseas what they cannot obtain in China under the present circumstances: money, material goods, higher academic training and qualifications, and advanced technical skills, which they may, at a later date, take back with them to China.
Not all of those applying for scholarships or assistance from foreign universities wish to stay away indefinitely.
Many are vague.
Others realise that it will be difficult to extend their stay overseas without becoming an illegal immigrant, an added burden they may not wish to take on.
Consequently, it can be seen as a strategy for improving their social position and ‘market’ position, i.e. being able to offer more skills in the labour market in the future.
Whether that would be in China or another country depended on the unknown factors of what they would actually find overseas and the outcome of developments in China.
The events of June 1989 will certainly influence their decisions, as mentioned before.
In 1988, the country was seen to be losing some of its best and brightest people, which further demoralised those who could not leave.
According to a Zhongguo Qingnian article, the ‘dream of the generation’ had changed (ZGQN 1988, 1: 2).
Young people were looking forward to a modern China in which they would play an active role.
They wished to be ‘good socialists’, working hard for their country but without the  burden of excessive, leftist political campaigns.
Dreams and desires may have changed during the reform decade, but the conditions of society had not altered accordingly.
‘Looking towards money’ had become a key phrase, but young intellectuals were aware of its adverse effects.
There was little chance to look towards democracy or any political liberalisation, moreover, while the party remained the central authority.
The ‘going abroad tide’ with its mixture of motivations, sentiments and contradictions was set to continue as long as the leadership refused to address the major reasons behind it.
Many students realised they had little hope of going abroad and sought instead other escape routes from their situation.
The ‘doing business’(‘jing shangre’) tide or craze swept through the campuses, motivating the students to make money and improve life for themselves within the confines of Chinese society.
Initially encouraged as a way for both students and teachers to become financially independent, using their own efforts to earn extra money, the tide had many negative side-effects.
By selling various items from computers to eggs, offering consultative services and home tutoring, young intellectuals showed their ingenuity and flexibility in trying to improve their economic situation.
Some universities insisted that departmental offices made business their primary concern in order to boost finances, especially since the government could not promise increased investment.
Chan gives the example of Oinghua University in Beijing, which through a ‘create income’ scheme was able to distribute a 600 — 1,000 yuan bonus to staff members at the end of 1987 (Chan 1985: 72).
This amount was approximately equivalent to half of their annual salary, depending on age and position held.
It was certainly a substantial sum.
But Qinghua was something of an exception, being China's top technological university, with better facilities than other institutions and a high level of prestige.
Other universities could not expect to fare so well in operating ‘create income’ programmes, and within certain institutions some departments are in favourable positions to offer lucrative services such as computing.
Other subjects like philosophy and history have fewer opportunities.
Staff were more likely to be reduced to selling snacks during break, which was much less profitable than computing services and much more demeaning for academics.
The government at first thought the business trend embodied the pragmatic spirit of the reform decade and was a way to raise much-needed finances.
Intellectuals were called on to transform their knowledge into hard cash.
By ‘doing business’, students could be in contact with society rather than live the sheltered campus life which was  frequently blamed for their lack of realistic social knowledge.
It was implied that working part-time could disabuse them of naive and mistaken ideas about modern Chinese society.
The ‘bourgeois liberalism’ dreaded by the authorities would also be less likely to have an impact.
Students would be too busy with real life to be bothered about social problems and conditions.
There were thus political and ideological reasons for promoting this student tide, not just economic ones.
In the days of the ‘socialist commodity economy’(a slogan that described the expected outcome of party policies), ‘doing business, seemed to be a suitable pastime.
Even the CYL became involved with the tide, setting up small businesses to help raise money (ZGQN 16. 7. 1988: 15).
The problems, however, did not remain unnoticed for long.
By the start of the new term in the autumn of 1988, the negative aspects of the ‘tide’ were uppermost in the authorities' minds.
At the beginning of October, the State Education Commission issued a statement calling on all provincial education departments and universities under its jurisdiction to forbid students to ‘engage in business on or off campus for the purpose of getting rich’(CD 7. 10. 1988).
Students were expected to be ‘hardworking and thrifty’, only earning small amounts to help meet their study expenses or setting up shops to improve business practice and skills.
If such extra-curricula activities were well organised, they could be useful and educational, but they should not detract from study or emphasise the ‘get rich quick’ ideology.
Academics were always worried that young people would be spending too much time ‘looking towards money’ rather than their studies.
Increasingly, the authorities became concerned about the adverse effects of this trend and viewed it in a dimmer light.
Stories of students too tired to study and teachers selling boiled eggs during classes were common, bringing into question the value and role of education and its intellectual workers.
The money motive was perhaps not quite the panacea it was once believed to be, as some departments became relatively well off while others could barely afford to pay their salaries.
In a socialist society, it was asked, were such gross disparities and inequalities permissible?
The undercurrent of dissatisfaction with the business craze surfaced during 1988, although there were some intellectuals who unabashedly enjoyed the benefits of this trend.
An article in Zhongguo Qingnian summarised some of the main criticisms of ‘doing business’.
The author wrote that during reform, it was ‘admirable’ for students to do ‘creative’things but the results were ‘worrying’because, ‘it will probably lead to a vicious circle of everybody doing business’.
This would congest a already overcrowded circulation of goods.
‘When college students set about doing business, they can do  little to help provide raw materials and consumer goods at fair prices for thousands of people’.
But they can exploit people.
The author asked, ‘if they lose money in doing business how can they calm down to do their studies?’
(ZGQN 1.
9. 1988: 1).
The dangers were clear and ultimately no one benefited, least of all the students.
It was difficult, however, to stem the tide since the party leadership was committed to extending economic reforms and intent on reforming education to make it more self-financing.
Economic dependency was frowned on, but there was no question of political independence.
Students in the late 1980s, described as the ‘fourth generation’(since the communist revolution) in a popular book of the same title, could not be ‘relaxed’.
They were facing too many contradictory features in society.
According to the book's author, Zhang Yong Jie, himself a young man in his twenties, they were forced to find short-term solutions to long-term problems and they lacked well-established beliefs and values because of the rapidly changing nature of Chinese society.
‘Doing business’ was one of the contradictions.
It was not possible suddenly to change direction, yet the damage being done to education was obvious as campuses sometimes resembled market-places rather than institutions of higher learning.
Teachers were out ‘moonlighting’, while their students were trying to make some money in what was officially described as the ‘primary stage of socialism’.
The young people also wanted to have some enjoyment in their scarce free time and escape from the contradictions of their ‘privileged’ position.
‘Falling in love’ was another student tide considered as improper, even immoral if sexual relations were involved, by the authorities.
In the years before 1980, it was difficult for romance to develop given the strict socialist morality which stressed politics rather than personal relationships.
Privacy was virtually non-existent as the local ‘cadres’ knew all the details of people's lives.
Students living in crowded dormitories under the watchful eyes of their ‘banzhuren’ and monitors could be kept in line relatively easily.
To ‘talk love’ as it is described by the Chinese, was strictly taboo before the relaxations in the social code during the reform decade.
The authorities warned young people about the ‘unhealthy winds’ blowing in through the open door, such as sexual promiscuity, pornography and prostitution, homosexuality, alcohol abuse and drugs.
It was implied that socialist China was ‘pure’ and liable to be infected by these ‘evils’if people were not wary.
This is, of course, a point of contention which will not be pursued here but is useful to bear in mind.
During my first stay in China in 1984, it was very rare indeed to see young people holding hands in public and I clearly remember the  expressions of shock when a student dared to ask, in a packed lecture hall, if students in Britain were allowed to ‘talk love’.
He implied that Chinese students did form relationships, but these were frowned upon by the college authorities.
The nervous laughter from the young audience suggested that he had raised a ‘hot topic’.
Four years later, more open displays of affection both on and off campus were common.
Students were eager to develop relationships even in the restrictive university environment.
Some roommates had special arrangement with each other so they could all spend time alone with their ‘special friend’, even sleeping with them.
This behaviour was unmentionable a few years before, although it probably did take place.
It was still risky, however, and anyone found in the wrong dormitory outside of hours faced expulsion.
Announcements on college noticeboards often gave details of students who had been involved in ‘inappropriate conduct’ and dismissed from their studies.
There were other manifestations of this ‘craze’ such as‘love suicides’.
In 1988 there were several well-publicised cases of young people committing suicide apparently because of unrequited love.
There were probably other factors such as pressures caused by examinations and the competition for jobs.
At Qinghua University, I was told of a ‘suicide building’ where thirteen students had leapt to their death that year, mostly because of failure in love.
Young people were already feeling insecure because of the far-reaching changes going on around them and the uncertainties about the reform programme.
Seeking personal satisfaction through secure relationships was ‘adaptive behaviour’, a strategy for making the most of the situation.
But it had obvious difficulties for many students who found they could not manage both love affairs and study.
There were few places where young people with personal problems could seek help.
The authorities in Beijing realised that ‘many college students…suffered serious mental problems because of loneliness or anxiety over their studies or love lives’(CD 23. 2. 1988) and several major institutions were talking of the possibility of setting up advisory bodies for students with emotional problems, but few actually existed.
It had only been recently acknowledged by official bodies that psychology could offer some understanding of young people's problems.
In the past, the predominant ideology insisted that psychology and sociology were ‘bourgeois’ subjects which had no place in a socialist system.
People only had political problems, which could be solved with the proper application of Marxist-Leninist-Maoist thought.
In the changed social environment of the reform years, this solution was no longer seen as adequate because there were new problems.
But new solutions were still  being developed and meanwhile students with personal problems had to seek each other 's help.
The discussions of youth problems on the pages of Zhongguo Qingnian did not offer realistic advice according to many students.
‘It's out of touch with our lives’, they said.
Females were particularly vulnerable in the ‘falling in love craze’ and could suffer more than the males as a result of their romantic encounters.
The reasons, I would argue, are not just due to any innate biological features of females, but have social causes just as the ‘craze’ itself.
The ‘myth’ of sexual equality in China had been shattered during the reform decade with women facing discrimination in the workplace on a greater scale.
‘Go back to the kitchen’, was the plea of the male-dominated management and administration in commerce and industry.
The workforce in many work units was being trimmed in order to improve efficiency and save money.
Female graduates facing ever-increasing competition were often passed over in favour of their male classmates even when they possessed better qualifications.
A newly emerging Women's Studies movement in major universities saw this discrimination as a particularly negative effect of reform.
‘We don't want girls’, prospective employers were reported as saying, ‘unless they are pretty’.
In such a highly discouraging environment, female students were tempted to spend their college lives looking for ‘Mr Right’, who could offer them companionship during the years of study and secure a good future afterwards.
‘Falling in love’, therefore, was more than just a trivial pastime but a serious business.
It reflected to some extent the failure of reforms to provide sufficient opportunities for graduates of both sexes and was indicative of the devaluation of knowledge already referred to.
‘Be practical and be quick’, was the advice given to many girls when entering higher education.
It did not refer to study technique but to finding a husband, a potential breadwinner, because realistically speaking, females were increasingly unlikely to obtain satisfactory employment on graduation.
Given this situation, some girls were more likely to spend their time cultivating romance than academic qualifications.
Rejection by a boyfriend could be disastrous, especially if sexual activity had been involved.
The ‘double standard’ exists in China as elsewhere.
Sexually experienced females are viewed in derogatory terms.
‘Problem pages’ in the women's and youth magazines carried letters from unhappy girls who had ‘given themselves’to their boyfriends subsequently to be abandoned and labelled as a ‘package of dirty linen’.
For those females who had concentrated on love affairs rather than their studies, graduating with low grades and low status was bound to be distressing, giving rise to depression and even thoughts of suicide.
There seemed to  be little hope for the future, just a mundane job and low pay and fewer prospects for meeting the opposite sex once university days were over.
‘Falling in love’, therefore, reflected social realities.
It may have sounded like good fun, and obviously was for many young people, but this pleasurable diversion had a very serious side which went beyond romance.
Unsuccessful affairs could lead to personal disaster.
They could also lead to unwanted pregnancies and venereal disease, both on the increase among young people.
Contraception is usually not freely available to unmarried couples in China, therefore sexual activity between students involved added risks other than expulsion.
Abortion is normally mandatory for unmarried females and of course is a clear sign of their ‘unmoral’ behaviour.
There was something approaching a ‘moral panic’ taking place in China during the last few years of the reform decade, exacerbated by the ‘falling in love craze’and some of its unhealthy results.
The authorities were anxious not just about the state of students' political thought but their physical and mental health as well since they were increasingly prone to fall foul of temptation.
Even middle-school students, a number of articles declared, were doing more than merely ‘talking love’.
This increasing concern was behind a number of social surveys conducted among students by official bodies, and a greater official vigilance on the campuses during 1988, according to informed sources.
I was told that only about one-quarter of the students at institutes of higher education in Beijing were actually getting on with their studies and many of these were motivated solely by the desire to go abroad.
It is not clear how this estimate was reached or what the terms of reference were, but it is an indicative view borne out by widespread apathy among students for their lessons.
Many were simply too busy doing other things, and although not all were involved in the student tides discussed, a majority of them were devoting their energies to extracurricular activities.
The government was in an ambiguous position because its policies had created a social environment almost detrimental to study, yet the success of the reform was partly dependent upon academic research and development.
‘Without the participation of educated youth, the reform programme will fail’, became a frequently uttered warning.
But the conservatives within the party were more alarmed by the decline in ‘socialist morality’ which they attributed directly to the reform and open-door policies.
The so-called ‘fourth generation’ were caught in the middle and it is no wonder they suffered from a ‘clash in values’described in a number of articles discussing youth ‘problems’.
The students were being fed contradictory messages and did what they could  to lead their lives in the best way possible, given deteriorating conditions and mounting ideological and political debates.
They were, therefore, exhibiting adaptive behaviour in these various ‘student tides.’
The ‘Heshang’ controversy was one important debate which provided intellectual substance for those who believed that the contemporary situation could not continue indefinitely with all its dilemmas and difficulties.
YOUNG INTELLECTUALS AND THE ‘RIVER LEGACY'
This important six-part television series was shown for the first time in June 1988, and in itself was an indication that freedom of intellectual debate had indeed been extended, but it also forewarned of the type of strong criticism to be expected from the conservatives in the party.
‘Heshang’, translated as ‘River Elegy’ was written by three intellectuals, Su Xiaokang, Xia Jun and Lu Xiang who wanted to address the question of why the Chinese civilisation, once a world leader, declined so rapidly after the seventeenth century.
Even in its planning stages there was intense opposition to the series.
The conservative ‘faction’ in the party denounced it as sheer ‘bourgeois liberalism’and dangerous provocation.
Its pro-western stance brought into doubt the very legitimacy of the Chinese Communist Party, and its multitude of criticisms of the Chinese civilisation were akin to attitudes of the Cultural Revolution.
In spite of attempts to stop their transmission, the programmes went out on CCTV, watched by millions and caused a great deal of lively, heated debate.
The complex, sometimes obscure series certainly was provocative, as it probably meant to be, waking the Chinese people up to harsh realities.
The authors argued that the huge cultural wealth of China which had once made it such a powerful nation had become a massive psychological burden, weighing the people down, oppressing and stifling free thought.
This stunted any development and modernisation and kept China in a backward state.
Tracing the origins of Chinese civilisation back to the Yellow River (Huanghe), the ‘cradle’ of the nation's culture, a basic contradiction was noted which continued to have a profound effect on the people.
The river was not only the root of civilisation but also of China's ‘sorrow’ With its predilection for flooding and catastrophe.
The moods of the river affected the people and ultimately the culture which was bound to it.
The river was despotic and barbaric, ruling over its subjects without mercy.
This unequal relationship was reflected in the autocratic, all-powerful state headed usually by one person.
The people had to be obedient to the ruler and not question his government, just as the  Yellow River was feared and respected.
‘How could concepts of democracy take root in such a system?’, asked the author.
While western or ‘blue’ cultures were moving towards modernisation and democracy China was left behind, trapped in its own feudalistic culture of subservience.
There was no middle ground, the programme stressed, between absolute power and obedience on the one hand and chaos and ‘banditry’ on the other.
This traditional system was inherited by the communists who, by implication, continued to rule in an autocratic manner.
This point had been raised before by intellectuals and they usually suffered for their lack of ‘loyalty’.
The ‘Heshang’ authors were on a collision course with the conservatives by taking this stance.
They were also too ‘pro-western’.
These cultures, viewed as being more outward-looking and less insular because they had very early on been maritime powers, were referred to as ‘blue’ cultures.
While China turned inwards, European countries were involved increasingly in overseas trade and exploration of new territories, always looking to the horizon and the future.
Feudalistic China remained locked in the past and bore the seeds of its own decline, eventually being overpowered and nearly destroyed by the blue' cultures.
Modern China retained these problems which stemmed from its massive cultural heritage and as a consequence could not move forward.
The hope, according to the programme authors, lay with the intellectuals, described as an oasis in the midst of this desert of feudalistic subservience.
In the past they had spoken out and would do so again, drawing inspiration from the ideas of democracy and science to help China modernise.
This was a vital necessity, otherwise the nation would remain backward, introverted and its people remain in a state of psychological subjugation.
Thus an important role was envisaged for those with enough education to see beyond the ‘yellow’ culture.
The main failings of the nation lay within its own boundaries, not in the outside world or such phenomena as bourgeois liberalism', which the authors did not view in the same threatening light as did the more conservative party members.
If China was ‘backward’, it was its own fault and it was up to the people, led by the intellectuals, to do something about it.
Many of the ideas included in the series, only a few of which have been mentioned above, were not original.
But presented in this systematic and visually effective manner, they provoked viewers into consideration about the state of the nation.
It offered answers for frequently raised questions about China's relatively low level of development not just in comparison to western nations but also to other eastern states such as Japan, South Korea and others.
The main value of ‘Heshang’, I was told by a number of commentators, was that it did ‘wake people up’ and shake them out of their apathy.
Viewers tended to be either for or against the main thrust of its argument; few were able to take a neutral stance and discussions were often quite heated between students and their teachers, academics and party members.
The fact that the programmes were shown reflected a degree of openness on the part of Party authorities, with the reformists having the upper hand.
But there were heavy criticisms during the period it was broadcast and in the following months.
‘It speaks for all of us intellectuals, but will upset some people’, one class of students told me during a ‘Heshang’ discussion.
Others, however, described it as a form of ‘intellectual carping’ which failed to say anything of originality or significance.
Several newspapers carried extracts from the series, including Guangming Ribao and Wen Hui Bao throughout June and July, which kept the debate going.
Numerous articles elsewhere offered analysis and comments on ‘Heshang’.
Demand was so great that a commentary of the programmes was published.
Thousands of viewers wrote to CCTV insisting that the series be repeated.
Some Party members, however, were calling for it to be banned.
They drew parallels with the Cultural Revolution because of its criticisms of Chinese culture.
The glorification of the west was at the expense of China's own cultural heritage which could not be viewed in a totally negative light.
CCTV had to weigh up the demands for the series to be repeated with the views expressed by some Party members that ‘Heshang’ was subversive and dangerous.
The controversy deepened with obvious pressure corning from various quarters being put on the authors and the television network.
The series was eventually re-run in August but with several revisions.
In an interview in Zhongguo Qingnian Bao on 16 August, Su Xiao Kang, one of the writers of the series, talked about the concerns which were expressed by the authorities and the pressures to make some changes before the repeats.
While on Hainan Island, he received a telegram from Beijing urging him to return to the capital.
He said that after ‘Heshang’ was shown, there were different reactions.
A meeting of university presidents was taking place in Beijing, prompted by student unrest in June (which will be looked at in the next chapter), and they were considering the effects that ‘Heshang’ might have.
‘They were afraid that ‘Heshang’ would arouse radical reactions among college students’, Su Xiao Kang told the interviewer.
But he continued that this concern was quite natural because whenever something new emerges in the cultural/ideological area, those who are concerned about the future of  China become nervous.
Basically, he believed, ‘many people saw ‘Heshang’ as positive.
On the question of the revisions in the series, he said that the management of CCTV agreed that the series could be reshown but with some alterations.
The parts of the programmes which might cause ‘misunderstanding’ should be revised, but not the parts related to academic opinions which can be discussed within society.
He stressed that ‘Heshang’ was mainly intended to raise questions and some of the reactions were bound to be critical.
But if the audience could receive ‘Heshang’ with tolerance, then the programme should accept criticism with tolerance.
‘After all, one of the goals of ‘Heshang’ is to advocate criticism, assessment and discussion’(ZGQN 16. 8. 1988).
The clear danger was, however, that certain factions within the party leadership would not be so tolerant as Su Xiao Kang hoped and that the freer intellectual atmosphere of 1988 might be drawing to an end.
According to some critics, the ‘Heshang’ authors had gone too far and there were signs that a backlash might be imminent.
The programme had been linked to student unrest in June and it had indeed become a focus of attention among young intellectuals on the campuses.
‘Heshang’ became another ‘tide’as debates continued and articles in the media proliferated.
Discussions in student dormitories were often dominated by the ‘Heshang’ series at this time.
The series encapsulated many of the important social and political issues of the time and therefore was not just an academic analysis.
‘Heshang’ tested the intellectual water and the limits to which the debate could be taken.
By the end of 1988, the boundaries were becoming more obvious as the situation became more tense.
The writers of the series, like other intellectuals, were aware of the ever-present possibility of backlash and apparently were advised to ‘keep quiet’.
Increasing anxiety about the state of student thought and the prospect of disturbances added to the ‘Heshang’ controversy.
The student unrest of 1988 needs to be addressed next.
It is obviously linked to the dilemmas and strategies of contemporary students, and itself was a form of adaptive behaviour.
It also contained all the features of the protest which would break out in 1989 as the ‘patriotic democracy movement’.
The signs were already there on the campuses, particularly in the capital, that ‘something’ would happen sooner or later.
1988
The writing on the wall
OVERVIEW
At several points during 1988, the underlying tension of the students' position intensified to the point of open unrest on several campuses.
At Beida there were two major poster campaigns in April and June, the latter being provoked by the ‘murder’ of a postgraduate student.
The posters contained the major elements of student grievances and demands Which were to reappear in 1989.
The end-of-the-year demonstrations appeared to be caused by ‘racial’ conflict between Chinese and African students, but it will be argued that these were once again expressions of the Chinese students' general discontent and disappointment after ten years of reform.
A few other small-scale but significant events will also receive attention in our discussion of this period.
The message was being clearly expressed that the students were increasingly dissatisfied with the Deng-led regime and were ready to speak out.
APRIL AND MAY: POSTERS, THE SHOESHINE PROTEST AND A UNIVERSITY CELEBRATES ITS BIRTHDAY
The brief but significant poster campaign at Beida in early April took place against the background of one of the most open National People's Congresses (NPC) ever held.
Normally a rubber-stamping exercise, representatives from all over the country come to discuss an agenda largely set by the party.
Unanimous voting on all issues was the rule.
In 1988, the procedures were more open although still far from what could be described as ‘democratic’.
Members of the foreign press were allowed as observers for the first time and ‘dialogue’ was the stated aim of the congress and also of the CPPCC to follow.
The animated debate amongst students and intellectuals before the Seventh National People's Congress in April indicated that the anti-bourgeois campaign of 1987 was over and that a renewed period of liberalisation was under way.
But there was also the realisation that the economy was in trouble and the country was facing many problems.
The small ‘democratic’ parties at the NPC were invited to speak freely and offer their opinions for the party to consider.
Professor Fei Xiaotong of Beijing University was the chairman of the biggest Democratic party called the Democratic Alliance and he claimed that this party represented the interests of intellectuals and especially intellectuals involved in teaching (Chan 1989: 83).
A section of the intelligentsia watching the development, however, were less than enthusiastic about this appearance of liberalism, being well aware of the cyclical pattern of development in China.
Fearful of yet another backlash, some kept quiet while congress members spoke out about the reforms, the problems being experienced in the economy, social problems, the crisis in education and other topical issues.
Many delegates were concerned about increasing numbers of young people leaving schools and colleges before completing their courses.
According to official statistics, between 1980 and 1987 30 million primary and middle-school ‘dropouts’ had been recorded with the numbers rising more rapidly during the previous few years (CD 7.12. 88).
Some pupils, especially girls in rural areas, were withdrawn by their parents who considered it a Waste of money' to send girls to school.
Other young people left voluntarily to seek work and earn money, viewed as more important than education.
Increases in school fees and charges for ‘extras’ also discouraged parents from keeping their children in education for the required nine years, thus making a mockery of the ‘compulsory’education system in China.
But pupils were not the only ones ‘dropping out’.
Teachers were leaving the profession in growing numbers because of poor pay and conditions, especially in country areas.
These problems, among others, were aired during the 1988 NPC.
Outspoken speeches were given which received spontaneous standing ovations.
There were even some members who abstained from voting, a quite unprecedented phenomenon.
The lively debate spilled out onto the Beijing University campus where students and young teachers eagerly followed the proceedings.
The noticeboard area at Beida, so often the source of student movements, became busy after 6 April when several dazibao were posted.
One took the form of an ‘open’ letter to the NPC telling the representatives about their hopes for reform but their disappointment with the results.
The congress was called on to consider the ‘educational  crisis’ in particular, referring to the backward' and ‘miserable’conditions for students and teachers.
The dazibao also expressed the desire for freedom of speech, stating that, ‘intellectuals cannot be silenced any longer’.
Political reform had not kept pace with economic changes and some form of democracy was considered necessary to improve education and government.
The state bureaucracy, it was claimed, could be reduced to save money and time, as well as to allow direct contact between the Party and the people.
Bureaucracy was becoming a major issue in contemporary China.
The dazibao writers regretted the fact that they had to resort to this medium for making their opinions known.
Free speech was still a ‘dream’, yet to be realised.
Over the next few days, more posters went up and as I read them, students whispered that ‘something might happen’.
Beida has its long historical tradition of student movements and the foreign press, sent to Beijing to cover the NPC, were diverted to the poster sideshow.
The BBC World Service reported that this campaign appeared to unite both students and staff, particularly the younger teachers, a worrying trend for the authorities.
The posters were not removed however and education was certainly one of the main topics of debate at this unusual NPC.
Representatives from the State Education Commission accepted that funds were insufficient but argued that the state could not be expected to provide for everything.
Self-sufficiency was recommended since the ‘doing business craze’ still had the official blessing at this time.
The poster campaigners at Beida picked up this point, that academics were becoming financially independent and seeking ways of making money.
A group of young teachers wrote new posters calling on their colleagues to descend on the Great Hall of the People and offer to shine the shoes of the representatives to raise some cash.
The cynicism of this was obvious, along with the underlying sentiment.
A small group actually went to Tiananmen, sat down and made the ‘shoeshine protest’ for a brief period.
Police were put on alert in case larger groups of demonstrators joined in.
It remained a small, symbolic gesture of anger at the official policy on education.
A few new posters appeared as students from other colleges went to Beida to have a look at what was happening.
The appointment of Li Peng to the post of Premier at the congress did not impress the student protesters.
Although highly educated and a ‘technocrat’, Li was not a popular figure, and was viewed as an extreme example of ‘guanxi’, i.e. advancement by personal contacts.
Li was the adopted son of former Premier Zhou Enlai, yet he lacked the charisma and popularity of his ‘father’.
Also at the meeting, Zhao Ziyang, who had held the post of Premier temporarily since the downfall of Hu  Yaobang, was appointed to the position of Party General Secretary.
Apart from making fun of Li Peng, the main message of the posters was that reform could not succeed without a sound education system, a view widely supported among intellectuals, especially those in the Democratic Alliance.
They saw conditions at all levels of education worsening.
In the media, stories about primary school pupils ‘dropping out’ to take on jobs were common.
Spending per pupil averaged out over one year at less than what would be spent per person at an official banquet, it was claimed.
This bitter complaint and reference to lavish party practices and official corruption was to grow louder over the year.
Meanwhile, tension mounted at Beida with students becoming increasingly restless.
The university authorities did not wish to provoke the students by forcibly removing the posters.
Instead they tried to take their minds off the poster campaign by providing weekend entertainment.
In the middle of the campaign, there were several films and dance parties for the students.
Some were obviously more interested in break-dancing than poster writing, as I witnessed for myself.
Not all Beida students were activists or radicals.
Some told me that it was ‘useless’ to put up posters.
Several Veterans' of the Winter of discontent' told me that it was mainly the younger students who got together with their teachers to protest.
‘They're excited now but will learn later’.
The young teachers, recently assigned to their posts, perhaps felt they had little to lose by openly expressing their grievances because their salaries and living standards were low.
The poster campaign lasted just over one week, serving as a strong reminder to the party leadership of the underlying current of discontent among students and teachers.
On 17 April, several days after the conclusion of the protest, the government announced its intention to raise teachers' salaries and spend more in the next year on education.
This was probably related to the Beida poster campaign, but a ‘victory’ could not be claimed until the promises were actually fulfilled.
Sceptics greeted this news as yet more ‘empty words' (konghua ).
Several days later another interesting event took place, again at Beida.
The large statue of Chairman Mao which had dominated the quadrant outside the library, where he had once worked in his youth, suddenly ‘disappeared’.
I had noticed the scaffolding placed around it the week before and thought it looked an odd sight, with the Chairman's head just visible over the striped plastic sheeting.
I intended to take my camera to take a few pictures of the Mao under wraps, apparently for a ‘spring cleaning.
Next time I went to Beida, however, it had gone, having been demolished overnight.
This act provoked intense discussion in the dormitories among students who were scarcely teenagers when he died.
Some sang, ‘Where have all the statues gone?’, to the refrain of ‘Where have all the flowers gone?’.
Why should they be so concerned with the statue's removal when most other similar monuments erected during the height of the Cultural Revolution had already been demolished?
Few Beijing campuses still possessed these reminders of the ‘cult of personality’ which had led China to the brink of civil war.
Beida was just falling in line by removing the large statue, it was argued.
The issue was about more than the Chairman's statue, however.
His memory may have been tarnished over the previous decade with the acknowledgement of his serious policy errors.
But for many Chinese people he remained a great leader who, in spite of mistakes later in life, had led China into a new era.
His frugal life-style contrasted starkly with that of some of the more contemporary Party officials who seemed to relish soft living, at the nation's expense.
No one, it was argued, could accuse the former Chairman of corruption.
To remove his statue in such a disrespectful manner was an insult not only to Mao Zedong but also the Communist Party.
If the authorities could allow this sort of ‘vandalism’, what else were they capable of?
Indirect criticisms were made of the incumbent leadership who were themselves struggling to maintain legitimacy during this period when the reforms had run into difficulties.
The ‘closet Maoists’, even among this young generation of students who hardly remembered the Chairman, carne out temporarily to air their views.
Others were not as concerned about Mao as the manner in which his statue was removed: by night, under cover and without any consultation.
‘The statue was ugly, sure, but no one asked our opinions’, some students complained.
‘I think it should have been left alone’, one young man told me.
They were not Maoists, but recognised his special association with Beijing University, the home of ‘May Fourth’ and to some extent of Chinese communism.
For these reasons alone, they felt the statue should not have been demolished.
Others were pleased to see the ‘old man’ gone for good.
‘He was a dictator, just like an emperor’, they said.
The differing views on the ‘statue affair’ reflected deeper political opinions and divisions among the student body.
What they did seem in agreement on was their criticism of the university authorities and the government which allowed such actions to go unchallenged.
The next major event which could have ended in unrest was Beida's ninetieth anniversary on the historic date of 4 May.
This month had ushered in substantial price rises on basic food items like rice, oil, pork and flour.
Although students had a small subsidy, the increases represented a further erosion of living standards, for them as well as other urban residents.a Price rises of 30–50 per cent were not  uncommon at this time.
People were feeling the ‘pinch’ of economic reform and were not convinced by official explanations of the necessity for hardships while some private businesses were making huge profits.
Large, somewhat extravagant celebrations were planned at Beida, perhaps to take students' and teachers' minds off the immediate economic situation and to focus attention instead on the university's great traditional heritage.
Apart from dance parties and fireworks, there were several major meetings held during the week of the anniversary.
On 4 May, at one of these meetings, the minister of the State Education Commission, Li Tieying, addressed the Beida students.
He said that students should develop ‘morally’ as well as intellectually and referred to the historic legacy of Beida.
He apologised, however, for the fact that ‘funding for education cannot increase greatly because the country remains poor’(CD 5.5.1988) and appealed to the students to work hard for their country.
When he spoke of developing Beida as a ‘truly socialist university’, there were jeers and laughter from the students.
By contrast, when the university's president, Ding Shisun, spoke of developing Beida as a ‘pioneer of democracy’, the applause was loud and long.
The message was clear: Beijing University had a special character and wanted to go its own way, as it had done in the past, and lead other universities in the process.
The president's speech also indicated a degree of unity between staff and students.
Meanwhile, the CYL was holding its Twelfth National Congress in Beijing, but most students were more interested in social get-togethers than League policies.
They were viewed as ‘stuffy’ and ‘out of touch with reality’.
Many students told me that they only joined the League because it was the correct thing to do at middle school and at university they maintained their membership for the social functions the League organised, such as outings and dances.
As a political organisation it was generally considered defunct.
The CYL meeting attracted little attention apart from that of the official youth newspaper.
Meanwhile, the atmosphere on the Beida campus grew more excited as the celebrations continued.
It was a ‘celebration of youth by youth’.
The university authorities seemed to trust the students.
They provided many of the resources for the celebrations and allowed the students to proceed as they wished with few officials presiding over events.
The education and economic crises were temporarily forgotten as the Beida students, joined by others from nearby campuses, celebrated loudly and energetically.
I sensed they were trying to make a statement with their carefree attitude: if we can't do anything else, we are going to enjoy this anniversary.
It was clear that this privileged student body with its energy  and antagonism to the central authorities could one day be involved in a serious confrontation with the authorities.
All the pop songs in vogue at the time were sung communally — songs such as those from the award-winning film,Hong Gaoliang (Red Sorghum ) and the virtual national anthem of youth during 1988, ‘Yi Wu Suo You’, ‘The One Who Has Nothing’.
The hero in this song is pleading with his girlfriend to go with him, to love him in spite of his being poor and having nothing to offer.
He offers her his freedom, his only possession with his open hands.
It is a very emotional song made famous by the popular popstar, Cui Jian.
Many students identified with the character in this song and the sentiments behind the words.
‘We too have nothing, not even the freedom he sings of which we would like.
We enjoy this song.’
It was sung over and over during the parties.
The enthusiasm and energy of the Beida students were obvious, but there were few outlets for them and little prospect of doing anything with their love of life and of their country.
They threw themselves into the celebrations, a temporary release from the daily routine, but the problems would still be there once the party was over.
THE JUNE STUDENT MOVEMENT AT BEIJING UNIVERSITY
The June poster campaign was described as a ‘xuechao’, student movement, in one analysis carried out at the time, although there were no demonstrations.
It began only one month after Beida's ninetieth anniversary with the ‘murder’ of a postgraduate student, Chai Qing Feng, at a nearby snackbar.
This incident, on 2 June, enraged the dead student's classmates and friends, who demanded immediate official action to be taken.
They put up dazibao which at first mostly mourned Chai, but the contents of the posters soon became more politically oriented.
The situation at Beida became tense as demonstrations were called to protest not just at the student's death but the poor conditions of intellectuals in China, the lack of free speech and human rights, excessive bureaucracy in the party's structure and rampant corruption within party echelons.
These issues were all becoming ‘hot topics’ of discussion and were later to form an integral part of the 1989 student movement.
The tragic death of Chai Qing Feng gave rise to small-scale protest which signalled clear warnings to the leadership of the serious problems they would have to face.
A brief ‘diary’ of the tense days in June 1988, when a full-fledged ‘xuechao’was narrowly avoided, is given below.
2 June Beijing University postgraduate student Chai Qing Feng dies as a result of wounds received during a ‘brawl’ at a snack bar near to campus where he had gone with some friends to buy drinks.
The assailants were ‘unemployed youths’, apparently all with records of hooliganism.
3 June ‘Hundreds’ of Beida students march on the local Public Security Department to protest.
Calls were made for immediate action and ‘justice’.
The Vice Mayor of Beijing came to address them and appealed for calm, assuring them that the ‘murder’ would be dealt with speedily and according to proper legal procedures.
Dazibao appear at the university.
6 June The noticeboard area on campus becomes an ad hoc , outdoor ‘funeral parlour’ for the dead student, with poems, posters splashed with red paint, photographs and portraits of Chai and wreaths.
Funeral music is played continually.
Friends of Chai act as stewards as hundreds come to see the spectacle, including foreign correspondents.
7 June The university authorities are reported as saying only posters that support the government and reform are allowed and not those which incite trouble.
All the ‘mourning’ items, wreaths and so on, are removed to a specially designated memorial room, leaving the noticeboard area free for a ‘poster fight’.
Late night discussions held in an ‘open political forum’ around the noticeboard area.
The Party, reforms, democracy and other topics debated freely.
8 June Foreign reports based on student ‘rumours’ of demonstrations bring hundreds to the campus.
Tension mounts as temperatures soar on one of the hottest days of the year.
Thousands of police put on alert on all main roads leading to Tiananmen.
Attempts to organise demonstrations fail.
9 June University authorities warn that the poster campaign ‘should stop’.
No new posters appear.
Students are worried about the activities of ‘plain-clothes police’ mingling with the crowds on campus.
11 June All the posters are washed away under the orders of university authorities.
There are calls for a strengthening of ‘ideological work’ among students with a stress on ‘social practice’, i.e. doing work in the community during the forthcoming summer vacations.
The ‘xuechao’ died out after just over one week but at its height both the university and state authorities were concerned that demonstrations  could occur involving not only the Beida students but those from nearby campuses and even disaffected workers.
The recent price rises and the subsequent decline in general standards of living had left whole sections of the urban population dissatisfied with the results of reform.
Corruption was also an important issue which became very prominent during 1988.
For students, corruption and the use of ‘guanxi wang’— relationship networks — by those who had them, meant that their job prospects were further worsened.
It was not so much What you know' as ‘who you know’ and this heightened their already serious sense of unfairness.
Among the general population, corruption was a big issue.
According to a survey cited by the FEER, over 83 per cent of China's urban population believed that the state bureaucracy was corrupt.
Worse still, over 63 per cent of the cadres surveyed admitted that they were involved in some form of corrupt practice.
This ranged from the fairly trivial practice of holding too many banquets and offering ‘gifts’ to customers to the more serious misappropriation of state funds and reselling of state supplies on the free market for large profits.
While education and other social crises deepened, state officials were seen being driven around in expensive foreign cars and eating lavish banquets.
The CPC had released a statement from its three-day conference at the end of May strongly condemning corruption and excessive expenditure and promising to tackle these problems.
But students and many of their working counterparts no longer trusted the Party, which was seen to be ‘feathering its own nest’.
Their behaviour contrasted starkly to the more traditional image of Party members as simple-living, self-sacrificing people.
Even young students were aware of how things had changed.
‘We can no longer trust these people’, many told me quite openly.
June 1988 gave them an opportunity to express their grievances, seriously unnerving the struggling pro-reform Party leadership.
The disparities between rich and poor were becoming greater and they were not successfully justified in the official media.
Using terms like the ‘primary stage of socialism’, and the ‘socialist commodity economy’, did little to placate students and other low-income groups who were struggling to make ends meet.
There was genuine fear that demonstrations could erupt.
In an effort to contain the June ‘xuechao’ on campus, the authorities issued warnings to major Beijing work units.
Employees were told not to support the students and to reject any form of illegal protest (demonstrations and posters fell into this category).
The warning may have had an effect, but did nothing to dispel feelings among various groups of workers that the Party was not dealing with reform correctly.
They were quietly seething, June 1988 may not have been the right time  for demonstrations, but parts of the student body and some sectors of the urban population appeared to be contemplating some form of action to let the government know of their intentions.
The students at Beida, some of whom were on the verge of taking to the streets, probably feared the possible repercussions and with the end of term imminent, they decided that open protest was not worth the risk.
I spoke with many students during this period from several major universities and the majority were sympathetic to the poster campaign.
They considered it was ‘useless’, however, remembering the protests of 1986 — 7 and the backlash that followed.
Those approaching graduation had even more to fear.
Already job prospects had deteriorated because economic reforms had led to reductions in the labour force at many state organisations, where graduates hope to obtain positions.
The negative effects of the ‘guanxi wang’ reduced career opportunities still further.
The government had made serious proposals during 1988 about reforming the graduate assignment system because of its glaring inefficiencies.
The move from ‘arranged marriage’ to ‘marriage based on free choice’, as described in a Zhongguo Qingnian article (1988, 5: 27) was to be welcomed in many ways because a large number of graduates every year were wrongly placed.
But the problem with allowing free choice during the period of economic reform was that there were not enough suitable jobs available, and the prospect of graduate unemployment was very real in spite of official denials of graduate ‘surpluses’.
According to a State Education Commission investigation, various work units across the country had refused 5,500 graduates in 1987, indicating that there were too many coming from the universities.
The SEC, however, explained that in reality many ministries did not have their quota.
Beijing municipality, for example, required 9,000 graduates but only received 6,000.
In 1988, 460,000 students were graduating nationwide, but there was a demand for 700,000 a shortfall, not a surplus.
The commission pointed out that compared to developed nations, China was deficient in college-trained personnel.
In the USA, out of every 10,000 people, 524 were college students, compared to 60 in China (ZGQN 30. 7. 1988).
The main problem was that many graduates did not want to go to units where conditions were not seen as ‘suitable’ to their requirements.
They all wanted to ‘crowd into beneficial units and enterprises so there is a contradiction’(ZGQN 30. 7. 1988).
An apparent surplus was a shortage, according to this official line of argument, which was disputed by a number of students and teachers alike.
Some of the jobs on offer in the assignment process were not ‘good’ jobs, suited to graduates' fields of study or expertise, and some involved very little real work, being ‘employment’in name only.
The  statistics mentioned by the authorities could not be accepted at face value.
It was not surprising that students tried to find places in the ‘good’ work units which offered decent conditions along with a chance of self-development and advancement.
The prospect of ‘underemployment’ was not appealing, let alone finding no job at all.
Taking part in protests could jeopardise any existing opportunities of securing a decent employment position for those coming up to graduation.
The government still had this vital hold over many of its educated youth.
Consequently the June ‘xuechao’ was contained, but not before it had seriously worried the leadership and the students had made a number of important points which would resurface less than a year later.
The two student movements were both triggered by a death: in 1988, a student; in 1989, former party secretary Hu Yaobang.
The unfortunate death of Chai Qing Feng, labelled as a ‘murder’ immediately in the media, without a proper investigation into the circumstances, symbolised for the students just how low their social position had sunk.
The fact that the people involved who killed Chai in the snackbar fight were mostly ‘unemployed youths’, seemed to emphasise for the young intellectuals the disrespect for knowledge prevalent in a money-orientated society.
Educated people had become a despised group, just as during the Cultural Revolution, when they suffered verbal and physical abuse.
Reports of beatings and verbal attacks in and around other campuses were becoming common, according as local reports.
Students did not feel safe, yet the authorities did little to protect them.
Their pleas for greater security had gone unheard, and this murder in their view was the ‘inevitable’ outcome, raising the whole question of the social position of intellectuals in contemporary China.
There were obvious inaccuracies in the reports of Chai's death which, if investigated properly, would have shown it as a case of ‘manslaughter’ rather than‘murder’in my own view.
But passions were aroused.
Students were feeling threatened from all quarters, their social position deteriorating, living conditions worsening and prospects for the future looking fairly dim.
They wanted something to be done, quickly, to redress the situation.
The public security bureau provided the immediate action called for by the students.
Within forty hours of Chai's death, the six criminals had been arrested, their capture even conveniently filmed and shown on the television news.
They were pronounced ‘guilty’ even before their arrest, let alone the trial which was the usual brief process typical of Chinese legal justice.
The fact that most of them already had criminal records was widely publicised and used as evidence of their guilt in the Chai Qing Feng case.
The Guangming Daily had carried an article on 4 June, stating that, ‘a gang of ruffians violently beat a Beijing University postgraduate to death.’
(GMRB 4. 6. 1988) The case, it was said, was ‘basically cut and dried’, thus publicly condemning the six before they were even tried.
Other newspapers carried similar articles in an effort to show to the Beida students that something was being done quickly about the case.
After the speedy ‘trial’ and a statutory appeal, which was dismissed, as is usual within a few hours, one of the six was executed and the others started long prison sentences.
There had been little investigation or calling for witnesses.
They had little chance to ask for the type of ‘human rights’ being demanded by students in the Beida posters.
Were students satisfied with this summary justice?
The ones I spoke with believed that the authorities had failed to address the real issues.
The fate of the six people involved in the snackbar death reflected some of the bad practices which they said should be corrected through the institution of a truly socialist legal system which had human rights incorporated into it.
This would involve freedom of speech, another demand in the posters, and was reminiscent of the ‘Li Yi Zhe’ document of 1973.
The ideal of ‘democracy’ was also discussed during the ‘xuechao’, with the leadership being strongly criticised for their feudalistic autocratic manner of ruling the country.
Some slogans and ideas from the ‘Democracy Wall Movement’ of 1978–79 received another brief hearing during these days.
There were disagreements among poster writers and speakers at the political forums held at night.
Some insisted that the reforms were naturally problematic and they had to support the Party in its efforts to modernise China.
Others were pro-reform but disapproved of the way the reforms were currently being implemented.
A minority of activists raised more radical ideas for change in Chinese politics and society, such as the abandonment of socialism and doing away with Party domination.
Some posters were probably written by officials and there is no doubt that a few ‘agents provocateurs’ were active on the Beida campus, drawing out the activists so they would be recognised later.
Once it was clear that no demonstrations would take place, the students became nervous about the ‘xuechao’ and began to withdraw from any action which could have been construed as political activism.
Consequently, the ‘xuechao’ came to end, but not before the ‘hope of China’as young people are often referred to had declared that, ‘we have no hope’They insisted that they were supportive of reform, ‘but these are not the reforms we want’.
The demands for better conditions for young intellectuals, for action to be taken on corruption, for political reforms  to match those taking place in the economic sphere, and for free speech had become familiar by now.
These grievances and demands remained and although they did not drive the students out onto the streets of the capital this time to demonstrate, it was clear that they certainly could at some time in the near future.
THE YEAR WINDS DOWN, STUDENT DISCONTENT RISES
The authorities were becoming increasingly concerned by the unhealthy state of student activism.
Top-level meetings were called in the summer in which university principals and State Education Commission officials discussed the problems on the campuses and possible solutions.
Thousands of students, particularly from Beijing, were sent to undertake ‘social practice’ during the summer vacation in the hope that contact With ‘real life’would bring them down to earth and give them a more realistic assessment of society.
Returning to the universities for the new academic year in September 1988, this objective appeared to remain unachieved.
Dissatisfaction, apathy, the desire to escape and the other manifestations of the student ‘problem’ appeared to be intact.
Some of those who had been out to the countryside or into factories to do their ‘social practice’ were even more critical of the existing regime.
They had been shocked by the ‘reality’ they had come across and were more committed to action.
Beneath an apparent calm on the campuses were all the unresolved and unaddressed issues of the time.
Various isolated examples of unrest acted as reminders to the authorities.
A few of these incidents can be cited in support of this view.
On 17 November, for example, about 200 chemistry department students held a sit-in outside the main administrative building at Beijing Normal (Teachers') University.
They were objecting to having to travel by bus everyday to their laboratories and classrooms located on another site.
Those familiar with the bus arrangements in Beijing could understand their annoyance.
Despite year-long complaints nothing had been done about the problem.
Tired of being ignored, they demanded some immediate response from the authorities.
Many teachers appeared to support this action because their complaints taken through the proper channels had gone unanswered.
The sit-in at Beishida (shortened form of the university's name) caused some tension, but eventually the college principal promised to look into the matter.
The sit-in appeared to have scored a victory, but the ultimate outcome, i.e. whether the laboratories were moved, was not clear.
The students had, however, taken a fairly bold action to call attention to their grievance.
The day after their sit-in, some dazibao appeared on another Beijing campus, complaining about poor security.
People from outside the college had been coming in freely, causing trouble, stealing and even beating students.
This had also happened elsewhere, for instance at Beishida.
The residents were worried about this trend of increasing violence towards intellectuals, symptomatic, it was claimed, of their low status in society.
The authorities seemed to be doing little about tackling this social problem.
There were two sides to the campus security issue, however.
Most colleges are walled or fenced with guards at the gates.
The gates are usually locked at night and it used to be fairly standard practice that people going in and out had to identify themselves.
Non-residents would have to register their names at the gate as well as the time of arrival and their business.
I noticed in recent years these practices becoming more lax, which was supported in some ways by both students and staff, who felt an increased sense of freedom.
It was also easier to bring in friends without involving the college bureaucracy.
The negative effects, however, were the less welcome members of society coming and going quite freely.
By tightening security, ‘hooligans’ could be kept out by students and other college residents would once again feel as if they were ‘prisoners’.
(One campus I knew of in a large industrial city used to be so strictly guarded that the students referred to it as the town's ‘second prison’.)
Locking the gates, however, could do little to reverse the social trends which the dazibao complained of.
As December approached, there were fears that the historic ‘December Ninth’ might be marked by student unrest.
I was informed that a group of young teachers at one college were planning a boycott on the day to protests against their poor living conditions and low pay.
They did not want their gesture to be viewed as part of that historical movement but as a genuine protest with genuine grievances.
But they felt ‘December Ninth’ was a good day to attempt to gain sympathy for their cause.
They were finding it hard to make ends meet and life had become very miserable.
One of them told me, ‘We are the victims, the victims of reform.’
Although worried about the consequences of their boycott, they went ahead and were offered a pay rise as a result.
But they were all told to attend political study meetings and make self-criticisms about their actions.
They feared further repercussions at a later date because their participation in the boycott would almost certainly go into their files.
Any pay rises were quickly swallowed up by further price increases and unofficial estimates of inflation were as high as twenty-five per cent in the cities.
Some goods rose by more than this average percentage.
The general economic news for December was bad with forecasts of poverty, even starvation in the countryside.
Many farmers had given up working the land because of low rates of return and had turned to producing more lucrative goods.
There had also been a ‘drift’ to the cities of unemployed rural labour who were creating a new social problem in communist China.
Some as young as eleven and twelve, these ‘migrant labourers’ went looking for work and did not always find it, turning to other less than legal ways of earning their bread.
There was not enough food being grown on the farms and the government could not afford to pay for all of the grain it had requisitioned from the farmers.
There were rumours of anger among the grain farmers, who were being given IOUs instead of cash for their crops.
Comparisons were being drawn between the party leadership and the ‘bankrupt’ Nationalist government of Chiang Kaishek in the 1930s.
The student population was well-informed of the economic and social crises facing the country, but their own problems remained uppermost in their minds.
The trend of devaluing knowledge went on, leading to a drop in numbers applying for postgraduate study in 1989.
During the five-day application period that began on 1 December, only 5,700 young people applied for 8,600 postgraduate places available in Beijing.
The waning of enthusiasm for higher education had begun several years before, but this was the first time there had been fewer applicants than places offered.
There were also high drop-out rates from postgraduate study, with disillusioned academics applying for employment at the foreign hotels as waiters, porters and chambermaids.
They could earn far more money in these positions than if they remained inside the universities, be assured of good meals daily and sometimes also have accommodation provided.
Compared to dormitory life and low student stipends, even what was once considered demeaning work could offer a much more comfortable life.
Those who persisted with their postgraduate study often did so purely in order to go abroad.
Optimistic academics and enthusiastic students were in a minority.
Most were exasperated by their own position and that of the nation in general.
The end of the year saw thousands take to the streets in order to demonstrate their anger and resentment, ostensibly with the African students in China but more indirectly with the party's failure to tackle the problems of reform.
The trouble began in Nanjing, as reported in the China Daily on 27 December.
Two African students refused to register their Chinese girlfriends at a Christmas dance.
This regulation of registration often causes bad feeling because it means that Chinese people friendly with foreigners are easily recognised and traced.
The outcome of their refusal to follow the rules was a scuffle, apparently caused by the Africans not the Chinese.
‘African students attacked  university employees who came to the spot to maintain order’, wrote the China Daily .
Eleven university staff were injured, one seriously.
This all took place on Christmas Eve.
By the next day, hundreds of Chinese students gathered at the Nanjing campuses calling for the African students to be punished and marched on to the municipal offices.
Several days of unrest followed which spread across the country and involved thousands of students.
It is impossible to know exactly what happened that evening.
Although criticising the Africans, whom many Chinese do not like because they have more money because of higher scholarships and a greater degree of freedom, there is a legitimate case to be made for the view that the students had found another excuse to bring attention to their own problems and views about conditions in China.
There is even the suggestion of a ‘conspiracy’, that the authorities manipulated these troubles, realising the existence of conflicts between Chinese and African students and hoping to divert attention away from the disastrous economic forecasts for the coming year.
Whipping up nationalistic sentiment is not difficult to do with Chinese students because of an underlying layer of patriotic sentiment and if there is any substance to this ‘conspiracy’ theory, the African students may indeed have been used as a diversion.
Certainly, a good deal of anti-foreigner sentiment was unleashed, first of all in Nanjing and then other major cities, and traditional prejudices were allowed to run riot for the Christmas period.
The Africans were described as ‘noisy’ because they liked to party and sing and dance.
They were also accused of being sexually promiscuous and of leading young Chinese girls astray.
The spectre of  AIDS was raised.
Their general behaviour offended Chinese morality and also showed how ‘ungrateful’ they were to China — a special friend to Africa.
Some of the African students taken into custody by the police claimed they had been beaten up.
Accusations flew back and forth for several days.
Chinese students in Beijing did not march as their counterparts did in several provincial cities.
One student told me that they were watching and waiting.
‘We don't have any real grievances against the African students.’
The whole affair, however, failed to gain the status of a diplomatic issue and started to calm down after the New Year holiday, leaving bad feeling between different groups of students.
Was it all a stage-managed event by the party leadership in order to distract their own people and foreign observers from the real issues facing China?
There are strong suspicions of implicit backing for the anti-African demonstrations.
Whatever the truth is of the ‘Christmas clashes’, the situation in China could be seen as highly volatile.
Another small but significant outburst took place in Beijing on Mao Zedong's birthday, 26 December.
A group of around one hundred people stood outside his mausoleum in Tiananmen Square and chanted ‘Long Live Chairman Mao!’
This could be viewed as another indirect criticism of the embattled leadership and their poor record on corruption.
There were also several minority group demonstrations in December.
Students from Tibet studying in the capital held a brief demonstration against the Han Chinese treatment of their nation and people, as did a group of Uighurs from Xinjiang province.
The year 1988 ended with unrest, tension and uncertainty about which ‘faction’ was controlling the party's central committee.
According to official messages, the ‘modernisers’ still had the upper hand and the reform programme was set to continue in spite of the economic and social problems which had troubled the leaders throughout 1988.
Ten years before, in December 1978, Deng Xiaoping had given his support to reforming the economy first in the rural areas then in the cities.
The early successes of the responsibility system in the countryside had encouraged Deng and his close allies to propose further changes and China's population appeared happy with the developments.
Ten years on, the situation was different but, according to a People's Daily editorial entitled ‘A Great Decade’(22. 12. 1988).
‘China's reform, the trend of history and the choice of the people, should be carried out without wavering.’
It referred to the previous centrally planned economy as ‘unimaginable’ in the changed circumstances brought about by reform.
The editorial contained strong words of commitment to Deng's modernising policies, but was probably intended to convince an uncertain population that reforms would continue, despite apparent problems and doubts.
The China Daily wrote, ‘Decade-old reforms are destined to go on’, but not everyone was assured by these media messages.
In their existing forms, reforms looked likely to lead to social unrest and further disturbances.
The new year, 1989, opened with the government barely keeping a ‘lid’ on the situation.
I left China feeling that the state of affairs could not continue for much longer without serious public disorder, possibly started by the students.
Things were becoming intolerable, with many sections of the population holding serious grievances.
The government had admitted that as the reforms ‘deepened’ there would be signs of inequalities and economic problems which the people had to accept with patience.
Once the ‘primary stage of socialism’ had been passed through, everything would get better, according to the official propaganda.
But few people were listening any more.
Just in case they were not convinced, the authorities had broadcast messages of their  improved ability to cope with any public disorders.
The police, it was suggested, were prepared to tackle any outbreaks of ‘hooliganism’ or ‘counterrevolutionary’activity.
The scene was set for an eventual conflict with the question being ‘when’ rather than‘will’a protest movement break out.