

COMMENT
WITH BRITAIN'S WILDERNESS AREAS UNDER CONSTANT PRESSURE, PETER BEAUMONT CALLS ON THE GOVERNMENT TO SIT DOWN AND TALK OPENLY AND CONSTRUCTIVELY WITH ALL THE PARTIES CONCERNED
Compare two recollections: Delicate motes of movement  tiptoeing up the curving sabre-slash of Serenity Crack in Yosemite.
Immaculate climbing above a crowded holiday village and a snaking traffic jam.
Another day: Coire an t' Sneachda in the Cairngorms before dawn in December.
A full moon and crisp snow beneath crampon points.
A dimly lit gully beckons to a short easy solo and a luminous dawn over a deserted plateau: the light of Aviemore far away.
I am stretching a point.
I could describe crowded bank holidays with troops of walkers on the high tops of Scotland and the ugliness of the skilifts.
I could equally describe the dense wilderness that settles on you like a heavy hand, barely an hour's walk from Yosemite's granite architecture.
But while Scotland's wilderness areas are still not as overcrowded and overdeveloped as Yosemite or even the Lakes, the damage is there for all to see.
The waymarked tourist path to the summit of Ben Lomond in the recently created Loch Lomond regional park has become, in the words of the conservationists ‘a four lane motorway’, which at its worst cuts a deep furrow through the peak down to bedrock.
On the Mar Lodge estate in the Cairngorms, red deer introduced for hunting have overrun the estate, threatening their own existence and the estate's other wildlife.
On the Cairngorm plateau the pressure of walkers' feet on rare mosses and lichen continues to damage a sub-arctic habitat that would take 100 years to repair — if it had the chance.
Since the improvement to roads to Ben Nevis and Glen Coe in the west, and the Cairngorms in the east, visitor numbers have boomed, creating more pressure for tourist developments and bringing more people — including climbers and walkers — into these remote areas.
The damage is being done and the survival of Scotland's wild areas is at the cusp.
The danger is now.
The Scottish Office and its ministers have already shown themselves to be unreliable guardians of our heritage, formulating policies that have — I am told — even been greeted with horror in the Department of Environment in London.
In a series of assaults on Scotland's natural heritage laws the Scottish Office, and Scottish Secretary Ian Lang, have succeeded in overturning the presumption of protection for Sites of Special Scientific Interest, creating instead new ‘natural heritage areas’ which will be protected — if that's the right word — by voluntary agreements.
Over the issue of the future ownership of Mar Lodge, which contains three of Britain's five highest mountains, Mr. Lang for months resisted pressure even to meet with the conservation groups who would like to rescue it.
He is only now showing interest after pressure from Cabinet colleagues like Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine, fearful of the damage the Scottish Office is doing to the government's shaky green image.
And by the time this magazine goes to press Mr Lang is expected to have announced that he is rejecting the Countryside Commission for Scotland's detailed proposals for four Scottish national parks in Glen Coe and Ben Nevis, Loch Lomond, the Cairngorms and Wester Ross.
It's a sad turn of affairs, for while the CCS's proposals lack any real imagination for dealing with the problem of how to square conservation and recreation interests in sensitive areas, by imposing a broadly English national park model, Mr Lang's announcement will certainly stifle the real debate once more.
The facts are simple.
We have seen the English national parks collapsing under the weight of their own success, over-used and over-developed.
Scotland's wilderness areas do not even have the advantages of the little protection afforded to the English parks.
Instead, the argument in government is being driven by a coalition of landowning, agricultural and forestry interests to the detriment of a common heritage.
The long running saga over the Lurcher's Gully ski development showed just how hard the developers will try and push into even the most sensitive areas — a battle that was only won with massive support and a sympathetic word in the ear of then Scottish Secretary Malcolm Rifkind.
Which takes me back to my opening images.
For conservation is part of the lifeblood of all of us who use the outdoors for recreation.
The flora and fauna — the brilliant stooping of hawk or the whistling wing beat of a chough as it sails close to a stance — forms the backdrop and the motivation for our pursuits.
National parks for Scotland may not be the answer, but mountaineers and walkers, birdwatchers and mountainbikers, canoeists and — yes — tourists, must push for the survival of what we all value.
What is needed is a policy that protects access but saves the environment, that allows sensitive development in the interests of the residents but prevents exploitation.
It might sound like an impossible recipe, but this can only be achieved when the government is prepared to sit down and talk constructively and openly with all parties.
Mar Lodge has proved that even the most intransigent of ministers will begin to bend to public pressure.
We must ensure that pressure never stops.
Looking across to the open plateau of the Cairngorm massif.
In the height of summer, Cairn Gorm (top left) can be swarming with skilift transported tourists.
COMPASS
COMPILED BY   
VANDALS STRIKE AGAIN AT FROGGATT
Great Slab is daubed with graffiti
Following the desecration of Johnny Allen's testpiece Hareless Heart earlier this year, vandals have struck again on Froggatt Edge's Great Slab.
Huge letters and symbols, daubed in gloss paint on the slab, appeared over the August bank holiday, along with smaller graffiti on boulders in the vicinity.
The action was condemned by Ken Drabble, chief ranger of the Peak District National Park as being ‘irresponsible and mindless.’
He went on to add that disgruntled acid house partygoers were thought to be behind the vandalism.
‘We believe this is a protest.
We have had forewarning of a number of acid house parties and we've managed, by hook or by crook, to stop them.’
Reflecting growing concern about the use of national park locations for all-night raves, he added that ‘many quarry sites have flat areas of ground with a good sound panel, and are also remote.’
Bill Wright, Access and Conservation officer of the BMC, also condemned the vandalism.
‘It's the most disgraceful development in years,’ he said; ‘worse than bolts and as bad as chipping.
Anyone with any information on the incident should get in touch, in confidence if necessary, to stop any further damage.’
He added that a number of clubs had contacted offering to assist in a clean-up of Froggatt.
But the Peak Park moved swiftly to remove the anti-police slogans and other symbols.
After assessing what could be done, national park staff, together with local stone cleaner Peter McGuinness and the specialist, Chesterfield-based firm Can UK, set about sand-blasting the rock.
The use of solvents was discounted because of their adverse effect on the environment.
But it was no easy task, and heavy equipment had to be manhandled for about a mile from the nearest road.
Even though Can UK generously provided their services free of charge, the whole exercise was estimated to have cost the Peak Park in the region of £1,000.
There has been speculation among local climbers that the individuals responsible for the chipping of Hareless Heart are also to blame on this occasion; a theory backed up by the likelihood that the vandals had some level of climbing expertise.
Suggestions on how to help the rock recover its pre-sandblast colour included the use of a cow dung, which should add an unusual olfactory dimension to subsequent ascents.
The local police, against whom the graffiti was aimed, are not hopeful of catching those responsible.
The artistic daubings before their removal by sand-blasting (photo Jerry Rawson).
PEN TRWYN REOPENS
By the time Compass goes to press the limestone gymnasium at Upper Pen Trwyn will once again be open for arm pumps.
Work on placing bolt belay stations at the top of the crag has been completed and the placement of markers, showing which areas are available for climbing, was expected to be completed by mid-September.
Climbing was banned at Upper Pen Trwyn after a rockfall onto Marine Drive which killed a woman.
While climbers were not involved in the accident, climbing was suspended until a geological survey of the site could be made to assess its future suitability for climbing.
The belay stations were placed by local volunteers, with bolts provided from the BMC's Access and Conservation Fund.
Climbers should take special note of the new access agreement covering Marine Drive and Upper Pen Trwyn, which adds further restrictions to the existing arrangements in place before the climbing ban.
Due to the loose nature of parts of the cliff the local council, in agreement with the BMC, has closed off certain sections altogether.
The restricted sections will probably be marked with a series of posts.
It goes without saying that any infringements of these new restrictions will imperil what is already an extremely sensitive access agreement.
SCOTTISH ACCIDENTS
The Scottish Mountaineering Club Journal has published its annual report on mountaineering and walking accidents in Scotland.
Despite the tendency of the media to describe every accident in the Scottish mountains as a ‘climbing’ accident, the number of serious accidents involving climbers, as opposed to walkers, makes for interesting reading.
In 1990 — the period covered — only one climber was killed following a slip soloing a mixed climb.
In the same winter, six walkers were killed in a series of accidents, most involving simple slips but including one case of hypothermia.
The summer figures showed three rock climbing fatalities out of a total of 22 deaths in the mountains, of which five were accounted for by illness.
The details of the accidents also make for interesting analysis.
While some of the accidents were unavoidable, a large number, especially in winter, seemed to indicate lack of experience, inadequate fitness, failure to prepare properly — or that the victims ignored warnings on conditions.
Avalanches in high risk conditions, glissading in ‘Dr Marten’ boots, exhaustion and inadequate clothing all took their toll.
Some rescues described were more bizarre than anything else, including the rescue of two men collecting bonsai trees in Dalness chasm, one of whom got stuck!
GUIDED EVEREST EXPEDITION IS SET FOR 1993
The first British commercial guided expedition to Everest is now certain and fixed for 1993, pre-monsoon, courtesy of the Bristol firm Himalayan Kingdoms, which put a paying client on the top of 8,000-metre Broad Peak earlier this year.
Steve Berry of Himalayan Kingdoms says 23 people have now paid deposits.
The total cost per person, for three months in the field and a contribution to the large peak fee, will be about £10,000.
For this the clients, mostly professional people and businessmen who lack the time to organise their own expeditions, but who have some impressive climbing pedigrees, will get full sherpa support, oxygen and a well-stocked chain of camps along the standard South Col route from Nepal.
Many of them have taken part in earlier Himalayan Kingdoms ventures, including Broad Peak, Changtse (Everest's northern outlier) and Himalchuli.
Guided ascents in the greater ranges  is a big growth area, Berry says.
His own firm is planning commercial climbs of Broad Peak, Pik Lenin, Ama Dablam and Stok Kngri next year, with not only Everest but Cho Oyu, Aconacagua (highest peak in the Andes) and Pik Communism on the cards for 1993.
The company uses only qualified guides and chooses routes as objectively safe as possible.
So far there have been no accidents.
Everest via the South Col is not, however, without risk.
Aside from the great altitude, there is the notorious Khumbu icefall.
Berry dismisses criticism of climbs of this kind, made recently by Reinhiold Messner among others: ‘It's all very well for him to say this kind of thing, but when he climbed Everest for the first time without oxygen and on other occasions, he was quite happy to make use of heavyweight-style expeditions.
We are offering the experience of a lifetime, and it seems to appeal to people from all over the world.
Our clients come from Papua New Guinea to Venezuela.’
The Hillary step — nearly the summit of Everest from the South Col (photo Doug Scott).
NOTES FROM THE ALPS
By 
Further evidence that you have to climb solo in the big hills to make a name for yourself these days was produced, in dramatic fashion, in the Mont Blanc massif this summer.
Jean-Christophe Lafaille is no stranger to the risks and rewards of solitary ascents.
He was probably the first man to solo 8a on French rock; made the first winter lone ascent of the South Face of the Aiguille du Fou (scene of Alan Rouse's famed injury during an earlier, summer, solo) and also made one of the most prestigious ascents in the area with his solo of Divine Providence — Patrick Gabarrou's 1984 desperate on the Grand Pilier d'Angle buttress on Mont Blanc.
Apparently, it was while climbing D.P. that he spotted a new line on the buttress, but decided to wait a while and link it with another new route he had in mind for the Central Pillar of Freney.
This August, the alpine heatwave provided ideal conditions for his ascent.
The Grand Pilier d'Angle route took two and a half days and weighed in at 6c and A4.
It was on an aid pitch that he took his only fall, ripping two pegs before the last aid point held him.
At the top of the pillar, the 26-year-old guide picked up a new sack of food and popped across to the Freney face to solo a new direct version of the Central Pillar (Chris Bonington's finest hour).
In all, a five day ‘enchainement’.
At the same time, on the other side of the range, Christophe Moulin, a 33-year-old guide from Briancon, set off for the first solo ascent (and incidentally the first repeat) of Jean-Marc Boivin's Ballade Au Clair du Lune: a hooks-and-copperheads A4 on the south face of the Fou.
This has received little attention since its ascent in 1983, possibly because it contains such mind-blowing attractions as a 40-feet skyhook section.
Christophe had already had one attempt at this pitch when he took a 60-feet fall and decided, understandably, to await better omens.
At the more popular end of the spectrum of difficulty, controversy this summer in Chamonix when a seven-years-old girl climbed Mont Blanc by the Voie Normale.
This is not, of course, a route of any substantial technical difficulty, but it does present many would-be suitors with severe altitude problems, ranging from headaches to full-scale nausea, and some people thought the idea of taking the girl to altitude was an unjustifiable kind of medical experiment.
But this, of course, was no ordinary girl.
Valerie Schwartz had already, with her father Georges, a doctor from Geneva, climbed the Breithorn and Mont Blanc du Tacul as preparation for the big day.
The pair also spent three days at the new Cosmiques Refuge for acclimatization purposes, a heavy financial investment in the plan.
Local medical officials predictably hollered infamy at this indignity visited on a young girl who seems, by all accounts, to be completely infatuated with mountaineering and a more-than-willing partner in the venture.
It is not the first time that Chamonix officials have decided youth and mountains do not mix.
In 1989 there was outcry when a Pole carried his four-year-old son to the top of the Tacul, and two-years later the same pair were actually stopped by the police and turned back during an attempt on Mont Blanc.
VIRGIN RUSSIAN ROUTES THERE FOR THE TAKING, SAY BRITS
Area would repay closer attentions
Roger Payne, the BMC's national officer, with his wife Julie-Ann Clyma, Iain Peter and Allen Fyffe, spent a memorable four weeks in the Soviet Tien-Shan, making ascents of two 7,000-metre peaks: Khan Tengri (7,010) metres) and Pik Pobeda.
These two mountains in what, for the time being, remains the Kazakh Soviet republic were closed to all climbers from the mid-1960s until 1988, and the area as a whole, says Payne, contains huge potential for new routes on scores of beautiful peaks as yet barely inspected by mountaineers.
The four enjoyed extraordinary value for money, staying in one of the USSR's international mountaineering camps, based on a glacier 4,200 metres up.
There are no porters or pack animals in the region, and so all supplies were ferried in by regular helicopter deliveries.
And what supplies!
Forget the image of Moscow queues for bread and vegetables.
The climbers dined on a cornucopia of fresh fruits, meat, cream, cake and ale, cooked by the enormous basecamp staff.
The was hot water on demand for washing and, believe it or not, a sauna bath available at a moment's notice, run by a scientist from Estonia who was spending his holidays working at camp and doing a bit of climbing when there was no-one wanting a little birch-twig flagellation.
Yet the total cost, all-inclusive Moscow to Moscow, was just 42,000 a head — far cheaper than climbing in any other 7,000 metre peak range anywhere.
Most of the climbers at the camp came from all parts of the now-disintegrating Soviet Union.
Says Payne: ‘We found we had a tremendous amount in common, a real northern European outlook with people from the Pacific rim, Siberia or the Russian heartlands.
Gorbachev's talk of a common European home seemed to mean something out there.’
The Tien Shan does not, apparently, have quite such good weather as the nearby Pamirs, due mainly to the proximity of several huge lakes and inland seas, including the fast-disappearing Aral Sea.
The general pattern was similar to the Alps in an average year: a few days of afternoon cloud and snowstorms, followed by a day or two or more settled conditions.
The frequent snowfalls meant the party was unable to try a new, technical difficult line on Khan Tengri's marble face.
Instead, climbing as two pairs, the climbers settled for alpine-style ascents of the 3,000-metre west ridge —‘A bit like a giant version of the Hornli ridge on the Matterhorn or Tower Ridge on Ben Nevis,’ according to Roger.
Pik Pobeda, which means ‘victory peak’ and was named after the Soviet victory in World War Two, is a sterner proposition altogether.
Until last year the 70-odd summiteers were matched by the 70 people who had died on its flanks.
The reason is not technical difficulty or avalanches, but the fact that the normal route involves reaching a ridge at 7,000 metres which is no less than four kilometres away from the summit pyramid.
It's also uphill on the way back.
This is obviously a terrible place to be caught in bad weather or poorly acclimatised.
However, all went well for the British team.
‘On the summit day it was so hot our main problem was carrying our clothing along the undulating ridge,’ said Roger.
The area would repay much closer attention from foreign climbers, he added.
TWO MAKE FIRST BRITISH ASCENT OF NANGA PARBAT
Summit is gained in six-day, alpine-style assault
Dave Walsh and Roger Mear have made the first British ascent of mighty Nanga Parbat, 8,165 metres.
The huge mountain at the far, Pakistani end of the Himalaya saw the tragic massacre of Willy Merkl's German team in 1936 and eventually a solo first ascent by the legendary Hermann Buhl in 1953.
Climbing in a pure alpine style, without additional support, they spent six days climbing the Kishofer route on the Diamir face, and a further two and a half days to descend.
‘It was a varied, highly satisfying climb,’ says Walsh, ‘with quite a bit of ice up to 55 degrees; VS standard rock, albeit with old fixed ropes, and some tiring plodding through knee-deep powder.’
The climb was made after only three weeks at basecamp.
‘I don't think this is an unreasonably short period of acclimatisation,’ added Walsh, who climbed his first 8,000-er in the shape of Cho Oyu two years ago.
The pair's success leaves only two 8,000 metre peaks without British ascents: Makalu, tried frequently in recent years, and Hidden Peak.
ULTAR TEAM SCORES EARLY SUCCESS
Latest news from the expedition to climb Ultar, Pakistan's highest unclimbed summit at nearly 7,300 metres, is that while no result has emerged from the tussle with the main objective, Mick Fowler and Craig Jones have made the first British ascents of Bublimiting (5,750 metres) and Hunza Peak (6,250 metres).
In typical Fowler fashion, Mick flew straight out from his famous tax collecting job and went onto the hill.
Hunza peaks has just defeated a Swedish team, who disliked the steep, ice-covered slabs, climbed with apparent ease by Jones and Fowler.
As we went to press the above pair and another made up of Vic Saunders and Steve Sustad were both making attempts on Ultar from different sides.
The steep pillar initially intended was being examined by Vic and Steve, while the others were trying a longer more circuitous route which looked technically easier.
CHAMONIX DEATHS
The Chamonix guides' association say that 47 climbers died this year in the Mont Blanc range to the end of August — equal to the total for the whole of last year.
As ever, many of the deaths were entirely preventable: falls into crevasses by unroped climbers along popular trails in dangerous areas like the  Valee Blanche, and mishaps caused by inexperience and poor equipment.
But others fell foul of the unusual weather this year: a very snowy and stormy spring, with avalanches and generally poor conditions, replaced suddenly by a hot summer.
MAKRONG CHHISH TRAGEDY DETAILS MADE KNOWN
Following our report in the September issue on the accident which befell the British Makrong Chhish Expedition, this year's Nick Escourt Award winner, we have received further information from Geoff Tyson, father of David Tyson — one of the climbers who died.
‘The accident happened after the second, unsuccessful attempt on the mountain, during the descent.
The party had been roping down a hanging glacier.
At the very last abseil, which crossed a small, then large bergschrund, the abseil snowstake came out and Dave Lister, the third man down, fell past the two crevasses onto an open slope, miraculously stopping after about 50 feet.
The fourth man, Steve Hillen, was left ropeless and, after a shouted discussion in which the others offered to climb back up with the rope, he decided to down-climb, unroped.
‘Dave Tyson and Mike Penlington, who had already descended, now left the bottom abseil stance.
Mike went down to assist Dave Lister in sorting out the rope which was still attached to him, and Dave moved along and up the bergschrund to aid Steve in routefinding as he downclimbed, diagonally to the right, towards a narrower slot which he might cross unroped.
‘The climbers had not been able to retrieve their earlier fixed ropes and consequently there was no spare rope which Dave might use.
It probably wasn't practical to rig up a short tape belay and, in any case, the climbers felt they were down, with the climbing virtually finished.
‘Steve downclimbed successfully but, in making the short jump across the slot, lost his balance and fell.
Dave had foreseen some difficulty and had moved back left to get into a better position to assist Steve, just below him.
As Steve fell Dave attempted to hold him but was unsuccessful and both climbers fell into a sort of avalanche chute.
Neither was able to brake and in seconds both vanished over the top of an ice cliff, falling on to the seracs below.
‘Both climbers died instantly.
Steve fell about 250 feet and Dave 450 feet.
Subsequently, Steve's ice axes were found where he fell and Dave's were located, embedded in the icy avalanche slope down which they had slid.’
The imposing presence of Nanga Parbat.
ICE CLIMBING COMES IN FROM THE COLD
If you've fancied having a go at ice-climbing but the thought of all the discomforts of a Scottish winter keeps putting you off, take heart.
A French company is about to take the sport indoors.
Ice-climbers have often wondered when someone is going to provide them with a decent training facility.
Now it's finally been invented.
The world's first indoor ice-climbing wall resembles a refrigerator, badly in need of defrosting, turned into side.
It's the work of Grenobloise company named Alp'Roc who, until now, have been manufacturing normal climbing wall apparatus.
Their first ice-wall, a giant ice-cube, has been placed on the campus on the Saint-Martin-d'Héres university.
This a promotional model, and commercial production is expected to start in February next year.
The machinery which keeps the wall from melting is complicated, but despite this, Alp'Roc claim it will cost no more to buy than a normal climbing wall.
The prospective purchaser can also choose the size of the gadget.
One rather nice touch: fibre optics are built into the thermal panels behind the ice, so if you want to use it at night it will glow in the dark.
Whether the idea will catch on is anybody's guess.
Ice-climbing isn't such a technique-intensive business as its rockier counterpart.
But it might well appeal to yuppie climbers.
When they've finished the route then can chip off a bit of the climb to put in their gin and tonics!
ACCESS PROBLEMS
Climbers visiting the newly developed Thrang and Striddle quarries in Langdale have been parking over the access to the nearby farm, which is also a public right of way.
The BMC is asking climbers to park at Chapelstile and walk to prevent any further friction with the farmer.
There are also problems at Worksworth Crag in the Peak District which has been recently developed.
The landowner is concerned over liability for climbing on the crag, details of which are to be found in the new BMC Peak Guide supplement, and a discreet and sensitive approach is requested until the problems have been sorted out.
There are also problems at Wild Cat Tor, where serious erosion has been caused by climbers going up to the Blue Grass and Singing Kettle buttresses.
The erosion has created a fan of scree which is rapidly encroaching on the Lovers' walk path.
In view of this, climbers are asked to approach the crag direct from the old bridge and avoid Lovers' Walk.
The BMC are also asking for details from anyone who has had problems at Latterbarrow in Wasdale.
VETS MAKE PEAK BID
The veteran climbers narrowly defeated by the 6,200-metre Jaonli in Kashmir two years ago, are setting off again this month, a little older and fitter than eve.r Sponsored by Saga magazine, the team includes Mike Banks (68) Joss Lynam (67), Mike Westmacott, a 1953 Everest Vertan who is now 66, Richard Brooke (64) and striplings Jim Milledge and Paddy O'Leary, 61 and 56 respectively.
Their last attempt on this difficult mountain was repulsed by bad weather, but he hope that by climbing in the post-monsoon season they will have better luck.
GARDOM'S EDGE
LOOKING FOR SOME PEACE AND QUIET AWAY FROM THE PEAK DISTRICT HORDES?
BILL MCKEE THINKS HE MAY HAVE THE ANSWER, BUT DON'T TELL EVERYONE
The itinerant ticker of classic gritstone, steeped in the lure and legend of this most elemental of climbing forms, must sooner or later come to an end of the unusual circuit of well-publicised, polished testpieces and crowded crags.
At such times the ‘lesser’ crags will perhaps begin to appeal more.
The quieter, hidden venues may become increasingly attractive; those places where rare and unsuspected solitude can sometimes be found, where one's obsession can be indulged, away from the eyes of would-be competitors Gardom's Edge is such a place, despite its proximity to more celebrated neighbours such as Birchens (aagghh!),
Curbar and Froggatt.
Overlooking the Sheffield–Baslow road and forming a lengthy escarpment of both continues ‘edge’ and isolated buttress, Gardom's is the quiet and peaceful oasis well suited to the seeker of a bit of seclusion.
In places tree-shrouded, though never oppressively so, in others suitably imposing, the crag does not possess — horror of horrors!— a complete path under its length; still less the sandy wastes that appear wherever climbers congregate in large numbers under your average grit crag.
No, here a modicum of route-finding skill may be required, particularly if you choose to sample the routes described briefly below, for several must be located from the top.
Never mind, it all adds to the atmosphere.
Around this charming place lingers a vague air of ‘the land that time forgot’, an atmosphere which couldn't be further from nearby Birchens, with its polished horrors and hordes.
The routes here are many and varied with the grades well represented right through the spectrum to the nasty end of E6.
It is for the HVS–E1 climber that the crag has most to offer though, and a short tour along the edge taking in the following climbs will not disappoint.
The usual means of approach to the crag is from the layby at its north-east end.
A short stroll amid the usual birches, boulders and close-cropped grass brings the first and most continuous section to hand.
A series of imposing buttresses characterise this part of the crag, many of them sporting ominous roofs, or at least overhangs, in the vicinity of mid-height.
Moyer's Buttress is no exception and is probably the finest climb on the crag, tackling a feature which in days of yore would no doubt have been referred to as a bastion.
An arête climb of apparently reasonable angle which requires gritstone pedigree.
First top-roped in the mid-1930s by Eric Byne and Clifford Moyer before succumbing to the ubiquitous Peter Biven's lead in 1955, the route begins gently enough via a pleasant crack.
It's hard to remain unaware of the overlap above though — all the while growing in stature — as the feel of the place becomes apparent.
Forces conspire to push you onto the arête itself at the point where the overlap is reached, although good protection can be arranged to ease the passage of a couple of moves up the gently overhanging right wall of the buttress.
Don't dither here; it's steep enough to be noticed very quickly, and the moves back left above the overlap need presence of mind.
As is so often the case, the transition from arms to feet is more difficult than expected, but a careful combination of undercutting, balance and barely breathing should see you right.
Above lies 40 feet of delicate arête, poised on the crest of the buttress.
Slopers, smearing and associated delicate manoeuvres allow absorbing progress to be made, while the unexpectedly good protection completes the icing on the cake.
A climb to savour, Moyer's Buttress deserves its place as a classic gritstone E1.
Not far to the left, on a similarly imposing buttress, which lacks only the grandeur of Moyer's, the bizarre Vaya Con Dios may be found.
Although the guidebook says it's E2 5c, this is the kind of climb where a grade lacking some type of ‘stomach shuffle component means it isn't that relevant.
Yes this colourful expedition requires rather more than the obligatory three points of contact, but it's well worth seeking out, despite the alarm bells which may well have been triggered by now in the more squeamish reader.
The start, a wide crack in common with a Severe, allows a sizeable horizontal break to be gained and at first followed easily outwards above the lip of a large roof.
Progress becomes slower as the front face of the square-cut buttress is neared, and the though provoking and insecure terrain usually brings at least a temporary halt to the proceedings.
Climbs of this nature always seem to be peculiarly technical, despite the lack of any well-defined moves.
Anyway, the crux of the problem involves coaxing your reluctant body around the arête, while attempting to keep as much of it as possible crammed into the now less-than-accommodating horizontal break.
This inevitably leads to an undignified sprawl for most aspirants, relying heavily on the frictional property of stomachs, knees and anything else to hand, before the front face of the buttress is thankfully gained.
Once a standing position has been attained, the face above will come as a blessed relief!
We have Alan Austin to thank for this character-building little outing — an experience you won't forget in a hurry!
Between Vaya Con Dios and Moyer's Buttress, a contrast can be found in the beautifully pure crack of Nowanda.
As fine a piece of gritstone jamming as any, this fist-width fissure gives a short but sweet pitch of HV4S 5a, coming complete with the type of finish which will stump the out and out thug.
At the rightmost end of this most continuous section of the edge lies the fine Elliot's Buttress.
This sports another classic in the form of the Eye of Faith.
An exposed and sustained E1 5b, this takes the blunt nose of the buttress, gained strenuously via an overhang-capped corner and diagonal crack.
A long reach will come in handy once on the arête, though it wouldn't exactly be a disadvantage right from the word go, where good protection serves to alleviate the situation somewhat.
After a small platform the upper, much easier, arête can be savoured.
Never mind the trade routes of Stanage and Froggatt; if you climb just the Eye of Faith and Moyer's Buttress, your time at Gardom's will be very well spent.
It is worth extending the search for quality further along the crag however, where one or two hidden gems may be found lurking in relative isolation.
Hearse Arête is certainly worth a mention, being much less macabre than it sounds, simply the companion to Undertake's Buttress!
It's a juggy excursion across one of those jutting gritstone noses common to these parts; rather intimidating, but E1 5b nonetheless.
A much purer line, although firmly in the ‘short but sweet’ category, can be located at the far (Baslow) end of the crag.
Left hand Pillar Crack, besides having a name redolent of times when tradition counted for more than imagination, is a superb little layback testpiece.
Once the constrictions of the initial pod are left behind it's all ape-like free movement to the top.
At least in theory; I must confess to being peculiarly hopeless at this style of climbing and having had quite a struggle on this route in the past, which in no way detracts from its quality.
Enough said!
If you've reached this end of Gardom's picking at its quiet and subtle fruits en route, then an amble back along the cliff top path is a fine way to end a day at this land that time nearly, but not quite, forgot.
Pete Hardman on the classic Moyer's Buttress, photos Bill Mckee.
Pete Hardman and Simon Marsh on Moyer's Buttress.
ON THE ROCK NORMAN CROUCHER
With pads on his knees, Norman Croucher shows that six points of contact can have advantages
‘The story goes,’ I told him, as we drove up to Llanberis after meeting at Bangor station, ‘that you were in the Radziel and a woman came in collecting for charity.
Apparently she told you it was for ‘those poor disabled people with artificial limbs.’
‘What, like this?’ you're supposed to have said, reaching down and rapping a leg with your knuckles.
‘Or like this…?’, doing the same to the other, at which point she fled in tears.’
‘I wouldn't have done that,’ Norman protested: ‘I wouldn't have made her cry.’
And then, after a pause, he added: ‘But I might well have mildly taken the piss…‘
Once you get to know Norman Croucher, often billed as ‘Britain's most famous double amputee,’ the possibility that he had indeed ‘mildly taken the piss’clarifies out into near-certainty.
Which isn't to imply that flippancy is his stock-in-trade.
Far from it — where other people's welfare is concerned, or the mechanics of his own achievements, he is as serious and practical as the world out there might require.
It is the pomp and inflation of ignorant adulation which he both refuses and undercuts.
His proportions are soundly worked out.
We were to go climbing in Wales.
He had arrived in the late afternoon of a perfect summer's day, was shortly to go off to the Alps and then the Himalayas and had not touched rock for a couple of years, so the urge for activity was upon him.
After a hurried cup of tea at my house we were on our way to do a climb which had been a longstanding ambition of Norman's — Via Media on Craig Aderyn, probably the best medium-grade slab pitch in Snowdonia.
I don't like heroes, so I was pleased to find that on the way up to Gorffwysfa Norman fussed and worried as anyone might when faced with the return to climbing after a long break.
But he tempered the apprehensiveness with a shrug-of-the-shoulders-and-oh-what-the-hell attitude which told me that in his view the experience, and not the heroics of the impression he might create, was what mattered, was what he would enjoy, was what he had come for.
As we drove up the Llanberis Pass he imparted to me, in response to my questions, something of the routine of his life.
He lives — with Judy, his wife of 24 years — in Ealing, West London, where he drinks at the cricket club and, along with the Kinnocks, is one of the local celebrities.
He told me how, when he had first moved there, the local MP had written to him congratulating him on his climbing and mentioning that he had had a one-legged uncle who climbed.
‘Sir George Young's your MP, isn't he?’
‘That's right — he's Geoffrey Winthrop Young's nephew.’
Heading for the Teyrn Bluffs, just across the pipeline from Winthrop Young's Climb, the resonances were perfectly pitched.
We crossed the marshy ground at the head of Llyn Teyrn — still firm underfoot after two dry summers, despite this year's monsoon, squirmed under the writhing beast which is Cwm Dyli pipeline and scrambled down to the greensward under the slab.
‘That pipe looks new,’ Norman mused.
‘It is,’ I told him, ‘It's only been there a couple of years.
Do you remember the two old black ones which were there before?’
‘That's right, there were.
So why didn't they do away with it altogether, or at least bury thing.’
‘Cheap electricity's the answer to the first — sod the cost to the environment so long as it keeps down the cost to the consumer.
As to the second, they said it was too expensive, bedrock all the way, couldn't be done.
but when they came to put into the new concrete support cradles, they found on average there was 30 feet of peat on top of the bedrock, so it could easily have been done.
But since they were very important people who told the original lies, they   couldn't eat humble pie and be seen to change their minds, so we're stuck with the thing until the end of the next century, unless…‘
‘Unless what?’ asked Norman, sensing mischief in the pause.
‘Well, my plan's to form a British chapter of the Monkey Wrench Gang and blow the bugger to pieces.
That'd make them sit up and realise they can't get away with desecrating any bit of wild country they can get their hands on…‘
‘They'd send you down for years,’ chided Norman.
‘Like Sarah Tisdall?
And anyway, how can you commit criminal damage against a thing which itself is criminal damage?’
I think he liked the idea.
We got ready to climb.
Norman hadn't brought any rockboots, and intended climbing in the old green trainers he was wearing.
But he had a secret weapon.
Out of his sack he fished a pair of sticky-rubber knee-pads and proceeded to strap them on with a complicated system of webbing.
‘I'm pleased with this idea.
I made them myself, but I don't know if they work yet.
We'll soon see, though.’
I laced up my own rockboots with a curious sense of guilty awareness at the advantages and mobility which feet and ankles bring.
Remembering the first time I'd done the climb, back in 1964, an echo of precise-edged delicacy tingled in my mind.
I wondered how Norman's knee-pads would cope.
It's only a small crag, this, a mile or so from the car-park, easy to get at, a little ruined by the serpent presence at its side.
But it's still a wild place, and a good one in which to formulate an impression of your companion, of his reaction to the environment.
Between his preparations, Norman was quiet, looking around himself, breathing in deep the atmosphere of the place.
He belonged there.
And the manner of his preparations told you more — methodical, analytical, unflustered.
This was a man well in control; one whose business was to endure.
You see it in the set of his face and the obdurate, awkward dignity with which he carries his body — thick set and strong above the two prostheses — aluminium under the trouser-legs, steel behind the smile, pained concentration in the eyes.
I felt an instinctive confidence in him.
Wherever we'd been, I'd have banked on him to survive.
He's done more than just survive in the 31 years since he lost his legs.
His mountaineering record is outstanding by any standards: Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn and the Eiger; Muztagh Ata, Aconcagua, Huascaran.
I don't think Norman would want it to be dwelt upon, but he deserves our making the imaginative effort to appreciate the scale of those climbs for a man with artificial legs.
Try to grasp the remoteness of those summits, and understand the obduracy of the man.
The legs went when he was 19.
A chapel-reared Cornish boy, he was far from home, working in Salisbury, drinking in pubs for the first time in his life, sleeping rough in a wood.
On his way drunkenly from the pub to the wood one night he fell down a railway embankment on to the line.
A boy passing by homewards from the pictures heard his cries for help.
When Norman woke in hospital, there were stumps below his knees:
‘I think it made it easier knowing that I only had myself to blame.
If it had happened in a car accident and had been someone else's fault, perhaps I would've been bitter.
But there's never been the reason to allow myself that luxury.
I've just had to get on with it, and that's been a good thing.’
It was time for us to get on with the climbing.
I watched as Norman handled the rope with competent familiarity, and set out up the centre of the slab.
If you haven't done this route, then no matter at what grade you climb, get up there and do it.
And furthermore, don't bother with guidebook descriptions or the like, just find the crag and climb the rock, dappled with lichen, tinged with red and bristle-tufted with pink-and-dark-green heather, which soars up to a narrow apex.
At its highest point it probably reaches 170 feet (my rope is 180 feet long, and once I'd belayed, there was none to take in between Norman and myself).
There are several described routes on it, but really they're beside the point.
There are no real features — a low relief gangway here, a slashed crack there, a stiffening of angle at two thirds height seize the imagination of the guide-writer more than that of the viewing climber, who will want to go from bottom to top by the smoothest and straightest way.
It's a place for Comici's drop-of-water philosophy to hold sway.
Once you've committed yourself to that theme, the route's discreet wealth unfolds, and its names are movement and texture.
The movement is that light, dancing slab-delicacy in which the calves ache and fingertips scour smooth but the arms don't tire; and the texture, which dictates terms to this movement, is crystalline.
The rock is almost like gabbro, rough and abrasive, with little flat fingerholds and quartz-gemmed pockets everywhere across it — small enough, far enough apart, to keep you thinking and working, diffident enough never to announce their presence till you're upon them.
The green trainers were the problem.
Within 20 feet one of them had fallen off.
 Unfazed , Norman somehow caught it, jammed it back on, and shouted up his resolve to do the rest of the route for the most part on his knees.
Now grasp the reality of this.
You lose 18 inches of height, and the ability to use small footholds.
For 150 feet of steady VS climbing it's a case of smearing all the way.
From my perch, I can see the effort going into it, the muscles starting out under his shirt and the sweat running down his face.
But Norman's wholly unflustered, plots his way from hold to hold, from rest to rest, occasionally commenting on the way the knee-pads disconcertingly twist; sometimes whopping with delight as he gets a foot on to a substantial hold.
It is a very, very impressive piece of climbing — calm, strong and deliberate.
Foot by foot, inch by inch, move by move, I see the accumulated force and strength of character which hauled those thin-air summits — Aconcagua, Muztagh Ata — into view.
Norman smiles up at me:
‘I'm getting there,’ he nods, and adds, ‘The rubber in these knee-pads is great.’
Every move is an achievement.
Why does he do it?
Why does this inspirational man demand so much travail from his damaged body?
I look down the rope into his face.
There's a smile on his lips and a battle-gleam in his eyes.
Do you know the poem in Old English called The Battle of Maldon ?
The old warrior Byrhtwold, grasping his shield and spear, exhorts his men to fight on:
‘Thought shall be the harder, heart the keener, courage the greater as our strength grows less…may he lament forever who thinks now to turn from this war-play.’
Get to know more about Norman Croucher for yourself.
book him to lecture to your club or in your town, or buy a copy of his autobiographical Tales of Many Mountains (published by the  
; at £12 inc. p&p).
I think you may learn something about the human spirit.
Above: The knee pads in use on Via media.
Right: Assembling the complicated system of webbing which keeps the knee pads in place (photos Jim Perrin).
‘From my perch, I can see the effort going into it, the muscles starting out under his shirt and the sweat running down his face.
But Norman's wholly unflustered, plots his way from hold to hold, from rest to rest, occasionally commenting on the way the knee-pads disconcertingly twist, sometimes whooping with delight as he gets a foot on to a substantial hold.’
QUALITY CRAG By Bill Birkett
CARN DEARG
Map Ref:NN 163723.
Guidebooks:Rock climbing in Scotland by Kev Howett.
Lochaber and Badenoch by A.C. Stead & J.R.
Marshall (Scottish Mountaineering Club).
Seasons:At an altitude of 2,475′ (750m), this mountain crag faces NE and gets morning sunshine, with the top third of Titan's Wall receiving it in the evening.
The buttress is usually climbable between April and October inclusive.
Surprisingly, before the spring thaw finally sets in, April can provide excellent rock climbing.
Climbs can weep for a while after heavy rain, but the rock away from the natural drainage lines dries quickly.
Restrictions:None.
Camping/Accommodation etc:Bivouacking below the crag and camping by the Allt a ‘Mhuilinn.
The CIC (Charles Inglis Clark) hut is ideally situated and often deserted in summer.
It must be booked in advance through the Scottish Mountaineering Club.
There is a campsite and youth hostel in Glen Nevis and lots of shops in Fort William at the base of the mountain.
Situation & Access:Located at the heart of the Western Highlands this buttress (pronounced carn jerrak ) lies to the right of the cliffs forming the north face of Ben Nevis.
From Fort William drive north for a couple of miles on the A82 to a golf course on the right.
Park in the far corner of the car park.
A track leads under a railway bridge and out to the course.
Cross the course and pass a walled ruin to reach a stile in the fence.
Follow the path (muddy in places but gradually being improved) steeply up the hillside to reach a water intake, crane, and metalled track.
Follow the track for a short way until a path leads on through the bogs beside the Allt a ‘Mhuilinn.
Eventually the diminutive form of the CIC hut can be seen ahead.
Cross the stream and traverse past the barrier cliffs until an easy, slabby buttress/rake and scree lead to the foot of the cliff (2 hours).
Descent:Routes on the left half of the cliff join a terrace which leads easily left to the broad descent rake known as Ledge Route; those on the right lead to the top of the buttress and directly on to Ledge Route.
Descend Ledge Route into No. 5 Gully.
This steepens at the bottom and involves some moderately difficult scrambling.
If there's no snow in the gully descent is straightforward, but the snow can linger until the end of July.
To descend from Agrippa and Titan's Wall, make two abseils from the end of the difficulties.
Incidentally, a 50m abseil reaches the ground from the belay at the top of the big corner of The Bat.
Character:Possibly the finest rock bastion in Britain.
From tip to toe it gives almost 900 ′/270m; of verticality.
Its sheer size, mountain locality and NE aspect mean climbing here is of a serious nature.
Even so there's a wide range of difficulty, with some 20 rock routes (and numerous variations) ranging from Very Difficult to E5.
The rock is a very compact andesite lava, generally sound, with a reasonable degree of friction.
A full rack of gear should be carried.
Menace lurks in the huge, north facing cliffs of Ben Nevis.
A gigantic horseshoe of rock ascends from an altitude of 2000′ (the summit height of an average British hill) to a lofty 4000′.
Winter maintains its bitter grasp on this north face longer than any other in Britain.
The sun visits fleetingly, if at all, with the gullies often retaining snow throughout the year.
Despite this, the face cannot fail to evoke a sense of wonder; the fusion of sheer scale and complexity of the rock architecture sees to that.
For the mountaineer, summer and winter, it proves a rough and challenging environment.
To the right of the bulk, one buttress in particular holds the eye: Carn Dearg; Bill Brooker's Wall of the Winds.
Starkly primeval, it resembles the head of a giant gorilla!
Routes here provide some of the best climbs at their standard in Britain; Sassenach, Centurion, The Bat, Titan's Wall, Agrippa — names that represent the essence of the great British climbing adventure.
Each at the cutting edge of possibility within its own historical context, each a breakthrough in the standards of its day.
Surveying the great buttress from the door of the CIC hut in 1931, I suspect grit trained, Lakeland expert and crack climber extraordinaire.
A.T.
Hargreaves couldn't believe his luck when G.G. MacPhee reliably informed him it hadn't been climbed.
Hargreaves and party promptly set about the most obvious vertical weakness.
Taking a  subsidiary buttress to reach the shelf, they followed this rightwards to gain and follow the vertical chimney rift which defines the left side of the central face.
The route was wet, holds had to be dug out and they thought it Severe — the same grade Hargreaves and MacPhee had given their ascent of Deer Bield Crack (one of the Lakeland's hardest climbs at that time) the previous year.
Interestingly, the former is now given Very Difficult in the guidebook while the latter has been raised to Hard Very Severe.
Whatever the grade, Route I opened the way for all that was to follow.
Route II came in 1943 with Brian Kellet climbing on from the chimney rift of Route I to cross the upper slabs.
An extraordinary character, Kellet was a conscientious objector working in the forest on the lower flanks of the mountain.
In the two summers of ‘43 and ‘44 he recorded some 32 first ascents on the Ben, soloing 26 of them.
As many were at the Very Severe upper end of difficulty, he developed quite a reputation for fearlessness.
The face was beginning to look vulnerable; indeed, Kellet attempted to move right from the stunning central line (later Centurion) across to the great chimney corner which was to become Sassenach.
He was not to make another attempt, later tragically falling to his death from nearby Cousin's Buttress.
Another try at the corner of Sassenach was made by Jimmy Marshall in 1953, again from the Centurion groove.
Same result.
Then Tom Patey had a go.
Like the others he failed from the Centurion corner, so tried to gain entry from the right.
With Mike Taylor in the middle and Bill Brooker as last man, the team finally managed to traverse in to the corner from what is now Titan's Wall.
Alas, with Patey some way up the corner, darkness threatened.
Their forced retreat, with a rope too short to reach the ground, took on epic proportions.
It is said that Jimmy Marshall spilt the beans about this massive unclimbed buttress of corners and cracks to the Rock and Ice in Chamonix.
Maybe so, because in April 1954 Don Whillans went straight to attempt the great open book corner direct.
Joe Brown joined him when snow and ice conditions failed to materialise in the then unclimbed Point Five Gully and the two succeeded.
Sassenach was created, the great buttress climbed, as it should be, direct from top to bottom.
A new era of difficulty had dawned.
To add further injury to Scottish pride, Whillans returned with Bob Downes in the summer of 1956.
In two days they climbed the two remaining plumb lines, the magnificent  Centurion and The Shield.
Undaunted and determined to make his mark, the incomparable Robin Smith, accompanied by rising star Dougal Haston, took up the challenge.
Their gripping ascent of The Bat, immortalised by Smith's classic article The Bat and The Wicked , has become one of the most celebrated first ascents of all time.
Today, devoid of sundry aid pegs, it stands at hard E2; and at that time it was another leap in climbing standards.
Jimmy Marshall returned in the 60s to lead Bullroar, a rising left to right traverse offering quality climbing and tremendous exposure.
He also climbed the obvious direct start to The Shield, using a short section of aid round the large overhang on the second pitch.
The airy and intricate line of Torro, weaving up the slabby wall to the left of Centurion, followed in 1962. it fell to John McLean, Willie Smith and Willie Gordon of the Creagh Dhu, with some aid.
In June 1970 it was free climbed by ‘big’ Ian Nicholson and ‘wee’Ian Fulton, undoubtedly the hardest technical rock climb on the buttress at the time.
Elsewhere you may see it graded at E1 5b, but in my opinion its crux alone warrants E2 and 5c: an assessment made even without taking into account the remaining 700′, containing at least four pitches of 5b climbing.
Although Ian Clough and Hamish MacInnes had climbed Titan's Wall in 1959, it had been predominantly climbed with aid and was never really recognised as a free rock climb.
Nearing the end of the 70s this became the plumb to pick.
Mick Fowler and Phil Thomas managed it just four days before Dave ‘Cubby’ Cuthbertson and Murray Hamilton.
It is now rated at E3 6a.
The 80s brought a number of hard ascents but all were capped in difficulty and seriousness by Pete Whillance's Agrippa.
A powerful line taking he left arête of Titan's Wall, it is graded E5 6b, is rarely repeated and currently stands as Ben Nevis's hardest rock climb.
Whether the 90s will bear further fruit remains to be seen.
In the meantime Carn Dearg, one of Britain's most important crags, now offers routes spanning a wide spectrum of difficulty.
Irrespective of grade they all have one thing in common— sheer quality.
Moving out onto the slab at the start of the second pitch of Torro (photo Bill Birkett).
Blyth Wright starting the first pitch of The Bat — the traverse to the Hoodie Groove.
The belayer is at the top of the first pitch of Centurion (photo Tony Greenbank).
At the start of the superb, slabby wall on the third pitch of Torro (photo Bill Birkett).
I have selected ten routes to represent the varied character and development of the crag divided left to right.
The left photograph best shows the front face; the right section of the crag that breaks into a series of vertical weaknesses to turn a sharp corner.
Hit List:
SANDBAGS & SOFT TOUCHES
Climbing grades can often conceal the true character of a route, as Dave Cook has discovered down the years
‘Soft touches’— as every rock climber knows — are the ones which are easy for their grade and well protected into the bargain.
One of the most popular routes in Pembroke — when the army, with their massively increased use of the Ranges allow access to it — is Jolly Sensible Arête.
Although the photograph on the cover of the current guidebook certainly adds to the route's appeal, it doesn't explain it.
This is a slight, unremarkable pitch in an undistinguished position.
Even more surprising there are no stars: a deficiency which today usually condemns a climb to total obscurity.
If Jolly Sensible was a restaurant, everyone would be speculating about what went on in the basement.
The explanation is less exotic.
Jolly Sensible was a restaurant, everyone would be speculating about what went on in the basement.
The explanation is less exotic.
Jolly Sensible Arête is graded E2 5c, whereas in reality it is an adequately protected HVS 5a.
Enjoy this ‘tick’ while you can — before midnight strikes with the publication of the new guidebook.
In the ‘old-days’— another splendidly elastic keyword concept (concluding date usually adjusted to enable the person bullshitting to claim participation)— before climbing had lost its mystery, detective work to locate soft touches was as important for success on the crag as training is today.
Descriptions told you where the routes went, not how hard they were.
In fact, several guidebooks were conspiracies to conceal this information, and repel invaders from outside the initiated inner circle.
Gradually these minimalist restrictive practices have been flushed out by the unstoppable march of information technology.
In turn, Swanage, Yorkshire, North Devon, Mid-Wales, Kinder — even Scotland — have been de-mystified.
Ironically Pembroke, the most recently developed area, where today new routes are tumbling out of the sky as fast as the climbers, has become the place where descriptions — starred pitches probably excluded — still offend mightily under the grade descriptions act.
Elsewhere, guidebooks now pinpoint severity with laser accuracy — grades: adjectival and numerical: even death-potential; and those oh-so-helpful lists, usually hidden away at the back, slightly shamefacedly among the first ascent details.
Pembroke is the last frontier.
here old fashioned soft touch detective  work can still be observed in the bars and campsites; private eyeballing of which a Bogart or a Mitchum would have been proud — last call for a way of life about to disappear for ever.
Oh those happy days when ignorance was bliss.
How we used to ferret out the info, gradually piecing together the clues.
Soft touches did not arrive on sports plans without investigative effort.
First thing to take into account was geography.
I remember the sinking feeling still: 1964, having just moved up to Leeds and my first day at Almscliff — then, and probably still, the best swather of tall poppies in the land.
Demon Wall — VS!
Bird Lime Traverse — VS!
‘How could this be?’
I remember thinking.
‘Christ I have just led Lithrig’— then graded Exceptionally Severe in Peter Harding's ‘Bumper Fun Book’.
Another layer that had to be pierced was the mystique that surrounded Rock and Ice routes.
We now know that Robin Smith, John Cunningham and Pat Walsh in Scotland, and Arthur Dolphin and Pete Greenwood in the Lakes, were doing first ascents every bit as difficult as those by Joe Brown and Don Whillans — but I don't remember being aware of this at the time.
Years later, Ogwen apprenticeship having been served, we began to aspire to their routes, knees knocking at our effrontery.
The Rock and Ice imprint must have been worth at least a grade.
Stuffed With Goodies
The stars were often very idiosyncratic in the way they wrote up their first ascents.
Certain regions seemed to have ceilings placed on what was permissible.
In Snowdon South the 1960s, Joe Brown found everything Hard Very Severe.
First Slip, Premus, The Neb, The Toit, Hardd, Tensor — how desperate we found them — and what a sigh of relief when subsequent guidebook editions bounced them upwards: in the case of The Toit to E4!
Alan Austin and the Barley Brothers seemed afflicted by a similar grading paralysis on Yorkshire limestone.
Throughout the 60s we watched incredulously as the HVS category bulged evermore lopsidedly as these great pioneers stuffed it with their goodies — Wombat, Carnage, Macabre, Vagabond, Sundance Wall — today as touch a collection of E points as you'll find anywhere.
On the other hand, thank God for grade conservatism.
There was no way we would have dared attempt these routes had they sported their current designations then.
The direct start to Canol, Joe Brown's classic E1 on Craig Ddu in the Llanberis Pass, is a hard pitch which used to be graded Severe because Doug Belshaw, who ascended it first, ‘only led severes’.
I know the feeling.
A great number of us who dabbled in new routery imposed a similar limit upon our own claims.
It is pleasant enjoying the upgrading as new guidebooks come out!
Faced with the ubiquitous HVS or Extremely Severe descriptions, what was the next step in the quest for information?
Well, it was always worth looking at who put up the route up.
Like a crossword  aficionado you developed an affinity with certain compilers — and from Ximenes you stayed well clear!
Some pioneers (Ron James was a famous example) were well known for their peerless protection ability.
He was reputed to stop on the crux of Cemetery Gates, loop a single line through a natural thread and then tie it off.
Most of us didn't even notice the placement!
The arrival of numerical grades added new twists to detective work.
The prefix ‘hard’ always set red lights flashing, especially where the numerical grade was untypically high for the adjectival one — HVS 5b's like Praying Mantis, on Borrowdale's Goat Crag, or in Northumberland, Hard Severe 4c.
Rigor rules north of the Tyne; numerical and adjectival grades tell you different things — as they are meant to.
(Try and solo all the severes at Bowden Doors sometime!)
Gradually the memory banks would fill.
Pub talk, chance encounters, peeps across from adjacent climbs, knowledge of who had repeated them, extracts from hut-books, journals, magazines, sneaky top-rope ascents, half forgotten fragments.
Slowly, with George Smiley-like skill, a picture would form.
Sometimes though, you climbed blind, boldly, ill-informed, sand-bagged.
Amazingly Chalk Free
So is soft touch detection a dead art — doomed, like the buffalo, to guest appearances in Kevin Kostner movies — condemned to historical interest only by the unrelenting march of graded lists and guidebook waymarks?
It would appear not.
A firestorm of attraction still nebulas around certain routes, which leaves others — often much superior — unaccountably neglected.
Some time ago I achieved a longstanding ambition — a lead of Slape Direct on Llanberis's Clogwyn y Grochan.
First climbed in 1954, this classic test-piece had inspired me for decades.
Amazingly it was chalk-free.
Yet all around, E4's and E5's were white-caked: obviously ascended far more often than my lowly objective.
What struck me was how fashionable certain styles of climbing — and how neglected others — are becoming.
Intensive training is making many activists a trifle monosyllabic.
Ogwen apprenticeships had their uses, and maybe one of them was to bestow a wider vocabulary.
Saying this lays my head on the block, because the modern climber is much better at small hold pulling and on jamming cracks, thrutchy chimneys and greasy grooves, than I am.
But that's not the point.
In current perceptions, routes of certain styles — provided they are protected — may seem to be the soft touches, whereas more old-fashioned struggles which climbers once took regularly — if exhaustingly — in their stride, may have fewer takers today.
In the 60s we all swam our way up Cloggy's Black Cleft, usually declaring it a ‘great route’.
I've not heard of it getting a summer ascent since.
This search for soft touches tells us a great deal about ourselves.
Most of us want the esteem without the pain; the acclaim of our peers without fear's nauseous bile.
There is a battle going on within us as we climb.
For all our bullshit about adventure, most of us are craven at the crutch.
Conceit and fear reach down into our minds and enlist us into behaviour of which we are not proud.
Our collective obsession with soft touches smokes this dark conflict out into the open.
Your arms are swollen, flaccid.
The last runner — whimsical and cosmetic — flutters 15 feet below.
The next move is blind…one  committing lunge…into the fire…except that a piece of sturdy tat winks at you.
Hello tat (at this point you are invited to act out your own ending)…
Pure-minded paragons will read no further.
Many routes in Pembroke are undergraded.
Yuppification, not downward mobility, will be the name of the game in the new edition of the guidebook.
Sadly my list is very small, but this makes ‘soft touches’, when you find them, especially pleasurable — one in the eye for the cosmic injustice.
Also with publication close, they will have a short shelf life.!
Catch them while you can before it's too late.
How to make any route a soft touch — an unknown climber using a little assistance on The Strait Gate, Mother Carey's Kitchen (photo Jim Perrin).
Cool for Cats at Stennis Head — a soft touch E15b.
Climber Dick Swinden, photo Jim Perrin.
Above: Pedlar's Slab, Stanage, a protectionless VS that well deserves its 5c numerical grade (Jim Perrin climbing).
Below: Brown's Eliminate, Froggatt — Jim Perrin climbing in the early 60s when the route was given VS.
Today it's E3 5a.
FICTION By 
CYBER CRANKER
PROLOGUE
The Neurocranker — an elite class competition climber with a body and brain augmented by medical and computer technology — has fallen to his death from a competition climbing wall 5,000 metres above Tokyo.
Some of that climber's grey matter has been revived and placed into a robot-climbing machine.
The ‘Robocranker’, as it becomes known, is narrowly beaten in the world championship by a computer-generated holographic projection.
Bolt Head, the gangster who financed and masterminded both the Robocranker project and the computer generated hologram, meets the Robocranker after his defeat and offers him a new body in return for operating one of his machines…
Ed McEd entered Nobles' amusements to be met by a machinegun barrage of digitised sound.
The new machine consisted chiefly of a silver-flecked, blue fibreglass exoskeleton equipped with a helmet, from which sprouted a spaghetti-tangle of black cables.
A squat pillar housed the coin slot and a panel of warnings and insurance disclaimers in Japanese.
Ed McEd slotted a £10 coin.
The exoskeleton slid smoothly open and a little tune — Climb Every Mountain — issued tonelessly from a small loudspeaker somewhere.
Ed climbed in, feeling the structure closing firmly around him as he did so.
The woman at the change counter was awoken from her daydream by a sickening crunch.
She looked over to the new machine.
The glittering blue thigh had articulated sharply in the middle, shortening along its length and snapping the femur within.
The exoskeleton opened evicting a moaning Ed McEd, his face a ghastly white.
‘I think you may have gone too far this time Mr B.’ Sue N'Grabbit, lawyer, slapped a copy of the daily paper onto Bolt Head's vast desktop.
‘We've had complaints from over 200 amusement hall operators, parents, safety standards people…we're looking at a complete re-run of that blasted horrorshow we had when Pit Bull was released.’
The tall Zimbabwean paced nervously backwards and forwards.
‘We've already forked out a small fortune in out of court settlements; and the McEd boy — his father is creating a real stink.’
Bolt Head stared impassively out of the window at the dramatic skyline of Manhattan.
There was a long pause before he spoke: ‘The game is proving exceedingly popular Miss N'Grabbit — it provides a lot of thrills for young people.
Besides that, it's helping to maintain a high profile for the competition circuit and we depend on that for the continued success of our Crag-U-Like operations.’
Bolt Head sat up, left his desk and walked over to the huge VDU screen that dominated one wall of his office.
He pressed a button and a vivid, writhing, three dimensional computer graphic blossomed forth.
‘This is the model our analysts have come up with for the development of our leisure interests over the next few years.
‘Rock’ climbing has already overtaken shopping as the number one leisure pursuit in most parts of the developed world — and still has a good way to go before it peaks.
We are doing well with dog-fighting in spite of its illegality, and we are making progress with a few speculative lines such as cave diving, simulated extreme skiing and Russian roulette.
If we can train the market to accept a high degree of objective danger — such as we have in Cybercranker, then we can make mutually beneficial arrangements with certain medical organisations.
This will generate capital for further developments and we can almost guarantee market dominance for a very long time.’
A quick glimmer crossed the otherwise corpse-like eyes.
‘No Miss N'Grabbit, I'm  relying on you to safeguard products like Cybercranker — especially against the likes of McEd's father and any other whingeing killjoy.’
Bolt Head's office occupied the top floor of a vast mirror-fronted building in prime-site New York.
Several storeys below, in a cage in the research and development department, sat an unhappy looking rhesus monkey.
The monkey was wired up to a small computer terminal and was punching away with its leathery fingers at buttons on the keyboard in front of it.
The images generated were fed directly into other, more powerful computers, analysed by various marketing experts and filed away for use in the development of Cybercranker II — next in the line of arcade games to be pioneered by the Bolt Head Corporation.
Ed McEd was alone; exquisitely alone.
The only sound this crystal clear summer morning was the distant stridulation of a skylark.
The dry bracken crackled beneath his feet and gave off a pungent aroma.
He dipped his hands nervously into the chalk bag at his waist and went forward to the base of the soaring, twisting arête.
The prolonged dry spell meant the rock was warm and harboured no moisture — every crystal discernible through his roughened palms.
A few snatchy moves and he was committed.
A dozen or so greenish boulders lurked with angular menace below.
Subtleties in the texture of the grit, patches brushed clean of lichen, told him where to place his feet.
Ed's heart beat loud in his ears — speeding the rush of brain chemicals and adrenalin.
His right foot was high up by his waist; the bent knee felt cramped and painful.
His left foot, dangling beneath the slight overlap, stabbed frantically.
He was squeezing the angle of the arête with his right hand, easing his weight over his right foot.
The thumb and forefinger of his left clutched a sharp pebble.
Slowly he came upright onto his crazily angled right leg, brought up his left and squashed rubber into a shallow, horizontal ripple.
He slapped up with his right hand, aiming for a narrowing and sharpening of the arête.
Caught it…but didn't catch the right part of it…
Ed sat up stiffly, drenched in a cold sweat.
The thin duvet lay in a crumpled heap on the floor.
Illuminated digits on the clock alarm indicated the time 4.02.
His leg itched intolerably beneath its cladding of tubigrup and ‘breathable’ plastic pot.
It ached an ugly, dull ache.
He shook out a handful of painkillers — the box was nearly empty.
He could hear his father snoring through the thin plasterboard.
Ed figured his father probably needed the sleep.
The old man had been plagued by visitors all week.
Doctors, relatives, dubious pressmen, lawyers.
One lawyer in particular— an African woman — had been hanging around almost every day.
Ed missed most of the discussions his father had with these people.
He wasn't interested.
He was curious about his father's involvement with the African lawyer, however.
Mr McEd was acting pretty cagey about it for one thing and, when pressed, would only come up with the reassuring phrases: ‘Every cloud has a silver lining Ed…’ or ‘Don't worry son, you father's not such an old fool as he looks…
’ This last phrase, in particular, made Ed feel not only deeply curious but extremely worried.
Miss N'Grabbit slapped a copy of the daily newspaper onto the polished alloy boardroom table of Mild County Enterprises.
At her shoulder was an electronic flip chart she was using to assist in her presentation.
Ranged around the table were a number of relaxed, suited figures: the directors of Mild County.
‘As we can see’ continued a confident Miss N'Grabbit, ‘with the body of current parental opinion expressing dissatisfaction with dangerous and violent leisure pursuits, a sizeable gap has appeared in the marketplace for our products.
How, gentlemen, I think we should draw the blinds.’
Lights went on in the darkened boardroom.
‘This is a video-tape showing the marketing strategy of the Bolt Head Corporation — our principal competitor, as you are aware.
I managed to film this without Mr Bolt Head noticing at our last meeting.
‘As you can see, he has concentrated all of his investments in this sector of the market.
If we overlay the model that we came up with…
’ N'Grabbit depressed a button on the unit she held in her hand and a new graphic merged with the first ‘…you can see that he has been somewhat over-confident in his predictions.
In fact, he has completely failed to take into account this very important development.’
She pointed to an area of the graphic that was expanding into other sections, eating into them like some strange, glittering kind of cancer.
‘A new demand is spreading through the market like wildfire and Bolt Head has quite simply failed to spot it.
This will be the biggest thing to hit the leisure industry since indoor parapenting, and Mild County is fully prepared to meet this demand — right now — with a new range of products.
Gentlemen , we now have Bolt Head Enterprises well and truly licked.’
In the cage the monkey bitterly continued number-crunching; converting its imaginings into sable chunks of data.
‘We have to take these things in gentle stages…’ had been the words of a grinning Bolt Heat.
The round, hard face with its halo of glinting metal bolts was the first thing the animal remembered seeing on regaining consciousness in the small cage.
‘See this as an…interim stage, if you will, while we find you a suitable ‘donor’.
In the meantime, to keep you occupied — and to ensure that some part of the considerable sum of money invested in keeping you alive is repaid — we would like you to do some work for us.’
The monkey gingerly ran its fingers along wires to the point where the electrodes had been inserted in its brain.
‘I hope you will be co-operative.
I can assure you we will keep our side of the bargain…just as soon as you have completed this assignment.
Your instructions are on the computer — press any key to start.’
With that Bolt Head left the room.
This meeting had taken place about two weeks ago; two weeks of frustration and boredom rubbing away at the monkey's sanity, its only hope to keep concentrating; to put all its energy into finishing the task the computer had set for it; another four, maybe five hours of programming.
Then, quite suddenly, the monkey's body clocked kicked in and it fell asleep.
It was woken abruptly.
The sound of breaking glass — muffled remonstrations.
The room was dark.
The clock on the monitor said 12.30.
A voice again, closer this time.
‘Here's one Sinead.’
A torch stabbed a rude beam of light into the cage.
‘Look at what the bastards have done to this poor monkey.’
It was a man's voice, an English accent.
The door to the cage was opened, the wires gently removed from the skull implants and the animal was picked up.
It felt the cold from outside still clinging to the canvas that the man wore.
‘Don't worry mate — we'll have you out of this horrible place in no time.’
The torch dimly illuminated two figures — both wearing combat fatigues and black woollen ski masks.
‘Shut up and get on with it’— a woman's voice this time, more hurried.
The monkey was enveloped by the musty darkness of a coarse woollen bag.
The bag was closed, shutting out all light.
Some movement, the barely audible sound of a door opening and closing, then the monkey's body clock got the better of it again  and it fell asleep.
Bolt head has not seen Miss N'Grabbit for several weeks.
The businessman was staring in angry disbelief at the glittering computer graphic that hung on the screen before him.
The leisure industry had been consumed from within — filled — by some brightly coloured virus.
A new craze had swept in and he just hadn't seen it coming.
Who could have anticipated that handicrafts — macrame, cold enamelling, marquetry, weaving — would become so popular.
Who would have thought that knitting could provide such a buzz.
but it had.
All across the developed world kids were knotting, dying, marbling and lapidarizing like there was no tomorrow.
Dustbins were filling with lycra, elbow supports and chalk bags.
Living Dead and Terminator slippers — people had been queuing for them for God's sake — were being returned unused to the shops and credit notes cashed in for balls of wool and packets of scraperboard.
The Crag-U-Likes were virtually empty these days.
Members of the research and development department, put under the massive strain of trying to turn production over from rock slippers to ‘rubber craft’(not proving all that popular according to market research anyway) were dropping like flies.
There had been resignations, defections, even suicides.
Bolt Head had a clear choice: either boldly soldier on facing financial disaster or…
He picked up the power drill from the slick surface of his desk, noting the empty in/out trays as he did so.
He set the hammer action and drove the bit in between two shiny bolts.
Keen Dee McKeen was at a complete loss.
The Crag-U-Like was shut .
A curt notice had been posted on the door — it gave a number to phone in case of enquiries.
Not much use to Keen Dee; he didn't have any enquiries, just wanted to get pumped.
Maybe he could wander round to Ed McEd's a get a brew.
Ed had that excellent ceiling training unit — pretty pumpy if you could handle the boredom of notching up circuits.
Keen Dee knocked at the door of Ed's flat.
No answer.
The door was open so he went in.
Ed and a group of kids he hadn't seen before were all slumped around a slick looking computer games console — all plugged into the machine via wires and electrodes.
They were all in very trendy clothes — fluorescent shellsuits, gold and silver lame baseball caps.
He noticed a cassette cover by the machine…
Teenage Mutant Ninja Knitwear according to the bold type.
Somebody had obviously come into some money.
He nudged Ed, who opened his eyes.
‘Oh, hello Dee,’ said Ed, ‘want a brew?’
Ed limped into the kitchen followed by his friend.
‘Fancy a session on the unit, Ed?’
He turned off the tap and plugged in the kettle.
‘No thanks Dee, I've given up on climbing, it's a bit boring.’
Dee looked out of the window of the flat over long rows of grim, dark housing developments.
Beyond them in the grey distance was bleak moorland — the watershed — private land.
There were crags up there he'd heard, real crags, but they were empty now and host only to thriving colonies of brilliant green algae.
‘Have you ever tried knitting, Dee?
It's wild,’ interjected Ed.
‘No thanks Ed,’ said Dee.
Is it ok if I use the unit?’
‘Don't mind at all.
Ed had doubts about Dee — he was a bit, kind of , uncool at times — just like Dee to carry on climbing when everyone else knew it was boring.
In the gardens of a Buddhist temple somewhere in the Far East sat a contented looking rhesus monkey.
The electrodes that had been implanted in its brain had been removed; the scars from the surgery had healed and grown over with fur.
The monkey had plenty to eat, it was warm all the time and the monks in their saffron robes were very kind.
The monkey had another reason to be happy…it was about to give birth and was looking forward to raising a family.
PILLAR & GABLE
With a new guidebook out, Bob Wightman describes some Cumbrian architecture Prince Charles would be proud of
Away from the main Lakeland climbing centres of Borrowdale and Langdale there are many routes worthy of the attention of the modern mid-grade climber.
Yet many of these crags can remain unfrequented even on the busiest weekend.
Leaving aside Scafell (surely the best mountain crag south of the border) the wild west of Cumbria holds many surprises for those willing to try something new.
Here can be found the largest crag in the district: Pillar Rock; the dirtiest: Boat Howe Crag; the remotest: Haskett Buttress, and the sunniest: Buckbarrow.
On top of this you'll rarely have to queue for a route (even on The Napes).
Indeed, on most crags you won't see anybody else other than walkers escaping their own crowds.
For the visiting climber the natural starting point is Wasdale.
The first crag seen as you enter the valley is Buckbarrow Crag — a mere ten minutes from the car (yes, I know it looks further but trust me).
It has more routes than Shepherds Crag, ranging from VD to E6, and is a popular wet weather venue for those retreating from the hills.
The main buttresses are Witch Buttress and Pikes Crag, which lie above one another near the top of the fell and receive whatever sun there is, from dawn ‘till dusk.
Starting with Witch Buttress (the first you arrive at), the most prominent feature is a pinnacle with a crack on either side.
This is the best place to leave your sack, since it's the only flat area hereabouts.
Our first climb is the left crack of the pillar, Harmony (HVS 5a), an excellent warm up, as hands are almost redundant in the upward struggle.
Moving left, a group of routes is centred on an obvious over-hanging corner.
The corner is taken by Imagine (E1/2 5b).
A bold, and on first acquaintance awkward, start leads to the corner which is well protected and followed ever more steeply to the crux at the top.
As arms tire you may like to fiddle a tape around the obvious thread, though it's probably better to continue.
Starting at the same point but heading leftwards is Mysteron (HVS 5b).
The crux is a short corner to gain a ledge, above  which easier climbing leads to the belay.
Also using the Mysteron corner, but taking a different start and finish, is A Cut Above (E1 5b)— altogether a more sustained line.
An awkward initial groove leads to the Mysteron crux.
From the top of the corner and committing sequence of moves along a slanting crack hopefully gains the final airy arête.
Moving back to the right of the pillar is a slabby wall taken by several routes spread across the grades, though the best is Too Many Hands (E2 5b).
This takes a series of shallow hanging corners that become progressively harder.
Protection is quite good (if you trust micro wires) and the final slab has a sting in the tail.
NEEDLES AND PINNACLES
Moving up to Pikes Crag, another pinnacle, known as Buckbarrow Needle, has a fine E1 5b up its front face — the obviously named Needle Front.
To the right of the needle is Needless Eliminate (HVS 5b), taking the excellent and steep crackline.
Just left of the needle is a steep wall with two lines for those who like bold climbing.
Of the two, Last of the Summer Wine (E1 5b) is the finer and better protected; continually interesting with the crux just where it should be — at the top.
Further left the crag becomes higher and split into tiers.
Two routes to play on here are The Jewel (HVS 5a) and The Crystal (E1 5c).
The first has a very awkward (though avoidable) crack to start before climbing up easier grooves, while the second is balancy wall climbing on quartz holds, some of which slope disconcertingly.
The most popular crags in the area are those on Great Gable.
Following the styhead path the first buttress you come to is Kern Knotts.
This the best known for the crack lines on its east face.
Innominate Crack and Kern Knotts Crack are both 4c, though the first is the harder overall and more suited to the modern climber, being less of a squirm than the other.
On the west face are several newer routes of which Sylvester (E2 5c) is typical: steep, sloping holds and quite bolt — go for it!
Further on we come to Tophet Wall: impressively steep, even more so when you  are on it!
The only route I'll describe here is The Viking (E3 5c), the first route of that grade in the Lakes.
It takes the obvious wide crack (!?) on the left of the wall.
It isn't quite what it appears to be and success requires brain as well as brawn.
You'll just have to go and do it to find out!
Next along are The Napes; the breeding ground of many young tyros (easily recognised by the rising pitch of their calls).
Among the easier classics, several more testing quality climbs can be found, the best of which is The Cayman (E2 5b).
This takes the slim (and I mean slim) pillar between Crocodile Crack and Alligator Crawl.
Just off vertical, with 40 metres of 5b moves and a runner every other move, it ranks with the best single pitch routes in the district.
On the other side of the mountain lies Gable Crag which, though it can be approached from Wasdale, is easier to get to from the top of Honister Pass.
This is one of the few Lakeland crags to face due north and receives virtually no sun whatsoever.
It can take several days of fine weather to dry out.
The pride of the crag is the Engineers Slabs, situated high in the centre.
These walls are now covered in an amazing number of climbs ranging from the well protected to the very bold.
The most obvious line is that of Engineers Slabs (VS 4c, 4c).
Unfortunately, being a major drainage line, it takes the longest to dry out.
Luckily there are equally good routes on the walls to the side.
Just left of Engineers Slabs (indeed it shares the first 15 metres) i s Snicker Snack (E2 5c, 5b).
Quite hard for the grade, it follows one of the straightest cracklines in Lakeland for a full 50 metre rope length, with excellent protection ranging form RP's to medium sized friends!
The last pitch is easier but quite intimidating as it pulls through a roof at the top of the crag.
If you enjoy this then try Dream Twister (E3 6a) at the lefthand end of the wall.
It's only slightly harder, being a little bit steeper, and just as well protected.
An experience of a totally different kind waits those who try The Tomb (E2 5b).
Bold rather than technical, it strikes a diagonal line across the wall to the right of Engineers Slabs.
Choose a still, windless day to climb it, otherwise the name is likely to prove very apt!
Again a harder alternative exists.
Sarcophagus (E3 5c) takes a direct line through The Tomb and is just as poorly protected.
If these adventures seem a bit too much then try The Jabberwock (HVS 4c, 5a, 4c) up the obvious crack next to the righthand arête.
It gives fine views of the worried faces to your left and is itself in a splendid position.
LAKELAND'S LARGEST
The path from Honister Pass continues westwards past Gable Crag to Black Sail Pass and then continues via the High Level Route to Pillar Rock.
Before it reaches Black Sail however, it passes beneath what must be the dirtiest crag in the district, Boat Howe Crag.
It's worth climbing here if only to appreciate the cleanliness of other crags!
And so to Pillar Rock — the largest crag in Lakeland.
The rock quality here is superb, particularly on the west face.
It's true that at times the many ledges give some discontinuity to the routes, but they also provide good stances.
For the middle grader, Pillar Rock offers some of the finest climbing in Lakeland, with only four routes above E2 in difficulty.
Pillar has an undeserved reputation for shade.
However, with a little bit of planning it's possible to climb in the sun all day (assuming it's shining of course).
The north face is in the sun until around 10–11 am; then go round to the wall overlooking Walker's Gully until about 1pm.
Finally, move round to the west face for the rest of the day.
So to the routes.
Moving from east to west (left to right), we start with The Shamrock, which has several excellent routes to interest us.
Eros (W2 5a, 5b 5b) is well worth the effort in finding the protection on the second pitch.
The third pitch is probably harder, but being well protected doesn't leave such an impression.
Starting from the stretcher box beneath the buttress is Thanatos (HVS 5b), best done in one pitch to the heather terrace.
The crux is a strenuously delicate traverse from one groove to another near the top.
The best continuation is Electron (HVS 5a, 4b), which takes the prominent wide layback crack high on the face.
The slim pillar left of Walker's Gully is taken by Necromancer (HVS 5a).
Quite stiff for the grade, with several moves that leave you wondering if you are climbing as well as you thought!
To the right of Walker's Gully is a steep wall with a series of exposed ramp/grooves running diagonally across it.
This is the line of Groove Wall (VS 5a).
Most of the route is around Severe in standard but the crux pitch, though short and well protected, is very awkward and difficult to do with style.
Further right where the crag is at its highest, a clean wall at around half height dominates the cliff.
This is a split in two by the prominent crack of Scylla (VS 4c)— a fine, ever steepening line until a traverse left avoids the obvious direct finish (E2 5c): one of only four lines on the crag to have used aid on the first ascent.
In fact, this was a fully artificial pitch.
Using the first few feet of Scylla is Puppet (E1 5b, 5b) before it takes a delicate traverse out right to climb an obvious groove.
The second pitch takes the unlikely looking arête above the stance; with one committing move before good holds are reached, it certainly feels a bit wild.
Next in line is Charybdis (HVS 5a) an excellent sustained line up the righthand edge of the north face.
With continually varied climbing it proves interesting and improbable to the last.
The remaining routes are on the west faces of Lower and Upper Man.
On the lower crag lies Goth (E1 5b), a finely positioned climb up a steep, curving groove.
This can prove a little strenuous to those who climb slowly (hint!).
The most obvious line on the upper crag is Vandal (VS 4c), taking the hanging grooveline to the right of a huge triangular roof to the summit of the rock.
Despite appearances, its bark is definitely worse than its bite.
The best has been left until last however.
The hanging arête that dominates the upper part of the face to the left of Vandal, Gondor (E2 5c), gives superb climbing on perfect rock in an incredible position.
Described in two pitches, it can be done in one long runout.
The first pitch used to employ a point of aid to cross the overhang, but an alternative way round this was found and gives good jug pulling to the belay.
Above, the arête dominates and there are two ways to climb it.
Either traverse right until just right of the arête, then boldly straight up on small holds to an easing in the angle and protection, or take a lower traverse across the wall until it is possible to work back up and leftwards to join the direct way at the protection.
Either way is brilliant.
If you don't feel capable of leading it get your mate to take you up, it's worth it.
Finally to the remotest crag in the Lakes, Haskett Buttress.
Situated in Hind Cove, it takes over two hours to reach from Wasdale.
For some reason it's not very popular!
But at least you will be on your own.
Apart from a strong pair of legs you'll also need a good dictionary to decipher the route names.
The first wave of exploration was undertaken by an English teacher and more recent developments have followed his example.
For starters try The Dolorous Stroke (HVS 5a).
This offers a fine variety of climbing on the edge of Haskett gully.
Then there is The Delectation Sinistrorse — a girdle of VS standard (see what I mean about the dictionary!)
Of the newer routes, The Dipso Somnambulist (E2 5b) is worth doing.
It climbs the centre of the clean wall to the right Dolorous Stroke by a faint crack.
Thus finishes our tour of the western crags of Lakeland.
It does, unfortunately, leave you rather a long way from your car; but never mind, at least you're used to walking by now!
If the solitude and beauty of the area grabs you then these routes are just a taster of what the west has to offer, and no doubt you'll return.
For the more gregarious souls there's always Borrowdale and the queues…
The author on a strenuous section of Eastenders, Buckbarrow Crag (Al Phizacklea).
Seconding the crackline on the first pitch of Snicker Snack, Gable Crag (Al Phizacklea).
Al Phizacklea tackles Innominate Crack on Kern Knots (Wightman).
Selecting some gear under a roof on Cenotaph Left Hand, Kern Knotts (Wightman).
TREKKING
The WONDER WALK
Hamish Brown describes the creation of a new trekking route in Morocco
Granite slabs rough as gabbro (thank heavens!), curve over and fall vertically down into the boulder-filled gorge, loud with crashing waters and graced with pools of turquoise calm.
Like us the water had started days before on the snowy rim of the Tichka Plateau.
Descending this great river, the Oued Nfis, from that ‘lost world’ was something of a long dream realised.
At this moment however, it ordered on the nightmarish, for the slabs were very bare and very steep with an exposure usually associated with climbing rather than walking.
And it was a trekking possibility we were supposed to be exploring!
Days later, glutted with our experiences, we knew we had created a ‘wonder walk’, a two week trek which could be described as a jewel in the Atlas crown.
It was also a story about people and, if I keep returning to Morocco, it is not just because the Atlas offer superlative climbing and trekking but because the Berber ‘Highlanders’ are a very special people: incredibly hardy, had-working, lively and friendly.
Mohammed I first knew as a shepherd boy; now he is a middle-aged businessman with interests in innovative farming and trading, the owner of a shop and cafe, a professional mountain guide and trek organiser.
For a decade our groups have been staying at his home in a village above Imlil, the base for Jbel Toubkal, the alluring highest peak in the country, conveniently sited on the horizon south of Marrakech.
One of the joys of the Atlas is the availability of mules to do the donkey work of load carrying.
Mohammed has provided this service for us in the Toubkal massif over many years.
Mohammed has a son, Mustapha, who was a lively boy for the first eight years of his life, then some cerebral bug hit him.
Now he is 16 and sits, moaning, limbs useless, body and brain short-circuited.
For him the turn from winter to spring is milestoned with our coming, his smiling ‘Bonjour Hamish’ is a knife to my heart.
He has three sisters and two mothers and a grandfather, so the home is a lively, happy one.
It has become part of me.
So, too, has the home of Aziz.
Aziz lives in Taroudant, the forgotten mini-Marrakech in the south west of old Morocco, 50 miles inland from touristy Agadir.
He had a finger in several pies as well(which Moroccan hasn't?) but he also had a dream — of doing something with visitors up in the unknown peaks above Taroudant.
Years ago he persuaded me to go with him up to Tigouga, his home village, and the near-mystical Tichka Plateau above.
It was springtime and the slopes  were ablaze with almond blossom, the vivid green terraces edged with blue irises.
The plateau above was a hollow basin, ringed with bold peaks and holding several large meadows where millions of mini-daffodils overhung the rushing stream which head east as the Oued Nfis.
One of only three roads to cross the Atlas links Marrakech and Taroudant by the astonishing 7,000 ft Tizi n'Test pass.
The containing ridges holding the Nfis lead the river eastwards for 50 miles as the crow flies, before the waters break north onto the Marrakech Plain.
For some of this distance it parallels the Tizi n'Test road, so travellers are aware of the big river, but nobody had written about its higher reaches.
What lay between Tichka Plateau and the road?
Aziz did not know.
The maps showed no paths.
We'd have to go and see!
By a lucky accident we had already trekked (with Mohammed) from Imlil westwards to the Nfis, discovering superb trails through a bold landscape.
Both this area and the Tichka Plateau had taken us back year after year.
So why not link them together in a grand Tichka Plateau to Jbel Toubkal trek? the tantalisingly unknown descent of the Nfis went on our programme ‘for immediate attention’ and uniquely, we involved both Mohammed and Aziz in a co-operative venture.
Mohammed came with us to Taroudant where Aziz organised the Tichka end (his patch) and we set off for the mountains.
Some regard reaching the hills as the most hair-raising part of any trip here.
The pick-up truck transport carries an astonishing number of people and a vast quantity of baggage in a small vehicle.
‘They need a ton to stop bouncing,’ Aziz explained.
We didn't bounce.
Six of us, Mohammed, Aziz, Ali (Aziz's assistant), six locals and goods it took half an hour to unload half way, was a fairly modest load.
I've seen 30 people aboard.
The driver's home was en route so we stopped off for mint tea there.
(Could you see that happening in the UK?)
It took five hours to reach Tagmout, our overnight spot, first crossing the dusty plain then wiggling up long valleys, over spurs and through gorges — the road simply gouged out of the rock and wickedly rough on the vehicle.
The vegetation became more varied, from date palms and prickly pear through argan forests and orange groves to almond and walnut spreads.
A cheery old Berber made half his house ours at Tagmout.
There was piping hot bread and honey with the welcoming tea and, at night, a huge tagine (casserole) dish containing a delicious stew.
On the morrow we added three mules (and their muleteers): Llacen, a wizened old man, Hussein, a lively character, and young  Omar, all tousled hair and grin, who made the entire trip in flip flops!
You hurry slowly in the Atlas: at the highest village we were taken in for tea again, by a sister of Ali's.
The view down the Medlawa valley led the eye right back to the plains: and endless, changing, tonal array of jagged peaks, barren slopes and exuberantly cultivated fields.
Irrigation channels, centuries old, ensure this vivid contrast between the desert and the cultivated ground.
We slept out on the last fields, leaving the 90 zigzags of path up to the plateau for the next day.
It was not as fast ascent.
The col was at nearly 3,000 metres.
I felt an unbelievable relief when we were all up to the tizi and the real exploration could begin.
Below lay the infant Nfis.
It was all downhill from here!
We were soon relishing the walk along the Nfis.
There were rows of orchids, acres of daffodils, blue hedgehog brooms and other alpine flowers.
Two of the party shot off to climb a couple of 3,000 metre peaks on the rim.
We ended the day by bivouacking on a three-acre daffodil meadow, Ali producing the inevitable tasty tagine ; the meal ending under a sprouting of stars and sleep coming easily, despite trying to stay awake to spot satellites, or wonder at the rash of shooting stars.
Owls and foxes called eerily in the breathy chill.
There was great discussion about the onward route.
None of the five Moroccans had been down the Nfis and verbal information gleaned had been contradictory.
We crossed several large meadows before working along steep, loose flanks, rich with flowers but not a route for mules, wherever they were — they had taken a different line.
Ali shot off to find them.
Eventually we were all reunited on a spur at the lowest end of the plateau.
The Nfis looped off in gorges beyond and a path led us along, in swooping fashion, over the spurs and flanking down beside the clean, clear waters.
For the rest of the day we were blessed with the dappled shade of the Tiziatin Forest, a spread of evergreen oak.
Lunch by a side stream was blissful indulgence.
We wandered on, leaving the mules to catch up.
At a fork we waited and Mohammed and Hussein caught up.
They said the mules would go round by a good track but we'd explore the river.
The path teetered down into a side gorge — and then the granite slabs appeared.
Mohammed simply led our 74 year old by the hand and she followed in disbelief.
‘Take a picture for me please.
Nobody will believe this.’
Those of us with a climbing background revelled in the situation, but Mohammed and Ali agreed it was not a variant for the normal trekker!
Bare granite peaks towered over the south all day and the pools and falls seemed to grow bigger and better every mile.
The inadequate map suggested villages lay ahead so we stopped on a jut of land at the first hint of cultivation: another delectable bivvy site.
One member took an unintentional clothed ducking in the river to reach the site.
What swimming pools though.
We had haggis for supper that night.
The villages were not where expected and a good morning's walk passed before our first contact with people — an open-mouthed lad driving two cows up the path.
Before then we had had one last area of gorges and one long haul up — sweaty work under the hot sun.
At the first village, Amsiwi, we were soon sprawled on cushions under the carved guest-room ceiling in the chief's house, drinking tea and eating hot, wholemeal pancakes and butter.
Ali and Mohammed discussed the possibility of staying there with subsequent trekking parties.
The idea was that Aziz and Ali would organise the early stages and provide mules from Tagmout then, nearing the Tizi n'Test road, they would hand over to Mohammed, who had meantime brought his mules from Imlil.
The Tagmout mules would then return.
Our granite world gave way to limestones and shales, arid paths and even lusher fields.
We were astonished to see a piste (dirt road) being blasted and dug up the valley.
A dirt track drops from the Tizi n'Test to Souk Sebt, but this is now being extended too produce can flow in and out: an extraordinary effort.
One village was the birthplace of Ibn Toumert, creator of an early Berber dynasty which founded Tin Mal and then Marrakech, to end with an empire stretching from the Sahara to half way up Sapin.
In the UK at this time, William was becoming the Conqueror.
The afternoon temperature shot into three figures Fahrenheit so we dived into the river to cool off.
Souk Sebt, a Saturday marketplace, was our overnight stop.
One of the permanent shopkeepers said he had lived in Paris — but preferred the saner lifestyle of the Nfis.
We were up and off early to beat the heat.
A scattering of villages led on to miles of uninhabited cupressus forest which gave deliciously cool walking.
We went astray once but a man on a mule appeared and redirected us, and a solitary house provided welcome tea.
We gained a brick-red landscape and crossed a log-and-stone footbridge to the start of the last easy gorges.
Despite diversions because of the richer agriculture, seeing a chameleon, terrapins, and a mongoose, we reached the Tizi n'Test road at 2pm.
Some children said our hoped-for bus had gone through so Mohammed and Ali wandered off and somehow hired or hijacked a pick up truck.
Llacen, Hussein and Omar turned their mules to head back up the Nfis.
‘We'll be home tomorrow,’ they grinned, as we took our emotive farewells.
The truck took us to where the Imlil-Toubkal road branched off at the market town of Asni and there we swapped to the normal ‘shared taxis’ into Marrakech for a merry night at the Hotel Ali — famous for its buffet dinners and the starting point for many adventures.
Next day Ali returned by bus to Taroudant and we went ‘home’ to Mohammed's.
As we had already linked Imlil-Toubkal with the Nfis we didn't need to repeat that half to complete our explorations.
Tichka Plateau to Jbel Toubkal was, clearly, a wonder walk (perhaps the best in the High Atlas) and we were content.
A few days later we climbed Toubkal though.
It may be the highest summit but it was not the year's highlight.
That was the descent of the Oued Nfis, the magic link between Tichka Plateau and Jbel Toubkal.
I hope Aziz and Mohammed can make it a ‘treat of a trek’ to many visitors in the sunny years ahead.
Hamish has prepared a practical factsheet to the above trek giving the addresses of Aziz and Mohammed, details of maps, etc.
Copies may be obtained from Mountain Holidays (T to T),.
Please enclose a long SAE and six first class stamps.
Hamish would also be happy to advise on any aspect of climbing, trekking or holidaying in Morocco, which enjoys excellent weather and is remarkably cheap still.
(The above trek, climbing Toubkal, a week touring south of the Atlas, two days at charming Essaouira on the coast, and two days in Marrakech, three weeks in all, costs just over £200.)
SAE please with any queries.
Photos Right: Peaks ringing the Tichka Plateau.
Inset: Hooped petticoat daffodils.
Below: The Nfis Slabs — descending them posed a few problems (photos by the author).
Djebel Toubkal, highest peak in Morocco at 4167m.
A helping hand on the Nfis Slabs.
EQUIPMENT
FLEECE: FUNCTION OR FASHION
Windproofing isn't a quality associated with fleece clothing, but manufacturers are making moves to remedy the situation.
Tom Prentice reports and we review some new garments on the market
Like fibre pile before it, fleece has managed to cross the line between specialist and general leisure use.
Consequently, we're seeing it more on the high street as casual wear.
But high street use differs greatly from technical use in the hills, where getting the right balance between warmth, weight and function are critical.
One of the main failings of fleece, and for that matter fibre pile (and to an extent wool before it), is the material's inability to prevent the cooling effects of wind.
In the past, this was countered with cotton Ventile jackets and waterproof jackets.
During the fibre pile decline, attempts were made to cover the pile with windproof material, but none of the resulting garments captured the interest of the consumer.
It's only recently that lightweight microfibres, specialists nylons like Pertex and lightweight poly/cottons have come into their own and dramatically increased the versatility and insulation of fleece.
Of course, similar materials have been successfully applied to fibre pile, as in the present range of Pertex covered pile from buffalo Designs.
W.L. Gore, of Gore-Tex fame, clearly thought this wasn't enough and set about developing a lightweight, breathable windproof lining designed primarily for fleece and wool.
The result is Windstopper Gore-XCR, a PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene — bet you're pleased you asked!) membrane laminated to a knitted nylon lining.
So far only Berghaus, Karrimor and Phoenix — though the latter only in their ski-wear for now — are using the lining for a range of jackets and sweaters aimed at both the technical outdoor and leisure markets.
Having used samples of jackets with the lining, there can be no doubt that it works, but there are disadvantages.
There's still fleece on the outside, so once the drizzle or the rain starts, a waterproof needs to come out of the sack.
This is certainly a limitation of windstopper over microfibres or pertex coverings, which have some rain resistance or can be treated with a water repellent.
Windstopper doesn't stretch, so garments using the lining need quite a generous cut if you're going to be active on the hills in them, whether climbing or walking, and the added bulk and weight have to be considered.
Finally, there's that thorny question of price.
In general you're going to be paying £10 to £20 more for a fleece lined with Windstopper than a fleece lined or covered with some other material.
Looking at jackets linked with microfibre or Pertex/nylon, a variety of manufacturers offer suitable garments:.
Worth noting are new microfibre/fleece jackets due out soon from Karrimor and Berghaus, which should be technical garments well suited to climbing and walking.
It's a popular misconception that all fleece comes from the USA-based company Malden Mills, who produce the well-known ‘polar’ range: Polarquest, Polarlite, Polarplus etc.
Mountain Equipment continue to use their well established Ultrafleece, sourced from Far Eastern manufacturers.
Phoenix presently get their fleece from an Austrian producer and will soon launch a new range of garments for climbers and walkers, made up from Italian fleece.
The Austrian fleece is one reason why Phoenix are able to offer Windstopper on some of their jackets at about £15 to £20 less than others on the market.
Interestingly, Berghaus use a non-Malden fleece called Softlite for their Windstopper garments.
Quality?
Well, fleece just seems to go on forever, certainly when compared with some fibre-piles (Helly Hensen specifically excepted).
Thankfully rock climbs covered with a thick layer of red fibre pile fluff are largely a thing of the past.
However, it does seem to be Malden Mills who are putting most money into research and development.
Just to confuse matters they have decided to rename all their products.
Polartek , lightweight next to the skin layer becomes Polartek 100 ;Polarite medium weight becomes Polartek 20 and Polarplus heavy weight becomes Polartek 300 .
And that's pretty much all you have to know.
WHIRLWIND WINDSTOPPER Phoenix Approx retail: £95
At £95 this is far from being a cheap fleece.
However, it's certainly cheaper than Windstopper garments from Karrimor and Berghaus, so it must be considered when investigating what's on the market.
The Whirlwind combines two colours of lightweight Austrian fleece, with two colours of nylon trim to produce an extremely jazzy over-the-head garment.
Aimed principally at the skiing market, Phoenix are official clothing suppliers to the British alpine and freestyle ski teams, the colour combinations undoubtedly shine on the piste, but they won't suit everyone.
In the Whirlwind, the chances are you'll feel much more comfortable doing the ski bars in Aviemore than walking in the hills, or even down the high street at home.
In general this is a well designed and well made sweater with a stud fastened neck closure and medium height collar.
There are two zipped pockets and knitted hem and cuffs.
My only niggle is that the seams on the top of the shoulder are quite prominent and uncomfortable.
Carrying a rucksack or anything over your shoulder is likely to aggravate this.
While the Whirlwind is aimed at skiers, Phoenix are already working on a new line of garments made form Italian fleece and aimed at walkers and climbers.
They should include garments with microfibre shells and Windstopper linings.
So watch this space, as they say.
TRAMONTANA WINDSTOPPER CHINOOK WINDSTOPPER Berghaus Approx retail: £127, £132
These are two versions of the same garment, the Tramontana being an over-the-head style with a half zip, and the Chinook being a full-zip jacket.
Both these Berghaus garments exude style, with a tasteful mix of colours and a classy use of braid with a South American influence.
For the fashion-conscious climber, walker or skier not too worried about the dent in the wallet, these garments are likely to be top choice.
For the rest of us wanting function as well as fashion, they measure up fairly well.
The outer fleece fabric is called Softlite, chosen by Berghaus for its durability and relative lightness — a necessary consideration when combined with the Windstopper lining.
Both garments have high collars (too high for some) to keep the neck warm.
If you find this comfortable, then it's a great benefit for keeping out the spindrift when winter climbing.
However, there's no flap over the front zip, so some wind leakage is inevitable here.
Although the two external pockets are perfectly adequate, the absence of an internal pocket is noticeable, especially in a fashion garment when it's preferable to keep wallet, chequebook and bank cards inside.
Cuffs and hem are knitted, and though this doesn't suit everyone — the knitting can take a long time to dry out if it gets wet — I don't find it unacceptable.
However, this is another indicator that these are garments aimed more at the general leisure market.
Of course, that doesn't mean you can't go climbing in them, providing you get a size which gives you enough movement.
SLAMET WINDSTOPPER BALTORO WINDSTOPPER Karrimor Approx retail: £130, £120
This jacket combines a Gore Windstopper lining with Malden Polartex 200 (equivalent to Polarlite) to produce a stylish, windproof jacket designed for general and outdoor use.
Named after a volcano, Karrimor are clearly confident you shouldn't freeze while wearing this jacket.
To help keep the heat in, the full-length zip has a press-stud flap on the outside and there's a high collar for neck protection.
Four zipped pockets, two inside and two out, give a fair amount of carrying space.
Cuffs and hem are adjusted by flaps and poppers, using the natural spring of the fleece.
The jacket uses two colours and  comes in three combinations all with twin globe logo for an added bit of distinction.
For the more technically minded, the new Baltoro Windstopper jacket stands alone in the market.
Again, windproofness is a major consideration with a good collar and a substantial wind cover over the zip.
Like the Slamet, the Baltoro is made from Polartek 200, has four zipped pockets, two in and two out, but has elasticated (not knitted) hem and cuffs.
Designed to be part of the Karrimor's technical Baltoro mountain range, this fleece should appeal particularly to mountaineers looking for warm clothing for particularly cold conditions, whether worn with or without a waterproof.
The Baltoro comes in a variety of single colours, aiming for a market more interested in function than fashion.
FLIC FLAC Jack Wolfskin Approx retail: £110
Fancy a jacket with paw prints all over it? the Flic Flac's the one for you.
If it sounds horrendous then don't worry, it really is in the best possible taste.
Oh, they're multi-coloured paw prints by the way.
This is a superb, stylish reversible jacket using Polarite on one side and proofed nylon called Stormtex on the other.
The paw prints highlight the fleece side of the jacket on braiding which runs across the chest, up and down the sleeves and across the back.
Radical.
The braiding neatly divides my sample into a purple top half and a bottle green lower half.
To top it all off, the pockets are flashed with braiding as well.
It's an amazing effect.
So much for fashion, what about function?
The Stormtex outer gives the jacket a fair amount of shower and wind protection; excellent for hillwalking and hanging about at the bottom of climbs.
There are two pockets on each side with those annoying bottom-to-top zippers and a full length main zip covered with a small stormflap.
Cuffs and the hem are made from Stormtex, with elastic inside.
Unfortunately, the jacket has a major drawback should you want to go climbing in it.
There's nowhere like enough give under the arms, and when wearing a harness, raising your arms above your head is very restricted.
Even scrambling might cause a problem, but using the jacket for walking and general leisure is OK.
Otherwise this is an excellent warm jacket, it's just a pity it's limited by its design.
Tom Prentice
RENEGADE JACKET The North Face Approx retail: £103
I've been a fan of combining fleece with a windproof layer, ever since I discovered those lightweight waterproof cags worked best under a pullover for cragging.
In very general terms, the Renegade Jacket takes this principle to its logical conclusion.
A lightweight Polarlite fleece has been lined with a windproof nylon Pertex shell.
When climbing on rough rock I reverse the jacket to protect the Pertex layer from tearing; although I've been surprised just how robust the garment is, given a total weight of just 600g.
The outer stood up to everything I could throw at it until a wicked Gogarth chimney thrutch resulted in a nicked sleeve, while the fleece has resisted all but a hot cylinder from the Snowdon Railway!
The design ensures there's plenty of armpit room for climbing, and the long body length prevents frozen bum syndrome (although the jacket can easily be secured at the waist with the elastic drawcord in the hem if you prefer).
The jacket has six ample zipped pockets — three on each side — and this usually results in ‘the dance of the pockets’ every time the car keys are required!
In fact, the zips are really the only problem area; I find they continually jam — ludicrous on the garment of this price and an area needing urgent attention by the manufacturers.
A small quibble is the metal zip pullers, which are stylist and natty in design, but prone to digging into the flesh when under a rucksack waistbelt or climbing harness.
Andy Newton
POLARTEK 200 SWEATER/JACKET Mountain Equipment Approx retail: £55
So what's new about Polartek 200, apart from the name!
Considering that, to all intents and purposes, it's the same as Polarlite — not much.
What is new is that Mountain Equipment are now producing garments made out of it and Polartek 300 (formerly Polarplus).
For the past 10 years or so ME have made all their fleece garments from material mainly sourced form the Far East.
One of their long term winners has been the thin, lightweight, but very windproof Ultrafleece.
Less successful it would seem, has been ME's slightly heavier weight Karisma range.
So from the autumn Karisma will be gone and ME will have some new Malden Mills polar garments on the rack.
The ME Polartek Sweater has hardly been off my back for the past month or so.
It's light, comfortable, and worn over a T-shirt, or even next to the skin, warm enough for the Scottish summer without making you sweat to death.
The design is extremely simple, with a poppered front allowing easy over-the-head access, and a nylon trim helping the collar give some neck protection.
Hem and cuffs are faced with lycra and there are two simple unzipped pockets at the front.
The jacket has a similar design, but with a full-length zip.
Of course, ME aren't the only manufacturers producing this sort of lightweight Polarfleece sweater, so this garment is far from unique.
But it is comfortable, functional and good value.
MELROSE Risol Approx retail: £25
A fleece jacket for £25 — you better believe it.
It you are constantly down in the dumps over the price of fleecewear then this may be the answer to your prayers.
The Melrose may be the cheap end of the market, but it isn't the cheap and nasty end.
While it doesn't even bear lip-service to fashion, this is a perfectly functional piece of kit if you're looking for a bash about fleece jacket.
The fleece rates somewhere between Polartek 200 (Polarlite) and Polartek 300 (Polarplus) for thickness.
There's a reasonable collar, two zipped pockets and a full length zip, plus a knitted hem and cuffs.
It's also quite a bit heavier than a similar garment in, say, Polartek 300.
Of course, you get what you pay for, and no-one in his right mind would expect this garment to wear or wash as long, or as well as , a fleece jacket of double the price.
But once that's been accepted you can't argue with the price and this jacket's certain to keep you warm for a few years at least.
Heat images showing the benefits of the new Gore Windstopper lining under wind tunnel conditions.
Above: A garment not lined with Windstopper.
Below: A garment with the lining (photos: W.L. Gore and Associates).
Phoenix Whirlwind Windstopper
North Face Renegade Jacket
MOUNTAIN MINIATURES
Jerry Rawson takes an excursion round some of his favourite hills — isolated gems with a character all their own
As you approach the Peak District National Park from the west across the monotonous Cheshire Plain, past the star-probing Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope, a small blimp on the horizon gradually takes on the classic, pyramidal mountain shape — a sort of mini Mount Fuji.
The peak is Shutlingsloe, which rises above Macclesfield Forest, and its textbook shape when viewed from most directions belies its modest height of just 506 metres.
Shutlingsloe is just one of the numerous miniature mountain gems in Britain where quality, not quantity is the main attraction.
It isn't their height but their shapely form that attracts discerning hillgoers, and since many of the tops are not included in tick lists — some of the Scottish ones don't even get Corbett status — they tend not to be as popular as their loftier neighbours.
Another bonus is that the lower vantage point from the tops of these smaller hills, often with uncluttered surroundings, can occasionally provide more impressive views than from their big brothers.
The view from the rocky summit of Shutlingsloe is certainly impressive, especially in the late evening as the last of the sun's rays form a silver ribbon on the Merse, 35 miles away.
I persuaded a friend of mine to visit the summit one evening and he was so taken in by the view that he stepped back from the trig point and disappeared over the edge of the crag that crowns the top.
Fortunately he wasn't badly hurt and managed to make his way back down the usual approach route into the peaceful, leafy lanes of Wildboarclough.
A couple of years ago these lanes were far from peaceful when a flash flood swept through the area.
Starting near the Cat and Fiddle Inn the raging tide of mud and uprooted trees created havoc in the narrow valley, sweeping away bridges, large sections of road and anything else in its path.
South-west from Shutlingsloe, across the Dane Valley, is the rocky crest of the Roaches, beyond which stands the isolated, castle-like peak of Hen Cloud.
With its steep, rocky buttresses set above a fern-covered hillside near Upper Hulme, this craggy bastion, the last real peak at the southern end of the Pennines, has a real mountain profile.
The top is quickly reached from the grassy nick which separates it from the nearby Roaches.
Few other British gritstone outcrops can challenge this impressive sentinel, and finishing any of the fine rock climbs here gives the feeling of actually reaching the top of an isolated mountain.
As you coil the ropes you can soak up the panoramic landscape which stretches from the lush green valleys towards Leek and the Potteries, across to the Roaches and northwards to the wild moors of Axe Edge.
From Axe Edge, on the Buxton to Leek road, the shapely reef peaklets of Chrome and Parkhouse Hills can be seen, lying lengthways on the banks of the Dove.
These are real tiny gems, ascended easily from near Earl Sterndale.
Seen end on, their sharp, rocky summits point like arrows to the sky, while from the side they become narrow, crenellated ridges offering pleasant ways up to the tops, especially in winter.
These rugged limestone reef hills are not really typical of the dark, rolling peaty landscape of the Pennines, but even the gritstone moors have managed to throw up a few fine hills.
The southern Pennines offer the shapely cone of Lose Hill (476m) and the sharp poke of Win Hill (462m): two elegant sentinels that overlook the entrance to the Edale Valley: while at the northern end of the Pennines is Pen-y-ghent (694m) which looks like the prow of a great ship when seem from Ribblesdale.
Daniel Defoe journeyed this way in 1724 and when he passed through Settle, he noted: ‘…we saw nothing but high mountains, which had a terrible aspect.’
He thought them ‘…more frightful than any in Monmouthshire or Derbyshire, especially Penigent (sic) Hill!’
When covered in a mantle of snow, set against a clear, February sky at the pyramidal Pen-y-ghent looks every part a real mountain.
As it throws down its challenge to fellwalkers, its modest height seems irrelevant.
Under deep snow the wooden steps built to control erosion disappear, and the hill once again takes on its pristine quality.
This is the best time to climb Pen-y-ghent, either from Horton-in-Ribblesdale or Dale Head in Silverdale.
Both approaches meet up just below the craggy bastion on its south-west face, from where the broad top is soon reached.
Seen end on Pen-y-ghent always reminds me of Cnicht (690m) in Wales.
Viewed from Croesor, near Porthmadog, this shapely hill dominates the tiny hamlet.
‘A conical peak impaling heaven’ is how George Borrow described it, while others have likened it to the Matterhorn.
Its shape  is certainly a magnet for walkers.
Cnicht's south-west ridge provides a rapid direct ascent to the summit, with some pleasant scrambling thrown in near the top, and as height is gained the views across Snowdonia gradually unfold.
The lofty summit appears suddenly and you realise that Cnicht is really the end of a long, undulating ridge which leads the eye northwards towards shapely Moel Siabod.
Yewbarrow in the Lake District also manages to create that same feeling of aloofness as Cnicht.
As you head up Wasdale the prominent, wedge-shaped peak of Yewbarrow (627m) sweeps up from Wastwater and offers scramblers and competent walkers a challenging outing.
Starting up the steep, grassy shoulder above the dark waters of the lake, you eventually reach the rocky nose of Bell Rib which, if taken direct, gives an excellent scramble up onto the narrow, cockscomb summit ridge.
I can't think of any other small peak in Lakeland, apart from possibly Fleetwith Pike above Buttermere, that is so steep all round.
The traverse provided an evening's trip recently, but low cloud prevented good views across the patchwork of walled fields in the valley bottom of Scafell and Gable.
On a sunny evening you can stay to catch the last of the sun's rays highlighting Scafell's famous buttresses.
Then, in gathering darkness, drop down from the ridge to Dore Head, where a steep descent leads rapidly back to the security of the valley for that welcome pint at the Wasdale Head Inn.
Most walkers would probably agree that the Langdale Pikes are Lakeland's finest miniature hills — shapely and aloof, especially Pike o'Stickle (709m), and certainly there are enough quality approach walks and challenging scrambles here to satisfy the most discerning of mountain walkers.
But the range does tend to be very crowded.
An alternative, and just as shapely, rough and rocky peak to ascend, its Pike o'Blisco (705m) on the hillside opposite.
From most points of the compass Pike o'Blisco has a fine pyramidal shape and can be approached from various directions, the easiest of which is from the Three Shire Stone on Wrynose Pass.
But last time I climbed it I started at Wall End Farm and headed up the ravine of Redacre Gill.
The way is steep, rough and loose in places but eventually eases off before giving an enjoyable scramble up to the two rocky summit tors.
From here you can look down into Oxendale and across to Crinkle Crags and Bowfell, which leads the eye around the head of Langdale.
The best return route is to descend steeply to Red Tarn below Crinkle Crags and then follow the broken track beside Brown Gill into Oxendale, with the shapely Langdale Pikes dominating the skyline ahead.
Most of the peaks described up to now lack one additional ingredient to their aspect — namely the sea.
There is something very special about climbing hills where the sea plays a major part in the surrounding scenery.
To find that missing component we need to head for the west coast of Scotland, where some of the shapeliest small peaks in Britain are to be found.
Not all these minor hills are particularly popular.
For example, how many walkers who visit Glen Coe ever make the effort to climb Sgurr na Ciche — the Pap of Glencoe, which shares its name with a similar conical peak in Knoydart.
As you travel alongside Loch Leven the graceful shape of the Pap can be reached in about an hour up heather-covered, bouldery slopes, unpleasant in wet weather, but well worth the effort for the view to Ben Nevis and the Mamores.
A relatively small peak yet a wonderful vantage point!
It's amazing how often you can find solitude on some of these insignificant peaks, especially in Sutherland.
Here most of the hills are rocky and small, but since they thrust up their shapely, jagged features from lochan-speckled moors, they create a presence out of all proportion to their size: sort of miniature weathered sandstone versions of the Torridon giants.
They have mystical sounding names that pull walkers back time and again—— all breathtakingly beautiful, precipitous and forbidding, and standing in splendid isolation.
The 18th-century mountain traveller John Macculloch described Sutherlands as containing ‘mountains which seem as if they had tumbled from the clouds, having nothing to do with the country or each other.’
The only thing they seem to have in common is their isolated nature and striking individuality, and they scream out to be included in a list of favourite miniature mountain gems.
As would the remote and shapely hills of Caithness  such as Morven, Scaraben, Smean and Maiden Pap — all set in wild and beautiful country, yet rarely visited by walkers.
Mention of fine, shapely Scottish peaks must include examples from the islands — Askival (810m) on Rum; the gneiss peaks of North Harris and my own particular favourite, Sgur na Stri (495m) on Skye.
The rugged Cuillins offer classic ridge walks — summer or winter — rock climbs on superb rock and spectacular views across to the islands set against fiery sunsets.
Yet not many visitors bother to climb to the summit of Sgur na Stri, which rises straight from the sea.
Many walkers cross its famous ‘Bad Step’ just above the waters of Loch Scavaig, but few scramble up its slabs and buttresses to take in the view of Coruisk and its magnificent amphitheatre of black, jagged peaks — arguably the finest viewpoint of Skye.
There can be few more amazing contrasts of sea and mountains in Britain with Loch Scavaig below your feet, rippled by sea breezes, and the blue hills of Rum and Eigg shimmering out to sea.
On one occasion we picked out an exciting scrambling route to the top, taking each problem direct as it arose.
It was a blisteringly hot day and we ended it by plunging, fully-clothed off the boiler-plate slabs into the clear blue waters of Scavaig.
Memories are made of such days.
This personal excursion has been around some favourite isolated hills — there are many others — a few which have given some of my best mountain days.
So forget the tick lists, lower your sights and next time the high tops are covered in thick mist seek out a few of these miniature mountain gems.
I don't think you'll be disappointed.
Looking down on Loch Coruisk from Sgur na Stri in the Skye Cuillin.
Right: Chrome Hill, a classic reef knoll (photos by the author).
Above: Crinkle Crags from the summit of Pike o'Blisco in the Lake District.
Right: The summit ridge of Cnicht, North Wales.
MOUNTAINEERING COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND NEWS
MINING THREAT TO SCENIC AREAS
A recent spate of proposals for deep mining and opencasting in Scotland threaten to make a mockery of the government's designation for the country's most outstanding scenic areas.
National Scenic Areas (NSAs) are designated in recognition of exceptional value to the country, and you might expect they would afford protection from damaging commercial developments.
Yet two proposals are under active consideration.
On the island of South Harris, Redland Aggregates have applied for planning permission from the Western Isles Council for a ‘superquarry’.
If it gains approval it will last up to 80 years and remove the best part of an entire hillside in an NSA of stunning contrasts: sea lochs, rugged, glaciated gneiss and thriving crofting villages around Lingarabay.
Although the area is infrequently visited by walkers and it has a unique cultural heritage and offers those who do visit something special.
One look at the mess that is Inversander quarry over Loch Linnhe from Oban will give some impression of the outcome of this much larger project.
The Western Isles council are presently considering the proposal, but in their present financial straits following the BCCI collapse, they will no doubt be more interested in saving face with jobs than saving their unique landscape heritage.
The second application concerns the hills just north of Aberfeldy, where N.I.
Great Britain Ltd want to mine pyrites on a large scale.
This, too, is an NSA, overlooking Tummel Forest Park (famous for its ancient birchwoods), and is extremely popular with both tourists and hillwalkers.
Indeed, the site of the proposed mine lies next to two popular Corbetts — Meall Taineachan and Farragon Hill, and would ruin the enjoyment of these, as well as posing possible access restrictions.
There is already a highly unsightly quarry here, whose disgraceful bulldozed track and workings can be seen from every hill in the area, as well as by every tourist arriving in Aberfeldy.
The scale of the proposed mine means it would be even more obtrusive.
Perth and Kinross District Council are considering this application, which is being strongly opposed by the local community.
Apart from the face that consideration of scenic impact seems to carry little weight in the decision making process, there is another distressing angle to these applications.
When the Scottish Natural Heritage Agency is born next year from the amalgamation of the Countryside Commission for Scotland (CCS) and the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland (NCCS), areas currently designated as NSAs will be re-designated Natural Heritage Areas (NHAs).
These form the government's alternative protection measures to the CCS's recommendations for tighter general controls on all mountain developments and national park designation for some of the more delicate NSAs.
NHAs, like the present NSAs, will rely not on tighter legislation for protection but on voluntary agreements with landowners — where Sites of Special Scientific Interest can be contested, de-registered and exploited by, for example, mining, and where future access to the hills may well be subject to the same uncertainty.
If these major mining proposals within our most prized countryside are given the go-ahead now, they will make a mockery of the government's future conservation proposals.
Make your objections to the respective councils, the CCS and the Scottish Office.
Better late than never.
TREAD LIGHTLY
Considering the popularity of climbing in Glen Nevis, the amount of erosion is almost negligible — except, that is, for the area around Pinnacle Ridge and Styx Buttress.
This is largely the result of the crags' proximity to the road and their popularity with local outdoor centre groups.
Now one such centre, Outward Bound Loch Eil, have decided to help rectify the situation.
After consultation with the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland (the glen is an SSSI) and British Alcan (who own it); and with the help from the Glen Nevis ranger service and master footpath repairer Bob Aitken, the centre will erect low-key waymarking to minimise damage and monitor the situation in case remedial work is needed in the future.
So please stick to the path at this site and hopefully nothing else will need to be done.
Meanwhile, in the rest of Polldubh, climbers can continue to get lost amongst the buttresses, trees and indistinct sheep paths that lead nowhere (witness a recent new route-name — The Lost Fucawi Tribe!).
COME AND JOIN US
Most of you won't even know who the MCofS are; you're certainly not all members (did you know you could be?) and you probably don't belong to an affiliated club.
But the chances are you'll be heading for the hills next weekend, and according to the Countryside Commission for Scotland, almost 100,000 of you will be doing so in Scotland!
Whether you climb, walk, run, or just stroll from your car for a picnic, then you'll expect to be able to do so free of problems; not to be shouted at abusively or shot at (it still happens occasionally!); not to be spurned from the hills by aggressive signs erected by indignant landowners, or find endless and unyielding deer fences encircling your 232nd Munro; not to discover destruction from in appropriate developments over a once beautiful area.
Increasingly such an outing is hard to experience.
Indeed, even the freedom to roam over the Scottish hills that we, as a nation, have always taken as a basic right, is being increasingly questioned and undermined.
But luckily there's an organisation working to ensure you can take your recreation in peace — the MCofS — the representative body for all hillgoers in Scotland.
Our executive committee is composed of voluntary members and a part-time national officer.
We're severely under-funded and over-worked, but the benefits of our labours are enjoyed by many more than just our members.
So what is the price of the Scottish hills?
To landowners and forestry companies, the hills cost very little to exploit, but the financial returns can be vast.
To walkers and climbers the price of continued access to the hills need only be the cost of MCofS membership.
Join now as an individual, £6.75 per annum, or free with a Climber and Hillwalker subscription or join your local walking/climbing club (addresses available from the national officer).
There are over 100 affiliated clubs.
You don't have to be resident in Scotland to join, you just need an interest in the Scottish hills.
REPORTS
NEW LAKELAND CRAG DEVELOPED
Following a number of organised acid house parties around the slate embankments of Hodge Close, the land agents for landowner Lord Egremont have said they will blow up the caves.
Just which ‘caves’ and why (it wouldn't stop the partying which takes place on the embankments) is anyone's guess at the time of writing.
From a climbing, diving and industrial archaeological view, blowing up anything in this area would be a major disaster.
Since Scout Scar underwent extensive rebolting it has become tremendously popular (top guide available in Rock and Run, Ambleside and Lakeland Mountain Sports, Kendal).
Now Chapel Head is the latest limestone crag to receive the treatment.
A number of new routes have emerged: Gulbot Kallagna E5 6c (F7c) takes the wall left of Electric Warrior and is the work of Paul Cornforth.
Jim Byrd bolted a line left of Route of All Evil and finished up True Path to produce Eraser Head E5 6b.
Andy Hyslop added Mid Air Collision E5 6b (F7b) taking a line crossing Cyborg and finishing up Flight Path.
Andy also climbed an eliminate between Mangoustine and super Du Pont — En Plus E5 6b (F7b).
On the Asylum wall of Trobarrow Quarry, Dave Bates took a diagonal line to produce Diary of a Sane Man E7 6b, 100′.
In Tilberthwaite Quarry Mike Miller and tony Peak added Peter Pan E2 6b, 20′.
In the Duddon Valley on Little Blake Rigg up a wall right of Out Of The Game, The Sellafield Shuffle — E3 6a — has been climbed by S. Wood and A. Rowell.
On Buckbarrow, Witch Buttress, have added The Lion The Witch The Wardrobe E4 6a 150′.
On the fellside above and left of mighty Dove Crag there is a prominent cracked wall of rock.
Tony Greenbank told Paul Ross of its most salient features and Paul worked out its locality.
Firstly bringing his son Any over from the States and later marrying, he kept his development of Heirloom Crag (map ref 377103) very much in the family.
With Andy he climbed five routes: Relative Ease HVS, Like Father Like Son E4 6a, Family Affair E3 5c, Bloodling E3 6a and Genetic Edge, E3 6a.
Like Father Like Son is reputedly the hardest off-width in the Lakes (a second Post Mortem) and second ascensionists of Family Affair report that the climbing is excellent but the grade should be 6a.
With Marea (new wife) Paul added Under The Thumb, VS, Tying The Knot, HVS and Her Indoors, MS.
Tony Greenbank returned to clean an obvious corner groove line and made the mistake of asking me to test a hold.
Several tons of rock later the once pristine, now battle scarred and muddy groove, was led by Rick Graham and seconded by Tony and myself producing Heirloom, HVS 5a, 120′ (the route of the crag!).
Mike Millar, Elliot Blaylock and Tony Peak added Josse F Boyez, E2 5c.
On Hutaple Crag, Ron Kenyon and Steve Reid have added Scallywag, E1, up to the left of the crag, while in the Borrowdale area the same duo climbed Needless Sports, HVS, starting to the left of Squawk and finishing to its right.
Duncan Booth has added a test piece to Grange Crags with Body Count, E6 6c.
Ray McHaffie has developed Seargent Crag Slabs above the Langstrath valley with six routes up to 150′, ranging from HVS to E2.
Second ascensionist Steve Reid reports the crag to be of good, rough rock, although further cleaning would make the climbs more enjoyable.
By chance I witnessed (viewed through binoculars) an ascent of the impressive line through the arched overhangs on the right flank of Walla Crag.
As yet the ascent has not been written up — who was it?
The new routes book in the Borrowdale area is now firmly established in Needle Sport in Keswick high street.
HEIRLOOM CRAG
‘Mind if I bring Bill Birkett along to look at Heirloom Crag?’ asked Rick Graham.
Innocently I agreed it.
It was like taking Warren Beatty and Sean Penn with you on a hot date.
The hot date — the central groove I had been wire brushing — swooned at the sight of them.
Like all seducers they then backed-off, only to return when ostensibly they found the E4s Paul Ross had already made on the crag I had begun developing too wet.
‘We did garden those blocks for you, Tony,’ said Rick.
‘Let's do the groove today.’
My protests went unheard.
‘Today!’ echoed Bill.
The groove — now filthy again — acquiesced.
We cleaned it again.
‘OK, which hand?’ said Rick, who I believe does conjuring tricks for his small daughter.
Sure enough he won the lead, drifted up the HVS crux and vouched it a classic.
‘Like taking candy off a schoolkid,’ I complained.
‘We did ask you nicely,’ he said, with what can only be described as the faintest of smirks.
Mike Miller leads the second ascent of Paul Ross's Family Affair, belayed by Tony Peak.
SCOTLAND By 
The months of July and August saw an increase in activity on the new routes front.
As the New World Order think about new uses for the SDI ‘star wars’ technology (in particular the X-ray gun satellite that can evaporate caravans heading north up the A9), some familiar names have been busy.
On Creag a'Bhancair, Glen Coe, freshly graduated Doctor Grant Farquhar, with assistance from Gary Latter, climbed Up With The Sun — a line that starts next to Uncertain Emotions the heads up and right to the remaining peg on Risk Business, follows that route to its belay and then boldly climbs the arête left of Gone With The Wind crux to belay as for Carnivore.
A second pitch blasts through the steep wall left of the Carnivore direct finish past an ‘in situ’ thread runner.
A grade of E6\7 6b, 6b was suggested; the top pitch was led on sight, but the bold section up to the Risk Business peg was practised on a top-rope.
Mind you, there won't be too much muttering about top-roping from other Scottish climbers given that almost every ascent of Fated Path (on the same crag) has been top-roped prior to leading, despite that route having fixed protection all the way up!
On the Cobbler's South Peak, Gary Latter ventured up the slab directly above the start of Osirus: Horus E6 6b was the outcome.
One potential second  ascensionist who shall remain nameless (clue: he lives in Wallyford) tried to seat the gear on the crux so violently that he took an 80′ near groundfall when six runners ripped!!
On the Hebridena crag of Strone Ulladale, the North Wales based team of Noel Craine and Bob Drury made the long awaited second ascent of The Scoop.
They trailed a long rope (the only way of escaping off this severely overhanging route) all the way up and through the grade to be ‘mild E6’.
This leaves Scotland with only two routes confirmed at E7 and two more awaiting confirmation.
Finally on Creag Dubh, Newtonmore, ‘The Stork’ climbed a line right of Heather Wall, curiously named This One.
The grade is E4 6a.
SOUTHERN By 
Apart from a string of excellent new routes there have been a number of alternative activities taking place on southern sandstone.
In the middle of July a sponsored climb took place to raise money for a local charity — Special Sport — who take handicapped people climbing at Harrison's and North Wales.
Unfortunately, the day of the climb was dank and wet and only four climbers completed the 100 routes — the original aim of the day — yet many others put in a sterling effort to raise over £500.
The event was organised by Dionne Rogers, a member of staff in Harrison's Mobile Soft Rock Cafe.
Plans for the Julie Tullis campsite in the grounds of Harrison's are still being impeded, although it is likely that site clearing will begin in the near future.
Onto the new route scene, and this heralds some exciting news.
The strikingly aesthetic prow at Eridge Green Rocks, which resembles a mini Appointment With Fear was climbed at the surprising grade of 6a/b by Mike Vetterlein, and received an on sight second ascent by an on-form Adam Powell, followed by a rapid third ascent by the effervescent Doug Reid.
The route is named Veni Vedi Vici and has been ogled by climbers for years, who doubted its plausibility.
Jasper Sharpe powered up the direct start to Moving Staircase at High Rocks to give a fun (and 6b) boulder problem.
Also at High Rocks, Mat Smith climbed the bulging wall between Camelot and Lady of the Lake to give Penis Door Slam 6b?
Finally, Jasper Sharpe re-climbed Paul Hayes' arête to the left of Boonoonoonoos after the demise of a crucial hold, and it now receives the grade of hard 6c.
WALES By 
Considering the rock at Tremadog feels so solid on a small scale, it's rather a shame that it has a large scale tendency to become part of the scree at the foot of the crag!
A rockfall at the extreme right-hand end of Bwlch Y Moch earlier on this year was recently followed by the departure of much of the belay at the top of pitch one of Merlin.
Much of the perched loose rock in this area has been cleared off (probably 30 tonnes or so) although this has left a largish patch of newly exposed rock surface.
The initial grove of Merlin has lost the capping overhang, and the short slab to the foot of the layback groove is now a little more difficult.
The belay will probably be a few feet lower than it was and nearer to the exit from the groove.
Great care should be taken with the rock in this area until it has all washed clean and settled down again.
The scale of this rockfall certainly suggests that there will continue to be collapses on this popular buttress.
As the current Gogarth guidebook heads towards halfway in its lifespan and a reasonable number of new routes are being climbed, I have rounded up a few corrections and other snippets that are applicable to the existing routes.
The descent to the Main Cliff and Upper tier remains serious, but no workable remedy has been found so far.
The second pitch of Syringe has lost a hold and is now 6a (same E grade).
Nightride, although a fine route, is not worth three stars: one would seem appropriate.
The Three Musketeers, given E2, is more like E4, and quite hard at that.
Conan The Librarian is not now considered E7 and has been reported at possible E5, so let's compromise at E6.
The Trap somehow appeared at the easiest end of the HVS graded list; it should be at the top!
While climbing Britomartis Instead, it is worth noting that the second sentence of the description to pitch one should be deleted if the climber is not to pass the correct line and attempt a new route somewhere further along the wall.
Genuflex is E3 and Wreath of Deadly Nightshade is considered to be E6.
Spider's Web is no longer‘fairly impossible’ and goes at E5 6b, but only to those who are as adept at arm bars, leg bars etc. as George Smith.
Across on South Stack, the difficult overhanging wall of Rosebud sports about as many jugs as a pool ball, and continues to join Primate near the step around the arête.
The Green Slab should not have two stars — a black spot would be more appropriate for this serious route!
Not a good start for an aspiring VS leader.
The description is also wrong.
Leave the groove of Primevil as soon as possible and stay within 6 metres of it to reach a poor belay at the foot of a groove in the first tier of the wall above the slab (about 50m).
Climb up and right to land on the ledge which Mousetrap uses to the right.
The finish is onto steep, scary soil!
Another Roadside Attraction belays on Mantrap and Mousetrap.
Electrification and The Cree are separate routes, despite some doubt expressed in the guide.
Blue Remembered Hills is more like E4 and serious.
Angeldust is worth a star or even two, and Smurf and Gnome are hard at their given grades and may be E3.
Thunderbird Zawn and the adjacent Trinity House Wall now sport in the region of 20 routes of VS to E6 and are worth a visit.
Finally, up on Holyhead Mountain, Penny is considered 6a.
PEAK By 
With the recent publication of the Peak Supplement, most activity has been on the repeat scene rather than filling in the gaps.
The number of people repeating hard routes (F8a or harder) is alarming.
It's easier to get on an E5 than an E7 down at Cheedale.
This improvement in standards can only be put down to cellar training.
Next time the left hand section of Cheedale's Cornice dries out, we should see some fun and games.
One thing the supplement does make evident is how little space is left on limestone.
Looking at many of the crag diagrams, it's hard to see where new routes can be fitted in.
One item given a public airing in the supplement is the existence of a bolted-on hold on the Tea Monster at Water-cum-Jolly's Cornice.
This act was perpetrated by the first  ascensionist Nigel Slater.
Mark Pretty removed the offending hold, but it was left to Robin Barker to make the first free ascent of the Free Monster E6+ 6c (F7c+).
Less generous names suggested were Wiping the Slate Clean, and We're Only Making Holds for Nigel.
Other additions to make the supplement obsolete come mainly from the deep south, where Geoff Hornby and Suzi Sammut have been cruising around on their Luxury Liner (E3 5c), which is a variant on their own Crinoid Cruise.
Also at Colehill Quarry, they added Alligator Smiles (E1 5c), both with 3BR.
Their final addition (for this month, at least!) was in Lime Kiln Quarry, with Snooze and You Lose (E4 6a) taking the wall left of Amethyst Wall.
Back up north, Cheedale's Nighthawks Sector (above Runyon's Corner) has two new additions: Nighthawks At The Diner (F6b+) is a line with 3BR and the work of Steve Wright and the Afternoon Posse; whereas the line 10yds to the right with 3BR and 1PR is Shred Your Stick (E4 6b) which was done by Simon ‘Sharky’ Lee.
Simon's route names leave you asking the question, what do you do with (or to) yourself?
(Another of Sharky's new routes in Cheedale is the quaintly named Thrash Your Woodie — maybe he could get a job writing Finbar Saunders scripts!)
Simon also climbed the wall above Malnutrition to produce Ghee Force (E5 6b).
One final item.
Will whoever is ripping the pages out of the Stoney new route book please grow up.
This infantile behaviour is putting the book in jeopardy and makes it very hard to collate info on what's going on.
One casualty is Gary Gibson's string of new routes at Craig-y-Biceps.
It is arguable whether these routes are worthwhile, but it would be nice if everybody could judge this rather than some narrow-minded person not giving us the choice.
YORKSHIRE By 
If 1986 was the year of Malham and 1989 the year of Kilnsey, then 1991 will be remembered as the year of Gordale; the last of the big three to receive the  bolt blitz.
Prime movers in the recent development have been hyperactive local Mick Ryan, ably assisted by Mark Radtke and John Holmes, who have produced a number of excellent and atmospheric pitches between them.
Perhaps the most impressive of these is Revival [E6 6b (F7b+), 6a].
Climbed by Mark Radtke and Gerry Peel, this superb route has 11 bolts on its first pitch — a curving line up the shield of rock left of Masochism Tango — while the second pitch has three PRs.
Double ropes are useful for the first pitch.
A little further on Mark Radtke added another big traditional pitch to the gorge, described by second  ascensionists Neil Foster as ‘absorbing’.
Solstice (E5 6a) uses 11 PRs (yes 11!) of varying degrees of security to climb the wall between the first pitches of Climatic and Soft Machine.
While seconding the first ascent of Solstice, eagle-eyed Mick Ryan spotted a slab of perfect limestone above the lip and climbed out.
Ocean Heart (E2 5c) provides reasonable climbing in an outrageous position and is described as Yorkshire limestone at its best.
Mick and John Holmes have also developed a buttress by the 63 steps in the upper gorge.
Backwater Buttress now has six bolted routes.
Right of The Missing Link is Hoodlum Priest (F7b); taking the arête right of Pedestal Wall and Pedestal crack is Naked (F7b).
Right again past Wise Crack are four short routes: Featuristic (F7a), What do You Want Me To Do With It (F7a+), Don't Matter Just Bite It (F7a+) and Erotic Nightmare (F7b+).
Finally, Mick ventured even further up the gorge and discovered an excellent roof.
This became Revel In Your Time (F7c).
Unfortunately, several holds disappeared on the second and third ascents, although the wonders of epoxy resin should now have restored them.
Mick Lovatt has also been doing some sterling work here re-equipping some of the older classics — in particular both pitches of Pierrepoint, a classic (F7c+, F7b+) have been completely rebolted.
On the other crags activity has been more relaxed.
Andy Moss filled the gap between China Crisis and Dihedral Wall at Kilnsey with Solidarity, a pleasant (F7b+).
Mick Johnson made a lot of people happy by rebolting Frankie Comes To Kilnsey (F7b).
Hopefully this time the bolts will stay in for good, as chopping and replacing them (something which now seems an annual event) is causing untold damage to this superb pitch.
Also here Nick Sellars and I respectively made the second and third ascents of Peter Gomersall's outrageously steep Showtime, thinking the grade to be hard F8a+.
Over at Malham, Gomersall was adding another 15 feet of steep climbing, this time through the large bulge above Consenting Adults.
No name as yet but the grade is surprisingly modest at F7c.
At the left hand end of the lower catwalk, Mick Ryan demonstrated his newfound skills of speed boating and route cleaning.
Arriving at the crag at 11.00 a.m. he abseiled down the walls right of Begozi, placed a belay and several bolts and, wire brush in hand, climbed back out again to create Burning Rubber Necklace (F6b+).
By six the same evening the route had received at least five repeat ascents, and because of its relatively modest grade should stay very popular.
On the smaller limestone crags, Dave Musgrove and Steve Webster added Evening all (HVS 5b) and Lap Of Honour (E1 5c) to the right hand end of Loup Scar, while Guy Maddox and N. Engley added two routes to Low Stoney Bank: Mr. Lucozade (E1 5b) and Ogawayama Layback (HVS 5b).
The solitary plum line to fall on gritstone this summer is Martin Wood's Abstract Attitude (E5 6b) at Earl crag.
This line featured in glorious technicolour on P337 of the Yorkshire Limestone guide breaks right from the start of Distant Early Warning to climb the obvious hanging groove in the wall left of Desert Island Arête.
Finally at Eavestones, crag that doesn't appear to have any shortage of unclimbed rock, Tony Barley, Dave Musgrove and Steve Webster have added a number of new lines from VS to E4.
Further information can be found in the Centresport new route book.
Steve Haston and Andy Newton on the first ascent of The Prisoner (E1/2), Thunderbird Zawn, Gogarth (photo Andy Newton).
OFF BELAY
CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE
Are our national parks destined to become the adrenalin junkie's equivalent of a Centreparc?
Ed Douglas hopes not
No doubt you'll know Arnie Shwarzenegger.
Something of a cult hero to modern limestone climbers, or so I understand.
I mention Arnie because I recently saw, purely by chance, his latest flick (Terminator 2) which opens in post-holocaust Los Angeles circa 2029.
Flames belch from the wreckage, degenerate human beings scrabble for survival, the screen is dark and the aspect brooding.
The remarkable thing about this cinematic treat was the close comparison it bore to the scene at Stonethwaite campsite a few days previously.
It spent a fair amount of time in the Lake District this summer, filling in glaring gaps in my climbing education, and this charming campsite in Borrowdale, wit its renowned swimming hole, had proved a successful base.
until a West Midlands Social Services group chose to visit.
The boys in the group, around 15 years old I would imagine, spent the evening defoliating the live trees circling the campsite and building a monstrous fire, which threatened the tents downwind.
I saw in my car, avoiding the midges, listening to a torrent of abuse in which some words, familiar to regular readers of this column, cropped up more than others.
I distinctly remember feeling guilty at thinking that I would have to lock my car so these children wouldn't steal my cameras.
But then what can you expect from a part-time, middle-class socialist?
Actually, the Lake District has a lot in common with Los Angeles beyond deprived, inner-city children.
Car pollution and overcrowding for instance.
Levels of photo-chemical smog are remarkably high in the Lakes and the environmental agency Greenpeace reported recently that in the summer of last year, when smog is most likely to occur, the World Health Organisation's recommended safe limit was exceeded in London on one occasion only.
But in the Lake District it was exceeded no less than 17 times, with the top of Great Dun Fell having the most severe recorded incidence with 97 parts per billion, compared with London's worst at 63 parts per billion.
It's great to get away from it all!
I found myself wondering, sitting as I was in my own pollution generator, about education.
Those poor children in the  Cairngorms had just been recovered from the clutches of what can only be described as moronic supervisors.
I think back to the recommendations made at the inquest into that more tragic Cairngorm incident, now nearly 20 years ago, and my mind boggles.
What lessons have the educators been attending recently?
Methinks they've been truanting.
Their syllabus should include, on a reading list that would hopefully keep them indoors for a long time, the extensive article published in Mountain dealing with the affair.
But I don't wish to become involved in an argument about what level of certification should, or should not, be agreed upon.
Livesey is quite capable of looking after that particular angle, and no doubt he is sharpening his pencil for this purpose already.
It is what environmental requirements we should be making of such groups, what code of practice can be agreed upon, that is my concern.
ORGANISATION RULES
The pages of magazines have been filled this year with the usual crop of controversies.
Access problems and the odd bolt on Lakeland mountain crags have had activists frothing at the mouth.
And then an Outdoor Centre whacks in 50 bolts at a gritstone quarry and the Army start booking climbs.
Now those are problems.
Education groups thrive on organisation, on doing things in the prescribed manner.
And the mountains had better understand that and be prepared to alter their unpredictable ways.
Naturally I exaggerate, but it must be of vital importance that people whose contact with the hills is likely to be brief, are taught not just to fulfil their potential but to respect the environment that enables them to do it.
The problem remains that the majority of climbers and hillwalkers regard large groups of children in the mountains with some resentment and suspect the motives of those who organise them, relying on anecdotal evidence to back up these doubts.
My own dismay at the way those kids were savaging the flora of Stonethwaite is a good example.
They had as much right to be there as I, and I was in no position to judge what benefits they were deriving from their experiences, beyond a developed attraction towards pyromania.
Their supervisors would not so easily avoid censure.
What little research has been done in this area suggests that the proportion of deprived youngsters heading for the great outdoors is disproportionately low.
It requires money to travel, and while in the '50s working class people could reach the hills with sufficient determination, the increasing fashionability of outdoor sports is excluding more and more who have less and less.
It seems that the majority of those attending courses or travelling to the national parks and other environmentally sensitive areas are relatively well-off, and their parents are using adventure, or at least what is perceived as being adventure, as a kind of finishing school for the modern citizen, without taking the trouble to come to terms with the environment in which this happens.
I earnestly pray that the national parks are not about to become the adrenalin junkie's equivalent of a Centreparc.
There are welcome oases of common sense, however.
In the report from last year's Countryside Recreation Conference, I read the following enlightened suggestion from Keith Clarkson, Youth and Schools Liaison Officer at Losehill in the Peak District.
If you are interested in such matters track his words down, for they are succinct and carry a weight of authority I could not possibly hope to emulate.
‘Wherever I go,’ he wrote, ‘I see representatives of different organisation fighting their own corner at the expense of others.
Ironically, the recreational users and providers invariably argue that their pursuits have little or no environmental impact, and yet they are reluctant to share or publicise ‘their sites’ and resources — why?
The answer is clear to all…nobody wants to lose out, so the collective overview is lost, environmental and adventure quality suffer.
‘Perhaps this would change if everybody involved in outdoor activities had a personal commitment to the environment and a responsibility to minimise the impact upon it.’
Now that's something we can all agree on.
A quiet campsite in the Lake District.
Not so easy to find these days.
Photo Peter Wilson.
BOOKS
GABLE & PILLAR
D Kirby & J Loxham, Fell & Rock Climbing Club, £10.95
I was once most touched by Dave Armstrong.
He unselfishly stayed on the crag while I struggled with The Fang in wintry dusk and rain.
I still remember his upturned face far below.
As soon as I was up, he left.
Dave Armstrong is editor of the FRCC guidebooks.
Well, Dave, there are lots like me who climb in the middle grades and who will also love this guidebook.
As will those likely to enjoy stunning routes like Colin Downer's clutch of E3s on Engineers Slabs.
It is one of the best guides I have read, both the writings of both Jim Loxham and Dave Kirby inspiring delight.
Al Phizacklea's drawings are incomparable and I love the one of Gable Crag which, when the pages are folded back like in novelty production, mates up exactly with the frontispiece.
Most of the other photos are pretty wizard too.
So are there criticisms?
Just one.
If a Dave Armstrong were personally supplied with every copy of the guidebook to stand below any gripped middle grade climber it might be OK.
But he and his caring nature obviously can't always be there.
I only say this because some of the grades seem a bit low.
And so say others, too.
What might help are more guidebook writers concentrating on climbs below E1; and more of the policy occasionally adopted by the FRCC of sending graded route lists to distant climbing shops, cares and pubs so that all and sundry far away from the writing team can voice their opinions.
A mean can then be taken of grades and stars.
Kern Knotts and Innominate Crack are surely 4c compared with 4cs in other valleys?
Buttonhook has had a history of epics — possibly 5b?
Eagles Nest Direct at 4a is one I actually went to check and thought it rather more.
Kern Knotts Chimney at HS — yes HS — is quite the reverse.
I as so surprised by this (knowing how hard some Lakes HSs can be — ever done Woden's Cheek or Malediction?)
I went up and did it twice.
No, surely, HVD at the most.
Finally, the stars?
I wish there were more in the middle and lower grades.
(Stars sell guidebooks!)
That  — just some examples — don't merit more stars is sad.
They are classics of their time, as relevant today as ever they were to people climbing at that grade, with every move a gem where it counts.
And Fergus Graham's Lower Kern Knotts West Buttress's Buttress deserves a star too.
All this, though, is by the board.
Don't let me put you off.
Buy this fine guidebook while stocks last.
THE CONDITION OF ICE by Christopher Burns, Secker and Warburg, £12.95
This is the third novel from a young writer who has attracted considerable literary acclaim.
One shop window in Covent Garden was devoted entirely to a display of this book, and it received coveted reviews in the quality press.
Jubilee celebrations in an alpine village bring veteran climber Ernest Tinnion back to the scene of his greatest triumph — and to the reassessment of a youthful friendship and chilling events that coloured the rest of his life.
For the purpose of the story, the author has invented a peak — the Versücherin, or Temptress — of the same notoriety and ferocity as the Eiger, and which he places vaguely where the Eiger should be.
At the same time he keeps the real mountain intact, and Hinderstoisser, Kurz and company as historical markers.
Tinnion grew up in Switzerland, though by the mid-30s (when the body of this book is set) he has moved to London, where he is enmeshed in an adulterous affair.
The lady accompanies him back to the Alps, to wait and worry as he and his partner, Hansi Kirchner, set off up the virgin North Face of Versücherin.
Things do not go well, and as they climb higher it become clear that they are also no longer philosophically in tune.
Tinnion is appalled to discover that his old friend proposes to throw in his lot with the Nazis.
Yet he owes his life to this man who, in saving him, has sacrificed his hands to frostbite.
What can Tinnion do in return?
(Besides amputate the worst-affected finger with his penknife?)
Only one climber reaches the summit.
This is a gruesome and heavily symbolic tale.
Some of the description is superb, but the climbing remains unconvincing, slipping too easily into melodrama and strange terminology.
Though ambitious, the work I found ultimately thin, and derivative.
I had expected more.
BEST WALKS IN NORTHUMBERLAND by Frank Duerden, Constable, £9.95
Here we have yet another ‘Best Walks’ books in the usual Constable style.
Trying to group together a selection of best walks in an area as complex as Northumberland, with its historical landmarks, beautiful coastline, vast afforestation and rolling moorland is a very subjective exercise, but Frank Duerden has managed to select 30 diverse walks.
These range from a stroll around Lindisfarne (Holy Island) and the Berwick Ramparts, to long walks beside Hadrian's Wall and across the rolling moors of the Cheviot hills.
Apart from the detailed maps and walking instructions, the guide provides a wealth of background information on the geology, history and archaeology of the area.
For the first time visitor to the area, or local walkers looking for something new, this is an excellent guide providing a good foundation to appreciate this little known and one of the least spoilt areas of England.
MAIL
Guidebook descriptions can lead you into trouble
Before a scramble up Cust's Gully on Great End, I consulted Wainwright's Southern Fells and Scrambles in the Lake District by P.B. Evans.
The weather could have been better, with cloud at 2400ft.
I found the gully awe inspiring in the mist.
It was wet, with a steady trickle of water in its base.
I came across the expected pitch’ below the wedged boulders, which Wainwright describes as ‘The one difficulty, above which is nothing but simple scrambling to the top.’
Mr Evans describes the gully as a grade 2 scramble with ‘Two short, awkward pitches at a chockstone below the jammed boulder.’
Having negotiated the pitch with difficulty in the wet, I was at first relieved at having passed beneath the boulder and looking forward to an easy scramble to the top when I came across another difficult pitch.
This one meant either a crawl on my belly beneath a boulder, hoping to be able to escape out of the hole on the other side, or a wide sloping ledge on the right.
I decided on the latter and was again pleased when I managed to haul myself to safety at the top of the boulder.
‘Cracked it,’ I thought to myself.
I was amazed when, 30 more yards up the gully, I cam face to face with a blank, moss-covered wall.
This looked harder than the first two and I was concerned.
I didn't rate any chance of a retreat back down and could have so easily become trapped in between the pitches.
With some desperate moves, including a two finger jam in a wet, moss filled crack, I reached a jug, pulled myself to safety and finally found the easy scramble to the top.
On reflection, I vowed never to go solo up Cust's Gully again and to be wary of guidebook information.
One thing I know for certain is that after completing the first pitch it was only my experience as a climber to the lower E grades that got me through, and I wondered how a non-climber might have got on using the same information.
Please send us info on Clwyd rock
My girlfriend and I are trying to compile a new guidebook for the Clwyd area and would appreciate details of any new route information your readers might have.
The last guide was published in 1983 so there is a lot of catching up to do!
The crags concerned are as follows:, and any other crags in or around the Eglwyseg valley.
Any assistance given on this project will be gratefully received.
Take more care of mountain shelters
On a recent trip to the Brecon Beacons, while conducting adventurous training with some young apprentices from HMS Sultan, I was appalled to see the state in which the shelters on Craig Gwm-oergwm (GR 037202) had been left.
Not only was the amount of rubbish an eyesore, the conditions were such that anyone wishing to spend a night, whether in emergency circumstances or voluntarily, would find it a most unpleasant experience.
When I was in the same area again last week (w/c July 5 '91) I went up to the shelters one evening and cleaned out all the rubbish prior to spending the night there.
It is now an acceptable place to bivouac or just to break for lunch in bad weather.
A notice requesting people to take their litter with them had been placed, but I wonder how long the shelters will remain neat and tidy.
It is incumbent upon all hill users to respect the environment in which we pursue our pastimes and to take our rubbish with us.
Military and associated groups are not entirely blameless, as testified by the number of ration pack items discarded and it should be the duty of all in charge of such groups to ensure rubbish is brought down off the hill or from campsites.
We in the armed forces are privileged to be able to use an ideal environment to assess leadership potential and the ability to work as a team.
However, it is imperative that all hill users develop responsible attitudes towards the countryside.
Maybe it's time to demolish Scottish bothies
Scottish bothies are indeed being misused as Mike Wilson-Roberts points out in your August issue.
Adventure schools use them as centres, climbing clubs arrange meets at them; the Army Camps around them with the bothy the designated ‘mess tent’, and people hold 50th birthday parties at them to save marquee costs.
We need a code of practice here — jointly drafted by the MCofS and the MBA and approved by their members, including the Scottish climbing clubs.
It should be a fair, sensible and practical code, be well publicised — and to help shame misusers and lend muscle to the squashed, intimidated, or left out in the rain, and be posted in each bothy.
Such a code would be concerned with a commonsense size of user party, but it might equally address issues such as litter removal (incl. bags of salt and empty whisky bottles), defaecating against outside walls and the drawing of genitalia in visitors' books.
But perhaps it may regretfully be time to demolish our bothies — their unique charm and tradition destroyed by the greedy — another casualty like that on the consciences of the cairnbuilding, memorial erecting, road bulldozing and ‘100 best walks’ brigade.
EVENTS
Chris Bonington to make charity lecture
Julie Tullis, who was Britain's most eminent woman mountaineer, died five years ago on K2 following her ascent of the peak.
Having eventually gained planning permission, we have now launched in earnest our appeal for funds to create a suitable memorial to her — a campsite at Harrison's Rocks near her home in, E. Sussex, where she taught climbing with her husband Terry.
As part of our programme to raise funds, we have fixed up a lecture by Chris Bonington in London on Wednesday, October 16.
Chris will give an illustrated talk on his expedition this summer with Robin Knox-Johnston to Greenland, entitled ‘Greenland The Hard Way’.
The lecture will start at 7.30p.m. at Westminster Central Hall.
Tickets, at £5.00, are available from the following outlets:
Caucasus symposium
The Alpine Club holds an annual symposium each November at Plas-y-Brenin, with the general aim of providing information for climbers on specific mountain areas.
We are keen that the climbing public is aware that the event is open to all (for the price of a ticket).
This year's symposium is titled as follows:
The Caucasus , The grandest chain of ice mountains that Europe can claim: history, geography , great climbs and new challenges.
Speakers: and others.
The event will be held on Saturday, November 23 at .
The cost to AC/ACG members is £45 and to non-members £16.
Tickets, accommodation and information from .
LOST & FOUND
Found Pair of small climbing boots   
By Ben Klibreck, July 16: one SLR superzoom camera.
Call  to identify and arrange return.
35mm compact camera found below the summit of Stac Pollaidh on Sunday, August 4.
If the owner could write to me giving details of the camera case, I will gladly return it to him (her).
Lost Copy of new Yorkshire Gritstone guide at Ilkley or Brimham Rocks around the beginning of July.
Great sentimental value: £15.00 reward.
Books for charity
Would you be kind enough to mention that Needle Sports of Keswick sells secondhand guidebooks to raise money for North of England Children's Cancer Research (NECCR), a registered charity.
All profit made is donated to NECCR.
We would particularly appreciate donations of guidebooks, especially those for Lakeland crags.
Condition is relatively immaterial, as those that do not appeal to collectors are often bought by visitors who cannot afford the full price of an up to date guide.
We would also be interested in purchasing some of the more sought after antiquarian guides and books where their value is such that a pure donation might be considered over-generous.
As long as we feel we can sell them on and make a profit for the NECCR then we will be happy.
Some examples of books we have received requests for include:
To date we have raised over £200 since we opened and this has largely been from re-selling books we have had to buy.
We could do much better with donated books.
Just a wind-up
May I, through your august columns, apologise to all those climbers who have tried to locate MOT-While-U-Wait-Garage Crag, Selside, Cumbria, credited as my discovery in a Lakes Report.
I am afraid this was entered in the New Routes Book as a wind-up for a certain rock climbing columnist and to check whether he actually visited the places he wrote about.
(It was revealing who fell by the wayside).
Sorry, then, for those gallons of petrol fruitlessly spent in such a barren zone.
And also to those innocent victims of this jape who might even have put their cars in for the test and discovered the garage is no longer the soft option it was once reputed to be!
Let's hope it was, in the end, all in a good cause.
Anyone can vote
On return from a recent trip abroad, I rad with interest the article headed Democracy in Action?in the July pages of Compass .
While being of a fairly broadminded and humorous nature myself, I felt the piece to be a little controversial in its standpoint, and also a shade inaccurate.
Firstly, the reported meeting was in fact instigated by the Committee for Wales at the well attended ‘bolt debate’ meeting, which took place at Plas-y-Brenin on May 18.
It was felt at that meeting that another bolt debate was required to further air the views of all parties active in the Clwyd arena.
Representatives of Clwyd MC kindly volunteered to organise this meeting at date and venue reported (it has subsequently been held and was well attended).
Secondly, but perhaps more importantly, there are certainly no climbing qualifications required for voting purposes within the BMC system, only the requirements of the standard operating procedures.
P.S. Mind you, you do have to be able to on-sight Indian Face with an anvil strapped to your chest to become chairman!
CLUB NOTES
EQUIPMENT DIRECTORY
PETE LIVESEY
RAPPING
As everyone knows, rappelling is a good game and becoming very popular.
So much so that last month saw the formation of a national body for abseilers and rappellers — the British Abseil Association, which aims to act as a focus for those interested solely in abseiling, whether as an adventure activity, competitively or as a sponsored activity for fund raising.
The latter form is becoming extremely popular these days, a recent event witnessing the first 100 plus participants in a sponsored abseil over Malham Cove.
One of the main reasons for the BAA's formation is, of course, the great potential for dangerous practice in abseiling, and the activity's high accident rate in the past, with several well known climbers having lost their lives.
The BAA intends that a qualification scheme will soon be in place, with a graded multi-tier system of certificates available, from Assistant Supervisor (where one is merely allowed to assist with abseiling a small group down a short drop) through the Abseil Instructor and Abseil Coach.
The instructor's award is to be subdivided into those able to instruct on cliffs of less than 40 metres and 40 metres plus, and groups of less than 50 abseilers (one coachload?), and more than 50 people (multiple coach loads).
The instructor's rating in terms of party size is presumably linked to school party abseiling expeditions where the group may be merely one class, or a whole year group for instance.
At the top of the heap is the Abseil Coach, who is responsible for the training and assessment of instructors and supervisors.
As well as all the usual coaching and safety skills, the coach will be expected to show a high level of competence in speed abseiling on 40 and 120 metre descents and what I call ‘trick abseiling’ but which the BAA describes as ‘alternative techniques’.
Included here are such delights as classic commando style, where the rope merely slides through both outstretched arms and across the upper back; or abseiling from a sling and descendeur with the sling attached to either wrist or ankle — all great fun.
A badge scheme is also to be introduced for participants, whereby badges are awarded for completing abseils of varying lengths and on payment of a nominal fee.
The badges start at 15 metres with safety rope through five stages to the gold badge for a continuous 120 metre abseil.
This can only be done on specified cliffs and a cagoule must be carried, though not necessarily worn.
Examples of specified locations for the gold badge are Glogwyn Du'r Arddu, Gogarth and Lliwedd (Wales); Esk Buttress (Lakes); Gaping Ghyll (Yorkshire) and such gems as the North West Face of Sgurr a'Mhadaidh, Skye and Carn Dearg on Ben Nevis.
Safety in abseiling is a key feature of the BAA's raison d'etre , with a comprehensive set of abseiling rules issued to all active members; it is worth reproducing these regulations here as wider circulation could reduce the already alarming incident rate in abseiling (many potentially fatal incidents end up as ‘near misses’ and fail to be recorded.
I remember leaving a ledge to abseil down Scafell's East Buttress once only to realise I was falling out of control; I had forgotten to clip my figure of eight descendeur into my harness.
Luckily I managed to grab the abseil rope firmly enough with both hands to stop).
THE REGULATIONS
1.
Always wear a climbing or motorcycle helmet — the latter offers more protection from bouncing stones and bad weather.
2.
A good harness, descendeur and screwgate karabiner are essential; make sure the karabiner is well oiled for ease of use.
3.
Always carry a good sharp knife (useful in emergencies for cutting free tangles and cutting ropes for short abseils).
If an abseiler becomes entangled and stuck during an abseil then the only remedy is for the instructor to cut the rope at the top.
A safety rope is helpful in these situations.
4.
Anchors — Not normally needed; one can  nearly always find a rock or tree to secure the abseil rope.
On many cliffs, however, it is necessary to place stakes of wood or steel.
A suitable sledgehammer should be carried.
Note that for long abseils, competitive abseils or multiple person abseils, the rope should be secured to more than one point.
5.
Numbers — Although it's good fun for three or more people to abseil down a rope at the same time, normally no more than two should be attached to the same descendeur.
The strongest person should always hold the down rope from the descendeur and should wear gloves.
Motorcycle gloves are most suitable.
6.
Instructor groups — The maximum group size under the guidance of a qualified instructor should be 120.
No more should be allowed as this may interfere with enjoyment of other abseilers on the same cliff.
7.
Clothing — There is no set uniform for abseiling, but smart casual wear is a good idea and will promote the image of the activity.
It should be remembered, however, that a lot of abseils are to be found in remote areas such as national parks, and those venturing into these areas should carry and be able to use survival equipment.
A cagoule or plastic cape and space blanket should be carried in a knapsack, along with equipment to light a fire and cook a warm, nourishing meal.
8.
Safety ropes should be used by all abseilers until they have gained the blue 15m badge.
9.
Take great care over the choice of cliff and site for your abseil and remember that the paths to the tops of some cliffs are not yet waymarked, though the association is committed to achieving safe, waymarked approaches.
Some cliffs are very slippery or in very windy positions and are therefore not suitable for abseiling.
10.
All abseilers should be members of the British Abseil Association, abide by its rules, and hold the appropriate award for the level of abseiling being undertaken.
Now as a traditional climber I find the emergence of these new activities such as sport abseiling and sport climbing somewhat sterilised and regulated, but I suppose there is plenty of room in Britain for all offshoots and variations of the parent activity, and we must accept these developments with open arms as we did bolts and competitions.