

THE PRACTICAL HOME IMPROVEMENT MAGAZINE POWER TOOLS ON TEST VENTILATION: A BREATH OF FRESH AIR A LOOK INTO MIRRORS CHRISTMAS ELECTRICS Cosy hearth FOCUS ON FIREPLACES WIN A FABULOUS BATHROOM SUITE WORTH £1,000!
CONTENTS
UPDATE
What's making news in the home improvement market
VENTILATION
Why get all steamed up this winter?
A breath of fresh air keeps condensation away
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
Repairing a felt roof
Mending books
Fitting a ventilator
Panelling a wall
Connecting a power shower
Fixing flashings
Replacing a socket outlet
Installing patio doors
Hanging a garage door
Sealing water pipes
Fixing a plate shelf
MIRRORS
Reflecting light, ‘increasing’ space — every home should have some.
Product guide and fixing facts
FIREPLACES
The hearth of the home and here's how to keep the home fires burning
SPECIAL OFFERS
Huge discounts on sawbench, workbench, wall hangers, and a revolutionary handsaw
TOOL TESTS
We report on a
Black & Decker Cut Saw
AEG Router
Peugeot Air Gun
Black & Decker Workmate
NEXT MONTH
Into 1993 with a packed January issue.
Find out what's coming
LETTERS
Readers have their say on d-i-y, and win great prizes!
READERS STORIES
We want to hear from you about your most successful d-i-y project, be it a coffee table or an extension £1,000
COMPETITION
Your chance to win an Armitage Shanks bathroom suite
GARDENWISE
Designing an adventurous, illuminated garden
FEDERATIONS
Planning a new kitchen? then the Kitchen Specialists Association can help
FINANCIAL AND REGULATIONS
Checking high bills and dealing with tree roots are among the topics we cover
CHRISTMAS
Make this a safe festive period
GARDENING
Preparing ponds for winter, collecting leaves, planting for winter colour
PROBLEMS
Our experts solve a wide range of d-i-y problems
BUILDER'S DIARY
Our professional advises on hanging wallpaper borders 
NEWS
UP date
FREE! 25 SETS OF COLOUR-CODED SCREWDRIVERS
Halfway through a d-i-y job, when you reach for a screwdriver, do you always seem to find the right tip and size on the last you pick up?
Well Spear & Jackson has found a way to solve that problem — by colour coding its range of screwdrivers.
So from now on, all you'll have to look for is a red handle for slotted, green for Phillips, blue for Pozidriv/Supadriv, and yellow for Torx.
As a special introduction to this colourful, high-quality range of screwdrivers, 25 DIY readers have the opportunity to acquire a boxed set, worth £17.50, free.
The set includes three slotted drivers with 8, 5 and 3mm wide blades; two sizes of Pozidriv/ Supadriv, and a Phillips No 2.
Just sent your name and address on a postcard, to arrive before 14 December, to:,.
The first 25 out of the bag win a free set.
For more information, contact:,..
LET IN THE LIGHT
The Purilan range of 12 maintenance-free plastic skylights includes units ideal for pitched roofs over workrooms, hobby areas, corridors and stairwells, and also for replacing old cast-iron skylights.
The range features pre-flashing; specialist units for tiled roofs and for slated roofs pitched from 25°-75°; a double or single-glazed option; and special external locking units for outside to inside access.,..
QUICK-DRYING PAINT RANGE
The first water-based Gloss and Satin paints produced exclusively for independent retailers have been launched by Trend.
The new Kwikcoat range will be supplied in one litre cans of Brilliant White Satin, and one litre and 500ml cans of Brilliant White Gloss finish, with recommended retail prices of £6.49, £6.99 and £3.99 respectively.
Trend Kwikcoat is fast-drying, so that up to three coats may be applied in a day; its acrylic base ensures it does not turn yellow; it is low in odour; and brushes may be washed out in water.,..
WATER-BASED FLOOR VARNISH
Designed to enhance and protect both new and previously sealed timber and cork floors, water-based Beaver Clear Satin Floor Varnish is safer and more pleasant to use than solvent-based varnishes which give off strong, unpleasant smells that can cause headaches and nausea, particularly when used in confined areas.
Easily applied with a brush or roller, two or three coats will normally be sufficient.
The varnish can also be successfully applied over a solvent-based stain if required.
Drying time is only one to two hours per coat and the surface can take light foot traffic after just eight hours.
Beaver Clear Satin Floor Varnish is available in 1 litre and 5 litre packs which sell for around £13 and £44 respectively.,..
VENTILATION
Don't be stuffy!
Condensation is a big problem in many homes: if it's not cured it can lead to serious health problems, and cause damage to the structure of your home.
If you suffer from its effects, you need to know why it happens and what you can do to reduce its impact…or to eliminate it altogether.
Better ventilation will be your number one ally.
THE air around us always contains a certain amount of moisture — a lot on a humid summer's day, less on a clear winter one.
However, there is a limit to the amount of water vapour that it can hold, rather like a sponge, and this varies with the temperature — warm air can hold more moisture than cool air.
When the air at a particular temperature cannot hold any more moisture, it is said to have reached saturation point, and this condition is described as a relative humidity of 100%.
Air at saturation point is the key to the problem.
If that saturated air is cooled, for example by coming into contact with a surface such as a window pane on a chilly day, it can no longer hold so much moisture as vapour; the effect is the same as squeezing out your bath sponge.
The excess moisture vapour in the air condenses into droplets of water, and these are deposited on the cold surface, first as a fine film that mists up the glass, and then as more moisture is deposited, the droplets combine to form rivulets that run down the surface to form those tell-tale pools of water on window sills and the like, sometimes ruining decoration, and causing window sills and frames to rot and rust.
The temperature at which water droplets begin to condense is called the dew-point — literally, the temperature below which dew will form.
MOULD
Apart from moisture vapour, the air also contains millions of tiny plant spores which float around looking for somewhere to live and multiply.
The one thing they need is water, and if they find a damp surface in the home they will germinate and grow there quite happily over a wide range of temperatures, especially if the relative humidity of the air is above 70% for long periods.
The result is the familiar patches of black, brown or dark green mould seen in so many homes, especially around windows, in fitted cupboards and in the upper corners of rooms which have poor insulation and ventilation and inadequate heating.
The second problem is interstitial condensation.
If the materials used to build walls, roofs and other parts of a building allow water vapour to penetrate, then condensation can occur within the structure as well as on its surface if the air's  moisture content is high and the structure's temperature is low.
Most building materials are porous to some extent, although in a well-designed and properly maintained building the absorbed moisture can evaporate harmlessly to the outside.
If it can't do this the affected part of the structure remains damp; This can then encourage rot to grow on timber, and may also result in frost damage to masonry in cold weather.
What's more, a damp wall has a lower resistance to the passage of heat than a dry one, so it becomes colder and simply encourages more condensation.
WHERE MOISTURE COMES FROM
We are ourselves a major source of the moisture in the air inside our homes.
Our breath is moist and our sweat evaporates; one person ‘produces’ a quarter of a litre of water during eight hours of sleep, and as much a litre and a half during an active day.
Domestic activities create even more moisture.
Cooking, washing up, bathing, washing and drying clothes and so on can create as much as a further 10 to 12 litres of water a day, and every litre of fuel burnt in a flueless oil or paraffin heater gives off roughly another litre of water vapour.
We expect the air in the house to ‘soak up’ all this extra moisture invisibly for us.
It may not be able to manage unaided.
THE NEED FOR VENTILATION
Removing stale, moist air from inside the house may be brought about deliberately — by opening a window or switching on an extractor fan — or may occur fortuitously — air passing up chimney flues, for example, or finding its own way out through one or two small gaps in the house structure.
Most modern houses have very little fortuitous ventilation because improved standards of insulation and draught-proofing have made them much more air-tight than they have ever been in the past.
Of course this reduces our heating bills and keeps us warm and comfortable…so long as we don't create too much moisture for the air to cope with.
If we do, condensation will be the inevitable result unless mechanical ventilation of some form or another is installed to help out.
This reduction in natural ventilation not only causes trouble within the house, but also can affect its structure, and one problem area is the roof space.
Since we now insulate above loft ceilings and within flat roof structures, the air space above the insulation is cold.
When warm moist air finds its way into these cold areas, it condenses to form water droplets which soak the insulation, making it useless, and which can also cause serious outbreaks of rot in the roof timbers.
MAIN AIMS
The first aim is to extract moisture quickly  from rooms where it is produced — kitchens, bathrooms and shower rooms.
The second is to provide occasional rapid ventilation in habitable rooms and toilets.
The third is to provide continuous background ventilation which does not adversely affect the comfort of the occupants and which is secure against intruders.
Here is how to make sure your home meets these goals.
Habitable rooms other than kitchens, bathrooms and toilets must have:
One or more rapid ventilation openings (ie windows or exterior doors) with a total area of at least 1/20th of the room's floor area, with some part of the opening at least 1.75m above floor level.
And background ventilation openings (ie trickle ventilators) with a total area of at least 4000sq mm.
A kitchen must have both:
Mechanical extractor ventilation — either an extractor fan capable of removing at least 60 litres of air per second, or an extracting cooker hood working at 30 litres per second or more.
And background ventilation, either via ventilators, as for other habitable rooms, or by mechanical ventilation operating continuously at one air change per hour.
A bathroom not containing a wc must have mechanical extractor ventilation (ie an extractor fan) capable of removing at least 15 litres of air per second.
A wc, or a bathroom containing one, must have either:
A rapid ventilation opening as for other habitable rooms;
Or mechanical extractor ventilation capable of providing at least three air changes per hour and operating with 15-minute overrun after activation.
There are also special requirements for the ventilation of adjoining rooms, such as a lounge with a conservatory built over its only window, and for rooms with windows opening onto closed or open courtyards.
SAFETY FIRST
Fuel-burning appliances need an adequate supply of air to work efficiently and safely, so unless they have balanced flues, the rooms where they are sited must contain provision for this if they are well sealed against natural draughts.
An open fire needs an air entry opening with a free area of at least 50% of the fire's throat area, while rooms container other solid fuel or oil-burning appliances must have openings totalling 550sq mm per kilowatt of rated output above the first 5kW.
Rooms containing open-flued gas-burning appliances must have permanent ventilation openings of at least 450sq mm per KW of heat input over 7KW.
Finally, rooms containing gas cookers must have an openable window or other means of providing ventilation, and if the room's volume is less than 10cu m, it must also have a permanent ventilation opening with an area of at least 5000sq mm.
ROOFS
In lofts, you must ensure that condensation cannot cause deterioration of the roof structure or of any thermal insulating materials that are fixed or laid within it.
A duo-pitch roof must have ventilation openings at eaves level on opposite sides of the roof providing ventilation equivalent to having a continuous strip, 10mm wide, running the full length of the eaves.
If the roof slope is less than 15° (including flat roofs), the eaves vents must be the equivalent of a 25mm wide continuous opening, and there must be a clear airway at least 50mm wide between the roof surface and the insulation.
If the underside of the roof slope is insulated, there must be a gap of 50mm between it and the insulation, and there should also be ventilation openings at the ridge equivalent to a continuous strip 5mm wide running the full length of the ridge.
A mono-pitch roof should have eaves-level ventilation as for a duo-pitch roof, plus additional ventilation openings at high level equivalent to a continuous strip, 5mm wide, running the full width of the roof.
In all cases insulation material must not be allowed to block the ventilation openings.
Roof ventilation is now standard on all new houses.
However, many older homes do not have the benefit of even ‘accidental’ air flow through roof spaces, and may be starting to suffer problems as a result.
More ventilation must therefore be provided by means of eaves-level vents and airbricks on gable ends, and insulation materials must be pulled clear of eaves to allow air to circulate.
It is also a good idea to use insulation materials in conjunction with a vapour barrier to stop moist air passing into the cold area from the rooms below.
STRUCTURAL VENTILATION
There are two other areas of your home that also need effective ventilation.
The first is the crawl space beneath any suspended timber floors, where rot can quickly develop unless ventilation is good.
These spaces are normally ventilated by means of airbricks set in outside walls below the level of the damp course, but these can easily become blocked, cutting off the air flow beneath the floor and allowing rot to develop.
Check that all airbricks are kept clear, and put in extra ones if you suspect that underfloor ventilation is not adequate — there should be one every 1.8m along all outside walls.
Secondly, disused flues must be ventilated at top and bottom; if they are not, condensation can occur within the flue and this may show up as damp patches on chimney breasts.
DEHUMIDIFIERS
If you suffer from really severe indoor condensation problems that sensible ventilation will not cure, it may be worth considering dehumidification — removing the moisture from the air, rather than trying to disperse it.
Electric appliances called dehumidifiers work on a closed refrigeration cycle, both drying and heating the air.
The heating is a bonus, resulting from the release of latent heat as the moisture vapour condenses to liquid water within the machine, but dehumidifiers are not really heating devices — they are more effective in warm homes with high humidity levels than they are in buildings where low temperatures are the main problem.
Portable types can be intrusively noisy to run, but whole-house types linked to a ducted air circulation and redistribution system with the dehumidifier placed in the loft can reduce the noise level significantly.
These whole-house systems are comparatively expensive to install, but will do the job when all else has failed.
CHANGING HABITS
Lastly, we can all make a contribution towards reducing condensation by a mixture of common sense and a few simple changes to our everyday habits.
For example, keeping the doors to steamy rooms closed prevents moist air from reaching other parts of the house; fit door closers to ensure they are not left open accidentally.
Drying clothes in the open air if possible is preferable to hanging them indoors; if tumble driers are used instead, they must be vented to the outside.
Lastly, always sleep with some ventilation in bedrooms to prevent night-time condensation there; if it's too cold to have the window ajar, then leave the bedroom door open instead.
FITTING AN ORACSTAR VENTING KIT
1
Installation through a window is possible only where there is single glazing.
A louvred vent cover prevents rainwater ingress.
The tumble-dryer hose is connected to the vent from the inside
2
Having made a hole through the wall, the flat channel ducting is pushed through to the inside
3
An extended duct is available to accommodate the extra few inches of depth created by a cavity wall
4
A louvred exterior vent with non-return flaps prevents wind or rainwater blowing into the ducting
5
Having screwed the internal outlet in position on the wall, the 5ft long flexible tumble-dryer hose slots into place
Left: Central ventilation from Rega does away with individual room fans.
The multi-room extract ventilation system removes moist air and odours
Below: Speed controllable and wall or window-mountable.
The pull-cord studio range from S.A.M.E.
is easy to install
Above: Xpelair's GX6 exceeds building regulations and fits into the most stylish kitchen
Right: An efficient steam extractor, the Aquafresh 2 from Aqualisa fits into the ceiling
Through the window frame ventilation provided by the Vent-A-Matic TTF 2000/4000 (RW Simon Ltd)
The Ubbink MVC range of terminals match all interlocking tiles and slates
The Ebac Humidex 4, suitable for two bedroomed flats or houses.
CONDENSATION — problem areas:
Uncapped chimney on unused flue allows rain in, leading to condensation on flue lining
Washing hanging in bathrooms produces moisture vapour and bathwater is a common source of steam
Utility room with washing machine, tumble dryer and sink produce large quantities of moisture vapour
Porous plasterboard ceiling and gaps around loft hatch allow warm moist air into cold roof space
Unventilated shower cabinet in bedroom a real problem area
Probably the largest area for generating steam — the kitchen
Even normal breathing produces enough water vapour to cause condensation and mould growth
Paraffin heaters produce approximately one gallon of water vapour for every gallon of fuel burned
Cold bedroom above a built-in garage prone to condensation
A car put away wet will feed water vapour into the air, which may then pass up into the room above
Porous building materials allow damp between leaves of the exterior walls.
This also has a cooling effect, encouraging condensation
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
REPAIR A FELTED ROOF
Felted roofing — and flat roofs in particular, need regular supervision if they are to stay watertight once they're more than about 10 years old.
The ideal is to coat them with a good flexible roofing compound while still sound, which can extend the life of a roof by up to 20 years.
Materials are available in the Isoflex range for both emergency repairs and for long-lasting re-roofing.
1
Use an instant repair aerosol for sealing cracks in bitumen, metal or pvc, on either wet or dry surfaces.
The specially formulated mastic thickens on contact, so can be used on vertical surfaces
2
For emergency sealing of damaged area, use Wet Patch — a spread-on sealant which will stop leaks until a more permanent repair can be undertaken.
It will stick to most wet or dry surfaces.
3
For permanent treatment, sweep off loose stones and dust, and seal any large cracks with liquid rubber.
Allow to set
4
Apply special primer to provide a tough preparatory coating prior to applying top coat
5
Brush on a thick coating of liquid rubber.
This is available in black or aluminium finish.
It will not crack or perish
6
Remove any spots or splashes with special clean-up fluid.
It can also be used for cleaning or restoring brushes
REPAIRING BOOKS
FRAYED HINGE
Some favourite old books are irreplaceable, so time spent on repairing superficial damage is well worthwhile.
A book with a frayed cloth hinge is easily mended.
1
Start by cleaning the ragged edges, and trim any long or loose strands.
Ease the cloth away from the cover boards to a depth of 25mm.
The best tool to use is a bone folder, which is especially smooth and strong.
2
Ease the bone folder between the cloth on the spine and its backing of thin card or paper, to a depth of 12mm along the length of the spine
3
Cut a strip of matching book cloth 37mm wide and the length of the book cover.
Trim the ends to form two tapered flaps
4
Carefully glue between cloth and card on the spine, using a thin piece of card to spread the adhesive thinly and evenly
5
Insert the narrow flap of the new piece of cloth into the slot on the spine.
Rub well down
6
Using a piece of thin card, apply glue to the slot between the cloth and cover board.
Make sure that no surplus is spread on the cover.
Insert the cloth flap
7
Push the flap well home, using the bone folder to ensure there are no folds or creases
8
Lay the book on its side, with the repair uppermost.
Run the blunt end of the bone folder along the groove that forms the hinge.
This should firm the edge fibres on to the new cloth, and form a definite groove along the book.
The book can then be pressed until adhesive has completely dried
Bone folders and other bookbinding material are available from:,,.
HOLES IN PAPER
Sometimes the appearance of an old book can be spoiled by holed end papers.
Here's how to repair, and to make your book look as good as new.
1
Find paper of similar weight and colour — try old end papers from discarded books at jumble sales.
Lay paper under the hole, and mark the edges with a very sharp pencil
2
Cut out the shape with a scalpel or scissors where the edge is sharp, or tear where soft; make sure paper patch fits the hole exactly
3
Tear a piece of tissue paper larger than the hole, making edges frayed and fibrous
4
Spread paste on to piece of glass or rigid plastic.
Lay the tissue over it, pressing down with your fingernail
5
Carefully place paper patch into the hole, then lay the tissue over the whole area.
Smooth down with fingernail, and allow to dry
FITTING A ROOF VENTILATOR
When a loft is insulated you need to ensure the roof space is ventilated to combat potential condensation.
Fitting roof space ventilation is not difficult, and products such as those in the Glidevale range, readily available at most builder's merchants, do the job to Building Regulation requirements.
They will provide the required 10mm air opening, ensuring a weatherproof and large insect-resistant airpath for roofs with pitches of 15° and over — which covers most houses in Britain.
The insulation here is into a soffit.
You can also fit eaves-level ventilation above the fascia board, or through slates or tiles to match the roof
1
Mark the position of the Spring Wing SV 120 ventilator at 120mm centres along the length of the soffits at both eaves.
A template is supplied to give the correct opening size
2
Saw out a 270 x 92mm hole into which the ventilator will fit.
The Spring Wings at either end snap-fix it into position.
A lip hides sawn edges to provide a neat appearance.
Care should be taken when working with soffits made from any material containing asbestos.
Wear a simple dust mask and damp the material before cutting
3
Inside the loft, roll back any insulation, when slide the Rafter Ventilator into position between the rafters.
Its L-shape moulds to the inside pitch of the roof, allowing a clear air passage into the loft, between the spacer ribs and the roofing felt.
This prevents any blockage to the eaves vents, which would otherwise be caused by the insulation.
Gloves should be worn when handling insulation material.
Rafter Ventilators can be supplied for 400 or 600mm rafter spacings.
The should be fitted between rafters to ensure adequate cross ventilation
4
Lay or roll back the insulation using a brush to push the material into the angle of the rafter ventilator to avoid any cold spots
5
The completed installation requires no maintenance other than occasionally wiping down the soffit vent to ensure that the large insect screened grille remains clear of obstructions
6
There are Glidevale Ventilators for most roofs
Further details can be obtained from:,,.
REPAIRING A TIMBER FRAME
A neglected window frame can reach the point of no return, but it could gain a couple of years' reprieve by the clever use of a wood repair system.
1
Remove as much damaged wood as possible, then dry off the remaining timber with a hot air gun
2
Treat all soft fibres with a special preservative wood hardener, and leave to dry
3
After 24 hours, fill cavities with a two-part repair material, mixing only as much as you can use in about five minutes (less in hot weather)
4
Leave the filler a little proud of the surrounding timber, then, when set (in about 20 minutes), sand smooth
5
Apply wood primer to bare wood, then follow with undercoat and top coat, or a combined one-coat gloss, blending the gloss into the existing rubbed-down paintwork
6
The repaired frame
PANELLING A WALL
Add a touch of country style to a room, with the warmth of timber panelling.
The system illustrated here comes in easy-to-assemble kit form, and the range includes a neat display shelf.
It's best to store the panelling for a few days in the room in which it will be used, to allow the moisture content of the wood to settle before installation.
1
The panels laid out, showing the individual components.
Side and bottom rails are fixed first, ensuring that the two bottom corners form true right angles
2
Drill and plug the wall, then fix rails in place with screws sunk below the surface of the wood.
Fill the holes with wood plugs of matching timber
3
Alternatively, fix with masonry nails direct to the wall, nailing through the back section of the frame, which will be covered by panels.
Drill start-holes for nails to avoid splitting the wood.
Once the rails are firmly fixed, panels and centre uprights are dropped in place
4
The finished effect in a country-style kitchen
INSTALLING A POWER SHOWER
If you've insufficient head of water, taking a shower when water merely dribbles form the shower rose can be a miserable experience.
But units are available where the water is pumped, ensuring plenty of pressure; the Redring Superflow 3000 Power Shower shown here is a good example.
The very compact control unit incorporates mixer valve, pump, transformer and motor unit.
The only stipulation is that both hot and cold water should be fed from the same header tank — the unit must not be connected direct to the mains cold water supply.
Only 3 to 4in is required between the shower and the base of cold water storage tank.
Be sure to isolate electrical and water supplies before attempting to install a Superflow 3000 power shower, and follow the manufacturer's instructions carefully.
1
Position the shower on the wall at the recommended height — 1.2m (4ft) average height from the bottom of shower to the base of bath or cubicle; the top of the unit should be horizontal.
(Ensure a sufficient head of water is available to prime the pump)
2
Drill or channel out the wall plaster for rear cable entry
3
With the water supply to the hot water cylinder isolated and the top 500mm of water from the cylinder drained off, fit the Surrey flange into the top of the cylinder, and reconnect the vent and hot water pipe
4
Make the cold water connection by isolating the cold water supply to the hot water cylinder, and tap into the feed pipe, using a reduced T connection
5
Drill or channel out the wall plaster for water pipe entry
6
Deburr the ends of the water supply pipes to avoid damaging the 0-ring seal in the inlet ports of the shower
7
Push the water supply pipes into the correct ports in the shower, and fix to the wall
8
With the electrical supply isolated, connect the shower through a double-pole ceiling switch
9
Connect the other end of the mains cable to the terminal blocks inside the shower unit
10
Position and fix the riser rail and accessories
11
Before replacing the front cover adjust the temperature limiting device to set shower's maximum working temperature
12
Re-assemble the shower by placing the front cover and control knobs back in their original positions.
Switch on electricity and water supplies, and check the shower works
FITTING A DOUBLE SOCKET
If you want to avoid channelling out a wall, but would like to replace a single outlet with a double outlet, which can be a switched one, and will sit over the old position.
1
Switch off the power at source, remove the single flush socket and disconnect the cables
2
Hold your new surface-mounting box in place and mark for new screw positions.
Check the wall with a metal detector for cables, then drill and plug the wall
3
Pull the cables through a grommet fitted in the knock-out in the box.
Screw box in place
4
Connect the cables to the correct terminals and fit the securing screws
REPAIRS TO FLASHINGS
The joint between a house wall and the flat roof of a garage or extension is a good example of where flashings may need replacing.
First clean off all loose material, then coat the area to be covered by the repair with special primer.
This is supplied with certain rolls of self-adhesive flashing tape, such as the Evo-Stik Flashband used here
1
The flashing tape is supplied in various widths, and only needs cutting to length with an old pair of scissors
2
Peel away the backing paper to expose about 300mm of adhesive
3
Use a soft cloth to ease the strip into place, peeling off more backing paper as you progress.
An old wallpaper seam roller is ideal for giving a final firm press in place
4
Other areas showing slight cracking can be sealed with a bituminous mastic.
Be sure to clean all dirt and loose material from the cracks before mastic is applied
REPLACING A PATIO DOOR
A modern patio with a large glazed area is the ideal way of opening up a living room by leading the eye out into the garden.
The new door should also be virtually maintenance-free.
Here, we show how a Solair X5 aluminium door from Hillaldam Coburn is fitted.
1
These French doors are definitely ready for scrap.
The frames are rotten, which has led to distortion
2
The doors and opening casements are removed, then the jambs cut at an angle and levered out.
After removing the glass, the sidelights can be taken out in a similar way.
3
Next, head and sills are cut through
4
The sub-frame is then levered out.
You can use a timber off-cut to protect brick edges.
Then the opening is cleaned out, ready to accept the new sub-frame.
5
The hardwood sub-frame should be assembled on a flat, protected surface, and sealant applied to the joints.
Check diagonal measurements to ensure that the frame is truly square, before screwing tightly together
6
After fitting any necessary bitumen damp-proof course, the sub-frame is installed, checking again for square.
Nail battens  across two corners to hold the frame true
7
The frame is then checked for plumb, and adjusted with packing pieces if necessary.
If any adjustments are made, check again for square
8
If you are using modern hammer-in fixings, drill holes through the frame and into the brickwork, making sure you don't drill into soft mortar
9
Hammer in the fixings through their plastic plugs, taking care not to pull the frame out of true
10
Assemble the aluminium outer frame on a flat protected surface.
Apply sealant to joints and check for square, before screwing tightly together
11
Apply a bead of non-setting mastic all around the base of rebates on the timber subframe, and across the front sill platform
12
Lift the outer frame into position, bottom first, then swing in the top.
Push back firmly against the rebate, and fix loosely, starting with the sill fixings
13
Ensure that the outer frame is square and plumb, then fix shim behind each screw in the jambs, and apply sealant under screw heads in the sill, before tightening all screws
14
On the side which will hold the fixed panel, apply a thick bead of mastic around the inside of the jamb recesses, and up the joint with the jamb.
Also apply a thin bead along the front groove in the sill
15
Slide the cover strip over the edge of the fixed panel which will interlock with the sliding section.
Screw together.
Lift in the fixed panel, angling it into the head recess first.
Ensure that the legs of the bottom rail both engage in the sill grooves, and that the panel is tight against the jamb.
16
After sealing both ends of the sill adaptor with sealant, hook the adaptor over the grooves in the sill.
Fit tight against the jamb.
Using woodscrews, screw direct into the timber frame.
Fit the ventilator in the head, and the security plate to the aluminium sill
17
Lift the sliding panel over the security plate and place the rollers on the track.
Swing the head into the frame, together with outerhead section and weatherhood.
Secure the outerhead section in place.
Adjust the rollers with a Pozidriv screwdriver, to ensure that the panel slides square to the frame
18
At this stage, the lock cylinder is inserted in the sliding panel; sealant is applied all round, then it is screwed in place
19
Handles are fitted over the cylinder, both inside and out.
Use female screws on the outside, and screw covers on the interior ones
20
A bead of non-setting mastic is applied to the external joints, between the aluminium and hardwood frames at head and jambs, and between timber frame and brickwork
FIXING PLASTIC ROOFING SHEET
1
When securing corrugated sheeting to timbers, always drill on the highest spot of a corrugation.
Use a twist drill and operate the drill slowly.
With some sheeting, drilling can generate heat which will clog the drill with melted plastic
2
Use plastic top hats to ensure a good seal.
Don't over-tighten the screws or you will distort or even damage the sheeting
3
If sheeting has to be trimmed, support the plastic sheet over two pieces of timber and cut between the timbers.
Use a fine-tooth saw and cut at the shallowest angle possible.
Work slowly to avoid generating heat
FAST-FIXING FENCE POSTS
A bagged concrete mix is now available which speeds up the erection of fence posts very considerably.
Called Post-Fix, it requires no prior mixing.
1
Stand the post on a bed of rubble, then empty half the bag of mix into the hole.
Water in as recommended on the pack
2
Check the post for true vertical, add a fence panel, then tip the remainder of the bag around the first post.
Add water as directed, and the job is complete
REPAIRING SHOES
Trainers can be mended with super glue, but make sure meeting surfaces are free from dust and grit.
If leather is involved, rough the area to be stuck with coarse abrasive paper.
Apply a thin layer of adhesive to one surface and press firmly together until bonding is complete.
SHARPENING A SPADE
When using your space to cut, improve the edge by using a file.
Clamp the spade in a vice and work with up-strokes.
Then turn the blade to sharpen the reverse side.
Don't make the edge too sharp or it will blunt very rapidly.
BUILDING A PARTITION WALL
A large room often presents an uneconomic use of space — particularly when a growing family is involved.
Dividing one room into two is not a difficult operation, and simple studding can provide adequate support for sheet plasterboard.
In most cases the only disadvantage of such divisions is that you must pass through one room to reach the other.
If this is inconvenient, a passageway may be possible, with doors leading from the side.
1
Measure up for an outer framework, based upon sawn timber, 75x25mm.
Mark the floor, walls and ceiling, making sure that wall marks are truly vertical.
Mark out on the floor and ceiling timbers the position of the vertical studs
2
Locate the ceiling joists, and if not in a suitable position fit noggins in between the joists.
The timbers must be held firmly.
Make the end timbers a good push-fit
3
Build up the framework, skew-nailing where necessary (see inset) after the application of wood adhesive to meeting surfaces.
Check for true angles as construction proceeds
4
Now is the time to insert support pieces for socket outlets and switches.
Make holes through which to feed cables
5
Fix the plasterboard sheets using special nails.
Sink them just far enough to dimple but not fracture the paper surface
6
Where feasible, divide a large room to provide daylight in each area
SEALING CRACKS AND GAPS
Rain driven by the wind will find its way into the smallest cracks, causing all kinds of internal damp problems.
So while the weather is reasonably dry, check the exterior for weak spots in the defences.
If you have to venture on to the roof, be sure to hire a roof ladder which hooks over the roof ridge; and for other work above ground level, make sure your ladder is anchored so it can't move.
Don't take chances — 40% of d-i-y injuries are caused by falls.
1
If a chimney is out of use, see that it is capped with a slab (B), and that there is a ventilation brick (A) inserted in the stack to ensure a free flow of air to ventilate the flue.
Check ridge tiles and reset loose ones (C) in fresh mortar.
Examine the flashing seal between stack and roof (D).
Use Evo-Stik Flashband Flashing to repair cracks or replace damaged flashing.
Flashband Plus includes a can of special primer for the preparation of porous surfaces such as brickwork, timber, concrete and mineralised felt, prior to applying the flashing strip
2
Check the gaps around window and door frames (C) and that drip grooves on sills (A) are not blocked with paint.
Examine the flashings between extensions and porches and the house wall (B).
Repair damage as for the chimney
3
Clean out gaps around frames, removing hardened putty or damaged mortar, and replace with Evo-Seal Acrylic Outdoor Sealant.
Make slightly proud of the surface, then smooth with a wet finger.
Use a shave hook to remove build up of paint from drip grooves.
Prime and repaint.
INSULATING WATER PIPES
With the loft floor well insulated and the roof space ventilated, it is vital to ensure that all pipes are well protected against freezing conditions.
1
If bandage-type insulation is used, start at the tank and tie the first wrap, pressing it in close contact with the tank
2
Wind up the bandage around the pipe, allowing for generous overlaps.
Don't pull too tight or some insulation value is lost
3
As one length is finished, overlap and tie in a new one, ensuring that no gaps are left
4
At the end of the run, cut off and tie the insulation so it is in close contact with the wall
5
Include stop taps in your insulation, ensuring that the body of the tap is well protected
As an alternative to bandage-type insulation, you can use lengths of plastic foam pipe insulation.
This is flexible enough to follow curves, and it comes split along the length so it can be wrapped around a pipe
6
Open the length of insulation and wrap it around the pipe, pressing it into contact with the tank.
Some types are self-locking, while other will need taping up
7
Use either a plastic tape or waterproof clear adhesive tape.
Be sure to overlap the tape on itself as it may not adhere to the foam
8
Where pipes form a T-junction, cut the insulation using a mitre box and serrated knife to form a V mitre
9
Make sure both sections form a close fit.
Bostik Weatherproof Sealant can be used to seal the joint tightly
10
Where pipes exit through an external wall, use an expanding form filler both to seal the hole and to insulate the pipes.
When the foam has expanded, any surplus can be trimmed away with a knife
Apart from the obvious water-carrying pipes, be sure to lag the expansion pipe up to the point it bends into the cold water storage tank.
Also carefully lag any overflow pipes, so that should there be a ball valve failure there is no risk of an ice blockage building up in the overflow.
This would lead to tank overflow in the loft.
It is also advisable to protect any outside hopper where pipes enter the open top.
A flap of tough roofing felt or butyl sheet will do.
This will help prevent freezing air blowing up the open ends of the waste pipes.
Another approach is to fit a small length of old cycle inner tube over the end of each open pipe.
This will allow waste water out, but prevent air blowing in
REPLACING A WALL CORNER
External corners of plastered wall are easily damaged.
Adding a mesh angle bead to the repair will improve its resistance.
1
Cut back damaged plaster until there is room for the bead.
Apply neat pva, then anchor the bead with blobs of plaster applied about every 250mm
2
Work from the corner out on both walls, blending the plaster to the existing surface.
Leave the corner strip just visible
FITTING A PLATE SHELF
If you collect plates or similar items, which are best displayed vertically, a grooved shelf installed at about picture rail height provides an answer.
The one illustrated here is available from Richard Burbidge.
Fitting is simple.
1
Ideally, start at an external corner.
Drill pilot holes, and fix the support brackets to each corner piece
2
Using the plastic clips supplied, attached the corner piece at the required height
3
Use a spirit level to ensure the moulding is horizontal, then pencil a line along the top of the moulding.
Draw another line 30mm below, and parallel, to mark the position of the clips
4
Drill and plug the wall at 400mm centres and fix the clips.
Check for level as you go
5
Space the brackets equally along the moulding, and screw in place — one screw per bracket
6
Gently push the moulding on to the clips, adjusting as necessary; oval slots allow some play
7
Place the shelf on the supports and mark the centres, 27mm in from the wall.
Drill pilot holes
8
Fit the grooved shelf to the supports with the screws provided
9
The finished shelf
MIRRORS
Mirror mirror on the wall
A mirror is an essential piece of furniture — not only for checking your appearance, putting on make up, or straightening your tie — but also as an integral part of the home's decoration.
Mirrors are used in the home for a number of reasons: as decorative features; to reflect light, colour and patterns; and even to change the apparent size and shape of rooms.
They come in all shapes and sizes: as flat sheets, in decorative shapes, and as mirror tiles or mirror mosaics.
MIRROR IMAGE
Flat sheets of mirror glass and square or arched panels come in two main thicknesses — 4mm for mirrors up to 1m sq, and 6mm for mirrors larger than this.
The mirror can be silver, bronze tinted or smoke tinted, and the panels can be cut to six, and have their edges finished in a number of different ways.
They are fixed to walls with special screws or clips.
decorative mirror , with or without a frame, is the type you would normally hand on a bedroom or living room wall, or perhaps over a mantlepiece to reflect the room.
This type comes in different sizes and shapes, and is generally hung on clips or chains.
Mirror tiles come in different patterns, and are usually 100–150 or 300mm square, For large areas, they are safer and easier to handle than sheets or panels, but the surface to which they are attached (be self adhesive pads) needs to be absolutely flat.
To create an interesting decorative effect with mirrors, you may like to consider mirror mosaic , which consists of small squares of mirror held in place on a fabric backing.
The backing can be cut to give the shape you want and can also be used around a curved surface.
LIGHTING UP
If you have a room that is particularly dark, you should consider using mirrors to reflect what light there is.
One simple way to do this is to line the window reveals with mirror glass so that more light is reflected into the room.
Or, you could fix floor to ceiling mirror panels to the walls, either at right angles to the window, or on the wall opposite.
Above: The adjustable Alg mirror tiles from IKEA fit safely onto uneven surfaces and can be hung horizontally or vertically
Right: Hanging a large mirror opposite windows will add light to a dark room.
This splendid gift archtop mirror is from Overmantels
SHAPING UP
One very effective use of mirrors is to make rooms look more spacious, and therefore, more attractive.
The best way of achieving this is to secure that what the mirror is reflecting is interesting — perhaps plants, pictures, or even a fireplace.
To make a room look wider, long horizontal bands of mirror can be placed at the top and bottom of walls, or vertical floor to ceiling panels can be added to walls at right angles to a window.
Blinds on the window and a strong wall pattern will help disguise the edges of the mirror.
A narrow hall can be made wider by covering the whole length of one wall with mirrors, from skirting board to ceiling cornice.
To make a room look longer; fit a floor to ceiling mirror panel in the centre of the wall, opposite a window, then cover the remaining wall or panels on either side with wallpaper that matches that in the rest of the room.
If the mirror does not have an attractive frame, tongued and grooved cladding on the ceiling will conceal its top edge, and careful positioning of plants will conceal the bottom, and also create an attractive reflection.
Fitting floor to ceiling mirror panels in the recesses either side of a fireplace will also increase the feeling of light and space, as will replacing cupboard doors with mirrored doors.
Where mirrors are likely to confuse and be dangerous, it's best to hang them with the bottom edge above ground level where it's visible.
Above right: If you have a small bathroom, heighten the impression of space by hanging mirrors along one wall
Right: Double the size of your bedroom and create space with Wickes' mirror wardrobes
Below: Used against wall in small gardens, mirrors make them seem longer or wider
Above: Reflecting interesting ornaments creates a dramatic effect
Above left and left: Gilt framed mirrors against boldly coloured walls give a feeling of grandeur to large rooms
Right: a mirror frame should be an attractive feature: this one, created with tiles from Fired Earth, complements the floor tiles below it
Above: Functional yet decorative, this unusual mirror is from Disaster Designs
Right: Fitting floor to ceiling mirrors in recesses either side of a fireplace widens a room
TIME TO REFLECT
What are the best ways of fixing mirrors to walls?
Decorative, framed mirrors can be hung against a wall in much the same way as a picture, but to avoid having an exposed wire or chain, glass plates are often used.
These have countersunk screw holes, pointing in different directions — usually two for screws going into the back of the mirror frame, and one for a screw going into the wall.
To fix sheet mirror to walls, you can either use clips screwed to the wall, screws or adhesive.
Firstly, check with a straight-edge that the wall is flat, and remove any bumps.
With clips, one or two fixed clips (depending on the size of the mirror) support the bottom of the mirror, with one to two sliding clips along each of the other two sides.
The mirror is placed onto the fixed clips, pushed back against the wall, and the sliding clips are pushed in to hold it in place.
The positioning of the fixed slips is the vital point — use a spirit level to make sure the bottom of the mirror is absolutely horizontal.
The clips come with two washers: the metal washer is fitted between the clip and the wall; the nylon washer between the clip and the mirror.
Use extra metal washers to cope with uneven walls.
If you're going to use screws, you'll need to drill holes in the mirror (unless it comes pre-drilled).
Before drilling, hold the mirror up against the wall and mark the position of where the holes will be (using a spirit level to make sure it's horizontal).
then drill holes to take the wall plugs.
A large washer should be fitted between the mirror and the wall (a tap washer is ideal), a nylon sleeve put in the hole in the mirror, and a plastic screw cup placed under the screw head to protect the mirror.
Once in place, put decorative chrome caps on to the screw heads to hide them.
It is essential when screwing a mirror to a wall that the wall is flat, and there should be a gap of around 3mm behind the mirror to allow it to ‘breathe’.
Do not overtighten the screws or you could crack the mirror.
Fixing mirrors to ceilings requires some skill and knowledge, and is probably best left to a glazier.
A GLAZED LOOK
Mirror tiles are fitted in much the same way as other types of wall tile — that is, you secure a horizontal batten to the wall, lay the first row of tiles on it, sticking each one to the wall with double-sided self-adhesive pads.
You then remove the batten, using the first row of tiles as the guide for the second, and so on.
Unlike ceramic wall tiles, there should be no gaps left between mirror tiles (although you should leave a gap at either end, between the tiles and the side wall), and the wall surface must be really flat before you start.
If the wall surface is very uneven, it would be a good idea to create a new surface on to which you could then mount the mirror tiles.
To do this, fix battens to the wall, levelling then with slivers of wood, so that they form a truly flat surface (check with a spirit level in all directions).
Then mount plasterboard or plywood over them as your surface for tiling.
Finally, never stick mirror tiles (or any other tiles, for that matter) in top of wallpaper, and make sure that all porous wall surfaces are sealed with gloss or eggshell (not emulsion) before you start the job.
Leave to dry for at least three days, and don't fix to wall surfaces that are very cold (the adhesive on the tabs won't work properly).
DRILLING, CUTTING & POLISHING
Cutting and drilling into mirrors can be tricky, and you may want to leave these jobs to a glass merchant.
However, if you have a mirror and need to cut it to size, drill holes in it, or smooth, bevel or polish the edges, you may want to tackle the job yourself.
Here are a few guidelines:
Sheet music and mirror tiles are cut in the same way as sheet glass — that is, on a large, flat surface, with the mirror lying on a blanket or newspaper.
A straight-edge is used to guide a glass cutter, which is drawn across the glass in one firm continuous stroke.
The mirror is then placed on top of the straight-edge (or a thin timber batten) and lined up with it, tapped lightly to ‘spread the cut’, and broken by pressing firmly down on the two sides of the cut.
Any pieces left can be ‘nibbled’ away with pliers or the breaker rack on the glass cutter.
The edges of mirrors can be smoothed with a carborundum stone but using water rather than oil as the lubricant.
To polish the edge, use a piece of hardwood with a few drops of oil on it.
Place the block oil-side down into some jeweller's rouge powder, then rub it on to the mirror edge.
To drill holes in a mirror, you need a special ‘spear point’ mirror drill bit.
To lubricate the drill, first build a small ring of putty or plasticine around the mark for the hole.
and fill it with a small amount of water.
Use a hand drill or an electric drill on very low speed.
When the drill point is just through, turn the mirror over and drill from the other side.
SAFETY FIRST
Before you begin work, it is worth taking the time to consider safety measures.
Gloves (or gauntlets, which also protect your wrists) should be worn when smoothing mirror edges, or cutting a large mirror to size.
Stout shoes will protect your feet.
When handling or putting up large mirrors, it is essential to have help.
When installing large mirrors, take care not to damage them while drilling holes in the wall.
Any large mirrors (those more than 1m sq) should have additional support to take their weight; mirror doors for wardrobes and low level mirrors should have a commercially-applied film, so that the pieces are held together if the mirror gets broken.
Be careful not to install a mirror in such a position that it looks like a door, which people might then try to walk through!
The Glass and Glazing Federation has produced a leaflet,Glass in furniture —be safe and sure , which explains the minimum requirements for glass in furniture, including wall-hung or free-standing mirrors, and ways of checking whether or not the glass meets the relevant safety standards.
For a copy, write to:,,.
LOOKING INTO MIRRORS
We all know that breaking a mirror may cost us seven year's bad luck, but did you know that…
The earliest known glass mirrors date back to Greco-Roman times, and were found in the tombs at Arsinoe in Egypt.
In medieval times, mirrors were sold by pedlars, and were used mainly as looking glasses.
The first English factory to manufacture looking glass plates was set up by Sir Robert Mansell in the reign of James I.
Until the reign of Charles II mirrors were small and used as dressing glasses.
During his reign, it became fashionable to use mirrors as decorative features, surrounding them with broad, impressive frames.
Above: Add a touch of Peru to a room with this hand-painted, wooden framed mirror from Oxfam Trading
NEWS
UP date
BRIGHTER BATTERY
Bosch has introduced an ‘intelligent’ 9.6 volt battery pack for cordless power tools: with this pack, you don't need to guess whether the battery needs recharging.
Green, yellow and red lights indicate how much charge there is in the battery, in four stages from 5% to 100%.
If the red light starts to flash whilst in operation, the battery has less than 5% life left, and there is no light at all when the battery is completely flat.
An overload indicator helps the user get the most from one charge, and saves energy by showing when too much pressure is being applied.
When the battery needs replacing, the indicator can be transferred to a new pack, which has the same recommended list price as a standard 9.6 volt battery.
Bosch will safely dispose of old batteries returned to them.
The battery fits all Bosch 9.6 volt cordless tools, and costs about £83.,,.
PLUGGING SAFETY
Check Plugs are a simple and economical way of ensuring that all existing electrical wiring is sound and properly installed.
Check Plugs are light and compact enough to be carried in a pocket or as part of a tool kit.
The 13 amp Check Plug (price around £15 from B&Q stores) simply plugs into a live 13 amp flat pin socket to show whether or not the socket is correctly wired.
Faults are instantly identified using the key on the face label.,,.
HIGH TORQUE DRIVER
An ergonomically designed screwdriver called the Topra has been introduced by Wilha.
Claimed to be exceptionally easy to use, this new driver is designed for high-pressure operation.
The free-running ratchet mechanism allow changes of direction to be made with finger and thumb, without releasing the handle.
The smooth handle is comfortable to hold, and the reversible cross-head and single-blot blades are made from chrome-vanadium-molybdenum steel, held in a 6mm hex retainer.
For more information contact:,,.
CHAINSAW SHARPENER
The Martek Chainsaw Sharpener, a winner of The Daily Mail New Design Blue Ribbon Award, is unique in that it allows the cutting edges of chainsaws to be sharpened ‘on-bar’— utilising a power drill.
Designed to eliminate the sometimes difficult removal (and re-assembly) of the chain blade form the saw, and the time-consuming hand filing of the individual teeth — the Martek Chainsaw Sharpener will precisely grind the correct cutting pitch safely and accurately.
The sharpener simply clamps on to the bar of the saw, and the grinding wheel slots automatically into the teeth of the chain.
Price is about £50.,,.
FIREPLACES
Glow away!
As Christmas draws near, many of us cherish a cosy vision of spending it around a traditional open fire, toasting crumpets in its dancing flames.
Despite modern central heating systems, which heat our homes from cellar to attic, nothing can quite replace that warm glow — even if we have to recreate it with ceramic ‘coals’ and gas-fired flames…
The UK's Clean Air Acts, which forced many homes to replace coal-burning fires with smokeless fuel, gas or electric versions, may have cleaned up the smog from out cities, but the utilitarian heaters and radiators that replaced those fires seemed to take some of the cheer from our lives.
The steady burning of gas fire jets, the bars of an electric fire, or background radiator heat, may have warmed just as efficiently, but didn't create the same level of flickering flame comfort in our drab British winters.
Now homes all over the country are having their flues and chimneys unblocked, and old-fashioned fireplaces are being reinstated.
But instead of coal or logs, most of use are recreating those dancing flames by piping gas through ceramic ‘logs’ or ‘coals’, or faking that warm glow with a flickering red light hidden under an electric element.
The effect may not be quite as convincing, but the combination of traditional fireplace and coal-effect fires, without any of the fuss of making real ones, preserves our cherished illusions.
Non-city dwellers may still be able to burn coal or logs in their fireplaces, but today's busy lifestyles don't usually allow time for tending them.
Modern technology comes to the rescue here, however: solid-fuel handling systems, developed by British Coal, allow automatic fuelling from an outside coal store; de-ashing systems have improved, making the job quicker and easier; smokeless fuels have made the burning of fires possible even in cities; and some modern solid fuel stoves, which can be installed in front of a fireplace, burn so efficiently that they can be used in smokeless zones.
There's even a fireplace which can be installed on a wall with no flue: a container of special fuel is lit under ‘coals’, and gives you up to three hours of warmth and flames with no mess, no de-ashing, and no chimney is needed.
It's ideal for those special occasions when you want a ‘real’ fire, just for an evening.
Whether, you're burning solid fuel, gas, or electricity, there's a fireplace for you.
But before you install one, especially of the coal or gas-burning variety, which needs the correct flue conditions so that harmful fumes are expelled, there are a few things you must check.
OPENING UP A FLUE
Whatever you do, don't open up the flue, install your fireplace, and light a fire immediately.
Much may have happened to a flue, both during its closure, and when it was previously in use.
For a start, a flue which has had its fireplace closed, should also have had its chimney capped.
This cap must be removed.
This is a job for your local builder if you're not happy working up ladders.
When the cap has been removed, the chimney must be swept thoroughly to remove all remaining soot, as well as loose mortar and other lining material.
Follow this with a smoke test, using smoke pellets obtained from a builder's merchant or specialist shop.
The smoke should be drawn cleanly up the flue.
If the draught is sluggish, it may be improved by fitting vents in wooden floors near to the fireplace; or you might have to install a vent in an outside wall.
Should gusts of wind send smoke billowing back into the room, you'll have to fit a special cowl on top of the chimney, or some type of anti-back-draught chimney pot.
But before any type of chimney pot is fitted, check the condition of the flue.
A professional chimney sweep may be able to give you some indication of the flue's condition from the type of debris his brush brings down.
Look for stains on the chimney-breast, which will indicate that fumes are passing through the old lining.
A smell of smoke in the rooms through which the flue passes or in the loft will also indicate that some form of new flue lining is essential.
Unless you have above-average building skills, lining a flue with precast liners is not a job you should attempt to do yourself.
It entails cutting into the flue at strategic points, inserting the liners, end-joining them, and packing them around with mortar.
Another method is to insert and inflate a tube, then fill the space around it with an insulating mortar, before deflating the tube and withdrawing it once this has dried.
Where gas fires are going to be installed, flues can be lined with flexible metal tube liners which are inserted down the chimney, but their life may be shortened by contaminating acids, formed by condensation in the flue combining with the carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide contained in the flue gases.
These acids attack the structure of the chimney, causing the stains on chimney-breasts.
They can also be the cause of chimneys which lean: should your chimney stack lean, it is essential to have it rebuilt — there is no other cure.
Once you are satisfied that the flue is in a usable condition, you can turn your attention to the fireplace itself.
When opening up a fireplace, you'll usually find that the fireback is in a poor condition, and needs replacing.
This is a job you can do without too much difficulty.
If the old fire surround was taken away when the flue was sealed, the old fireback needs to be cut out carefully, using a hammer and cold chisel.
Try not to disturb the filling behind it.
In old fireplaces this will be a very weak sand and lime mix, but more modern houses will have one part cement to about six parts vermiculite.
Then buy a new fireback: standard firebacks are 16 or 18in wide, sold in one or two sections, or as one piece which can be split into two, but you can also get types with more sections for larger openings.
Position the fireback so that its front edge will meet the back of the fire surround.
Bed down on fire cement, allowing it to dry before filling in behind it.
Wrap a piece of corrugated cardboard around the back to allow movement caused by heat when the fire is lit, and fill any spaces with the weak vermiculite mix (use the minimum water).
The sections of fireback are then joined with fire cement, which is also used to point the joint between the fireback and the surround.
Opposite page: Living flame gas with three sided gas front allowing all-round view of flames; the SP firefront hides a Baxi Bermuda back boiler.
It's available as a renewable firefront for some older models of Baxi back boilers
Left: Parkray Chevin inset solid fuel roomheater, also available as a freestanding model and with back boiler for central heating and hot water, in choice of three colours and black, in a range of heat outputs (Hepworth Heating)
Right: Lichfield fire surround from Richard Burbidge, here in rich mahogany finish, from a wide range of easy-to-assemble kits, suitable for gas, electric or solid fuel fires.
From a choice of seven finishes, or unfinished, most models are available in four colours
Above: A living flame gas fire is now a possibility for virtually anywhere in the home.
The Cannon Coalridge's new Power Flue option allows installation up to 4m away from an outside wall, and will also take in up to four right angled bends
Above: Potterton Myson's new Main Legend live fuel effect gas fire is available as a fire front for the company's Housewarmer boiler.
The light, compact fire will fit on to 12in hearths, and will suit most surrounds
Left: Enhance your fireplace with an elegant surround from Richard Burbidge.
The AM9 kit comes unfinished, so you can paint or stain it to match your decor.
From a range of six, from leading d-i-y stores
Left: Suitable for burning wood or coal, the Dovre 2000.
Stone inglenook fireplace by Brock's Fireplaces of Kingsbridge
Right: A live fuel effect gas fire, the Mainflame from Potterton Myson suits modern or traditional surrounds, and can be used with a back boiler
AROUND THE FIRE
When it comes to selecting a fire surround, there's a vast number of styles and materials to choose from.
You can build your own in brick or stone, or choose from one of the many polished marble design.
If you think that an old-fashioned open fire needs an old-fashioned fireplace, you can visit one of the architectural salvage companies, where you can find genuine Victorian cast-iron surrounds, and ornate wooden surrounds with inset tiles complete with brass fenders.
There's also a vast array of kits to choose from: in brick, or brick slips; and a good selection of reproduction wood surrounds, some including reproduction tiles based on traditional designs.
Georgian and Adam-style surrounds are also available in fibrous plaster.
The part of the surround which is adjacent to the fire opening must always be of non-combustible material, such as marble or tiles.
Plaster and wooden surrounds are fixed to the wall by screws, through metal plates or wire loops and hooks.
Tiled surrounds built in the 1930s are set back against the brickwork, and the plaster made good around them.
It's important that the joint between the surround and the chimneybreast is sealed completely, to prevent smoke from escaping.
Until the 1930s, when totally tiled surrounds became popular, decorative hearths were formed by laying tiles on top of the structural concrete hearth, flush with the floor boards.
This required a protective ornamental fender, usually of brass or copper, which usually matched a set of fire-irons (small and long-handled shovel, poker, and long-handled tongs and brush).
The tiled hearth of a 1930s' surround was made in a single unit, and simply laid on the structural hearth.
A thin bed of cement and sand would be used to overcome any irregularities, and ensure the unit was level.
Some hearths were simply butted up against the surround, whilst in other designs, the surround stood on the hearth.
Fitting or removing these tiled surrounds is a relatively simple job, but you will need assistance, as the tiled units are very heavy.
GAS FIRES
Some gas fires are installed with special gas flues or ducts, but these are not always big enough to efficiently extract fumes from a coal-efficient fire: most living-flame or coal-effect fires require a flue of the same dimensions as that for an ordinary coal fire.
Because of the acid nature of these fumes, it's usually best to line an old flue before installing one of these fires.
Check with your local Gas Board showroom or CORGI installer, and have your flue and chimney surveyed by them before  committing yourself to one.
An alternative is to install a fire with a balanced flue — this passes straight through an external wall, to discharge in the open air.
This type of fire is totally enclosed, and uses no air from the room.
It therefore doesn't offer any ventilation bonus like an open fire does, but it has the advantage that it doesn't suffer from back-draughts, which can blow smoke and fumes back into the room from open flues.
INSTALLING A NEW FLUE
Supposing the room in which you want to have an open fire does not have a chimney or a flue of any kind.
What can you do about it?
It is possible to build a new flue, either inside or outside, but there will be certain regulations to comply with.
You will have to get Building Regulations approval, and you may need planning permission if you're going to add an external chimney.
There are various ways of constructing a new flue.
One it so build it in brick in the traditional manner, bonding it into the existing wall as you go.
An easier way is to use preformed, interlocking, insulating flue blocks.
You can also get insulated socketed metal tubes, but unless there are encased in brick or stone blocks, they tend to look a bit industrial.
The flues can be erected inside or outside to house, but indoors there is a lot of extra work necessary — trimming floor joists and providing fire resistance, for instance.
This work is best left to a professional builder, with experience of altering and renovating chimneys and flues.
CLOSING A FLUE
It may be, of course, that you don't like open fires.
You may prefer central heating, and more controllable ventilation than permanently open flue.
If this is the case and you want to close the flue, you still have to start by having the flue swept.
This will help to avoid clouds of falling soot from blowing into the room through the air vent which you must install at the bottom of the closed flue.
Removing the fire surround and sealing the opening is a job you can easily do yourself.
Take care when removing the surround, especially if it's very old, as it can be sold if it's in good condition.
Victorian and Edwardian models fetch a very good price!
The opening can be closed by brickwork or blockwork, which is then plastered.
Or you can install a wooden framework, and cover it with plasterboard, chipboard or hardboard (although the latter may buckle if it is not well supported).
A ventilator should then be inserted in the bottom: this can be adjustable for very windy weather, but must be kept open as much as possible to prevent dampness in the flue being caused by condensation.
The top of the chimney must be capped, again making provision for ventilation.
Various types of capping device are available, but this should be done by a builder.
Don't go up on to the roof yourself unless you are very confident — and your insurance policy covers you!
Above: Operating on natural or propane gas, the versatile Thermocet Rose stove, from Frampton's Fireplace Centre, is available with 4 or 9.3kW output, and with optional boiler and electric booster fan
Right: Styled with elegant black casing and brass trim, the new Valor Heartbeat gas fire gives living flame effect at little more cost than a radiant fire
SPOTLIGHT ON FIRE TYPES
When it comes to gas fires, there's a confusingly wide array of makes and models available.
Essentially, however, all of these fall into one of five groups, each with its own specific applications.
There can also be a considerable variation in the overall efficiency of each type.
Expressed as a percentage of heat output to heat input, thermal efficiency for these types of fires normally spans a range from 20% (poor, above average running costs) to 70–80% (good, very economical).
The five categories of fires, plus their efficiency ratings, are described below.
Further information on various gas fires is available from the Society of British Gas industries, which publishes two useful booklets:Fly the Kite , with advice on choosing Kite-marked gas appliances of all types; and Make the safe choice , which includes explanations of the range of gas fires and heaters available from different companies.
They may be available from gas showrooms, or contact:,,.
Cannon Misermatic Radiant Convector Similar to the traditional radiant fire, the main difference is that these have a heat exchanger through which air passes, before rising to disperse through louvres in the outer case.
Some may be combined with a back roller or circulator unit to produce hot water and limited central heating.
Typical efficiency: 60–65%.
Baxi Bermuda VP, glass-fronted Living Flame Effect These have flames which flicker from imitation logs or coal and combine the appealing looks of an open fire with a heat exchanger to provide convected warmth.
Some models have ceramic glass panels fitted to the front for increased safety and efficiency.
A range of cases and finishes, suitable for hearth or wall mounting, is available.
Typical efficiency: 60%.
Flamewave Supreme Inset Living Flame Effect Unlike the first two types, these can be fully installed within a fireplace opening, and project only minimally into a room.
They normally feature a convector heat exchanger rather than relying on heat simply to be radiated from glowing ceramic coals/logs.
Typical efficiency: 40%.
Valor Dream Decorative Gas These differ from Living Flame Effect Fires by being entirely open, although once again, they are designed to simulate solid fuel coal or log fires.
There are two main types: one fits a standard 16in or 18in fireplace opening, and the other is self-contained in a firebasket or ‘dog-crate’ on a large rectangular hearth, sometimes with a canopy flue.
Heat is radiated entirely from the ceramic coals or logs.
Typical efficiency: 20–30%.
Cannon Coalridge: Living Flame fire with conventional, balanced flue, or fan-assisted Power Flue options Balanced Flue/Ducted Fires Of Radiant Convector or Living Flame design, these fires don't require a chimney, although the Balanced Flue variety does need to be mounted on an outside wall in order to draw in air for combustion, and expel waste gases.
Fan-assisted flue ducts allow some fires to be used up to 4m away from the outside wall — they are often skirting flues, which run along a skirting board to an outside wall, and an be used to complement a limited range of conventional fires.
Typical efficiency: 70%.
Exterior terminal of balanced flue appliance: 4in diameter
NO DRAUGHT COWL Prevent downdraught from blowing smoke back into the room with the new Eurocowl.
Suitable for all solid fuels and gas, it meets BS 715 and has been certified by British Gas
Glenlomond Tweedsdale with electric radiant/convector fire Finally, for those desiring to close up a flue, or without a gas supply to their home, there is still the chance of enjoying the soothing glow of a ‘open’ fire with an electric flickering flame unit.
These aren't in the same league as the gas variety when it comes to providing ‘real’ flames, but there's a wide variety available, and they can just add that cosy finishing touch which helps turn a house into a home.
OFFERS
SPECIAL OFFERS
Yes, there's still time to get that extra-special present for the d-i-y enthusiast on your Christmas shopping list.
Once again this month, we've assembled a selection of interesting products in a variety of price ranges.
Save the trek around the shops — order right away, and that useful gift can still be with you in time for Christmas.
SAWBENCH WORKHORSE £19.95 TRESTLE WORKHORSE £37.95
The Workhorse is a new, British-made invention, designed for the handyman and professional alike.
Using it with standard 2x2in timber, you can create a custom-built sawbench with the two sturdy hinged units supplied.
These have screw-holes for permanent fixing of the wooden battens and legs, together with a locking device to ensure they do not accidentally close in use.
The Workhorse is supplied as a single pair of hinges, for use as a sawbench; or as two pairs, which can be used to create a stable trestle on uneven ground, for such applications as a garden barbecue or fête table.
Please note that the necessary wood is not supplied as part of the offer.
The Sawbench Workhorse units are on offer for £19.95, including VAT and postage and packing.
Use order code WHS on the order form.
The Trestle Workhorse units are on offer for £37.95, including VAT, postage and packing.
Use order code WHD .
WOLFCRAFT PIONEER WORKBENCH £89.95…
PLUS ACCESSORIES
Wolfcraft's Pioneer Workbench combines features from its Hercules and Master models to provide a machining table on one side and a work table on the other.
The shaper and sawing table features a swivelling table top, for easy tool mounting from above, and an adjustable sawing fence.
Four clamping bars ensure a solid mounting, but also permit a quick changeover of power tools.
The table is ideal for circular sawing, jig sawing and shaping, and the top and frame are hot-dip galvanised for long life.
The work and planing table section consists of a 40mm thick, impact-resistant mdf top, with mdf jaw vice which opens to 150mm.
Supplied with the Pioneer Workbench are three rows of bores for the four clamping jaws, which increase the clamping capacity to am impressive 550mm.
As with the Hercules, the Pioneer folds flat, and has wheels and a handle for ease of transport.
Priced at £89.95, including VAT and carriage, there's no doubt it makes a desirable gift for a d-i-y handyman, especially if he's got limited space in which to work.
Use code WPW .
Also on offer are some highly useful Wolfcraft accessories to complement the workbench.
EASY-TO-USE WALL HANGERS £6.95
As anyone who has ever attempted it will know, driving nails or picture hooks into a concrete brick wall is not always an easy task — more often than not, you end up with bent nails, and quite possibly, damaged masonry.
TRI-R Hangers make such problems a thing of the past.
They are specifically designed for hanging objects on hard surfaces, and can be driven easily into brick and most types of concrete or hard plaster walls (including plastered brick or concrete), with only a hammer — no drilling is required.
We've tried these hangers ourselves, and found they worked exceedingly well on surfaces which normally required drilling and plugging.
They are also being personally recommended to his clients by Nicholas Bonham, the Deputy Chairman of Bonhams Auctioneers.
TRI-R hangers will not be available in the shops for some time, but we're able to offer you a chance to try two different versions of this exciting wall-hanging system.
The TRI-R Hanger I caters for just about every hanging requirement in the house and garden.
Included in the pack are 20 specially tempered steel pins, 20 plastic caps, and a driving device.
The pin is inserted into the device, its facing plate placed against the wall, and a couple of taps with a hammer on the plunger drive the pin into the wall.
The flanged plastic collet is then pushed firmly on to this, and acts as the hanger for items up to 30lb in weight.
Removal is easy, with just a pair of pliers, and only a tiny, easily-disguised hole remains.
The TRI-R Hanger III is for heavier items.
Each heavy-duty Celcon plastic hook has three pins built in: you just place the hook against the wall, hammer the pins through, and that's it!
It couldn't be simpler or easier.
Our offer pack contains three of these hangers.
Our price for this special offer of 20 TRI-R Hangers with driving device, and three TRI-R Hanger IIIs, is just £6.95, including VAT, postage and packing.
Quote code reference TRI-R on the order form.
REVOLUTIONARY NEW SANDVIK SAW £12.95
Sandvik broke new woodworking ground when it introduced that Sandvik XT range of saws last year.
Unlike normal handsaws, where teeth are set alternatively left and then right, only every third tooth of the XT saws is alternatively set.
These teeth are also shorter and set at a different angle from the other teeth.
The changes result in a staggering improvement in sawing efficiency, with tests showing improvements of up to 20% efficiency in cross-cutting and 50% in rip-cutting efficiency.
This translates into faster working, with less wear and tear on both the user's arm and the saw.
In fact, the XT range is claimed to have up to 100% longer life when compared with traditional hardpoint saws.
The XT blade is substantially thicker than on conventional saws, which results in less side vibration and enables more precise cutting.
The location of the handle — lower down on the blade — and its angle with respect to the toothline of the saw, means that sawing power is distributed evenly along the whole length of the blade, unlike conventional handsaws.
Sandvik has just launched a new model in the XT range, the XT2500 , with a 22in long blade.
It will retail for £18.49 once it appears in the shops.
We have arranged an impressive 30% discount on this price for DIY readers.
To save you the mental arithmetic, that means you can buy the XT2500 for a limited period for only £12.95, including VAT, postage and packing.
Use code XT2500 .
NEWS
UPdate
WOOD FINISH FOR GRP GARAGE DOORS
A timber-effect version of the popular 2005 Colonial door extends the Hormann Series 2000 range of up-and-over garage doors.
The new door, manufactured from grp (glass-reinforced plastic), features a Georgian panelled design, but with an attractive wood grain effect in place of the conventional high gloss white finish.
There is a choice of two traditional timber colours, mahogany or dark oak.
The result is a door with all the appeal of hand-crafted timber, but with none of the associated problems of up-keep.
The doors are tough and durable, and they require almost no maintenance, a quick wash down being all that is required to restore them to pristine condition.,,.
RECHARGE YOUR BATTERIES
If you are looking for a Christmas present that saves money, is good for the environment and can be used time and time again, Ever Ready has the perfect present — the new FCH6 battery charger.
This fast charger will recharge four RX6 batteries from flat in just two hours; it will also accommodate RX03 and RX22 size batteries.
The charger is manufactured to conform with BS415 and has a number of integral safety features such as protection against wrongly inserted batteries, clear LED indicators to show when on charge, and timer control for the RX6 size which reduces the charge to a trickle after two hours.
Nickel cadmium batteries can be recharged up to 1000 times, at which point they will have cost less than one pence per cycle, including the electricity used.
The FCH6 Charger is available for £8.99 or with four with four high-capacity Ever Ready RX6 rechargeable batteries for £15.99.,.
BIG BLOWER
The new Stihl BG 72 Blower is a remarkable and versatile machine recently added to the Stihl power tool family.
It will eliminate those time-consuming and tiring sweeping jobs which every homeowner dreads.
The BG 72 can be used to clear grass cuttings and trimmings following mowing and brushcutting work, and really comes into its own when used to remove leaves and cut grass.
Lightweight, and with a powerful airstream, the BG 72 has a two-stroke engine which runs on lead-free fuel.
The collected refuse can even be removed with the simple addition of a separate part to turn the BG 72 into a powerful vacuuming tool.
Available from all Stihl Nationwide Service Dealers, its price is £280.82.,,.
SECURITY GRILLING
Burglaries continue to increase, and a particularly vulnerable part of any building is the glazed area.
A new but effective way of securing windows and glazed doors is to fit Security Grilles from Homeguard Products.
Being a visible physical barrier, the grilles are an excellent deterrent.
They are also trouble free, and give continuous protection, even when a window is open — a feature not available with most other forms of security.
The security grilles are made from steel or aluminium, and can also give the effect of leaded lights.
It's important that at least some of the grilles are fitted with quick-release locking systems, so they can be quickly removed in the case of fire.
Security grilles give more protection than window locks alone, and are ideal for the more vulnerable windows or doors at the back or side of a property.
They can also be used with other forms of security, thereby improving the overall protection of a property.,,.
TESTING
BLACK & DECKER 575E CUT SAW
Black & Decker has introduced the Cut Saw on the d-i-y market.
Previously only available in the Professional range, this multi-purpose variable-speed power saw, rated at 710 watts, does the same job as a range of hand saws: it will cut through hard or soft wood, fibre- and plasterboard, plastics and metals (ferrous and non-ferrous), cutting through timbers or across boards with accuracy and ease.
Working on the same principle as a jigsaw, but with the reciprocating blade in line with the saw body, it's used in the same position as a hand saw, but held with both hands.
One hand on the pistol grip handle controls the variable-speed trigger and lock-on power button, the other grips the saw around its insulated rubber ‘boot’.
When cutting, the saw is partially rested on its metal shoe, which acts as a pivot point.
This shoe protects the blade mounting (and your thumbs!), but has an open construction to give good visibility when guiding the blade.
Although the Cut Saw weighs in at 3kg (6–1/2lb), it's easy to control because you rarely need to support the entire tool when using it.
The almost flat top of the saw body and a cut-out section on the top of the show mean that the blade can be sighted along the length of the saw, giving great accuracy of cut.
The saw will cut wood up to 115mm thick.
Maximum blade cutting speeds are controlled by a dial set into the trigger switch.
Marked A to E, A being the slowest (recommended for hard metals), and E the highest (for wood), the dial is set before cutting begins, so that speed will increase only up to that setting: range is 0 to 2400rpm.
The dial is in a slightly difficult position to read, and the required letter should be positioned at the bottom of the trigger, which wasn't immediately obvious.
Blade changing is quick, with an Allen key inserted into a set screw on the inside of the show.
Three blades are supplied with the saw: an 80mm metal cutting blade, and two 130mm wood cutting blades, for fast and fine cutting.
A wide range of blades is available, including tungsten carbide tipped, blades for pruning and fence work, for cutting wood or plasterboard wit mails embedded in it, and for simple curve cutting, to mention a few.
They include blades up to 305mm long.
Blades can be fitted pointing up or down, should you need, for instance, to cut up into plasterboard, instead of inverting the saw.
The slim-bodied design of the Cut Saw enables it to be used right up to walls or floors, so protruding pipes, etc, can be sawn off almost flush, especially if a slightly flexible blade is used.
It can also cut access holes down to about 5in diameter in plasterboard or floorboards in fairly confined spaces because of its in-line design,(using a small-radius cutting blade for wood/plaster).
Both holes and pockets can be cut in wood or plasterboard without having to drill a starting hole: but it's only advised for experienced users.
The Cut Saw comes with 9ft (2.7m) of cable attached, but no plug fitted.
The motor is of professional quality, and was quite capable of tackling all the materials we tried it on, from thick kitchen worktop to metal pipes and plastic sheeting, provided the correct blades were used.
A counterweighted gearbox ensured there was very little vibration, making the tool comfortable to use.
We were surprised to find the saw so easy to control, as it seemed rather cumbersome at first.
It did take a few minutes to get used to the cutting action of steadying the saw on it shoe, starting the motor, then gradually starting the cut by pivoting down with the blade, but it was a knack soon acquired.
Although we thought at first that this was a saw intended for only a serious builder, we discovered that it also earned its keep doing fairly mundane cutting jobs that would normally be done by hand.
It certainly saved a lot of elbow grease.
If you already own a jigsaw and circular saw, the Cut Saw is probably not for you.
But if you just want one multi-purpose power saw, it could be worth the investment.
WHAT IT COSTS
The recommended retail price of the BD575E Cut Saw is £117.95, but shop around!
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
,,.
Maximum speed is controlled by dial set into variable-speed trigger
With the saw steadied on its shoe, cuts can be accurately controlled
Slim body and good line of sight enable cutting in confined spaces
Blade changing is easy, with Allen key releasing set screw inside shoe
AEG OF 450S ROUTER
Routers have really revolutionised the trade and home woodworking sectors of the power tool market over the last 20 or so years.
Slowly, the fixed router has  become a popular tool amongst tradesmen.
This did not originally have the plunging action of today's routers, and was really only a fixed motor with a collet to take a limited number of cutters.
Today, even the smallest tool shop will often have two or three plunge-action routers for sale.
AEG has recently introduced a wide range of d-i-y power tools to this country.
Professionals will be familiar with the company's black-bodied trade range.
The d-i-y tools are all in blue, and therefore termed the Blue Range.
We tested the OF 450S router, a 450 watt machine with a 1/4in collet capacity and a no-load speed of 27,500rev/min.
The first thought was how similar the machine is to the POF range of routers from Bosch.
Sure enough, the casing and motor are the same.
That is where the similarity ends, however.
AEG has taken a fairly established design of router, and fine-tuned it to become a much more easy to use machine than the Bosch.
The most noticeable difference is the move to a two-spanner system of tightening the collet.
We felt this was an improvement over the rival system of inserting a tommy bar through the collet and using one spanner.
Although the tommy bar is quick to use, there is always the danger that the user will forget to remove it before starting the motor!
Assembly of the package did not take too long.
Two plastic rounded handles are screwed to each side of the motor carriage, and serve to control the plunge action.
Here again, AEG has decided to do away with the system of locking the motor at the required height by twisting one of these handles.
Instead there is a separate cam-action lever, level with the handles.
This follows the trend of more professional models, and does give the user confidence in knowing exactly where to locate the handle, without having to fumble with the guide handles.
In use, the AEG machine proved to be simple to handle, and adjust — often a bugbear with routers.
Setting the depth of cut is done by a revolving plate, with three varying length screws protruding upwards.
These are especially useful when deep cuts are to be made in several shallower stages.
For simpler work, the depth is adjusted merely by setting the cam lever.
More often than not, a router can be left with its parallel guide fence in place to aid accurate cutting.
In this case, the fence is better than average, having a hard plastic buffer.
Most routers have bare metal, which can mark the wood.
For making a decorative edge on a curved section of timber, a round table for example, a round guide fence is included in the package.
Most of the other more common accessories can be bought, eg router table attachment, extractor nozzle, and circular guide.
The detachable motor assembly may be used as a mini-grinder with the correct attachments, but the elongated shape of the motor housing does make the router feel ‘top heavy’.
All in all, the AEG model can be recommended as an easy to use product of good quality, which is likely to cope with any routing tasks the d-i-yer may encounter.
Full marks for the cam clamping lever and cutter changing system.
Disadvantages were the tall body shape and lack of variable speed (available on the OFE500S model).
WHAT IT COSTS
The AEG OF 4505 has a list price of £133.27
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
,,.
The power unit may be detached from the base and used as a mini grinder.
Note large cam lever for depth adjustment
Routers soon pay for themselves if you intend to make up mortise and tenon or other joints.
Here, a straight bit cuts a mortise
A three-position ‘turret’ with adjustable screws serves to pre-set depth of cut positions on the AEG machine
We liked the large contact area and plastic fence attachments, which made rip cutting accurate and smooth
PEUGEOT DT2600 E HOT AIR GUN
Peugeot produces two hot air guns for the d-i-yer: the 1500 watt DT 2550, which has two speeds and a 550°C maximum temperature, and the DT 2600 E.
The DT 2600 E has about as many features as can be squeezed on to a hot air gun.
The distinctive Peugeot blue body is much bulkier than that of the average tool.
The rounded body and extra long handle are ideal when wearing gloves.
On top of the body, at the rear of the heating element, is a round temperature control dial, with calibrations from 1 to 5.
Each number roughly corresponds to a 100°C temperature change, giving a band of 100–600°C.
Unlike the DT 2550, the model we tested had an electronic, self-regulation device, which acts rather like a thermostat to prevent the gun overheating.
This is a worthwhile device, as cheaper guns will often burn themselves out through overheating on prolonged tasks.
The rocker-type trigger of the hot air gun has three positions: OFF, 1 and 2; the numbers indicate the airflow rate.
Peugeot quotes the airflow rate as 280 and 480 litres/minute respectively.
The only other ‘control’ is the removable plastic shroud which covers the tubular metal body of the gun.
This can be twisted and removed for use in inaccessible areas.
Unfortunately, despite the specifications and price of the tool, there are none of the nozzle accessories that would exploit the full potential of the machine; these must be purchased separately.
There is a flat, swivelling nozzle for paint removal, a window protector nozzle for work near glass, and a deflector nozzle for soldering.
However, we found the machine could still be used for much more than the average heat gun.
The instructions give a detailed table of 20 possible uses for the gun.
These include the shrinking of plastic film (d-i-y secondary glazing), drying of putty joints, and the freeing of rusty nuts.
It is also suggested as a weapon against parasites, but this does sound rather hazardous!
We liked the feel of the gun in use.
At 0.7kg, it is no heavier than most basic models, and holding the gun for long periods was not awkward.
We stripped a combination of primer and varnish from a plywood screen with comparative ease.
It should be stressed that large wooden articles such as doors are usually far better stripped by removing them and dipping in a caustic tank.
This is far quicker, and lessens the risk of damage from charring and scraping.
Having said this, a hot air gun should be included in any homeowner's toolkit.
They are ideal for stripping off old paint from fixed joinery such as windows and skirtings.
In this respect, the Peugeot DT 2600 E did not disappoint.
The natural tendency was to use the maximum setting and airflow to get the job done quickly.
But, this should be avoided, as we created several burn marks through over-zealous use.
Set on the maximum temperature we were able to quickly loosen three stubborn hinge screws.
The heat swells the metal, so breaking the rusted joint.
Welding plastic was less successful, but this does require practice.
As a general-purpose hot air gun, the Peugeot cannot really be faulted.
Controls were simple and the heat output is considerable for the price.
WHAT IT COSTS
Peugeot DT 2600 E costs around £70.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
,,.
At work on a combination of old varnish and primer, the Peugeot rapidly melted the surface layers.
Note over-large handle
A plastic shroud protects the user from accidentally touching the hot metal nozzle.
This may be removed for cramped working conditions
By using the tool at a high heat setting, rusted screws can be freed by making the metal expand, then contract
One of the numerous tasks that can be tackled by the Peugeot is the moulding and welding of plastics.
Use a low heat setting for Peugeot hot air gun
B & D WM750 WORKMATE
Black & Decker's portable workbench, the Workmate, probably needs very little introduction.
Even if you're not a serious d-i-yer, you're bound to be aware of this clever invention.
For those of us not lucky enough to have a workshop, it's an invaluable portable work bench which can be hung on the garage wall, and fits in the car.
Both d-i-y versions of the Workmate, the 536 and the 750, can be used at two heights: with the feet folded in, they form a low sawbench 23in high, and folded out, they give a 30in working height.
We tested the 750 (also known as Workmate 2), which is the most versatile of the two.
It has a wider removable rear jaw which has three positions; it can also later be replaced with a Power Tool Table, enabling a circular saw, jigsaw or router to be fixed underneath, and be used in a stationary position.
The 750 also has a larger bench surface, 29in long and 13in wide (with the narrower, 4–3/4in jaw closed up to the wider 8–1/4in one) and it will grip wider objects, as the vice jaws can be spaced further apart.
We were surprised to find that the 750 was only partially assembled, having expected to just pull it out of its box and start using it.
The tempered steel pins which held the handles in position were rather difficult to fit, and eventually had to be hammered in.
An older hand, helping with the fixing, commented that the release clips for folding and unfolding the Workmate were set further back than on his old-style version, making them a little more difficult to operate, and that the metal frame had more angular, sharper corners — not quite as user-friendly, he reckoned!
In use, we liked the larger, rubber-padded vice pegs of the 750, compared to the 536, and the larger variety of possible positions, which made it easy to grip straight-sided, tapered or oddly-shaped items on the surface of the bench.
The independent adjustment of each side meant that jaws could also be positioned at infinitely varying angles, and the grooves on the inside faces of the maws were useful for clamping copper or plastic pipe or dowelling when cutting.
The Workmate coped equally well with small, fiddly jobs, and with gripping a heavy panelled door while damaged mouldings were replaced.
Imperial, metric, protractor markings and 45° and 90° fixing/cutting guidelines on the bench top were occasionally useful.
We unfortunately discovered, when using sanding sealer, that its solvent base was quite effective at removing both the finish of the bench top, and the black markings underneath.
So be warned: don't splash meths on this surface!
We found that the recess formed by the metal structure under the bench, fitted neatly with a plywood offcut, made a perfect tool rest for holding tools which were temporarily not needed.
Folded up, the 750 was only 7in deep, 30in high and 29in long — compact enough to lean against a wall while jobs were in progress, and not too heavy to hang at about shoulder height when stored away.
For any d-i-yer, attempting large or small-scale jobs, without access to a permanent workshop, the 750 is an ideal helpmate, which you'll find more and more uses for in time.
The extra facility of the Power Tool Table, which can be bought as an accessory later, means that you can have virtually a mobile workshop, almost anywhere you're likely to need it, eventually.
There are, of course, other power tool tables which will perform both tasks together at the outset, but the 750 gives you the option of not adding the table if you don't need it, and meanwhile, having the versatility of an extremely useful work and saw bench for clamping, gripping and marking.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Black & Decker WM750 Workmate has a recommended retail price of £82.95, but you'll find it discounted in some stores.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION
,,.
Rear vice jaw has three positioning slots; max width between jaws is 8in
Grooves on inside faces of jaws grip round objects like pipe or dowelling
Jaws adjust to hold difficult or tapered shapes, or for angled cutting
The Workmate folds to a 7in depth, and is carried by the fixed rear jaw
DIY DO IT YOURSELF
NEXT MONTH
Some of the main features to be included in the January issue
DAMP
Home and dry — that should be your aim for winter — so here's a look at some damp-proofing products which can help
FROST
Be prepared!
How to avoid freeze-ups — and what to do if the worst should happen
CERAMIC FLOOR TILES
Follow our step-by-step guide and be flat out at the finish
CEILINGS
It's nice to have ceilings you can look up to— and there are lots of way to make them eye-catching
GUTTERS & DOWNPIPES
Here's how to fix a new plastic rainwater system
PLUS
All the latest d-i-y and home improvement news, gardening, special offers, and tool tests 
LETTERS
YOUR SAY
Get the New Year off to a good start by writing or telephoning us with your latest d-i-y tip, adventure — or misadventure!
If we publish your story, we'll send you £5.
Write to the editor at:,,.
STAR LETTER PRIZE
The lucky author of this month's Star Letter has won £50 worth of JB Weld adhesives.
JB Weld is a complete adhesive range which can meet all your d-i-y requirements.
Its innovative Coldweld compound actually etches the materials together: the secret combination of liquid steel and non-toxic chemical hardener results in a product which will fix, fill and bond any surface to any other.
JB Weld works on iron, steel, aluminium, bronze, brass, copper pewter, all woods, ceramics and plastics, and it can be used for mechanical, automotive and plumbing jobs, as well as around the home and garden, and much more.
It's odourless, resistant to very high temperatures, and does not shrink.
Call  for more information.
THE FIRES OF CHILDHOOD
A late shower of snow in spring, and I smiled at childhood memories.
On such a morning, I remember dressing in a freezing bedroom, then coming down to the kitchen with its brightly flaming coal fire, dad having been up much earlier to coax the sleeping embers to life.
Lighting the fire when the wind was in the wrong direction, or when there was no wind at all, took skill.
I remember cold days, when both back and front doors had to be kept wide open to cause a through-draught, or clear a smoke-filled room.
Once lit, however, the fire was the centre of the home.
I would return from a trek in the snow, to thaw out by the roaring flames, one side at a time, just like the bread on a toasting fork.
Snuggled on my mother's knee on the fire-side rocker, waiting for the black kettle to boil on the hob, I could smell the dinner cooking in the coal-fired oven; only the cat, nestling in the plate-warmer, could have been any more cosy.
Burning straw was the best fun — it was poked through the grill at the front of the grate and, when it caught fire, smoke would stream out of the other end.
‘Quick!
Your father's coming and the water's not hot enough for his bath!’
Fear of a tired, cold and blackened miner returning from a hard shift down the pit, caused the fire to be stoked to a raging blaze.
Then night time, when dad would bank it up with duff-mucky coal saved for this.
Happy memories?
Perhaps.
Today's coal fires are a luxury, but do they make life as interesting?,
Ed: Do you have a nostalgic memory of your childhood home to pass on?
Write and let us know.
KEEP OUT
When poking ends of copper pipe through walls, or under floors, make sure that the end is sealed off first with insulating tape.
It is all too easy to get foreign bodies into the pipe, which will wreak havoc with pumps and valves at a later date.,.
HOLE-ISTIC APPROACH
The floor of my brick garage is lower than the surrounding area, and I had trouble because water kept leaking in and collecting along one side.
I tried various methods of keeping the water out, but without success.
I eventually cured the trouble by hiring an electric drill, and drilling a row of 1–1/4in holes through the 9in thick concrete base.
The water now flows away immediately.
But a word of warning: a 1–1/4in drill takes some handling and can be dangerous, particularly when the drill jams in the hole.
so, unless you have very strong arms, get a hefty friend or workman to do the drilling for you!,.
SANDVIK TOP TIP PRIZE
This month's Top Tip prize is a selection of power tool accessories from the Sandvik Power Plus range.
Large and small arbors are included, to be used with Sandvik's VIP holesaws, which give a smoother and faster cut than ordinary holesaws.
The teeth have a varied and more aggressive shape than conventional types, resulting in a 20% faster cut, and the distance between the teeth is varied, to give a smooth cut with less vibration.
Three sizes are included in the prize: diameters of 20mm, 25mm and 32mm.
Two sets of five woodcutting jigsaw blades (one is pictured left) are also included.
Made from carbon steel, the blades are based on the Euroshank, and so are suitable for power tools such as those made by Bosch.
One set has a length of 75mm and gives a medium cut, and the second a length of 100mm, and gives a coarse cut.
The blades are also suitable for cutting plastics, laminates and other soft materials.
IN THE TUBE
Fixing a curtain rail to the top of a window surround can be a rather tricky business.
The job can be greatly simplified if a few short lengths of plastic tubing are kept in stock.
A screw should be placed on top of a vertically help Phillips or Posidriv-type screwdriver (I used an electric drill/driver), and supported in that position by a short length of plastic tubing.
The tubing should cover the screwdriver shaft, except for 1/4in of the screw point.
The assembly can then be guided until the screw locates a previously bored hole in the surrounding frame and a few turns made until it is firmly engaged.
The tubing may then be removed and the screw tightened normally.
This method of fixing has two advantages: no more dropped screws, and no fingers to obscure the view when probing for the target hole.,.
READER'S STORY
HAPPY NEW YEAR?
It had been traditional weather, with snow and frosty mornings to highlight the glittering hilly landscape of North Derbyshire, where we had enjoyed our Christmas holiday.
As we returned home during the afternoon of 31 December, it was freezing.
The snow crunched a protest under the car wheels, as we turned down the country road which led to our home, thoughts of a hot cup of tea uppermost in our minds.
At last our driveway — but what on earth…?
Coming out of our back door and making a frozen spread across the pith, came trickling water.
We couldn't have left a tap on, as we had taken the precaution of turning the water off at the mains, so where could it be coming from?
We pushed the front door open against a swish of water, then stood horrified: the kitchen floor was covered, with two inches of water.
We looked into the dining room, and stared unbelieving at the water dripping through the ceiling, being absorbed by our furniture and new carpet.
With only shocked monosyllables passing between us, we waded into the living room, where just a small steam flowed through from the area of the guest bedroom and bathroom.
The former was dry, but the latter was gradually catching up with kitchen.
The front area of the house, including our bedroom, was dry, and how I wished I could lock myself in there and pretend the rest wasn't happening.
The mains water tap was found to be turned on, and I gradually became aware of warmth emanating from the living room fireplace.
We knew then what had happened.
Our neighbour, who had been given a key to check on our house while we had been away, had thoughtfully lit a fire to welcome us home.
He had tried the water taps to make sure they weren't frozen, unaware that the water he ran off was only that in the pipes.
On looking more closely, we discovered that in one corner of the house, where the Electricity Authority had been carrying out some repair work, the pipe insulation hadn't been replaced.
The water there had frozen, and as the fire heated through the system, the pipe had burst.
‘Well, it's no good just looking at it,’ I said.
‘We'd better get to work.
At least it's a single storey bungalow.’
With the water once more turned off, and old clothes put on, we swept, mopped, and carried soggy furniture and carpets outside the drip.
They didn't drip long.
Within minutes of being tossed out, the soaking fabrics became stiff boards.
Leaving me to continue cleaning up, my husband climbed the ladder into the roof space to see what the situation was there.
His expletives are unprintable.
During the summer, he had insulated the roof by filling the areas between the joists with glass fibre wool.
One third of this now sagged under water.
With his hands protected by rubber gauntlets, he passed bucket after bucket of soggy glass fibre wool though the trap door into my waiting aching arms.
In silence we worked, completely indifferent to the freezing cold, as the pile built up at the side of the house.
At last the final bucket was passed down.
Grinning as he peered down, my husband wished me a ‘Happy New Year’.
It was just after midnight.
Good humour being somewhat restored, I turned away to make the hot drink we had promised ourselves so long ago CRASH!
I flew into the dining room, and found my husband in the middle of the floor, with a gaping hole in the ceiling above him.
While making a final check in the loft, his feet had slipped on the wet glassy joists.
He was shaken, but unhurt, and merely ordered me not to say a word.
I felt it wise to abide by this.
I have heard it said that an Englishman's humour is unique.
There must be something in this: when morning came, amid some laughter, my husband re-enacted the closing chapter of the old year by going up into the rafters and suspending himself through the hole so that I could take photographs.
With this attitude, despite the bad start, we knew it was going to be a Happy New Year after all, and set about restoring some order to our home…,.
STACKING THE ODDS
My nose told me there was a problem.
I opened a bedroom door, and could smell damp; there was a large patch on the wall.
I hurried up to the loft, hoping the water tank wasn't leaking, but it wasn't.
I was baffled.
Then my torch showed up streaks of water running down the chimney stack.
I got on to the roof: the upper levels of mortar had crumbled so much that it was doubtful if the stack would survive the next gale.
Four courses of bricks were renewed, and the patch in the bedroom disappeared.
But come autumn, the smell returned.
The mortar securing the chimney pot would have to be replaced, along with the pot.
But the problem still continued to get worse.
The plaster on the affected wall disintegrated, and black marks showed through the living room wallpaper as well, which revealed a slimy mess when peeled back.
Had anything happened around two years before that might have caused all this?
Well, we'd changed our solid-fuel central heating boiler for an oil-fuelled one…
Bingo!
It took a three-minute phone call to the boiler manufacturers to discover that chimneys with cross sections larger than 100sq in needed metal liners, otherwise flue gases would condense on the sides and penetrate the walls.
The installer had come highly recommended, but that hadn't prevented him from installing our boiler without one!
What lessons did we learn?
First problems can have several causes; and second, even when you're employing a specialist, read any information you can about the job — you may not understand everything, but you might save yourself a lot of bother.,.
DIY DO IT YOURSELF
READER'S REPORT
Write to us!
Have you converted a barn into a comfortable home?
Have you built a weekend cottage?
Or have you just made your own garden furniture?
However big or small your project is, we'd like to hear about it.
Write to us with an outline of your story, include a picture of the completed project, and if it's published, you'll receive a cash reward!
These readers designed, and then spent their spare time building this fabulous bungalow, complete with swimming pool and a large garden pond.
When this opening was created between two rooms, elegant display shelving, storage cupboards and stylish Victorian lace curtains were added to make it into an attractive feature
Two small rooms were made into a large bright lounge and dining room when the partition wall was knocked down and fashioned into a generous arch
This handmade table, which took less than a day to put together, made a great drink stand for the garden and conservatory
This kitchen extension is an excellent example of how it should be done: it looks as if it was built at the same time as the rest of the house
Can you match these?
GARDENWISE
Light & easy
If you find traditional gardens boring, be adventurous!
Abandon lawns, herbaceous and annual plants, and create interest with strong architectural lines, softened with a bold planting of mainly evergreen shrubs.
Then add lighting so you can enjoy the garden after dark.
The planting suggestions for this garden include many plants that require an acid soil.
If your garden is an alkaline (chalky) soil, choose other evergreen shrubs in place of the rhododendrons, azaleas, pieris, and camellias.
Laurels, aucubas and different colours of conifers are a few suggestions.
Install garden lighting
If using mains lighting, feed the cable through conduit buried at least 450mm (18in) deep, connecting it indoors to a residual current device.
Or use low-voltage lights through a transformer
Set a length of plastic conduit in concrete before constructing the brickwork.
Use elbow pieces for corners, and solvent weld all the joints.
Leave enough free cable to connect to the light fitting
Fill the centre of the brickwork with rubble and concrete, then fix the light according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Seal joints with mastic, and fit sealing grommets carefully
NEWS
UP date
ETHNIC LOOK FOR A BATHROOM
This geometric design is Inca, from Croydex's new Premiere range of textile shower curtains, forming a dramatic focal point around which a warm ethnic look has been developed in this bathroom.
The dark green colourway provides vibrancy and depth, which is echoed by the towels, tiles and flooring, and a cotton pile bathmat from Croydex's Catherine range continues the theme.
A feeling of understated elegance is provided by the chrome-plated brass accessories, from the Winchester range and the stylish mirror and glass shelf.,,.
GARDEN DIY
A new Expert book has been brought out in time for Christmas.
Called the garden DIY expert , it is the latest addition to Dr Hessayon's record-breaking range of Expert gardening books, and it literally breaks new ground.
The garden DIY expert makes an ideal Christmas present for the keen and not-to-keen gardener, as it will be used all year round.
Winter, spring, summer and autumn — there's always something that needs doing out there.
Price is £4.50.,,.
ALL KINDS OF GARDEN REPAIRS
Plastic Padding has a number of easy-to-use adhesive fillers to cope with the repair of most materials.
The range includes Chemical Metal, for use on earthenware, terracotta, concrete, marble, stone, etc.
Plastic Padding's Woodfiller is easy to shape, carve and sand, and is weatherproof, non-shrink and stainable.
Leak-Fix seals leaks in tanks made of steel, copper, lead, aluminium and glass fibre.
Super Epoxy is a strong, transparent, general-purpose adhesive for use on metal, glass, leather, wood, china, rubber, stone and hard plastics.
Super Glue gives instant bonding, and is available as a liquid in a safety bottle, or, alternatively, as a non-drip gel.
For more information contact:,,.
GOOD CONNECTION
A new brochure from John Guest shows how pleasant it can be to carry out plumbing work using JG Speedfit Fittings.
Spanners and blowtorch are not required, so risk of damage and fire is eliminated.
The new publication features the full range of Speedfit products for both copper and plastic pipes, for hot and cold water services and for central heating.,,.
ADVICE CENTRE
KSA
KITCHEN SPECIALISTS ASSOCIATION
A fully fitted kitchen at a bargain price may seem like the answer to your dreams, but there could be a catch.
Before you sign on the dotted line, check to see if the company is a member is a member of the Kitchen Specialists Association (KSA).
It may stop your dream from turning into a nightmare.
The KSA was the brainchild of seven independent kitchen specialists, who formed the body in 1977 to increase the professionalism of the UK kitchen industry.
Now more than a quarter of all kitchen specialists are members of the association, which offers a range of attractive consumer benefits.
There are two member categories: Associate members, which are drawn from a large number of manufacturers and distributors; and Full members, consisting of companies which have been involved in successful kitchen retailing for a minimum of two years.
The latter must also have a fully equipped showroom on their premises, and should be able to provide a full design, supply and installation service.
Look out for a current KSA membership certificate in showrooms — a KSA logo reproduced in a manufacturer's brochure doesn't always indicate the status of the retailer — check that he's a KSA member in his own right.
Vetting procedures are thorough.
Each prospective members is checked out by a KSA officer, and the standard of its installations in monitored.
The assessments continue after membership has been approved, and it companies fail to meet the association's high standards, their membership will be withdrawn.
DISCOUNTS & DEPOSITS
The kitchen salesman who offers you a ridiculously large discount is probably not doing you any favours.
If he also asks for a large deposit, the alarm bells should be ringing.
The KSA advises that you shouldn't pay a deposit amounting to more than 25% of the total contract price of your kitchen.
All KSA members pay into an insurance-backed bond known as KSA-Consumercare; this scheme ensures that customers are protected if a company ceases trading before goods have been delivered.
In this event, providing the deposit paid isn't over 25%, you are guaranteed to get your chosen kitchen at the agreed price, or your deposit back in full.
KSA-Consumercare also covers bathrooms and bedrooms sold by Full members of the association.
A number of KSA members also offer ‘Servicecare’ on domestic appliances supplied by them.
This is an independent, five-year parts and labour warranty, which is sold at a competitive rate.
If you're seriously tempted by a ‘never-to-be-repeated’ offer, take the advice of the KSA and check the  small print .
Does the price include everything shown on the company's glossy ad, such as appliances, taps, sinks, plinths, worktops and decorative edges?
The likelihood is that it doesn't.
It's best to ‘shop around’ before committing yourself to one company.
The KSA recommends a visit to at least three showrooms displaying comparable kitchens.
Ask for quotes for the full job, which will including fitting charges, plus any structural alterations needed.
The final price will confirm whether you're getting a bargain or not; as Syd Sewell, chief executive of the KSA points out, ‘…it costs as much — if not more — to fit a cheap kitchen as it does an expensive one.’
CAN WE HELP?
Maybe you need to track down an old kitchen manufacturer, or perhaps you've just signed a contract to get rid of a high-pressure salesman, and are worried because there doesn't appear to be a get-out clause.
Sound advice is available on the KSA's Helpline: call .
‘Between us we have a great deal of experience in knowing where to look for the answers’, says Syd Sewell.
‘If we can't help people directly, we can usually put then in touch with someone who can.’
The KSA will also act as an independent arbitrator if complaints are made against a member company.
The association publishes the booklet Do's and don'ts of buying a kitchen , which is available free of charge from the address at the end of this feature.
There is also a video, starring Angela Rippon, which explains the services of a KSA member offer; this costs £10, but the fee is refunded when the video is returned.
A list of KSA members in your area is available from ,,.
KITCHEN CHECKLIST
Don't rush into buying a new kitchen.
Around a million kitchens are purchased or upgraded each year in Great Britain.
Make sure you're one of the satisfied customers by following this advice from the KSA:
Choose a company which has a showroom, and take time to inspect the kitchens on offer.
Are they well installed and of good quality?
Beware of retailers who offer to supply a kitchen without doing a site survey of your home.
A good retailer won't give you a firm quotation before he's done his homework.
Are you dealing with a salesman eager to clinch a deal, or with a kitchen designer actually employed by the company?
Don't sign any agreements before you've taken expert advice.
You'll recognise good retailers by their thoroughness.
For example, they'll ask you what budget you are working to, and the size of your family.
They'll also require details of how you'll be using your new kitchen: ie, will it be used for entertaining, storage purposes, or doing homework, in addition to more usual activities?
In the company happy for you to visit previous customers in the area?
Don't pay a large deposit, and be wary of making payment in full before the work is completed (many retailers will let you hold back up to 10% of costs until you are satisfied with the work).
Treat special offers with extreme caution.
Ensure you receive a written quotation covering all aspects of the job.
Finally, do not sign anything in a hurry.
Some contracts may be impossible to get out of, or may have expensive cancellation clauses.
FINANCIAL SKY-HIGH BILLS?
Suppose a sky-high gas, electricity or telephone bill sends your blood pressure soaring.
Is it correct — or could you be the victim of a computer hiccup?
How can you be sure that your own meters are accurate?
You can usually work out who is to blame and what you can do about it.
Details vary around the country, but this is the basic drill.
Gas:First, read the meter.
After making an allowance for what you've used since the meter reader called, is it roughly the same as the reading on your bill?
If there's a rise compared with the same quarter last year, could there be a good reason, perhaps a new baby or a recently retired person spending more time at home?
If you're still not satisfied, contact British Gas, and then your independent Gas Consumers Council.
The phone number and address are on your bill.
If you suspect your meter has given an incorrect reading, you can ask for a check by government examiner.
This costs £26.64 (£29.65 in London), but you get a refund if it's found to be faulty.
Electricity:Make the preliminary checks as for gas.
No joy?
Then contact your electricity company, and finally the Office of Electricity Regulation (OFFER), whose phone number and address are on your bill.
the electricity company will arrange a meter check which is again free if the meter is found to be faulty, but otherwise will cost you £56 (London rate).
If you're still unhappy, OFFER will appoint an official examiner.
Again, there's no charge if the meter proves to be faulty.
Telephone:Check individual calls — most BT customers can now request an itemised bill if they dial 150 advance.
You are legally responsible for the cost of all calls made from your phone — could a swollen bill be explained by someone making secret 0898 calls, or ringing friends in California?
Take up problems with your BT office (phone number on bill), then contact the Office of Telecommunications (Oftel) if you live in England; otherwise, your National Advisory Committee on Telecommunications (number in phone book).
BT will check for free the exchange equipment used to meter your calls, but you can't have it checked independently.
You can keep tabs with your own call-logger, but the results won't be recognised by BT.
As a last resort, use BT's independent low-cost arbitration service.
The only charge is £15 if you lose.
REGULATIONS THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM
There's no doubt that trees can greatly enhance the beauty of a garden.
But they can also cause havoc to buildings.
Trees need moisture in order to maintain their growth, and this is obtained from the surrounding ground through the roots.
On shrinkable soils, such as clay, this continual extraction of water, followed by the absorption of further supplies from rainfalls, causes a certain amount of movement in the surrounding ground.
When buildings are sited near trees, the continual movement of the ground can cause structural damage, such as subsidence of foundations and cracking of walls.
This problem is most prevalent during prolonged periods of hot, dry weather.
The best way of avoiding this problem is to ensure that there is a safe distance between the trees and buildings.
A good rule-of-thumb to remember is that this distance should be at least the height of the tree when it is fully matured.
This ‘safe’ distance will obviously vary according to the different tree species.
When planting new trees in your garden, make sure that you know what the mature heights are likely to be.
Bear in mind that this ‘safe’ distance also includes your neighbour's buildings — not just your own.
Of course, you may not have been responsible for an existing problem.
An offending tree may have been planted many years ago by a previous owner.
If the tree has not yet reached its mature height, then you may wish to anticipate the likelihood of a problem occurring if the tree is allowed to grow unchecked.
Pruning trees is a good way of controlling their growth, and reduces the amount of water extracted from the ground.
However, sometimes the problems associated with large trees can only be solved by felling, which also has its problems.
When a tree is removed, the water which would normally have been extracted remains in the ground, which can result in swelling.
This upward pressure is known as ‘heave’, and can cause cracking in buildings in the same way as subsidence.
Some care must therefore be taken before deciding to cut down large trees.
Finally, if felling is the answer, then do make sure that your tree is not protected by a Tree Preservation Order, which could prevent you cutting it down.
If in doubt about this, consult your local council's Planning Officer.
WATCH THAT ENDOWMENT
If you took out a unit-linked endowment mortgage some years ago, now is the time to check it out.
When your mortgage comes to an end, you will use the proceeds to pay off your loan.
But will they be sufficient?
A unit-linked endowment is linked to units in a fund of stocks and shares.
With each monthly premium, you acquire more units.
In ‘normal’ times, these can be expected to rise in value, but the last five years have not been ‘normal’.
Units have tended to fall not rise, so the value of many endowments has not grown as expected.
On present form, some will not provide a big enough payout to clear off the loan, so you may have to pay higher monthly premiums to make up the shortfall.
HEALTHY HOMES
Have you ever thought of giving your home a health check?
Nationwide Surveyors now offers Homecheck , a report for homeowners which shows what maintenance and repairs are needed — in order of priority.
Nationwide says, ‘Over time, properties develop minor defects, which are often not visible to the untrained eye, but which, if left unattended, can grow into major problems requiring costly repairs.
A leaking gutter, for instance, can be repaired quickly and at a small cost, but if the leak remains unnoticed, water could seriously damage the fabric, resulting in expensive repairs for the future.’
Also on offer is a Home Energy Audit .
This measure the energy efficiency of your home, shows how it could be improved, and gives estimates of costs and potential savings.
Charges are £95 for Homecheck , £60 for Home Energy Audit , or £125 for both together (all plus VAT.
Contact your local Nationwide building society or estate agency branch.
NO-CLAIMS BONUS FOR HOMES
Household insurance specialists Hill House Hammond think that householders should qualify for a bonus if they avoid making claims.
After a claim-free year, even with another company, they offer a 25% no-claim discount on their Bonus 25 policy.
If you're willing to pay the first £100 of any claim, your premium will fall by a further 10%.
For a quote, ring  at local rates.
XMAS ELECTRICS
Electricity has a major part to play in making Christmas go with a swing.
It lights the tree, powers the tv, may cook the turkey, and powers many of the kids' Christmas presents.
To make sure your Christmas doesn't go with a bang instead, here's a checklist for the festive season.
THE HOUSE
Start your pre-Christmas check by giving your home's electrical system a quick once-over.
This should allow you to spot any incipient faults before they turn into a Christmas day blackout, and will also ensure that everything is safe and in good condition.
Check all your wiring accessories first of all, to make sure that faceplates are undamaged, that switches operate properly with no sign of arcing (this could indicate badly work contacts) and that switch cord pulls are in one piece.
It's a simple and relatively inexpensive job to remove and replace any damaged accessories you find; if you're not sure how to do this, call in an electrician.
Next, take a couple of hours to inspect every plug in the house.
Make sure the plug casing is in one piece, and replace any that are cracked, chipped or, worst of all, have bits missing that could expose live parts.
Next, check that the pins are clean and bright; clean any that show signs of discolouration or charring with wire wool (an old Brillo pad is ideal).
For safety's sake, replace any plugs that do not have partly sleeved live and neutral pins if you have children in the house, since this provides extra protection for prying little fingers.
Then open up each plug in turn so you can check that it is correctly wired up, that the terminal screws are secure (they can easily work loose in time), that the cord grip is working properly, and lastly, that the correct fuse is fitted.
You need a 3amp fuse for any appliance rated at under 720 watts, and a 13amp fuse otherwise.
While you are doing this, take the opportunity to inspect the condition of all flexes linking portable or free-standing appliances to the mains, and also those holding pendant ceiling lights.
The former can be easily damaged by careless use or everyday wear and tear, while the latter can fray due to fittings swaying in the breeze, and can become brittle with age.
Replace any flexes that have damaged insulation with new flex of the correct type and current rating for the appliance concerned.
Use 0.5sq mm flex for light fittings, 0.75sq mm flex for light fittings, 0.75sq mm flex for small appliances, 1 sq mm flex for those rated at up to 2kW, and 1.25sq mm for ratings up to 3kW.
Fit a larger size flex than the current demand requires to support heavy lampshades.
Lastly, to ensure everyone's safety over the Christmas period, get an electrician to install a whole-house residual current device (RCD) next to your main fusebox.
This will guard the installation against the risk of an electrical fire caused by current leaking to earth, and will cut off the power in the event of anyone touching something live when they shouldn't.
THE SOCKETS
Few homes have nearly enough socket outlets to cope with all the electrical appliances the average household now owns, and at Christmas the demand rises to a peak as seldom-used appliances are pressed into duty, and every item of home entertainment equipment seems to be on at once.
If you must use adaptors, make sure they will accept a maximum of two plugs; those taking three put too much strain on the contacts within the socket outlet, leading to sparking and overheating.
In the living room, wire all your hi-fi components into a multi-way adaptor which can then be plugged into a single socket outlet.
Do the same for children's home computers, ghetto blasters and mains-powered toys in bedrooms.
In the kitchen, you can provide temporary extra outlets at worktop level by fitting a four-way strip adaptor to the wall and plugging it into a nearby socket outlet.
Don't use these outlets for appliances containing heating elements, though, in case you overload the adaptor.
Avoid long trailing flexes wherever possible; they are a trip hazard, and a careless foot could yank the flex out of a plug or appliance, or pull the appliance over.
If you must use then as a temporary measure, run them round the room at skirting-board level and tape them in position.
Don't thread them under carpets.
If you are using an extension flex reel, always uncoil it fully to prevent it from overheating.
THE LIGHTS
When you rescue the old Christmas tree lights from the loft for the umpteenth time, remember that they could be the cause of an electrical disaster.
Before using them, inspect them carefully to make sure they are safe to use.
Tighten all the bulbs in their lampholders, and check that these are intact and fully enclose all metallic parts.
Make sure that a fuse lamp is fitted in one of the lampholders.
Inspect the flex carefully for any signs of damage or bare wires especially where the cores enter the lampholders.
If you find any faults at all, simply throw the set away and buy a new one; they cost very little, and it is a false and potentially lethal economy to try to patch up an unsafe set.
Make sue that any lights you buy are marked ‘Made to British Standard BS4637’— beware unmarked cheap imports.
Fit a 3amp fuse in the plug.
This safety advice applies even more particularly to sets for use out of doors, which should be clearly marked as suitable for exterior use.
When you install an outdoor light set, make sure that high winds cannot dash the individual lamps against hard surfaces — tree branches, wall and the like — and ensure that the flex connections are completely watertight if you have to use an extension flex.
It is safest to plug the lead from the lights into either a special socket outlet containing a high-sensitivity residual current device, it you have such a socket, or into an RCD adaptor otherwise.
Lastly, make sure that flexes leading to trees or other sites remote from the house are kept well out of harm's way.
Finally, check that you have a supply of spare lamps for each lighting set you are using.
Remember that the type of bulb used depends on the number of lamps in the set.
You cannot use bulbs for a 20-lamp set in a 40-lamp one, or vice versa.
THE PRESENTS
There are bound to be some mains-operated or battery-powered items among the Christmas presents.
Make sure the former are fitted with a plug (and the correct fuse), and fit batteries in the latter,before wrapping them up.
Make sure you have a supply of spare batteries too.
New toys will probably get a lot of use when they are first opened, and batteries can run down surprisingly quickly.
Being prepared could avoid tears before bedtime!
BE PREPARED
Being prepared doesn't stop at batteries.
Even though you have checked things over thoroughly, there is always the distinct possibility that something electrical will pack up over the Christmas period.
Be ready to cope by assembling an emergency kit containing the following items:
Spare fuse wire or cartridge fuses in ratings to match the fuseways in your fusebox/consumer unit.
3 and 13amp plug fuses.
Small BS646 fuses for dimmer switches and shaver outlets.
A couple of screwdrivers (including a small electrical one).
A roll of pvc insulating tape.
Spare lamps for all your light fittings, especially those taking Edison screw or small bayonet cap (SBC) lamps
A torch fitted with new batteries.
Pack everything in a box, and keep it somewhere accessible — ideally near the fusebox.
Have a safe and carefree Christmas!
They're lovely to look at, but remember that old Christmas tree lights are potentially lethal.
Check that all the bulbs and wires work and are intact, and if they're not, throw the old set away and buy new ones.
GARDENING
PREPARING PONDS FOR WINTER
This is a good time to give ponds, bubble fountains and water sprouts a seasonal check, and prepare them for winter.
If you haven't already done so, remove and drain pumps so that freezing water doesn't damage them.
Now is a good time to have them serviced too.
Make sure all pipes are drained, to prevent bursts when you reconnect them in the spring.
Ice can also harm fish by reducing the amount of oxygen available, and preventing toxic gases, created by rotting vegetation, from escaping.
A pond that is iced over for just a few days will come to no harm, but in a prolonged freeze, the fish may suffer unless you take precautions.
Rake out as much leaf debris and rotting vegetation as you can — a spring-lined garden rake will help.
Cut back any plants around pond edges that are dying back, and compost them before they pollute the water.
If a small area of water isn't kept open, thick ice can tear pond liners, and harm fish in severe weather.
An inexpensive pond heater will solve the problem — and cost little more than a lightbulb to run.
Good garden centres and aquatic specialists sell both mains and low-voltage types.
Depending on the severity of the cold, they will keep an area of about 300mm (1ft) diameter clear of ice, which is usually enough to allow gases to escape.
Rake out leaves and debris; use heater to prevent ice harming fish and liner
DAHLIAS & GLADIOLI
Don't let dahlias and gladioli perish in the ground.
If you haven't already lifted them, do so now.
Top growth will be dead, but frosts are unlikely to have penetrated deeply.
Let dahlia tubers dry off thoroughly before storing them — they will rot if storing them — they will rot if stored with damp soil still adhering.
If a frost-free greenhouse or shed is not available, place them on trays indoors for a week, then pack them in peat or vermiculite, or surround them with screwed-up newspaper.
Dry off gladioli corms in trays, then remove very small cormlets that have developed around the base — these will eventually flower, but only when grown on for several years.
Corms can be stored in trays or paper bags.
Store both in a coo but frost-free place until the spring, but remember to periodically remove any that have gone soft or rotten.
Also dust them with a fungicide such as green or yellow sulphur before storing.
SEED OF THE MONTH
Primula veris : Cowslip from Mr Fothergill's Wild Flower Seeds range.
Need a period of cold before germination.
Sow in trays of coarse, gritty compost, on or near surface.
Water well, cover with glass, and leave over winter in exposed position.
When seeds start to germinate, tray may be brought into gentle heat.
Flowers April to May, flowers scented, about 1ft tall.
PROTECT SHRUBS
If you grow some of the more vulnerable shrubs in an area where they are on the borderline of hardness, give them a little winter protection.
Most at risk are shrubs that have been planted this year, and are not yet fully established.
An established hebe may survive all but the worst winters, but a young plant may succumb to moderately severe weather.
Evergreens are also vulnerable, because they lose moisture from their leaves in high winds, which they can't replace from cold or frozen soil.
Except for the toughest types, such as yew and holly, protect newly-planted evergreens by stretching clear polythene around four stakes to act as a windbreak.
It shouldn't be necessary to cover the top, unless the plant is particularly cold-sensitive.
Container-grown evergreens, such as bays (Laurus nobilis ) are especially vulnerable because the root-ball may freeze solid.
To protect the roots of cold-sensitive plants such as African lilies (agapanthus ), pack straw or insulating material such as polystyrene blocks around the pot, held in place with bubble polythene.
CHECK TIES
Young trees should be staked until they are well established, but check the ties at least once a year, so that they don't bite into the rapidly expanding stem, and damage the tree.
A good tree tie will be adjustable and easy to slacken off.
If you've improvised and made a tie yourself, undo it and retie.
Always make sure there is a buffer between the tree and its support, to prevent chaffing.
•Continue to clear leaves, especially from the lawn, where they encourage grass diseases, and around rose bushes, where black spot may overwinter.
WINTER HEATHER GARDEN
Heathers are among the best shrubs for winter colour — they're not as demanding as the summer-flowering ones, and an acid soil isn't essential, as long as it isn't very chalky.
A shortlist of some of the best is given below.
They look good in bold drifts, and the effect is usually more pleasing if you choose just two or three varieties to plant in groups, rather than dot around a large number of different varieties in a small area.
Erica carnea ‘Myretoun Ruby’Glowing ruby red 
Erica carnea ‘Pink Spangles’Pink and cream 
Erica carnea ‘Springwood White’White 
Erica x darleyensis ‘Arthur Johnson’Pink 
Erica x darleyensis ‘Darley Dale’Mauve/pink 
Erica x darleyensis ‘Silberschmelze’ (syn ‘Molten Silver’Silvery-white 
E darleyensis ‘Silberschmelze’, ‘Darley Dale’
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problem, write to:,.
1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
And we are unable to supply plans for projects.
BUILDING
Skirting removal
I want to fix new skirtings.
How do I remove the old ones without damaging the wall?
Skirtings are generally nailed into place to timber packing pieces, called grounds, which are themselves secured to the masonry behind with large cut nails.
To remove a length of skirting, first run a knife along the join between the top edge of the board and the wall surface, to free any bond between the wall decorations, and the board.
Then place some packing against the wall just above the centre of the board to protect the plaster, and insert a lever such as a slim crowbar or an old chisel between board and wall.
Prise it away carefully, and have some timber offcuts handy to pop into the gaps as the board comes away.
If you can get it off in one piece, so much the better; if you cannot, pull the centre far enough away from the wall to allow you to cut through the board with a padsaw or jig saw, and free each half separately.
Stone blocks
I want to build a garden wall, what is a commonly used block?
The most popular is reconstituted stone: this is made by bonding coloured aggregates together under pressure, to recreate blocks with one decorative face and end, in imitation of natural quarried stone.
Blocks of this kind have the advantage of being regular and of uniform size, making planning, estimating and building easier than if using natural stone.
They come in a range of colours and textures, and can be laid just like bricks.
Block lengths range from  Most are a standard 100mm (4in) wide, and some are made as multistone blocks complete with recessed pointing.
These are quicker to build up than individual blocks, so are ideal for the waller in a hurry.
Try local builders' merchants and garden centres for stocks.
Concrete blocks
I have seen that concrete blocks are cheaper to use for a garden wall; would you recommend them?
Plain concrete blocks are not intended to be on show, and are used mainly for constructing retaining walls which will then be faced with a decorative skin.
The advantage of using them in this situation is their low cost and the speed with which the wall can be built up.
Sizes range from  They could be used for perimeter walls and the like if finished with a decorative rendering, if other materials prove too expensive.
Buy from builders' merchants.
Brick choice
What is there to choose from when selecting bricks for a garden wall?
There is an enormous range of colours available, from bright reds and yellows, through buffs and browns, to purplish-black.
Surface textured vary too, from smooth or sand-faced, to wire-cut, combed and dragged.
And you can even buy imitations of handmade bricks with all the individuality of texture that makes them so attractive to use, but they are  pricy .
Start by looking at the stocks carried by builders' merchants in your area.
They may be able to order bricks of a particular type if they don't have them in stock, or it may be worth investigating whether second-hand bricks are available from demolition contractors in your area.
Quality is the most important factor since your brickwork will be exposed to everything the elements can throw at it.
Ordinary-quality facing bricks will be ideal for most outdoor walling, but you may want to consider using special-quality bricks in particularly exposed areas.
With second-hand bricks you may have to accept variable quality.
DECORATING
Fixing panelling
Once you have fixed a framework of battens to the wall, how is panelling fixed?
Plywood and hardboard sheets, which are usually V-grooved to represent planking, are nailed through the grooves using fine pins, and the holes are filled, using a coloured filler.
Thin wedges are used to keep the sheets a couple of millimetres off the floor.
Nailing should start at the middle of the sheet on the horizontal battens, working out to the edges; this method keeps the board flat.
Hardboard sheets need to be stored in the room for a day or two before fixing.
Damping the back of the hardboard is also a good idea, but don't overdo it; a pint of water brushed over a 2.44 x 1.2m (8 x 4ft) sheet is ample.
At internal angles the boards are simply butted together.
If you don't make a neat joint, you can fit a strip of hardwood cove moulding into the corner to provide a better finish.
External angles can be finished off by fitting a rebated angle moulding down the corner.
FLOORS
Quarry tile base
Can a new floorcovering be laid over quarry tiles?
Old quarry tiles can be covered as long as the surface is smooth and you are sure there is no risk of rising damp.
If the floor is uneven, cover with a self-levelling screeding compound.
Vinyl over concrete
How do you prepare a solid floor to accept vinyl over the top?
Remove any nibs with a cold chisel and club hammer and dust clean.
If the surface is rough or uneven, cover the floor with a screeding compound.
This is easy to lay as it is self-levelling, needing no trowelling.
The surface then produced is ideal for sheet floorcoverings.
PATHS
Versatile concrete
I am uncertain as to whether I am capable of laying a drive in concrete.
What do you advise?
Concrete can be moulded into the most complex shapes but it can be difficult to lay and you'll have to prepare formwork to contain it.
The choice is between mixing your own, or having a ready-mixed version delivered.
It's a long-lasting finish and relatively inexpensive to buy but can look rather drab.
You can ring the changes by exposing the aggregate and creating a rough surface texture if you find a smooth finish uninspiring.
Or concrete can be used as a firm foundation for a more decorative finish later.
Paver preference
Are pavers a good choice for a drive?
Block pavers have the big advantage of being easy to handle (they're usually the same size as conventional bricks).
They're available in a wide range of colours and textures and can be used to create unconventional patterns such as circular and oval designs.
As well as rectangular shapes, there is an interlocking design which can be used to create more unusual patio patterns.
Crazy choice
Where is the best place to buy  crazy paving and how is it laid?
Crazy paving is bought at garden centres and builder's merchants.
It's best if you can collect your own because then you can select a balanced blend of large and small pieces and, possibly, different colours.
Crazy paving allows you to introduce curves into the path outline very easily.
The pieces are laid on mortar over a bed of concrete.
The joints between the stones are filled with mortar after bedding sets.
PATHS
Choosing Slabs
Are ordinary slabs the best choice for a patio?
Paving slabs are available in a wide variety of shapes, colours and finishes to suit the most ambitious schemes.
They're a popular choice for patios.
The lighter paving slabs are easy to lay, but heavy ones can be difficult to handle.
However, once you have a prepared site — a sand bed, or concrete base, the slabs can generally be laid very quickly.
ROOFWORK
Missing tiles
I have several tiles that need to be replaced.
Is this a fairly easy job to tackle?
Tiles, whether traditional clay ones or more modern concrete ones, are hooked on to the roof battens.
For security, every fourth or fifth row is nailed in place as well, but replacing an individual tile is usually fairly easy.
If the tile has simply slipped out of place but is undamaged (that is, it still has its hanging ‘nibs’ on the back), you should be able to slide it back into place after easing up the surrounding tiles under wood wedges.
If the tile is damaged, you can either buy a replacement (not always easy to match with traditional clay tiles, though architectural salvage yards are a good place to try).
You can always use tiles form the back of the house to replace any at the front where appearance is most important!
Flat repairs
I want to make sure my flat extension roof is waterproof for winter.
What should I look for?
Start by inspecting the roof surface carefully to pinpoint obvious faults; patch holes with mastic and use flashing or repair tape to cover splits.
Stick down lifting seams with roofing felt adhesive.
Then give the whole roof surface two coats of bituminous waterproofer, allowing the first to dry before applying the second.
Use a heavy-duty solvent-based type instead if the roof surface is in very poor condition.
PLUMBING
Frozen waste
What do you do if a waste pipe freezes?
The first symptom of a frozen waste pipe is that the contents of a bath or basin will not flow out.
Check that the problem is not one of a blocked waste pipe, by using a plunger over the plug hole.
If the pipe has frozen, the ice ‘plug’ is almost certainly outside, and the solution is the same as for a supply pipe — that is, the application of heat.
However, standing at the top of a ladder with a hot air gun is not funny when the weather is freezing cold, and a better answer is the hot towel treatment, especially with plastic waste pipes, which may melt if heated too much.
Boil up some water and pour it over towels which can then be draped successively over the waste pipe until the water runs away.
The most likely reason that waste pipes have frozen is because you have a dripping tap.
If it isn't obvious, check by leaving the plugs in basins and baths overnight (which will in itself prevent the waste pipe freezing unless the basin overflows) and if this is the problem, replace the tap washer.
Tap seat
I have rewashed a tap but it continues to drip.
Why is this?
Have a look at the seat against which the washer is forced when the tap is closed — if it's badly scored it may need regrinding, or the new washer won't be very effective.
Before you fit the new washer, make sure it's the same size and type as the old one.
If it's not, you can turn the old one upside down and replace it as a temporary measure until you get the right one.
Cistern overflow
What causes a cistern to overflow?
Modern ballvalves are closed by a large flexible diaphragm, older types by a rubber washer.
If the diaphragm is torn (a wc may be difficult to flush), or the washer is worn, it may prevent the ballvalve from closing properly, and the cistern will continue to fill until it runs out of the overflow.
Similarly, if the float has been set too high, or it has been damaged, and no longer floats on the surface, water will also reach the overflow.
Turn off the water supply before carrying out repairs, unless it's just a minor adjustment to the float arm.
If the level of this is set too high, there may be an adjuster which controls it, or you may be able to simply bend the float arm down to the correct level.
If the float is holed, replace it (it simply unscrews) or, as a temporary measure, empty out the water, then tie a plastic bag around it to stop water getting back in.
Capillary joint
How is a leaking capillary joint fixed?
Leaking capillary joints usually need replacing.
Drain the pipe and use a jot air gun (with special nozzle) or blow torch (protect the wall with a flame-resistant pad placed behind the joint), then remove it.
Before you replace it, clean the two pipe ends thoroughly with wire wool, then brush on flux.
Replace with new fitting, heat and add solder.
REPAIR TAPES
Which type?
What is the difference between repair and waterproofing tape?
Repair tapes come in several guises.
Flashing tape is one of the most useful; as its name implies it is used to patch torn or porous flashings between roofs and walls, on chimney stacks, in valley gutter, and so on.
Most have a metallic finish, and are bonded in place with a special primer.
Waterproofing tapes are mainly used for repairing things like cracks and leaking glazing bars in glass roofs, and for lining leaky gutters.
There are also clear types which are useful for making less visible repairs to glass and corrugated plastic.
WALLS
STONE CLADDING
How are exterior stone tiles fixed?
They are fixed in much the same way that ceramic tiles are stuck to internal walls, but using a special adhesive mortar suitable for outdoor use.
It's important to follow manufacturers' instructions as stone cladding differs considerably in weight, thickness and shape.
WOODWORK
Dismantling a chair
How do you take apart a quality chair in order to refix loose joints?
Most good — quality chairs have mortise and tenon joints between the seat rails and legs, and any stretchers (rails between front and back legs) also fit in mortises.
The main joints may be additionally secured by wooded pegs through the tenons; look out for tell-tale discs of endgrain showing on the legs.
Cheaper, mass-produced furniture may have dowel joints  instead of tenons, and you may find that screws have been used for makeshift repairs in the past.
Remove any that you find.
If you find pegged tenons, the next stage is to drill out the pegs without damaging the surrounding wood.
If their heads protrude, pare them down with a chisel, and then drill slightly smaller than the peg diameter, and drill out the peg (use a depth gauge so you don't go right through the leg).
Finally, use a small screwdriver or similar tool to ‘ream’ out the remains of the peg.
You're now ready to knock the joint apart with a mallet or hammer and a block of scrap softwood.
Matching moulding
I want to get some more moulding to match that in my hallway.
Where am I likely to find it?
You can tackle the problem in several ways.
The first is to find a timber merchant or cabinet maker who is prepared to machine it for you to the pattern you want — likely to be expensive.
The second is to tackle the job yourself, if you have the skill, using either traditional moulding planes or power tools such as the router or edge cutter.
Moulding planes are excellent to work with, but the job of producing long lengths of moulding can be very time-consuming.
You should be able to hire the tools locally, if you don't already own them.
Your third option is to make up what you want by adding small decorative mouldings to plain stock, gluing and pinning them on as appropriate to create the cross-section you want.
Freeing glued joints
I have tried to dismantle an old chair using conventional methods but the glued joints won't budge.
What next?
If ‘reasonable force’ fails to free a joint, your next trick is to resort to some liquid help.
Old glues are softened by heat and water, so immersing the joint in a bowl of hot water, wrapping it in hot wet cloths or playing steam from the spout of an electric kettle over it will all help to break the bond.
On modern chairs, pva woodworking adhesives will probably have been used, so the soaking or steaming process will take a lot longer; however, it will work in the end.
WOODWORM
Time of the year
At what time of the year should woodworm be treated?
There is no particular ‘best’ time of the year for treating woodworm.
Modern woodworm killing fluids are very efficient and will kill the insects at all stages of their life cycle.
Any deep-seated grubs will take in a lethal dose as they bite their way towards the surface, and the treatment will prevent reinfestation, provided it is thorough.
Treatment area
When applying woodworm killer fluid, do you just treat those areas where holes are found?
Woodworm holes are made by emerging adult furniture beetles which mate and lay eggs on any nearby timber that is suitably rough, or occasionally even in old holes.
It is no use only treating areas where holes are seen — treat all surfaces.
When the grubs hatch, they tunnel into the wood and carry on gnawing it away for about three years, before turning into pupae just below the surface and so restarting the cycle.
DIARY
BORDERLINE JOB
Extracts from the diary of a working supervisor with a small building company, with many useful tips on all sorts of building problems.
Fashions come and fashions go, but one style repeating itself with enormous popularity is that of the Edwardian era.
Happily, the Edwardians had considerable good taste, which is more than can be said for some of the awful designs of the late fifties which were in vogue during the transition from more traditional styles.
I'm rather fond of Edwardian tastes myself, but sadly, I don't live in the type of property where it's possible to go  berserk recreating the rich style of that bygone age.
Although I'm strongly against what can only be described as the ‘bastardisation’ of a property, a little out-of-keeping decor is often unavoidable unless you restrict yourself to a very limited range of choice.
Few of us would want cream distemper with rough and ready dark graining — except perhaps in a listed building or outside privy.
The problem with fashions is permanency.
If you're incontrovertibly hooked on a particular style, you won't be deterred by the changing face of fashion.
With central heating and fewer smokers these days, the decoration in a home can last 10 years or more with only a couple of adult occupants and you could therefore feel the need for change long before it really needs doing.
This is where borders can help.
Borders can be at the top, middle or bottom of a wall.
In the middle, they can offer a non-permanent alternative to dado rails, providing a separation for one or two different wallcoverings, or a useful way of relieving small patterns.
We were to decorate a staircase in this way.
To achieve something close to a perfect finish, a little forethought and measurement are essential before the first length of wallcovering is cut to length.
Straight borders seem simple enough, but changing angles can lead you into traps which are actually easily avoided.
The first step with our project was to establish the position of the border running down the stairs as this would dictate the join in the two types of wallcovering and the height of the whole border.
It may sound complicated, but it's not.
The low headroom on the staircase meant that we had to find a sensible height for the border by doing a ‘dry’ run without cutting any material from the roll (an assistant is invaluable for this).
The change of angle should be vertical to the point where the skirting and stairs meet.
This determines the position for horizontal sections and must be dome at the top and bottom of the stairs.
The same rules apply if you're fitting a dado rail.
We were then able to pencil a line where the centre of the border would run.
I'm sure you don't need me to tell you that vinyl wallcovering shows every defect in the plasterwork, so it was important to butt the different vinyls perfectly to avoid the joints showing through the border.
To ensure this, we hung the top piece slightly overlapping our pencil line (about 25–50mm) and followed with the bottom wallcovering also slightly overlapping.
With a dado rail you would hang all of one type first, but we didn't do this as we needed both pieces wet so we could cut right through the overlap point with a sharp knife and remove both pieces of waste to leave a perfect butt joint.
The cut doesn't have to be straight — you can do it freehand, as long as it remains within the area to be covered by the border.
There's no doubt poor joints or iffy angle alignment can spoil this sort of job, but nothing is worse than a staircase border which snakes up and down, glaring at you daily.
It's very important to get this strip perfectly straight, either by accurate measurement against the stairs or by using a string line and making small pencil marks every half-metre to align the bottom edge — again, that second pair of hands can come in very useful.
Any remaining pencil marks are unlikely to be noticeable.
I've mentioned in the past that vinyl doesn't adhere to itself with wallpaper paste, a simple and quick-to-use latex adhesive being the most effective way of dealing with normal corner overlaps.
Unfortunately, latex is not suitable for borders since it dries too quickly and is not durable for exposed and vulnerable areas.
A special overlap and border adhesive, like a thick pva, is made for just this type of situation.
Bearing in mind the narrowness of the border and the thickness of the paste, it is best to use a fairly small brush (25–50mm) in one direction to prevent the border from sliding about on the pasting table.
Folding it concertina-style every 500–600mm will make handling and hanging easy.
Once the angled section was in position, the two adjoining horizontal pieces were hung while everything was still wet and workable.
With correct positioning, to ensure the join came at the right point with the stairs, and a generous overlap, we could cut the correct angle through both.
Note that the butt joint is not cut vertical since this would result in only one piece being cut at an angle, this preventing a proper match.
The correct way to cut this type of joint is right through the two points where the sections of border intersect, although care must be exercised to avoid marking the main wallcovering where it would show.
Remove the two pieces of waste and clean off all adhesive from the surface — the joint should be perfect.
It also pays to try and match the pattern of the border at the joint.
It will not align perfectly, of course but this will help to camouflage the mismatch caused by the change in direction of the border.
By following the rules of paperhanging and plumbing a vertical after turning the corners, the remaining border could be levelled by following the pattern in the wallcovering and the need for marking out thus dispensed with.
It is surprising the difference such a relatively small decorative touch can make to an ordinary room or staircase.
Our customer certainly thought so — she gave us the cheque before we left!