

Football vs fashion: this season's biggest mismatch No 48 SEPTEMBER 1992 £1.80 Happy Mondays come clean Right Said Fred talk dirty America's DIY porn boom Disco: trash is back!
SANDRA BERNHARD mouths off X-rated issue!
letters
Write to THE FACE (Letters)
Draw score
In Amy Raphael's article ‘Phish Heads’(FACE 47) she stated, ‘No one seems to be smoking, although the smell of dope occasionally drifts by.’
What is she chatting about?
It is obvious to see from the photos that nuff of them were rushing out of their heads!
And isn't ‘dope’ a bit dated?
How about calling it good old spliff or draw or even marijuana?
Then you wouldn't have people thinking that going to a Phish concert means you have to put up with the smell of somebody who didn't do very well at school.
Arty face
Re: ‘Art Attack’(FACE 46).
I guess Damien Hirst didn't go clubbing in the mid-Eighties in NY, otherwise he might have noticed a shark in a tank in artist Eric Goode's nightclub, Area.
Leap year
Nice article on the jump trend (FACE 46).
All the records in that chart are pogo classics, and will get you jumping around like a lunatic, but don't forget Britain's finest purveyors of the pogo: Galliano.
If you've ever been to one of their live performances, you will find the band, yourself and the whole of the crowd jumping around like it was a punk reunion.
Galliano are the true kings of Nineties pop.
Talking loud
Thanks for ‘Ladies With An Attitude’(FACE 46).
After many years of male dominance in the dance music industry, you have finally helped to break down one of the biggest barriers and prejudices.
At last it has been recognised that there are many females within the club scene who have true potential.
One of England's finest DJs, Lisa Loud, summed it all up by saying, ‘Look between the ears and see the brain, that is what is important.’
Rave off
In FACE 46 you complimented a new club in Leeds, saying it was a refreshing change to the frenzied sweaty Ecstasy nights of the last few years.
The article enthused about the return to the norm, but what may we ask is the norm?
Although it is frightening that so many people take Ecstasy to guarantee a ‘good time’, what is more frightening is that it takes a Class A drug for them to feel they can lose their inhibitions.
Too many normal clubs are full of preoccupied people who spend the night wiggling their hips on the edge of the dancefloor, swigging beer and smoking endless cigs with a ‘half bored, half I'm beautiful’ look on their faces.
So it is no wonder that so many people go to ‘sweaty Ecstasy raves’ because at least there they can let themselves go.
So how about finding some nights where people can lose it, without having to drop one?
Beach bums
Gavin Hills' ‘Disco Europa’ article (FACE 46) had me rolling on the floor with laughter as the memories came flooding back.
In 1981 I was working the summer in Tenerife as a PR and when we got bored of the clubs, we would go to the beach at about 3am.
There we would see about 30 pissed-up shaggers giving it some behind the piled-high sun loungers (no standards).
We'd slowly creep up on them then shout abuse and kick sand all over them.
Sometimes they didn't stop or even bat an eyelid, and I bet there were a few people waking up with painful parts in the morning.
Riot act
Friday July 10 in a small northern town, there was nearly a riot.
It started with a fight, but fights can easily be controlled.
Instead more police turned up.
As they arrived more people wanted to know what was going on.
Except that 's the point, there was nothing going on.
The situation grew beyond belief.
Police started pushing and shoving people down the street, as the people turned to ask why, to defend themselves, they were dragged off.
The police did not have reasons to arrest people, they made them up.
I was threatened with a drunk and disorderly charge — I was neither.
Please have an article on this situation, not in London, not in Manchester, but a small town where people believe, rightly or wrongly, that nothing ever happens.
Riot reply
In your article on the LA riots (FACE 45), one of the photo captions pointing out locations around LA said, ‘Mt Wilson Observatory as featured in Rebel Without A Cause and countless films since.’
Rebel was filmed around Griffith Park Observatory in LA not Mt Wilson, which is located about a 40 mile drive from Hollywood.
The Griffith Observatory is located in Griffith Park, where the famous Hollywood sign is also located.
I have been to both places and can assure you, there is a great difference.
Mock manifesto
What we would demand given half a chance: Electro-shock treatment for anyone with home-made tattoos.
The electric chair for those with spelling mistakes.
The designer sunglasses of your choice available free on the NHS.
National Rodney King Day, when the victims of police injustice can stop, search and use ‘reasonable force’ on officers of their choice.
A 7pm curfew on all tourists in London during the summer.
That London Underground bring back their chocolate vending machines.
A night out was not complete without a gamble on the station machine, when the agony of nine successive defeats would be replaced by euphoria when you actually got your bar.
Skin up
Re ‘Little Hitlers’(FACE 44).
It's great to see that people are more aware of right-wing politics and the problems its supporters can cause, but not at the expense of all skinheads.
When are we going to get an article on the positive side of skins?
Movements like SHARP have been campaigning to show that not all skinheads are Nazi morons, and a regular newspaper called The Skinhead Times is distributed by George Marshall, author of Spirit Of 69 .
The people in your article aren't skinheads but thugs.
Right out
Contrary to the implication in your report on Italian Fascists, Spy Eye are not ‘a Nazi skin group’.
We are a reggae band with absolutely no political thoughts or affiliation, as our song ‘Neither Red/Black Or Racist’ states.
Sorry
Credits omitted from last month's travellers photo story: film courtesy of Fuji Professional, black and white prints by Danny Chan, colour by ETA colour labs
SAVE FACE
In the four months that have elapsed since we asked for your help in the aftermath of the Jason Donovan libel case, we have been overwhelmed by the show of goodwill and support from friends of THE FACE around the world.
We faced legal bills of £120,000 and set out to raise the majority of this money by public appeal, to save the magazine from the threat of extinction.
Thanks to the extraordinary generosity of our friends, readers, supporters, we have accrued in excess of £90,000 (a more precise figure will be published next issue).
This includes the profit from the SAVE FACE party reported over page, monies raised by various club activities, and the profit from the merchandise we've been selling by mail order these past three months.
It also includes the proceeds of National Liggers Week (July 20–26), when clubs across the UK — and in Amsterdam and Milan — taxed their guest lists, donated portions of their profits and held collections on their dancefloors.
Liggers Week raised around £10,000, most of it in small change, and provides further proof, if any were needed, of Britain's thriving, thoughtful club culture.
Finally, in October there will be a limited edition EP by The Shamen, featuring four tracks, specially remixed by Mark McGuire.
In the belief that we can fund any remaining difference out of normal trading, we are now delighted to be able to bring the Lemon Fund/SAVE FACE appeal to an end.
It's been an emotional, turbulent four months: we've read every letter sent with every donation, been touched and amazed time and again by your generosity, and offer our warmest thanks to everyone who has given time and/or money to help.
When we needed you, you were brilliant, and hopefully we can show our gratitude by continuing to produce a magazine that is innovative, entertaining and infuriating.
Thank you 
despite being acclaimed by New York's Interview magazine as ‘the best young actress in Britain’, Jane Horrocks is not your usual ‘luvvie dahling’ type at all.
With a raw Lancashire accent that can strip paint at ten feet and a well-known dislike of Shakespeare (she terms Juliet ‘a weed’), she debunks all the usual guff about acting.
‘RADA taught me about drugs and I learned to cook and to drive at the RSC,’ she laughs.
Best known for her incredible chocolate-coated performance as Nicola, the depressive bulimic, in Mike Leigh's Life Is Sweet (for which she won the LA Critics award and gained the admiration of pervy chocoholics everywhere), the 28-year-old from Rawtenstall is now enjoying massive critical acclaim and popular success on stage and screen.
Currently playing Alison Steadman's shy daughter, Little Voice, she is the talk of London's theatregoers for her virtuoso role in Jim Cartwright's new play The Rise And Fall Of Little Voice at the National's Cottesloe theatre.
Concerning a downtrodden girl in a back-street bedroom with an amazing talent for vocal mimicry, it was specially written for her after the playwright ‘heard me singing as Shirley Bassey, Judy Garland and Cilla Black in the garden’.
The buzz surrounding Horrocks is set to continue with her appearance in Jennifer Saunders' new BBC2 sitcom Absolutely Fabulous .
Frighteningly true-to-life, and very funny, it is set in the fashion business and stars Joanna Lumley as a coked-up magazine editor and Jennifer Saunders as a drunken PR woman.
‘I play her assistant, Bubbles,’ explains Horrocks, ‘she is a right airhead.’
With Little Voice transferring to the West End in October and another TV role next month in Arnold Wesker's Roots , Jane Horrocks is now a fully-fledged star.
It seems life can be sweet after all.
Plain Jane?
The divine Ms Horrocks proves that not all British actresses are posh, fey and precious
john!
Damien!
Jim!
Ian!
Trevor!
Nautical William are a pop band.
A proper pop band, not a pretend one.
Not three studio boffins and a model got in to do the video; not a TV celeb on the make; and not a bunch of suffering-for-their-art students whose only ambition is to get in the indie charts and be interviewed in Melody Maker .
‘It's time for the mediocrity that has governed and dominated Nineties pop music to give way to a band that can deliver what it promises,’ declares Damien, the gold lamé-shirted singer and lead guitarist.
Well, we've hard that one before, but what exactly are this year-old Bristol combo going to deliver?
‘Music that's right for the time,’ butts in drummer John (yes, the drummer — you can tell a band is going places when even the stick-head looks good and demands to have his say).
‘Good dance music, not those wet club records you get nowadays.
Music with substance.
Good songs.’
In other words, dandy fresh pop grooves over a disco sweet funk grind, which can all be found on ‘Rollercoaster’, their sexy single out this month.
‘We want to be on the cover of Smash Hits …and we deserve it,’ announces bass-player Ian, resplendent in his rubber trousers bought from a Soho sex shop.
‘Pop stars are special,’ insists John.
‘It doesn't have to be just page-three girls and TV stars that are the celebrities.
We're showing bands can be exciting.’
Nautical William are a band for the Nineties steeped in three decades of pop star culture: Sly Stone meets Marc Bolan in an Adam And The Ants video.
They've got energy, humour and attitude to spare, and back-of-the-bus debates about which one is the best looking could rage for years.
Damien sums it up, really: ‘People come to our shows, get their kicks and go away desperate to frig themselves off.’
Hello sailor!
Pop star wannabes Nautical William
in 1992, everything (apparently) starts with a D. With D-Ream and D-Influence leading the new D-Mobs, it would be a shame if people passed over the name D*Note.
With their debut album for the superb independent label Dorado, D*Note are going to go clear.
Since meeting at a Roy Ayres gig at Ronnie Scotts, hard blowing jazzer Matt Wienevski and rapper/DJ D-Zine have developed a partnership that will see them hailed as the Phil Spectors of London funk.
‘Everyone says we're jazz-rap, because of Matt's avant-garde jazz background and my rapping, but we're expecting that,’ says D-Zine.
Jazz-rap is, frankly, an insult.
Drawing on a huge spectrum of influences, every D*Note tune is doing something fresh, with a filmic quality that must make even Massive Attack blush.
The album is preceded by the single ‘Rain’, with a demonic American preacher, a Gambian thunderstorm and the bells of Oxford's Merton college all segued in the first 20 seconds.
‘It's going to upset people's expectations of what a D*Note record is,’ says Wienevski, who, holed up in a studio and creating his pocket symphonies, is proving to be a man to watch.
His D*Note spin-off project, Circle In the Round, created the craziest fusion grooves heard in clubs for months.
A rebirth of the cool?
Get out of here.
These boys are smokin'.
D*Note's D-Zine and Matt Wienevski — the funky face of studio boffins
you might not recognise him, but you have definitely heard his voice.
He's Steve Coogan and he's responsible for most of the male characters on Spitting Image — from Kinnock to Major, Prince Edward to Jeremy Paxman — as well as TV ad voice-overs for the likes of Bird's Eye.
But if you're thinking Mike Yarwood wannabe, forget it.
OK, impressions play a big part in his stand up act (his Ronnie Corbett as the Terminator in Vietnam is a classic), but he's also invented a bunch of characters to rival the best of Harry Enfield.
For this month's Edinburgh festival, Coogan is basing his entire act around four of these mysterious misfit creations: Alan Partridge the patronising sports commentator, Earnest Moss the pedantic safety officer, bad aspiring alternative comedian Duncan Thicket, and Paul Calf the slurring beer boy from suburban hell.
‘At school, I was one of those annoying shits who'd reel off whole Monty Python sketches.
I eventually ended up on Live From The Palladium as one of comedy's bright young hopes.’
Turning down ‘loads of really tacky telly’, he decided he'd rather slog it out on the alternative circuit than settle for being the new Bobby Davro.
Now he's finally won through: a pilot with Granada completed; independent producers wooing his Radio 4 On The Hour series to TV; a regular slot on Johnny Ross's upcoming Saturday Zoo for Channel 4.
Hobnobbing in TV circles he may even get to meet Richard Briars and solve a mystery that's plagued him for years: Those voice-overs he does for ads on the telly, he always sounds so out of breath.
I've always wanted to know what he's doing with his hands.’
Steve Coogan: not the new Mike Yarwood
leos Carax loves old Paris, hates modern Hollywood and couldn't care less what anyone else thinks.
The 32-year-old French film director has just flown into London from LA, and has not had an easy time of it.
‘I was in jail yesterday,’ he says.
‘They stopped me at the border and arrested me.’
Trouble seems to follow Carax.
His latest film,Les Amants Du Pont Neuf (see left), an unrestrained and intensely romantic love story starring Denis Lavant and Juliette Binoche, took three years to complete.
Filming was repeatedly interrupted, the budget span out of control, and the production had to be shifted from the Pont Neuf in Paris to a reconstruction built in the south of France.
Carax describes the whole experience as ‘hell’ and is surprised that he didn't have to resort to using Super 8.
The result, though, is the best thing he has done: it is nervy, poetic, loopy and very personal.
Lavant plays a vagrant waif, Binoche a runaway painter.
Together they turn the dead heart of the city into a riot of passion.
Carax is trying to capture an intensity of feeling, and is not afraid to risk the vulgarity of silent cinema.
‘I think that in any art form, the primitive years have the innocence and truth.
Then you lose it.
By a miracle maybe you can find it again some time — in ten minutes of one film, maybe.’
With the main market for computer games (pre-adolescent boys) reaching saturation point, the big companies are casting around for ways to keep those sales figures healthy.
The latest big idea is to turn girls into committed gameheads.
Obviously some games are already designed to have unisex appeal.
Take the cute contours of Sonic and Super Mario .
Some games have featured digital heroines (eg Top Banana ).
But games companies seem convinced that only the odd tomboy would enjoy the shoot outs and punch-ups of the average game.
So what do you do to turn young girls into console fiends?
When in doubt, try those old gender stereotypes.
What do little girls like?
Dolls, dressing up, shopping, the mall, pink stuff.
Hence Nintendo's seriously tacky Barbie game, which features the digital doll, kitted out in pink aerobics-class drag, negotiating various worlds on the way to a dream date with main squeeze Ken.
This entails some serious shopping in Mall World (while being menaced by flying bra tops — honest), turning into a mermaid in Underwater World, and ducking giant ice-creams in Soda Fountain World.
On the way, she's helped by a pack of cute puppy dogs.
In America it's already selling well, but it won't be out here for some time.
According to Nintendo, ‘the market hasn't advanced far enough’.
Translation — with both Sega and Nintendo still locked in combat for the pre-pubescent male dollar, anything that might alienate little boys (eg girlie games) is still a definite no-no.
september manifesto
gavin hills will not be happy until:
Students in possession of any Morrissey records are charged a higher rate of interest on their college loans •A hitman is hired to hit the Hit Man and Her as well as all the bloody dancers (especially that git who's been wearing the same crappy wig for the last five mindbendingly-dull years).
‘Tonight we're coming from…’
Bang Bang!!
Now that's what I call music •All ‘street entertainers’ at the Edinburgh Festival who insist on miming, unicycling or juggling novelty items are forced to partake in that oldest of street entertainment: tarring and feathering •Soccer's new premier league is renamed ‘The Premium Interest Super Plug Golden Accountant League’•Someone explains why American riots are caused by ‘poverty and injustice’and British riots are caused by ‘joy-riders and anarchists’•A Telethon is held to raise money for the fourth Trident Sub, rather than the essential services of our country •New laws to curb the press include compulsory dope testing for pop columnists •The KLF reveal Eldorado was just their latest Situ-prank •The Groucho replaces the goatee in the fashionable facial hair stakes.
This thick tash must be accompanied by a large cigar and the refusal to go to any club that would have you as a member •Nabisco takes over disco as this year's club theme.
Shreddies can provide the fibre that's needed to bring regular bowel movements to uncoordinated clubbers
me phi me
‘I've grown up believing in God.
He's allowed generations to totally fuck up, but we'll see happier times’
A car slows down and the driver leans out of the window —‘Hey, are you Me Phi Me?
Man, I really like what you're doing.
Your music is right up there, man.’
He punches the air with his fist, accelerates and speeds off.
Me Phi (for short) swings his strands of dreaded hair over his face and grins sheepishly.
Later, he's playing at Washington DC's 9.30 Club and the modest-sized venue is already sold out — hardly surprising for a line-up which also boasts Arrested Development and the Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy, two of the States' most acclaimed ‘alternative rap acts’.
Just as Public Enemy, Ice-T, the Beastie Boys and the Chili Peppers have all found wider audiences by fusing rap with rock, these acts also cast their nets wide, attracting people who aren't into the aggressive, in-yer-face style of hardcore rap.
‘I thank God that Arrested Development and the Disposable Heroes are so powerful and mysterious,’ says Me Phi.
‘We're all giving a message of positivity and saying, ‘Lift up your head, there's a lot that needs to be seen.’
For me it's not even a matter of specific issues such as Aids and homelessness, it simply comes down to people's relationships with each other.’
Born in the depressed town of Flint, Michigan, 21 years ago, Me Phi Me (who uses the symbol of the Greek letter phi to spell out his middle name) started writing poetry at the age of six, before graduating to rapping on the streets.
Mixing these two mediums, he has created what he calls Big Beat Poetry — thoughtful lyrics, dynamic raps, soulful melodies, harmonicas, flutes, much-favoured acoustic guitars and hints of reggae.
‘At the moment people are really into music for the body, but good music is for the body and soul as well.
Me Phi Me is a physical, emotional and  spiritual concept.’
Worryingly spiritual.
But concerned.
‘I get down on my knees every day and pray that this election may help change things.
Crack is the most fearsome monster the world will see for years, above nuclear weapons, evil people and bigotry.
It saddens me that it's an inner-city drug, that genocide happens where there's a high concentration of black people.
I've grown up believing in God.
I know He's allowed generations to totally fuck up, and for now we're carrying really heavy loads.
But we will enjoy happier times.’
For now the Big Beat Poet is content with his debut album ‘One’: 16 tracks chosen from an arsenal of over 60, which encourage the humble listener to join the Me Phi Me fraternity where the only rule is individuality.
The first British single release for this month is still being debated, but whichever track is picked, Me Phi Me is confident his message is strong enough to be heard the world over.
‘There's a little God in me helping the world — when I see women wearing pointy bras at gigs, I see the power Madonna has.
And I realise what I can do.’
California Cool: West Coast Cover Art is a classic collection of West Coast jazz imagery, and follows the superlative Cover Art Of Blue Note released earlier in the year.
Check the excellent scantily clads and look for the blatant Talkin Loud ‘inspiration’
10 to read
Fever Pitch Thirtysomething autobiography from a man who ‘has measured out his life in Arsenal fixtures’(poor bastard).
Hornby delivers the expected critical kicking to out-of-touch literary lads Martin Amis and Bill Buford, meditates on fannish obsession and the emptiness of suburban adolescence and finds time to ponder the eternal mysteries (eg Malcolm Macdonald's sideburns).
Very funny
Close To The Knives A Boy's Own Story for today — artist Wojnarowicz's observations on Aids, America and obscenity cut deep, counterbalanced with snapshots from his own brutal childhood.
Shocking and essential
Bridal Gown It's that time of the month: Gladwell's debut collection evokes the cyclical nature of womanhood, throwing down a bloodied gauntlet in the shape of these gripping stories and essays
TAZ Bey's theory of the ‘temporary autonomous zone’ has been floating around on the margins of Stateside cybertippy culture for a couple of years and has now drifted over here.
The TAZ is not a place so much as a mobile event compressing punk nihilism, neo-paganism and radical information.
A pass to the hippest club in the world
Poor Things Frankenstein revisited in this tale of a doctor who puts a baby's brain in a grown woman's body.
Read it as an entertaining mock gothic tale, or see it as a celebration of Scottish pride and of feminism, and a condemnation of the return to Victorian values.
It's entertaining on both levels
Give War A Chance Not only the best title for years, but funnier than a billion politically correct comedies.
Despite the obligatory Republican, anti-commie ranting, O'Rourke is a softie who hates all politicians.
Anybody who still sports a Beatle cut must be a hippie at heart
Montgomery Clift: Beautiful Loser Five quid cheaper now it's out in paperback, this is a finely packaged and illuminating biog of the drop-dead gorgeous Hollywood icon who made James Dean look well-adjusted.
Linger over the pictures and melt
Good Sex ‘Subtitled ‘Real Stories From Real People’, this is absolutely guaranteed to hook its claws into your voyeuristic nature while simultaneously engendering a massive sense of relief at the drabness of your own sex life.
Each personal account has more plot twists than a whole series of Dynasty : compulsive, unputdownable, gripping
Nightmare, With Angel Ten-year-old Marianne is in danger.
But from whom?
The rapist and child killer she sees as her friend, her traumatised father, her sad, sick mother or the police who are trying to trace her?
Taut, engrossing thriller that transcends genre to examine the fragile, contradictory balance between good and evil and finds a little of both in all of us
Unfinished Business, The Politics Of Class War Statement of political intent from Britain's only credible revolutionaries.
Hard going in places, it provides a handbook for individuals who've had it with ‘Mickey Mouse politics’.
A relevant, thought provoking, often amusing read 
poetry emotion
‘in the past poets were the fucking pop stars.
That's what poets were, y'know, in a very distant time.’
Stephen Yelverton has got a point.
After all, who would you rather hang out with: Byron or Take That?
Shakespeare or Shakespears Sister?
When Coleridge got on one and let his imagination run riot, he came up with Kubla Khan .
Nowadays, most people's idea of a tribute to the transgressive joys of altered states is ‘A Trip To Trumpton’.
Sad.
Which is where Mr Yelverton comes in.
He's a poet, and he wants to be a star.
‘I want recognition.
I want to be accepted.
I want to reach people.
I want to blow people's minds.’
The man is on a mission and he intends to take no prisoners.
He lives in Newcastle and he is 21 years old.
It's in his adopted home town that I first witness him.
It's summer 1992, a poetry reading evening in a working men's club.
It's all dismal, of course, middle-aged idiots in slacks and blouses intoning about postmen and dolls in droll voices.
Then I notice this lanky, scuzzy kid, who's kinda cool in a Jaggeresque way, scowling his way to the podium.
The expression that spreads through the audience makes this man immediately endearing.
Disgust the parents!
What happened in the next 15 minutes is hard to describe, but it was mind-blowing.
It was ‘Search And Destroy’ by the Stooges, it was Mick Jagger's lips, it was the Sex Pistols.
It was rock'n'roll.
They tried to eject him from the podium.
OK, the mic-stand might cost a few bob to repair.
And the insane, uncontrollable screaming of ‘I'm gonna be a pop star might be a bit much for some.
But listen up you pitiful poetry people: just deal with it.
Three years ago was the turning point for Stephen.
He arrived in Newcastle, having been thrown out of South Africa for spending most of his national service in a psychiatric hospital.
His army experience was chronicled in the Guardian and he felt proud.
He began to pour all his time and emotion into poetry, writing with a passion that recalls the English romantics, Oscar Wilde and the American beats.
He is an Allen Ginsberg for the Nineties, and this time the howling will be heard.
Sometimes his work is immediate and comic: ‘Elephants trumpet for his creed, he travels quicker than wildebeest.
Smoking bamboozled wonderweed, he loves the visual feast .
Other times it's dark, intense, epic: ‘The perpetual parasite of my mind.
I have hated her with theatric passion.
Her startling tears my richest friend.
I have loved her in obsessive fashion .’
He's a bewildered romantic; optimism shines brightly in his eyes.
The hostility of the Newcastle poetry scene can't hurt him: he doesn't want to perform for poets, anyway.
He wants to perform for people.
‘I don't want some arty-farty type analysing every line.
When I write, I rhyme.
They call me old-fashioned but there's nothing wrong with rhyme — it's very good for creating rhythm, making it accessible.
Poetry these days isolates people.
People still think a poet is a person who prances about in frilly shirts and things, and the fucking poets you see on television read like it's a grocery list: ‘The frog leapt over the moon, I want some cheese soon .’
Hey, I wouldn't be interested.
I want to reach out to everybody.
For too long poetry's been written by poets for poets.
‘Some fuckwits have said I try too hard to steal the show and shock by saying things like ‘masturbate’.
But they hadn't considered the rest of the poem, which was the ultimate feminist statement.
I want a poem to be monumental and eternal.
Current poetry is too fleeting.
I perform aggressively because I don't want to put people to sleep.
If you want people's attention, you've got to scream.’
The Late Show and Jonathan Ross are currently clashing heads over who will televise Stephen's most legendary and outlandish moment to date.
He is planning to read a 100-line poem about suicide from the top of Nelson's Column.
As the poem reaches its climax, Stephen — naked but covered in paint: green body, red cock and yellow balls — will leap, screaming down the 200 feet into a safety net.
Now, doesn't that sound a whole lot more exciting than the next Prodigy video?
The word's been going round: ‘Have you seen that crazy Spiderman stuff?’
With his first collection, completed for his MA at Central St Martins, Michael Udo has begun to cause quite a stir.
Certainly the Lycra and neoprene-clad Spider People sporting Udo's creations are adding a new twist to the tired Lycra-top genre.
‘People might see it as a joke, but it's really wearable,’ says Udo.
‘The collection's called ‘Owo’, Nigerian for ‘person’— it looks good on both men and women, whether they're on open Swiss ski-slopes or in a cramped British club.
I'm really trying to go against the whole clubby/tribey feel to clothes we have here, though.’
Alongside the Marvel-ous Spiderman stance, Udo has included quality cashmere and leather tops and jackets.
A fanaticism for Romeo Gigli suggests he's going to carry on doing things right; Browns thinks so too and this month the shop is giving him prestigious South Molton Street window space.
‘Gigli's simple, relaxed and earthy and that's what it's all about,’ says Udo.
‘You can get that feel with man-made fabrics too — a big well-cut, microfibre parka can be real earthy if it's done right.’
Udo's doing it.
In the USA, drug prevention material is so pervasive — and persuasive — that the propaganda barrage begins at breakfast.
Nabisco breakfast cereals now contain collectors cards which feature US Customs sniffer dogs.
Now baseball stars and batting averages are passé.
Instead, kids compare the stats on dogs like Scion, whose total seizure value to date is over $91 million, or Sinbad, who once turned over a camper van on the Mexican border and sniffed out 400 pounds of cocaine.
Before the authorities get too enthusiastic about reports on a fall in illegal drug use by white, middle-class high school seniors, a study conducted at the University of California found that young people who do experiment with drugs are usually better adjusted than kids who abstain from drugs completely.
So will Nabisco pay the cost of therapy for those who were psychologically unhinged over the cornflakes?
Just say woof!
Japanese fashion-lovers take as much care of their underwear as they do of their overwear.
In these hot summer months prudent Japanese girls suppress the potential faux pas of erect nipples that could spring up from a cool blast of the air-conditioner by sticking on a handy pair of ‘Nipples’.
Tough titties are frowned upon in the Far East, so skimpy dressers must take care of unwanted hard-ons with these elastoplast imitators.
Whatever next, stick-on jockstraps for poolside control?
Last time their work was in THE FACE it had to be censored.
We'd asked them to create an image on the theme of ‘Love Sees No Colour’: Pierre et Gilles came up with ‘Lola’, a white glamourpuss demurely fingering a large black erection.
Somehow, we just didn't think our moral guardians (or WH Smith) would let us get away with it.
Pierre et Gilles are a cult phenomenon.
Their postcards and T-shirts sell by the crateload, they've done cover art for Marc Almond, Erasure and Boy George — and yet this month sees the first ever UK exhibition of their work (including ‘The Gipsy’,right ).
Photos retouched into iconic and ironic works of art, the French pair's creations are a camp celebration of religious kitsch and supermodel glamour: street boys transformed into homoerotic saints, famous fashion victims as legendary gods.
Prices start at £3,000, but you can gaze for free at the Raab Gallery in London's Cork Street from Sept 8 to Oct 3.
music
Paul Weller is a bit of a god.
‘Going Underground’: there's enough proof.
‘Long Hot Summer’: there's more.
The man who was modernist and proud when most just didn't get it hasn't gone away, he's thrived — his first solo album is another gem.
The release of the ‘Into Tomorrow’ single on Weller's own Freedom High label last year suggested the Cappuccino Kid was about to drop a big one.
With the sort of guitar riff we haven't heard much since George Harrison took up yoga, Weller proved the more banal Style Council meanderings are not to be his epitaph.
The new self-titled album, released on Go!
Discs, continues the Sixties rock flirtation, with healthy elements of soul, funk and jazz in the brew.
People will talk about a marrying of the Jam and the Style Council, but the truth is that no one else is coming up with such an effective rock'n'soul buzz.
Lenny Kravitz?
Please , this is a style  magazine.
Alongside Edwyn Collins, Weller is a revered figure in this office.
The man is safe!
Do yourself a favour 
the pleased wimmin
Dancing on the podiums at the Milk Bar's Friday night club Glam has become a hazardous business, due to the frenzied swaying of the Essex Girls that now monopolise them.
However, this lively lot are not your stereotypical Essex Girls, but a trio of glamorous drag queens with the names Saffron Walden, Kirby Cross and Sible Headingham (all Essex towns), known collectively as ‘The Pleased Wimmin’.
(it's spelt ‘wimmin’ because we're feminists!’)
‘We're always first in, last out at Glam,’ says Sible, also known as Jon.
‘We never go home unless we're in an ambulance!’
But it's not all play for Jon, because he now has to drag himself off the podiums to do the warm-up spot behind the decks.
And he also sacrifices his dancefloor fun for DJing chores at the legendary Pushca parties, the Superstar Niteclub at Bar Industria and The Fruit Machine, Heaven's new Wednesday night gay club.
‘I've collected records since I was about 11’, he says, confessing to an early case of the vinyl addiction that is a prerequisite for any DJ worth his or her Technics.
‘I used to spend all my school dinner money on records.’
Starting out with New Romantics (‘You know, ‘Fade To Grey’ and all that sort of thing’), he now prefers (thankfully) a mixture of disco and Euro house, and also rates many of the current British releases such as Gat Decors' ‘Passion’.
The recent blurring of distinctions between gay and straight clubs is a welcome development: ‘I'd really like to educate and entertain at the same time.
At Pushca you get 2,000 straight people dancing to a trannie DJ, and that's a really good thing.’
He disapproves of the whole superstar DJ scene, however: ‘At the end of the day it's only about a bit of plastic — people shouldn't wet their knickers about it.
I don't think mixing's that important, it's what you play and what order you play it in that's important.
You've just got to get people excited.’
Jon sees the key to it all as simply getting out and having a good time: ‘I just do it for a laugh, basically.
When I'm not DJing I'm dancing.’
So with his endless itinerary of clubbing and DJing, how does he relax?
‘Oh, I lie in bed and eat cakes!’
toni Palmer was born on Majorca, and he didn't leave it until he was 18, where he won an award as one of the best employees in the bank where he worked.
The prize was a week's holiday in neighbouring Ibiza — Toni met his first hippies there, liked their communal lifestyle better than the bank, and didn't go back.
There are stories from the years that followed — hitching to the Isle of Wight festival and getting stuck in Piccadilly instead, working as a DJ across the Balearics, watching the islands' booming club culture become internationally recognised.
And now Toni lives in Magaluf — once a tiny village where even islanders rarely visited, now a sprawling mess of neon, curry burgers and chips, the Benny Hill and Linekers bars, and holidaying Brits drunk in charge of a limited vocabulary.
It's also home to BCM, one of Europe's biggest clubs, where Toni presides as manager and king of Majorcan clubland.
A monstrous box of pastel neon with two huge fountains playing outside the entrance, BCM cost some £5 million to build and takes its name from the owner's initials — if the club failed, he said, he'd be buried and it could be his mausoleum.
Luckily, it worked and, despite the recession cutting the tourist trade, it is open till 6am seven nights a week until the season ends in October, and at weekends all year round for the Spanish.
The lasers are extraordinary, the sound system all you'd expect from a custom-built club, and guest DJs travel in from across Europe — in one week last month, Brit visitors included Trevor Fung, Paul Oakenfold, Mrs Woods, Fat Tony and Danny Rampling.
Every other Friday, London club Rage moves over for the night, bringing its own choice of DJs.
Magaluf itself is hell, but if you're on holiday on Majorca, BCM is one to check.
hype! trivia
IT LOOKS like Ron Dixon and son Mike (above ) have just nicked a TV, but times aren't that hard in Brookside Close.
Loveable scally Mike has graduated from his Farm T-shirts to wearing one of our limited-edition SAVE FACE tops and slinging our record bag over his shoulder.
Watch out for the much appreciated support in the omnibus Brookside on August 22 and in subsequent episodes 
AN UPDATED computerised loo will be going on the market in Japan soon — it'll be able to give a detailed report on the user's health by analysing the contents of the deposit
WITH THEIR In The City festival focusing attention on the city, Manchester is in the news this month.
Sublime, The Sol Mix: Manchester Music And Design 1976–92 is a retrospective celebrating the close marriage between the two art forms in the city.
The exhibition takes in punk designers Malcolm Garrett and Peter Saville — the latter responsible for Joy Division and then the cunning New Order artwork — to Central Station Design, whose CV includes the Happy Mondays and James.
The exhibition runs Sept 5–Oct 18 at the Cornerhouse, Manchester and entry is free.
To celebrate, sponsors Sol are giving away a crate of beer each to the first five postcards to arrive before Sept 24 at THE FACE.
CLUBLAND gets real about the recession.
A new deep house night opens its doors on Aug 28 at The Podium, but Work has a twist — members can enter their names on a database so that any fellow worker looking for a singer, dancer, or whoever can access them and offer them a job.
IF YOU'RE tense and upset in Japan, a phone line has been developed specially for you.
The new service allows the hyper-stressed to hurl verbal abuse down the phone and the recipient responds with appropriate apologetic noises until the angry caller has let off steam
MANCHESTER's Most Excellent, one of the city's finest one nighters till the Salford posse smashed in and forced them to close last month, has started its own record label.
Releases this month include Justin Robertson aka Lion Rock and Dub Federation's remix of the Grid's ‘Fire Engine Red’ featuring Zodiac Mindwarp.
Listen out too for Coco, Steel and Lovebomb, and in the meantime watch out for some imaginative one-off club events
HAVING SET the standard with the Donald Byrd, ‘Blue Break Beats’ and ‘Blues ‘N’Soul’compilations, Blue Note continues the modern(ist) repackaging drive: Art Blakey, Jimmy Smith and more Byrd gems hit CD.
Groove on
ALL THE more pertinent with the rise of fascism in Europe, the late John Heartfield's anti-Nazi photomontages are a strong reminder of the power of art as a political weapon.
Sounds heavy?
The images can be, but they've also got an edge of grim humour —Heartfield and police president Zorgiebel (below)shows the artist's response to the man held responsible by the Communists for the killing of May Day demonstrators in 1929.
There are some 300 similarly strong agitprop images on display at the Barbican Centre
THE HAÇIENDA's tenth birthday celebrations continue with The Haçienda Must Be Built ! a book edited by Jon Savage with contributions from our own Mandi James and John McCready among others.
It tells the stories of the people who were there, subjectively as any record of a club should be, though still doesn't explain how such a fine, spacious city centre venue is so underused.
Due mid-September also is a double album of ‘Haçienda Classics’, from New Order to Marshall Jefferson, and it's all topped off with a party at the club itself on Sept 14.
Finally, our heartfelt thanks to the Haç and Manchester's equally fine Most Excellent posse, whose joint party for the SAVE FACE fund last month raised a stunning £2,500 — more details of this and other Ligger's Week events on page 8
MY OWN Private Idaho , Gus Van Sant's surreal exploration of young love, rent boys and narcolepsy, was crying out to be released on video.
Freeze-frame the rude bits, replay River Phoenix declaring his love for Keanu Reeves — fun for all the family!
We've got a pile to give away to the first 20 correct answers (picked out at random) to the question: which of these movies was also directed by Van Sant? a Drugstore Cowboy .
b Midnight Cowboy .
c Oklahoma !
WEEKENDERS can do it in Amsterdam courtesy of Acid Jazz, who invade the city's Melkweg arts centre on Aug 29–31.
The Sandals, Mother Earth, Diana Brown & Barrie K Sharpe are among the entertainers hoping to introduce the Dutch to the joys of corduroy.
You can join them for £199 including flights, accommodation and club passes.
CLOSER TO home, Bournemouth's funky Wild At Heart crew present the Well Hung Parliament's Country Balls Up on Aug 30 in a country club with swimming pool and gardens, and with Andy Weatherall, Dean Thatcher and the Wild At Heart regulars delivering the noise.
Tickets £20, details from Flying's shops in Bournemouth
WITH COVENT Garden on the rise, West Soho, London's Eighties mecca of zonal shopping, is looking to keep itself on the agenda.
A new guide to the Newburgh Street nuance is now being published and is available free throughout the West Soho area.
Watch for a twinning campaign with SoHo in New York too.
Is the white jeans pose as obligatory over there?
films of the month
news and reviews compiled by jim mcclellan and steve beard
bob roberts
Before Bill Clinton played sax on Arsenio Hall , before Big Arnie came out for George Bush, before the movie-made presidency of Ronald Reagan, there was the Boston Tea Party: American politics has always been more surreal than any satire.
Which is partly the problem with Bob Roberts , Tim Robbins' first film as writer, director and star.
Constructed as a spoof documentary about a political candidate for the US Senate whose promotional ads are pop videos and whose campaign bus is a mobile trading floor, it joins the dots of a diagram — Eighties politics as the flip-side of Sixties counter-culture — which has long been part of the landscape (and which could do with an update).
Robbins is wonderfully ambivalent as the ‘rebel conservative’ pop star with Washington in his sights, and puts in a performance to match anything he did in The Player .
But the supporting cast are simply wheeled on to do their party pieces: Alan Rickman as an evil spin doctor, Giancarlo Esposito as a conspiracy, obsessed reporter, and (best of all) Gore Vidal as a dandified liberal senator.
All in all, though, this is still likely to be the sharpest comment on the venality and duplicity of the American political process you are likely to find this side of November ‘92.
films on release
THE POWER OF ONE Aka Rocky In The Townships .
Like Medicine Man , this sees an action director (John Rocky Avildsen) throwing his populist sensibility behind a Good Cause and producing a piece of liberal kitsch.
The early days of apartheid get rewritten as one (white) boy's mythical slugfest for justice, all set against a backdrop of Big Scenery, psycho-Nazi  Afrikaners , good-natured English liberals and nobly suffering blacks.
Almost camp
CALIFORNIA MAN Not the latest Wayne's World , just a hyped-up high school comedy/Pauly Shore vehicle.
The ‘Sean Astin digs up a caveman and he fits right in in the Valley’ plot doesn't add to the suburban dumbnation routines but rather reworks the Eighties' ‘innocents abroad in America’genre (eg anything from Starman to Crocodile Dundee ).
Worth it for Shore's spaced gibberish — but they're tweaking our melons, and Astin should definitely chill a little on the grindage 
California Man: tweaking our melons
PATRIOT GAMES Latest post- Die Hard middle-aged action pic stars Harrison Ford as heroic executive Jack Ryan, a retired CIA man who starts working late at the office again to rescue his family from vengeful IRA man Sean Bean.
Badly paced, with a familiar climax (The Silence Of The Lambs meets Cape Fear ), but if you stay awake look out for the relatively complex treatment of the IRA early on, the Gulf War references and Sean Bean's sunglasses
After tights (for Hamlet ), it seems that Mel Gibson now has a yen to wear chaps and star in a Western.
However, he isn't inspired by John Ford epics, just old TV shows.
After considering an update of Fifties TV Western Maverick , he's now set to star in a big-screen version of the Sixties series The Wild, Wild West .
Our advice — what about the Seventies and Alias Smith And Jones , Mel.
In recession Hollywood, the race is on to come on seriously downbeat, hence the current fad for nutritional slumming.
Warren Beatty, Annette Bening, Julia Roberts, Jason Patric, Michelle Pfeiffer and John Malkovich have all been seen chomping junk food and rubbing shoulders with the masses at various LA greasy spoons.
Meanwhile Johnny Depp is a regular at Ben Frank's, normally the eaterie of choice for struggling actors and street hustlers.
Hey, he's probably researching a role.
You're not really a big star these days until you've lost a lot of money trying to run your own restaurant.
Arnie may be coining it with the Planet Hollywood eateries, but he's still doing his best to do the right thing with the loss-making Schatzis in Santa Monica.
Maybe it should drop the bratwurst and strudel and serve junk food.
A family affair: after making the year's worst video with brother Mike, John Singleton has cast Janet Jackson (as a hairdresser/poet?) in his next outing Poet Justice , which will also star Tupac Shakur (from Juice ).
With so many films being made in South Central LA, an organisation has arrived to help out directors in the ghetto: BOSSO Personal Bodyguard And Escort Services ‘took care of business’ for Boyz N The Hood and the upcoming White Men Can't Jump .
Any doubts about BOSSO's usefulness were dispelled when the upcoming Blood In…
Blood Out (which didn't use them) ran into trouble.
It seems gang members cruising by thought some of the actors on set were for real and got heavy.
A catering employee wound up getting shot
desert storm
The pleasantly incoherent CIA/FBI mindgames-in-the-desert thriller White Sands  may be stronger on visuals than plot or dialogue but it does allow Willem Dafoe and Mickey Rourke to bounce off each other moodily in an attempt to discover who is the bigger existential dude.
(Rourke makes sure he is the loser; the guy is such an incurable romantic.)
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio and Mimi Rogers fill up the background prettily enough, but director Roger Donaldson could really have used a sharper script 
COUSIN BOBBY In and around filming The Silence Of The Lambs , Jonathan Demme was also putting together a cinematic portrait of his long-lost cousin, Robert Castle, a Harlem preacher, minister to the oppressed and scourge of City Hall.
Not just a home movie, this is also a cultural document which exhumes the history of African-American struggle through Bobby's memories of the Black Panther Isaiah Rawley.
Passionate, lucid, authentic and often harrowing.
A real consciousness-raiser
JUICE ‘The directorial debut of Spike Lee's cinematographer, Ernest R Dickerson, has already generated mild controversy Stateside, but is no Boyz N The Hood .
It begins as a sharp and funky hang-out movie which drifts towards real political complexity (and absurdism) before retreating to the safer territory of a ‘black gangster/psycho movie.
Omar Epps is an aspiring Harlem DJ whose career is compromised by crazy homeboy Tupac Shakur.
Great visuals, great performances, great soundtrack, plus cameos galore.
A must
STRAIGHT OUT OF BROOKLYN Unfortunately more interesting than 19-year-old Matty Rich's film — a slice-of-Brooklyn melodrama crusted with symbolism and piety — is the story of how it came to be made: ambitious kid from Brooklyn drops out of film school, blags some equipment and funds a film on the back of radio appeals.
Worth seeing for the performances, especially those of George T Odom, Ann D Sanders and Rich himself.
Raw, angry, tender, funny incoherent.
Rich is obviously a talent to watch
Perhaps it's only appropriate that the ultimate colonialist rip-off should translate into the cynical money-grabbing myth making of Christopher Columbus: The Discovery .
Even so you feel sorry for George Corraface, whose Columbus is pictured here estimating the size of Spanish inquisitor Marlon Brando's beer gut.
In the rush to beat the Ridley Scott/Gérard Depardieu version to the screen, a decent script wasn't a priority.
With most of the big stars (Tom Selleck as the King of Spain?) jumping ship early, Corraface is left on his own to struggle with lines about how he really ‘knows his wind’.
Aren't we supposed to be getting this sort of thing from Carry On Columbus  next month?
Public Enemy/Private Friends: best of British
going underground
In principle we can all agree that the British Film Institute's New Directors scheme, which funds short films by new talent, is a Good Thing.
In practice, you wouldn't really want to spend your own money on the films it tends to produce.
This year's programme (out in London this month and at regional arthouses thereafter) is no exception.
Take Cheryl Farthing's Rosebud , which aims to reclaim porn stereotypes for lesbian desire, and Danny Thompson's Public Enemy/Private Friends , which amusingly pokes fun at black macho.
Both show potential, but Farthing's effort winds up little more than a diagrammatic doodle and Thompson's feels like a hip TV sketch.
Maybe the fault lies with the BFI, an ageing bureaucracy with its own interests to protect, its own ideas of what constitutes ‘exciting new film’.
Perhaps British film-makers would be better off developing alternative creative networks, as in America.
Possible options are shown by two films in At The Edge Of The World , a season of weird stuff from the US film and video underground currently on regional tour.
Craig Baldwin's excellent Tribulation 99: Alien Anomalies Under America rediscovers the cutting edge of scratch, splicing Cold War movies into a delirious rant which parodically presents US intervention in Central America as a holy war against alien invaders.
Alternatively David Blair's WAX uses low-budget computer tech and digital FX to mix original film and animation, found footage and a zoned-out voiceover, as it follows a weapons industry worker who, via a television implanted in his head by bees, visits the land of the dead before turning into a smart bomb in Iraq.
Blair calls his low-budget high-tech approach ‘electronic cinema’ and says it will be the form of the Nineties for creative independents.
Time will tell.
His home-brewed techno-myth is so out there it gets lost occasionally, but at least he's managed to go all the way, unlike the BFI's new directors who sadly seem creatively hamstrung by an outmoded system.
funny face
In her head, Sandra Bernhard has always been a star.
But now the rest of the world is starting to believe it too…
One of the most stylish — and silliest — musicals ever made was Funny Face , a 1956 film in which Audrey Hepburn plays a Greenwich Village intellectual who travels to Paris and is transformed into a model for Quality magazine.
The photographer is called Dick Avery in homage to Richard Avedon, one of the greatest fashion photographers ever.
The magazine editor (‘Think pink!’) is an equally tongue-in-chic version of Vogue 's late, great Diana Vreeland.
It's Paris, 1992, just before the couture shows and, although no one is bursting into song every five minutes, I'm surrounded by such high-fashion gloss that I feel like I'm in a remake.
This time, the editor is played by André Leon Talley, a large, genial black man in Dior sequinned pants who is the real-life creative director of US Vogue .
The changeling character is Sandra Bernhard, who is perched next to me on a gilt-covered chair in a mirrored room high up in the House of Dior.
On cue, the house model walks in wearing a cream cashmere coat-dress that will eventually cost some wealthy couture customer £10,000 or so.
The model, of course, looks just like the young Audrey Hepburn.
After she has paraded up and down with Gianfranco Ferré, current king of Dior, pointing out various details on his work, we look at the sketches and ask to see dress number 59.
There are behind-the-scenes flurries as the sheet-covered frock is brought out of storage — by ladies dressed in white coats and white gloves so that the masterpiece isn't stained — and the model changes to give us another twirl.
‘It's beautiful!’ purrs Sandra.
‘Is it comfortable?’
As the Audrey clone leaves, she smiles in appreciation.
‘Those house models are so cool!!’
Upstairs in the workshop, there is an air of quiet panic mingled with excitement because nothing is quite ready for the upcoming show, but it's near enough to know it's all going to be just divine.
Some of the fabrics draped across workbenches cost more than my annual wage, but the workers are wearing jeans or polyester florals.
It looks like any high street sweatshop except for the light streaming through the huge windows looking across Paris, the dummies bearing the names an exact shapes of various famous models and customers, and the quiet pride in the workers' faces as they attach elaborately-tooled gold leather to a bustier, hand-embroidered velvet details to a pocket flap, a mink trim to an underskirt.
This being a movie, Sandra is recognised, by a young American woman who won her place in the workshop in a competition and who now, shyly, politely, asks if she can trouble her for an autograph.
‘Sandra,’ I whisper as we take the lift to sit amongst the flowers and sculptures in Gianfranco Ferré's office, ‘we're in Cosmo .’
‘No,’ she grins, ‘this is far more sophisticated.’
For this is not, after all, a movie.
Lunch with Paloma Picasso, friendships with the supermodels, front-row seats at the shows and invites to the designers' private dinners afterwards, fashion advice from her friend at Vogue .
Later, she'll be in Edinburgh for the festival then across the UK, performing her new one-woman show to sell-out audiences.
Her film,Without You I'm Nothing , will be playing at the ICA and arthouses across the country, and she's on the cover of Playboy and THE FACE.
This is glamour.
This is Sandra's life.
And she's loving it.
‘They used to call me ‘nigger lips’ in high school: ‘Oh, you're so ugly, you're so skinny and you got nigger lips!’
It really took the late-Eighties and Nineties before I had people I could relate to’
SANDRA BERNHARD GREW UP in Michigan, Arizona, the youngest child (there were three older brothers) of a doctor and an artist.
When she was eight, they went to Detroit to see Hello Dolly and Sandra decided to become a performer.
She learned to mime to the soundtrack, putting on shows in the basement and forcing her parents to watch.
She sang folk songs at cousins' bar mitzvahs.
She even learned the play the ukelele.
Then she saw Funny Girl , and memorised every part of Barbra Streisand's performance.
To Sandra, Barbra was glamour.
Before the visit to Dior, we eat lunch — Sandra, her friend André and I — and we discuss the idea of glamour.
I tell them of a babysitting job I had when I was 12.
I worked for one of the youngest couples on our street, who were so chic they even had an Afghan hound.
One night, the wife pointed casually to a cupboard and told me there were some back issues of Cosmopolitan there if I wanted to look.
I read them, furtively, like boys do pornography, and they showed me another world.
At 12, I wanted badly to be a Cosmo girl.
‘I understand that,’ says Sandra, nodding emphatically.
‘Completely.’
She read a lot of magazines:Cosmo in high school and then Vogue .
It was in that confusing time when half the articles were informed by feminism and talked of career and independence, while the rest still showed a very rigid ideal of feminine beauty.
Sandra used all the recommended beauty products, but she didn't see herself in those pictures.
It's a contradiction she captures in one of her characters in Without You I'm Nothing — a secretary who moves to swinging San Francisco, gets a great job, then marries her boss, talking all the time in a torrent of adspeak, product placement and magazine cliché.
‘That's really what I wanted to be like — all the cosmetics mentioned were products I used growing up.’
When she read those magazines, did she think she'd ever be part of that world?
‘Oh, for sure.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
I always knew I wanted to be a performer, and a performer gets to do whatever they want, so I started practising early.
It became second nature.’
PEOPLE PUZZLE OVER WHAT to call Sandra Bernhard.
They don't quite get it.
If she's an actress, why isn't she in more movies?
And if she's a comedian, why aren't there more jokes in her shows?
But if she's a singer, why all the other stuff around the songs onstage, and why not more records?
Then there's her book — a series of short stories and reflections entitled Memoirs Of A Pretty Lady — that is due to be followed by a second volume next summer, ‘if I finish it on time, which I'd better’.
A great talk show guest, she's a regular on David Letterman's show, which is where she and Madonna started those rumours by announcing that when they went out together, they liked to go to the Cubbyhole, a tiny lesbian bar in downtown Manhattan.
She's also a regular on Roseanne , where a small part playing Tom Arnold's kooky wife has been beefed up to include her in almost every other episode in the next series.
Roseanne, her screen sister Jackie, and Sandra are to start their own business together.
But Sandra is probably at her best in her live shows, which she writes with her partner John Boskovich and performs alone apart from a band.
The first,Without You I'm Nothing , is now preserved on film — a motley mixture of songs, monologues and Sandra taking her clothes off.
The second,Giving Till It Hurts , is the one she now performs live.
A loose tribute to Judy Garland, Liza Minnelli, Barbra Streisand and ‘those women who can't give enough as a performer’, it also involves Sandra taking even more of her clothes off.
Sometimes its funny, sometimes its poignant, sometimes it's just an excuse to show off a fine singing voice.
Were the term not tainted with pretension, probably ‘performance artist’ would be the label that suits her best.
She used to attack the audience — during the hugely-successful New York run of Without You I'm Nothing , she would use a torch to pick faces out of the dark — and for a while incorporated messages left on her answering machine by a once hostile critic who was trying to suck up and make friends.
Now, she says, the hostility is gone, and her work is only confrontational in that‘it deals with issues that people find uncomfortable’.
The sharp tongue is now reserved for the consciousness-raising rap session she gives at American universities, where students are allowed to ask whatever they like about her life, her sexuality, her views of the world, provided they can cope with the answers.
Finally, there's Sandra After Dark , a cable show that offers a twist on the chat format by inviting guests to drop by, take a few drinks from the topless waitresses, and talk casually, with the kind of natural interruptions that occur at a party.
Guests on the first of what Sandra hopes will be a series of specials were Tom and Roseanne Arnold, Tom Jones, ‘a bunch of supermodels’, and a drag queen called Lipsynca.
‘Boy, did we get away with things!’ she says with relish.
‘Tom Jones sang ‘Unbelievable’, I did a rap and kind of gave him a mock blow job at the end.
It's everyone's dream — to give Tom Jones a blow job, to control him.
He was great, very cool.’
TO BECOME A PERFORMER , Sandra moved to LA in 1975, working as a manicurist in the day to pay the rent, and by night performing in the comedy clubs.
‘When I first got there it was a lot of fun, a big gay scene that I fell into, dancing every night.
A few good movies were still being made in Hollywood, and it was an interesting time there.’
She says she never wanted to be a movie star: ‘For me, it was always the stage.’
Which is probably just as well, since the film roles have proved elusive.
After her electrifying performance as an obsessive fan who helps Robert De Niro kidnap a talk show host in Martin Scorsese's 1982 King Of Comedy , she has admitted she expected the phone to ring.
When it didn't she became resigned.
‘I guess they just want other sorts of women in their movies in Hollywood,’ she shrugs, saying she'd rather now have no offers at all than be asked to play the kind of ‘one-note, bitchy character’that has since come her way.
There may be more work as she gets older, she says: ‘I'd like to do the kind of roles Anjelica Huston can do.
It's kind of ridiculous that I have to backtrack after doing the performance I did in King Of Comedy , but it's a very mercurial business.
That's why I'm glad I do my own work: I don't have to be dependent on the whims of Hollywood.
‘I think it's a triumph for women for somebody like me to be on the cover of Playboy, because I don't fall into the clichéd, subservient bimbo mode.
I'm a woman who completely supports herself and lives out her life, her ideals and philosophy’
‘Anybody can be in a movie.
That's the bottom line.
You can pick up some waif on the street and with a good director she can be a good actor, because it's really about isolated moments on film that are edited down.
To me, it's no big feat to be good in a movie, but it's a great feat to be good onstage.
I'm not starving.
I'm not making a million dollars a performance, but I do damn well, and I don't think people should make a million dollars for a film.
It's ridiculous.
Everything is overblown and inflated and out of control in the film business.’
Perhaps a prime example of the above is Hudson Hawk , the Bruce Willis vehicle that stalled, hideously, at the box office and features Sandra and Richard E Grant as a psychotic rich couple who want more.
The initial script, she says, was good.
The making of the movie was not.
‘I don't know why we were making the damn thing — everybody was acting like it was a pain in the ass.
All they could do was talk about their next movie, and I'm thinking, ‘Have we finished this one?’’
Pressed for more, she clams firmly up.
‘It's really not professional of me to comment on these things.
I don't want to be a spokesperson for why things go wrong in Hollywood, because then I get into trouble.
I don't really care why it didn't go well.
I didn't write it, and I didn't direct it, so it's not my responsibility.’
SANDRA BERNHARD IS TALL , slim, works out a lot, has good cheekbones and stunning dark eyes and skin.
But the first thing you tend to notice is her mouth.
Sandra has a big mouth.
An elastic mouth that can perform a perfect Bardot pout, then with one twitch of a muscle curl with absolute contempt.
Her looks perplex people, and much of her press involves long discussions about them.
‘They're all fascinated,’ she says, that lip twitching now with apparent displeasure.
‘I guess they're all either uncomfortable with themselves or with me.
I don't know which.
It gets a little tedious.’
Yet a lot of her work is about fashion, style, ideas of beauty.
And though she's spent a lot of time onstage talking about how pretty she is, it's only quite recently she started to believe it herself.
‘It's probably only the past two or three years that I started to feel comfortable with myself.
It took a long time.
But then I met people like André, people in that world who recognised my beauty and that kind of validated me.
Growing up in our culture, there's a certain standard for beauty and I think it evolved from the Sixties and Seventies through the Eighties.
Whereas it used to be just the blonde stereotype, now it's changed to become more exotic, interesting or diverse.
But I think I would have become more comfortable with myself anyway — it's just the times catching up with me, my success, and feeling better about myself all came at about the same time.’
So do you like what you see in the mirror now?
‘Yes.’
‘Didn't you before?’ asks André, intrigued.
‘No.
I used to look in the mirror and cry.
I just used to feel horrible.’
‘Didn't you like your body when you were naked?’
‘No.
Not in my early twenties.
I didn't understand my body at all.
It freaked me out.
I had no point of reference for it, you understand?
Nobody was telling me what a terrific body I have.
Because I'd always been called skinny.
And my lips.
They used to call me nigger lips in high school: ‘Oh, you're so ugly, you're so skinny and you got nigger lips!’
It really took the late Eighties and Nineties before I had people I could relate to.
They were out there, it just took a long time to find them.
But that's all behind me now.’
Which may be why she takes her clothes off so often.
British viewers of Manhattan Cable are by now familiar with Robin Byrd, whose late-night TV show consists of her reclining in a string bikini, a microphone clipped somewhat clumsily on to one breast, exhorting viewers to ‘lie back and get comfortable’ while various folk bare their pimply bottoms and everything else in an on camera strip show.
Sandra is probably Robin's most famous guest ever, and the videos of her baring her all are treasured by devotees.
‘There's much too much made out of nudity,’ she shrugs.
‘I just don't think it's such a big deal.
I'm not peddling my flesh.
I just think it's kinda funny, and it's become an ongoing theme in my work.’
She says she did the Byrd show ‘because I found her a fascinating part of the underground scene in New York, and I felt somebody should expose her to a bigger market.
She's very genuine, very funky and extremely free with herself — a little crazy, half out of her mind, but very amusing.
She's taken this public access show and turned it into something completely entertaining.
It's completely real, there's no pretence, and so it's what every performer in America aspires to be.
Completely exposed.
All those women singers trying to be sexy in their videos, it's bullshit.
She's the real thing.’
The film version of Without You I'm Nothing features Sandra's voice singing a slowed-down version of Prince's ‘Little Red Corvette’ while she dances, wearing  tassels on her nipples and a tiny stars-and-stripes shield on her crotch.
Perhaps the logical extension of this getting undressed for success in this month's Playboy , in which Sandra's regular photographer Michel Comte pictures her in various states of undress ‘with women, with men — nothing very raunchy.
They're classical pictures, really.’
She has little patience with any feminist arguments against such pin-ups.
‘Men are going to get off on women anyway, just walking down the street.
You can't control men.
But, for me, it's a twist on that because I'm in control of the situation.
It's a conscious decision and I think it's important that men understand a woman who is offering an alternative lifestyle.
I think it's a triumph for women for somebody like me to be on the cover of Playboy , because I don't fall into the clichéd, subservient bimbo mode.
I'm a woman who completely supports herself and lives out her life, her ideals and philosophy.’
RECENTLY, AMANDA DE CADANET was interviewed by Paula Yates on TV, and they talked about Sandra Bernhard.
Amanda said she loved the live show, that Sandra wasn't particularly attractive but had a great body and showed what good hair and good clothes could do, and then, in an off-hand comment that she probably regretted almost immediately, declared that if she was ever to sleep with a woman, it would be Sandra.
I mention this and, since Sandra has been on The Word , after a while she remembers Amanda.
‘She's married to one of Duran Duran,’ she tells André, ‘so you know she's up on thinking about me — hoping, wishing, praying, for me to justify her love.
That's funny!’
She turns back to me.
‘Tell her to quit flattering herself.
If she was the last woman on the face of the earth I wouldn't fuck her!’
But, then, on reflection, it's not all bad.
‘At least she's talking about me — I love that.’
Unfairly, Sandra is still best known in Britain as ‘Madonna's best friend’, the possible — but in the end rather improbable — lesbian love interest that titillated the tabloids for a while until Maddy moved on to other mock shocks.
In Bed With Madonna showed the two engaged in a little self-conscious girl talk for the camera, but now it's a subject that Sandra would rather avoid.
‘I have nothing to say about Madonna,’ she says, concentrating hard on the food on her plate and resisting the urge to fill in the strategic silence I leave in the hope of getting more.
Does that mean you're not friends any more?
‘I've just nothing to say, one way or the other.
Let's close that chapter and go on.’
Later, when we're talking some more about the Playboy pictures, I wonder if they are in a similar vein to Madonna's upcoming book of fantasy photos, the imaginatively titled Sex .
‘No.
Au contraire .
I make a much different statement in all my work — you can never compare us.
This is not about exploiting lifestyles.
It's about lifestyles that I've lived and lifestyles that I respect and that I can speak for because I've been there.
These aren't just people I've picked up on the street and thought, Ooh let's show some kooky S&M now!
There's nothing S&M or perverse or fucked up about this.
They're beautiful pictures, in situations I've been in.’
I hate the Madonna shots I've seen, I venture.
‘I'm sure that most people will.’
They seemed to be pandering to the silliest stereotypes.
‘I'm not going to exploit the basest aspects of sexuality.
To me, sexuality is romance and love and poetry and beauty, not picking somebody up on the street and using each other then telling them to fuck off and burning them with a cigarette.
I don't get off on that, it's not my trip.’
‘The fact that a woman sleeps with a woman doesn't mean she forgets how to sleep with a man.
And it doesn't make men find you any less attractive.
Probably more.
Men still want to fuck me’
She moves on before I can ask how much of the above is intended as a reference to Madonna.
But this, and the look of disdain on Sandra's face when I mention the Material Girl as one of the consummate Eighties pop stars, makes it fairly certain that the two are no longer official Best Friends.
LAST TIME SHE WANTED to sleep with a man, says Sandra, was two-and-a-half years ago.
He was a New York photographer, and he wasn't into the idea.
Last time a man wanted to sleep with her was last night.
He was a London model and, since she is in Paris to spend some time with her girlfriend, she wasn't into the idea.
‘I've always been pretty open about my sexuality,’ she says.
‘But I walk a fine line of ambiguity because I'm also reaching a straight audience who need the education much more than the gay audience.
And you can't do that by beating them over the head with clichéd, didactic behaviour.
Going in front of a gay audience to say all the things we know already is stupid.
But the effect I've had on the straight world, the fact that they come to me and they feel comfortable, half knowing that maybe I've been involved in…what to them is alternative sexuality, is a positive thing.’
Do you see it as a brave thing to do?
‘Not particularly.
I have this capacity to shed humour on things, so I don't feel like it's such a major revolutionary statement.
I've got more work since I've been open about my sexuality than before.
I mean, the fact that a woman sleeps with a woman doesn't mean she forgets how to sleep with a man.
And it doesn't make men find you any less attractive.
Probably more.
Men still want to fuck me, and I still sometimes want to fuck men.’
She forces a false, schoolgirl giggle.
‘How kooky.
That's the real alternative lifestyle!’
‘When I first moved to LA, I still had this idea of swinging glamour — to be a woman in control but sexy and fun.
I think I'm finally living that fantasy’
TODAY, SANDRA IS WEARING a black and white houndstooth trouser suit by Isaac Mizrahi, white T-shirt by Gap.
She looks good.
Clothes, she says, have always been a passion.
‘It's a celebration of the best of a woman when a designer makes a great dress, and it takes a certain intelligence to carry it off.
In the Sixties, women had that kind of confidence and wanted to express themselves in that way.
But in the reaction to the Eighties and the Reagan/Bush mentality, people can't deal with it.
There has to be a way of infusing glamour and compassion.
It's not clothes to shut people off, it's clothes to say, I feel good.
I'm celebrating my independence, my intelligence — let's have pride and take care of our bodies and our minds and our health.’
‘She's very inspiring,’ says André, ‘because I think she's very glamorous.
And I only wish the world had a sense of the glamour like we had in the Sixties.
Y'know, Barbra Streisand has a nose that is beyond a nose, but she was a style icon.
And Sandra has become a style icon, for the fashion world particularly.
Isaac Mizrahi was the first to dress her in a big way, but since she came to Paris last year the designers all want to meet her, as do the socialites, the Left Bank social hostesses who receive prime ministers as well as actors.
People find her inspiring because she expresses something that is sophisticated beyond the clothing.
It's her body — she has great legs — but people are also inspired by Sandra's message.
I know I am.
It's uplifting.’
Sandra takes the compliment gracefully, then moves back to those magazine fantasies.
‘When I first moved to LA, I still had this idea of swinging glamour.
James Bond fantasies, you know, when things just appear and you're just sophisticated and your hair's in a flip and you look great and you get on your private jet.
But you're always smart, you're always intellectual, and you're always a woman who's in control but at the same time sexy and…fun.’
So did you spend a lot of time in the mirror doing that?
‘Yeah, well, in my head,’ she says dismissively, then adds a wry smile.
‘I think I'm finally living that fantasy now’.
disco
Punks once said that the music sucked, but who listens to punks any more?
Gloria Gaynor (above) was closer to the mark with her dance anthem ‘I Will Survive’— for disco is back.
Not that it ever really went away.
But suddenly the D word is being dropped in fashion (left), in clubs, on records, reasserting a long rhythmic line that connects Barry White to Joey Negro, Sylvester to U2.
And the beat goes on…
A nose for action, a microphone haircut, an all-in-white outfit, and a diva's swoon.
Barry and nostrils (Manilow), Barry and babes (Love Unlimited), Barry and bros (Bee Gees) and Donna Summer perform the disco standards
On a humid summer Sunday in 1979, aliens hovered above New York's Central Park in their saucer.
Tired of listening to dolphins squeak, they were searching for new ways to communicate with those obdurate, cloth-eared Earthlings.
Below them, a large group of human subjects had been circling for hours around a roller rink set among the trees.
Powered by roller skates, many of these locomotive dancers were whirling corrugated plastic tubes that made a wooo-wooo sound.
Other than irritating wooo-wooo, the predominant noise was a ceaseless 140-beats-per-minute boom-chi-boom-chi-boom-chi-boom-chi which seems to drive the skaters on to a higher and wilder plateaux of whirling and circling.
Intrigued, the aliens monitored the few lyrics they could hear rising up from this outdoor roller ritual.
Gino Soccio's ‘The Visitors’ was on the DJ's decks.
How appropriate, how impressive: ‘From light years they arrived, to feel the pulse of everyone around.
The years have come and gone and mystery survives, as we await the contact from the sky.
And if they could agree to make it all worthwhile and let us know just what they really are .’
Unaware that these were the last rites of disco, the aliens reported back to their Mistress ruler on the home planet.
After many years spent developing a communication method based on this halcyon midday scene in Manhattan, however, the best plan that the not-so-clever beings could devise was an idea for creating large circular patterns in fields of corn.
Should we laugh?
Late-twentieth century culture is hard enough to fathom, even if you live within its centrifugal core.
By the end of the Seventies, the aliens had already found their classification systems in disarray after all manner of musical artists — Dolly Parton, Barry Manilow, Rod Stewart, the Doobie Brothers, Engelbert Humperdinck, the Beach Boys, Andy Williams, Jackie McClean, Esther Phillips, Ethel Merman, the Osmonds, Cab Calloway, Cher, Count Basie and even the Rolling Stones — recorded songs with the distinctive boom-chi beat.
This was disco, the beat that devoured humanity.
But they also heard angry cries of ‘disco sucks’.
A new aural sex aid?
Perhaps.
And why were evangelical Christians and Bruce Springsteen fans burning disco records in ceremonies reminiscent of the book bonfires of Nazi Germany?
These Earthlings: so strange, so superstitious, such slaves to repetition.
WHAT WAS DISCO , what is it, what could it be?
In 1992, the restless radar of DJ culture is settling uneasily, often reluctantly, on disco.
But who, at this late date, can really penetrate the origins and deep meaning of this music, its shamans and its temples?
Joey Negro's ‘Enter Your Fantasy’, Deep Collective's ‘Disco Elements’, Disco Universe Orchestra's ‘Soul On Ice’, Grace Under Pressure's ‘Make My Day’, the Disco Brothers and Sure Is Pure's ‘Is This Love Really Real?’,
M People's ‘Northern Soul’ album, Mass Order, Last Rhythm and all the other neo-disco tracks and trackers of the Nineties elegantly negotiate a space between nostalgia and machine futurism.
Studded with (studied) disco clichés now distant enough to resonate with Antiques Roadshow mystique, throbbing with a new cyber-strength that the old classics could never match, they are smart enough to avoid a headlong plunge into unabashed shallowness.
Only Joey Negro (aka Dave Lee) has the cheek to flirt with the Syndrum clap clap style of pre-1979 disco.
Introducing the soul boy concept of pure roots into the arena of disco kitsch is perverse, although understandable, given the enduring belief in dance music's spiritual, cathartic purpose.
From the disco veteran who speaks with fundamentalist passion about the centred sense of self-belief and release while dancing to Diana Ross ‘Love Hangover’, to the fabric of self-realisation portrayed in Saturday Night Fever , disco has always functioned as an entrée to ecstasy (with a small e) and identity.
‘You Make Me Feel (Mighty Real)’ sang Sylvester with that glorious lightness of spirit that was his trademark, encapsulating our lack, our need, our desire.
But disco was not just the Tramps, the Salsoul Orchestra, Montana Sextet, MFSB, the Temptations, Leleatta Holloway, Sylvester, Chic and Sister Sledge.
Disco was also Silver Convention, Macho and the Constellation Orchestra, the Richie Family, Wing And A Prayer Fife and Drum Corps, Meco, Lipps Inc, Tuxedo Junction, Village People and, somewhere at the bottom of these ankle-deep waters, Frankie Crocker and the Heart And Soul Orchestra.
Bear in mind the fact that, prior to his current job as smoking pistol of the biography racket, Album Goldman wrote a book on disco.
Also, consider this odd snippet of information: Sun Ra, America's bandleader from Saturn, was inspired to record an album called ‘Disco 3000’.
In March this year, on stage in London, Barry White lifted a tiny conductor's baton in his huge hand to launch his Love Unlimited Orchestra into ‘Love's Theme’, perhaps the first disco pop hit back in 1974.
Majestic in its neo-classical pretension, it still brings tears to the eyes.
Here is music that is indefinably ridiculous, sentimental and full of stone age sexual politics, yet it is also deeply moving and irresistibly thrilling.
‘Love's Theme’ live, now 18 years old and hopelessly dated, does what pop music is supposed to do, which is to make you feel good about yourself and momentarily released from the impossible contradictions, demands and sadness of life.
But let's not get too serious and religious about disco.
When Frankie Crocker devised the Heart And Soul Orchestra, what he really meant was the Dollar And Dick Orchestra.
Behind every deep-voiced Barry White sermon —‘Making love is the most sacred act ever committed by a man and a woman.
Men may have nature, the birds and trees, but women are the greatest gift of all’— is the drive to build Money Unlimited.
SO WHEN THE DUST cleared after  Armageddon , what meaning could be found in the ruins?
Was disco this?:
‘It was a true sanctuary.
Once inside, the Faces were unreachable.
Nothing could molest them.
They were no longer the oppressed, wretched teen menials who must take orders, toe the line.
Here they took command, they reigned.’(from Nik Cohn's Another Saturday Night )
Or was it this?:
‘Forty-nine pipi rooms — that is success!’
(Regine, French disco entrepreneur describing the most interesting feature of her Paris nightclub)
What did it mean, to ‘get down’?
Was getting down the same as getting up and could you do it in platforms and slingbacks?
Did the Spanish Hustle originate in Spain?
Why Bus Stop, why not Fire Hydrant or Lamp-post?
What was a Syndrum?
Why did disco suck?
What were pea soup rhythms and honda-honda basslines and who invented them?
Was it prestigious or trashy to be a disco diva?
Was disco a profound religion forged in the heat and Klipschorn bass bins of Paradise Garage, a tribute to the razor blade skills of remixer Tom Moulton, an underground celebration of gay life and libido which washed over straight, mainstream existence like a tidal wave?
Alternatively, was it an iniquitous form of torture perfected in Munich?
A new form of socialisation invented by Andy Warhol, Bianca Jagger and Calvin Klein?
A jackboot serial killer on the loose, stomping down the humanist softies of soul?
Reviled and discounted, knocked to the bottom of the cultural studies agenda, mythical and legendary, cheap and tacky, disco (like surfing) is pagan bliss enacted to the ripples of God's pulsation.
Metaphors of transcendence, paradise, radiance, sanctuary, community, faith and rebirth abound.
Party people from Donna Summer to pioneer DJ and remixer Walter Gibbons have boogied into the sexual inferno of disco and emerged from the flames as Bible-spouting just-born Christians.
Then came the reaper.
Steve Rubell died.
The owner of Manhattan's most famous disco, Studio 54, Rubell was the man who breakfasted on Coca-Cola and Famous Amos chocolate chip cookies and who had once claimed, proudly: ‘It's like I can't sleep.
I'm driven.
I can't sit still.’
Neil Bogart died, also.
Bogart was the quintessential Seventies entrepreneur who  ploughed through an alpine landscape of cocaine, finally towing his company, Casablanca Records, over the financial brink and leaving the entire disco industry and, in particular, Casablanca's owners PolyGram, tottering on the edge.
The party scattered.
What did it mean to ‘get down’?
Was getting down the same as getting up and could you do it in platforms and slingbacks?
Did the Spanish hustle originate in Spain?
Why Bus Stop, why not Fire Hydrant or Lamp-post?
Shaken by a mounting toll of Aids casualties, plus the expense and embarrassment of clearing up a valium habit, Calvin Klein stepped out of the disco lifestyle and into Nineties post decadence.
‘Right now I have a whole set of ads I'm just mad for,’ Klein told a Sunday Times writer.
‘There's a happy, healthy attitude.
They're kind of warmer, more friendly.
The people are smiling.
You see teeth.’
Yet though disco has never been short of ‘Push push in the bush ’ and ‘Ring My Bell’sentiments, voices of doom, correction, ‘positive’lifestyle and spiritual inspiration have always reacted as counter-insurgents to disco's erotic, dervish thrust.
For the chill of divine retribution, listen to Russ Brown's 1986 track, ‘Gotta Find A Way’: ‘I must let you know that judgement is here below.
It will start at any time — earthquakes are here and there, and destruction is everywhere.
See the signs on the wall .’
For more Biblical brimstone, listen to Peacetime's ‘The Truth Will Set You Free’: ‘Well if you believe the truth you will be saved, from a world that's ending anyway.
Revelaaaaations aggghh …’
Oh, the rapture.
Written and produced by Paul Simpson, the man behind Serious Intention's garage classic ‘You Don't Know’, Peacetime's recent track perfectly illustrates one half of the Nineties disco equation.
Technology and passion unite to promote values which most clubgoers would cross the universe to avoid.
There are born-again Christians at large in every field of music, even thrash metal, but disco and evangelical God bothering seem to go together like hassocks and cassocks.
On the historical tip, disco has an unsevered umbilical cord which still, even in the current phase of Caucasian robot tribalism, connects straight back to African-American Holiness churches within which preaching was delivered in searing, heavenly voices and the flock lifted up their own voices, spoke in strange tongues, rolled in holy fervour and fell backwards when smitten by the presence of the Lord.
Listen to any Loleatta Holloway track, the indeterminate positivism of New Jersey garage, the gospel disco of the Joubert Singers, Sounds Of Blackness and Voices Of 6th Avenue and you can hear distant sanctified echoes.
Suited and sharp; casual but glitzy; tight and sporty…
John, Sylvester and James flaunt it disco style
YET AS A FORCE capable of smothering this divine connection, disco was so hellbound; so much work for a missionary.
This was music spawned in secret clubs that thronged with gay blacks and Latins.
As the Bacchanal spread, New York clubs such as GG's Barnum Room, Xenon and Studio 54 became evangelical in their own way.
‘Enjoy our disco-bats in their jungle gym in the sky!’ was the enticing offer stripped across the GG's Barnum Room doors, the disco-bats being male acrobats who performed over a net draped just above the heads of the dancers.
Inside, if you wanted to pee, you never knew who you might meet.
‘Those with hang-ups about their unisex arrangement and weak bladders will be miserable at the Barnum Room,’ one guidebook warned.
The gospel of semi-nudity, cocaine, cross-dressing and thumping, pumping sex-dance marathons attracted even the most conservative types.
The inhibitions of the average citizen were hot to trot.
Disco in its most grandiose form worked on the principle that a heartbeat rhythm, combined with soupy strings and a chain of Afro-Cuban drum breakdowns, could pop out the tightest emotional and sexual blocks.
At its most basic, this was a case of dance your ass off, although Hamilton Bohannon, another Christian, felt obliged to point out that ‘Ps.
Dance Your Ass Off is not used in the sense of profanity .’
What sense was it used in, Hamilton?
As Vince Aletti, premier prophet of the scene, once wrote: ‘Disco fetishised the break — the instrumental change that became a song's pivot and peak — so records opened up to accommodate extended passages, musical movements that washed through the dancefloor like waves.
Producers learned to build records on a more open plan, to stretch out and pace their music to the more leisurely, indulgent mood of the club crowd.’
THE AIM OF DANCING your ass off, sacred or profane, was inspired by disco's flow motion, the seamless mix that transformed three-minute pop songs (Phil Spector's little symphonies for the kids) into long-form epics.
Like an all-night performance of Balinese gamelan or a Central African cult ceremony, the music moved through dusk until dawn.
This nocturnal rhythm was bisected with sexual rhythms and the rhythms of crosstown, crosscountry, transworld movement.
The futuristic vision of hypnotic living and machine sex was imported from Europe: from Germany came Kraftwerk with ‘Autobahn’ and ‘Trans-Europe Express’; from France came Jean-Marc Cerrone with ‘Supernature’and from the South Tyrol, crucially placed in the centre of Germany, Italian, Swiss and German culture, came Giorgio Moroder with Donna Summer's ‘Love To Love You Baby’and ‘I Feel Love’.
Even the Bee Gees' ‘Jive Talking’ was inspired by car wheels bumping over a railway track.
Interviewing Giorgio Moroder earlier this year, I asked him why he and his co-producer, Pete Bellotte, had decided to extend ‘Love To Love You Baby’ into a 17-minute orgasmic epic.
He laid the blame at Neil Bogart's door.
‘He liked the song so much he wanted to have a long version of it,’ claimed Moroder, ‘and that's when I did the 17-minute one.
The official story is that he was playing it at a party and people wanted to hear it over and over.
I think the real one was more like the bad story.
He was doing some other thing than dancing.’
So a revolution in music was catalysed by a record executive's desire for his own personal sexual soundtrack.
ACTUALLY, THE STORY WAS MORE complicated.
According to Vince Aletti, writing in Rolling Stone in 1973, some of the earliest records played in New York's underground of ‘juice bars, after-hours clubs, private lofts open on weekends to members only, floating groups of partygoers who take over the ballrooms of old hotels from midnight to dawn’ were unusual imports from France and Spain.
Play ‘Soul Makossa’ by Manu Dibango and ‘Wild Safari’by Barrabas back to back and you had a hybrid of rock, jazz and Afro-funk.
African, Latin and jazz influences were softening the boundaries of rock.
From the late Sixties, there was reciprocal motion throughout music.
Miles Davis, Sly Stone, Santana, War, the Temptations and the Grateful Dead all indulged in marathon trance grooves, rippling with strange currents, often stretching beyond the bounds of endurance into boredom but hunting ecstatic release through repetition.
Bob Dylan may have regarded Smokey Robinson as a great poet, but the effect of Dylan on Motown was more obvious.
Whatever it was that Bob Dylan, the Beatles and the Rolling Stones had done, a lot of black artists wanted the freedom to follow.
Norman Whitfield's response to acid rock — at least to Sly and the Family Stone's rainbow coalition version of it — was to produce psychedelic soul for the Temptations and Undisputed Truth.
In Philadelphia, Thom Bell was going in the opposite direction, enveloping a romantic vocal group called the Delfonics in a jacuzzi of French horns, flugelhorns, flutes, strings, harps, tinkerbell glockenspiels and even Indian sitars.
The gospel of semi-nudity, cocaine, cross-dressing and thumping, pumping sex-dance marathons attracted even the most conservative types.
The inhibitions of the average citizen were hot to trot…
At its most basic, this was a case of dance your ass off
As individual developments, both directions were destined to run themselves into the ground.
Copied ad nauseum , Whitfield's funkrock workouts became a monotonous grind, while Bell's crisp, quasi-classical arranging was caricatured by lesser talents and eventually reduced to slush.
Fused, however, they metamorphosed into something that conjured improbable visions.
If composers such as Mahler, Scriabin, Mussorgsky, Prokofiev and Richard Strauss had collaborated as equals with musicians from the European colonies of Brazil, Cuba, Haiti, Nigeria, Ghana, Cameroon and Congo, what a sound they would have made.
The nearest approximation of this impossible counter-colonialist dream that we have is disco.
If you can find them, listen to the African and Latin hybrids of Babatundi Olatunji's ‘O-Wa’(1973) or ‘Music Trance’ and ‘No Nos Pararan’by Charanga 76 for a glimpse into the potential that was opening out.
Who invented disco?
Here are a few names, almost an  arbitrary list: James Brown (the visionary), Norman Harris (the producer), Earl Young (the drummer), Tom Moulton (the original remixer), Walter Gibbons (the dub futurist), Francis Grosse (the original DJ), Eugene ‘Tony’ Robinson (the Brooklyn disco dancer and delivery boy who formed the subject of Nik Cohn's 1976 essay for New York Magazine , later the basis for John Travolta's character in Saturday Night Fever ).
All of these individuals were links in a chain.
For Norman Harris, a guitarist and producer in Philadelphia, his ideas seemed to coalesce in 1972, around the time he put together ‘Armed And Extremely Dangerous’ by a high school trio called First Choice.
This is absolutely one of the greatest pop singles of all time: Earl Young's cymbals fly as he experiments with patterns that would later become instant indicators of disco, the arrangement is equivalent to a condensed blaxploitation movie, the song is terrific and Rochelle Fleming's lead vocal soars.
Was this one of the first disco records?
Who knows, who cares?
Certainly it was up there with ‘Girl You Need A Change Of Mind’ by Eddie Kendricks — both innovative examples of soul music that combined drive and drama in a subtle new form.
Whatever Harris, Young, Vince Montana, Gamble and Huff and the rest of the Philadelphia team could produce, remixers such as Tom Moulton and Walter Gibbons could extend it, reshape it, change the dynamics, shift all the elements into new sequences.
Then the club DJs could change it again, extending it further, overlaying different elements, adjusting the speed, heightening a mood through context.
For the full effect of this radical approach, listen to the early-Eighties dub mixes: Larry Levan reworking Gwen Guthrie's ‘Seventh Heaven’, Shep Pettibone breaking down Sinnamon's ‘He's Gonna Take You Home (To His House)’, Nick Martinelli and David Todd abstracting Raw Silk's ‘Just In Time’, Francois Kervorkian plunging Forrrce, D-Train and Sharon Redd into the stoned deep echo spaces first explored by King Tubby and Lee Perry in Jamaica.
‘Hey!— who's nicked our Syndrum sound?’
The Village People and Kraftwerk seek the stolen boom-chi-boom beat.
Joey Negro's saying nothing
THE CHRONOLOGY OF DISCO is extremely vague, which is surprising, considering disco's importance as a mass-market phenomenon through the Seventies and its musical influence up to the present.
Disco history is a fragmented book, much of it lost to Aids or fatal drug habits, but also to snobbery, ignorance and a tenacious belief among critics, musicians and music historians that disco was, and is, ephemeral, superficial, trivial.
In a severe edit of the facts, then, the approximate sequence goes something like this: Late-Fifties/early-Sixties — dance crazes like the Twist, Fly, Locomotion, Swim etc.
1964–65 — James Browns records ‘Out Of Sight’ and ‘Papa's Got A Brand New Bag’, transforming R&B into pop-soul, propelling it on a trance groove.
1969–73 — underground gay, Latin and black parties, playing eclectic mixes of danceable ‘party music’, so called after the massed chants of Paaaarty !
1974–76 — disco madness hits the mainstream.
1977–79 — overkill with Saturday Night Fever and a glorious disco sunset of ‘Weekend’, ‘Saturday’, ‘Shame’, ‘Good Times’ and ‘Ain't No Stopping Us Now’.
1980–83 — disco goes back underground and a new electronic sound emerges.
Key tracks —‘Searching’ by Change and ‘Is It All Over My Face’by Loose Joints — followed by D-Train, the Peech Boys, Raw Silk, Sharon Redd, Arts & Craft, Dinosaur Lip, Rockers Revenge, Visual, Sinnamon, Gwen Guthrie, etc.
Emergence of what Sylvester and Patrick Cowley called ‘Menergy’, ie niche-marketed gay disco.
1984–87 — house music and the electronic transformation in Chicago of everything that had gone before.
24; 1H
No one who reads THE FACE needs to know the post-acid conclusion to the story.
Inevitably, that Eighties concept of revivalism has to surface in a piece like this, yet how can we pin down a disco revival?
Ever since the record industry walked off the dancefloor, disco has been in a constant state of revival.
24; 1H
The PWL disco machine of Stock Aitken Waterman has never stopped reviving disco; Madonna's ‘Vogue’ and her ‘You Can Dance’remix album were clear tributes to disco culture; the Pet Shop Boys' ‘Disco’album was released in 1986; Deee-Lite's ‘Groove Is In The Heart’was disco, as were Army Of Lovers, the Pasadenas, Marshall Jefferson's productions for Ten City, the early S'Express tracks, the Night Writers' ‘Let The Music (Use You)’and even Yello's ‘The Race’, which stole its horn arrangement from Gino Soccio's ‘Dancer’.
The entire New Jersey garage movement which I documented in a 1988 issue of THE FACE was disco.
Jive Bunny and Hooked On Classics were disco.
Jimmy Somerville is Xerox disco.
Sigue Sigue Sputnik tried to be disco.
Russ Abbott made a disco revival record.
U2 have just released a disco remix.
What isn't disco?
A mere handful of rock and rap bands (only joking, indie kids).
24; 1H
In the current fractured, territorial phase of pop music, disco revivalists emphasise the quality factor in disco's past: Paradise Garage, Larry Levan, Tony Humphries, the Salsoul/West End/Prelude labels, great singers such as Jocelyn Brown, Gwen McCrae and Loleatta Holloway.
Yet disco was, and should remain, much more than this.
Without glamour, diversity, wit and experiment, disco can deteriorate into the most boring music of all time.
Just as the O'Jay's ‘Love Train’ and Silver Convention's ‘Fly Robin Fly’were intimately related, so the cheapest, nastiest nosebleed rave track is a distant cousin to the greatest night at Paradise Garage.
Without pain there is no pleasure.
MONITOR happy daze
Jim McClellan on the growing ties between the big and small screen
Time was you used to go out to the pictures to see something new, to escape endless reruns of old TV shows.
However, following the success of The Addams Family , you might have to get used to seeing repeats on the big screen as well.
The current fad in Hollywood is for TV remakes which will tape the baby boomer nostalgia market in the style of The Addams Family .
Studios have been raiding network archives, and versions of everything from The Flintstones, Bewitched, The Beverly Hillbillies and Car 54, Where Are You to The Fugitive and The Saint are apparently in development.
Critics have written the current fad off as yet another sign of Hollywood's creative bankruptcy, its recession nerves.
It's also a neat symbol of the way the relationship between the film biz and TV has changed in recent years.
In the Fifties they were sworn enemies.
Now they're both playing on the same team, integrated into large multinational, multi-media entertainment corporations.
The consequences of this really became apparent in the Eighties, with stars, directors, writers, producers, execs and, most crucially, product shuttling back and forth between TV and Tinseltown.
Movies, particularly comedies, are now put together with half an eye on the potential for a spin-off TV series.
And this year's surprise box office hit was provided by an extended version of the TV skits of Wayne's World .
Integration has led to what's best referred to as the televisualisation of Hollywood.
Aside from a few event movies, most people see their films on television now.
But, increasingly, films look like they were designed for the small screen.
Less charitably, you sometimes get the feeling that some modern American directors can't help themselves.
They set out to make sweeping historical epics but all they can come up with are mini-series with no ad breaks.
They want to make screwball romantic comedies but they wind up producing sitcoms that look lost without a laugh track.
Take A League Of Their Own , Penny Marshall's comedy about women's baseball during WWII, which stars Madonna and Geena Davis and has coined it in America.
Marshall doesn't quite know what to do with Geena Davis' study in female renunciation as star player Dottie, a woman who gives up baseball to be a good wife.
But she's undoubtedly good at directing ensemble comedy, coaxing stereotypical comic turns out of her cast (Tom Hanks' groaty old pro is surprisingly funny, though Madonna's character, sassy Brooklyn goil ‘All The Way Mae’, is a rather pointless Forties version of herself).
You could get to quite like these characters if all you got was half an hour a week.
Two solid hours in one evening and their charm wears thin.
In part it's down to the sheer dullness of the directing.
Despite its attempts at old-style grandstanding montages,League radiates the slick, banal legibility of old TV.
Marshall confuses a genuine conclusion with a fake sentimental climax, conveniently losing the tension between Davis and her uptight ambitious sister (played by Lori Petty) somewhere in a dodgy flashback.
Typically the film ends with a grandiose version of the kind of corny reconciliation TV comedies routinely rely on.
Maddie, lingerie and A League Of Their Own
If you're looking to explain the televisualisation of Tinseltown, then perhaps it's not just a coincidence that Marshall started out in TV: acting in, then directing Laverne And Shirley , a spin-off from the Fifties nostalgia sitcom Happy Days .
Marshall isn't on her own.
Two of the most powerful directors in Hollywood graduated from the Happy Days academy.
The show was produced by her brother Garry, the same Garry Marshall who directed Pretty Woman .
Of course, the star of Happy Days was Ron Howard, who played teen everynerd Richie Cunningham and went on to direct Parenthood, Backdraft and the recent Oirish immigrant western Far And Away .
The rise of the Happy Days mob shows how far Hollywood has fallen.
Scorsese and Coppola grew up on movies.
This lot grew up on TV
Some have argued that the rise of the Happy Days mob shows how far Hollywood has fallen since the Seventies, the era of the Movie Brats.
Spielberg, Scorsese, Coppola and the rest grew up on movies.
The new generation grew up on TV (literally in Howard's case — before Richie Cunningham he played a kid on the Fifties TV show Leave It To Beaver ).
While you wouldn't want to call the cosy little sitcommunity of Marshall, Marshall and Howard auteurs, they do share a similar cinematic vision.
Their films are slickly manipulative, sentimental confections, nostalgic, naive celebrations of ‘family values’ and the American Dream, perhaps the definitive celluloid reflections of the happy daze of the Reagan/Bush era.
Only Ron Howard could still manage to make a western like Far And Away , a hallucinatory fantasy of American origins in which native Americans look on indulgently as a bunch of white men carve up their land.
Tinseltown's televisualisation is not an inherently bad thing.
You could argue that the most interesting directors in mainstream Hollywood today are people like David Lynch, Joe Dante and others: tele-visionaries whose aesthetic owes something to the disjunctions of the small screen.
The real problems are caused by directors who cling to the dead forms of classic Hollywood.
Certainly, as the Happy Days generation try to escape sitcom suburbia, their films are getting worse.
As Big showed, Penny Marshall's strength is sentimental comedy.
She obviously wants to graduate to serious emotional drama, but all she does is turn interesting subjects (in this case the buried feminist history of women's baseball) into mush.
Still, as long as the Happy Days generation continue to make money, Hollywood will continue to indulge them.
How far will it go?
There are reports that in the post- Addams Family rush, the head of Paramount, Brandon Tartikoff (former head of NBC), has signed a production deal with the missing man of Happy Days , Henry Winkler aka The Fonz.
indecent exposures
The camcorder has given everyone the chance to star in their own home movies.
In America, it's also revolutionised the nation's pornography.
People are still having sex.
But now they're filming it for an appreciative video audience
For weeks the videos sat in their plain brown wrappers next to my VCR.
I was supposed to be investigating the latest camcorder craze to sweep America — amateur home porn — but found myself dreading the thought of viewing the tapes.
Glancing at the revealing pictures on the video boxes, I ask myself: am I really prepared to see a five-months pregnant woman get fucked doggie style?
Or a lesbian genital-shaving fest?
Or a group of pot-bellied men have group sex with a middle-aged woman with stretch marks and a cellulite problem?
It's not that I'm a prude.
Granted, I'm no peepshow regular, but the pleasure of commercial pornography isn't totally lost on me.
But why would anyone choose to buy pornography with performers who could make Roseanne and Tom Arnold seem sexy?
The dreaded videos themselves gave me no clue.
I still don't understand how anyone could get turned on watching the X-rated frolicking of a very large pregnant woman and her pimply-butted lover.
But it seems my taste for traditional sex objects is terribly old-fashioned.
Gone are the days when only the Madonnas of the world get to preen in public.
Today, even if you haven't got it, oh-so-egalitarian America is saying it's OK to flaunt it.
Thanks to the camcorder, Andy Warhol's prediction that everyone will be famous seems more of a possibility than ever before.
Funny he didn't mention that people would be spending their 15 minutes of glory naked, sweaty and panting.
It's really no surprise that the amateur porn video is a strictly American phenomenon.
We have always loved to talk about and look at ourselves, as anyone who has watched or seen on TV home videos of family life can tell you.
The amateur porn video marks just another testament to the tenacity of the country's exhibitionist spirit.
People got bored watching little Johnny take his first steps?
Here's a sure-fire way to hold everyone's attention: videotape his conception.
The ploy has worked beautifully.
Amateur porn has turned a private passion into a public infatuation.
What I found repulsive has proved riveting for hundreds of thousands of Americans who see in this unbridled narcissism a refreshing naturalism.
‘The performers are not particularly attractive — they're more like everyday people you'd find on the street,’ acknowledges one aficionado, explaining why he likes the tapes.
‘But that's more of a turn-on to me.
With these videos, you can get a little insight into how other people live.’
This peeping tom appeal led to the sale last year of about £25 million worth of amateur porn videos.
Industry experts say this booming cottage industry now accounts for about a quarter of the X-rated video market.
Indeed, the business is so popular that professional pornography producers are trying to get in on the action with their own ‘amateur’ videos.
The tapes — genuine or imitation — can be obtained by mail or by strolling into the X-rated video stores of urban America.
The fakes are quite easy to spot.
They've got titles like Mo' Better Amateur Ho' Videos and Beach Bum Amateurs .
And slick pictures of pretty young people who seem to have nothing better to do than make amateur porn videos — often appearing in up to a dozen different tapes.
For those into kink, the amateur videos are definitely worth checking out.
‘The amateurs do things you'd never see in the commercial stuff,’ I was told by one connoisseur of raunch, who I found sitting on the floor of a porn shop
The genuine home-made goods come in boxes with shoddy pictures of their blemished stars, who generally tend to make a one-time appearance on the store racks.
On the back of the video cases are detailed typewritten performance descriptions that can read like a Chinese restaurant menu.
One boasts ‘excellent video & audio’, while another talks of ‘hungry pussies’ and ‘great cumm scenes’.
The shelves of the amateur home porn section are packed with hundreds of tapes that aim to satisfy every sexual desire.
There are tapes with straight and gay couples, orgies, inter-racial sex, light S&M sessions and even hermaphrodites.
But beware.
These homemade videos are often as rough-looking inside as they are on the outside.
Bad lighting, shaky shots, unfocused lenses and lousy camera angles generally mar most of the tapes.
I imagine it's not easy to hold a camcorder steady when you're breathing that hard.
But if you don't mind this cinema verité approach to pornography and you get turned on by freaky-looking people, then the amateur video could introduce you to some interesting new bedtime pals.
There's Roy, a lithe man who can ‘suck his own cock’.
Or Lisa and Tamla, two ‘fat momma beauticians’ who will ‘strip down nude and shave a white man's cock and balls with shaving cream…and then chow down on powdered donuts’.
For those into kink, the amateur videos are definitely something you'll want to check out.
‘The amateurs do things you'd never see in the commercial stuff,’ I was told by one connoisseur of raunch, an unemployed factory worker named Jesse who I found sitting on the floor of a porn shop in Manhattan's Times Square, diligently sifting through dozens of the more hardcore amateur tapes.
Besides the pregnant women and genital shaving cassettes, Jesse pointed out videos of people having sex with every conceivable inanimate object.
You name it, they were shoving it: two arms, entire feet, foot-long vibrators, coke bottles, burning candles, telephone receivers, broomsticks, baseball bats, ping-pong balls, steel chains, a brush, cigarettes and even whole raw eggs.
PRETTY WILD STUFF .
Especially when you consider this is what real people — lawyers, teachers, secretaries, waitresses, military officers and ditch diggers, among others — are doing behind closed doors.
It's no wonder America has so many shrinks.
But if the videos seem like some psychologist's nightmare, to the people who make them, they are a dream come true.
‘It was something I'd always fantasised about,’ says Kitty, a 44-year-old saleswoman from Tennessee, whose first amateur foray was a group sex video appropriately titled Kitty Kitty Bang Bang .
‘I was the centre of attention for four or five different guys.
It was a real turn-on.’
Kitty says she got involved in amateur home porn video-making through swinging, the Seventies open-marriage ‘lifestyle movement’ that seems to have regained popularity among some suburbanites in recent years.
Indeed, industry observers say it was the swingers who gave birth to the home porn video in the early-Eighties.
‘It was like a collective, you could either buy the porn through the mail, or you could send in a tape of yourself and get plugged into the apparatus that way,’ explains David James, a film professor at the University of Southern California, who has researched the phenomenon.
‘Everyone who enrolled got a number.
So, for example, if I rented a tape and I saw someone I liked, I could call the central distributor for that person's number and then we could get together.’
It might seem odd that this kind of thing is happening in the age of Aids, but none of the home porn stars I interviewed seemed very concerned.
Sara, a 34-year-old office worker who has starred in a number of group sex videos, claims to have no fears of contracting sexually-transmitted diseases.
‘It's always with people I know,’ she says.
Health experts would undoubtedly argue that Sara's blasé attitude makes her a prime target for infection.
But Allen Wood, her trusted cameraman and the mail-order distributor for a number of other Southern swingers, insists that Sara's sense of security is well-grounded.
‘Most of the people into the swinging lifestyle are upper-middle-income people with something to lose.
They have always practised safer sex.
They were using condoms long before Aids came out.’
He adds that most of the performers are cautious about who they bed.
‘A lot of times, husbands and wives will not want to be with anybody but themselves.
So what we'll do, say in a foursome scenario, is we'll make it look like they're switching partners, when really they're not.’
The videos are filmed everywhere from seedy hotel rooms to construction yards or suburban porches.
Generally, there are none of the inane pizzaman delivery scenarios you find in commercial porn — something consumers cherish about the amateurs.
‘They just go straight at it,’ enthuses one fan.
‘They don't insult you with weak dialogue or a stupid plot.’
For some of the performers, this no-nonsense approach can be intimidating.
Woods recalls filming a video for a husband and wife, which ended up being titled Not Hardly In Vegas because the man never managed to get it up.
But for most amateur porn stars, performance anxiety is not a problem.
‘The first film I did was with these other guys who were a little camera shy,’ recalls Rod, who has appeared in a number of Sara's group sex films.
‘I remember being a little apprehensive.
I was kind of giggly.
But it ended up OK.
There wasn't a whole lot of acting going on.
So I just did what was natural.’
Sara insists that she too had no stage fright.
‘If you're really enjoying yourself and having a good time, you don't really notice the camera.’
The performers say their confidence only began to wane after the filming was over.
‘The first thing I thought when I saw myself on video was, ‘Gosh, do I really look that bad?’’ confides Kitty, who has the problematic body of your standard middle-aged woman: potbelly, cellulite, stretch marks.
‘I saw all of my flaws.
I could see the stomach that I had.
I could see the wrinkles that I had.
It was awful.’
‘It was something I'd always fantasised about,’ says Kitty, whose first try was a group sex video titled Kitty Kitty Bang Bang.
‘I was the centre of attention for four or five guys.
It was a real turn-on’
Doing it for real: forget well-toned bodies and cute faces, America's home porn addicts are getting off on sex between Mr and Mrs Average (and we mean average)
Sara, a 200-plus-pound woman with boobs to match, says she was also hard on herself.
‘I just nit-picked.
I'd say to myself, ‘You should lose weight’ or ‘Your hair looks horrible.’
I tended to be real critical.’
Similar insecurities were nursed even by Rod, a big-gutted guy with a double chin and greying hair.
‘Men can be pretty vain too,’ he says.
‘The first thing I thought was, ‘Boy, am I fat.’’
Beyond this, no other anxieties were expressed.
You might think they would all be terrified of having their family and acquaintances find out.
Not Sara, who becomes self-righteous when asked how she would feel should her mother, father or children learn that she was the star of videos with titles like Cum To The Mountains or Nurse Goodbody .
‘My sex life is my business,’ she declares.
And certainly not Rod, who likes to brag about his off-the-job exploits at the meat factory where he works.
‘People look at me kind of surprised,’ he says.
‘They just don't seem to understand, even though I tell them it's a lot of fun.’
WITH ALL THIS BRAVADO it's rather ironic that none of the performers would tell me their real names.
Allen Wood explains that this is because a fellow amateur had ended up in trouble after being written up last year in the New York Times .
A lawyer who performs under the name ‘Mary Lou’, she agreed to be interviewed about her amateur pornography videos, provided that her real identity remain concealed.
The newspaper printed the story, using only the lawyer's performance name, as requested.
But the article was run with a photo of the amateur video magazine that carried the cover shot of a woman with the name ‘Mary Lou’ printed at the bottom.
The state lawyer's association was outraged that one of their own was involved in such unseemly out-of-court antics.
‘They went witch-hunting for her,’ Wood recalls.
‘They looked all over the state.
They even threatened to subpoena all of my films.’
Luckily for Mary Lou, the caption on the photo that ran in the Times was misleading.
The cover carried a shot of another amateur — not the exhibitionist lawyer.
Nonetheless, Wood said he has destroyed all of Mary Lou's tapes to ensure that she will not be further hassled.
Scandals like these have prompted other firms to provide services aimed at protecting their performers.
Gary Aptaker of Homegrown Videos in San Diego says his company will let you specify where the tapes are to be distributed.
‘There are some people who don't want their work shown in certain states,’ he explains.
‘We're more than happy to comply.’
The company also closely checks the ages and identification of all performers and obtains legal releases from them.
‘This is to ensure that your ex doesn't send in the tape after you split up and try to invade your right to privacy.’
After accepting a tape, the company also waits 30 days before distributing it, in case any jittery performers want to back out.
This kind of specialised service has helped make Homegrown Videos one of the biggest distributors in the business.
Last year, the ten-year-old company sold more than 750,000 videos.
Luckily, the supply has risen to meet the demand.
Today, Homegrown Videos receives about three to five cassettes daily.
Homegrown, like most of the firms in the amateur home porn business, pays a one-time release fee for all tapes it distributes: up to $15 for each minute of edited tape.
That's $1,800 for a couple of hours of sex — not an unpleasant way to earn a little extra cash.
But, Aptaker cautions, the company can be picky about which videos it accepts.
‘If someone looks like they're not having a good time, or they look like they're acting, the tape is rejected.
Once we sent back a tape because it was too short.
I mean, there's not much we can do with a two-minute video’
Technical problems are the main reason why tapes are sent back.
‘A lot of times, the camera is too shaky.
Or there's a lot of stopping and starting,’ Aptaker says.
‘Once we rejected a tape because it was too short.
I mean, there's not much we can do with a two-minute video.’
Homegrown will also turn down a cassette because it doesn't like the performance.
‘If someone looks like they're not having a good time, or they're looking at their watch, or they look like they're acting, then the tape is rejected.’
Understandably, illegally-made porn involving children is also shunned.
‘We don't have anything where anyone's violated against their will.
There are no rape movies in our catalogue.
Our performers are all willing, fun-loving participants.
Whatever they're doing is by their own choice.’
ANYONE CONCERNED that their camcorder skills might not be up to par could consider doing what some New Yorkers have done — take a ‘how to’ class in X-rated video production.
I attended one course with about 50 porn star wannabes — nearly all of them men — and got to see the way things operate both in front of and behind the camera.
The class began with select students getting the chance to perform with a live ‘model’ called Lolita, whose strip act was videotaped in class.
Later, we were offered more technical production tips during a screening of several flawed amateur efforts.
These included the famous Rob Lowe video (‘When the light's poor, you can't see the million dollar dick!’) and a film of the Go-Gos drunkenly deriding a groupie jerking off backstage (‘Microphone placement is very important.
You can't hear a word they're saying!’).
In the end, I'm not sure how much I actually learned from the two-hour, $40 course.
The truly interested would undoubtedly be better off sitting down with a less amusing but ultimately more useful camcorder manual.
Watching real people do real things on video has become a favourite American pastime.
You can see this infatuation not only in the world of pornography, but on prime-time TV as well.
Today, some of the most popular shows on the tube are the ones that promise a glimpse of reality.
America's Funniest Videos.
America's Funniest People.
Candid Camera.
America's Most Wanted.
Hidden Video.
FBI: Untold Stories.
Real Cops.
Rescue 911.
Lifestyles Of The Rich And Famous .
Even MTV has jumped on the bandwagon with The Real World , a show that chronicles the lives of seven kids rooming together in a SoHo loft.
Programming trends that encourage people to watch rather than live reality might not sound like the healthiest thing for Americans, who on average already waste nine years of their lives — about four hours a day — in front of the tube.
The camcorder craze hasn't helped this voyeuristic tendency any by putting video cameras into the hands of an estimated 27 million Americans.
Now, you don't just have to watch other people's lives on TV — you can watch your own.
More than ever, video seems to drive reality in America today.
It's kind of a scary thought, knowing that a camcorder sparked one of the biggest riots in the country's history.
Some have hailed the amateur porn videos as a visionary art form whose ‘fuck commodity culture!’ attitude subverts the powers that be.
‘Most pornography reflects male fantasies.
The amateur stuff loosens things up a bit’
But, oddly, a number of culture critics insist that the popularity of reality-based TV — especially home-made porn — indicates something good.
‘I think this is partly a reaction against the artificial nature of our media system,’ says Sut Jhally, a communications professor at Amherst University.
‘In a society where the image has virtually taken over every aspect of life, people are tired of having someone else decide what it is they will see.
Some critics have even hailed the amateur porn videos as a visionary art form whose ‘fuck commodity culture!’ attitude seeks to subvert the powers that be.
In a 1988 essay titled,Hardcore: Cultural Resistance In The Post Modern , David James argues that the videos aim to bridge the gap between producer and consumer and offer a kind of ‘Sixties utopianism’.
‘The self-consciousness allows [the performer]the pleasure of exhibitionism [while their]blatant self-display releases them from guilt and invites a similarly shameless gaze from the spectator, whose participation is implicit throughout,’ James writes.
The tapes also allow a ‘transcending of the commodity relations of pornography’, especially when viewers join the tape network as a performer themselves.
The recent co-opting of the amateur video trend by commercial pornographers has predictably made James less optimistic today about the subversive possibilities of home porn.
But even short of this, other critics believe the videos are likely to foster some beneficial change.
Sut Jhally, who created a stir two years ago with a critical video he produced for his students about the sexist images on MTV, explains: ‘Most pornography reflects male fantasies.
It may not be as slick as the rock video stuff, but it's men behind the cameras and men who control the business.
There's not much room for other types of performance and other body types.
To the extent that the amateur stuff loosens things up a bit, it can't help but in some sense be positive.’
Even feminists, most of whom are traditionally opposed to pornography, have voiced approval for what the amateur performers are doing.
‘It does break down the tyranny of the Madonna body.
So within that context, I'd say it was a good thing,’ says Linda Williams, a feminist and film professor at the University of California in Irvine.
‘In a pervasive image culture, I think it's better to bring more bodies on the scene because the more variety there is, the more potential liberation there is.’
In principal, these critics have a good point.
Whatever you say about home-made porn, you can't really accuse it of propagating images that further oppressive sexual stereotypes.
And yet I find that I'm disturbed at the thought of what the world would look like in the wake of an amateur home porn video-led fashion revolution.
Personally, I'm just not looking forward to seeing some Roseanne Arnold look-alike corseted into a catsuit.
Or a man with her husband's build parading down a Paris runway in Calvin Klein's latest skivvies.
Call me old-fashioned.
Rubber love
Make mine a small one: views from both sexes on the female condom
I've always seen condoms as pretty ridiculous objects.
It doesn't help when, as a child, your brother leads you to believe that they're used as rubber pants for hamsters.
Gnasher (my hamster) used to like to roam freely throughout the living room but unfortunately this involved him crapping all over the carpet.
Ever ingenious, my brother snipped two holes in the top of one of his secret stash of ‘johnnies’ and stuck little Gnasher's back legs through them.
Gnasher then sported a fetching pair of rubber pants and the carpet was spared further soiling.
Nowadays few youngsters hold such innocent misconceptions.
Condom culture extends right down to the kindergarten where games of ‘Aids tag’ are now occurring.
Despite being so ubiquitous, until now they've been solely a male preserve.
In fact one of the traditional initiations into manhood is buying your first packet of condoms.
Like membership cards to an exclusive men's club, you carry them with pride throughout puberty.
And the sad truth is that most chaps still have this first token of manhood languishing somewhere.
The turmoil of adolescence ensures the expiry date flies by before all three can be used.
Now girls have the option on a pocket full of hopes too.
Females can join the condom club as rubber sheaths become available to all.
The Femidom is a new female condom looking very much like a larger version of the male variety, except these things are ribbed at both ends, a bit like a fisherman's keep net.
You poke it up and in before the action begins, thus providing a protective barrier against pregnancy and sexually-transmitted diseases.
They can take some getting used to and a bit of furtive fumbling is to be expected on the first few occasions.
Sensitivity is the same as normal condoms although lubrication can be a bit of a problem.
The thing to watch out for is getting them twisted because as the male member bangs away and doesn't get in very far, it can push the whole thing inside and slip around the sides.
With practice, teething troubles such as these get ironed out and the Femidom becomes a happy rival to your Mates, Durex, or Jiffy.
For couples who currently use condoms regularly and would like a bit of a change, I'd say these things are ideal.
Still essentially ridiculous objects, they at least don't smell as bad as male condoms and seem to give women greater independence and protection when things start to get moist.
Unfortunately they still don't solve the age-old problem — what to do with the things afterwards?
These things are pretty big and it's a shame to waste such a large resource of petrochemicals.
I suggest a quick rinse under the tap, a couple of holes cut in the top end, and voilá !
A handy pair of rubber pants for your guinea pig, rabbit or small child.
What's a girl to do in these trying times?
Trust her man with the condoms?
Negotiate safer sex?
Or bypass his brain altogether by using the ‘Femidom’— a disposable, odourless internal sheath for women, launched in the UK this month.
The Pussy Posse accepted a four-day challenge to road test this new friend, but the hard part proved to be finding a hard part.
This practical made Lethal Weapon 3 seems like Annie Get Your Gun .
The pressure was on — add a new chat-up line was born: ‘Would you like to join me in testing a new way to prevent childbirth and other medical misfortunes?’
The Posse were moist at the thought.
‘The outer ring,’ proclaims the press release, ‘encourages clitoral stimulation, and the polyurethane (as opposed to latex) increases heat sensitivity and therefore enhances pleasure for both contestants [sic].’
Unfortunately, there was only a 50 per cent success rate — the experiment went off half-cocked.
Farika wandered around with her unused plastic for four days, expectation the watchword on her lips, while Sara found herself in a much better position to comment.
Interviewed shortly after the experience by an unknown reporter underneath the bed, she gasped: ‘God, I was so excited, it reminded me of when I was 13, of the first time I looked at an unwrapped tampon.
I felt like a real woman.
Now, at 27, I'm confronted with a new female accessory to insert.
My partner (the hard part) was jittery too.
Could this be at the end of the vacuum-packed salami syndrome?’
Taking a deep breath, Sara went on to explain how huge the Femidom is.
‘There's no small, medium or large.
One fanny fits it all.
This is definitely a concept the makers must address — but then can you imagine what'll happen if there are sizes, all these women will be asking for Extra Small.’
There are two rings, one at the top which you fold into a figure eight and one at the bottom which hangs outside.
‘It was hilarious putting it inside me.
I think they suggest the figure of-eight method as a hint at how many times you have to keep trying at your first attempt.
It doesn't matter how wet you may be, or how much lube you use, by the time you get going most of the moisture has gone.
I even turned my ‘hard partner’ into a gynaecologist.
But the combination of a dryish sheath and a fairly large member played havoc with the outer ring, which must stay outside.
However, I remain undeterred.
Practice makes perfect as with any sport.’
Even the partner was impressed at the end of the session; with his dick freer to move around, he said it felt more like the real thing.
Farika's perspective on contraception: ‘It's never been a bed of roses.’
But the Pussy Posse both agree that the Femidom — or the ‘Femy’ as it's known in Italy and Spain — gives women the freedom to put it in beforehand, leave it in afterwards.
‘It gives Queen Bees the freedom to put it in…and just let it be.’
MONITOR ready, steady, gone
Ekow Eshun on the crisis in pop music television
Aaarrgghhh!!
Top Of The Pops .
Hence it comes, tottering on to the screen, like a faded rock star — still swinging after all these years, still looking for the party.
In the twilight of its life,TOTP has opted for a radical face-lift, which has turned out instead like a make-over from Hell.
Gone are those things we loved to hate.
The phoney excitement of the chart countdown; the self-consciously ‘zany’ camera effects; smug presenters like ‘Diddy’David Hamilton and Alan ‘Fluff’Freeman, who made an art form of insincerity.
Kids watched it in their millions every week because it was that rarity: an adult show which listened to their viewpoint.
Well, in as much as it was their spending decisions on records that determined the programme's line-up.
And so every generation has their own essential TOTP moment.
A pop epiphany which, for them, crystallised the very essence of youth.
Who remembers the Beatles singing ‘Hey Jude’ live, Jimi Hendrix doing ‘Purple Haze’or David Bowie camping it up as Ziggy Stardust?
I certainly don't.
But ask me about Boy George's first time on the show — looking gorgeous in a dress, with make-up and ribbons through his dreadlock extensions — and I can still remember the fevered speculation about his ambiguous sexuality that gripped my school the next day.
At those rare, timeless instances, childhood itself-slipped away, and we glimpsed an adult world of celebrity, glamour and sexuality.
During the Seventies a hazy eroticism was on offer every week, courtesy of Pan's People in their gold Lurex hot pants.
All this, sadly, is no more.
Instead, the revamp has brought glassy-eyed, barely post-pubescent new presenters, who can grin, nod and say their lines at the same time.
Maybe with lots of training and effort, they can also be taught to roll over, fetch and play dead.
Just as annoying is the pretty dictum that acts must sing live, when most of them can't.
Bring back miming.
After all, audiences want to be entertained, not see their idols with feet of clay.
All these changes, just to prove that TOTP can still cut it in the ratings game.
Which, let's face it, it can't.
Figures are still falling, from the mid-Seventies peak of 15 million, down, down, to 5 million and below.
No wonder calls are growing for the show to be put out of its misery once and for all.
Hell, it would put us all out of pain.
Still,TOTP can take some consolation from the knowledge that other pop programmes share some of its problems.
At Dance Energy , wobbly audience figures have prompted a remix.
Now Dance Energy House Party , it seems to be moving away from dance altogether, in favour of‘off-beat’ comedy sketches and the dubious attraction of Normski in drag.
The ITV's Chart Show dispenses with a presenter entirely.
But even its unmediated, image-led format can only command an audience of around 3 million — a few million less than normally turn on to Songs Of Praise .
Other series that ran until recently, like Rapido, Snub TV and Friday At The Dance , have all been unceremoniously axed.
Clearly there's a crisis in pop music programming.
At the core of which is a seemingly insoluble difficulty: the 45 singles market, on which all pop shows past have been based, is in steady, irreversible decline.
Beyond perhaps a specialist 12-inch dance market, it will eventually disappear completely.
This, of course, doesn't have to mean that the pop stars, or the programmes which court them, will disappear.
Just that the latter will have to lower their expectations and make do with imperfect versions of the former.
Anonymous techno acts, European soft-rockers and pseudo-stars like Dannii Minogue and Take That now dominate the charts.
And only relatively thin sales are needed to join them.
But it doesn't take a crystal ball to figure out the diminishing returns involved in planning programmes around such disposable performers.
After all, if no one is really buying their records, how can their appearance on TV draw an audience or hope to attract advertisers?
If there's a reason for the collapse in sales, it's not simply that acts are worse than before, but that there are fewer teenagers to buy their records.
Britain's ageing population means record companies prefer to promote album bands like Simply Red to adults, over high-cost, low-return pop acts.
For the same reason, the smart money in music programming is abandoning pop and instead developing grown-up shows — like BBC2's Rhythms Of The World and Channel 4's Mojo Working .
These may seem like dull, scholarly exercises in ethno-musicography.
But for their middle-class, middle-aged, CD-buying target audience, such shows, which tend to concentrate on either the roots of popular music or music from the less-developed world, offer the chance to explore the very ‘essence’ of a musical culture.
They provide all the thrills of safari — discovering music in its ‘natural state’, untouched by modern society — without any of the troublesome ethical dilemmas.
It's all a bit like going back to the Fifties, when TV's role was to entertain and inform in equal measure.
And perhaps, sensing that matters have come full circle, some of that era's pop idols are returning to host a new generation of adult oriented music shows.
Tom Jones: The Right Time , a pop history programme-cum-chat show — where Tom sung a bit, introduced some contemporary guests and reminisced a lot about the good old days — was only the first.
Already projected is a BBC answer version, presented by Cliff Richard.
Where will it end?
Georgie Fame, Billy Fury and Pet Clarke all dusted down from retirement and brought back to our screens?
Strangely, in writing off pop programmes as a lost cause, British TV seems to have ignored the example of MTV, which has come to define that genre across much of the world.
Many here have sniffed that the seamless mix of promo-clips, adverts and infotainment is intellectually — and, ultimately, morally — numbing.
Which, of course, they once said about pop music.
MTV hardly has the anti-establishment ethos of Sixties rock or Seventies punk.
But, apparently, its availability in Eastern Europe during the late-Eighties helped hasten the collapse of Communism — which is certainly more of a revolutionary achievement than either of the other two music forms managed.
In Britain, MTV is still an ill-loved interloper.
Instead, it's Ready, Steady, Go , the last show in which young people had fun on TV, that still defines conventional wisdom about pop shows.
As for the beleaguered Top Of The Pops , there's talk of a white knight riding in to lead one last dash at the ratings.
Jimmy Savile has offered to return and save the show.
And who knows?
These are strange, time-warped times.
Jim, true to his word, may be the man to fix it after all.
Pan's People show off their winter wardrobe
born again
Recycled chic: trash aesthetics for the modern age
Children on the streets of developing countries have been doing it for years.
Scouring rubbish tips to use garbage as raw material to make toys which they can sell — selling wealthier people their own recycled waste.
Using bits of wire, tins, old flip-flops, half-rubbed-out India rubbers, pieces of plastic, they make sophisticated bicycles, motorbikes and ice-cream carts.
In most of these countries there's now a price tag on these toys cum- objets d'art and they are even ending up in rarefied art galleries.
Hand in hand with environmental panic, recycling chic is growing in Europe too.
Not only in Paris where fashion designers like Martin Margiela, Veronique Leroy, Jean Collona and Lamine Kouyate are famed for being creative with second-hand clothing, searching out their raw material in flea markets.
But also in London.
At the start of the summer, Helen Storey got together with American second-hand clothing specialists Flip for her 2nd Line collection.
‘I sat down to design yet another collection and felt sick.
The idea of recycled clothes seemed more exciting in a way than modern clothes.
I wanted to put a line in the King's Road shop that was unique — one-off, cheap items.
Which is exactly what second-hand clothes are.
It's creative recycling as much as material recycling.
I've taken as much stick as praise since the line started in June, with people saying it's not real recycling.
Hence my association with Flip, because they've been doing second-hand clothes for 20 or 30 years.
Nothing costs over £50, prices start at £9, and the line now accounts for 65 per cent of my overall sales.’
Storey's move away from obsessive designer lifestyles — she has won widespread acclaim for her classic, well-cut women's range — may not be as adventurous as some would hope, but real dedication to recycling clothes comes from hippier quarters.
Eco-friendly collectives such as Catweasle Press, Conscious Earthwear and No Lo Go (a label and an Oxfam shop in London's Marylebone High Street) are embracing unbleached cotton, old bedspreads and jumble sale clothes.
Sarah Ratty, the designer behind the south London-based Conscious Earthwear, is always on the look-out for new eco-products.
She tried out traditional natural dyeing methods (eg the African resist technique) for this season's collection, which, incidentally, is dedicated Stussy-style to ‘groovers and growers of the one world tribe vibe who want to be a part of the solution’.
Even students are wising up and getting in on loving the environment.
Julian Horsey recently won £2,500 and the title of New Designer Of The Year ‘92 –'93; for his recyclable shoes.
‘The idea started as a bit of a joke.
I did a degree in packaging design, and I experimented with potato sacks and corrugated boxes, trying out different shoe styles.’
His Liberty-style wrapping paper slip-ons were made specifically with youth hostels in mind: ‘At the end of the stay, they would be put in a dispenser and recycled.
I also had long haul flights in mind.’
Recycling ideas take many forms — resin mirrors and jewellery, recyclable CD packaging, pencils made from twigs.
With such a frenzy building up, and most of it apparently style-obsessed, it's not surprising that opposition is emerging.
Exclusively Finland (which promotes its arguments in a glossy touristy brochure that includes an advert for Kulta beer) argues that recycling ‘consumes more external energy than primary fibre production’.
It insists that paper can only be recycled four times before it disintegrates, and claims that if  Scandinavia stopped producing primary fibre Europe would run out of paper in six months.
It proposes the controlled planting and harvesting of more fir and birch trees.
But corporations like Nike are already planning ahead.
Nike's Air Escape shoes already have a percentage of reused materials in them — by next year it plans a completely recycled athletic shoe.
Worn and defective shoes will be shredded in the US, shipped to Korea and turned into a filter for outsoles (providing, of course, that this doesn't harm the performance).
And it may be a comforting thought to some that an Australian company is experimenting with eco-friendly coffins made of newspapers, which are cheap and biodegradable.
fred bared
Right Said Fred are camp, silly and deeply dippy.
They're also the best British pop group for some time…
Pinewood Studios, 8.45am, July 28.
Soon the three members of Right Said Fred will put on their pop faces, two of them will put on their unplugged guitars, and they will walk along a corridor, down some stairs, into a colourfully-lit plastic cave that is part of the set for the children's TV programme Parallel 9 .
There they will mime their fourth single, ‘Those Simple Things’, and then will be interviewed.
The interviewer will get their names mixed up and Fred Fm — the bald one who doesn't sing — will smile and say ‘just call us all Gloria’.
Then she will ask if they have a label for their music and Richard Fm — the bald one who sings — will say ‘St Michael’ before his brother chips in with the episode's one almost serious observation, saying, of their success: ‘I think it's because we play with our tongues in cheek.
The Eighties were a bit too serious.’
Then the interviewer will turn to Rob — the other one — and ask him if he's hot with all that hair, and he'll say ‘it's my week to wear the wig’, and they'll leave the cave.
It will probably take six or seven minutes in all, and will be a perfect pop group performance.
And it will appear to come quite naturally to them.
And, indeed, it probably does.
You may be able to fake being a grunge rock hero, a techno guru, or a new age ambient space cadet, but you cannot fake being a pop star.
You either understand — and like it — or you don't.
It's easy to spot the ones who fake it: the cheesy smiles, the way they talk slowly in short sentences, the condescension, the contempt.
They think they're wooing the masses; instead they're sowing the seeds of their comeuppance.
But Right Said Fred are good at all this.
In a way they're the best pop group for years because — bereft of youthful, lithe hormone appeal or sculptured cheekbones — they stand or fall totally on how good a pop group they are.
Nevertheless, away from the cameras, they are a far more rough, camp, unfettered experience than you might expect.
When I arrive, Richard is fretting about tomorrow's photo session for THE FACE.
He's heard that some of the shots will be with female models.
‘It's a bit stereotypical: rock stars with girls.’
Pause.
‘I'd rather do it with sheep.’
Pause.
‘Or any furry animal.
A koala…’
Meanwhile, Fred worries about a spot on his back.
He wonders how he got it.
‘You spent so much time on your stomach in Australia,’ comments their stylist Peter.
‘My brother,’ Richard says to me, ‘is a pillow-biter.
You can quote me on that.’
The conversation continues.
It is about 70 seconds until the next anatomical crudity — Fred commenting, ‘My balls are soft, but times are hard.’
Before 9.15, phrases that will have been used include: ‘a lethal dose of my love rod’; ‘young girls’ love juices’; ‘a good fist-fucking’; ‘all your fudge-packing’; ‘the mark of a man across your bun’; ‘most people have carried your hand baggage’; ‘he's recovering from a rogering in the toilet’and ‘he's pouring a hand shandy in the car park’.
THE RIGHT SAID FRED STORY:two brothers work for years trying to become pop stars.
The highs were few and far between.
When Fred was a kid he sent John Peel a demo tape and John Peel phoned him up, but nothing came of it.
(Partly because he remembers how ‘cool’ this was of John Peel, Fred sometimes now grabs fan letters and phones up the writer, ‘to freak them out’.)
In their early twenties they had a group called the Actors and RCA records asked them to come in for a meeting.
(This seemed encouragement enough for Richard, the academic brother — Fred didn't get any O levels — to chuck in his cultural studies course at polytechnic.
‘You think,’ he smiles wistfully, ‘this is it!’)
The closest they came was in the mid-Eighties when their group, Trash, Flash And Money —‘straight down-the-line uninteresting Billy Idol rock music’— was signed to a development deal by Capitol records in America (in a development deal they give you some money while they decide whether you are any cop after all).
The brothers moved to New York for a while and then, when the deal fell through, moved back.
At the same time they tried other jobs, the sort of also-ran jobs the music business is full of where you never become a celebrity but you are paid union rates and allowed to stand nearby.
They were in videos: Richard in a series of David Bowie ones (‘Underground’, ‘Loving The Alien’, two for ‘Blue Jean’); Fred for Billy Ocean.
A Flock Of Seagulls, Evelyn ‘Champagne’ King, The Outfield and Saxon.
Fred was also first assistant director on videos for Maxi Priest and the Communards.
(‘The first assistant director,’ he says when I query his qualifications for the role, ‘just had to shout at the second assistant director.’)
They were both part of Bob Dylan's backing band in the disastrous film Hearts Of Fire : Fred had to teach the songs they would mime to that day to Dylan each morning.
Slowly the truth dawned on them.
Being an extra in other people's star turns wasn't a good way of graduating to becoming a star.
At best it was a good way of getting more work as an extra.
As an acoustic duo they took the name Right Said Fred (suggested by a girlfriend of Fred's after she'd heard the 1962 Bernard Cribbins novelty hit of that name on the radio.
‘A cross between REM and richard Marx, but not as good as either,’ is Fred's grim confession of how they sounded.
Around this time Fred shaved his head.
He was receding a bit, and ‘with long hair I always looked pretty and I don't like being pretty — I wanted a bit more of a hard image’.
(Richard shaved his a few months before ‘I'm Too Sexy’ came out.)
When we talk about how camp they are now — Fred considers that on the official pop campness scale ‘out of ten we're about eight: Erasure are ten’— the non-singing brother also explains that there was no other way.
‘We were the most bizarre two-piece you've seen in your life.
I'm playing a guitar and he's acting like Liberace, acting like he's in front of a 50-piece orchestra with a silver dress on.
And we were doing that in front of 30 people at the Mean Fiddler.
So what we've done since is keep Richard exactly the way he is — completely camp — and have written to that.’
Meanwhile Rob had been having his own separate grapple with dismal failure.
In Right Said Fred's first rush of press, it was said that he had played with ZZ Top but it was never quite specified how.
In fact it was 20 years ago, before ZZ Top were even famous.
In a small club in Hamilton, Ontario, he jammed with them onstage for a few nights.
After that he occasionally backed pop legends on the has-been circuit, people like Geno Washington, Jimmy James.
In the Eighties he tried to find success with his ex-wife, Anoushka, who for a while was signed to Rusty Egan's Metropolis label as a potential new romantic diva.
The three of them were introduced by a local rehearsal studio owner.
Rob went round Fred's flat and the Fm brothers played a couple of songs on acoustic guitar.
‘They sounded dreadful,’ Rob remembers, ‘like an unsignable Proclaimers.’
But the three of them got on and Fred explained that ‘we desperately wanted to turn into a dance band but didn't know how’.
Anyway, they all sensed they had to make this work.
‘We were debris thrown together by the vagaries of the music industry,’ sighs Fred.
‘Three bottles thrown out to sea and they just happen to meet up a thousand miles away.
And you realise you have to get on because it's your last fucking chance.’
So they started getting drunk together, and writing songs together.
A few months later Rob was playing this bassline and richard, prancing about with the microphone, started singing ‘I'm too sexy …’
Rob fell on the floor, laughing.
Fred thought it was crap.
But he came round…
IN THE PINEWOOD DRESSING ROOM Tamzin, Right Said Fred's young manager, wanders over to the window where Rob — the one some magazine called ‘the bubble-permed misfit’— sits, in silence, just smoking roll-ups, his tobacco tin next to him.
‘You're a joy to work with,’ she tells him.
The two of them dated for a while, but it didn't work out.
‘The cry goes up every morning to Rob,’ sniggers Fred.
‘Why can't you be as jolly as Richard and Fred’
Rob does not smile.
‘I never look like I enjoy anything,’ he replies.
‘Why should I force myself to pretend I'm enjoying this?’
‘You know what's wrong with Rob?’ says Richard.
‘He only received £11,000 PRS.’
PRS money is what you get for your compositions being played and performed.
‘Gone are the days of dole and he's pissed off.’
As they continue to get dressed, Tamzin conducts a meeting of sorts.
She asks whether they want an appointment with their accountants.
‘Yeah,’ says Fred.
‘I want to talk about buying a car.’
Pause.
‘And my drug habits.
Are escort girls tax deductible?’
‘I'm mostly gay at the moment.
But I'd love to have kids, and I wouldn't like to think I would never have another physical relationship with a woman’— Richard
Styling Peter Hawker, hair by Eugene at Windle using Paul Mitchell, make-up by Val Garland at Camilla Arthur using Prescriptives, models Tamzin Greenhill at Models 1 and Lisa Roudette at Select, photo assistants Jeremy and Nick, shot at Metro Studios
‘I've lost six dildos up my bum; I want my money back,’ says Richard.
Fred asks whether Sega are still interested in providing tour support.
‘Yeah,’ says Tamzin.
‘They've invited you down to their warehouse, they want to take some photos.’
‘I'd rather just take the gear and give them nothing’ pretends Richard, smiling.
‘Stuff it up their Japanese rear end.’
Later Fred sits down to play Gameboy tennis but tells me, ‘Say I'm playing Sega and…’— he halts a moment, thinking sponsorship —‘…wearing Levi's and a John Richmond jacket.’
Right Said Fred have been learning about the strange life of a pop group.
There are things people want to do to you.
‘We could actually get laid every night if we wanted to,’ reflects Fred.
It is an opportunity of which they have availed themselves to varying degrees.
Fred tells me, a little horrified, about a girl in Los Angeles sitting on his lap in a restaurant who, by way of introduction, ‘started to massage my bollocks under the table’.
Sometimes intentions are simply spelt out in fan letters.
‘Can you stick your trouser snake down my throat?’’ quotes Richard.
‘They tend to be very fantasy-type letters,’ says Fred.
‘My mum and dad go to aerobics every Thursday night — please come and screw me.’
(Richard's favourite, however, wasn't filthy at all.
It was from a consultant psychiatrist from the Twickenham Area Health Authority who was fulsome in her compliments then added, ‘Should you ever need any free psychiatric advice, please don't hesitate to let me know.’)
There are also the strange things people want you to do.
They have been asked to perform amidst naked babies and phallic balloons on Japanese TV.
They have been asked to sing a revised version of ‘I'm Too Sexy’ written by an Australian radio station (sample lyric ‘I'm not gay/but I'm into leather …’).
The first time I met them, a few months ago in a London photo studio, they were having confetti dumped over their heads by a girl who plays Gemma in Neighbours .
FRED TRIES ON TODAY'S CLOTHES .
‘Cheap gear as usual, Peter,’ he says to their stylist.
‘Cheap gear for cheap people,’ replies Peter.
Fred's outfit is a fusion of tight muscle-hugging fabric and cowboy-style  tassels .
‘You look like a camp Gene Autry,’ teases Richard.
‘Or an effeminate Alan Ladd.’
He lets out a long, marvellously theatrical sigh.
‘If we were an interesting group we wouldn't need these silly clothes.
If we played proper music…’
Their third member has disappeared.
‘Where's Rob?’ wonders Fred.
‘Beating the meat, probably, sad old bastard,’ says Richard.
‘He always whacks off before going on TV,’ says Fred.
‘He likes that dilated pupil look.’
Melanie, their new PR, has been watching proceedings for the last few minutes.
‘Now you see what you're dealing with,’ Richard says to her, chuckling.
‘The most charismatic group of the Nineties.’
‘It gets to the point,’ explains Fred apologetically, ‘where we disgust ourselves.
In Australia it went past humorous and into the twilight zone of grossness.’
In Japan too, they'll tell me later, they almost lost touch with sensible layman reality, screaming when drinks were wrong or cars were late.
It is daft and unpleasant, rationalises Richard, but logical: ‘You're told where to go and what to say — or at least how to say it — and the only thing you can control is the shape of your sandwich or whether your coffee's cold, so that's where you exercise the control.’
After his apology to her, Richard stops in anecdote and says to Melanie, ‘You've got a polite jumper on.
I can't swear in front of it.’
‘Can you take it off?’ asks Fred.
‘Can you take off your jeans, more like,’ says Richard.
AFTER THEY HAD WRITTEN ‘I'm Too Sexy’, a plugger called Guy Holmes — who may or may not have heard the song working out at the Putney gym, the Dance Attic, which Fred managed and Richard worked at — got interested.
After the major record companies had turned it down, Right Said Fred had it remixed (borrowing money from Lloyds Bank, Putney) and Holmes formed a record label, Tug.
When the song was first released, Right Said Fred had the notion that it would find an audience in the gay club scene.
‘We thought it was very camp,’ says Fred, not unreasonably.
So they booked some PAs (‘It stands,’ Richard says, ‘for Pathetic Attempt’) in gay clubs.
These were not a success.
‘They just thought we were taking the piss,’ remembers Rob.
‘They were stony,’ agrees Richard.
‘We had catcalls.’
Then Radio One discovered the song, and soon the nation was full of people declaring their over-sexiness for anything they could think of.
‘It was,’ Richard would reflect, ‘the first-do-it-yourself totally modular pop song.’
It was a silly song but a silly song that ‘did three million worldwide and makes people feel better’.
But they had no follow-up written, and they knew the public would be perfectly happy if they just disappeared, leaving behind this one camp masterpiece, and nothing afterwards to spoil it.
‘That's why people like casual sex,’ reflects Fred.
‘It's the thrill of the moment, and you don't want to see the person the next day, because it ruins the moment.’
Nevertheless they hadn't waited all these years for one quick roll in the hay.
They went into the studio determined to write a hit follow-up.
The result was ‘Don't Talk Just Kiss’.
Part of its promotion campaign was the announcement of forthcoming nuptials between Richard and his duet partner on the song, Jocelyn Brown.
Of course it wasn't true in the slightest.
‘The thing is,’ he told me shortly afterwards, trying to justify this shoddy media manipulation.
‘You realise that when you tell it like it is, they ham it up for you anyway.’
Then came the third single, ‘Deeply Dippy’, and a number one LP, ‘Up’.
Right Said Fred learned they could do something, and they learned to be proud of it.
‘Pop music is so difficult ,’ says Richard.
‘It's fucking easy to do an obscure jazz album or some rootsy blues album.
Any idiot can go off and do that.
Making it simple is what's difficult.’
‘A pop song has got to have a good short title,’ explains Fred.
‘The chorus has got to happen within the first 30 seconds, it's got to be memorable after the first play and it's either got to make you feel reflective or happy.’
It is Fred who writes most of the words, Rob who writes most of the music.
Rob is a canny researcher.
‘I'm Too Sexy’ borrows one section from Jimi Hendrix's ‘3rd Stone From The Sun’(Hendrix's estate asked for an ‘inspiration’credit rather than money, apparently because they're most keen for people to be directed to his music).
Rob took the chorus chords of ‘Upon My Heart’ from the middle eight of a Bananarama song.
‘These Simple Things’ uses some chords found on an early Jack Bruce LP.
In his Filofax he has a list of possible sources —‘a certain Sly Stone LP, track two, side one, outro chorus’— for the next album's songs.
It was also he who scribbled down the title ‘Deeply Dippy’ one evening when he heard the phrase used in a Fry and Laurie exchange on Jeeves And Wooster .
Before that, the song's original first line, also his, had not been ‘Deeply dippy 'bout the curves you got ’ but ‘She lost her knickers on the underground ’.
‘Richard has the biggest ego of anyone I've ever met,’ says Fred.
‘It makes up for his small penis,’ points out Rob.
‘God's idea of balance,’ sighs Richard
RECENTLY RICHARD APPEARED IN For Women magazine, with a head of hair but without clothes.
The photos were, he says, taken eight years ago.
He says he was just about to start weight training and wanted a record of his body before and after.
These were the before shots.
The photographer offered to sell him the negatives for £30 at the time but he didn't have the money.
This session is the cause of much joshing in the Right Said Fred camp, him saying how he'd make sure he had a hot shower first and primed himself for action if he did it again, his partners enjoying wiggling their little fingers at any opportunity and ribbing him for his perceived shortcomings.
Today — Sunday, the day of THE FACE photo session — Melanie asks him for some quotes to give to the Daily Mirror about the affair.
She tells him For Women have been swamped with fan mail and want to do a contemporary shoot.
He says he'll consider it.
When she tells him how popular the photos apparently were he says, ‘My first quote is, ‘The readership of For Women must all have cataracts or be retarded.’
I'm very flattered but I think they're mistaken.
What can I say?
I look at those pictures and think about joining a religious order.’
‘What did you think of the spread?’
Melanie asks him.
‘Shall I tell you honestly?’ he says.
‘Before the band ever happened I was driving around Hammersmith roundabout and I saw ‘Nude picture of Patsy Kensit!’ on a sign, and I remember being slightly jealous, thinking.
‘Wouldn't it be good if people were interested in pictures of you with no clothes on?’
So it was a dream come true, like having a number one single or having grandchildren.’
Richard split up with his girlfriend when he was about 24.
‘I moved to London and the first thing I did was track down the nearest bloke.
Because I hadn't done it’
Two days after, I sit in while an Australian journalist wearing a Wayne's World baseball cap backwards interrogates the other two on this matter.
‘Old weeny-winkle,’ says Fred.
‘I think it's very funny.’
‘Inch worm,’ adds Rob.
‘He clearly has been sold short by God.’
Richard is a classic pop star split personality.
He is the one who has reacted to success by becoming obsessive about peace and quiet, about making time to read books and see friends.
And yet…
‘Richard has the biggest ego of anyone I've ever met,’ says Fred.
‘It makes up for his small penis,’ points out Rob.
‘God's idea of balance,’ sighs Richard himself.
‘He is quite schizophrenic,’ diagnoses Fred.
‘There's one person you meet sitting in a restaurant having a chat, and then that person will go and put on a see-through lurex all-in-one bodice and stand in front of 10,000 people and make a complete cunt of himself and not think about it.
I watch him at PAs and he'll go up to screaming girls and undo his tunic and twist his nipple right in a girl's face.
I couldn't do that.’
Richard smiles gently.
I dig for his reasons, for the inner need driving his exhibitionism, but he isn't prepared to delve too far.
‘When I do it people smile,’ he says.
‘People like it.
That's why I do it.
If the first two rows started barfing when I took my shirt off, I wouldn't do it again…’
‘Onstage,’ Fred reflects, ‘he's this outrageous lunatic camp person, but half an hour after the gig he's back at the hotel reading Somerset Maugham and Rob and I are being disgusting to some barmaid completely off our head.’
The other day Richard saw Madonna on TV, arriving at a Hollywood film premiere, banks of photographers around her.
‘Like it was the Pope,’ he says.
‘And the first reaction I had was, I was just jealous.’
We talk about Madonna a while.
‘It says in the Daily Mirror that she fancies me,’ he boasts lightheartedly.
‘I can believe it.’
‘We'll do a record with Madonna before our musical career has died.’
Fred announces confidently today.
Fred is the person who makes confident assertions like this.
Why do you think that?
I ask.
‘Because I think she'd like us.
And it'd be a fuckin' good record.
And we could do with a break in America.’
(‘I'm Too Sexy’ was number one in America, but since then they've struggled there.)
‘The song would be a dance track with her and Richard doing some rather ridiculous duetting, and me and Rob being rather groovy in the background.’
‘And it'd be called?’ asks Richard.
Fred thinks for a moment.
‘Swallow It’,’ he says.
‘And I think she would find it equally credible for her as it is for us.’
There is round-the-table sniggering at this bold assertion of Fred's.
‘You knobheads,’ he says.
IT WAS WHILE ‘I'M TOO SEXY’was enjoying its long stay at number two beneath Bryan Adams that Richard Fm told the Sun that he was bisexual.
‘I didn't think they'd print it for some reason.
I told Rob and Fred afterwards and they looked at me in horror, and that's when I started getting panic-stricken.
Then when I saw the ‘I'm Bi-Sexy Too’ headline I just freaked.
For half an hour I thought that was the end of our career.
I assumed there would be a massive outcry, they'd ban the record and I'd be arrested and taken to the Tower or something…’
Instead, he learned a different lesson.
It was no big deal.
‘People will put up with all sorts of stuff,’ he oddly phrases it, ‘if they like you.’
Still, he was ‘absolutely very aware’ that ‘bisexual’is often taken as some strange pop-code for ‘gay’and is keen to point out that, as it happens, he is indeed bisexual.
He talks through his sexuality's genesis.
At school he had a three-year affair with a fellow student —‘a rummaging around adolescent affair’— and then went to college ‘and got into girls’.
He settled down with a dance student called Jane, then ‘one day I was sitting with her in a train station and I realised I'd been staring at a bloke for about ten minutes’.
They split up when he was about 24.
‘I moved to London and the first thing I did was track down the nearest bloke.
Because I hadn't done it.
It had all just been rummaging around.
He was an American guy named Brad.
Really sweet guy.
We went out for about two years.
We both had girlfriends — he swung as well.
‘I remember the first time we went to bed and did the business.
We both pissed ourselves laughing afterwards, wondering what all the fuss was about.
It's not boring, but it's certainly no better than straight sex.
Gay sex doesn't deserve the obsession that surrounds it.
And there are enormous similarities between going to bed with a man and a woman.
It's not another world or another language.’
Ever since, he has oscillated.
‘There's a lot of misunderstanding about what being bisexual is.
The most common thing is that you've got twice as many people you can screw.
The other is that you're bisexual all the time, and of course you're not.
Sometimes you're gay and sometimes you're straight.
That's how I see it.’
And right now?
‘I'm mostly gay at the moment.
But I'd love to have kids, and I wouldn't like to think I would never have another physical relationship with a woman.
It may be that I won't, but I like to keep that option.’
He told his mother just before ‘I'm Too Sexy’ was released ‘partly because I had a premonition my life was going to change.
Sometimes there's a moral imperative and you feel everything building up behind you that you have to do it.
I felt at that point if I didn't tell her she was going to find out anyway.
She was very good, actually.
She was fine.
I think subsequently she found it harder to deal with.’
Nevertheless when the Sun story appeared he talked to her on the phone for an hour, her in tears.
It wasn't so much what she thought.
But the neighbours, the neighbours…
AS SOON AS THEY ARRIVE at Sunday's photo session the brothers start teasing Rob for looking miserable.
He scowls at them, and tells me he never smiles in photos.
‘I've smiled before, because I've been forced to, and now we've had three hit singles I'll smile when I fuckin' want to.’
Melanie needs more press information.
She asks for lists of their favourite records.
There's some crossover, but the three different angles on pop music maybe give some clue as to how three old failed musicians could suddenly get together and write such a series of unpredictable hoots.
Fred likes pop music old and new (Bob Dylan, Pet Shop Boys, Van Morrison, B-52s), Rob likes funk and blues (Jimi Hendrix, Parliament, Sly Stone, Dr John), and Richard likes crooners and balladeers (Frank Sinatra, Elton John, John Lennon).
While Richard is having trouble thinking of ten LPs, Melanie suggests George Michael, but Richard shakes his head.
‘He sounds like he's grown up too fast, like he's middle-aged and asleep.
He sounds like he needs a good rogering to wake him up.’
Rob is next door.
‘Is he being moody?’
Richard asks Tamzin.
‘He doesn't like his clothes,’ she says.
‘Why doesn't he just wear a cocktail dress?’ asks Richard.
‘Why doesn't he just admit he's half queenie?
There's nothing worse than the straight man who shouts it from the rooftop.’
TUESDAY, JULY 28.
RIGHT SAID FRED are spending the day in a first floor suite of the Conrad Hilton Hotel (£270) to do some ‘international press’— interviews, mostly by telephone, with Greece, Israel, Germany, Austria, South Africa and Brazil.
It is not great fun.
They are drinking endless cups of coffee and have already thrown the room service menu out of the window.
Whenever the phone rings — about once every ten minutes — they bicker over who must answer it.
Right now the others are chatting with Guy Holmes and Tamzin, discussing their love lives — in Fred and Rob's cases matters of quite rampaging heterosexual complexity — while Richard talks down the phone to South Africa, saying ‘success has a price…’
Yesterday they drove to Wales to do the Radio One Roadshow.
Guy tells them they don't look like they're enjoying things and he wants them to take a holiday.
The phone rings.
‘Not me,’ says Richard.
‘I've just done one.
Why am I doing them all?’
Sometimes intentions are simply spelt out in fan letters.
‘Can you stick your trouser snake down my throat?’ quotes Richard.
‘My mum and dad go to aerobics every Thursday — please come and screw me’
‘Because you're the bloody singer, you dickhead,’ says Fred.
Tamzin needs them to fill in a questionnaire.
‘Who would you go to a desert island with?’
‘Put bloody Winona Ryder,’ says Rob.
‘That's what I usually say.’
‘Lane Smith from My Cousin Vinny ,’ says Fred.
‘No, cancel that.
Olivia Newton John.
I met her in Monte Carlo.
She asked if she could rub my head and we had a dance.’
‘Any vices?’
Tamzin asks.
‘No,’ answers Rob wearily.
‘Masturbation, weight training and sex,’ says Fred.
‘I masturbate when I can't get sex, and I weight train when I can't masturbate.’
Then the three of them talk to a radio interviewer from The Coca-Cola Euro Chart Hot 100 show.
She asks about money.
‘It's good for our mum, because we can help her, if we want to,’ says Richard.
‘But we don't want to,’ says Fred.
‘Stuff her.’
They roar with mirth.
In fact they're in the process of buying Mrs Fm a home on the south coast.
(Their father, who worked for a specialist printer, died three-and-a-half years ago.)
A few minutes later the very same Mrs Fm turns up.
She seems rather charming, though a little dazed.
As they break for food the general conversation isn't much toned down for her benefit.
Mum says nothing until Richard lets loose a mid-sized burp.
‘Richard !’ scolds Mrs Fm firmly.
They continue their ribald banter, and Peter stage-whispers to her, ‘It's disgusting.’
‘I don't understand most of it,’ she says.
But after a few more choice obscenities slide by she turns to me and, smiling, says, ‘I'm doing my best.
I'm going to change my name shortly.’
Ann Marie from Brazil arrives and asks them if they were quite surprised by the success of ‘I'm Too Sexy’.
‘We weren't quite surprised,’ says Fred.
‘We were fucking amazed.’
They discuss Faith No More.
One of them came to see Right Said Fred in Los Angeles and there was lighthearted talk of a collaboration.
‘They're gods in Brazil,’ observes Ann Marie.
‘Are we demi-gods yet?’ asks Richard.
‘Yes,’ she allows.
‘You're climbing the face of Olympus.’
ABBA MAY HAVE HAD TO WAIT YEARS , but the Right Said Fred tribute industry is starting up early.
This autumn Heavenly records will release ‘The Fred EP’ on which St Etienne, Flowered Up and the Rockingbirds perform ‘I'm Too Sexy’, ‘Don't Talk Just Kiss’and ‘Deeply Dippy’respectively (all royalties, including Right Said Fred's publishing money, is going to the Terence Higgins Trust).
The unlikely idea began to germinate when Flowered Up were asked to perform a daft cover version for a pilot Channel 4 pop programme.
They tried Chris Isaak's ‘Wicked Game’ but it didn't work out and, during a pub break, they heard ‘Don't Talk Just Kiss’on the jukebox.
‘We quite liked it, that was why,’ says keyboard player Tim Dorney.
‘They just have a laugh, don't they?
Sexy young chaps.’
Heavenly's boss, Jeff Barrett, told St Etienne's Bob Stanley about this.
‘That's a weird coincidence,’ said Stanley, ‘because I really think ‘Deeply Dippy’sounds like the Rockingbirds could do it.’
At which Barrett apparently exclaimed, ‘That's it!
The Fred EP!’
‘Which,’ says Stanley, ‘left us with ‘I'm Too Sexy’.’
The Rockingbirds' Alan Tyler says they recorded ‘Deeply Dippy’ because they were told to.
‘We generally take most of our ideas from Jeff Barrett,’ he grunts wryly, ‘but I think Right Said Fred are one of the wittiest pop groups there is.
They're good old swingers.
They're not afraid to be bald and they're not afraid to appear naked in magazines.’
They didn't mess about with the song much.
‘There wasn't any point.
We made it a bit more Kinks-y and added just a little bit of flamenco, but how can you improve a great song like that?’
Like the other bands, the Rockingbirds have yet to meet Right Said Fred.
‘I hope we can all meet up at some time in the future,’ says Tyler, ‘and have a tap-dance.’
St Etienne's ‘I'm Too Sexy’ is the strangest mutation, featuring Pete Wiggs' voice, heard for the first time, improvising lyrics like ‘I'm too shaky for my Stevens ’.
‘They're a brilliant pop group,’ testifies Stanley.
‘They just don't come across as remotely manufactured although soon they'll probably become too aware to be good any more.’
‘I heard this interesting story.
This girl we know was in Germany and they were doing a PA and she ran up to Richard Fm and said ‘I've come all the way from England to see you’— which was a complete lie — and she said, ‘Can I have a signed photo?’
And he said, ‘I haven't got any — will a kiss do?’
And he gave her a proper snog.
Not just a peck on the cheek.
Yes, tongues.
She was wildly impressed.
What a pop star!’
When I mention the Heavenly EP to Right Said Fred it turns out that only Fred has heard it, so I play it to them.
After about 30 seconds of mellow techno abstraction from St Etienne, Richard asks earnestly, ‘Which song is this?’
‘Do they do drugs or something?’ asks Rob.
Pause.
‘And if so, where do they get them?’
‘Is she attractive?’ says Fred, when Sarah Cracknell's voice comes in.
‘She hasn't quite got it right, but if she wants to come round my flat…’
‘This is flattering,’ says Rob, of Flowered Up.
‘More drugs?’
‘Spoons!’ exclaims Rob, approvingly, after the Rockingbirds strike up.
‘This lot don't sound like they're on drugs.’
And for about five minutes they rave about how flattered they are, a little bemused but clearly touched.
Right Said Fred are making a fairly robust attempt not to become too aware, but they do have the odd theory, the odd observation.
‘I'm pleased,’ says Richard, ‘that we've proved that you can come out with a silly record and it doesn't have to be your only silly record.
You can make dozens of silly records.’
They also have this thing about being popular because most of their songs are about sex, but only on the level of innuendo and suggestion.
‘They're about flirtation and titillation,’ analyses Richard.
‘When Madonna masturbates on stage, she does it as though it's a serious business — ours is a silly, flirtatious sex.
Price's songs are about actually doing it.
His is fuck pop; ours is winky-winky nudge-nudge pop.’
And what, I casually wonder, if they get sick of just teasing?
‘Well,’ snaps Richard, happy to flip back into non-analytical filth-talk autodrive, ‘then we'll fuck 'em all.
We'll work our way through the whole fuckin' audience, shaft every man-jack of them’.
do you like Mondays?
Happy daze aren't here again, for the new album is a crucial one for the lads once hailed as Factory's finest.
But to make ‘Yes Please’, they had to learn to say ‘No thanks’ to the old excesses
‘You know,’ ruminates Shaun Ryder, frowning over his fifth pint, after a night of stilted soul-searching, six months of silence and a whole heap of rumours, ‘it surprises me that people ever expected anything more from us.
We've got through all this just by being ourselves, which is a bunch of lying, gibbering twats.
Know what I mean?’
Happy Mondays are back, then.
Mischiefmakers, mayhem creators, fraudulent shady cartoon characters.
The ones who made the best records with the least effort, took the most drugs, gatecrashed the best parties and got involved with the strangest people.
No one could exploit their myth better, because no one tells 'em like the Mondays.
Even Shaun Ryder's habitual use of heroin has been well documented.
No one was really surprised when news first broke last January of his voluntary admission to a drugs rehabilitation unit.
No one was really surprised when he checked out a week later after an argument about drinking beer in his room.
After all, up the lads and down the hatch.
But at times it's been hard to ignore that sinking feeling that what we've been witnessing is another case of gradual rock'n'roll suicide, that what we're about to experience is the possible self-destruction of not just one individual but a whole band.
But, for now, Happy Mondays are back and ready for the next round.
Only this time they're armed not just with a new album but new producers, new horizons, a new attitude and apparently a new code of conduct in interviews.
For once, Happy Mondays are keeping schtum.
There's more gossip than you can muster flying round about Shaun Ryder's health and state of mind, fuelled further by stories of ructions and in-band rifts during the recording of ‘Yes Please’ in Barbados.
My first rendezvous with the cocky yet strangely charismatic frontman is cancelled due to‘recording commitments’.
Six weeks later, I wait three hours for him to appear only to be completely blown out.
Meanwhile, every other person I speak to who's been in Manchester's Dry Bar relates what a mess he looks.
Yet, over the space of two days while waiting for Ryder to appear, guitarist Mark Day shows me his holiday snaps of Barbados, drummer Gaz Whelan is more preoccupied with the hassles of having a broken foot, while PD and Paul Ryder don't so much brag as baulk at the very mention of drugs, seeming far more at home with talk of ‘middle-eights’, ‘mixing desks’ and ‘jamming grooves’.
The original 24-hour party people have put the rave on hold.
‘We've had our fun and now we've recorded an album how it should have been, without anyone disturbing us.
Our attitude to work's changed, being out in Barbados changed us,’ PD, the Mondays' amiable keyboard player, announces defiantly.
‘It's like you were just out there to work, not mess about, so we got more into the music than going out and celebrating.
We got our heads right round it, whereas before, like, half the time we wasn't even bothered what was recorded or how it was done, it was always bang, get a groove, put it down and see what we can do with it later.’
Prior to starting their fourth album, the Mondays were characteristically in a state of organised chaos.
Although the band had chosen where they wanted to record the album — Compass Point in Nassau, Bahamas — they had no one to record with us usual collaborators Paul Oakenfold and Steve Osborne, producers behind the laid-back groove of ‘Pills'N'Thrills And Bellyaches’, were tied up with commitments to their Perfecto label.
Meantime a small entourage travelled out to Compass Point to meet with Chris Frantz and Tina Weymouth, formerly of the weird and very wonderful Talking Heads, who had previously worked at the studio under the guise of Tom Tom Club.
As it turned out, the studio ‘wasn't up to much any more and half the equipment was broken’, but, according to Mondays' manager Nathan McGough, ‘a little light went on as soon as I met Chris and Tina, so I phoned them to ask what they thought of the band and what they had planned for the next couple of months’.
The lads were ‘bang up for it — Talking Heads has been one of our favourite bands for a long time’, and another odd musical alliance was struck up, adding to a curious list of collaborations including the Velvet Underground's John Cale (who produced ‘Squirrel And G-Man’) and Donovan (who supported them on tour).
The Mondays, with girlfriends, wives and kids in tow, eventually decided on Blue Wave, Eddy Grant's studio in Barbados, set up shack in the middle of a sugar plantation miles away from anywhere, and immediately established a mutual rapport and respect with Frantz and Weymouth.
‘I think Chris and Tina were freaked by the experience and have gone home with a few grey hairs.
Like, one minute we're there, next minute we're in the hospital.
They seen a lot of shit going on but I think they were impressed with home we coped with it all,’ enthuses PD to the eager nods of Paul.
‘In fact, we actually learnt a lot recording the album the way we did because first and foremost Chris and Tina are band people, they know how to work it live.
It wasn't like, ‘I'm the producer, these are my secrets and I'm gonna keep 'em to myself.’
Chris and Tina liked telling us things.
Working with them was like no cheating, you know like machines and things like that.
I ain't knocking dance music, but at the end of the day we're a band.’
‘IT'S FUNNY WHEN YOU work with people how attached you get to them.
We got real close to the Mondays,’ enthuses Tina Weymouth in conversation over the phone from the States.
‘I've worked on a lot of great albums and this is right up there with them.
The Mondays create together from a jam, that's part of their magic, their chemistry.
Because they have such a fantastic performance feel, it never occurred to us to loop.
I know this was the first time they'd ever thought of or considered themselves as artists, before that I guess they just thought they were lucky.
They'd not really given themselves the opportunity to consider a song from beginning to end — with them it was just get high and play.
They're still completely wild, but then they also want to be remembered as a damned good band and not just as part of a mad drugs scene.’
Although most of the Mondays managed to knuckle down to a daily routine, rather than the usual blurred, night-time slog, stories continued to filter back to Britain that it wasn't all hunky-dory in paradise.
According to hearsay, Bez had managed to break his arm — twice; Shaun was there in body but his head was elsewhere; and there were persistent rumours of rifts between the pair and the rest of the band, who just wanted to get their heads down and get on with work rather than get on one.
Ryder returned home alone to get his shit together, eventually laying down the vocals on his own in the rather less glamorous surroundings of Surrey.
When this episode is mentioned to PD and Paul, they merely shrug their shoulders and close ranks.
‘This time round,’ snorts Paul protectively, ‘the press couldn't even get the name of the studio right.
They got the wrong island, wrong producers, so what do they know, going on about these mad drug stories and us not getting our shit together?
Half the facts are wrong, we weren't there for fucking carnival.
Whatever went on, though, it never affected the recording of the album.
That was like our sanctuary, there was never any bollocks going on there.’
‘By the time Shaun came to Barbados, he was at the stage where he was incapable of getting his act together,’ recalls Chris Frantz.
‘And there were periods when everyone around us was severely pissed off with Shaun.
Then everyone realised that he really needed to go and sort himself out.
Basically he'd over indulged for too many years, to the point here even he realised he'd gone too far.’
While the rest of the Mondays had, for the first time in their lives, thrown themselves with abandon into their work and discovered a new passion for playing, Shaun just couldn't match up.
Singing was physically impossible due to the state of his throat, and practically impossible, as he later admits.
‘It wasn't just a case of me having to lay vocals down while I was over there.
I went over to Barbados with nothing wrote at all.
I'd been doing press and touring and all that lot for two years without a break, I'd not had time to change or take anything in.’
‘Eventually,’ continues Chris, ‘Shaun decided to go back to England to detox, which was a real tough decision to make.
I guess he went through a period where he felt frustrated with himself, he didn't trust himself.
He has a child now and he wants her to grow up without facing ridicule because of his actions.
Speaking from a personal experience, I had to go through a similar kind of programme after years of cocaine abuse.
I learnt if you want the party to continue, you have to chill.
Only then will your art continue to flourish.’
He looks like hell and sounds awful…the nascent Mancunian drawl is weak and strained, his hands shake, and there's a muscle by his jaw that keeps twitching violently every time there's a lull in the conversation
I FINALLY GET TO MEET Shaun William Ryder, with boss-eyed sidekick Bez in tow, not at his favourite haunt —‘I know there'll be people there I don't want to see, 'cause they'll have drugs on 'em and that’— but in Manto, Manchester's most popular gay bar.
He looks like hell and sounds awful, but then, as he's the first to admit, he always did.
To add to the effect, there's a scribbled line of stitches visible through his cropped hair — a result of headbutting the windscreen of his girlfriend's car which he trashed driving into the back of a Lada.
The nascent Mancunian drawl is weak and strained, his hands shake, and there's a muscle by his jaw that keeps twitching violently every time there's a lull in the conversation.
Which there is, frequently.
For someone who so obviously thrives on holding court, Shaun is neither ranting nor railing, the bragging and bullshit which characteristically pepper his interviews are conspicuous by their absence.
The nearest he gets to his usual form is during a discussion about the Mondays' donation to the Hard Rock Café, coming to the grinning conclusion he should send ‘a bong made from a Boddingtons beer tin, a packet of Rizla, some tinfoil, an empty skag packet and the sheet me and Bez slept on when we shared a flat together.
We never washed it, never changed it, must look like a Jackson Pollock painting.’
Yet as soon as the tape recorder clicks into action, Bez, his arm still in plaster, disappears into the night rather than hanging around as he usually would, and Shaun stop/starts his way through conversations seeming subdued and most definitely cagey.
‘By the time I'd got to Surrey,’ says Shaun of the trials and tribulations of recording ‘Yes Please’, ‘I'd had a great time in Barbados letting off steam and everything.
I mean, alright a few mad things happened and everything and when I came home I was whacked because we'd just been on a big adventure theme park for a month.
I was on a real holiday buzz, had a big, erm…party, y'know, and got totally fuckin' kettled.
But I got myself straightened out and I was in the mood then to write some words, get into being into the music, get the tunes making me groove.’
Asked how much his relationship and sense of responsibility towards the rest of the band gave him the impetus to get his act together, there's a long embarrassed silence.
The Happy Mondays may have been all too willing to sell their souls for a few column inches, but watching Shaun gaze at the floor ‘uhming’ and ‘aahing’, struggling to get his brain into gear, I feel like a voyeur.
‘To us it's as simple as writing good tunes and having fun,’ he begins weakly.
‘Well, it should be that simple but then sometimes all the business shit gets in the way of it.
I mean, yeah, I feel responsible to like…
No, I don't even feel responsible…
I don't know what it is.
We're all really close to each other, so if the lads give me a good track with some good bits that turn me on, I want to do well for them, I wanna get some lyrics out they'd like.
For nobody else, just for them.
I mean, I don't know if you've noticed but our band are really good friends — apart from Mark Day.
After ten years his views are still totally different from the rest of the band.
We don't see it as much as a business or a pressure like he does.
The five of us do still treat it like a joke, like a laugh.
I mean, OK I went mad in Barbados or whatever and the rest of it, but the rest of the band are like, ‘Oh, X went mad, now he's back to normal, it's sweet.’
We've all got confidence in each other because to us friendship is more important than anything.
We're just into each other getting our act together.’
Being surrounded by a supportive network of friends has always given the Happy Mondays the edge in the bullshit world of the music industry.
Back when no one took any notice of them, they kept the band together to entertain themselves.
Then when everybody wanted a piece of the action, they suddenly became the impenetrable clique every young soul rebel, too sacred to kick arse on their own, wanted to join.
As Nathan points out, ‘Everyone likes the anti-hero thing, don't they?
People like a villain, people love rogues and Shaun fits the bill perfectly.’
‘When you have a real problem with drink and drugs when you're in your twenties, you're still young and everything.
But when you see older people who are addicted, I think it looks double sad’
So Shaun got to hold court, shoot his mouth off and was rarely challenged for his dodgy comments.
In return the press, from tabloids to music magazines, got vicarious thrills from the Mondays' precarious lifestyle, great copy in a dull climate.
A strange code of double standards emerged where artists such as Sinéad O'Connor were universally slated for putting one foot out of line, and yet the Mondays were somehow immune from serious criticism.
Even when Shaun and Bez went as far as editing Penthouse for the day, papers tutted and sighed but still printed pictures of the pair grinning like village idiots, surrounded by tits and bums.
Then came the infamous NME interview last November — their last for the weekly music papers.
It featured Shaun and Bez again, ‘off our heads, in full throttle, coming out with all sorts of shit’, except this time no one turned a blind eye, offered excuses or mildly slapped their wrists.
This time the Mondays felt the full bite of backlash and came across as a scummy homophobes busy, said writer Stephen Wells, ‘articulating bootstrap Thatcherism’.
‘It did our heads in a bit, freaked us out just for the fact that everybody who's ever met us in the business knows exactly how we are.
We mouth off,’ shrugs Shaun.
‘Kirsty MacColl bollocked me about that gay thing, right, because she had to defend herself to the people she knew saying, ‘Look, Shaun ain't like that.’
I've read things in papers people are supposed to have said and think, ‘You obnoxious twat, I hate you for saying that,’ but I know there's gay people out there who read that thing in NME and know it's a load of bollocks.
They know we're not anti-gay, or we hate this or we hate that.
Even though we say things, it[s just mouthing off like when you're talking to the lads, showing off, I s'pose.
But Bez ain't capable of hating anyone.
To us it was just Bez being Bez, off his box, acting dumb.
There's no excuse for what was said, but people aren't just a pile of words.’
Shaun Ryder has always maintained he won't let the press ‘be real because it's like a fookin' mad film, it ain't the real world’.
But when the tabloids come knocking on your front door, harassing your girlfriend, when you spend some time making headlines than music, when you've developed a habit that's hard to break when you've pissed your best mates off to the max, something's got to give, right?
‘When you have a real problem with drink and drugs, when you're in your twenties, you're still young and everything,’ reflects Shaun, who's just turned 30.
‘But when you see older people who are addicted, I think it looks double sad.
It's like ‘kin hell, get some control!
You're not exactly a young lad any more so you've got to pull your socks up.
I think you've got a responsibility to yourself, but then maybe I'm a hypocrite.
Not everyone can be like Keith Richards, drinking vodka for breakfast and shit like that.
I'm not knocking Keith for that, I think it's mega, but I don't see myself being in any sort of league like that.’
MEANWHILE, THE REST of the Mondays have sorted themselves out, got their sights set and, after the recent carry-ons, are ready for anything.
They still maintain they're ‘dead immature and don't give a shit’, but they are also bored stupid by all the tales of rock'n'roll excess.
It's time for a change if they want to survive, and first up for a face-lift is their music.
For a band now irritated by most dance music —‘most of it's cack, I hate going into bars where they've got it blaring out from everywhere, you can't hear yourself think’— and uncomfortable with the accoutrements of clubbing —‘I can't stand being under strobes no more, do me head in, make me lose my balance’— it was inevitable the Mondays would rake up their rock roots, ‘mature’ their sound and make a major musical transition.
According to Shaun, ‘Yes Please’ has got the same production on it as ‘hardcore, rock smokin' ragga music — it's more leather than loops, harder than the artist’, which, to be fair, at the moment doesn't account for much.
But then the Mondays, as they insist, have changed.
‘Yes Please’ isn't about thrills and pills, it's not meant to be consumed through a pumping club sound system, it's altogether on a much mellower tip.
Whereas the Mondays were once upfront and in your face, now they've polished up their act, they've sacrificed the power punch of their old menace.
Gone is the Mondays' rough and tumble free-for-all of, say, ‘Wrote For Luck’, replaced by the spliffed-out, laid-back groove and surprisingly sexy undercurrent of ‘Stinkin', Thinkin’’.
Even the dirty-phonecall vocals have been put on hold, with Shaun's monochrome monotone given more emotional support than usual by Rowetta.
‘Yes Please’ isn't designed to blow you into oblivion, more lull you into a false sense of security.
Deprived of the usual dash of digital and chemical additives, it could become the first easy-listening album for the post-E, no power generation.
‘Working with Oaky and Osborne was right for that time, but now it's time to move on, do something a bit different,’ shrugs Shaun.
‘I couldn't really see us doing another ‘Pills ‘N’ Thrills'-type thing, but then we've always done exactly what we've liked, always been a little bit different.
I mean anybody who'd do a stupid song like fookin', er…what's the one we did with Karl Denver called?
Yeah, right, ‘Lazyitis’.
Now that's a really lame and dumb song, but that's what we liked about it.
That's why we came out with it 'cause it reflected what we liked at the time.’
And time has moved on.
‘Rave’ is now a dirty word, ‘Manchester’is best forgotten, and as for the Mondays, how daft must it feel to be a rebel role model for spotty teenagers when you've got kids yourself?
With their new album there's enthusiastic talk of breaking the American market that has long eluded them.
In the past, the Mondays have been received in the States with mixed reviews, with Americans apparently unable to relate to working class hooligans going ballistic on MDMA and PCP.
But this time, they insist, things are going to be different.
‘We're not sweet and innocent as everyone knows, but we do have pure accidents happen to us,’ insists PD.
‘If a plane's delayed, it's because one of us has nicked the wheel, shit like that.
It's got to the point now where everyone thinks everything we do is just deliberate shit, us causing a disturbance.
But we are pretty serious about our band.
We take great pride in our shows, we get right off on playing live, always have done.
We like putting on a good show.
We've gone on stage and played with fractures, abscesses, ulcers, deaf ears, smashed fingers, stitches, whiplash.
But we've gone on and done it.
That's how dedicated we are — the show must go on and it will’.
Backlash
With Michelle Pfeiffer's rubber-clad Catwoman whipping up a frenzy at the box office, S&M has never been so chic.
So why are the Customs clamping down?
Film critics may have disagreed on the merits of Batman Returns , but they did seem to reach a consensus on at least one thing.
Michelle Pfeiffer's leather-clad, whip-wielding, husky-bitchy Catwoman was the summer's sex symbol.
The movie-buffish Sight And Sound magazine concluded solemnly that Catwoman and Batman shared ‘the strangest S&M relationship in mainstream cinema’ while the tabloids let out rather more energetic caterwauls of appreciation.
Everyone got the  critical hots for Gotham's rooftop dominatrix.
No one quite ascended to poster cliché heaven and declared that ‘Michelle Pfeiffer is so sexy it's a crime’, but if they had it would have emphasised some of the ironies that underly Michelle Pfeiffer's striking star profile.
The whiplash dynamics of Batman Returns represent the culmination of a process that has been going on for the last 15 years.
Ever since punk brought fetishwear on to the street, S&M imagery has been taken up by the mainstream.
From fashion designers looking for a source of chic thrills to Sunday supplements looking to tickle their readers' fancy, everyone has plundered the S&M scene for imagery.
Fetish fashion designers now regularly appear on TV.
After starting out a special interest magazine,Skin 2 now looks like a mainstream style mag (sometimes you feel it can't be long before S&M will make it into M&S).
But even as the mainstream has turned on to S&M images, those involved in the scene have been subject to increased  harassment from the authorities.
Now as Catwoman whips Batman and the box office into a frenzy, those who enjoy a little sub/dom in the privacy of their own homes are actually being criminalised.
Take what happened recently to a friend of mine.
Neil (not his real name) likes gathering and circulating information (if anything, that's his real fetish).
Recently he was called up by the Customs and Excise about 20 videos (mostly tapes from TV) a friend had sent him from America.
Neil concluded that perhaps there was a problem with duty and, as customs didn't contradict this, Neil invited them to his work to sort things out.
But when two officers showed up, they said they had officially seized the package, and wished to search his flat.
Without revealing what caused the original problem, they confiscated anything remotely kinky they could lay their hands on (old Fifties fetish comics, a collection of fetish art by German artist Tom,Skin 2 videos and catalogues, piercing magazines).
Customs then took three weeks to have a closer look at the booty (oh yeah).
Eventually Neil was interviewed by a customs officer who, he says, ‘Looked like Agent Cooper from Twin Peaks , but unlike him was as straight on the inside as he appeared on the outside.’
The officer said that the problem was caused by two magazines (one about piercing, one about ‘sexual brainwashing’) and one tape (a copy of The Rubber Ghost , a dodgy fetish video that was actually made in the UK).
Despite the fact that out of 400 videos in his flat they found only five that could be classified as kinky, despite the fact that Skin 2 videos can be bought at places like Virgin (something they were unaware of), they accused him of importing and distributing porn for profit.
Customs have now returned the Skin 2 tapes (perhaps they got bored with them), but still seem gripped by the American mags, the comics and the fetish art.
Neil doesn't care about the American mags, but since the comics and art (both more kitsch than kinky) are collector's items, he'd like to get them back.
The latest word from customs is that they won't press charges, if Neil doesn't try to get his material back.
What's so ludicrous about all this, aside from the paternalistic attitude that they're protecting Neil ‘for his own good’, aside from the fact that it's an outrageous waste of time and money, is the arbitrary way customs exercise power.
Clearly some approach their work with a mix of ignorance and paranoia.
They have no idea what's out there (the top shelf of Smiths defines their sexual horizons) but they fear the worst — they're the kind of people who see a Cronenberg film and think it's a snuff movie.
This kind of thing is nothing out of the ordinary.
Talk to anyone involved in the scene and they have similar stories.
The worrying thing is that raids by customs and the Obscene Publications Squad are on the up.
Beginning with the precedent setting Operation Spanner trial (in which 16 gay men were successfully prosecuted for indulging in consensual S&M), the authorities are targeting S&M and ‘sexual deviance’, even seizing rubberwear.
Those being raided argue that, with hard core porn gradually disappearing, police and customs, worried about cuts in jobs and funding, are deliberately whipping up a new moral panic.
One thing is certain, though: interest in S&M and related practices is rising.
In part it's down to S&M mainstream fashion; in part to the rise of interest in all forms of body art; in part to the fact that gays are turning to it as a form of safer sex (hardly the sort of thing that should be criminalised).
Some people involved in the scene argue that S&M, with its ritual power plays and role reversals, is genuinely threatening to those in authority.
In fact there's already been a conference at London's Institute of Contemporary Art which pondered whether perversity, S&M and fetishism are ‘politically radical’.
There is an element of desperation in this (ageing vampiric lefties looking for a radical fix from the last sexual sub-culture left in town).
Really, the range of deviance that gets linked with S&M (everything from suburban catwomen to lesbian ‘chicks with dicks’, from gay men attending workshops on scat to the body piercing crowd) is too diverse, in some cases too much of a genuine underground, to be tied down to a single political reading.
And if S&M is so politically challenging, how come so many judges and high-ranking civil servants enjoy it?
Nevertheless, it's hard not to agree with those at the ICA who said that the legal precedent established by the Spanner trial should be properly contested (the latest appeal will be heard by the House of Lords in December).
There is talk of setting up a ‘proud to be perverted’ pressure group along the lines of Act Up),(perhaps they should call it Strapped Up), which will campaign around the issue of consent, the idea that whatever two adults agree to do in the privacy of their own homes is no concern of the courts.
But with basic civil liberties at stake, it's not just S&M ers who are being squeezed.
If you wanted to indulge in dodgy puns (and why stop now?), you could say S&M was all about coming under pressure but the authorities are taking things too far.
Those involved in the scene understand limits and respect boundaries — they know that people who don't know where to stop are dangerous.
Perhaps they could teach those in power something about the correct use of force.
‘Life's a bitch, now so am I.’ But could Catwoman be deemed obscene?
Strip Search
The match between football and fashion has been a bad one since the Seventies.
With this season's shirts as foul as ever, we asked Britain's top design teams to get their kits out for the lads
Boy's Own with Global Guide for Chelsea reserves
‘The shirt enters the realms of gentlemanly attire.
Made by John Smedley in luxurious sea-island cotton, it sports posh white collar and cuff.
Shorts are not so short and feature a frogmouth pocket detail for holding the goalhanger's pipe.
Knee-high stockings come with contrasting turn-back cuff.
Boots are the ones worn by George Best aeons before they crapped up as motifs in Yohji shoe collections’
Professional verdict: It looks like they've gone back in time to the Fifties — not very practical
Opposite, left to right:Man City away strip by Umbro ditches last year's maroon for papal purple; Norwich home shirt by Ribero makes a cardinal style error — flecking; Man Utd away design by Umbro with peculiar charcoal-effect pattern and torso-sized emblem  
We Brits may have invented cricket, tennis, football, rugby, golf, darts and bowls but we can't lay claim to baseball, ice hockey, American football, ten-pin bowling, rhythmic gymnastics, synchro swimming or sumo wrestling.
From a fashion point of view this is a pity: a glance at any of our native sports reveals a certain lack of sartorial élan .
OK — a complete style bypass.
Traditionally for the British, playing the game is all; looking like you've slept in the leftovers from a car boot sale that have run in the wash is, apparently, of little concern.
We're above all that kind of petty vanity, unfortunately.
Elsewhere winning the game is as much about having a psychological edge as a physical one.
American sports particularly stand out when it comes to style over content.
American football is profoundly dull when pared down to basics — imagine the game free of cheerleaders, Lycra, shoulder pads, helmets, half-time razzmatazz and that menacing black eye make up.
But American football is also sexy because it looks so good.
Never mind the action, which sometimes resembles a low-tech early-Eighties video game and is about as interesting to watch.
As a total style package, US footie runs rings round the competition.
Equally, baseball is a fundamentally silly game that somehow achieves a kind of iconic status because its players dress like mad old Great Uncle Alfred on a day trip to Blackpool in 1910.
As a sport, good old-fashioned English football can't be beat.
For skills and thrills and nailbiting, edge-of-the-seat gladiatorial tension it knocks spots off its US counterpart.
But football isn't sexy.
An Arsenal player could be the genetically engineered bastard son of a dangerous liaison between Luke Perry and Paul Newman circa 1960 and yet he'd still look like Pee Wee Herman in his pyjamas if he was playing away.
The unfashionability of football kits is a fashionable topic but you don't need to be able to recite the birthdays and middle names of every member of the England '66 squad to have an opinion.
Despite intensive instruction during the World Cup, I was still unable to get to grips with offside by the time Tomorrow Belonged To Germany.
But it still didn't stop me having a perfectly valid opinion on the parlous state of contemporary kits.
Boys may sneer when girls freeze-frame shots of John Barnes’ backside but, let's face it, Barnes' bum is built for body consciousness.
We women lust for Lycra.
Instead we get polyester and cotton in colour combinations that induce such a bad trip they'll soon start prescribing intravenous Ketamine as an antidote.
Considering the recent near-miraculous developments in fibre technology which mean that synthetic fabrics can now imitate everything from silk to rubber while they absorb sweat, change colour, fill in your tax returns and remix Michael Jackson singles, polyester and cotton (at the cutting edge of style in about 1953) is an insult to our national game.
An Arsenal player could be the genetically engineered bastard son of a dangerous liaison between Luke Perry and Paul Newman circa 1966 and he'd still look like Pee Wee Herman in his pyjamas if he was playing away
Things weren't always this bad, of course.
When Aston Villa forward Billy Walker scored two goals against Chelsea in the FA Cup semi-final of 1920 he was wearing a kit that looked like it had been designed by Yohji, styled by Gaultier and captured for posterity by Bruce Weber and his trusty box brownie.
Great haircut, too.
In fact, up until the Seventies football kits looked like they meant business.
I loved those dinky club crests on the left breast.
Very Ralph Lauren, very Calvin, very Giorgio.
When, in the mid-Eighties, Rei Kawakubo of Comme des Garçons stated that ‘red is the new black’(narrowly beating Diana Vreelands' ‘pink is the navy blue of India’ observation in the Pretentious Fashion Statement stakes), it appeared to have been taken to heart by the designers of football kits.
I like to think I know my way round the colour spectrum, but these days the colour red, for example, has been reinterpreted in a ghastly post-modern mish-mash that can encompass anything from blood to Schiaparelli pink via puce and scarlet, preferably all together.
All this, rendered in polyester and rounded off with some gut-wrenching graphics, represents the chaos theory of kit design.
The rot set in during 1973.
Up until then kits had been simple and smart and gimmick-free, with the Golden Age of styling lasting throughout the Sixties and into the early-Seventies.
Subtle changes — the evolution of the neckline from the Thirties lace-up to the Sixties crew neck via the Fifties V — were inevitable and inoffensive.
Colours and patterns changed hardly at all and the dinky club badge remained firmly in place.
In 1973, however, a thrusting new sportswear company called Admiral struck a deal with Leeds United and the first manufacturer's label made its debut.
By 1975 Leeds' manager Don Revie left to manage England and took Admiral with him.
The resulting redesign of the England kit — a discordant symphony of red and blue stripes on collar and sleeves and white and red stripes on shorts — was widely panned by the punters, but there was no turning back.
Synthetics soon replaced cotton, an ostensibly practical move that saved players from being bogged down in a waterlogged kit that ripped easily.
But it was the omnipresent manufacturer's logo woven into increasingly complex designs that really offended the fashion police.
By the time Adidas and Umbro got in on the act in the late-Seventies, a shirt could be carrying up to 40 little advertisements for the manufacturers, less than subtly integrated into the stripes.
Any historical references to team colours were increasingly bypassed in frenetic, gratuitous seasonal redesigns, particularly for away strips, while those beloved club badges were ousted in favour of bizarre geometric graphics and yet more plugs for the manufacturers.
Adidas managed to keep their cool while all about them were losing theirs because their trainers were playground staples and their kit designs were head and shoulders above the rest.
Adidas' cred came courtesy of Nottingham Forest, at the time the best team in Europe.
When Trevor Francis became England's first million-pound player in 1978, Adidas basked in a considerable reflected glory.
By the early-Eighties though, Adidas and Umbro were competing for business and in the process developing ever more complex designs.
Fabric technology meant that new patterns — pinstripes, shadow stripes and the notorious jacquard weave — cropped up in increasingly suspect combinations.
Fussy stripes and piping, shoulder flashes and chest panels, buttons, drawstrings and cuffs all came under the manufacturers' scrutiny and were tampered with.
The jacquard, a grotesque affront to good taste, something of an Umbro speciality and first sported by Manchester United, was supposedly brought in to help counteract counterfeiting.
But since when does something have to be badly-designed in order to thwart the counterfeiters?
‘Hideous?!
Well obviously I don't agree,’ says John Price at Adidas, manufacturer of last season's infamous Arsenal away strip, as well as those for Liverpool, Glasgow Rangers and, abroad, AC Milan, Bayern Munich and Olympic Marseilles.
‘Over the last three years our sales have quadrupled so we must be doing something right.
The interesting thing is that while the hard core fan is obviously going to buy a strip, we are selling more and more of them as fashion and leisure garments, and not just to kids.’
Tim Gardiner at Umbro, the market leaders (Man Utd, Spurs, Everton, Nottingham Forest, Aston Villa and many more), acknowledges the trend.
‘Our kits are marketed as much for leisurewear as they are for wearing on the terraces.
You may consider them hideous but they have evolved from trends within sportswear, particularly from the States and the licensed products used by the NFL.
They may stand outside of high fashion, but in context they are at the leading edge.’
Both companies are, however, this season exploring the nostalgia value of ‘heritage’.
‘We've reintroduced longer shorts, laced necklines and embroidered badges,’ says Tim Gardiner, while over at Adidas they are exploring their own heritage as much as that of the clubs they dress, focusing on variations of their trademark triple stripe ‘in more interesting colourways’.
Both companies deny, however, that they are responding to criticism.
‘Absolutely not,’ says Gardiner.
‘This is as much about ergonomics as it is about fashion.
Players want longer shorts for practical reasons as much as anything and the nostalgic look is simply another trend.
This does not mean the end of prints and weaves.’
This season, though, may bring temporary respite.
Purists are giving the thumbs up to the Everton away strip in salmon and navy which, according to Umbro, harks back to the 1880s for inspiration, while Man Utd's basic blue and Ipswich Town's nod towards the Thirties also appeal.
However, if you really hanker for a return to the glory days of kit design, look no further to the glory days of kit design, look no further than Arkwright, the Leeds-based company who reproduce classic old designs from the Fifties to the Seventies in 100 per cent cotton.
‘We sell most of our stuff to people in their twenties rather than to kids,’ says Arkwright's Kath Robbins.
‘Kids don't seem to mind the modern shirts but of course older people remember how they used to be.
On the M1 last season I saw a whole coachload of West Ham fans wearing our strip’.
Q+A
TEN MINUTES IN THE MIND OF george clinton
In Britain, there are Seventies funk compilations being released nearly every week.
We're being swamped by the funk, and disco is hip.
George, what's happening?
Heh, heh…
I knew it was only a matter of time before people caught on to what he was trying to do back then!
I'd watched Motown and the blues catch on in the Sixties and the roots of all that stuff was laid in the Forties, so the funk was always going to catch on and stay.
When I first played in England in 1968, it was with a guy called Arthur Brown And His Crazy World.
‘I bring you hell fire ,’ he was shouting, and then he'd set fire to his fucking head!
People take time to get into all that shit
What's the state of the funk today?
Well, I never expected sampling to be part of it all.
But if you look at a modern group like those Fishbone fellas, hell they're really into my Funkadelic stuff: ‘Free Your Mind And Your Ass Will Follow’!
The Chili Peppers and all that, they're funky.
Then there's all those groups I call ‘industrial dance punk’, bands like Nitzer Ebb.
Man, I never knew all them lot grooved that much, but they're funking alright
How do you feel when you hear people like De La Soul so blatantly sampling your music?
Well, technology and sampling makes it a lot easier if you really want to detonate!
I'm using all that shit myself now.
But you have to put your ass into it — you've got to end up playing it like another instrument like a guitar or a piano and getting down with it.
Right now, those hip hop beats have been taken to the max and they've got to be real careful it doesn't become like Muzak
What's your idea of a blinding good night out?
To shake my body
How important is a haircut to dropping the funk?
Heh, there things really have gone right back to 1965.
And way back, you know I used to be a hair stylist myself.
The hair's important.
I've always fixed my hair the way that people had it before they came to me to have it styled and fixed.
I always unfix my hair, you know, That's funky
Have you taken more drugs than eaten hot meals?
Well, the first three albums I ever did, I was taking a lot of LSD.
After that I had to stop and check myself.
But I was originally from the street gangs, a New Jersey street fighter, and my concept had always been ‘watch your own back’, and there was no such thing as ‘peace and love’.
It was only when I was 26 that I realised that was possible
Are you just a well-dressed dippie, then?
Man, that period in history, the late-Sixties, it saved mankind.
If it hadn't been for rock'n'roll, they'd have dropped a bomb on someone else.
They'd have nuked Vietnam.
I remember before then when it was really scary.
I ran home from school in the Fifties and I would be crying because they really sold us all the fear of a nuclear explosion.
The hippies saved us
Have you ever taken Ecstasy?
I'm scared of that because the government is selling too many drugs now.
I'm scared of Ecstasy.
Today there's no way I'd try all the drugs around.
It's all too commercial and too corrupt.
I think it's going to sneak into each set of young people in each country.
They're trying to create a social order problem: it's all controlled by the government and their secret organisations.
Under this current administration, they make big money out of pretending to fight drugs instead of actually fighting them.
They could stop it all.
I really think they're creating all that shit and who knows where it's leading us
People claim you're mad and paranoid .
Man, everything is bugged now and things are all pre-programmed.
All contingencies are covered.
I'm talkin' about control on a massive scale.
We've all got to be healthy enough to challenge the situation.
We've got to educate ourselves.
If we're so smart we wouldn't be in this mess in the first place.
We've got to talk in secret codes, like the P-Funk codes.
Make some noise, form a band, whatever.
The only thing you can do is funk it!
What's your masterplan for surviving in the Nineties?
We're doing the P-Funk movie.
It's being done by the Hudlin brothers who did House Party .
When the movie comes out I want people to know that we're still around, that the P-Funk lives and that we can act and can still drop it.
It's not just nostalgia.
I'll never be like Chuck Berry and Little Richard — that ‘oldie but goodie’ vibe
Which is better,Sesame Street or The Muppets ?
Heh, they're all little funkateers
You've worked in the last few years with Prince.
What do you think of him?
Well, Prince comes into a studio and he plays bass, keyboards, guitar…anything.
He's been a little funkateer since ‘85, but he used to come around to the Bootsy Collins Rubber Band shows back in ‘75 and ‘76.
He's been around and he's supertuned.
In the Seventies, you know he looked just like a Funkadelic thing: the hair, the shirts, the parts, the shades.
Yeah, he's always looked good
Who's your P-Funk hero?
Jimi Hendrix.
He wrote three of my favourite ever songs: ‘Crosstown Traffic’, ‘Voodoo Chile’ and ‘Purple Haze’
What's on your Walkman today?
Thomas Dolby.
I really like him for all those synthesisers.
Once you get into that new thing you've got to really go with it.
Also, Muddy Waters, Curtis Mayfield, Ravi Shankar, Lightning Hopkins and Iggy Pop.
Now Iggy's a real cool dude
What's your message for the world?
Smell my finger!
You know what I'm talking about!