

editorial
WORKING in Stamford has many attractions.
From the office window the Editorial day is frequently broken by the sight of Wittering's Harriers going about their exercises, the gorgeous Vulcan comes over and invariably waggles its wings…
On Wednesday September 11, catching sight of the BBMF Hurricane heading south was, at first, pleasant.
Then it became obvious that she was in trouble.
As she continued on her way, now clearly hoping upon hope to make Wittering, many in Stamford watched and urged her on.
As the Hurricane cleared the tree-line of Burghley House, she disappeared from view from Key Publishing's building.
Then the news came that Hurricane LF363 had crashed in flames while making an emergency landing at Wittering.
Praise be, the pilot was injured but alive.
BBMF had lost its first aircraft, but not its first pilot.
(Mindful of what we had seen from the office, we volunteered as witnesses to the Board of Enquiry.)
Not a good year…
On October 26 the Historic Aircraft Association is convening a conference at Middle Wallop to discuss the operation of historic aircraft, particularly in the light of the losses during 1991.
The title of the conference is Old, but Safe , which sums up how most people regard older aircraft.
The very fact that there are bodies in existence whereby such matters can be mulled over, experiences exchanged and ‘fixes’ established bodes more than well for the safe operation of such aircraft.
Whatever knowledge there is to be gleaned from this year's batch of accidents will not be of an academic nature, but will be used to teach and to train for the future.
FRONT COVER
Stricken Dakota teaching the saving of life at the International Fire and Safety Training School on the former Hal Far airfield.
A two-part special on Malta starts in this issue and is concluded in the February FlyPast .
NEWS
Hurricane LF363 crashes
BATTLE of Britain Memorial Flight lost one of its founder aircraft on September 11, when Hurricane LF363 made an emergency landing at Wittering, Cambs, after experiencing engine problems.
The Hurricane caught fire upon landing, ending up burnt out, with pilot S/L Allan Martin escaping from the aircraft with a broken ankle.
Rapid knock-down by the Wittering emergency services had the blaze out in seconds.
S/L Martin joined the RAF as a Halton apprentice in 1963.
After aircrew selection in 1966 he went on to train on Jet Provosts, Gnats and Hunters.
Completing operational tours on Lightnings, Phantoms and Tornado F.3s, he serves as a Weapons Instructor at 229 Operational Conversion Unit, Coningsby, flying BBMF's fighters as a ‘voluntary’ commitment.
‘LF’, in company with a Spitfire X1X and the Lancaster, was transiting from Coningsby to Jersey Airport, prior to the Flight's participation in the Channel Islands Battle of Britain airshows.
This is a sad blow for BBMF, blotting an otherwise immaculate safety record.
Up until the accident LF363 was the longest serving aircraft in the RAF, having been taken on charge on January 28, 1944, serving with 63, 309 (Polish) and 26 Squadrons.
In June 1957, along with the three Spitfire X1Xs, ‘LF’ was the founding aircraft in what was to become the BBMF, and had served with them ever since.
During her career she became something of a film star, taking part in such films as,Angels One Five ,Reach for the Sky ,The One That Got Away , and Battle of Britain .
Wearing various Squadron markings over the years with BBMF, ‘LF’ for the last couple of years was seen in the markings of James Nicolson's aircraft, ‘GN-A’of 249 Squadron.
A Board of Inquiry was convened immediately after the accident.
The wreckage of LF363 was moved to BBMF hangar at Coningsby by September 13.
Decisions relating to the possible rebuild or replacement of the aircraft have yet to be made.
Fellow Hurricane PZ865 was grounded for a short while at Coningsby, while the Flight made every effort to meet their appearance commitments.
On September 25, the Flight had the pleasure of entertaining former Battle of Britain pilot and Lebanese hostage Jackie Mann with a display by Spitfire V AB910 over Lyneham just after his interrupted flight from Syria in a one-legged VC-10.
One of several Hurricanes ‘discovered’ by Peter Dimond during his visit to the USSR in August 1991.
Remains of a P-40 are behind the Hurricane.
Above: The remains of LF363 at Wittering after the crash crews had succeeded in a very quick knock-down of the blaze.
Below: S/L Allan Martin at the controls of LF363 in September 1990.
Dave Southwood taxi-ing Hurricane G-ORGI.
She was test flown in silver dope and primer.
G-ORGI flies
‘LIKE A LITTLE bird, sweet and smooth’, was how a jubilant Dick Melton of Dick Melton Aviation described the first flight of Hurricane G-ORGI from a Hampshire airstrip on September 8.
Dick was describing the first flight of the fifth airworthy Hurricane in the world on the day that it tragically became the fourth .
Dick expressed his great sorrow at the news of LF363 and said that he had a very soft spot for it, having ‘cut his teeth’ on that Hurricane during his days with BBMF.
Dave Southwood took the aircraft for a fifteen minute first flight which was faultless other than running out of nose-down trim.
Dick said that Mod 318 would be introduced to give the elevator a tab.
Fitted with a four blade prop and flying in yellow primer and silver dope with its civil registration proudly on the side, G-ORGI flew again the following day for thirty minutes.
‘I'm very proud of my guys’, said Dick, ‘through them Dick Melton Aviation has put two vintage aircraft back into the air in the space of six months’.
Dick was referring to Spitfire IX G-IXCC which first flew on March 11.
G-Orgi takes to the air from the Dick Melton Aviation strip in Hampshire.
Soviet possibilities
PERESTROIKA and Glasnost have been the buzzwords coming out of the USSR (or whatever it is now going to be called) in recent years and the aviation world too, has been buzzing with exciting words like Fw 190, Hampden, Hurricane, and Yak-1.
Alleged finds, discoveries and rumours have been circulating wildly…but how much is fact and how much is  hearsay ?
Well, all the types listed above have come out of the Soviet Union recently.
Talk, though, has been of ‘dozens of Hurricanes’ with strong rumours of some examples still in their shipping crates!
Certainly, a vast number of Hurricanes were sent to the USSR from 1941 onwards — over 3,000.
Proof is now to hand that some exciting airframes are still there!
Peter Dimond, a Director of the Tangmere Military Aviation Museum has recently returned from a trip to the USSR and reports he has seen five Hurricanes and at least one P-40.
A large number of 1939–1945 Soviet types were seen, as were remains of German types, including substantial sections of a Bf 109G and a Ju 88.
At least one of the Hurricanes is virtually complete and looks a viable project to rebuild to flying condition.
Peter has established all the necessary contacts and made preliminary negotiations to obtain these aircraft.
Apart from the language and culture barrier in dealing with the USSR, this airframes are in military zones which are strictly no-go areas — even in post- Coup era!
Peter is happy to talk to any genuinely interested party relating to these finds on   
FlyHarvard!
ANDREW EDIE'S BEAUTIFULLY RESTORED AND MAINTAINED T-6G IS THE ONLY MACHINE OF ITS TYPE CURRENTLY OPERATING WITH A CERTIFICATE OF AIRWORTHINESS IN THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT CATEGORY (MORE DETAILS IN THE OCTOBER ISSUE).
THIS MEANS IT CAN BE USED TO CARRY OUT CONVERSION TRAINING, ‘TAILDRAGGER’ EXPERIENCE, ‘WARBIRD’FAMILIARISATION AS WELL AS BASIC INSTRUCTION.
OPERATING OUT OF DELIGHTFUL SHOREHAM AIRPORT,G-BKRA IS NOW SET TO EXPAND THE EXPERIENCE AND COMPETENCE OF MANY PILOTS AND WOULD-BE OPERATORS.
FLYPAST IS OFFERING THREE TRIAL FLIGHT LESSONS IN THE ANDREW EDIE T-6 TO THE LUCKY READERS WHO SUCCESSFULLY ENTER OUR COMPETITION.
THESE FLIGHTS WILL TAKE PLACE FROM SHOREHAM WITH A  FULLY QUALIFIED INSTRUCTOR.
ALL YOU HAVE TO DO IS CLIP THE COUPON BELOW AND MATCH THE ANSWERS TO THE QUESTIONS BELOW:
Maltese Motive
POWERHOUSE
The Editor travels to delightful Malta to see the work of CFS Aeroengines, providing power to piston operators far and wide.
Kevin Chevis photography.
Completed powerplants, on their stands and ready for return to customers.
An R-1830 is run-up on the Doane test-rig against a backdrop of typical Maltese architecture.
After monitoring the performance of the engine on the rig, it is prepared for despatch to the customer.
WELL BEYOND the wildest expectations of even the most optimistic airframe designer, certain piston-engines airlines seem set to fly into the next century.
Some are in the hands of collectors or co-operatives of enthusiasts who see them as relics to cherish and maintain as part of our heritage, but these are in the minority.
Those in the majority are certainly loved, certainly cherished and enjoyed by all who work on them, but they are first and foremost, money-earners for their owners.
In the world of aviation, aircraft are not kept on by airline or airfreight operators out of sentiment.
They either pay their way, or they go.
FlyPast readers have a decided soft-spot for what are universally regarded as ‘propliners’.
That such aircraft are still earning their keep and plying the airwaves of the world indicates that they still have a role to play, even in this high tech age of ‘glass’ cockpits, autoland, sub-Mach cruise and the like.
Oddly enough, it is largely the increasing sophistication of jet and turboprop airliners that has extended the lifespan of classic piston-engined transports into the 1990s and, doubtless into the next century.
Even the now firmly ‘geriatric’ Boeing 707 family requires a large infra-structure to keep it and its systems flying.
While the hull price of a 707 may be low, the number of people required to support it is large and the capital required to purchase support equipment is larger still.
Additionally, just like modern-day cars, the airlines of the last thirty years appears to lack true ‘staying power’.
Anti-corrosion treatments and a never-ceasing number of airframe, engine and systems modifications are required to keep the necessary standard.
All this takes time and money.
Jet-age airliners are also less robust in the field.
While you can drop a DC8 onto a dirt strip, continued operation in this manner is not recommended.
Once on the strip, it is doubtful that the sort of support equipment it is used to will be found there.
What keeps the propliners of the world still going as viable business propositions is an item known as the bottom line .
Take purchase cost, expected operating costs, maintenance costs, operating capability and efficiency.
Add them all up.
The jets will have a bottom line that is invariably above that of the propliners.
That means the jets have priced themselves out of many markets the world over.
As the hull value of 707s, 727s, DC-8s and their ilk falls, their support costs — engines, systems, airport facilities etc, is not decreasing at the same rate.
Even if a 727 could slip into a Caribbean community with all the basic needs of life — video games, CD players, Benetton shirts and Playboy — its operating costs would mean the folk it was delivering to could not afford the service.
A motor manufacturer needs to retain an airline for the short notice movement of components, bulky and/or high value.
The capacity will be needed, but the company cannot say when, or how often, but it is prepared to pay the operator to keep an airliner ‘on standby’ ready for the eventuality.
The jet has a high bottom line, the operator has to find as much work for it as he can to spread its costs and make a profitable.
The motor manufacturer is not going to be best pleased to discover that the aircraft he though he had retained has hopped to Ibiza with a load of spotty would-be tourists from Kettering.
He is equally not going to be very happy with hearing that he certainly can have a jetliner on exclusive standby, but will have to pay heavily for the privilege.
Speed is not the car builder's over-riding need.
As long as his parts will reach Plant X before it runs out of them he is happy.
Those so-vital components are totally unconcerned if they are travelling in the latest in airline development or in a 1940s technology propliner.
Unlike a jet operator, the owner of a piston-powered airliner can offer that motor manufacturer (and other operations like him) a relatively low fee to have an aircraft packed-out just awaiting the customer's whim and still make a profit.
He has the advantage of low purchase price, low-ish operating costs and even in this day and age — good spares back-up.
And so it is that propliners operators have an essential specialist role to play in modern commercial aviation.
Any work that involves ‘waiting’ or ‘cab rank’service is all the better for the mathematics of operating a piston-powered airliner.
Flying low value goods to isolated communities — without the aid of government subsidy — is still the domain of the propliner because it is cheap to run.
The commercial propliner world is dominated by the Douglas family, from the ubiquitous Dc-3 and all its variants to the DC-4, DC-6 and DC-7.
Geographically, operators can be found spread all over the globe, but the so-called Third World, especially the Caribbean and Alaska are the prime areas of the activity.
Europe has its fair share of such operators but the king of them is the Coventry based Atlantic Group who have established themselves under the banner International Task Force .
Best known element of this operation is Air Atlantique, operators of a fleet of nine DC-3s and two DC-6s on specialist cargo and charter work anywhere they are required.
Air Atlantique also operate the pollution reconnaissance and slick dispersant fleets for the Department of Transport's Marine Pollution Control Unit (MPCU).
Their expertise in the operation of such aircraft and their conversion to these highly-specialist roles is also marketed worldwide by the Atlantic Group.
Backing Air Atlantique and the MPCU fleet is Atlantic Aeroengineering.
Their hangar complex at Coventry Airport is capable of major airframe overhaul, modification and repair.
Atlantic Aeroengineering naturally specialises in the types in the remainder of the Group, the DC-3, DC-6, Britten-Norman BN-2A Islander and the Cessna 402/404 series, but work can be undertaken on a wide variety of types.
Whereas most operators of propliners can undertake maintenance work on every aspect of the airframes of their fleet, not that many can boast the same capacity for their engines.
To meet the needs of piston-engine operators worldwide, a small number of specialist concerns thrive looking after the precious radial engine that go a long way towards making the DC-3 and DC-6 such economic miracle workers.
The Atlantic Group owns and operates just such a specialist engine overhaul business, Not to be found at Coventry, wholly-owned subsidiary CFS Aeroengines is located at Hal Safi, alongside Malta's Luqa International Airport.
CFS is Europe's leading  specialist in large radial piston engines, their accessories and propellers.
Convair CV-240 N327UW, configured for air-sampling, seen outside the NCA International (see page 24) in June.
The aircraft is an example of aircraft that ‘call-in’ for engine attention care of CFS
In August 1989, Lindholm Aircraft Ltd — an associated company of the Atlantic Group — purchased Miaco 86 Aviation Ltd.
The new company was named CFS Aeroengines from the surnames of its directors,.
As a major ‘consumer’ of overhauled piston engines for its own fleet, it made sense for the Atlantic Group to extend their activities to engine overhaul.
However, as with Atlantic Aeroengineering, from the start of acquiring the new operation, Managing Director Martin Slater was determined to attract further engine business to CFS: ‘This is not just a private engine-bay, we have acquired a company with considerable experience in the overhaul of piston engines and our own expertise in this area is well-known.
It is our aim to offer this combination of skills to the wider market and give the best engine overhauls and support available’.
Martin is Engineering Manager for Atlantic Aeroengineering and MD to CFS.
This means that at least once a month, he can be found on Air Malta's service to the Island.
Martin can then liaise CFS General Manager Tony Gauci on the overhaul programme in general and as a customer.
CFS work for the parent company is costed as though it were an outside contractor and has to be competitive.
Assembly well underway, showing here the central core and the double row of cylinder attachment holes.
Magnaflux inspection can reveal anomalies in a component even if they are under the surface.
Tony Gauci (left), CFS Aeroengines General Manager, with Managing Director Martin Slater.
Miaco were a well-known operator of DC-3s and other types out of the Island and had been overhauling radial piston engines as another facet of their business for over twenty years.
In 1983 the Company obtained UK Civil Aviation Authority Approval such work.
Since acquisition by the Atlantic Group, the Miaco operation has been streamlined and refined and up to the FlyPast visit had overhauled 25 Pratt & Whitney engines.
This through-put of work is impressive and the US dominance on this type of work is now very much under threat from CFS Aeroengines.
From school, Martin spent ten years learning his trade with Yorkshire Light Aircraft at Leeds/Bradford Airport before joining Bristow Helicopters and travelling variously to Nigeria and then Abu Dhabi and Doha.
He moved to an independent helicopter operator in Dubai and had cause to visit Egypt to inspect some Bell 212s for sale.
While there he begged  a look around a semi-derelict Dakota and realised he was hooked on propliners!
The offer of the post at Atlantic Aeroengineering was snapped-up and the extension of his responsibilities to CFS was logical.
General Manager Tony Gauci knows his engines and his Company very well.
Tony was with Miaco from its inception in 1967 when it was located at Hal Far airfield (more of this in the January issue), moving through to the Hal Safi site in February 1979.
Today, Tony has a staff of seventeen full time workers, each with their own area of specialisation.
The premises that CFS occupy are part of the former RAF airfield and the large engine bay used to resound to work on Griffons from Shackletons and Centauruses from Beverlies.
‘Driving’ a most unusual conveyance during FlyPast's visit to CFS was Larry Scerri, who looks after quality control.
Completed engines are test-driven on a rig mounted on a Doane chain-driven bus which was acquired from California when Miaco was set up.
This faithful rig has served to ground-run engines ever since.
A three-bladed test prop is fitted to each engine for its assessment runs.
Larry was running an R-1830 from the cab of the Doane and explained that testing would take around four to five hours.
All gauges are carefully monitored with regular readings taken to establish the performance of the engine at different settings and temperatures.
About half way through a sump and filter check would be taken and then the ground running would continue.
Balancing propeller blades is a careful and skilled job
Assembly of engines takes place on a central jig, the radial being built-up, ‘Christmas tree’ fashion
Beyond this, the engine is carefully crated to its customer.
Few clients actually fly-in for work these days, although CFS does play host to the occasional itinerant propliner staging through the Mediterranean.
Tony Gauci talked through the progression of an engine from receipt through to strapping on to Larry's former bus.
In the tear-down bay the engine is carefully dismantled and an initial ‘eyeball’ inspection is made to see if any snags become apparent.
Engine components are stacked to portable shelving and essentially follow the stripped-down radial on a parallel around the CFS facility.
An R-1830 Twin Wasp for ‘nostalgia’ operator Classic Air of Switzerland had just completed tear-down during our visit.
Next stage is a thorough clean-again associated with a careful visual inspection.
Parts are placed into decarbonising tanks and finished off with a compressed air agitated ‘rinse’.
Each cylinder head (‘pot’) is individually cleaned and is readied for its own route through the system.
This sequence will take an engine around a week and there follows the formal inspection stage where all of the parts are assessed and courses of action initiated.
All steel parts are checked through on a magnaflux machine.
By establishing a magnetic field around a component, fluid that will react to the field is poured over.
Flaws, even those under the surface will show up as anomalies under an ultra violet lamp.
Magnetic force lines will ‘flow’ over the surface unless there is a flaw, in which case they will go around it.
Cylinder heads are being sand blasted while the steel inspection work is continuing.
The ‘pot’ shop held examples  from all three types most commonly handled by CFS, from R-1830–92s for Air Survey of India's Dakotas; R-2000 for Chad and R-2800s for Air Atlantique's and Instone's Dc-6s.
Piston rings are changed every time.
Larry Scerri at the controls of the Doane engine test rig, from an R-1830 running.
Working on the cylinder heads —‘pots’.
Magnetos are overhauled in their own segment of the CFS facility.
A huge, thermionic valve-based, test-rig to access their performance has now been by-passed by a comparatively tiny piece of modern-day electronics.
As with the designers of the Douglas pistonliner family, those that designed the test-rigs to go in support of the Pratt & Whitneys could never have envisaged their creations having to last as long as they have.
Along with the Magnetos themselves, the wiring ‘harnesses’ are rebuilt and tested thoroughly.
CFS has an Accessory Bay dealing in a similar manner with starter motors, hydraulics and governors.
All of this allows the Company to offer a comprehensive systems overhaul capacity.
Another major capacity that CFS have on site at Hal Safi is the overhaul of propellers.
This work is close to the level of an artform.
The Propeller Shop is a spacious and well-equipped area where the careful work of prop balancing and rebuilding takes place.
Propellers are delicate creations and a skilled technician can bring new life to an engine/propeller combination with care and attention to the blades.
Blades are divided chordwise into ‘Stations’ set six inches apart with the mid-line being termed ‘Station 42’.
CFS maintain a wide stock of templates so that the profile of the blade can be ‘retuned’ and its performance brought back to optimum.
After tear-down, cleaning and inspection of each of the major engine sub-assemblies, replacement or refurbishment work is carried-out as need be.
CFS carry an extensive store of spares and is able to supply most needs from stock.
Engines are their trays of components are then brought together into the assembly area and a reversion of the tear-down process commences.
This work takes place in the large engine test-cell established by the RAF.
Once complete, the engines can be lifted and placed onto the venerable Doane test-bed and rolled outside ready for Larry to begin his monitoring work again.
Unusual view of the Doane test rig, showing the special three-bladed test propeller.
Looking through the carefully-kept records, Company Accountant Mike Magri showed that the Company has handled 620 engine overhauls since such work began, initially at Hal Far with Miaco and now with CFS at Hal Safi/ That is an impressive average of thirty per year, effectively two per month.
Tony Gauci explained that the overhaul of engines of this age was a very specialised task.
Too many operators felt that the technology level was low enough to ‘have a go’ themselves, and had paid dearly for it.
While the engines are robust and renowned for their reliability, it wan an impossibility to guarantee how long individual engines could run before having to return to CFS for another overhaul.
Greatest limiting factor on the redials CFS handle is not spares and their availability, but how the engines (and the aircraft they propel) are handles.
‘Pilots are the most important factor in the treatment of an engine’, commented Tony, who has seen several powerplants come back to the care of his team long before they need have done, had they been handled correctly.
While it might appear that the demand for redial engine overhaul is a declining trade, the need for reliable, thorough and comprehensive refurbishment of engines is all the more important.
To enable propliners to maintain their unique niche in the world of air transport, permitting that bottom line to function, the ability to get total support for their powerplants is paramount.
The combination of CFS Aeroengines in Malta and Atlantic Aeroengineering at Coventry, provides the Atlantic Group and its customers with an all-embracing package of capability.
The long-established skills on Malta have found customers in Africa, Asia and in Europe.
The capacity of CFS Aeroengines is such that they can now offer their services on a worldwide basis and are set to take a larger slice of the redial engine business by offering a ‘one stop’ service from mags, to props, to accessories, to whole powerplants.
The craftsmen at Hal Safi are ready and capable of supporting today's propliners wherever they may be in the next century.
[With many thanks to all of the staff of CFS Aeroengines for their patience and hospitality during FlyPast's visit to the Island.
Their co-operation and warmth enables the entire Maltese project to take shape and they are fine ambassadors to their enchanting country.]
LAST ORDERS!
A Maltese landmark has closed its doors to customers and the future looks bleak.
Touching down on Luqa's main runway, heading east and sitting on the port side of the aircraft, the aviation-oriented visitor to the Island is drawn to a distinctive sight within the village of Kirkop, just of the Airport's southern perimeter road, three fins!
They can only mean the magic word — Connie!
This is Lockheed L.1049G-82-81 Super Constellation serial 4618, now a dainty 36 years old, but looking more than a little worse for wear.
She's been in Malta since February 1968 when she was impounded by the Airport Authorities whilst wearing the spurious registration 5T-TAF and carrying a cargo of aircraft tyres with the suspected destination of Biafra.
After a lengthy, but apparently fruitless, search for an owner, the Connie was auctioned in November 1972 and towed to its current position in the following January.
From flagship with the Portuguese airline TAP (where she was CS-TLC), to ‘twilight cargo carrier, to bar.
It must have been a wonderful place to have a beer in…
As the airframe (and business) have deteriorated, so the owners of this distinctive hostelry have had to call ‘Last Orders’.
There are some plans for the Connie, but the reality of the situation is that, at best, only the cockpit area could be saved.
But now those magnificent fins and rudders are the victim of the wind, corrosion is rife, windows crazed or broken, the fairy lights of the air conditioning work no more.
The grass is overgrown, snails call the entrance gates home and the only lizards and aviation enthusiasts tread the path to its door — the latter to pay homage, the former to seek shade.
MUSEUMS OF THE WORLD
MALTA
MALTA's steadfast defence during 1940 to 143 played a major part in the course of the war.
The efforts to defend the island are well-known (see also page 20) and the honour of the George Cross, bestowed on April 15, 1942 recorded the esteem with which Britain regarded the courage and sacrifice of her people.
It is not surprising then, to discover that the National War Museum is largely devoted to World War Two and price of place goes to the Island's GC.
Sea Gladiator Faith in her restored form inside the somewhat cramped confines of the Museum.
Located in the historic Fort St Elmo, which has protected both of the entrances to Valetta's stunning harbour for centuries, the Museum bulges at the seams with exhibits.
Opened in May 1975, the Museum is rightly a popular attraction on the Island.
Dominating the collection from an aeronautical point of view is the restored fuselage of Gloster Sea Gladiator N5520, the survivor of those used by the Hal Far Fighter Flight in the early defence of the Island from April 1940.
The superb book Malta: The Hurricane Years 1940–1941 by Shores/Cull/Malizia (Grub Street, 1987), proves that at least six Sea Gladiators were assembled from those crated at Kalafrana for  use by the Flight.
Just which aircraft became the famous Faith, Hope and Charity — if ever they were marked as such — is unclear.
N5520, which has irrecoverably been christened Faith , was one of four Gladiators transferred from the Flight to 261 Squadron's care at Luqa in September 1940.
Four machines were transferred to 806 Squadron at the end of January 1941, one later being burnt out and two damaged during a raid on Hal Far in early February.
The survivor (we assume N5520) continued to fly on meteorological flights until perhaps as late as January 1942.
The surviving airframe was ‘found’ lying in skeletal form in a quarry at Kalafrana and presented to the people of Malta by AVM Keith Park on September, 1943.
It went on display at the Palace Armoury in Valetta, being refurbished again in 1961.
A team from RAF Luqa restored her more fully in 1973 and Faith was presented to the National War Museum.
During this restoration, the number N5520 was found engraved on the rudder post.
Second largest aviation relic within the Museum is the forward fuselage and Merlin engine of Spitfire Vc BR108.
This machine was one of a flight of eight 603 Squadron machines scrambled from Ta'Qali on July 8, 1942.
Piloted by F/L Vincent Sanders, BR108 was forced-down by a Bf 109 of 1/JG77.
View of the remains of Spitfire Vc BR108 with the wing from a Bf 109F on the wall behind.
The wreck was salvaged by an RAF team in 1973.
A Jumo 211 from a Ju 87 Stuka , recovered from the seabed off Zondor Point in 1983 is also displayed, as is the distinctive spar from another continually attracting new exhibits and ‘87.
Nearby is the wing of a Bf 109F-1 salvaged from the Malta Channel.
There is a fascinating array of photographs and smaller artifacts, charting Malta's war from all points, civilian, naval and airborne, Allied and Axis.
Run under a voluntary basis by the National War Museum Association, the Museum is hopes to expand one day.
Now that the Island is well into the fiftieth anniversary of its defence from the Axis powers, surely this is a fitting moment for further funds to be channelled into this splendid method of showing Maltese too young to have experienced the era, and the world at large, of the time when Malta stood alone.
National War Museum of Malta, Telephone (from the UK).
Opening times may vary with the season with extensions during the 50th anniversary celebrations.
More details from the Malta National Tourist Office in London on   
Luqa airfield in September 1940, shortly after 261 Squadron took over the Hal Far Fighter Flight.
This shot is perhaps unique in showing three of the Glads together.
It follows that N5520 Faith is illustrated here.
Answering the Call?
In the struggle to supply besieged Malta with Spitfires for her air defence, many Allied resources were tapped.
Chuck Sloat examines the role of the Air Transport Auxiliary, and in particular James McGuinness, when they met the call in 1942 to move Spitfires to the aid of the Island.
A shot taken in the early 1930s — location unknown.
F/O James McGuinness is at the right on the rear row.
(via Tom McGuinness.
AIR TRANSPORT AUXILIARY (ATA) Commander James McGuinness was notified of a large Priority One-Plus Spitfire movement that was imminent in the area of the River Clyde on April 5, 1942.
As Officer Commanding, 4 Ferry Pool at Prestwick, McGuinness was instructed to act as Liaison Officer on behalf of the ATA which was to be directly involved in the critical transfer.
On the evening of April 6, the first six Spitfires, all equipped with tropical filters and ferry drop tanks, arrived at Prestwick for delivery to Abbotsinch by 4 Ferry Pool pilots.
Early the following morning, Commander McGuinness flew to Abbotsinch in a Fairchild Argus to inspect the airfield.
While circling the field, he noted the grass facility was inundated with water and realized that landing Spitfires under the existing conditions would be a hazardous undertaking.
Shortly after landing at the site, McGuinness met W/C Parsons, Embarkation Officer at Glasgow; S/L Orr, Maintenance Command; F/L Morgan, 50 Squadron, S/L Wall from the Air Ministry and S/L Hughes who was in charge of the RAF ground crews tasked with maintaining the Spitfires during their transfer.
The airfield was then inspected on foot by the six officers following which all were in agreement that conditions were far from satisfactory and McGuinness advised they should be prepared for accidents and possible aircraft losses.
To compound the problem, drizzle and low cloud was firmly entrenched in the area.
The aircraft were being flown to Prestwick from Brize Norton, Colerne and Little Rissington.
Maintaining a close liaison with officials at the three locations, McGuinness was kept aware of the exact position of each Spitfire involved in the transfer.
As time was a most critical factor, No 4 Ferry Pool pilots at Prestwick, who had been advised of the conditions to be expected, were informed of the decision to ferry the first aircraft to Abbotsinch.
The pilots were instructed simply to switch off their engines upon landing as  taxi-ing the aircraft would be impossible.
Flaps were to be left in the down position to facilitate the removal of mud and other debris prior to their retraction.
First Spitfire to arrive was flown-in by F/O Kohn followed closely by F/O Pickard and F/C Chase.
All were completely enveloped in a sea of mud and water upon touchdown, but fortunately remained upright.
A ground party was immediately organised to manhandle the aircraft onto sheets of corrugated iron positioned on the tarmac.
In the meantime, F/O Kohn had been flown back by ATA ‘taxi’ for another aircraft.
Following completion of his second successful landing of the day at 15:00 hours, officials made the decision not to risk any further deliveries on April 7.
Although an earlier check with the weather office predicted a favourable wind for that evening, it did not materialize and conditions were to remain the same the following day when only one Spitfire was delivered by F/C Heering who had flown direct from Brize Norton.
It was on this date personnel involved learned that an unidentified aircraft carrier would be anchoring at Greenock where the Spitfires would be loaded on board.
It was also rumoured that the carrier would be delivering the aircraft into the Mediterranean Sea.
Original plan was to load the aircraft on barges in the River Cart at Abbotsinch then float them to Greenock via the Clyde for transfer to the carrier anchored in midstream.
Upon closer inspection of the tidal Cart, however, it was realized only two hours would be available during high tide for the operation.
This method therefore had to be cancelled as the time the carrier could remain at Greenock was severely limited.
Authorities decided the only possible means of completing the transfer on time would be from a proper docking facility and requested the carrier be moved to nearby Glasgow for loading.
Permission was granted and the vessel sailed for the King George V Docks in that city.
During this period, one Spitfire was manhandled through the mud to the far end of the Abbotsinch field where it was loaded onto road transport for conveyance to Glasgow.
A trial run was carried out but it was soon realized the volume of traffic in the town of Paisley would prevent any large movement of aircraft in time for the carrier to meet its scheduled departure.
Another possibility presented itself when it was noted the town of Renfrew had a small airfield that would site the aircraft much closer to the docks.
Enquiries were made into the feasibility of ferrying Spitfires into this tiny field but the same reply was received from all contacted who were unanimous in replying that the airfield was too small to accommodate a Spitfire landing.
Although the forecast wind did not materialise to assist in drying out the field, a further six aircraft were ferried to Abbotsinch on April 9.
As each landing became more hazardous, authorities eventually had no alternative but to declare the field completely unserviceable.
Meanwhile, Spitfires were arriving at Prestwick and a survey was conducted to determine if the aircraft could be transferred by road to Glasgow.
This alternative was also deemed impossible in the limited time available.
The situation was now desperate.
With aircraft on the unserviceable field at Abbotsinch and others thirty to forty miles away at Prestwick, and the carrier en route to Glasgow with a scheduled departure in three days, it was decided the only possible solution remaining was Renfrew — if the ATA could come through and land Spitfires on the tiny field.
Following a detailed inspection of the strip, the decision was reached to make the attempt and pilots were selected from 4 Ferry Pool.
Tension was high on the morning of April 10 when the first Spitfires arrived over the field.
Following two or three circuits to assess conditions, the first pilot to land throttled back, lowered the undercarriage and performed a perfect landing.
On that day, 23 Spitfires were safely delivered to the field.
On April 11, eight more aircraft were received and, on the 12th, a further ten without incident.
The ATA had proven the tiny field could accommodate Spitfires and more were to follow.
In the meantime, maintenance equipment and personnel were relocated to Renfrew from Abbotsinch and began preparing the Spitfires for transfer to the docks.
Concentration now had to be aimed at the means of transporting the aircraft from the field to the carrier in Glasgow.
With the assistance of Lockheed Aircraft representative Tex Nixon, who was present at Renfrew, special cradles were constructed and fitted on six available Queen Marys.
Spitfire Vb BR226 on one of the six special ‘Queen Mary’ cradles constructed to take the aircraft to Glasgow Docks.
Each Spitfire had to be positioned on the flatbed in such a manner as to clear roadblock obstructions as well as overhead tramway cables encountered along the route.
Wing tips on each aircraft were removed and deposited in the cockpit for passage through the narrow streets.
Upon arrival at the docks, the Spitfires were immediately hoisted on to the carrier deck.
Once the initial problems encountered during the first run of six aircraft had been overcome, it was assured the time limit could be met.
Despite the desire to maintain secrecy, the entire operation was under the scrutiny of local citizens in the area, many of whom stayed for hours to witness the spectacle.
Maximum effort was expended by RAF ground crews to assure the carrier would sail on schedule.
Minor aircraft snags encountered were of no concern as these would be rectified by the previously-noted maintenance crews under the command of S/L Hughes who were scheduled to sail with the vessel.
Spitfire about to alight on Wasp's deck.
Fifty-four Spitfires were delivered to Renfrew with a total of 47 being loaded on board the vessel.
The remaining seven aircraft were flown back to Prestwick for re-allotment.
During the entire movement, none of the aircraft were damaged and the only incident recorded was of one Spitfire performing a forced landing in a farmer's field while en route to Prestwick.
Undamaged, the aircraft was later flown from the field direct to Renfrew by F/O Pickard.
Special mention must be made of the same F/O N G Pickard and F/C E E Heering who ferried seventeen and thirteen aircraft respectively to Renfrew during this transfer.
F/O Pickard, a US citizen who coincidentally had worked on the carrier in the US before joining the ATA, recognized the vessel at Glasgow and was the first of those involved to identify it as VF-7 (USS Wasp).
All concerned were aware of its identity when the Wasp sailed for the Mediterranean on schedule on April 12 with its vital load of Spitfires.
It was now also common knowledge that the aircraft, once the Wasp was within range, were to be flown from its decks to the besieged island of Malta.
(This was Operation Calendar — KE)
Discussion of the movement had hardly died down when Commander McGuinness was advised by ATA Headquarters on April 25 that another Priority One-Plus Spitfire movement would commence the following day.
Immediately proceeding to Renfrew, McGuinness once again met the same officers involved in the previous transfer.
All personnel were ready when twelve Spitfires arrived at Prestwick on April 26 with seven of the aircraft ferried on to Renfrew the same day.
The balance were kept overnight at Prestwick as RAF ground handling crews had yet to arrive at Renfrew.
The following day, the ground crews arrived and received thirteen Spitfires with another ten on April 28.
Owing to the limited dispersal area and the possibility of enemy air attack in the  Clyde area, the decision was made not to risk ferrying any more to Renfrew until the 23 Spitfires already on the ground had been transferred to the docks in Glasgow.
The carrier arrived at the King Edward Docks and excitement ran high when it was learned to be the Wasp once again.
During several visits to the vessel, information was gleaned from USN crew members that all Spitfires on board the first sailing had taken-off successfully for Malta which was, at the time, being systematically bombed by a ruthless enemy.
(One aircraft actually failed to arrive on the Island — KE)
Favourable wind direction was enjoyed at Renfrew up to this point, however the weather appeared to be on the change on April 29.
As the Renfrew field only had one runway the forecast predicted a change in wind direction which would make landing difficult, if not impossible.
Commander McGuinness reported to S/L Wall that, in his opinion, it would be advisable to immediately fly all aircraft assembled at Prestwick to Renfrew.
Wall agreed even though the aircraft would be parked in a much closer dispersal and be running the risk of enemy air attack.
That day, April 29, twenty Spitfires were safely delivered to Renfrew with one each on April 30 and May 1 for a total of 52 aircraft which constituted 100% of the complement assigned for the second delivery to Malta.
Road transfer of these Spitfires to the Glasgow docks went flawlessly as a result of previously-gained experience.
An example of the groundcrew's efforts is well illustrated by their handling of the last aircraft that arrived on May 1.
Immediately after the engine stopped and with the ferry pilot still in the aircraft, all wireless, electrical and weapons systems plus engine and airframe were inspected by the ground crews.
Fuel tanks were drained, leaving only enough for the pilot to taxi to the Queen Mary loading point where any surplus fuel would then be completely drained.
Crowded flight deck of the USS Wasp en route to Malta April 19, 1942.
In the foreground are fixed-wing F4F-3 Wildcats with folding-wing F4F-4s parked to the left.
A Spitfire V awaits the launch signal.
To facilitate the mass launch, most of Wasp's Wildcats had to be flown off to loiter overhead.
For the road transfer to the docks, wing tips were removed and deposited in the cockpit to be re-installed after the Wasp sailed.
Once loaded on the Queen Mary, the aircraft was transported the 2–3 miles to the docks then hoisted to the carrier flight deck.
All of the preceding was accomplished within one hour of the Spitfire's arrival at Renfrew!
Upon receipt of this aircraft, the Wasp immediately sailed for the Mediterranean.
) This being Operation Bowery , conducted with HMS Eagle 60 of 64 aircraft successfully landing on Malta —KE)
No. 4 Ferry Pool pilots involved in the transfer of the Spitfires to Abbotsinch and/or Renfrew were recorded by Commander McGuinness as follows:
Prior to sailing on its second delivery, Commander McGuinness toured the carrier and noted Wasp 's entire complement of F4F Wildcats parked on the open flight deck to accommodate the majority of the Spitfires in the enclosed hangar decks below.
Repeating the first delivery, it would be necessary to launch the Wildcats before raising the Spitfires to the flight deck as every inch of the Wasp 's 740 foot ‘runway’ was required by the fuel-laden Spitfires for their take-off run.
The Wildcats would then be recovered following the final departure.
The preceding was edited from a personal account written in 1945 by the late ATA Commander James McGuinness of his involvement in the two transfers of Spitfires into the Mediterranean.
Regrettably, first and middle names or initials of most of the participants involved in the two transfers were not recorded by Commander McGuinness.
In addition, numerous other ATA pilots, whose names he was unable to record, participated in the two transfers by flying the ATA ‘taxi’ aircraft used to transport the ferry pilots back to other aircraft awaiting delivery to Renfrew at the three pick-up points.
Commander McGuinness' closing statements written in 1945 are quoted as follows:
The same keenness prevailed on board.
Our American Allies were all out to see this job through and were full of stories of the RAF on the first trip which was so successful and were even more sure that the second run would be better.
They also had previous experience, so we hoped all would go well for the second run.
The carrier sailed again to schedule on May 1, 1942 — a really magnificent performance.
It was little wonder that our Prime Minister, Mr Churchill, made the remark in the House of Commons ‘Who said a wasp cannot sting twice?’
This was the Wasp’ that stung twice when 99 Spitfires were delivered to Malta in so short a period.
This was the turn of the tide for Malta — a turn of the tide in the Mediterranean — a turn of the tide for North Africa — and we all know what followed.’
COMMANDER James McGuinness was born the fourth of seven children at Motherwell, Scotland on October 26, 1896.
In 1915, he enlisted in the RFC and served for the remainder of World War One firstly as a gunner then as a pilot.
Remaining in the RAF after the war, McGuinness served for another seventeen years until taking his discharge in 1935.
For a period of his twenty year tenure, he served with 55 Squadron at Baghdad in the mid-1920s and, as related by his son Thomas, earned the distinction of being the first non-commissioned airman in the RAF to receive a commission during peace-time.
Immediately upon his retirement, McGuinness earned his civil pilots licence (6845) on July 12, 1935 and, on July 24, 1936, was granted an instructors licence.
He served as a flying instructor with the North Staffordshire Flying Club at Meir until joining the Air Transport Auxiliary.
On April 16, 1947, James McGuinness was appointed Additional Officer of the Civil Division of the Order of the British Empire by His Majesty King George VI.
Commander McGuinness, OBE and his wife Helen and three sons, emigrated to Canada in 1955 where he died on April 13, 1962 in his 66th year.
Photos and all related documents, unless otherwise noted, were supplied to the Author by Commander McGuinness' second son Thomas of Fonthill, Ontario.
His only daughter lives in Scotland.
Mrs James McGuinness died on June 23, 1986.
A TOTAL of one hundred Mark V Spitfires serialled in the BP/BR ranges that were flown to Abbotsinch and Renfrew follow, as per Spitfire — The History Morgan & Shacklady, Key Publishing 1987 and, as the dates coincide, are assumed to include those transported to the Mediterranean by the USS Wasp .
Although hundreds of identified Spitfires are recorded in the book as having been transported to Malta either in their holds or openly on the decks of many named cargo ships, it was interesting to note that the Author could find no mention in Spitfire — The History of the aircraft carrier USS Wasp nor of the serialled Spitfires it transported to the Mediterranean in 1942 for the defence of Malta.
(See also the September 1991 issue of our sister journal Air International for Dr Alfred Price's feature Spitfires to Malta ).
USS WASP headed for Norfolk, Virginia, upon completion of its second Spitfire delivery to the Mediterranean.
Following replenishment, she sailed through the Panama Canal on June 10. 1942 for San Diego and, on July 1, left the California naval base escorting a convoy bound for New Zealand and Guadalcanal.
Wasp conducted her first combat mission on August 17 when sixteen F4Fs and fifteen SBD Dauntless dive-bombers were launched.
On this and the following day, over 300 sorties were flown as part of preparations for the US Marine invasion of Tulagi and two smaller nearby islands.
The carriers were withdrawn from the invasion fleet following recovery of their aircraft on August 8.
The Wasp sailed for Noumea on August 23 to refuel and embark USMC fighters for transfer to Guadalcanal for which she sailed on September 13.
Shortly after flying-off her load of fighters two days later on September 15, the USS Wasp was hit by three torpedoes launched by the Japanese submarine 119.
Two of the torpedoes struck below the waterline on the port side near the aviation fuel tanks.
The third struck above the waterline setting fire to the aircraft fuelling system ruptured by the first two hits.
With the vessel's fire mains also fractured, the crew was unable to contain the ensuing fires.
As a result, violent explosions rocked the vessel and led to its abandonment within an hour of the attack.
Destroyer USS Lansdowne was ordered two and a half hours later to fire four torpedoes into the side of the stricken carrier.
Less than 4½ months following the two successful Spitfire transfers, VF-7 (USS Wasp ) and a number of her crew were lying on the bottom of the Pacific.
Delivery of RAF Spitfires to the Mediterranean by the Wasp has been cited as the first large-scale act of co-operation between British and American forces during World War Two.
KINGS OF THE CARIBOU
Among their many roles, NCA International have developed an enviable reputation putting new life into the capable and versatile DHC Caribou
Three views of NCA International's ‘stock’ and spares recovery airframes.
Flown for the first time in 1958, the DHC-4 Caribou has seen extensive military service.
The rugged and capacious airframe offers plenty of scope for civilian operators.
WHILE the Dakota hogs all the limelight, there are aircraft to be found that approach (and in many ways, surpass) the do-it-all image of that ubiquitous aircraft.
One of these types is the de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou and over the years it has attracted a long list of very satisfied customers.
After having established themselves powerfully in the ‘bush’ market, DHC decided that a larger machine would also find a market.
They envisaged the aircraft as having at least the capacity of the Dakota, but the robustness and short take-off and landing (STOL) capabilities of their DHC-2 Beaver and DHC-3 Otter.
The prototype Caribou first flower on July 30, 1958 and attracted a lot of interest, including the US Army who ordered the type initially as the CV-2 and later the C-7, the type seeing service in Vietnam.
Military ordered came from as far afield as India, Malaysia, Africa and, of course, Canada.
The type found some favour with civilian operators, mostly in the oil support business.
Production amounted to 307 and was completed in 1973.
On April 9, 1964 the rethought, turboprop, DHC-5 Buffalo first flew, but this failed to be built in the numbers of its predecessor.
Based at Hal Safi, across the road from Luqa International Airport, Malta, is NCA International Ltd, a company that have expressed their faith in the Caribou and have developed a name as a specialist in the type.
Military use of the robust Caribou is now waning, but NCA see the aircraft as an ideal machine for a wide range of civilian tasks, from ‘bush’ flying, to construction work support, parachuting, fire-fighting, anti-pollution and other forms of maritime work.
NCA offer a total support package to the DHC-4, having established a large spares backing and a good stock of airframes.
Sources for the aircraft so far handled by NCA have included the Abu Dhabi, Kenya, Spain, Tanzania and Zambia air arms.
Power comes from the Pratt & Whitney (P&W) R-2000 of 1,450hp for which spares and overhaul support are available throughout the world.
NCA have looked into the possibility of re-engining the Caribou with turboprops, probably the P&W PT-6, but consider that this would increase the purchase price of the airframe, which is a decided attraction at present.
Customers will receive a completely refurbished aircraft, fitted-out to their specification.
NCA can undertake a wide variety of specialist role modifications to the Caribou and are currently working on a palletised anti-pollution system that would enable an operator to maintain the capacity of the fuselage, but to change to oil-slick dispersant status very quickly.
Newly-arrived in the NCA hangar during FlyPast's visit was a pair of DHC-3 Otters that had last served with the Ethiopian Army and further cementing NCA's associations with the Canadian manufacturer.
Unlike the Caribou, NCA were busy studying possibilities of converting these machines to turboprop power prior to sale onto the civilian market.
Four former Sudanese Pilatus Porters have arrived for rework, three being Turbo models, the other a piston engined version.
Latest arrival with NCA, two DHC-3 Otters from the Ethiopian Army.
These may well be converted to turboprop power by NCA.
Another classic ‘bush’ type being worked upon was the Swiss Pilatus PC-6 Porter and Turbo-Porter.
Four examples acquired in Sudan were being refurbished.
First flown in piston form in May 1959 and then introduced as a turboprop of quite alarming STOL capabilities from May 1961, the Porter family is still in limited production at Stans and commands very high regard in the market as the ultimate in aerial ‘jeeps’.
Back to the Caribou, current ‘demonstrator’ for NCA is N96Nc, fitted out to full civilian status.
Depending on the role a Caribou is to perform, NCA can deliver a completely reworked example within six months.
NCA's hangar and ramp complex at Hal Safi is capable of taking a wide variety of types, and the company undertakes a wide range of maintenance work in addition to its refurbishing and converting business.
With the Spanish Air Force having just retired the remainder of their Caribou fleet, the number of these workhorses are available for the civilian or governmental market is increasing.
With NCA's expertise on the type, it may well be that operators around the world may have finally found a real replacement for the DC-3!
NCA's latest refurbished aircraft is N96CA, fitted out to FAA specifications.
Work underway on the next Caribou off the NCA ‘production line’.
Our Malta Special is concluded in the February FlyPast.
Features will include a guide to historic aviation on the island and the celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the award of the George Cross.
On sale January 23.
Biplane trio
Flying-Boats of the Royal Air Force
IRIS
In response to Air Ministry Specification R14/24 calling for a large, long-range flying-boat, Blackburn Aircraft ventured into this field for the first time in 1924 with their RB.1 Iris (Blackburn's previous flying-boat experience had been with the diminutive N.1B and Pellet single-seat designs).
Major J D Rennie and his design team commenced work during 1924, the new boat featuring a plywood-covered hull of wooden construction with provision for a crew of five.
Two pilots sat side-by-side in an open cockpit, aft of which was a single cockpit for the navigator, who was also provided with an interior cabin as were the wireless-operator and flight engineer.
Open gun positions were located in the bow, midships and extreme tail and provision made to carry bombs beneath the lower wings.
Equal-span wings were of three-bay biplane configuration had some dihedral but no stagger and measured 97ft tip-to-tip.
Three large gravity-feed fuel tanks were situated immediately beneath the upper wing centre-section, each tank feeding an individual engine.
Mainplanes were separated by a series of sturdy, upright, interplane struts, while similar struts formed mounts for the three 650hp Rolls-Royce Condor III liquid-cooled engines located mid-way between the upper and lower mainplanes.
Mounted atop the upswept rear of the hull was a large biplane tail unit with triple fins and rudders.
The upper tailplane featured the elevator, while trimming tabs were fitted to the lower shorter-span tailplane, the whole being well braced to the rear hull section.
Initial flight of the prototype Iris (N185) took place on June 19, 1926, this being followed throughout the summer by a series of trials at the Marine Aircraft Experimental Establishment (MAEE), Felixstowe.
A problem with wooden-hulled flying-boats was additional weight incurred by water soakage, and like other companies, Blackburn designed a metal hull for the Iris to which the original superstructure was added, while uprated Condor IIIA engines were installed.
Redesignated RB.1A Iris II, N185 underwent further MAEE trials, and on August 12, 1927, together with a Saunders-Roe Valkyrie, Supermarine Southampton and Short Singapore, took-off on a 9,400 mile cruise of the Baltic.
As flagship of the quartet, N185 carried aboard the then Secretary of State for Air, Sir Samuel Hoare.
Success of this flight prompted selection of the Iris II to convey Sir Philip Sassoon on his 17,000 mile tour to India and back in 1928.
More serious was the task performed by N185 in June 1929, when it assisted in the search for HM Submarine H47 which sank off Plymouth.
Impressed with the performance of N185, Air Ministry officials decided to order four Iris Mk 111s for RAF service.
These had a metal superstructure, fabric-covered, as well as a duralumin hull, modified engine mountings and internal alterations including cooking, sleeping and repair facilities.
First Iris III (N238) made its initial flight on November 21, 1929, to be followed by S1263, S1264 and S1593, all machines going to 209 Squadron, which had reformed in January 1930 at Mount Batten, Plymouth.
June 1930 saw two Iris IIIs (S1263 and S1264) flying from Plymouth to Iceland (Reykjavik) as part of the ceremony to mark the 1,000th anniversary of the Icelandic Parliament.
First non-stop flight from Iceland to the UK was made on July 2, 1930, when Iris III (S1264) flew to Stornoway in 7¼ hours.
RAF Irises also flew to Gibraltar via Lisbon during August 1930, and conveyed Chief of the Air Staff, Sir John Salmond, on a return flight to Egypt in 1931 for his inspection of overseas units of the RAF.
Normally provision was made for a 0.303″ Lewis gun to be mounted on a Scarf gun ring in the three gun position on Iris IIIs, but S1593 had the bow cockpit enlarged to house a 37mm COW gun.
This aircraft, together with S1263 and S1264, was also modified to accept installation of three 825hp Rolls-Royce Buzzard IIMS engines, the first machine so updated flying in March 1932, and being redesignated Iris Mk V. Both S1263 and S1264 were lost in 1933, S1263 sinking after colliding with a launch in Plymouth Sound.
Meanwhile Iris II N195 had been converted to a Mk IV by having three 800hp Armstrong Siddeley Leopard radials fitted, the two outer as tractors and the centre one a pusher.
In this configuration, N185 first flew on May 6, 1931, going to the MAEE in 1932 for further trials.
As for S1593, it was returned to the makers where three 720hp Junkers Jumo IVC diesel engines were fitted, these being built under licence as the Napier Culverin Series I. This aircraft finished its days as a test machine for anti-corrosive paints, but with its 37mm COW gun was considered the prototype for the Blackburn Perth which followed.
Below: Iris III S1263 fitted with Rolls-Royce Buzzard engines became the Mk V. This aircraft was lost in 1933 after colliding with a launch in Plymouth Sound.
(Author's collection)
PERTH
KNOWN INITIALLY as the Iris VI, the first Blackburn Perth built was K3580 produced to Specification 20/32, its maiden flight being on October 11, 1933.
Powered by three 825hp Rolls-Royce Buzzard IIMS liquid-cooled, in-line engines, the Perth retained a number of features familiar to the Iris, but differed in having a hull shallower and less broad in the beam, this hull being covered by corrosion-resistant Alclad.
An enclosed glazed cabin was provided for the pilot and co-pilot, and a specious interior allowed for a navigation compartment complete with chart table, a wireless cabin, canteen, galley and sleeping berths.
Flight structure was similar to the Iris, an all-metal affair with fabric covering, engines strut-mounted in a mid-wing position and outboard underwing stabilising floats.
Modifications included increased capacity gravity-feed fuel tanks in which the outboard tanks were re-located closer to the centre-line, and aerodynamically refined radiators positioned toward the rear of each engine nacelle.
By contemporary standards forward armament on the Perth was heavy, comprising a 37mm COW automatic gun mounted in the bow cockpit capable of firing 1½ pound shells at 100 rounds per minute.
This gun was for use as an offensive anti-shipping weapon, but the three defensive 0.303″ Lewis guns were retained in bow (alternative weapon), midships and extreme tail positions.
Provision was also made to carry up to a 2,000lb bomb load under the lower wings.
In addition to K3580, three other Perths were produced, K3581 and K4011, the last being delivered in February 1934.
Recipient of the first three Perths was 209 Squadron at Mount Batten, which replaced its Irises with the new ‘boats.
However, problems with the tail units necessitated modifications being undertaken at the Makers, and all three Perths were temporarily out of service from October 1934 until July 1935.
During that time interim replacement aircraft included the Supermarine Scapa and Short R24/31 Knuckleduster prototypes.
Unusual shot of Blackburn Perth K3581, the second production aircraft.
Middle engine is on overhaul and the outers have four-bladed propellers.
For much of their service the Perths operated from Mount Batten, flew exercises over the Irish Sea, participated in naval manoeuvres by co-operating with the British Fleet, and used Stranraer as a second base.
The first Perth (K3580) was lost while taking-off in heavy seas at Stornoway on September 14, 1935, while the remaining two were struck-off charge (SOC) during January 1936.
As for the fourth Perth (K4011) it was delivered to the MAEE at Felixstowe for experimental work.
This aircraft was fitted with only two upper wing fuel tanks, and for a time was used on test flights with four-bladed propellers which, instead of the usual right angles, had angles of 80° and 100°.
This Perth lasted with MAEE until February 1938, when it too was SOC.
Historically the Blackburn Perth has the distinction of being the largest flying-boat of the biplane era to serve with the RAF.
SEVERN
A NEW FLYING-BOAT emerged from the works of S E Saunders (later Saro) at Cowes, Isle of Wight, in 1930, this being designated the A.7 and named Severn.
Work on this aircraft had been prompted by the success earlier of an experimental lightweight hull used in a converted Supermarine Southampton known as the A.14.
Conventional riveted stringers were replaced by a system of longitudinal corrugation applied to the sides and planing bottom.
Provision was made for a crew of five; pilot and co-pilot side-by-side in an open cockpit, a flight engineer, wireless-operator and gunner.
A bow gun position housed a 0.303″ Lewis machine-gun mounted on a Scarf ring, and this could be pushed back to facilitate mooring-up or towing.
Provision was also made for two other Lewis guns, one amidships and one in the tail.
Up to 2,200lb of bombs could be carried on underwing racks.
The one-off Saro A.7 Severn N240 in the works at Cowes, Isle of Wight, circa early 1930s.
(Westland Aerospace)
The superstructure was practically of sesquiplane configuration, the upper mainplane being of much wider span than the lower.
Outboard interplane struts slanted outward from the lower wingtips, but a system of sturdy inverted V-struts and single struts supported the three 485hp Bristol Jupiter IX radial engines mounted on the upper wing.
Driving two-bladed wooden propellers these engines were uncowled, fuel being supplied from gravity-feed tanks in the upper wing.
The empennage featured a strut-braced, monoplane-type, tailplane mounted atop the rear hull, while strut-braced twin fins and rudders were fitted, each with a servo rudder.
Serialled N240, the Severn first flew in July 1930, and a series of trials followed at the MAEE.
Performance was considered an improvement over the Southampton, and on a par with the three-engined Southampton Mk X, but because of several structural faults the Severn did not enter production.
However, it did achieve a top speed of 126mph, and cruised at 96mph with a weight of 22,000lb at 2,050ft altitude.
One memorable flight was made by N240 in August 1931, when in company with Short Singapore II, N246, it carried out a Middle East cruise.
Despite a number of faults occurring en route, the Severn returned from this flight without serious mishap, having covered a distance of 6,530 miles.
The Severn did fly with 209 Squadron as an interim measure starting in February 1932, but on July 13 that year N240 was lost in the Channel.
The Severn could not be considered a complete failure, however, for from it was developed the very successful Saro A.27 London flying-boat.
HELM OF THE VALKYRIE
Grant Simons presents a view of the inside of the North American XB-70 Valkyrie at the USAF Museum and looks back into the type's turbulent past
Just seconds left…20207 leads the formation.
Joe Walker is flying the F-104 immediately behind the XB-70's right downward-deflected wing.
The formation is already very tight, but for whatever reason he closed up even more.
(via USAF Museum)
CONCEIVED with high expectations in 1954, the B-70 Valkyrie was produced to give the USAF's Strategic Air Command (SAC) a long range, high altitude Mach 3+ heavy bomber with the primary aim of delivering H-Bombs deep inside the Soviet Union.
The USAF's speed and altitude requirements were eventually met by the Los Angeles Division of North American Aviation (NAA)— but not without first overcoming tremendous technical, design and manufacturing problems.
Early studies took the form of a competition between Boeing and NAA which resulted in two grossly overweight designs.
A second study followed with NAA making use of a little-known Top Secret paper published in 1954 on compression lift, in which two National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) aerodynamicists — A J Eggers and C A Syverston — correctly theorized that supersonic shockwaves could be used to partially support an aircraft during supersonic flight.
At the same time engineers and chemists were working hard to develop new, high energy, chemical fuels to make engines push harder.
Instead of kerosene-based hydrocarbon fuel, the chemists proposed that the supersonic ‘dash’ part of the flight profile should be made with the afterburners fed with ethyl borane, the new boron ‘zip’fuel.
Top left: Co-pilot's side of the cockpit.
Note the ‘Valkyrie’ shape in the middle of the control yoke, showing the position and number of the fuel tanks.
Much of the instrumentation relates to fuel, engine and inlet controls.
Compare this 1964 cockpit with the 1942 example on page 49.
(Author) Bottom left: Finally at rest.
The first XB-70 prototype at the USAF Museum, Dayton, Ohio.
The aircraft  is displayed under cover in the newly-built Modern Flight Gallery.
(USAF Museum
As a result of this, the NAA team proposed the NA-259, a six-engined General Electric (GE) YJ93-GE-5-powered design with a projected gross take-off weight of 500,000 pounds, Mach 3+ cruise and an unrefuelled range of over 7,500 miles.
On December 23, 1957 the USAF awarded NAA a $360 million contract for three aircraft.
Valkyrie was chosen from some 20,235 entrants in a name-a-plane content — there were thirteen entries suggesting this name, but the winner, Air Force T/Sgt Francis W Seiler posted his entry first.
From Norse mythology, Odin's twelve female Valkyries would choose those who were to be slain.
In the deep days of the so-called ‘Cold War’ such a name was well in keeping, but was also to have tragic reflections on the project in later years.
SAC announced a requirement for some 250 B-70s, but on August 10, 1959 the Air Force announced the cancellation of the highly expensive boron fuel, which in turn brought about the demise of the GE YJ93-5 engine.
A sister to this engine, the -3, burnt highly-refined JP-6 fuel and offered a viable alternative.
Although perceived by the public as harming the B-70 project, the cancellation of the boron fuel brought about benefits.
It simplified fuel system complexity and drastically reduced the projected operational cost.
The ‘zip’ fuel was terrible to handle, being toxic, difficult to store and pump and burned badly in the afterburners, leaving hard, coke-like deposits.
Developments the other side of the globe meant that the B-70 was becoming obsolete even before it was built.
The Soviets produced a highly accurate radar network and this, linked with improved surface-to-air missiles brought about the downfall of the concept of a manned, intercontinental, high altitude bomber.
Furthermore, the Soviets were at work on a manned tri-sonic interceptor — that would become the MiG-25 Foxbat — designed to shoot down potential threats such as the B-70.
During 1959 the Intercontinental Ballistic Missile lobby successfully argued their case for automated weapons.
In December 1959 Congress announced the cancellation of the B-70 weapons system, leaving NAA with only permission to proceed with a single XB-70 prototype.
On July 30, 1960 Congress approved further funds allowing NAA to complete the prototype, build one static test machine and plan for twelve fully operational machines.
Nearly two months later — on September 21 — a supplemental contract was granted for a second XB-70 and a single YB-70.
The latter machine would have the full weapons system and a four man crew — pilot, co-pilot, bombardier/navigator and defensive systems operator.
Overall programme costs now stood at $1,300 million.
In April 1961 newly-elected President Kennedy's Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, cancelled the production aspect — the YB-70.
What were to be built were three high-speed aerodynamic research aircraft to help develop America's Supersonic Transport aircraft.
First flight was scheduled for December 1963 but due to fuel tank leakage the programme fell well behind schedule.
The JP-6 fuel was encased in nitrogen to prevent auto-ignition at high temperatures.
Eventually a number of layers of organic Viton-B compound were applied to seal the pin-hole leaks.
On May 11, 1964 the first XB-70 (serialled 62–1, tail number 20001) was rolled-out into the sunshine at Palmdale, California.
After a series of high speed taxi-runs, at 8:38am on September 21, 1964 NAA's Chief Test Pilot, Al White, and the USAF's project pilot Colonel Joe Cotton lifted 20001 off the runway by the 5,000 foot marker, leaving behind them a sooty trail from the six most powerful jet engines then known to exist.
A malfunctioning main undercarriage gear meant that NAA missed out on a $250,000 bonus for exceeding Mach One on the first flight.
An impressive arrival was made at Edward Air Force Base (AFB) where flight  testing was to commence on five engines — No 3 had been shut down after overspeeding.
The second XB-70 (62–207, tail number 20207) flew on July 17, 1965, with many of the ‘bugs’ that plagued the first example ironed-out and exceeded Mach 1.4 at 42,000 feet on the first flight.
It joined the first aircraft on the test programme and soon both machines were breaking existing speed and altitude records with every flight.
June 8, 1966 saw ‘the blackest day in the history of Edwards AFB’ and an event that was to place a dark shadow over the whole of the XB-70 programme.
With Al White and Major Carl Cross at the controls of 20207, after a series of tests the Valkyrie joined-up with four other aircraft: a white USAF F-5A Freedom Fighter flown by GE test pilot John Fritz; a T-38A Talon flown by USAF Captain Peter Hoag with Joe Cotton in the rear seat; a USN F-4B Phantom II piloted by USN Commander Jerome Skyrud with E J Black in the back and a red-tailed NASA-owned F-104 Starfighter flown by Joe A Walker.
All were powered by GE engines and were to formate on a Lear Jet flown by H Clay Lacey for a public relations photographic sortie over the Mojave Desert.
The formation started to build at 8:27am when the F-5A joined the Valkyrie.
By 8:43 the vee formation was complete with the XB-70 in the lead, its movable wing-tips in the mid-down position.
The Lear Jet was 600 feet out and to the left.
Cameras started clicking at 8:45 — the photographic session ended at 9:15.
One minute later there were frantic radio calls ‘Mid-air!
Mid-air!’
In the blink of an eye, Joe Walker's Starfighter rammed the Valkyrie's starboard wingtip with its tail, then rolled sharply left and flipped upside-down, ripping off most of the left hand and part of the right hand vertical tails.
Walker died instantly; his F-104 bursting into flames, the pieces falling away to the desert floor 25,000 feet below.
as if nothing had happened, the Valkyrie flew on for sixteen seconds.
Them with terrible majesty, it snap-rolled onto its back and with its nose down began yawing violently to the right.
It flipped and spun a number of times, fuel spilling out of the damaged left wing — the aircraft was doomed.
From the start the XB-70 was fitted with pressurised cocoon-like escape capsules with upper and lower closing clamshell doors.
Despite catching his arm in these doors, White initiated the escape procedure, but Cross didn't. 20207 hit the desert at 9:28am in a relatively flat altitude, killing Cross instantly.
Despite a failure of the airbag system that should have damped-out much of the impact of White's capsule, White survived the ejection, suffering terrible injuries to his arm in the clamshell mechanism.
Carl Cross was a veteran of Korea and Vietnam and that sortie was his check-out ride on the XB-70 before joining the test programme.
Joe Walker was famous for his record-breaking X-15 flights and was due to become NASA's Chief Project Pilot on the XB-70. 20207 had been carrying many millions of dollars worth of sophisticated test equipment in the forward weapons bay for NASA — all of this was lost.
The loss of two men, a highly expensive experimental aeroplane and the F-104 had serious repercussions, especially when one considered that all this happened when all were engaged in taking photographs for a private company during a military test flight.
Two Boards of Enquiry were appointed to investigate the collision, although  no concrete findings ensued.
20001 had been grounded due to stress cracks and skin detachment in flight which resulted in a Mach 2.5 speed limit put on the airframe.
Continued doubts about the XB-70's ability to complete the test programme resulted in the USAF pulling out of further testing.
NASA went on alone, repairing and updating the survivor so that much further valuable data was obtained.
Final flight came when the aircraft was retired to the Air Force Museum at Dayton, Ohio.
At 10:57am on February 4, 1969 20001 under command of Fritz Fulton and Ted Sturmthal rotated away from W£Edwards AFB and set course eastwards.
Even this sortie was a test flight.
At 2:15pm they landed at Wright Patterson AFB and handed the aircraft's logbooks over.
It is difficult to judge if the Air Force and NASA got good value for the $1,700 million they spent — $13.17 million per flight.
Without doubt the two machines were a marvellous achievement, but were a response to a mission requirement that had been overtaken by events and missile technology.
Ted Sturmthal, who was on the last flight, summed it all up ‘I'll do anything to keep the XB-70 in the air — except pay for it myself!’
Pilot's position, giving a good view of  his seat inside the Escape Capsule.
(Author's Photo)
The formation splits apart as the Valkyrie continues on course, minus most of its verticals.
The fiery remains of Joe Walkers F-104 fall away behind.
(via USAF Museum).
Cockpit of 20001.
Note the sides of crew Escape Capsules with their clamshell doors.
The six engine throttles sit in the centre console, surrounded by engine, undercarriage and radio controls.
The panel has a number of linear instead of clock-type instrument faces.
(Author's Photo)
UNDER THE HAMMER
Reports from two recent UK sales show that despite a wide variety of very collectable material, the chill winds of the economy are holding back bidders.
Sunderland G-BJHS was unsold at the Sotheby's auction.
After a year of inactivity, on September 12, Ken Emmott and Geoff Masterton crewed the aircraft for its important C of A test flight.
Overpasses at Heathrow and Farnborough were requested during the flight.
The above shot was taken on the 18th while the aircraft flew for Dutch TV.
With grateful thanks from Sunderland Ltd to the Royal Navy who supplied Gazelle XW887 from Fleetlands as camera-ship.
Heavyweights
A TOTAL of 270 lots were hammered down in just over two hours by Sotheby's auctioneer Johnathan Baddeley at their sale on September 24.
In the present economic climate it is doubtful if many lots were actually sold.
Star of the auction was Edward Hulton's magnificent Short Sunderland G-BJHS.
Bidding for this (mostly down the ‘phone) stopped at £320,000, way short of the catalogue estimate of £450,000–£550,000, and the lot was withdrawn.
Captain Ken Emmott, speaking of G-BJHS's future said that ‘the aircraft will have to be moved from its present base at Southampton, where the conditions are not really conducive to keeping a large flying-boat in good condition’.
Ken, now the only pilot in the UK checked out to captain the flying-boat, said that after the recent test flights the Sunderland is now ‘fully serviceable and in really tip-top condition, it just needs a good home where it can be looked after.’
Only other aircraft in the sale, was Slingsby Grasshopper glider XK824, which only reached £650 in the bidding and was unsold.
A pair of Derwent jet engines, once fitted to Meteor WL181 and latterly used as runway de-icers were hammered down for only £750.
Lancaster prototype BT308 at Ringway, January 1941.
The original Air Ministry design certificate for this aircraft fetched £3,100 at the Sotheby's sale.
Lady Drummond Hay and Karl von Wiegand, the only newspaper correspondents on the Graf Zeppelin during its first commercial trans-Atlantic journey.
Just a fraction of the fascinating collection sold by Christie's.
The only really ‘high’ prices in the sale were realised by the collection of memorabilia relating to Avro designer Roy Chadwick.
A script for a 1942 BBC broadcast went for £500, the Air Ministry design certificate for Lancaster prototype BT308 fetched £3,100, a signed menu from the Dam Busters celebratory dinner on June 22, 1943 realised £2,900 and an early sketch and calculations by Chadwick for the Avro Vulcan, together with his slide rule and desk-set was sold for £6,100 with most of the Chadwick collection going to a telephone bidder.
The rest of the sale items were a mixture of paintings, clothing, models and medals reflected the state of the market at the moment with a pair each of metal desk-top models of Mosquito and Hampden going for £130 and £70 respectively.
Various collections of Battle of Britain pilots medals all sold in the £300–£350 region, whilst World War One medal collections reached higher prices in the £300–£3,000 region.
At the other end of the scale, six small segments of aircraft fabric, reputedly coming from the Fokker Triplane in which Baron von Richthofen was shot down, reached £1,000.
More Zeppelins
FOLLOWING the success of aviation memorabilia sold at Wroughton in April, Christie's managed to secure yet another Zeppelin archive for their August 13 sale in London.
This time the collection was the remaining part of the one-time extensive archive of ephemera gathered together by the newspaper correspondent Lady Grace Hay-Drummond-Hay.
Little is known of this strikingly beautiful femme-fatale , except that her contribution to early aviation reporting was considerable.
Some have described her as a 1920s version of much-admired  Kate Adie, who always appears to be in the thick of things wherever the action is!
What is clear is that Lady Grace, in her early twenties, led an adventurous life of which many of her successors today would be somewhat envious.
Her love and zest for life comes out in her unique correspondence and notes made during the momentous first east-west crossing of the Atlantic of the Graf Zeppelin LZ.127.
She came into contact with many well-known pioneers of lighter-than-air transport, including, Countess Brandenstein von Zeppelin, Captains Lehmann and Priess, Hugo Eckener, Heinrich Kubis and many others.
In New York she was feted at City Hall, had exclusive access to the great airship base at Lakehurst, Commander Rosendahl waiving all restrictions.
She flew with Maurice Dornier in the Do X flying-boat and enjoyed, it seems, many other privileges not given to other correspondents.
Lady Grace also flew on the Graf Zeppelin round-the-world epic, and when in Japan, was received by Emperor Hirohito.
So it was that her charisma and undoubted beauty helped to make her the first lady air correspondent in the world.
With her sharp pen and keen observation she was joined by Karl von Wiegand for the first Atlantic crossing voyage.
Camera-gun recovered from a Dornier Do 17 and successfully sold at Christie's August sale.
In the auction a copy of her official published report compiled with Wiegand and accompanied by two letters to her mother, Mrs S T Lethbridge, sold for £650, against an estimate of £100–150.
A unique lot in this sale was the group of five telegrams sent by Lady Grace on October 12/13, 1928 from LZ.127, giving her impressions of the epic ‘first-crossing’ voyage.
One particular passage, ‘wonderful silver ship driving through air at 75 miles an hour towards Bermuda’, perhaps says it all.
Of the other Zeppelin memorabilia in this collection, perhaps the menu cards signed by passengers and crew (£750), and Lady Grace's circumnavigation flight ticket were unique and items so rare that they will form a valuable part of the private collection to which they have passed.
There were two other collections in this 1,000 lot sale, which also included a good selection of Marine, Motoring and Railway items.
These were the remaining items from the collection of Major David Summonsby, who as a bomb disposal specialist acquired an amazing collection of World War Two German aircraft relics, such as werke nummer plates, a Bf 109 control column, a fragment of a tail fin from a ‘109, a rare camera-gun liberated from a Do 17, and, interestingly, a pennant flown from a JU188 shot down over Combe Hill, Dorset, in 1944.
Every lot in this collection, as in the Zeppelin archive found a buyer.
Not all lots sold however, the auctioneer's buying-in an extensive collection of medals and badges awarded to Ben and Joe Adamowicz who flew the Atlantic in their Bellanca as well as the historic log books which so faithfully recorded this epic flight.
End of an Era?
An RAF institution has quietly slipped into what is surely oblivion.
Ken Delve charts the long history of 231 Operational Conversion Unit — Canberra tutors since 1951.
B.2 WE114 at Bassingbourn under the admiring glances of OCU students.
The aircraft was lost when it crashed on a night overshoot on July 24, 1957.
IN DECEMBER 1990 231 Operational Conversion Unit (OCU) disbanded at RAF Wyton as a result of manpower constraints caused by the Gulf conflict.
The plan was for the Unit to reform in the middle of this year.
It now looks likely that this will not happen — a great RAF institution, and I use the word with care, will have passed away almost without notice…
The build-up of the Binbrook Canberra Wing in 1951 meant that Bomber Command had entered the jet age; the Lincolns and Washingtons were being replaced by an aircraft of very different character and performance.
It would need a major rethink both on operational employment and training.
With the advent of the single-pilot bomber aircraft came the problem of conversion to type.
Specification T11/49 had been issued for a dual control trainer but this was not due to enter service until mid-1953.
In the meantime, the Jet Conversion Unit (or Flight) at Binbrook undertook the task of pilot conversion using Meteors for basic jet conversion and handling, together with Canberra B.2s for on-type instruction with a ‘watch what I do and then do it yourself’ technique.
JCU, or JCF as it was often called, was very much a part of the build-up of the Canberra force at Binbrook.
As early as January 1951, 101 Squadron had two Meteor F.4s on charge as part of the run down of Lincoln strength ready for the concentration on jet re-role.
By early July the two Meteor F.4s had been joined by two Meteor T.7s (and a Tiger Moth!) and the crews were introduced to the ‘joys’ of jet asymmetric flying.
The large numbers of new aircraft entering service made it obvious that ‘on-squadron’ conversion would have to give way to a proper Operational Conversion Unit (OCU) and so in the latter part of 1951, 231 OCU was formed at RAF Bassingbourn, a place that became with the Canberra.
In October Bassingbourn had become the home of 231 (Mosquito) OCU and 237 (Meteor) OCU and it was on the Meteors that the initial staff work-up was done, the first Canberras did not arrive until the following February.
237 OCU disbanded on December 1 and became ‘C’ Squadron (the PR element) of 231 OCU, ‘A’and ‘B’Squadrons being the bomber squadrons.
The unit became, ‘the Bomber Command OCU, training pilots, navigators and radar operators to reinforce Photo Reconnaissance and Light Bomber squadrons at home and overseas.’
Two-Three-One was not simply a resident unit at Bassingbourn it was Bassingbourn and vice versa.
The entire Station was the OCU with a complement of three squadrons and all the standard engineering and admin support.
Initially the OCU had a mixed complement of Mosquitos (T.3 and PR.34) and Meteors (T.7 and PR.10) plus assorted Tiger Moths and Ansons.
For the first few months of 1952 flying concentrated on standardising the instructors and from February, with the arrival of the first B.2s, type conversion for the staff.
The initial Unit Establishment (UE) was set at 26 B.2s and four PR.3s.
By mid February there were only two B.2s and one PR.3 on strength and it was not until the end of the year that B.2 strength reached a reasonable figure with 25 aircraft.
By early summer the OCU was ready to receive its first students and 1 Course, of five crews, assembled at Bassingbourn on May 27 to herald the Canberra era.
In search of better weather, the OCU detached to Cyprus.
This particular detachment being Winter Watcher, October/November 1985.
First T.4 arrived at the OCU in August 1953.
From then on the relative UE and strength of each type varied almost month by month!
UE started at 37 B.2s, five PR.3s and six T.4s in early 1954 with the T.4 element increasing to eighteen by January 1956.
The actual strength of each type very rarely reflected this establishment — at one stage no less than forty B.2s were in use!
Pilots who were selected for the early courses were from very varied backgrounds.
Some were converting from the heavies such as the Lincoln and Washington, others from the recce and light bomber Mosquito squadrons.
There were some who had been destined for fighters, especially Meteors, who found themselves headed for a dreaded bomber tour.
It took only one or two flights in the Canberra to convince them that they were getting was a bomber with a fighter performance!
Responsible for training all three crewmen — pilot, navigator/radar and navigator/plotter, a new course commenced at 231 every four weeks.
The first two weeks of the course were spent in the classroom on the groundschool phase and then it was into the flying phase with a daylight jet refresher on the Meteors for the pilots before going on to the B.2s.
The introduction of the T.4 saw the end of the Meteors, much to the regret of some of the pilots.
Towards the middle of the course bombing was introduced and the student crew started to work together.
In the early years about 50% of aircrew going through the course were National Servicemen who would only serve some  three months or so on a squadron before their commitment was ended.
It was, therefore, proposed in 1953 to introduce a form of ‘boost’ training for trained crews on reserve status whereby they could return to a squadron to undertake two weeks of intensive refresher flying.
An excellent summary of life at the OCU appeared in the RAF magazine,Air Clues .
‘At first the pilots and navigators will mostly go their separate ways and concentrate on the subjects peculiar to their own calling, but after about a week they will be crewed-up — one pilot, one nav/observer, and one nav/plotter to a crew on the bomber side and a pilot and a navigator on the PR — and from then on will attend lectures and do drills as crew members.
‘This first stage of the course will last about three weeks (ten days for the short courses) and during that time the crews will complete about 84 hours of lectures covering eight different subjects.
Thus the pilots may be found in the Engines Section absorbing the means whereby the aviation spirit and flames arrive at the right place at the right time to produce the urge for forward movement, or they could be watching in some fascination an array of lights and switches on a array known as ‘electrics’ which behave themselves so well under the persuasion of the engines instructor, but which flash and fail to respond in such heart-breaking fashion when the student is urged to demonstrate that he has ‘got’it.
The OCU carries out a mass start-up for its move from Cottesmore to Marham.
‘Perhaps they are learning a little more about airmanship or the way they should behave at 40,000ft and above from the medical point of view.
They may even be found in the Link trainer or, perhaps, in the Navigation Section!
And with two navigators in the crew!
‘Meanwhile, the navs will probably be found either navigating an aircraft on a 1,000 mile cross country while firmly rooted to the earth in a cubicle in the DRI or lying full length on a mock-up bombing platform aiming imaginary bombs at a projected figure on the earth's surface which moves sedately beneath them.
‘They may be in the radar demonstration room learning the art of manipulating radar devices which surely must be beyond the comprehension of all but the bespectacled gentry who invented them, or maybe they, too, are learning something of ‘behaviour at height’ and the ‘ways of jetstreams’.
‘At the same time the PR navs, who, at heart, are quite snooty about this bombing business, will be learning about cameras and how to take pictures and, having taken them, how to interpret them.
Theirs is a nice little empire…
‘Towards the end of the three weeks’ period the crews will be found together in the dummy cockpits where they will remain until, suitably hooded, they are able to lay fingers on any tap or switch that the instructor may mention.
It is only then that they will be deemed ready to report to the flying squadron.
‘For three weeks flying will alternate daily with the final phase of ground school which includes such subjects as aircraft recognition, intelligence and tactics, and from then on flying is the order of the day.
On the flying side the early trips will be in a dual Canberra and all the sequences that make-up a general handling exercise will be demonstrated and practised.
There will also be some IF and an introduction to the let-down procedure.
This will be followed by a demonstration flight in the bomber or PR version and the student's first solo.
‘There follow two general handling trips to accustom the pilot to the feel of the aircraft and he is ready to start his operational exercises.
For the bomber these include cross-country flights, simulated and live bombing, and for the PR, cross-country flights and photographic exercises.
A dual check half-way through the operational flying and an instrument rating test at the end will complete the day flying syllabus.
At night the sequence is repeated, but to a lesser extent.
On the short courses only one of each exercise is completed after the initial conversion and familiarisation flight.’
On average the OCU would fly 1,400 hours a month (!), mostly in the B.2s.
A typical breakdown being that for May 1953 with 745 hours B.2 by day and 385 B.2 at night, 111 T.4 day and fifteen night and 116 hours day PR.3.
As the number of T.4s increased so these hours increased and the B.2 hours decreased.
The T.4 entered service at the planned date with an original total order for 65 aircraft.
This was continually increased over the lifetime of the Canberra force, with several B.2s being converted to T.4s.
The initial concept of the T.4 was for a ‘dual-control trainer with as few changes as possible’.
The prototype, WN467, made its first flight on June 12, 1952 and entered service with the OCU a year later.
Prior to the introduction of the T.4 there had been a number of fatal accidents with aircraft crashing short of the runway on approach and this was attributed to lack of familiarity with the effects of acceleration.
Rapid acceleration gave pilots a false nose-up sense and they were correcting this with nose-down on the flying controls and flying into the ground.
Since its introduction in 1953 the T.4 has been know and ‘loved’ by generations of Canberra aircrew!
After hoisting aboard the almost wondrous performance of the aircraft probably the most important single element to master was asymmetric flying.
If the Canberra had emerged with wingroot-mounted engines it would have dispelled its only major flying problem.
Asymmetric refers to the problems caused when the aircraft is flying on one engine, ie asymmetric thrust.
With engines close to the centre of the aircraft body there is very little asymmetric force being exerted when only one engine is producing thrust but with engines widely spaced in the wings, as they are on the Canberra, there is a great deal of thrust on one side and nothing on the other to counterbalance it.
The pilot has to provide the balancing force by keeping the rudder fully deflected to oppose the turning moment of the live engine.
Pilot's Notes' advice on single engine flying says ‘the aircraft has a very good single-engine performance and the rudder trimmers are powerful enough to trim out all the foot load at normal cruising speeds.
At 7,400 rpm on one engine the aircraft will maintain a speed of approx 330 knots in level flight below 5,000ft.’
If insufficient force is maintained, or relaxed for a moment, the aircraft will try and turn which will produce a roll and in next to no time the aircraft is inverted and on its way down.
Over the years this has killed a great many Canberra aircrew.
Thus the teaching of how to cope with this potential killer became a critical part of the OCU course.
By the mid 1950s the OCU was also training the first of the foreign aircrew whose governments had bought various marks of Canberras.
Over the years the OCU became a truly cosmopolitan empire and hardly a month went by without a new uniform or flying suit making an appearance.
Staff crews frequently flew on major exercises and enjoyed the change from the routine of training flying.
The PR element normally deployed to and operated from Wyton during exercises: a typical example being Exercise Tapdance in September 1959 —‘I was particularly pleased with the efforts of our PR Squadron during the detachment to Wyton.
Air and ground crews did well and it is quite clear that the OCU effort was in no way inferior to that of the operational Canberra PR squadrons.’
By 1962 the boom period of Canberra usage was over in the UK as the bomber squadrons disbanded or re-equipped with the trio of V-bombers.
A few hectic years and the Canberra  bomber wings had vanished.
T.4 WJ866, having been with 231 OCU until transfer to the Navy in 1969, was borrowed from FRADU at Yeovilton in the mid-1980s to ease the shortage of T.4s.
It was the ‘second line’, ‘support’ and ‘facility’squadrons which took the UK Canberra squadrons into another twenty years of service with a variety of roles and mark conversions, and so brought a continued need for the services of 231 OCU, albeit on a decreasing scale over the years.
At Bassingbourn the job of providing aircrew for the depleted number of operational squadrons continued but with an increased emphasis on the low level role-training which had been introduced in late 1960.
This reflected the increased low level nature of Canberra ops and the higher proportion of Interdictor marks entering service.
Early in 1960 a proper low level package was included in the PR course, when crews flew at 250ft on dual exercises and 1,000ft when solo (Bomber Squadron did not commence low level training until late 1961).
At the same time Gee was being phased out and LABS techniques introduced.
It was a period of upheaval at OCU and in May 1960 ‘A’ and ‘B’Squadrons amalgamated into a single squadron of two flights.
Further contraction of aircraft strength led to the amalgamation of these into a single flight in November 1961, as Bomber Squadron.
‘C’ Flight remained, as before, the Recce flight.
A few years later the names were changed to reflect the changes in the operational roles of front-line Canberra squadrons, Bomber Squadron became Strike Squadron and PR Squadron became Recce Squadron.
This change took effect in August 1964.
Brian Cook and John Craven went through the PR OCU as a crew in late 1964–1965 before being posted to 39 Squadron.
Brian Cook well remembers the five month course: ‘The flying phase started with five dual families in the T.4 for circuit work, general handling and asymmetric flying.
This was followed by a solo T.4 trip before a pre-solo dual check in the PR.3 — with first the student and then the QFI taking it in turns to quiver on the rumble seat!
Then came the bulk of the PR conversion with twelve PR.3  navexs , high level photo and low level trips with targets.
Then, five T.4/PR.3 night trips before the T.4 pre final ride and the final handling check with the OC.’
Birds 1 — OCU 0.
July 1973, the result of a bird strike after a roller landing at Waddington.
Throughout the 1960s the OCU remained part of No 1 Group except for the period March 1st 1960 to November 1st 1967 when it was part of 3 Group.
A bit of light relief in the summer of 1967 was a role in the film Billion Dollar Brain when a number of aircraft were painted with Soviet red star markings and were filmed being bombed-up and scrambling.
It was unfortunate that the Arab-Israeli war broke out at the same time and some overseas commentators took the presence of Canberras in this guise as proof of British participation in the war!
Aircraft strength continued to drop until by late 1966 the OCU was operating an average of eleven B.2s, nine PR.3s and sixteen T.4s.
The following November it was announced that because of the impending reduction in the Canberra force the role of Bassingbourn would reduce and that by mid 1969 the Station would close.
The end came even earlier than planned and in May 1968 the OCU ceased flying from Bassingbourn saying farewell to this historic station on the 19th and flying to their new home at Cottesmore.
After an eight-year sojourn in Rutland the OCU moved again, in February 1976 to Marham, having in the meantime ceased PR conversion and lost its PR.3s.
From now on all aircrew went through either a full conversion course or a short refresher course.
Role training, for example PR, was done at squadron level.
Life continued as normal at Marham with four T.4s and two or three B.2s, two of the latter being designated B.2T because of a change in nav fit which gave them a Green Satin doppler and a GPI IV.
There were, however, fewer courses and fewer students, reflecting the continued run-down of Canberra strength with the withdrawal from the Near East and Far East.
The demise of the Interdictor squadrons in Germany resulted in a reduction in the low level training and the OCU no longer taught weaponry.
When the Author arrived at Marham in May 1977 the OCU was only a shadow of its former glory and the training aids, such as the ‘nav sim’ were distinctly antiquated.
This latter device consisted of a row of boxes containing basic items of nav equipment to be found in the aircraft.
However, there was no computer system to manage the exercise — when the nav wanted a position line or fix he pre-warned the instructor, who sat the other side of the ‘cockpit’ facia, and at the appropriate time a piece of paper was pushed through the wall with the details scrawled upon it!
For a nav, the syllabus consisted of a mixture of T.4 and B.2 trips, most of which were orientated around the requirements of the student pilot with whom the nav was crewed.
The Author few his first Canberra trip in T.4 WT483 with a familiarisation sortie around the local area.
The course lasted until early July by which time twenty T.4 and ten B.2 trips had been flown — a total of 53 hours twenty minutes, including eight hours fifty minutes night flying.
With the decision to concentrate all Canberra units at Wyton, the OCU moved across in July 1982 and took over the accommodation vacated by 39 Squadron.
The OCU also operated the T.4s which were on the strength of the flying squadrons so that the actual complement was almost double this meagre total.
An organisation once the size of a Station now resided in one small corner of the airfield at Wyton but it maintained the excellent tradition that saw it produce many thousands of aircrew.
May 1989 brought a chance for the OCU to renew old glories when it created a formation team, the Green Marrows , to perform at the 40th Anniversary celebrations at Wyton.
The four Canberras looked most impressive, although the routine was much tamer than those of the old OCU displays of earlier years — in deference to the airframes!
It was a great pity that the team was not allowed to perform at other displays during the anniversary year.
Celebrations over, the training task continued as ever.
December 1990 saw 231 OCU disbanded as manpower requirements for Operation Granby , the British element of the Gulf conflict, left insufficient resources for the unit to continue its usual role.
At the time the decision was that a review would be undertaken at the end of the conflict or ‘in six months time’ to look at the long-term future of the OCU.
With the continued planned decline of the Canberra force — 100 Squadron are already re-equipping with Hawks — it now seems most unlikely that the OCU will reform.
RAF Wyton has created an interim unit — CAST (Canberra Standards and Training) Flight to continue essential standardisation and training tasks, the Unit being equipped with a small number of aircraft and QFIs.
If the OCU does not reform then it will be a sad day, at the very least this unique RAF institution should have been allowed to ‘go out’ in style rather than simply vanish out of the back door.
Under Cover!
Winner of the 1990 FlyPast Twite Award is the Newark Air Museum for their aircraft exhibition hall.
Competition for the award was hotly contested, but Newark won by a neck for improving All of their exhibits in one fell swoop!
View inside NAM's award-winning Exhibition Hall.
EXCELLENCE, innovation and determination were the three targets FlyPast set member organisations of the British Aviation Preservation Council (BAPC) for the reformulated trophy in memory of the magazine's Founder-Editor, Mike Twite.
Those that entered, found the competition tough and the judging committee were impressed with the quality of the presentations made.
For the past five years, the prestigious trophy had been awarded through the voting of FlyPast readers.
During 1991, in consultation with Pat Twite, the decision was taken to change the direction of the award and use it to encourage museums and other organisations to strive for improvements in their respective fields and to align the award with the good works of the BAPC.
Pat has maintained strong links with the running of the trophy that carries the name of her husband and follows its judging with interest.
Mike Twite was one of eleven souls taken from us in the Varsity disaster of August 1984.
Key Publishing, who produce FlyPast , added a sum of £500 to go with the prestigious trophy and the associated publicity.
As well as having undertaken the nominated activity within 1990 and being members of the BAPC, entrants for the award had to assemble a small report giving the ‘whys’ and the ‘hows’of their particular project.
A judging panel of BAPC Executive Committee members and FlyPast writers tackled assessment of the entrants.
Receiving a unanimous vote was Newark Air Museum's (NAM) exhibition hangar.
Two other projects were so outstanding that it  was decided to declare them as Commendations, both co-incidentally going to DH Mosquito work, the Mosquito Aircraft Museum's completed restoration of TT.35 TA634 and the Night Fighter Preservation Team's on-going restoration of NF.IIHJ711.
In one act at the exhibition hangar gave NAM ‘back’ its workshop, enabling the restoration of Anson C.19 VL348 to come on apace; it allowed several of their exhibits the luxury of a controlled environment; gave the Museum an ‘all weather’visitor capability and made them a suitable location for the RAF Museum to loan them their Airspeed Oxford and North American Harvard — see the August issue.
All of this most certainly constituted the Excellence the award was looking to stimulate.
That the hanger showed Innovation goes without saying — enter the Oxford and the Harvard again.
The ability to display airframes and artifacts within such a building is only just beginning to be capitalised upon by NAM.
As a largely amateur run operation, a building of such proportions instantly qualifies for the requirement Determination .
Plans to build a display hangar on the NAM site go back to the early 1980s.
A patient period of fund-raising ensued using all sorts of ideas to bring money in to enable such an ambitious project to commence.
NAM Chairman Roger Bryan felt it was very important to remember every effort made at fund-raising, while at the time the work might have seemed far removed from aviation preservation, this work was incremental in the success of the overall project.
By 1989 fund-raising and the general economy were at such a position that a ‘Go’ decision was either to be made, or it would never happen.
Planning had always been centred around the acquisition of a suitable building elsewhere, followed by its removal and re-erection.
As the search intensified, a firm in Lincoln surfaced who could supply and erect a new building 200′ by 100′ and still be within the budget considered by NAM.
Pat Twite presents the trophy to NAM Chairman Roger Bryan in front of the RAF Museum's Harvard.
The excellence of the Exhibition Hangar made the loan of this aircraft possible.
This was too good an option to miss and in April 1989 the building was ordered.
NAM had bitten the bullet.
Fund-raising took on a new meaning and a massive mail-out was undertaken to companies, councils, tourist boards, charitable trusts etc.
No stone was left unturned.
During the summer NAM successfully renegotiated a new fifty year lease on their site — no point truing to cement their future with a display hall if someone was going to move not just the goalposts but the pitch.
Newark and Sherwood District Council showed their faith with a substantial grant towards the project.
Turf was first cut on November 2, 1989.
As the foundations went down, the spirits of the volunteers at NAM rocketed.
Steelwork and the cladding followed in quick succession.
Continual re-examining of the costing of the project allowed NAM to make savings  wherever possible.
The notion of putting down the hardcore floor of the hangar using NAM volunteers and not the contractor made it possible to slice £10,000 off the cost of the project.
An appeal went out locally for building rubble and the volunteers started their task two days prior to Christmas.
They moved more than 3,000 tonnes of soil and sourced more than a 1,000 tonnes of clean building rubble, completing this task by the middle of January 1990.
A low interest loan from an anonymous benefactor allowed the concrete floor to go in.
This loan moved the fund-raising timetable along considerably.
Easter had been set as the tentative date to ‘roll-in’ the first aircraft and everything was looking on course for this.
Concrete started pouring onto the hardcore in the first week of March.
A huge and intensive effort by the volunteers was being covered forever!
Six months after the turf was cut for the first time, Saab Safir 56321 was rolled-in with due ceremony on April 11, 1990 and all at NAM could feel justifiably proud of their achievement.
Ten other airframes followed and still the hangar seemed vast!
By moving indoors, several airframes could commence restoration programmes that before had  been difficult, or just very cold!
At the same moment, NAM's ‘workshop’ stopped being effectively a deep store and the Anson restoration could spread out.
Dove 1B G-AHRI moved inside to start its revival.
In their turn, the Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines Lee-Richards Annular Biplane replica (BAPC.20) and GAL Monospar VH-UTH will start restoration programmes after the Dove.
US bound.
Meteor F.4 VT229 during dismantling at Newark.
It is bound for Kermit Weeks' extensive restoration facility at Tamiami, Florida.
During August, two delicate replica airframes were placed on loan with NAM from Keith Fordyce's Torbay Aircraft Museum Collection.
Keith was impressed with the integrity of the conditions at Newark and was more than happy to come to a loan agreement.
The Fokker Dr.I and SE.5A were a portent of things to come…
By Christmas sealing of the hangar, electrical power and lighting were all complete and work on the displays could start in earnest.
Throughout the autumn, NAM had entered into negotiations with three national aviation collections relating to the potential loan of aircraft now that they had a display hangar of more than ‘professional’ standing.
NAM's massive project was given a firm ‘thumbs-up’ by the RAF Museum who delivered the Oxford and Harvard in May this year on loan.
Rounding-off an incredible period in the Museum's history, Pat Twite presented Roger Bryan on behalf of all at NAM with the 1990 Twite Award on September 11.
By chance, the Museum was also acting as host to a large delegation of Mayors and Councillors from the surrounding area and it is hoped that the significance of the presentation rubbed-off on them.
Through the display hangar, NAM has become not just a local attraction and amenity, but has developed into a regional, if not national, venue.
While the hangar has clearly attracted much of the limelight during the last couple of years, NAM have been undertaking a programme of conservation on their larger airframes.
One project that was underway on the day of the trophy presentation was the awesome task of repainting Vulcan B.2 XM594.
NAM's Membership Secretary Terry Musson is in charge of this project and has undertaken this work largely single-handed since July.
Terry has found the general condition of the airframe to be very good (it flew into Newark in February 1983) requiring ‘the usual work’ around the rivets.
Painting has all been achieved using a roller with a mixture prepared by a Derby company.
Terry has portioned up the mighty delta and has wisely opted to do the undersides during the winter!
So far, the nose of Vulcan B.2 has been repainted by Terry Musson.
Rub down of the port intake area was underway when this shot was taken.
Arriving at Newark two months after the Vulcan (but this time by road) was Meteor F.4 VT229.
The aircraft was presented to the Museum on extended loan and became part of NAM's ‘Meteor comer’ along with RB.108 test-bed FR.9 VZ608, T.7 VZ634, NF.12 WS692 and NF.14 WS739.
The aircraft serve to show the incredible adaptability of the design to take on new roles and new shapes.
Newark's newly-completed aircraft exhibition hall has not only transformed the Museum, but shows the way for others.
From September 9, dismantling of VT229 took place to enable it to be shipped to its owner, well-known collector, restorer and operator, Kermit Weeks.
Plans for VT229 to include its restoration to flying condition and it is hoped to display the aircraft in the colours of a wartime F.3.
NAM's Public Relations Officer, Howard Heeley, said that while the Museum were sorry to see the Mk 4 go, it was more than pleasing to know that it was intended to fly it again.
The magnificent FlyPast Twite Trophy is now proudly held at Newark.
The £500 is going towards additional support displays inside the exhibition hall and towards the installation of a new video surveillance system in the hall.
Entry forms for the 1991 FlyPast Twite Awards will be going out to BAPC member organisations in the New Year.
What next for NAM?
Chairman Roger Bryan said that the Museum had learnt from the sad example of others that the softly, softly approach was best.
‘There are some classic examples of project first, funds second,’ he explained, ‘Newark will not follow that path.’
Fund-raising is now underway for the next stage of development, a large entrance hall, lecture/video theatre and shop/catering area.
Following the learning curve of the exhibition hall, this project will await the gathering of a substantial fund, up to 1993, and then move into a step-by-step series of achievable and self-contained goals leading to the completion of the overall project.
OLD Sugar
Stuart Howe concludes his history of Hendon's Lancaster
D-DAY, June 6, 1944 when the Allied invasion of Europe began,Sugar took off under the command of F/O I Fotheringham of 467 Squadron at 02.53 hours on this momentous day and delivered its 13,000lb bomb load onto a coastal battery at St Pierre du Mont.
Just before midnight the same day, the same crew took Sugar to attack a road and rail target at Argentan, in support of the invading ground forces.
The V-1 Buzz-Bomb assault on London began on June 12, 1944 and Sugar's first attack against their launching sites was on the night of June 24 when it attacked a site at Prouville with P/O G C Skelton in command.
Next V-1 sortie was a daylight one at Beauvoir on June 29, R5868's first daylight sortie since its fourth operation with 83 Squadron on July 18, 1942, when it bombed the Krupps works at Essen.
John Young's wonderful recreation of Old Sugar is ‘March’ in the RAF Museum's 1992 Calendar and also available as a fine art print in the RAF Museum Shop's new series — see page 2 for more details.
On July 18 Sugar was one of 1,080 aircraft which unloaded some 5,000 tons of high explosive on enemy strong points in the Caen area, just before a ground offensive by British and Canadian troops.
Later the same day,Sugar was off again, this time to bomb the railway junction at Revigny.
This was to be Sugar's last operation for almost five months.
A view of Sugar's cockpit as she is at Hendon today.
Comparisons with page 32 are inevitable!
(Author, with many thanks to the RAF Museum)
Towards the end of July Sugar was dismantled and on August 3, 1944 it left Waddington to be refurbished by Avros, a long  overdue move, as by now the veteran Lancaster was really showing its age, with an increasing number of wing rivets popping out.
It was also due to be converted to H2S, which would be completed during the re-furbishment.
At the time it was widely believed that Sugar would not be returning to operational flying, as the following press release issued at the time seemed to indicate:
‘S-Sugar, the famous veteran Lancaster of RAF Bomber Command, which was the first heavy bomber to complete one hundred war flights, is unlikely to fly again on operations.
‘On her last, and 114th flight to bomb the railway yards at Revigny in Northern France, on July 18, Sugar's mainplane was damaged and repairs are not considered feasible.
‘When Sugar was on its way to Revigny, an enemy fighter was observed closing rapidly at 2,000 yards  range.
Evasive action was taken, and the fighter broke away at 700 yards.
P/O J W McManus and his crew pose with Sugar.
98 bomb symbols on the nose, in which case P/O Scholefield and crew flew the 99th!
(RAAF via Author)
‘I thought we had been hit in the starboard wing’, said the pilot F/O M G Johnson, of Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
‘But afterwards, I found that the noise that I had heard was the springing of rivets.
We went on to the target, all the same, and we not only bombed, but obtained a photograph of the aiming point at the moment of bombing.
‘On the way home, we were approached a second time, by an Me 109.
But this fighter sheered-off without firing a shot, after our rear gunner had given it several short bursts.
We reached base with the rest of our Squadron, though we had started ten minutes after them’.
‘Earlier that day, the bomber had taken part in the great daylight attack on Caen.
Three DFC's and one DSO have been won in Sugar, and just as it began its career with a daylight attack, it finished with another.
Sugar 's last 46 trips have been with an RAAF Squadron.
And F/O Johnson says: ‘If she flies again I should like to take her.’
The full extent of the work carried out is not known, but it is thought that at least the outboard wing panels were replaced but certainly it was given four new Merlin 22 engines, H2S and the navigation aid Rebecca , as well as a brand new paint scheme.
By November 17 Sugar was ready for collection and it arrived back at Waddington to re-join 467 Squadron on December 3, returning to a warm welcome by the Squadron personnel.
In R5868's absence Lancaster NF910 was code lettered ‘PO-S’, and then when R5868 returned was then re-lettered ‘PO-Q’.
This time there was no confusion.
Sugar's first operation after refurbish was a daylight attack on the Urft Dam, piloted by the Squadron's new CO, W/C J K Douglas, DFC, AFC.
Unfortunately there was ths cloud and when the bomber force reached the dam, it was obscured.
As orbiting was not permitted the force was withdrawn,Sugar landing back at Ford in Sussex.
The idea of the trip was to trap German forces with Americans in front and a sea of water behind them.
The nights of December 17, 18 and 19 were all raids of over nine hours duration.
First raid was on Munich when the Squadron sent out 22 out of the 88 aircraft despatched that night.
The second attack on the 18th was on shipping and dock installations in the Port of Gdynia in Poland on the Baltic Sea, and the third was on the synthetic oil plant at Politz near Stetin.
On its return from the last raid Sugar diverted to Leuchars in Scotland after a sortie lasting 10 hours 51 minutes, which turned out to be her longest flight of the war.
Sugar's 1st raid of the year was a daylight attack on the railway marshalling yards at Rheydt, captained by F/L M G Johnson, who had already flown Sugar on several previous occasions.
Another member of the Squadron, air bomber Colin Gifford, remembers Johnson declaring Sugar the best aeroplane on the Squadron after having got him through some violent evasive action one night.
New Year's day, 1945, was no holiday for Sugar and the other crews at Waddington, for the target that night was the Gravenhorst-Mittelland canal, but on the return bad weather again forced Sugar to divert to Scotland, this time to Lossiemouth.
Once again, we come across of the Squadron's Operation Record Book (ORB) to record a sortie carried out by Sugar .
The logbook of mid-upper gunner Albert F Wallace clearly shows him as having flown in Sugar during the early hours of January 5.
Captained by F/O Laurie W Baker, they took-off at 01.12 hours on a six-hour round trip to Royan, where they unloaded their 12,400lb bombload onto troop concentrations in the area, encountering moderate flak .
The flying logbook is an official document which is carefully filled in after each flight, and after each month's flying the entries are verified and then signed by the Flight Commander and the Squadron's Officer Commanding as being correct.
With the fact that Sugar was the regular mount for Wallace and Baker, there is a definite case for adding the January 5 mission to Sugar's official tally of trips.
After a short break,Sugar's next sortie was a ten-hour trip to bomb the Politz oil works where light flak and searchlights were encountered over the target.
The following sortie, on the 14/16th, was to bomb the synthetic oil plant at Merseburg-Leuna, diverting on its return to East Moor in Yorkshire along with other aircraft of the Squadron, returning back to base the following day.
A third lengthy sortie was carried-out on the 16/17th to attack the synthetic oil plant at Brux in Czechoslovakia, carrying a full fuel load of 2,154 gallons.
During its bombing run, a piece of flak pierced the bomb aimer's blister, slightly injuring the bomb aimer in the process.
After its sortie to Karlsruhe on February 2/3,Sugar was ‘rested’ for six weeks in order to make a goodwill tour of US 8th Air Force bases in England.
For this tour Sugar also carried two engine fitters and an airframe fitter, Cecil W Brownlee, as well as the air crew.
Cecil recalls that for the tour the crew members were drawn from various squadrons from 5 Group.
Captained by W/C F M Osborn from Coningsby.
Only the three groundcrew were Australians, the aircrew being drawn from the RAF.
After assembling at Waddington,Sugar was flown to Bovington in Hertfordshire on February 10 to visit the US 8th Air Force Headquarters at High Wycombe, where the crew were warmly received, and then started its tour of the bases.
Cecil recalls that one of the bases was Great Ashfield and other Woodbridge, one of the three emergency strips located on the east coast, Cecil particularly recalling the very long runway there.
Most of the airfields were bomber units, with the exception of Debden in Essex, a Mustang base, where they were talked down by the American Ground Controllers after exercising around in fog for some time.
After her return to operations,Sugar's first trip was to Wurzburg on March 16/17, followed by another on 20/21, this time again piloted by Laurie Baker on a 1,560 mile trip to attack the Bohlen oil works, where they met only moderate defences.
The new Squadron CO, W/C H A Hay, decided to take Sugar on her next operation which was to Bremen to attack a railway bridge that was vital to enemy communications, a daylight operation on the 22nd.
Wireless operator on this trip was Sgt George H Wing and he recounts an amusing incident:
‘Our pilot W/C Hay, being the Squadron Leader, was to be one of the leading aircraft.
We formed up over the Channel, and it was my job to fire the Very pistol, with pre-arranged colour flares, so all the other Lancs knew which aircraft to form up on.
In the Lancaster we never wore our parachutes, only the harness, which was kept handy nearby ready to clip on in an emergency.
‘When it was time for me to fire the very pistol, I had to get up from the wireless operator's seat and had to move my parachute — which was always as close to my feet as possible and instead of lifting it up by the canvas carrying handle, I lifted it up by the metal handle (the rip cord) and so had a bundle of silk to get out of the way.
‘There was plenty of flak over the target area, and I kept looking at my useless chute, yet at the same time it was treated as a huge joke by us all, with the rest of the crew saying that no way was I going down with any of them if need be!
I must admit, though, I was very pleased when we landed back at base’.
George Wing had been with Hay ever since they met at 1660 Heavy Bomber Conversion Unit.
Hay had already completed a tour of operations in the Middle East on twin-engined aircraft and was converting onto heavies at the HBCU.
George had gone there straight from Operation Conversion Unit.
Before the Bremen sortie, George's only flight in Sugar was a two hour forty minute trip to Martlesham Heath on March 19.
Early evening on the 23rd Laurie Baker took Sugar to bomb troop concentrations at Wesel, just across the river Rhine, the purpose of the attack being to soften-up the enemy positions prior to the crossing of the Rhine by our ground forces.
It was full moon that night, which provided good visual bombing.
The Rhine was crossed the following day with minimal casualties.
On the 27th the same combination of crew and aircraft attacked the U-Boat pens at Farge, near Bremen, but this time the flak was really close, causing seven small holes, including one  of the crew windows.
Although it doesn't quite tie-up with the listing of Sugar's operations, Albert Wallace's logbook states that it was Sugar's ‘130th Operation’.
Approaching her 100th operation, Sugar gets a check-over from her groundcrew.
Armourers are about to load-up a 4,000lb Cookie and at least a dozen 500lb bombs are ready for the night's operation.
The CO took the next trip, to Nordhausen on April 4, but on this occasion carried an eighth crew member who acted as a second pilot.
On the 6th S/L W M Kynock took the veteran Lancaster to Ijmuiden in Holland, but owing to cloud cover over the target, the Master Bomber turned back Sugar and the rest of the Lancaster force and no attack was made.
For a change, this was a comparatively short flight.
Next trip, on April 9, by the CO, was to be Sugar's last daylight sortie when it was one of forty Lancasters that attacked oil storage tanks at Hamburg.
On April 16/17 Sugar took her crew on a raid on the marshalling yards at Pilsen in Czechoslovakia, this time a flight of over eight hours duration, but on the return home a diversion was made into Boscombe Down.
The very next night Laurie Baker took her to Komotau, also in Czechoslovakia, to give the railway yards there a load of bombs.
There was no flak or fighters and it was an easy trip, but on the return a diversion was made to Lyneham in Wiltshire, the crew and Sugar returning to base the following day, this flight lasting 45 minutes.
It fell to Laurie and his crew to take Sugar on her ‘137th’ and last operational sortie on April 23, 1945, to attack U-Boats at Flensburg.
However, when the force of 59 Lancasters arrived over the port, the area was covered in cloud and the Deputy Leader called-off the attack.
The gallant Lanc had flown over 800 hours on operations and had dropped around 500 tons of bombs, as well as many more flying hours on air tests and cross-countries.
Altogether a quite remarkable achievement.
Only one other Lancaster exceeded R5868's tally of operations, which was Lancaster III ED888 of 103 and 576 Squadrons with a tally of 146.
As in the case of Sugar , the ORB's of both of these Squadrons are incomplete regarding ED888, but it is fairly certain that it completed at least 140 operations.
Also like Sugar , it was to survive the war, but was scrapped and struck off charge on January 8, 1947.
Although Sugar's war was now over, the sound of her engines were to be heard over Europe on many more occasions over the next few weeks.
No 467 Squadron took part in one more raid on April 25, to attack oil storage tanks on Tonsberg in Norway, but Sugar was not one of them.
Instead W/C Hay took her to Brussels the same morning to finalise the bringing home of released Prisoners of War.
With the negotiations over,Sugar returned the same afternoon with between eighteen and twenty PoWs, landing at Westcott to disembark its passengers and then return to Waddington.
George Wing describes his emotions on this trip:
‘The memory will always be with me of those  lads' faces, even though at the time I was only twenty years old myself, to see them sat on the floor of the aircraft, and some of the trying to negotiate the main spar, and the cheers and tears when we came over the white cliffs of England.
One of my happiest flights’.
Back to being Queenie, R5868 on the gate at Scampton in July 1971, shortly before removal to Bicester for restoration.
Sugar was the first aircraft to undertake such a mercy flight, and over the next two or three weeks many other Lancasters made similar trips from all over Europe.
These mercy flights were operated under the code name Exodus , with 467 Squadron making 27 such flights in all, each bringing home 24 ex-PoWs.
Sugar flew quite a number of these Exodus flights, including another one by Hay from Waddington to Jouvincourt in France on May 4, letting-off his grateful passengers at Dunsfold before returning to base.
On May 7, the Squadron CO then took Sugar on a tour of European cities to check on the suitability of certain enemy airfields to accept Allied heavy aircraft.
The 6 hour 45 minute trip took them to Amiens, Mannheim, Kitzingen, Wurzburg, Frankfurt, Brussels, Wing and then back to base.
Landings were made at Wurzburg and Frankfurt, but only the pilot and navigator were allowed to get out.
 This flight became another ‘first’ for Sugar , as it was the first Lancaster to land on an ‘enemy’airfield!
Hostilities in Europe ended on May 8, and soon after the Squadron was informed that it would be going to the Far East as part of the ‘Tiger Force’, and on June 16 Sugar went with the rest of the unit to Metheringham to prepare for the move.
When the war in the Pacific ended on August 15, ‘Tiger Force’ was disbanded early the following month.
Very soon after, on September 30, 467 Squadron was disbanded, with many of its air and groundcrews going home to Australia, where today there is still a great affection for Old Sugar .
On September 23, 1945,Sugar bade farewell to Waddington and flew to 15 Maintenance Unit (MU) at Wroughton for storage.
It is not known if at this stage Sugar was earmarked for preservation, or whether it was simply put into storage along with hundreds of other Lancasters to await their fate.
On September 1, 1947, it was declared a ‘Non Effective’ Airframe.
She was not scrapped and remained at Wroughton where on March 16, 1956, she was officially transferred to the RAF's Historical Aircraft Collection, which at that time was widely dispersed at such locations such as Gaydon and Fulbeck.
On March 13, 1956, she was assigned the Maintenance Command serial 7325M, for display purposes.
She was thought to have remained at Wroughton until delivered to Scampton late in 1958 or early 1959, where she had commenced operations seventeen years earlier, to be looked after and displayed by the Station.
Sugar was on hand as part of a static display of aircraft on May 14, 1956, when Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother presented 617 Squadron with its standard.
R6858 was later displayed at the entrance to Scampton and when 83 Squadron returned to the Station, by now equipped with another Avro classic, the Vulcan, the 467 Squadron code letters were replaced by its original markings of ‘OL-Q’.
During the many years it was to remain at Scampton R5868 was maintained and also given the occasional coat of paint.
It was also regularly inspected by the Station Commander, who appointed an officer to be in charge of the aircraft.
The Lanc that been allocated to the RAF Museum was PA474 and after the end of its active life it was flown into the Museum's storage  and restoration facility at Henlow on September 25, 1964, to await the opening of a new museum.
While at Henlow PA474 was ‘discovered’ by members of 44 (Rhodesia) Squadron, based at Waddington on the Vulcan.
The Squadron had been the first to receive the Lancaster in December 1941, and W/C d'Arcy, the Squadron's commander, was anxious to find a Lancaster for display at Waddington as a reminder of the unit's close association with the type.
As the recently-formed RAF Museum was still several years away from having its own permanent display building, D'Arcy persuaded the Air Historical Branch to release PA474 to him in order that he could properly restore it and keep it under cover.
After closer inspection PA474 was found to be in excellent condition and permission was granted to fly it to Waddington, where it arrived on August 18, 1965.
At Waddington PA474 was restored to full airworthy condition and Air Force Board authority was obtained to fly it at certain RAF Fiftieth Anniversary celebrations in 1968.
On November 5, 1969 the Ministry of Defence (MoD) sought the RAF Museum's approval to keep PA474 flying right up to the date that it was due to go into Hendon, which the Museum agreed to.
When the time approached for a decision on when to ground PA474, the feeling within the RAF was that PA474 should be kept airworthy for at least another ten years, and the suggestion was made that R5868 should go to Hendon instead, as it was by far the most historical of the two Lancasters.
ACM Sir Denis Spotiswood supported this solution and arranged for a survey of R5868 to be carried-out to assess its general condition and the work that would be involved to bring it up to display condition.
R5868 was surveyed on July 7, 1970 by F/O R M Forder of 71 MU, Bicester, accompanied by Jack Bruce, Deputy Keeper of the RAF Museum.
The survey was mainly restricted to the exterior of the Lancaster and estimated that it would take 2,000 man hours to bring R5868 up to exhibition standards externally.
On July 15, 1970, the RAF Museum were informed that the MoD had decided that R5868 should replace PA474 as the Museum's exhibit, with HQ Maintenance Command tasked with the dismantling and refurbishment of R5868.
No 71 MU, the RAF's prime repair and recovery organisation, dismantled Queenie and left with the Lancaster for their base at Bicester on August 24, 1970.
The restoration team was initially led by C/T Henry, followed later by Sgt Thomason and in the finishing stages by C/T Stanley, with F/L Peaple in overall charge of the restoration.
Late in 1970 the substantial remains of Lancaster I EE173 of 207 Squadron were discovered in Lake Krumme in the suburbs of West Berlin and after the German authorities salvaged the aircraft, the RAF Museum were offered the opportunity to keep such items as might be useful for the restoration of R5868.
Amongst the items salvaged were a complete Merlin engine, propellers, guns and instruments and the Deputy Keeper of the RAF Museum, Jack Bruce, flew out to Berlin to inspect the items, but it is not known if any of the items were suitable for use.
EE173 had completed a raid on Berlin on January 15, 1944 when it was shot down, its crew being listed as missing.
The task of painting R5868 was given to RAF St Athan.
Before it left Scampton it was inspected to gauge the material and manpower needed to re-finish the aircraft, and while it was at Bicester a team from St Athan completely stripped the Lancaster, although it was decided not to apply its new paint scheme until it was finally in situ at the RAF Museum, to avoid damaging the paintwork on its journey to Hendon.
At last the restoration was completed and R5868 looked as if it had just come off the production line, a fine tribute to F/L Peaple and his team.
Under the direction of Sgt Hayter the Lancaster was loaded onto six Queen Maries, three of which were wide loads, and started the journey to Hendon.
With an overnight stop at Northolt the convoy reached Hendon, accompanied by a police motorcycle escort, on March 20, 1972.
Sgt Hayter's problems were only half over as the height of the museum building was too low to allow assembly inside the building, so R5868 had to be assembled outside.
Minus one wing it was carefully moved inside with just two and a half inches clearance from the tail and the side of the building!
When inside the wing was attached, polythene sheeting was thrown up all around and the Lancaster emerged from its respray in its most famous guise of S-for-Sugar .
Jack Bruce had thoroughly researched the markings and colour scheme of Sugar , in which he received assistance from several sources, including Harry Holmes, then Market Information Officer of Hawker Siddeley Aviation Ltd, Manchester.
Although from the outside Sugar looked very complete, from the inside it was very different with much of the internal equipment fittings and instruments long since gone.
Ted Willoughby, who had looked after Sugar throughout its service with 467 Squadron, came on to the scene and offered to try and find the missing items and then re-fit them to the aircraft, to which Jack Bruce readily agreed.
One of Ted's first tasks was to pass on his advice about the installation of the starboard inner engine on Sugar , following which he made a sortie to RAF Catterick where several Shackletons at the Fire School there yielded a number of instruments that were compatible to the Lancaster.
Sugar again.
Inside the Bomber Command Hall, finishing touches being carried out before ‘curtain up’.
A further boost to Ted's detective work came when the broadcaster Raymond Baxter put out an appeal for instruments during his commentary at the Farnborough Air Show in September 1972.
One of the first replies came from W M Allan Ltd of Dudley who offered a Lancaster Control Panel Box, the company having made these items during the war.
A C Gray of Cambridge offered a Mk.X Oxygen Regulator, four aircraft O&sup2; bottles, two portable O&sup2; bottles and two rmp counters, all of which were gratefully received by the Museum.
Kenneth Shores of Honiton sent an eight day clock, while Norman G Bird of Keighley, who was in charge of engine testing at Avro's Yeadon factory, offered many items including a P4 compass, Astro compass, bomb switches, blind approach meter and numerous gauges.
D Goldstein of Staravia Ltd, Ascot, who has long been a good friend of the aircraft preservation movement, offered a range of instruments.
These and many offers of assistance came in, were collected and them fitted by Ted Willoughby into Sugar .
In August 1974 Brian Johnson broadcast an appeal for radio equipment, which resulted in many offers, some of which the Museum were able to accept.
An appeal was also made in the magazine Radio Communications which also resulted in several offers, including some Gee equipment from F W Milford of Norbury, London.
Another appeal, this time in the newsletter of the RAF Amateur Radio Society brought forth a much needed morse key, followed by offers of several others!
Steve Pope of Dereham, Norfolk, has been concentrating in recent times on improving the radio fit in Sugar and a number of boxes have been found on the shelves at the Museum's store and restoration facility at Cardington.
These included the H2S and Gee indicators and the IFF Transmitter/Receiver, although some of the boxes did not have connectors attached which will have to be made up.
A number of the mounting trays are still missing, especially the ones for the Standard Beam Approach boxes.
One of the problems Steve has encountered is finding the exact locations of where some of the equipment was installed.
Much equipment is still sought by Steve, including Monica Mk 1, H2S Mk 11B,Lucero and Rebecca and much more.
Early in 1983 the new Bomber Command Hall extension had been completed and Sugar was moved the few yards to take pride of place at the entrance to the exhibition, where she still is today.
Without doubt, this veteran Lancaster is still the most popular exhibit at the RAF Museum, and young and old alike stare in awe at this great aircraft and wonder at its remarkable achievements.
The Author would like to thank the RAF Museum for its co-operation in the making of this article, and for allowing reference to its own publication on Sugar, A Very Special Lancaster by F E Dymond.
Sugar's story is by no means complete and the Author would like to hear from anyone who was associated or remembers R5868 to get in touch with him.
Photographs will also be very welcome.
AIR SHOW 91
GENESEO
Air-to-air action from the Wings of Eagles display, hosted by the National Warplane Museum, Geneseo, New York, August 17/18, from Chuck Sloat.
Top left: NWM's own PBY-6A Catalina N7057C on let-down to the lush Geneseo, all-grass, airfield.
Left: Rick Korff's Cavalier Mustang N151RK Six Shooter — a regular Geneseo supporter.
Above: B-17s have become an integral part of the Wings of Eagles show.
CAF Headquarters PB-1W N7227C Texas Raiders regularly makes the trek north.
Below: Dan Keller's NA-64 Yale N3406 leads another in formation over the New York State greensward.
Above: Finningley's show was dominated by the Russian Knights Su-27 Flanker team, who provided a four-ship and singleton routine.
Above: Victor again.
Starting Rare Bear, Lyle Shelton's outstanding Bearcat.
Below, left: The Burt Rutan-designed Pond Racer suffered engine problems during its Reno debut.
Above: Star of Shuttleworth's September 1 show was the twin Miles Magister fly-by; Shoreham-based G-AKPF and resident G-AJRS.
Below, left: Angus McVitie delighted the crowds at Old Warden on September 1 with Percival Gull G-ADPR.
OPTIONS for CHANGE
RAF MUSEUM have announced a series of changes to their ‘fleet’ that involve some intricate ‘ins’and ‘outs’at Hendon.
Robert Rudhall reports.
WHILE the Ministry of Defence may be looking at major cut-backs in all three forces, the RAF Museum (RAFM) has announced its own form of Options for Change that will see a welcome major change in the aircraft exhibits at Hendon.
At a briefing given on September 19, Dr Michael Fopp, Director of the RAFM, announced that, starting on November 1 and taking until February 7 next year, Hendon will see the departure of five airframes and the arrival for display of six ‘new’ aircraft.
This major reorganisation of the aircraft exhibits at Hendon is by far the biggest move of airframes that the Museum has seen since its opening in 1972.
The changes will involve the moving of some 35 aircraft that are on display inside the main Museum.
Aircraft leaving Hendon include three that have been on show since 1972: Hawker P.1127 XP831 will be placed on loan with the Science Museum and be displayed at South Kensington.
Hawker Sea Fury FB.11 VX653 will take-up residence with The Fighter Collection (TFC) at Duxford, where it will be restored to flying condition; Mosquito T.III TW117 is being removed from display and placed in temporary storage.
The former Benson gate guard Spitfire PR.XIX PM651 will return to St Athan and be placed in storage along with the remaining Spitfires that were brought in out of the cold some time ago.
Largest aircraft to leave the Museum and  the one that could give the most problems when it comes to moving it, is former Spanish Dornier Do 24 flying boat HD5-1.
This large, three-engined, beast is being placed on a 21 year loan to the Dutch Military Aviation Museum at Kamp Zeist, near Soesterberg, where it will be displayed in Dutch Far East markings.
To many, the arrival of the Dornier at Hendon was an irrelevancy in terms of RAF history, and it will find a far more apposite home in the Netherlands.
Of all the aircraft to move, the Dornier will be the first, needing the removal of the engines, the wing and the tailplane before it can be brought out of the Museum, through the Bomber Command Hall.
This will entail removing the port outer engine and outer wing assembly of Lancaster R5868 (see page 49) and moving it slightly sideways.
All aircraft entering and leaving the Museum will need to take this route, through to the only large capacity doors in the complex.
Watching the dismantling of the Do 24 with great interest will be a team of Dutch engineers from the Militaire Luchvaart Museum , who will be making a video of the event to aid them in the task of reassembling the flying boat in Holland.
Taking the Dornier's position will be Hudson A16-199, itself needing the other wings removed before it can be towed from its current position through the Sydney Camm Hall in the centre of the display area, and back down past the Beaufighter and Belvedere, finally being positioned opposite the Stranraer flying-boat.
Standing next to the Hudson will be the eagerly-awaited Bristol Beaufort, currently being prepared at Cardington, this aircraft will be displayed as ‘DD931’, a 42 Squadron Mk I of Coastal Command.
Positioned next to the Beaufort will be the existing Beaufighter, thereby creating a classic Coastal Command line-up, around which will be displayed various associated exhibits, Leigh light, airborne lifeboat etc.
Alongside the Beaufighter and replacing the Sea Fury will be the Hawker Tempest II ‘PR536’ /HA457 which has been restored to static condition for the RAFM by TFC at Duxford.
The Tempest will remind visitors of the type's connection with India.
Replica BE.2b 687/BAPC.181, built by John McKenzie from original drawings with many original fittings, is currently at Cardington for final rigging adjustments.
On completion, the ‘BE’ will join the extensive line-up of World War One types in the main hall.
On a more modern note, replacing the P.1127 will be Harrier GR.3 XZ997, a combat veteran.
This ex 4 Squadron machine carried-out the first successful laser guided bomb attack on Tumbledown, flown by W/C Squire, during the Falklands campaign in 1982.
Only change to the Bomber Command Hall will come with the removal of the Mosquito T.III, which is being replaced with the much more appropriate Mosquito B.35 TJ138, which has been refurbished at St Athan.
This will possibly be the easiest of the aircraft moves as the Mossie is nearest the doors of the Museum.
Eventually to be positioned next to the Swift, the RAFM's first-ever ‘touch-and=try’(jargon would have it as ‘visitor-inter-active’!) aircraft is already on site, Jet Provost T.3A XM463 from 1 FTS at Linton-on-Ouse.
This has been configured so that visitors to the Museum can see in the cockpit and operate the flying controls to see for themselves the effects of stick on elevators and rudder.
To prevent the inevitable ‘sticky fingers’ brigade from damaging the aircraft, the instrument panel has been covered with perspex.
This major rearrangement of the aircraft will enable the RAFM to reposition some of the existing aircraft, for example, the Fairey Battle will occupy the place vacated by the Hudson and there will be a general shuffle around with the Proctor and C.30A autogiro.
Planning has been taking place on this restructure for some months now with close liaison between RAFM and the Aircraft Salvage and Transportation Flight at Abingdon, who will be responsible for all of the dismantling and moving of the airframes.
The Museum will remain open to the public during the restructuring programme, providing many photographic opportunities — the sight of a Beaufort, Do 24 or Harrier in the RAFM car park doesn't happen every day of the week!
Overlooked in the light of the more exotic aircraft is the RAFM's ‘new’ gate guard, an ex-85 Squadron Bloodhound 2 surface to air missile.
Recently retired from RAF front line service, the Dog arrived on site during September to take-up position near the main entrance to the site.
Above: Lovely, but, to many, an irrelevancy at Hendon.
The Dornier DO 24 is bound for the Netherlands.
Left: In — Bloodhound surface to air missile, newly-retired from 85 Squadron.
Fair Left: New — Detail from the Whittle display.
Right: In — Jet Provost T.3A XM463, a ‘touch-and-try’ exhibit.
american classics
Harlows
MAX B HARLOW graduated from Stanford University in 1927 and during the next ten years or so worked for various aircraft manufacturers, including Thaden, Bach, Waldo Waterman, Allan Lockheed, Bert Kinner, Northrop and Douglas, where he was involved in stress analysis for the DC-2.
By 1935 he had joined the Pasadena Junior College as Professor in charge of aeronautics.
While there he helped Howard Hughes with his racer.
He also persuaded the college authorities that they ought to embark on a class project and construction was started in November 1936.
Ten months later the PJC-1 was test-flown — accounting for the odd designation.
Trials for certification went well until a spin test dictated by the Bureau of Air Commerce (later CAA) resulted in a flat spin, whereupon the pilot, Jack Kelley, abandoned the aircraft by parachute and it was destroyed.
Despite the accident, sponsors were impressed with the PJC-1's performance, and the first PJC-2 was soon built, modified so that the crossed-controls which resulted in the earlier accident, could not again occur.
The new aircraft passed all certification tests and on August 26, 1938 was granted ATC-659.
To manufacture the aircraft the Harlow Aircraft Co was incorporated in 1939, at Alhambra Airport in California, with some financial support from Howard Hughes.
PJC-1 and PJC-2 were both low-wing two-four seaters, depending on whether there was a huge or small baggage compartment.
Power was supplied in both models by a 145hp Warner Super Scarab 50 radial engine.
Construction was all metal, with a semi-monocoque fuselage, using 24ST ‘dural’, the skin being riveted over dural rings.
The cabin was entered via a door on the starboard side, off the wing-walk.
Normally two seats, side-by-side, were provided, with space for 130lbs of baggage, but with baggage reduced to 80lbs, two more could be seated behind — presumably children as only 174lbs were allowed.
Wing was a one piece semi-monocoque cantilever structure, with ribs and stringers, covered with 24ST ‘Alclad’ sheet.
Split trailing edge flaps were fitted for use on landing only.
A 34 gallon fuel tank was placed below the cabin floor.
The undercarriage was fully retractable inwards into the wing, with a 90″ track.
The tail-wheel was not retractable, but could be steerable as an option.
The fixed tail surfaces were all-metal, but the elevators and rudder were fabric covered.
Adjustable trim-tabs were fitted to the elevators.
Many accessories were standard, but the wooden Hartzell propeller could be replaced by a Curtiss Reed metal one.
Production of the PJC-2 started in 1940, the first three being built to an order by the Civil Aeronautics Administration, to be used by their inspectors.
The aircraft proved popular with the pilots and a further three were ordered by the CAA.
Apart from these, only four other PJC-2s were ordered by private pilots and together with the prototype, eleven were sold when the need to build-up America's defences led to a curb on the use of strategic materials and production ceased.
While the PJC-2 was being put into production, Max Harlow was also engaged on modifying the design as a trainer, seating two in tandem.
This was known as the PC-5A and flew for the first time in July 1939.
In many ways it was the same as the PJC-2, using the same wing and control surfaces, but the fuselage was narrower and four inches longer.
Power was supplied by a 165hp Warner Super Scarab 165-D.
Each pilot had a separate door on the right hand side, off a wing walk.
Attempts were made to sell the PC-5 to the USAAC, but they showed no interest, due to the use of strategic materials.
early orders did not materialise, but Intercontinent Corp took a large share in Harlow Aircraft and bought three PC-5s as overseas demonstrators.
They were alleged to have ordered for 28 PC-5s overseas, but this probably never materialised.
Intercontinent were assisting in the formation of Hindustan Aircraft in India, and an assembly line for the PC-5A was set-up there.
The first PC-5A assembled in India was flown for the first time in August 1941 and one report suggests that fifty were delivered to the Indian Air Force from 1942, but this has not been confirmed.
The only positive information is that one PC-5A was registered VT-ATN in 1945, and remained on the register until 1955.
With the constructors number 501, it may have been the only aircraft built.
Intercontinent attempted to develop the PC-5 as the simplified PC-6 but this lost a wing in early test flights, killing the test-pilot Jack O'Meara.
No other aircraft were produced and Harlow passed the war years in subcontract work.
Max Harlow had given-up his management responsibilities when Intercontinent took an interest, returning to his teaching duties.
He did inherit the assets of the Company post war, but took the projects no further.
NC54KC was one of the CAA fleet, originally as NC54.
It is seen here as Oshkosh in 1984.
CATCHING-UP WITH THE past
Rendcomb aerodrome in the Cotswolds re-opened on September 15.
In this day and age a remarkable enough event, but Rendcomb is a World War One flying field and it has been returned to life with an eye on its heritage.
Ken Ellis reports.
Rendcomb now boasts a double row of period-style hangars alongside the refurbished ‘Officers Mess’
Vic Norman and Brendan O'Brien combined their Stearman prowess to produce a lovely synchronized aerobatic routine.
IN THE DARK days of 1916, what might have been called the ‘Battle of Britain’ was being fought only partially in the skies over the homeland.
While there were several theatres of operation, it was the carnage of the Western Front, in Belgium and France, where the destinies of several Empires  were being determined.
From the moment it was obvious that the Schlieffen Plan had failed and that Imperial Germany was not to sweep through to Paris in a brief, punitive, conflict, the Great War became one of grinding attrition.
The objective was not outright dominance, it was posturing for who would head the table and set the agenda at the peace conference.
Aerial warfare was growing and maturing by the minute as method after method of breaking the deadlock was tried out.
Essentially, the air war was one of reconnaissance and counter-reconnaissance.
Aircrew training was as much in its infancy as aerial warfare itself and there was a never-ceasing demand for pilots at the Front.
It was for this reason that Rendcomb aerodrome, nestled in the Cotswolds, came into being in 1916.
Included in the small collection of buildings that constituted the training field there was a mortuary and the pilots had a rota to attend burials.
While the mortality  rate at Rendcomb was high, it was merely a preparation for what pilots could expect to face in France.
And it was but a tiny fraction of the Armageddon that was the front line…
By 1921, Rendcomb had returned to farming.
As our June 1991 issue revealed, Rendcomb has bucked the odds and become a very fine aerodrome again, in the hands of Vic Norman, Torquil Norman and their friends.
Despite the surnames, Vic and Norman are not related, they share a passion for historic aviation and the Cotswolds, all of which has gelled into Rendcomb.
Since our June issue, we have chosen to standardise and dropped the ‘e’ from the name; sources are 50/50 on the spelling!
Sydney Newton proudly showing off his RFC logbook and the first page of his many entries under Rendcomb.
Seventy-five years on, Vic and Torquil succeeded in focussing much effort into a grand opening of their aerodrome on Battle of Britain Day 1991.
Rendcomb ‘fought’ the battle in 1940 in terms of the never-ceasing need to feed a population at war.
Now the centre-piece of the ‘new’, lush, grass, airfield, and serving as the ‘Officers Mess’ is a surviving building from the field's brief ‘other’life, a totally restored relic of a war that grows more and more a second-hand experience as every day ticks by.
The ‘Mess’ is now thought to have been the Quartermaster's Stores.
September 15 was a day of great significance for the two Normans and all who had helped them, for the local area and for aviation itself.
An airfield reborn.
An airfield restored, tastefully so.
An airfield that is an asset to the local community.
An airfield that can serve as a focus for, and a monument to, an era of aviation long gone.
Visitors came by air and by road to congratulate and to celebrate.
There was a deliberate garden party atmosphere as the picnics came out and corks popped among the invited audience and the locals who had been very keen to see the new happening within their midst.
Derelict World War One building on the north side of the aerodrome, now part of a farm.
This shot was taken from where the original hangars were erected.
Those wingborne came only in historic aircraft and the flying display was a vivid expression of the joys of classic aircraft set against a near-perfect sky and on a landing ground new to the late 20th Century.
From now on, the aerodrome is open to visitors, but by prior permission only and only aerial carriages of some distinction and age will be permitted to alight.
Three Fokker Dr.I replicas made for a fascinating sight, added to which came the Great War Combat Team and a decidedly real SE.5A.
From another war, only 21 years ahead in time but a quantum leap away in development, came Dave Gilmour's P-51D (in the hands of Robs Lamplough) and The Fighter Collection's Hurricane (with Stephen Grey at the helm).
But the day belonged to biplanes with a stirring co-ordinated aerobatic routine from Vic Norman and Brendan O'Brien in Stearmen; lyrical singleton aerobatics routines from types as varied as Jungmann, Great Lakes and Stampe; Barry Tempest crazy flying and taking much advantage of the local topography; the Diamond Nine Tiger Moth team dominating the intimate skyline with their outstanding final burst; the Tiger Walk twin Tiger Moth girl-on-the-wing team; with the weather preventing a migration to France for a booking, the Crunchie Flying Circus aerobatic girls-on-the-wing attended for a show on ‘home’ territory.
Diamond Nine's parachute squad completed a day laden with atmosphere.
Both Torquil and Vic were taken over in pace during the day by the aerodrome itself.
The past is only ever just over the shoulder and all day artifacts from Rendcomb's valiant time as a Great War training ground came ‘home’ to the careful hands of its new owners.
Torquil Norman summed-up the ‘life’ that the airfield had regained, ‘the place has grown a pace more through its own heritage than our input…it has taken on its own momentum…’
Sitting quietly among his family was a man who knew of the ‘old’ Rendcomb only too well.
Sydney Newton was born on January 10, 1900 and now lives locally.
Proudly holding his RFC logbook, in which is a section headed ‘Rendcomb’— here was a man who had flown from the aerodrome not for recreation and a sense of history, but to ready himself and others for war.
Interior of the ‘Officers Mess’ after its complete refurbishment.
It may well be that this building was the Quartermasters Stores originally.
Sydney was only too pleased to share his memories with Rendcomb's modern-day visitors.
He learned to fly on Caudrons at Hendon and then moved on to BE.2s.
He moved to Rendcomb (it's with the ‘e’ in his logbook!) in July 1918, by which time he was flying the type most associated with the aerodrome, the Bristol F.2b.
Vic Norman (left) and Torquil Norman  take a moment to pause and reflect on the aerodrome they have brought back to life.
Life was hectic and difficult, it was Sydney that had given the information about the mortuary and the duty rota.
He pointed towards the firing butts and explained to Vic Norman how the aircraft were positioned to try the guns.
Sydney told Vic that there should be plenty of shell cases to be found over there, a delighted Vic explained that  a workman had found hundreds and that the remains of the butts were still in place!
Sydney's closest call operating out of Rendcomb was in a Brisfit shortly after his arrival.
On July 25, 1918 he became lost on a solo exercise in mist and cloud.
He flew around hoping for a break in the visibility.
None came.
Out of fuel, he descended and crash-landed near Burford.
He saw a stonewall coming up and ‘got out smartish’, Sydney believes this  saved his life.
Upon examining the wreck the engine had shot backwards into the cockpit.
Injured, he remembers little after that.
A ‘toff’ in a car rolled-up and helped him.
The main thrust of his para-medic care was to give Sydney ‘very nearly half a pint of sloe gin’.
He stopped flying after demob in 1920.
During World War Two he worked at Boscombe Down on what he guardedly called ‘communications development’.
Moving to the Cotswolds, Sydney heard of the rebirth of ‘his’ aerodrome and was ‘flattered’to be hosted by its new owners.
Sydney said that he was very pleased that someone should want to take the time, money and effort to operate a Great War aerodrome and expressed his thanks to Torquil, Vic and all that had made it possible…
A lot of people would like to join him in those sentiments…
NEWS…
Round the World
POSSIBLY the lowest-houred Beech 18 in the world has been entered in next year's Round the World Air Race by Len Perry, Flying Instructor at the West London Aeroclub based at White Waltham.
Ex-USAF Beech C-45 51–11836A/N8389H was found in a hangar at Saratoga, Wyoming, where it has been ‘mothballed’ for 23 years.
With only 1,950 flying hours on the airframe, the Beech was auctioned-off by the US Administration in 1958 at Davis Monthan, Tuscon.
Perry is busy preparing the vintage Beech for a ferry flight to Blackhawk Airways Inc at Janesville, Wisconsin, who will modify the aircraft ready for the race.
It will emerge in a ‘shocking pink’ colour scheme, and then be ferried across the Atlantic to White Waltham where it will be based prior to the race.
Mk XVIII to fly
ANOTHER Spitfire is about to join the airworthy ranks of World War Two's most famous fighter.
FR.XVIII TP298, owned by David Tallichet, is nearing completion of its long term rebuild at Tallichet's MARC facility, Chino, California.
Spitfire XVIII TP298 in her new colours.
TP298 was built in 1945 and allocated to the RAF Far East Air Force, it later saw limited service with the Indian Air Force during the late 1940s.
Acquired by Ormond Haydon-Baillie in 1977 along with seven other Spitfires, ‘298 eventually ended up in the USA, passing through several owners until being purchased by David tallichet who embarked on the full restoration to flying condition of this rare mark of Supermarine's famous fighter.
Now painted in RAF SEAC camouflage and markings, a first flight is planned for the end of 1991.
Tallichet's most recently airworthy Spitfire, Mk XVI RW382/G-XVIA (see Register Review in the October issue) is to stay in the UK ‘for the foreseeable future’ explained Clive Denney of Audley End-based Historic Flying Ltd, who restored the former gate guardian to airworthiness.
UK-bound B-24?
PROVIDING sufficient sponsorship is forthcoming, the sight and sound of a B-24 Liberator bomber in the UK skies could become a reality very soon.
David Tallichet, owner of B-24J N94459 Delectable Doris is having the bomber made ready at Wilmington, Delaware, for a ferry flight across the Atlantic.
If a successful sponsorship deal is arranged, the Liberator will be based in the UK for a two year period, during which time it would be a major attraction at the various events marking the 50th Anniversary of the US 8th Air Force's arrival in the UK.
Doris is no stranger to the UK, having been resident at Duxford in the mid-1970s during its flight from India to the USA.
Tallichet's B-17G was based at Duxford during the summer of 1989 for the filming of Memphis Belle .
Brick exchange
BLACKBURN Buccaneer S.1XK532, gate guardian at RAF Lossiemouth since 1984, is being put up for disposal.
It will be replaced on the gate by Desert Storm veteran Buccaneer XV863 which will be in position as part of a new main gate and guardroom development next year.
The Fresson Trust, who are unveiling a statue to Northern air pioneer Captain Ernest Fresson (see FlyPast October issue), are keen to start a small museum at the Highlands capital airport and ‘we would love to have the aircraft as our first exhibit’, said Trust Chairman Peter Clegg.
Yaks across the Water
YAKOVLEV Design Bureau (OKB) are creating a number of Yak-3 replicas for an order from the USA, confirms Chief Designer, Sergey Yakovlev.
Expanding upon his conversation at the Paris airshow (see the August issue), Yakovlev noted that, ‘It is possible that other types of single-engined Yak replicas or restorations will appear.’
Correcting the August report, the Yak C-11s recently removed to the USSR from the UK and the USA are not being worked on by the Yak OKB.
They are thought to be under the aegis of the Soviet military.
Accidents
July 21 : Sikorsky S-58H N58WH suffered partial loss of engine power and rolled over on touchdown after autorotation at Daggett, California.
July 28 : Erco 415C N94385 crashed when engine quit soon after take-off from Rubidoux, California.
Pilot killed.
August 20 : CP.301A Emeraude G-AYEC overshot on landing at Netherthorpe, hit hedge and written-off.
Neither of the two occupants were injured.
September 1 : Auster AOP.9 G-BDXY/XR269 suffered engine failure on flight from Cheddington to Northbrook and force-landed at Southend Hill, Cheddington.
The pilot was not seriously injured but the aircraft was burnt-out.
September 7 : Taiwanese Air Force TF-104G Starfighter spun into sea off Yunlin.
One crew member ejected but was later found drowned, the other did not eject and died in the crash.
September 8 : NA T-28 Trojan, crashed during the airshow at St Rambert d'Albon, killing well-known French warbird Pierre Dague.
September 8 : Antonov An-2 crop-sprayer destroyed while parked at Osijek Airport, Yugoslavia, during rocket attack by two Yugoslav Air Force Galeb aircraft.
September 11 : BBMF Hurricane IIC LF363 suffered engine problems en route to Coningsby to Jersey, diverted to RAF Wittering, crash-landed but burnt out on the runway.
Pilot injured.
(See page 6.)
September 12 or 13 : NA AT-6 Texan N29931 Yabba Dabba Doo crashed and cartwheeled during qualifying heats at the Reno Air Races, Nevada, and badly damaged.
(See photo:Jim Babcock)
September 19 : Convair 580 C-FICA of Canair Cargo crashed 30nm north east of Burlington, Vermont.
Aircraft destroyed and both crew killed.
September 21 : Antonov An-2 crashed on the Indonesian island of Lombok during emergency landing following in-flight fire while en route from Lombok to Sumbawa.
Two suffered serious burns.
The Antonov had left Berlin, Germany, in June on a commemorative flight to Sydney, Australia, to mark the 100th anniversary of the first glider flights by Otto Lilienthal.
September 25 : Tsunami, the all-new, but ‘warbird’ configured unlimited racer crashed today near Pier, South Dakota, killing well-known pilot John Sandberg.
The aircraft was being ferried from Reno (see page 58) to Minneapolis.
Tsunami on take-off at Reno.
T-Bird bows out
AFTER 38 years of service with the Portuguese Air Force, the last five remaining operational Lockheed T-33s were retired from active service at Beja Air Base in September.
Two of the T-Birds will be kept in airworthy condition for the Museo do Ar,flying on special occasions only.
Complex plans
NOVEMBER 5 is the (perhaps appropriate!) starting date for the public enquiry into the proposed shopping/leisure complex development to the east of Duxford airfield and under the approach to their Runway 24.
Many people expressed alarm at the plans, seeing possible conflicts with flying operations from the Imperial Museum's airfield.
Anyone can petition their views on the matter, contact South Cambridgeshire District Council,
Hampden background
NEGOTIATIONS are now well in hand with a UK national collection concerning the Handley Page Hampden that was salvaged from the Murmansk area of the USSR and arrived in the UK on September 4.
This aircraft is now confirmed at P1344, built in late 1939 as a Mk I at Cricklewood.
(The English Electric number quoted in the October FlyPast may well relate only to a sub-section.)
Serving initially with 14 Operational Training Unit from Cottesmore, this Hampden was then converted to torpedo bomber status.
Issued to 144 Squadron (becoming ‘PL-K’) at Leuchars, the unit trained-up and ferried out to Vaenga I in the USSR to give support to the convoy lifeline around the top of Norway.
The unit was established and ‘open for business’ at Vaenga on September 6, 1942.
P1344  never made it, being forced down in what was thought to be Finland on the night of the 4th/5th.
Rising sun
JAPANESE aircraft of World War Two are going through a resurgence of interest with several different types coming to the fore once more.
Washington DC-based National Air and Space Museum are well into the restoration of their Aichi M6A1 submarine-launched floatplane.
NASM also holds substantial parts, including a wing and centre section of a second Nakajima Kikka or,Orange Blossom jet powered fighter.
Based on the Me 262, the Kikka was smaller and lighter, but it did not enter operational service, making only two powered flights before the end of the war.
In February of this year John Sterling imported an additional pair of Mitsubishi A6A Zeros , bringing his total to three.
All of the aircraft were recovered from remote airstrips on islands in the Pacific.
The problems that Sterling faced in recovering the aircraft were at some times almost insurmountable.
One of the Zeros , a Model 21, is on display at the Caldwell Air Museum, Idaho, and the remaining pair (both 32s) are in storage.
Sterling is looking to part with one or more of the aircraft in an attempt to recover some of the costs incurred in bringing the aircraft back to civilisation.
Unveiled
Resplendent in traditional training scheme of silver with yellow T-bands, Vampire T.11 XD434 was formally handed back to the Fenland Aviation Museum on September 30 after restoration at RAF Marham.
Full details next month.
'190 moves
CONFIRMING our newsbreak in the October issue, Fw 190A-5 1227 moved from Wycombe Air Park, Bucks, on August 30 to take up residence in the Warbirds of Great Britain hangars at Biggin Hill, London.
The aircraft was the first salvaged from the Soviet Union to arrive in the UK.
Lanc project needs help
AT FIRST GLANCE, the hulk of Lancaster Mk 10 FM118 may seem beyond use.
Lying on the Shilo Gunnery Range after being struck off charge with the RCAF in May 1946, the remains fascinate collector/restorer Bernie Salter from Fareham, Hants.
Bernie has created a Lancaster cockpit section that occasionally travels to airshows.
The cockpit incorporates authentic fittings and systems and has amazed even former Lancaster crews with its authenticity.
Now Bernie plans to make his cockpit section into a full-blown forward fuselage and the Shilo remains could be the key to this project.
‘The floor section is largely intact,’ said Bernie, and ‘there is plenty usable inside.’
FM118's remains are the property of the Nanton Lancaster Society, but have been offered to Bernie for restoration.
Bernie is now trying to raise the funds needed to salvage the Lanc remains, a 20′ container from Nanton to Harwich would seem to be the best system.
Bernie's nose section has seen much publicity in the past, and has recently ‘starred’ in a well-known TV advert for lager featuring a new interpretation of the Dam Busters raid!
Offers of help or sponsorship would give new life to a very forlorn Lancaster — contact Bernie via the FlyPast office.
While they may not look much.
The remains of Lancaster FM118 could form the basis of a cockpit project in the UK.
Spares spree
TENDERS were due to be in by October 10 for the latest round of Ministry of Defence disposals.
A selection of aircraft spares from 16 Maintenance Unit at Stafford to include parts from Victor, Sea Heron, Canberra, Gnat, Vulcan, Chipmunk, Harrier and Pembroke aircraft.
The Pembroke lot comprising 766 items would probably prove to be very useful to owners of the ex-60 Squadron machines, despite the parts having no paperwork available.
Nose-job
Warbirds of Norway's Vampire, former Swiss J-1146, has gained nose-art in character with the odd nose her last operators gave her.
Gunnar Rostad (illustrated) gave the Vampire its Pinocchio nose-art.
In time, the original profile nose will be returned.
‘Working’ Auster
Leicestershire Aero Club have added immaculate 1952 Auster J/5F Aiglet Trainer G-AMTD to their training fleet of Cessnas and a Cherokee.
Built at Rearsby, Tango Delta is back on ‘home’ ground.
Work to bring her to Transport Category Certificate was carried out by Ron Neal Aviation.
Available for tail wheel conversion and club flying, more details on  
Great War roll-out
Great War Flying Museum's latest replica, a full-size SE.5A in Billy Bishop's colours.
‘NOT TO THE GLORY of war, but to the Canadians who inherit these legends of valour and devotion to duty.’
Such is the theme of the Great War Flying Museum, Brampton, near Toronto, dedicated to the creation of the sights and sounds of World War One aircraft.
To achieve this, the Museum has built and flown a fleet of replicas.
Most recent addition, a full-size SE.5A was unveiled on August 11.
Construction took five years, under a team led by Ron Clifford.
Powered by a converted Ford V6, the aircraft carried the markings of Billy Bishop, Canadian commander of 85 Squadron, RFC.
Caproni projects
Work underway on the Caproni Museum's Breda 19 — see news story at right.
Fiat nears flight
After a long rebuild by Pino Valenti and a dedicated team of former Aeronavali technicians, Fiat G.59B I-SHOW is now nearing first flight in Venice.
The Merlin-powered trainer was acquired from the Italian Air Force in 1984.
Biscuit Bomber scrapped
ONE OF AUSTRALIA's few remaining Douglas C-47s, and one of the most historic examples, VH-SBO, was cut-up by Sydney (Bankstown) Airport Fire Service during May.
Latterly flying as the flagship of Australian TV comedian Norman Gunston, the aircraft had been a familiar sight at Bankstown and, although grounded for the last ten years, had remained substantially complete.
More importantly, it was only Biscuit Bomber left in Australia.
It had arrived in the south west Pacific area in December 1942 and served with the US 5th Air Force throughout the Pacific campaign.
Nicknamed Cold Turkey , it was used to ferry supplies and personnel from the mainland to the New Guinea battlefields and also took part in the Nadzab landing which, at the time, was the world's largest airborne troop assault.
Wartime service spanned almost the entire Pacific conflict, making it one of the most historically significant of the few remaining Australian Dakotas, the other preserved examples appearing to have had very pedestrian careers in comparison while ‘SBO was used exclusively for military frontline transport operations, making it a veteran par excellence.
Significantly, the Aviation Museums Association of Australia had applied to the New South Wales Heritage Council in 1990 to have the aircraft protected by State heritage legislation but eight months later it has yet to receive even an acknowledgement from the Council.
RAPIDLY approaching completion for the Caproni Museum, Italy, is 1930s Breda 19, MM70019.
Acquired as a corroded fuselage frame, upper/lower wing panels and a fin & rudder in 1988, restoration has meant fabricating the undercarriage, acquiring a Lynx radial engine (on loan from the Italian Air Force Museum) and building from scratch the tailplane, elevator and engine cowlings.
When completed the Breda will be painted as I-ABCT, the aircraft flown by Lt Andrea Zotti at the 1932 Cleveland National Air Races, and will be displayed inverted.
Construction of the Museum's new hangar is running a little behind schedule, but the aim is to open in early 1992 with some seventeen aircraft on exhibition.
Also underway for the Museum, this time in Masterfly's workshop, is a Bristol M.1 Monoplane.
An 80hp Gnome engine has been acquired on loan from the Air Force Museum and the fuselage is complete, except for covering.
A plate has been found confirming construction by Bristol in November 1912, although the number 174 conflicts with 154 oft-quoted by most sources.
Bearcat activity
WITH THE RECENT arrival of a derelict Vietnamese Air Force Bearcat for restoration at Santa Monica California's Museum of Flying, a total of three rare Grumman F8Fs are now undergoing restoration in Southern California.
Officials at the Museum of Flying have refused requests to photograph the Bearcat, which is presumably one of several -2 examples that have been held in store and displayed by the VAF at several bases.
Identity of this machine is currently unknown.
The project has seen significant progress over the last few months, with major reskinning of the fuselage nearing completion.
A first flight is not expected for another year.
At Fighter Rebuilders in Chino, work continues on the F8F-2 N7825C owned by the Confederate Air Force, which was damaged in a crash-landing several years ago.
This machine was donated to the CAF by Gary Levitz in 1969.
According to Steve Hinton, the project is currently being held up due to a lack of parts, but the machine should be airborne within a couple of months.
Planes of Fame also owns the remains of another CAF Bearcat that was written-off in the mid 1970s.
When time permits, Fighter Rebuilders will be restoring this aircraft to flying status as well.
Also at Chino at Pioneer Aero is Elmer Ward's F8F-2 N1027B.
This restoration has been an off-again-on-again project for several years but recently work has resumed on the Bearcat, which will be the only two seat example flying.
The aircraft spent many years at Kaman helicopters as a wind making machine until it was recovered by the Marine Corps Museum in 1971.
It was then acquired by Wally McDonnel of Mojave, California, who sold it to Elmer Ward in the mid 1970s.
Ward has modified the aircraft's firewall extensively, and has added T-28 brakes and other modifications such as extra wing spars, which will make this one of the finest Bearcats flying.
Pioneer Aero staff report that this machine should be flying sometime in late 1991.
Santa Monica Yak
Arriving in mid-August for the Museum of Flight at Santa Monica, California, was the Yak-3, described as ‘on indefinite loan from the Soviet Union’.
The Yak was flown airfreight via Anchorage and into Vancouver, making the remainder of the journey by road.
While in the USSR negotiating, Dave Price and Alan Preston also acquired a Yak-55 aerobatic aircraft for the Museum.
Fly United Newly rolled-out at Seattle is Boeing 247D NC13347 for that Museum of Flight.
Painted in United Airlines colours, the Museum's Boeing 737 N7001U provided an appropriate back-drop.
Canadian Swordfish ready
Robert Spence's Swordfish C-GEVS (see the August issue) had not gained its Permit to Fly on August 31 so was restricted to taxi-ing at Muirkirk, Ontario, during the Labour Day fly-in.
Twilight for Goose New Zealand has said goodbye to her last Grumman Goose.
Sea Bee Air's ZK-DFC made her last flight (above) on August 26 from Ardmore to Mechanics Bay on the Auckland waterfront for transfer to a ship and the journey to Colorado.
Privately owned Widgeon ZK-CAF is now the only reminder of the Kiwi connection with Grumman amphibians.
Roll-out
DESPITE Castle Air Force Base, California, being scheduled for closure, Museum officials  rolled out three new aircraft on August 3.
Republic F-84F Thunderstreak 49–433, F-89J Scorpion 52–1927 and Grumman HU-16B Albatross 50–17163.
The latter aircraft actually served at Castle AFB during 1960 and ended its Air Force career in 1976.
Interested?
STRATFORD Aircraft collection have Whirlwind HAR.10 XP346 less engine and instruments available for disposal.
Midland Air Museum at Coventry are looking for a good home for the fuselage and other components of Messenger IV VP-KJL.
In each case, contact the FlyPast office for further details.
Tigercat trade
GRUMMAN F7F Tigercat 80374/N7629C, in store for some time at the Marine Corps Museum at Quantico, Virginia, has been traded to famed Reno racer/Lockheed test pilot Darryl Greenamyer in exchange for four aircraft (reported to include a TBM and a PBJ Mitchell).
The Tigercat was one of the Sis-Q firebombing aircraft before being acquired by the Museum.
Big gun
ACTOR Charlton Heston  has agreed to become the new US Chairman of the Duxford-based American Air Museum in Britain Campaign.
Heston succeeds Senator John Tower, who was tragically killed in an air crash in Brunswick, Georgia, April 5.
Heston shares the Chairmanship with Marshal of the RAF Sir John Grandy, of whom he remarked ‘I confess to a frisson of awe at sharing a Chairmanship with a former Air Vice Marshal, I never did better than Staff Sergeant myself.’
Heston's wartime service as a B-25 tail-gunner with the US 11th Air Force in the Far East and his stardom make him an ideal Chairman.
Harris Appeal
BOMBER COMMAND Association has launched its Sir Arthur Harris Appeal to commemorate the wartime leader's contribution to the Command's efforts during World War Two.
Next year will be the fiftieth anniversary of the year in which Bomber Harris became Commander-in-Chief and the Association intends to mark the occasion by erecting a statue of Sir Arthur in the forecourt of St Clement Danes in London, adjacent to the statue of Lord Dowding (C-in-C RAF Fighter Command, 1940).
In this way, two of the RAF's great leaders, the one who saved this country from invasion in 1940 and the other who paved the way to victory in 1945 will be rightly commemorated.
The statue will also serve as a memorial to the 55,000 RAF bomber aircrew who sacrificed their lives during the War.
Donations can be sent to:
Before…
Since covering the restoration of the Benson Gustav in the July issue, much feedback has come in from our ever-vigilant readers.
Above: the Gustav parked at Lydda, Palestine, in the latter months of 1942 from L N Boot.
Left: 1426 EAF line-up (at Collyweston?
Hs 129 (must be ‘B-1 0297); Fw 190A-4/U8 PC999; Gustav RN228; Bf 110; Ju 88 — from the collection of N Westwood's father
…and after
Two superb views of RN228 as she is today (as G-USTV) from the lens of RAF Public Relations photographer Sgt Rick Brewell.
The Gustav was captured on a sortie out of her base at Duxford, her public debut was on home territory on September 15.
FlyPost
Letters from readers are always welcome.
Letters published in FlyPost will receive a newly-launched hardback book.
Readers requiring a reply should enclose a stamped addressed envelope or an international reply coupon.
Send to  .
Gustav thoughts
HAVING BEEN a regular reader of your magazine for a few years now, I have been most interested in the regular updates on the progress in restoration of Bf 109G G-USTV.
The prospect of seeing and hearing a genuine Bf 109 in the air is quite exciting and something I look forward to very much.
My interest in this particular aircraft is brought about mainly by my father who, now in his 70s, spent his war years as a young man serving in the RAF as an airframe fitter.
His period of service was almost entirely spent (after training) as part of a small and relatively unheard of unit: 1426 Enemy Aircraft Flight, based at Duxford, Collyweston and Tangmere, among others.
Owing to the fact that most of his time was spent working on a vast selection of crashed and captured German aircraft, he got to know (and love) them quite well.
He had a hand in cannibalising, building and maintaining many of them.
The Bf 109G that he remembers and photographed carried the serial RN228.
Imagine his surprise when reading the article on the Benson Bf 109G in your July issue to find that this aircraft was in fact one of ‘his’!
Owing to the small size of the unit in which he served, I wonder after so many years, how many (if any?) of the men serving with him in 1426 still survive?
SEEING THE ARTICLE on the ‘109 in the July issue of FlyPast reminded me of the first time I saw it.
I was a flight mech on the Tiffies of CFE at Tangmere when I watched this ‘109 wobbling its way across the grass.
I had mixed feelings then because the last time one had been that close on the ground was in 1940 during the Battle when one passed over my head at Allington, crashing a few hundred yards away.
I thought the hand-cranking on the ‘109 a bit dodgy, till an impatient Navy pilot threw me off the wing of a Harvard into the prop, miraculously only tearing my jacket and grazing my arm, putting me in dock for a couple of days.
Strange that it should survive with an adversary, the BBMF Mk II Spit which I once serviced.
The metal survives whilst the flesh withers.
IN YOUR JULY 91 issue of FlyPast you had an article entitled Gustav Airborne , relating to the rebuild of a Messerschmitt 109G, which included also a brief history of the aircraft.
I am enclosing a photograph (opposite) of the aircraft, that I took when I was serving with the Communication Flight based at RAF Lydda, Palestine,(now Ben Gurion Airport, Israel) during the latter months of 1942.
I thought you would find it of interest.
My memory isn't what it was; but I do remember that at the time the aircraft was considered the fastest in the Middle East.
I also remember the effort required to initially turn the inertia starters.
Those old enough, will recognise the American Liberator in the background.
Gustav victors
From Bert Horden (who wrote Gustav and the Sharks in the August issue) comes this shot of Western Desert Brown (top arrow) and Goose Guess (bottom arrow) of 112 Squadron, 1943.
Brown may have been the one who forced-down Heinz Ludemann in November 1942, thereby ensuring RN228 would join the show circuit in 1991!
Guess shot down (and killed) Ludemann on March 10, 1943.
Defiants by numbers
Formation of 264 Squadron Defiants — see the August issue.
John Parkhouse would like to know more about the roundels.
I REFER to the photo of six Defiants in echelon starboard in the August issue.
I am fascinated by the difference in the markings on (some) of these aircraft.
For ease of identification I will number them one to six with one being the leader at the bottom of the photo.
It would appear that one, two, four and six are marked in a basically similar fashion.
Number three has a quite different style of roundel and, to me it looks as if the tail stripe colours are reversed!
Number five appears to have a very strange roundel.
Compared with the black and grey tones for the blue and red of the other roundels one might almost believe that on number five the roundel ring immediately inside the yellow  is red and the inner spot is blue, although on this one the tail stripes  appear similar to numbers one, two, four and six.
Can you or any of your readers put forward ideas that would account for these oddities?