

What's new
HAIR
BEAUTY
FASHION
If you're in London for Valentine's and you want to make sure your hair is looking good and feeling fab for that hot date then go along to the Schumi salon in Belgravia.
Have a hair cut for £40 with Heinz Schumi, the leading stylist, and you will also be entitled to a free hair treatment worth £20 plus a colour conditioning rinse worth £30!
Telephone  for an appointment.
From Superdrug comes a great new range of hairbrushes.
The Pro-Style collection has been carefully designed to help create and control all styles on all hair types.
Available in all Superdrug stores around the country.
From £2.25 to £3.99.
If you're North of the country then whisk your fella off to Beaverbrooks Jewellers and take a look at their fab Valentine's Jeweller
If you colour your hair because greys are growing faster than you can pull them out, you'll be pleased to know that Poly Color has been improved.
Poly Color Blonde and Poly Color Tint have been specially developed to permanently cover all grey hair.
They have excellent conditioning properties and are available for £2.54 each.
If you suffer from allergies or have sensitive skin or scalp, here is some good news for you.
After extensive research, the Crimpers Pure Hypo Allergenic Haircare range has been developed with a unique formulation by leading British Trichologist Andrew Bernie.
Suitable for vegetarians and vegans it is available from £2.25 to £3.50 at larger Boots stores.
Just in time for Valentine's comes the new Escada Body & Bath Collection.
This range of luxurious creams, gels and scents is made with natural organic extracts and vitamins to help stimulate circulation for fresh glowing skin.
Presented in beautiful heart-shaped packaging, prices start at £19.
Perfect for your Valentine's Day fragranced bath!
DON'T FORGET
February 14 is Gold Heart Day!
Wear a gold heart on your sleeve in support of the Variety Club of Great Britain's appeal for sick and under-privileged children.
You can buy your gold heart from all Tesco stores for a minimum donation of a £1 from Jan 6th until Feb 14.
Congratulations 40 years
Oil of Ulay is 40 years young this year and to celebrate they have given the range a striking new look.
Oil of Ulay's moisturising, replenishing and cleansing products are available from £2.40 to £5.10.
Look out for the superb new range of dryers and stylers now on the shelves in major Marks and Spencers stores.
Priced from £12.99 to £32.50, they are all beautifully designed and each comes with a two year guarantee.
FOR HIM
If you're looking for the perfect Valentine's prezzie for your perfect man that's just a bit different check these out!
Now on the streets is the fabulous Davidoff Cool Water aftershave collection.
This one's just as much of a prezzie for you as it is for him because it smells absolutely delicious!
Available nationwide from as little as £9.50.
Or how about…
Taking him along to the Daniel Rouah Barber Shop in Baker St., London.
He'll get more than a short back and sides at this men-only beauty salon.
Pamper him with a shave, facial, massage, pedicure, manicure and more!
Tel:.
The latest lurve video.
‘Secrets of Making Love to the Same Person Forever’— the title says it all really.
From  virgin and HMV at £14.99.
A Vidal Sassoon Barber Shop Courtesy Card could do nicely.
This will entitle your man to a 20% discount on each appointment if he has his hair cut at least once a month.
There will also be other special benefits on offer to him as a cardholder.
There's no joining fee and all you have to do is call .
There are some great hair and skin care collections around for the guys.
Look-out for:
The Skin Survival Kit from Clinique can go everywhere — gym, office, car, plane.
Or how about the All Over Body Kit from Slazenger Sport for £4.45.
If your man is a greenie then go for the Man's Natural Balance hair and body range from Boots.
Prices start at £1.
To make sure that dancing cheek to cheek this Valentine's is a smooth experience try the Brylcreem Sensus shaving range of The Conditioner from Paul Mitchell Systems — its a brilliant all-rounder.
Not only a great conditioner but a superb skin moisturiser and it's perfect for shaving!
STYLE FILE
If you're fed up with giving him heart-shaped chocolates on St. Valentine's Day, why not treat him to one of these delicious haircuts!
IAN DUNCAN AT PARTNERS FOR PAUL MITCHELL
RITA RUSK INTERNATIONAL ARTISTIC TEAM
DAYWEAR FROM THE GUS CATALOGUE
HAIR CUT AND STYLES BY WELLA
BY RONNIE MARSHALL AT DOM MIGELE
STYLES BY HAIR ON BROADWAY
RITA RUSK INTERNATIONAL ARTISTIC TEAM
JUMPER FROM A SELECTION AT TESCO
SMOOTH STYLE BY PANACHE
WET-LOOK STYLE BY JINGLES INT
HAIR BY ROZ MAIN FOR RITA RUSK
SUPERB STYLING BY MACMILLAN OF LONDON
SLICK LOOK BY TERENCE RENATI
IAN DUNCAN AT PARTNERS FOR PAUL MITCHELL
STYLED WITH REDKEN RANGE
HAIR BY MAHOGANY U.K. STYLING TEAM
HAIR BY RITA RUSK.
GLASGOW
PRACTICAL HAIRCARE
HAIR THERAPY
While magazines celebrate the return of hollywood glamour, with glossy pages dedicated to the super model who is immaculately coiffed and beautifully in control, you may feel your hair would be more suited to a bit part in a disaster movie!
For those unmanageable stressed tresses, Judie Burton comes to the rescue with a special revival course for hair…
CAREFUL COMBING
For both traumatised hair and hair in good condition, get into the habit of using a wide tooth comb with rounded tips or a good quality brush.
Comb from tip to root, working out the knots at the end before moving up the hair.
SCALP SOOTHERS
Chilly winds and central heating both have a drying effect on the skin.
However, dry flaky skin on the scalp is often wrongly diagnosed as dandruff.
Just as you care for dry skin on the face, the scalp needs a soothing touch…gentle cleansing and moisturising.
Cosmetics to Go have a wonderful pre-shampoo conditioning treatment.
Strandlooper for your scalp and hair is made from sea kelp and contains deep cleansers plus 16 conditioning agents to nourish and revitalise.
£3.75/200 ml.
Lamaur's pHlexhair Nucleo Moisturizer maintains perfect moisture balance — from salons only.
STIMULATE CIRCULATION
Poor circulation in the scalp can lead to under nourishment to the hair follicle and the quality and growth potential of the individual hair will suffer.
When you wash your hair make it part of your routine to gently massage your scalp using the soft pads of your finger tips in circular movements.
Never use your nails.
GENTLE CLEANSERS
Over use of styling products (especially during the party season),grime and pollution all contribute to making the hair look dull.
Yet if you have dry hair you have to be careful to choose a shampoo that will effectively rid you of these nasties without stripping your hair of its natural oils.
Go for rich emollient shampoos with proteins, balsams and moisturisers.
WONDER WASHES
Try a revitalising shampoo, formulated to seal in moisture and improve the surface structure of excessively brittle hair.
John Freida Restructuring Shampoo at £4.50/250ml.
NEW Bain De Terre Recovery Complex Shampoo at £7.75/250ml.
Clinique's Extra Benefits Shampoo, at £6.50/200ml.
Gliss Corimist Cleanse & Revive, £1.95/250ml.
RAPID REVIVERS
Dry and brittle hair lacks moisture and the hair becomes prone to splitting and breaking.
Use a conditioner with moisturising properties as part of your everyday routine.
A good remoisturising conditioner contains non-greasy oils to trap in the moisture without dragging the hair down and making it lank.
Try Trevor Sorbie's Rich Conditioner, £3.65/330ml for good conditioning without build-up or Boots Remoisturising Conditioner at £1.73 for 150ml.
Boost:If your hair is particularly dry it will benefit from a deep conditioning treatment, which is left on the hair for up to 30 minutes.
These nourish the hair and leave it soft and healthy.
Wrap your hair in a hot towel to maximise the effect.
NEW:Crimpers Pure Intensive Hair Conditioning treatment is a hypo allergenic formulation enriched with vitamins and moisturisers.
£3.50 for 200gms.
NEW:Daniel Field's Mineral Hair Repair Mask — 240 gms for £4.45 — contains rich, beneficial minerals extracted from sea kelp plus avocado and essential oils; a highly effective remoisturising treatment for wrecked hair.
NEW:Poly Kur Intensive Repair treatment contains soluble collagen and costs £3.45/150ml.
From salons only.
For those with straight hair who rely on blow-drying for a sleek glossy look, try this tip from Daniel Field.
‘Dry your hair through an old fashioned hair net or a soft silk scarf.
This makes the cortex lie flat, hence giving a smooth shiny finish, protecting your hair from the harsh blastings of hot air at the same time.’
BODY BUILDERS
If your hair is fine and limp you should go for a conditioner with body building properties.
These conditioners contain a resin that coats each hair strand, making it appear fuller.
Choose conditioners with protein and balsams.
In true body-building style, the effects are  cumulative so start your routine now!
Try Daniel Field's Plant Moisturising Treatment, excellent for fine hair, a conditioner with a very light softening action at £3.99 for 240ml.
Molton Brown Remedy Conditioner is an ultra light instant conditioner at £5.95 for 225ml.
Boost:A.M. Long Hair Wheat Treat is a protein extracted from wheat and includes Olive Oil, Castor Oil and Sunflower Oil.
Used as a prewash, it conditions the hair and any excess is washed away, so your hair isn't left feeling heavy.
It costs £8.50 for 200ml.
INSTANT REPAIRERS
If your hair is seriously damaged and completely unmanageable, you probably need a professional haircut.
However, there are some excellent ‘repair' products around that will go some way to making your hair visibly smoother, glossier and much easier to comb.
These products
Contain filters which are easily absorbed and firm up the hair shaft.
Coat each hair with a fine translucent film which smooths down the rough surface & seals the hair to prevent moisture loss.
Guard against frizzing by preventing moisture absorption from the air.
Try…
Revitalising complex from Alberto VO5, £4.99/50ml.
Estée Lauder 7 Day hair Complex at £25 is a treatment to apply at night and washed out in the morning.
John Frieda Restructuring Serum, is a silicone based repair system which costs £5.99 for 50ml.
AIR CARE
Over-use of hot air appliances can contribute to drying out the hair.
The kindest way is to let it dry naturally, but if you have long hair, this isn't particularly practical in winter, so if you do use a dryer regularly, use a diffuser for a more gentle drying action.
Valentine special
With THE most romantic day of the year coming up, make sure you look your best for your Valentine.
Take extra care with your make-up, re-think your hairstyle and make sure you're wearing just enough perfume to drive him wild.
This month, romance is REALLY in the air!
Two soft, casual styles from the artistic team at Edmonds in London
LASTING IMPRESSION
Treat yourself to a designer shampoo and conditioner and leave your favourite fragrance lingering in your hair for those very special moments.
Obsession from Calvin Klein has shampoo and conditioner plus a complete styling range.
Look for their Hair Glistener — it leaves hair smelling irresistible and creates subtle, glittering highlights in your hair.
Hair Glistener costs £9.00.
Other delicious designer shampoos to look out for include Eternity and Anais Anais.
FINISHING TOUCH
Add a sparkle to your hairstyle with a beautiful accessory or go for a touch of luxury with a velvet band or bow.
A selection of designer hair accessories, including silk and heart patterned scrunchies, are available at the Edmonds hair salon in London — call  for details.
SOFT FOCUS
A healthy glow looks sexy so, in keeping with this season's shades, keep your cosmetics as natural as possible.
 Practise applying your make-up so that it looks as though you're not wearing any at all— it's a real art, but it can be done!
Good colours to look for include Dusk, Starstruck and Blush eye-shadows in The Naturalists range by Clinique, Luminous Beige foundation and Impalpable Pink Powder Blush from the Helena Rubinstein Preludes range and Rimmel's Heather Shimmer and Coffee Shimmer Colour Plus Lipsticks.
NUDE NAILS
Long, red talons are out.
Instead, nails should look natural and well-manicured but that doesn't mean that they've got to be long.
Short, it seems, is just as sweet!
Look for the Strong on Neutrals range from Cutex which includes four new Strong Nail polish shades — each one comes with a bottle of Colourless Strong Nail polish for £4.79.
Alternatively, try a French Manicure — natural pink polish with a slick of white at the nail tips.
The Elegant Touch kit contains all you need and costs £4.35.
BATHING BEAUTY
Treat yourself to a long, luxurious bath, full to the brim with beautifully fragranced water.
The Cosmetics To Go brochure (it's free if you call ) includes Violet Nights Luxury Bath Oil, £6.00 for 500ml, which is rich, aromatic and fabulously soothing.
If you want to smell good enough to eat, try their Knights in White Chocolate massage block which is a delicious combination of real white chocolate and cocoa butter — a real sweet treat at £2.75 for 35 grams!
BACK TO NATURE
There's nothing more romantic than mother nature herself and Schwarzkopf have come up with an exciting new product for colouring hair — the natural way.
Igora Botanic contains ingredients from the flora of five continents — tropical fruit skin, camomile, walnut and the bark from exotic trees.
It not only adds an exciting new dimension to hair, it actually improves the structure with each subsequent application.
Ask for details at your local professional hair salon that stocks Schwarzkopf.
For true romance, hair must shine with health — the Alberto range includes intensive conditioners for a once-a-week treat.
Two styles with volume and curls.
Daniel Field's new products for 1992 were used to get hair in peak condition, making it manageable and easier to style.
Long curls look great swept up loosely for the evening
Ring the changes with a new hair colour — check out the brand new Schwarzkopf Igora Botanic range of natural hair colourants from professional salons nationwide
Keep hair smelling clean and fresh — subtly perfumed shampoos do the trick beautifully!
Top stylist, Stephen Way, used the innovative Paul Mitchell Systems range on these styles
A beautiful crop by Stephen Way, a member of the prestigious 365 Day Hairdressing organisation.
Soft curls for her, dramatic styling for him.
By Glemby who are in stores nationwide
Blonde, layered hair is so sexy — this style is by Jeanne Braa for Paul Mitchell Systems
Face-framing urchin style by Edmonds, using their new range of styling products.
Phone  for details.
GET SEXY
YOU CAN WIN THIS SENSATIONAL LITTLE BLACK NUMBER!
Get romantic this month with Hairflair!
We have over £150 worth of fabulous underwear for you to win!
There's nothing quite like sexy lingerie to put you in the mood so knock him dead on Valentine's Day with some of this sizzling underwear from the latest Freemans Spring/Summer collection.
Tel  for a catalogue.
We're giving away this breathtaking body to 10 lucky Hairflair readers when you send your name and address on a postcard to Hairflair .
HAIRFLAIR MAKE-OVER
MEET OUR HOLLYWOOD HERO
Back in August we joined forces with Cossack and asked you to look at your fella and tell us if the man of your dreams had turned into the man of your nightmares!
After shifting through hundreds of pics of your gorgeous guys we found one that was in real need of a Hollywood make-over!
Our man of the moment is 32 year old Russell Sherwood, a tool maker from Mansfield.
His wife Ellen wrote to us with this smashing picture and told us that because Russell works so much she only ever sees him in his overall or a track suit.
Ellen pleaded with us to transform her Worzel Gummage into her Hollywood hero Kevin Costner!
So, the challenge was on — we couldn't guarantee the real Costner for Ellen but she said she would be happy with the next best thing.
We invited Russell to spend a day at our London studios where our team of professionals were let loose on him.
Here's what happened.
1
Russell doesn't know what we've got in store for him yet!
Don't worry Russell, this won't hurt a bit!
2
Left: Russell's hair is quite short and thick with a slight wave.
Top hair stylist Guy Kremer decided to thin the fringe and re-shape his close crop.
3
Guy achieved a perfectly groomed look with lots of Cossack gel and completed the style with a squirt of the Styling Spray for extra hold.
4
Now for the face…
Russell didn't fancy the make-up bit too much but Katya soon sorted him out.
5
Image Stylist, Kim dressed Russell in some fabulous clothes and armed him with chocs from Rococo.
FIRST DATE
Russell and Ellen met on Guy Fawkes night many moons ago.
It took Russell almost three weeks to call Ellen for a date and when they did meet he was 45 minutes late.
ROMANTIC SECRET
Russell used to buy Ellen a big bunch of flowers every month.
UNROMANTIC SECRET
He stopped buying them for her when they got married.
Since winning the competition Russell is quite a celeb in his home town.
He's done radio interviews and had his picture in the local papers!
We all had a great day and both Russell and Ellen were really pleased with the results.
Russell took home a bag of Cossack goodies and lucky Ellen got the  chocies and flowers from the new man of her dreams.
the heat of the night
Curls and waves are soft and sensual and if you choose the right appliance from the Clairol range, you're well on your way to creating the most romantic hairstyle of the moment.
If you saw our predictions in the January issue of Hairflair you'll know that structured curls are big news this year.
The ‘just rollered’ look is being worn by some of the world's most beautiful women — top model Linda Evangelista, Madonna and Kylie have all been sporting those unmistakable barrel curls.
To create them yourself, Clairol's Curl Control Setters are just the tool.
There are 20 heated curlers in the set, in three different sizes, all covered in a special rubber material which grips hair gently.
Curl Control Setters cost £29.95.
LONG HAIR
If your hair has a slight wave or natural curl, you can emphasise this beautifully with Clairol's Big Shot hairdryer.
It has its own diffuser attachment which enables you to dry your hair gently, eliminating the problem of frizz and flyaway hair.
Set the Big Shot on a low heat/speed setting and let your hair ‘sit’ in the cup of the diffuser.
The special prongs inside the cup lift and separate curls, adding super definition to your style.
Big Shot costs £26.95.
SHORT HAIR
1
Put the curlers in, using the larger size at the front and at the crown.
The medium size curlers can be used around the hairline on smaller sections of hair.
2
When they have cooled completely, remove the curlers carefully.
Pin each curl in place and apply a generous helping of fixing spray.
3
Take out the pins and dress your hair by smoothing stray ends and plumping your beautiful barrel curls with a tail comb.
MID-LENGTH HAIR
If your hair is shoulder-length or just beyond, Clairol's Lock 'N Roll are the best way to create fabulous curls and waves.
There are 24 soft, flexible styles in a set — they heat up but unlike conventional curlers, there are no clips or pins to contend with.
For ultra-curly styles simply wind very small sections of hair; for a looser wavier look, take larger sections of hair.
There are four smaller Lock 'N Roll stylers in the set, ideal for fringes.
Lock 'N Roll cost £29.95.
STYLE COLLECTION
BACK TO BOUFFANTS
CURLING WAYS
BOLD BOBS
SLEEK CHIC
SO LONG
Short, bleached cut with swirls of style!
Created by Charlie Miller in Scotland; Make-up by Janet Miller; Photographed by Roslyn Gaunt
NEW SHAPES •NEW COLOURS •NEW CUTS
BACK TO BOUFFANTS
Short hair has been elegantly back-combed into this fabulous shape.
By Guy Kremer at French Connection
Masses of volume and body can still be achieved on short hair.
By Altered Image
Chic, evening style by Guy Kremer at the French Connection salon in Winchester
Heavy back-combing at the crown makes for an unusual but stylish shape.
By 350 Salon
Super condition and shine achieved by Ricardo Rizzo at C.B. Academy, Cambridge
Perfect styling by Paul Beresford at Thatch, using Clynol professional styling products
Sleek styling with a pretty curl detailed by Ricardo Rizzo at C.B. Academy
The Peter Mark salon in Dublin used in the Bain de Terre styling range for this look
Tousled style by the innovative Trevor Sorbie creative team in London
Big rollered curls and sleek, straight hair by the Avant Garde team, Canada
Rich, vibrant shade achieved with Clynol's professional colourants range
Extravagant evening style created with the Schwarzkopf styling range
A fifties variation for a classic bob.
Created by the Schumi styling range
Create height and volume on hair with a little back-combing.
By Toni & Guy
Beautifully elegant shape with interesting curl detail.
By Splinters of Mayfair
Lovely golden shade enhances this striking shape which was created by Terence Renati
The height of style for short, layered hair.
Achieved by the Panache styling team
Classic bouffant, ideal for medium to long hair.
By the ‘Y' team in Newcastle-Upon-Tyne
Is she or isn't she — false hair from Antenna looks better than the real thing!
Guy Kremer of French Connection once again displays his talent for elegant evening styling
CURLING WAYS
Beautiful curls styled with BaByliss Professional Lightweight Dryer & Diffuser.
Photo by Henry Arden
Sculptured curls on short hair perfectly styled by Ricardo Rizzo at C.B. Academy
Interesting shape achieved with masses of curls by Mo Nabbach at M & M Hair Academy
Blonde bombshell style by Andrew Collinge using the TRESemme' professional range
Softly permed in an ultra-curly style.
By Mo Nabbach at M & M Hair Academy
The Revlon Flex range of shampoos and conditioners keep hair in maximum condition
Glamorous styling on curly hair by the Terence and Maria Renati hair and make-up team
Try our semi-permanent colourants to enliven curls, Soft styling by Greens, Derby
A soft, casual style from the masters of hair creativity, the Vidal Sassoon team
Huge waves have been swept back into a movie star style.
By the Cutting Garden, Liverpool
Dramatic pin-curled style created by the Paterson S A styling team
Sets are in for ‘92 — this beautiful style was created by Ricardo at C.B. Academy
Strawberry blonde hair, styled into huge waves by Andrew Collinge for TRESemme'
Masses of curls on short hair designed by Margaret Nabbach at M & M Hair Academy
Beautiful curls and stunning colour — all achieved with the professional Clynol range
Huge barrel curls — the look for the season — created by Anthony Skito
Soft, upswept styling on curly hair by the Collection Hair Club team in Surrey
Sonya at Philipsharon used Well's Revival Styling Mousse and Hairspray on this look
Exciting shape achieved on blonde hair by the Avant Garde styling team in Canada
A graduated hairstyle was stack permed on large rollers.
Created by Rainbow Room International in Glasgow
BOLD BOBS
Perfect condition achieved with Leave-in Conditioner from the Alberto Pure & Clear range
Beautifully thick hair, styled into this traditional bob by the Terence Renati team
A variation of the classic shape by Ricardo Rizzo at C, B. Academy, Cambridge
Stunning corkscrew curls on thick, shiny hair created by Paterson S.A. Scotland
Volumise the hair with a little back-combing at the crown.
Hair by Cebado in Spain
Emphasise condition with colour — Clairol's Loving Care Dark Warm Brown was used here
Precision cutting is the key to this look — by Ricardo Rizzo at C.B. Academy
Original innovators of the bob shape, this style was created by the Vidal Sassoon team
This bob has been dramatised with curls, Created by Ritz International U.S.A
SLEEK CHIC
Achieve the ultimate, natural-looking shine with Timotei Shampoo and Conditioner
Forward movement achieved on this sweeping style by the Shears team
The Peter Mark team in Dublin used the Bain de Terre range for body and shine
Long, straight style texturised with styling mousse.
By Charlie Miller in Scotland
Ideal for thick hair, this classic bob is full of volume.
By the Terence Renati team
A graduated bob, finger-dried to add texture.
By the Rita Rusk International Artistic Team
This short cut is accentuated with soft sideburns.
Created by the Schumi team
There's no doubt about it — sleek hair shines on!
Beautiful bob by Neo Hair Design
Ring the changes on a classic bob — just add a little lift!
By Bannons Hair Design
Sheer elegance for mid-length hair achieved by Taylor Ferguson in Glasgow
SO LONG
Beautiful voluminous curls achieved by Falltricks using Clynol styling products
A strong 60s look created by the Scissors Hair Group Design Team, using Colour Touch by Wella
Extremely stylish shape, ideal if you're growing short hair long.
By Sloanes For Hair
Sexy long, blonde hair has been tousled with styling mousse.
By the Schumi team
A combination of sleek styling and back-combing.
By Joy Agar in Northampton
Keep hair in tip-top condition with the Alberto range of shampoos and conditioners
The Martin Gold team in Stanmore used Wella's Novena environmentally-friendly perm
Choose the right shampoo and conditioner to keep hair healthy.
Hair by Silkience
Regular trims are a must to keep split ends at bay.
Hair styled by Terence Renati
Laini at Toni & Guy used the TiGi Linea range of styling products to create this stylish look
WIN A MAKE-OVER
WOULD YOU LIKE TO LOOK LIKE madonna or bardot?
How would you like to look like your all-time, favourite movie star?
Silvikrin, BaByliss and Hairflair are giving two readers the chance to recreate the glamorous look of their choice, with hair, make-up and photography by the experts.
The fabulous results will be appearing in a forthcoming issue.
50 RUNNERS-UP
will each receive a complete set of Silvikrin Active Care Styling Products, worth around £10 per set!
HOW TO ENTER
Complete our coupon, giving us the name of the movie star you would most like to look like.
Send this, together with a recent photograph of yourself to Hairflair/Movie Mania Competition,.
Please put your name on the back of the photograph — only those entries submitted with a stamped addressed envelope will be returned.
Julia Roberts, Anjelica Huston and Meryl Streep all famed for their individual beauty.
Which one are you?
Two fabulous Hollywood greats.
Sex siren style from Brigitte Bardot and sultry screen looks from Marlene Dietrich.
celebrity interview
BELINDA CARLISLE
This ex Go Go has more get up and go than most of us put together, she's strikingly beautiful and very, very talented.
Too good to be true?
Hairflair went along to meet her and find out.
WHEN YOU WERE WITH THE GO GO'S, YOU LED A PRETTY MAD LIFE.
WHAT MADE YOU DECIDE TO GO HEALTHY?
I remember coming off stage in Rio and being piled into a helicopter to take us back to the hotel.
I was exhausted and unhappy and really messed up.
Suddenly I realised that I couldn't go on anymore.
It just wasn't fun.
WHY DO YOU THINK YOU WENT A BIT WILD?
I have a very addictive personality.
If it wasn't food or drugs it was romance.
I used to get really hooked on being in love!
YOU'RE LOOKING REALLY FIT THESE DAYS.
IS IT A STRUGGLE?
I keep a constant eye on what I eat and how much weight I put on.
I spend a lot of time on the bathroom scales — too much time — I really should throw them away!
I have a real thing for frozen yoghurt (it's really popular in the States).
It's less fattening than ice cream but it's still not good for you.
Not in the amounts I eat, anyway!
I still have problems with my stomach — it won't go flat, whatever I do.
I do about three hundred sit-ups a day and it still refuses to firm up, but what else can I do?
WERE YOU ALWAYS SO BODY CONSCIOUS?
Not always.
Not back then when I was with the Go Go's.
I remember doing the cover of an American magazine called Rolling Stone in my underwear.
Looking back, I looked hideous!
You wouldn't catch me doing that now.
WHAT DO YOU DO TO YOUR HAIR — IT ALWAYS LOOKS SO GREAT!
Believe it or not, I can't usually cope with it!
When I wake up I just pull it back or put it on top of my head in a top knot.
On some days when it looks good and I let it dry naturally it goes curly.
Usually I like it off my face.
So really, I don't spend much time on it at all— five minutes maximum!
My hair is so thick and there's so much of it that it's just too annoying for me.
(Most of us would kill for hair like that, Belinda!)
WHO DOES YOUR HAIR?
A girl called Sarah when I'm in Los Angeles but she doesn't come on tour with me — I just use people from local salons if I need them.
They're recommended to me and sometimes they're terrible!
I go to various salons and when I'm in London I get it cut and coloured at Macmillans in Covent Garden — they're really good.
I usually try and time it so I can get it cut when I get back to L.A.
WHAT ABOUT IN-BETWEEN VISITS?
I use a range of French products which are very expensive but great.
It's a complete line of creams and stuff — it's amazing.
I do put a red rinse on my hair but I can't remember which shade it is!
EVER HAD A DISASTROUS CUT?
I had a ‘Dutch boy’ haircut when I was 13 and it made my face look really huge.
I cried for a week!
I haven't had any bad haircuts recently because my hair's so simple, it's all one length.
I guess I've been very lucky.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO CHANGE YOUR HAIR?
If I could, I'd make it permanently curly.
But you always want what you can't have, don't you.
I'd love hair like Isabella Rosselini, but mine's too thick.
Her hair is a really short, blunt cut but my hair is so thick that it would look like a triangle or a big hat!
WOULD YOU HAVE YOUR HAIR CUT OFF FOR AN ALBUM COVER?
No — I've had it cut short before and I didn't like the way it feels when you wake up in the mornings — really weird.
I wouldn't do it even if they offered me loads of money.
WHAT ABOUT WIGS?
I wore one for a photo-session and it was great fun.
It was a short bob, the same colour as my own hair.
Once I dressed up in a big, black shag wig, really tacky.
I was still recognised and my picture ended up in People magazine!
NEXT MONTH: NICOLA STEPHENSON (Margaret from Brookside)
PRACTICAL HAIRCARE
Maximise condition and curl for true styling sophistication.
a touch of class
Naturally curly hair is prone to dryness and can turn frizzy if it's neglected.
With the Trevor Sorbie cleansing, conditioning and styling range, you can revitalise lacklustre hair, improve shine and accentuate curls.
Step one
Clean hair thoroughly with Sorbie Cleane Shampoo for normal hair, leaving it soft and manageable.
Blot hair with a towel to remove excess water — this is important because it allows your conditioner to work properly without being diluted.
Apply Sorbie Deep Conditioning Treatment, making it sure it is worked into every part of the hair shaft.
This treatment contains protein and Vitamin E which help strengthen, moisturise and protect your hair.
Step two
For maximum results on curly hair, don't wash the conditioning treatment out.
Leave it in and twist small sections of hair together to achieve better curl formation.
Apply Sorbie Curl Forme onto hair to revitalise curls and add body and shine.
Spray it over your hair, ensuring even distribution down the hair length.
Step three
Attach your diffuser attachment to your hairdryer and, with your dryer on a medium to low heat/speed setting, put your hair into the cup of the diffuser.
For maximum volume and root lift, turn your head upside down— the special ‘fingers’ inside the cup will help life and separate curls giving them a fuller look.
You'll find the Trevor Sorbie range at Boots nationwide.
Prices range from £2.99 to £4.99.
THE FINISHED LOOK is a mass of sensational, bouncy curls with beautiful shape and definition.
Hair is shiny and sophisticated with more than a touch of class!
NEW TECHNIQUES
GREAT LENGTHS
Is your hair short/fine/dull and would you love it to be long/thick/glossy?
Well, there's a brand new salon in London that may have the answer to all your dreams.
Great Lengths is the brain-child of Margarita Vidal and Elias Raymond.
Together with American businessman David A Gold and technical experts from West Germany, they have come up with an exciting new development for hair.
Great Lengths are hair extensions made from 100% human hair, specifically prepared for you at the laboratory to match your own hair perfectly.
Only hair of the highest quality is used which is bonded to small sections of your hair.
This facility is available for European, Afro Caribbean and Asian/Oriental hair types and an initial complimentary consultation will determine your requirements — colour, texture and style, etc.
We've answered a few of the queries you may have regarding the new Great Lengths Hair Extensions:
There are 40 colours to choose from
Great Lengths are available in many different textures and lengths — from 14–20 inches
The molecular bonding process means your extensions will withstand the most active lifestyle
When extensions have been applied, they are professionally styled and a make-up expert will give your a complimentary make-over to complete your new look
The extensions can be removed at any time without damaging your hair.
If properly looked after, they can be re-applied at a later date without paying out the amount of your initial outlay
Prices vary according to volume and length — expect to pay between £100 to £475, maximum
For more details, contact Great Lengths (UK) Ltd 
double take
Twice as nice, two good to be true — whichever way you look at it, a versatile hairstyle if worth every penny.
There are limitless variations for long, straight hair.
It looks great when it's down or in a simple self-knotted style.
Two styles, equally elegant, each suited to day or evening wear.
Both looks accentuate shine
Two exciting variations for short, thick hair.
Use styling products to add texture and movement
A slick of styling wax or a blob of mousse can make all the difference on short hair
Naturally curly or permed hair can be scraped back into a formal look or left casual for the evenings
A smooth, forward sweeping style has been back-combed slightly to create body and movement
AFRO UP-DATE
TOO HOT TO HANDLE!
Exciting shapes, fabulous shades and pure sex appeal — that's the word from leading hair artists this season.
We've put together a selection of our favourite styles for your sheer seduction…
NEW SALONS
Splinters of Mayfair have expanded.
They now have salons in .
This makes them the first chain of salons in the U.K. specialising in both Afro and European hairdressing.
Along with this major expansion comes a whole new range of hair products.
Splinters Professional Hair Care System consists of shampoos, conditioning treatments and styling aids.
Suitable for all hair types this range has not been tested on animals, is totally organic and biodegradable.
Available from all Splinters salons or by mail-order.
Tel  for more information.
Short, sharp and very sleek.
A perfect precision cut from Splinters of Mayfair
Sensuously soft curls in great condition from the creative team at Schumi in London.
Why not try a buoyant body of tumbling curls.
These strong sexy looks were created by the Pacific salon in London.
What a party piece!
This wild bouffant is a creation from Carole Rickaby at Tusk.
This cropped cut with thinned fringe is from Desmond Murray for Paul Mitchell Systems.
Provocative and fun.
Soft, feminine sixties styling from Pacific of London.
A boyish blunt cut with graduated fringe from Desmond Murray for Paul Mitchell Systems.
A short, chic style with hair covering one eye from the team at Pacific in London.
Fabulous wild child spiral curls from Jeanne Braa for Paul Mitchell Systems.
Softly swept forward style with texture and movement from the Ebony salon.
STYLIST PROFILE
INDIA BEGINNING…
Twenty-five-year old India Miller is still reeling from the shock of being named 1991 Scottish Hairdresser of the Year.
The accolade came three months after giving birth to her first child, called Isha and she even beat her hairdressing husband, Jason to the title.
Hairflair interviewed the Edinburgh lass who is cutting a name for herself at the Charlie Miller salon.
How did you feel about being named Scotland's top hairdresser?
It was actually a complete shock.
I really didn't think I would win and didn't have a speech prepared.
It was a great honour to receive it from Trevor Sorbie and Anthony Mascolo.
It still hasn't really sunk in yet.
I also feel it was a great honour being a woman and having achieved it in such a short space of time as I have only been in hairdressing for around six years.
Had you always wanted to be a hairdresser?
‘When I first met Jason, I was 20 and about to go to Edinburgh Art College to study painting or sculpture.
A lot of people wonder why I opted for hairdressing as they don't realise how much goes into the job.
Not only have I got a career that I can earn money from.
I can teach, do my creative avant-garde work which I love, as well as dealing with clients and performing on stage.
There is so much more  fulfilment in it.
A lot of my friends who graduated from art college still aren't earning any money.
Getting on in the art world has a lot to do with having the right contacts.’
India with her best creation yet — lovely little Isha.
Inspired Pin curling — India Miller has style.
How late did you work up until the birth?
I was taken into hospital with high blood pressure the day after doing my last two pictures for the British Hairdressing Awards and Isha was born the following day.
My ankles were like tree trunks and I could just about reach the model because I was so big.
I gave up work at the salon eight weeks before Isha was born and so I had the space and time to just do the hair work that I really wanted to do.
I felt very creative when I was pregnant, very calm and at ease and think that as a result, I produced some of the best work that I have ever done.’
Where did you get the inspiration for the hairstyles you created for the Awards?
‘I developed the pin curl looks about two years ago and have since changed the technique by dressing the hair more with back-combing and pinning it up for a more avant-garde finish.
I first got the idea of the crocheted styles after looking at a piece of fabric and thinking: ‘I could do that with hair.’
I have been trying to make it more commercial and wearable for evening looks, and the staff are now using the technique on clients especially for weddings.’
How does it feel to be a mother?
It is the most amazing experience to go through.
To hold this little thing in your arms and feel a tremendous love and protection towards it is just incredible.
It is also part of two people who love each other and is ultimately something they have been able to create together.
What does the name Isha mean?
We have always liked the name Isaac for a boy.
Isha is the feminine meaning of Isaac in Hebrew.
Do you talk about hairdressing at home?
Jason and I made a pact that we wouldn't discuss hairdressing at home unless we had to and we think that is even more important now that we have the baby.
He needs time to switch off.
How soon did you return to work?
I went back to work for two days a week in December when Isha was six months old.
Do you work well under stress?
‘I enjoy being under pressure.
The pincurl technique came about when I was doing a show in America and I was landed with a model with hair down her back which was in a terrible state.
I was nearly in tears and didn't know what to do with it.
I started playing about with it and later felt a real satisfaction of doing something with that  girl's head of hair that no-one had wanted to touch.
How important is a good hair cut to someone's image?
‘People generally would rather spend money on clothes because they feel they are noticed first.
It is much more to do with the image within the hair and from a grooming point of view, the hair should be on a par with the clothes.
CAREER UP-DATE
VIDEO VISION
If you've been thinking about a career in hairdressing and need some professional advice without parting with any cash, the new video from Hair by Alan d may be just the answer.
Hellena Barnes checked it out.
Entitled ‘See Yourself in Hair d-sign’ this video is aimed to encourage those thinking of starting in the business from scratch.
It talks about the possibility of Hairdressing as a career and the superb educational facilities available.
When you watch the video you will find yourself following a short story about a young girl, unsure just what the future will unfold for her, in her search for a career.
The video will be sent to you free of charge — just return it when you are finished.
See yourself in Hair d-sign will give you an insight into the ideas and methods of the Hair by Alan d Training School, an introduction to the teachers plus it's full of invaluable info like how to obtain grants etc.
If you'd like to take a look at this new video or would like further information contact the Hair by Alan d and Morris School of Hairdressing,
Precision cutting, creativity and new techniques are all an essential part of training.
Students being put through their paces at the Hair by Alan d and Morris School of Hairdressing.
giftbox
LOADS OF EXCITING PRODUCTS AND WE'RE GIVING THEM ALL AWAY
10 FREE
Bodycare '92 — the health, fitness and beauty exhibition — make it a date for your diary!
It takes place during the second weekend of the Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition, from Thursday 19th to Sunday 22nd March 1992 and we've got 10 pairs of tickets to give away.
At Bodycare '92 you will be able to seek advice from the experts and have a good old browse through all of the stands.
If you'd like a free pair of tickets worth £12, simply put your name and address on a postcard and send it to  
200 FREE
Get your hair into fabulous shape for that special date with some great shiny hair tips from Silvikrin.
Don't over-dry your hair — whenever possible, let it dry naturally or use a diffuser.
Massage your scalp every time you shampoo, moving the pads of your fingers in circular movements.
Always rinse your hair thoroughly using warm water.
Use a deep conditioner as part of your weekly hair care routine.
Give your hair a real treat with Silvikrin Intensive Conditioning Treatment — it's one of the best deep conditioners around and we're giving 200 away.
Send your details on a postcard to  
5 FREE
The word Cellulite brings fear to the hearts of many women but unfortunately there are no miracle cures.
That's why Clairol have developed Cellutherapie, a new home vibromassage system.
It works alongside a healthy diet and regular exercise and just a few minutes massage each day with Cellutherapie will help to stimulate blood circulation and improve the skin tone and texture on your hips and thighs.
Clairol's Cellutherapie costs £39.95 and comes complete with Oil Dispensing Massage Head, Concentrator Massage Head, Massage Oil, Smoothing Lotion, Cosmetic Bag and Transformer plug.
We've got 5 to give way, absolutely free.
Send your details to  
200 FREE
A third of all women have hair that needs frequent washing or that tends to lack life and body.
For these women, regular 2 in 1's often add to the problem, over-conditioning the hair to leave it looking lank and lifeless or stripping the hair of its natural oils, leaving it dry and brittle.
That's where Cream Silk's new 2 in 1 Shampoo and Conditioner comes in.
With over 21 years' expertise in conditioning, they have developed a light but protective 2 in 1 especially for frequently washed hair.
The unique formulation contains Panthenol Pro-Vitamin B5 to thicken hair, repair damage and give ultra body and shine — without over-loading the hair shaft.
The full range of Cream Silk 2 in 1 products also features variants for dry/damaged hair and permed/coloured hair.
We have 200 bottles of Cream Silk's new 2 in 1 shampoo for Frequent Use — send your details on a postcard to   
100 FREE
Kick your curls back into action with ShockWaves Curl Shaper from Wella — a brand new styling spray that gives your curls body and bounce.
Brilliant on permed or naturally curly hair, damp or dry hair and great for scrunch drying, ShockWaves Curl Shaper can also be used in-between washes to re-energise tired curls — perfect for keeping in the office for an end-of-the-day style boost!
We've got 100 bottles, worth £1.99 each, to give away to Hairflair readers.
So, make your curls twist and shout and send your name and address on a postcard to  
60 FREE
If you're planning on some kissing action on February 14th, make sure your lips are looking lovely!
The latest for lips comes from Cover Girl.
New Lip Advance combines a smooth, long-lasting powder with a moisturising, glossy top-coat.
The powder lip colour lasts for ages and the top gloss seals the colour, but the great thing about it is that you can use different combinations for different effects.
Lip Advance c£normally costs £3.83 but we're giving away 60 mirrored compacts absolutely free.
Send your name and address on a postcard to  
50 FREE
If your hair is damaged and needs a new lease of life after the party season then this give-away if for you.
From TiGi Linea comes Deep Reconstruct Conditioner, an intense formula for damaged hair.
It works from the inside out and penetrates the hair shaft to rebuild and strengthen your hair.
By simply massaging it onto your scalp every week you can revive and restore your tired tresses.
We have 50 to give away when you send your name and address to  
100 FREE
If your Valentine date looks set to be a jog in the park, a game of squash or a cycle ride in the country, then this give-away is definitely for your action man.
Slazenger and sport go back a long way but did you know that they also have a great sports toiletries range?
From that range comes Slazenger Sport Cologne Activ, a light, invigorating fragrance — guaranteed to help you get fresh!
We are giving away 100 bottles of Slazenger Sport Cologne Activ with £4.00 each.
Send your name and address on a postcard or the back of a sealed envelope to   
HOT OFF THE PRESS
WOGAN'S WONDER
Style mogul Simon Forbes from Antenna made history in October by becoming the first hairdresser to appear on the Wogan show.
Introduced by Terry's stand-in Selina Scott, Simon presented a selection of models, each of them wearing one of his incredible Monofibre hair extension creations, to no less than 8 million viewers!
HAIR RAISERS
Well done Headjogs — their recent Autumn Hair and Fashion show raised £708 for St Bartholomew's Hospital Day Surgery!
Held in the Great Hall at the hospital, clothes were supplied by Top Man and Top Shop and all models were friends and associates of the Headjogs team who, of course, did the hair.
Headjogs have salons in 
TURNING JAPANESE
Influences from the Far East are hitting London in a big way.
Originally from Tokyo and trained at Vidal Sassoon in London, Yoshi Inamura has opened his own salon at  — call  for details and appointments.
Another new salon in the same area, Max & Co, was opened in November by Martyn Maxey and he has personally selected products from a variety of top manufacturers.
Their Hayashi range was researched and developed in Japan and contain only first class ingredients in precisely balanced formulations.
Call  on 
INITIAL SUCCESS
DLC is the name of a new salon in Glasgow — named after partners Derek, Leigh and Cath!
Open 12 hours a day, there's no excuse for any Glaswegian lass or laddie to be seen looking less than their beautiful best!
Phone now on  or pop in to see them at 
SERVICE WITH A SMILE
Having celebrated their 5th birthday in style with Beaujolais Nouveau for all  clientèle , the Greys salon in  have been quietly promoting their commitment to quality with their Customer Service Policy.
Anyone who dreads the hairdressers more than the dentists can be guaranteed a warm welcome at Greys with free advice available.
Call  for details of treatments, long hair dressing, wedding preparation and image consultancy — just a few of the services on offer.
ON THE MOVE
David Adams, one of London's leading technical experts has moved salons and you'll now find him at Paul Windle's salon in Covent Garden.
His clientele includes famous faces from stage, screen and the music industry — so, for any colouring and perming services, David's your man!
Call him on  for appointments.
thanks
Our thanks to the following salons without whose help this issue would not have been possible 
treatment time
If you're worried about hair loss, you needn't suffer in silence any longer.There's a new treatment programme that could be the answer you are looking for.
Contrary to rumour, hair loss isn't simply a hereditary condition nor is it confined to men.
Many factors can contribute to thinning hair, including stress, diet, illness and even pregnancy as well as the natural ageing process.
Foltene is a deep conditioning programme containing natural biological substances normally present in the body which act as a natural scalp stimulant to revitalise blood flow to the hair follicles.
When massaged into the scalp, it helps to slow down hair loss by strengthening each shaft, thus lengthening the life of each hair.
Foltene is easy to use and is available at the following outlets in London  or by mail order to FOLTENE  Send an S.A.E to this address for more details.
Foltene costs £19.95 for a pack of 10 phials but if you use our special coupon, the price to our readers is £14.95.
One subsequent purchase you decide to make will still only cost you £14.95 — details will be sent with your initial order.
Send your coupon to    
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
be our beautiful bride!
Love is in the air and for this fab Valentine's issue we have joined forces with Northern Hairdresser Of The Year, Gary Hooker from Saks to give you this superb wedding gift — a complete hair and beauty bridal make-over all in the comfort of your very own home.
No doubt if you're getting married between June and August this year, your wedding plans will be well underway by now.
With the dress ordered, church and reception booked, invitations sent and wedding lists prepared probably the last thing on your mind is YOU!
Top hairdresser, Gary Hooker will transform one lucky bride-to-be into our sensational summer Bride.
With Gary's wealth of experience in bridal hairstyles and his superb creative talent we're going to create a look for you that would make any bride blush.
Gary's expert advice, will also ensure that you can maintain your style throughout your wedding day and if required, adapt it for your honeymoon.
Accompanied by top beautician Sarah O'Brien from Saks, one of the UK's leading hair and beauty salon groups, you could be transformed into our stunning summer bride.
Sarah has some exciting and wonderful bridal make-up ideas.
Gary and Sarah will visit the bride to be at her home before the big day for a thorough hair and beauty consultation to discuss your hair style, make-up and consult the florist working on your flowers and head dress.
HOW TO ENTER: Send us a recent photo of yourself and tell us when you are getting married (please note this must be between June and August 1992), the length and colour of your hair, and if possible the colour of your wedding dress.
All entries must reach us by 15th March 1992.
Award winning Gary Hooker of Saks specialises in beautiful wedding day transformations.
Some of Gary's fabulous creations above.
Why not subscribe to your FAVOURITE hair, beauty and fashion magazine and enter our fabulous PRIZE draw absolutely FREE!
HAIR FLAIR SUBSCRIPTION SPECIAL
For just £15, you will receive a copy of Hairflair every month — before it's even in the shops!
And, by completing our special coupon below, your name will automatically be entered into our PRIZE DRAW.
Names will be picked out of the bag on January 31st, so coupons must reach us by that date.
We have SO MANY GREAT PRIZES to give away, everyone stands a good chance of winning something!
Send us your subscription form today and YOU could win:
1st Prize a day for two at The Sanctuary health and beauty spa in London worth £70!
Clairol Big Shot diffuser/dryers, worth £26.95
sets of Clairol Lock'N roll heated curlers, worth £29.95
100 100 sets of moisturising Palmers Cocoa Butter Formula — a jar of rich cream worth £2.65 plus a handy tube of lotion worth £2.20.
1 set of luxury bath products from the exotic Salvador Dali range — the collection includes Dusting Powder, Perfumed Soap and Body Lotion, worth £67
6 Salvador Dali Luxury Perfumed Soaps worth £13 each!
100 Silvikrin Active Care Goody Bags, worth £7.75.
It contains Mousse, Spray, Shampoo, Conditioner and Conditioning Treatment!