

MACHINE KNITTING MONTHLY SUMMER KNITTING Add crochet, beads, butterflies and daisies SPECIAL OFFER NEW ‘JAC-CARD’ for Double Jacquard NEW SERIES DOUBLE FEATURE FOR ALL SILVER REED MACHINES
Dear Readers
So what's new this month?
As this is the first of our summer issues, there's an air of warmer weather and sunnier days about the patterns.
Among the cool colours and short sleeves look out for an imaginative crochet trim — daisies, worked separately and set into open spaces left in the knitting.
We have a special offer for you too, the new Jac-Card yarn holder which has been produced by Jacpacs to enable knitters to try out double jacquard patterns before rushing into buying a colour changer.
Silver Reed knitters will find we've made a change in their favourite feature.
Liz Norton will now be writing a double ration for them but it will be divided into ‘Simply Silver’ for punchcard machines and the new ‘Silver Scene’devoted to the electronic machines.
This will enable her to cover the field more precisely so I'm sure you'll approve.
NEWS LINE
New products, colours and prices
A special event or a change of address
If it's news, we want to know
Send details, pictures or samples to the address on page 3
YARNS
Amberyarn have now launched a comprehensive mail order service for their entire range of yarns, books and accessories.
On the 15th, 16th and 17th of May they are opening the trade warehouse to the public.
On sale will be the entire range of branded yarns accessories and books, together with Bramwell, Forsell, Denys Brunton, BK yarns, Hague linkers, Brother, and Toyota knitting machines plus hundreds of mill ends, job lots and clearance yarns, many at trade price or even less.
Amberyarn is a real working mill, you will have the opportunity to see how the yarn is produced in a demonstration of twisting, spinning and winding.
If you are unable to obtain any Amber product in your area or would like tickets for the ‘open day’, contact them on  or write to ,.
Nina Miklin has introduced some new colours to the very popular Bellini yarn.
Bellini is soft to the touch, versatile and easy to wear, it is a blend of 45% Alpaca, 38% Pure Wool, 10% Kid Mohair with 7% man made fibre to give it extra strength and durability.
As with all Nina Miklin yarns it is easy to use, suitable for all standard gauge machines including Passap/Pfaff and Singer.
The February issue of MKM featured a 40 stitch repeat man's Jacquard jumper with Bellini as the main colour and Roma as the contrast colour.
The March issue of MKM includes two new designs using Bellini.
A hood collar jacket and a shawl collar jacket, both these designs have been very popular.
To obtain the complete set of Nina Miklin's shade cards which includes the new Bellini yarn and knitting tips for her yarns send a large SAE with £3.60 to  .
Narvik have introduced Young Touch a 100% mercerised cotton in eight plain shades and two complementary ‘splash’ colours for the summer.
It comes in 50g balls and retails at £1.95 a ball.
As some of the smaller garments only take two balls, for £3.90 you have an economical garment which is also machine washable.
The launch is supported by 15 leaflets.
Brockwell Yarns are introducing some new and exciting colours to their wonderful range of yarns.
To reflect the change in knitting habits they have also changed their name from Brockwell Wools to Brockwell Yarns.
Although they have only been trading for the last ten years, they continue the tradition of using a water powered mill which started in the 1800s.
In the early years they manufactured and supplied both hand and machine knitting yarns in natural fibres, principally wool and mohair.
Since then the demand for cotton has grown and after a trial range, they now produce more cotton than wool and have even added fancy cottons to their range.
They have recently opened a new spinning department initially producing Aran and chunky yarns in both ecru and naturally coloured British wools, such as Black Welsh, Suffolk and Wensleydale.
Dyed shades will be available both in Aran weight of yarn and finer machine knitting yarns from 4-ply to DK weight.
Yarns from Brockwell can be ‘made to measure’.
The individual qualities such as botany, lambswool and the different types of cotton are dyed and stocked in single strands ready to be twisted together to order.
This means the yarn produced can be any ply from two to eight and also be a mix of qualities and even colours if the customer wishes.
The lambswool yarns are oiled and require washing after knitting to remove the spinning oil and to develop a full soft handle.
Botany yarns and cotton yarns are dry spun and waxed on cone.
Sansolaine — first wash for Wool is a liquid surface treatment which is manufactured by their associated business ‘Protech’ for use by the Scottish and Midlands knitwear industry.
It is also available in small quantities for washing home produced garments in lambswool, Shetland or cashmere and comes with a product information leaflet ‘Care of Knitted Fabrics’.
For an extensive range of shade cards in various qualities and covering over 300 colours send £1.50 to cover cost and postage (refundable with first order for two cones or more) to:.
Tel:.
DIARY
MACHINES & ACCESSORIES
PDB Engineering have produced another of their aids to machine knitting.
This time it is a set of templates for ‘cut and sew’ necklines.
Six templates in all, they range from ‘Children's 2–4’ size up to‘Adult Large’.
Made from thick card, the shape is not rounded but angled, the templates can be used for round necks, then by extending the side lines, they can be used for V-necks.
At first sight the children's sizes look rather small but they are designed to shape not only the front neck, but also a few centimetres at the back.
We tried one on a child's jumper, chest size 66cm (26″), using the template for children 5–8, and this worked out very well.
Instructions are given for several neckbands, but everyone has their own pet neckband.
For anyone who does a lot of ‘cut and sew’ these templates would prove most useful.
They cost £4.95 plus 40p p&p per set, payable by cheque, postal order or credit card, from  .
BOOKS & PATTERNS
The latest collection of hand knitting designs from Rowan is Canary Rock .
Volcanic landscape, brilliant sun, clear blue skies and sandy beaches are the inspiration for the designs from Kaffe Fassett, Annabel Fox, Kim Hargreaves, Jamie and Jessi Seaton and Sasha Kagan among others.
There are 28 summer designs using Rowan's wide range of natural fibre yarns including the new Nice Cotton, Handknit DK Cotton, Wool and Cotton, Cotton and Fine Cotton Chenille, in a palette of rich, jewel, muted and pastel shades.
Each design has detailed instructions and is graded according to ability from the easy-knit Sand Sweater to Louisa Harding's Le Castelle, for the more experienced.
Rowan Knitting Book 11 costs £4.95 from Rowan stockists and bookshops.
Charity Knitting Competition
The Stroke Association is appealing to all knitters to enter their knitting competition .
The competition is aimed at hand knitters, with prizes to include a variety of hand knitting accessories and yarns plus a modern, easy to use knitting machine for the most outstanding entry.
However, machine knitters need not be deterred from contributing to this worthwhile cause as, after they have been exhibited and judged, all garments entered will be sold to raise funds for the Association.
The closing date for the competition is 1st September 1992, so there is plenty of time to plan your garment and early entries are welcome.
For full details, please write to Maria Henry, The Appeals Department, using the full address given below.
Stroke is the third biggest killer in the UK.
Every year, some 100,000 people in England and Wales suffer a stroke for the first time — one third will die within two to three weeks whilst around half the survivors remain permanently disabled.
Strokes can even occur in unborn babies and small children.
Your financial support is most welcome and The Stroke Association have produced a catalogue of useful items which are now available by mail order.
Knitters will find lots of fun ideas in the ‘Knitted Toys Book’ by Jean Greenhowe (priced at £8.99, with over 50 lovable toys to knit); there is also a battery-operated ‘Fuzz Remover’(price £5.99) which is the perfect gadget to remove bobbles and fuzz from tired knitwear and there are plenty of other items with general appeal including toys, cards, tea towels, gift sets and so on.
For your copy of the latest gift catalogue, please write to .
The Robert Glew Group have produced the Robin ‘Bambino’ look a range of clothes with co-ordinating yarns for a complete outfit.
The garments are available from Robin stockists, to fit children from 6 months to 2½ years with 41 to 66cm chest.
The DK yarn is available in colours to match the clothes and is supported by six leaflets each with two hand-knit designs.
bambino
GOLD ST*R AWARD
This month we turn to Yeovil in Somerset to hand out the bouquets, or rather our Gold St*r award.
You will remember that this is a commendation given to a shop or dealer on behalf of a reader who has written to tell us of service above and beyond the call of duty.
We have been delighted but not surprised to find so many deserving cases all round the country and now we take a look at ‘The Wool Shop’of Middle Street, Yeovil.
Mrs P Satterley is the reader who wrote to us some time ago to say how wonderful the people at this shop are.
Mrs Satterley is unfortunately disabled by illness but she is also an avid knitter with Brother chunky and Silver Reed fine gauge machines.
She recently added a ribber and finds that if she has a problem, thanks to her illness, she gets flustered.
However, she just has to pick up the phone and a friendly voice at The Wool Shop is always there to help.
If Trudi, the friendly voice, cannot make out what Mrs Satterley is trying to say, the owner of the shop, Mr Farquarson allows her to leave early in order to pop in and sort the problem out on her way home.
Mrs Satterley says, ‘I love doing lace and my Silver Reed has been playing up but — one phone call — and up comes Trudi.
Their kindness is out of this world and I do hope they win your Gold St*r award.
They deserve it.’
Well they have indeed won it Mrs Satterley and we hope that you will continue to enjoy your knitting, with their help, in spite of your poor health.
CLUBS & COURSES
Lewes Tertiary College is holding two courses starting in September:City & Guilds 790 Machine Knitting Course .
This two year course is to be held on Wednesday mornings from 9.30am to 12.30pm, starting 23rd of September.
Tutor:Linda Black .
Creative Machine Knitting Design This is a ten-week course to introduce students to the elements of designing their own machine knitted garments.
Starting 23rd September, 1.30pm to 3.30pm.
Tutor Linda Black .
For further information contact:.
The Chorley Machine Knitting Club hold their meetings on the second Tuesday of every month, 7.30pm to 9.30pm at the Astley Village Community Centre, Nr Chorley.
Contact  on .
The Ivel Machine Knitters Club hold their meetings on the second Thursday of every month from 7.30pm to 9.30pm at The Labour Hall,.
Further details from  on .
Loraine McClean and Angela Gordon are holding two one-week courses in Bournemouth and weekend workshops in Wimborne.
Loraine is the design tutor on their City and Guilds courses (Hand and Machine knitting) and will be showing knitters how to create their own designs.
Angela will then be showing the knitters how to convert their designs into perfectly fitting garments.
Computerised design methods will be demonstrated and available for students to use.
The aim of the course is to allow knitters to spend one week designing and creating their own original garment.
The course for knitters with any machines will be held on 20th to 24th July and will be followed by one specifically tailored for electronic machine owners on 27th to 31st July.
The cost is £45 per week, this does not include accommodation which should be organised separately.
Further details from Adult Education Centre, tel:.
Weekend workshops at Walford Mill, Wimborne.
27th/28th June, Knit a Suit or Dress.
26th/27th September, Lace Knitting.
Fees £25 per weekend (excluding accommodation).
For details contact: The Mill .
DEAR ANNE
Don't keep your ideas, suggestions, experiences, criticism or praise to yourself.
Share your thoughts with other readers by writing to Anne at Machine Knitting Monthly,.
A few months ago I bought a secondhand Singer 2310 machine with an electric motor.
The machine is attached to the table with two clamps and the motor is joined to the machine with pegs at each end.
When using the motor, I noticed that there was a lot of vibration, so I made certain the clamps were tight before I started.
In spite of this, one day the machine and the motor slid off the table and badly bruised my leg.
Since then I have fixed the motor to the table with two clamps.
Other knitters with this machine might like to take the precaution of buying a couple of clamps so that the same thing cannot happen to them.
Thank you for the warning.
I'm sure that all knitters, not just those with this particular machine, should check frequently that their machine and its accessories are fixed firmly to the table as some nasty accidents can occur.
I decided to put pen to paper and let you know of a few problems some of us have in trying to become machine knitters.
Having spent most of my life working on industrial sewing machines, hand knitting and doing crochet, I figured a knitting machine would be no problem.
I was right (big head).
Four years ago I bought a secondhand Toyota 858 and after ten minutes instruction, I was quite happy.
I did however, have a shaky start with casting on, but I read the instruction book, back to front and upside down until I had a good idea of what I was doing, resulting in two 4-ply cardigans for my eldest two grand-daughters.
Great, no problems.
That was week one.
However, I had hardly got started before I got the first complaint.
Problem No. 1: My husband and son started to complain they could not hear the TV.
Solution: Give up knitting for the moment.
Problem No. 2: Ill health meant no knitting for three years.
Question: Can I knit in the conservatory?
It's quite big.
Problem No. 3: Hubby's a cage and aviary bird breeder just like Caroline Holtby.
He breeds budgies and my conservatory was full of birds.
Solution: Head 'em up and move 'em out, just like ‘Rawhide’.
By the by, Caroline, you have taken my idea, I was also going to knit budgie sweaters.
Problem No. 4: I got my conservatory back, but what a waste of time — too cold in the morning and by lunch, boiling hot.
Problem No. 5: The neighbours, wanting to know what I am doing.
‘How do you know what to do?’ and so on.
Problem No. 6: Hubby's retired through ill health.
He has lots of ‘budgie’ pals dropping in for cups of tea and chats.
One fiend, so sorry, friend, visited him when I was trying to knit.
I had just got to the tricky bit when in walked this friend with the usual enquiries.
‘What's this bit for?
Why is that there?
Don't you want your wool on the table?
I'll lift it up for you.
You have dropped it on the floor.’
What with the heat, the fiddly bit and then him, I was ready to blow my top.
Solution: Stop knitting yet again but I never gave up.
I went and got a secondhand Bond.
Problem No. 7: Still nowhere to knit and I am getting very frustrated.
Solution: Our son, Mark, informs us that he will be buying his own house.
I got a bit upset, but soon found a silver lining.
When he moves, one good sized bedroom will be free.
Problem No. 8: Four rooms to paper for Mark.
Made it, they're done.
Problem No. 9: When Mark moved out, hubby decided we should paper our house (screams of anguish).
Two rooms done, three to go.
Still haven't done any knitting.
Problem No. 10: One week to go to school holidays.
Guess who baby sits for my full-time working daughter?
That's right, Mum of course.
No knitting for six weeks.
Problem No. 11: The week they go back I usually start a Christmas job for 13 weeks, with money short that's how I got my machines.
So, roll on January 1992, then I may be able to do some knitting.
Problem No. 12: I must go and hang out my son's washing as he hasn't got a machine yet, I still do it for him.
There will not be a Problem No. 13 on the grounds of superstition as number 13 is supposed to be unlucky, so
‘Excuse my writing, I'm not too bright,
With pen and paper I always fight
I love to knit and I like to sew
and all I want is to go, go, go.
The problems start the minute I try
So excuse me a moment while I cry, cry, cry.’
This may not be an original idea but I thought it might be worth a mention.
When knitting single motifs, if the designated space on my machine (Brother 891) doesn't correspond with the position I have in mind, I use the KC setting instead of the usual SM one.
I set the punchcard on lock and proceed as usual, select a group of needles to be used as the motif and push all others back to WP (needles must be pushed back on every row).
This way also eliminates the need for the single motif cams.
Motif edges do have to be bound with the main yarn in the usual way as work progresses.
I hate throwing my MKM away so I devised a way of condensing the information and patterns.
I cut out the index after noting any particular patterns or items specifically meant for my Knitmaster machine or any others of interest.
Then I store the magazines in the bottom of the wardrobe as they take up too much space in my knitting room.
This takes time to begin with — lots of lovely sitting around going through the magazines again but, when needed, the index which is stored in a file can be looked up and the right magazine located in a few minutes.
STAR LETTER
May I relate how MKM gave me a much needed ‘kick’?
Increasing disability made me to decide buy a Disabled Person's Scooter.
This arrived on Wednesday, February 12th when it was too wet and windy to try it out and frankly, I was too scared.
Thursday dawned crisp and sunny, perfect weather for a trial run, but I still chickened out!
There were more urgent things to do; a cardigan to finish, samples to make, wool to sort — you know the kind of thing.
Looking at my diary after lunch, I realised it was MKM day and they might sell out before someone could get me a copy!
That did it.
I dressed, got the scooter out, turned the motor on and off I went.
My MKM was more important than my fears.
Back home safely, I made a cuppa and sat for a good hour revelling in my favourite magazine.
I have a tip to pass on to other readers.
I buy those packets of small reels of thread which are often only 50p or £1 a pack.
The colour range is amazing and there is generally enough for the hems and sewing on the buttons of one garment on each reel.
I feel you are all friends, so thank you for a lovely magazine.
Thank you Joyce for a lovely letter.
It made our day to know that MKM can help with more than just knitting advice.
By now you'll be out and about all the time on your scooter but, just in case the second Thursday of the month should dawn wet and windy again, I have chosen yours as this month's Star Letter.
This means you win a free subscription to MKM as well as £5 so the postman will be braving the weather for you in the coming year.
How I wish I'd seen Shirley Cowling's article (Nov '91) on ‘Choosing the first machine’ eight years ago!
I had asked similar questions and was advised to try Jones + Brother with the result that I bought a KA881 with ribber and eventually we made some lovely garments together.
So when my cousin rang to ask ‘which machine’, I said I'd had good results and so on.
A month later she rang to say she'd bought a Knitmaster!
Some years ago I learnt this neckband method which I find invaluable.
It gives a neat neckline which looks hand stitched and is ideal for children as it has lots of stretch.
It can also be used for V necks and cardigans with a little adaptation.
NO SEW NECKLINE 
1
Knit front and back of garment and join one shoulder.
2
Cut neckline or use existing
3
Hold up to needles to estimate number of stitches required then deduct two at each end.
4
Adjust tension to your requirements.
5
Push needles into hold position, hang neckline with right side uppermost and over machine (in about ¼ to ½ inch).
Push behind latches.
6
Hook up neckband on first row, push behind latches and remove waste and nylon cord.
You know have a neat sandwich.
7
Open latches, take a piece of yarn at least four times the length of the neckband, lay behind needle heads and close latches over.
Make sure they are all closed or the next bit won't work.
8
Push needles back ALL AT ONCE with a long ruler or similar, until the heads are held by the fabric.
9
Test; the yarn must run freely so move it backwards and forwards.
10
Push needles back by hand; start at shortest end of running yarn and make big stitches.
You will have to reach round garment.
11
Pull garment over to hang as normal and push needles into holding position.
12
Latch off.
You can do this off the machine if your stitches are long enough.
13
Thread nylon cord through the neckband on a safety pin and give a good tug to close up the stitches and make the curve.
If you hang the garment wrong side out you can do a weaving cast-on without waste yarn and nylon cord, as the chain stitch will be on the right side.
You can use contrasting thread to tone with a Fair Isle pattern in this case.
Thank you, Rosemary, for sharing your neckband with us all and also for such a well-written pattern.
It is not always easy to describe a technique, even when it is really easy to do.
When knitting, if you suspect needles of being faulty, you can pick them out more easily while the knitting is on the machine.
Put a dab of coloured nail varnish on the end of suspect needles and then it is easy to inspect them when the machine is empty.
If they are undamaged remove the polish with nail varnish remover.
Driving to a knitting meeting with Bryan our Club President, I happened to mention that I had acquired an old Empisal 100 for knitting thicker yarns and slub cottons.
‘But,’ I said, ‘it jumps all over the place as it is so light!’
Without taking his eyes of the road he said, ‘What about putting a Velcro spot under the legs, with the sticky side facing down?’
‘Great!’
I said and went home and tried it.
It works like a CHARM!
Since then I have found other uses for it in my knitting room such as to anchor down that very important latch tool and to put in place the little basin on the weighing machine which tends to flop off when I go to weigh a heavy jumper.
Where to hang the steaming kit for a shadow pleated skirt is always quite a problem.
After lots of thought I've come up with this solution and hope it will be helpful to others.
Using an open doorway, screw in a hook at the centre of the door frame and suspend the skirt to the height required.
There is plenty of room to work around it in safety and no clothes horse to fall over!
We pay £5 for every letter we publish, provided it has not already been accepted or published elsewhere, plus a year's subscription to the magazine for a Star Letter.
OH brother
STITCH PATTERNS
Slip stitch — Part 2
This month, Diane explores some of the many interesting variations of slip stitch, including a variety of multi-colour designs.
In the April issue, I explored the use of basic slip stitch designs for knitting fabrics.
These designs involve slipping the same needle for between two and four rows.
It is also possible to produce deeper, ruched fabrics by slipping for more rows.
The simplest of these fabrics to knit is ‘teacosy’ stitch, knitted from Card 1 (Stitchworld design 30).
Owners of punchcard machines should lock the card on one row.
For 950/950i machines, use 999 mode and select one row of the design.
For 930/940/900/270 machines, enter a design two stitches wide, one row long, with one stitch black and one white.
Cast on and knit a new rows.
Set to KC and select alternate needles from the design and press both part buttons.
Knit six to eight rows, depending on the thickness of the yarn.
Cancel the part buttons and knit two or more rows stocking stitch.
Repeat for the required length.
The same needles are knitted and slipped throughout, producing a raised ridge.
This can be repeated throughout, with only two plain rows to produce a thick fabric which is ideal for a teacosy or cushion cover.
Use this also to decorate a plain garment by knitting the stitch on welts and cuffs.
For a decorative effect, space the ridges widely on a garment, or place on ridge level with the armhole on body and sleeves to form a yoke effect.
A variety of different designs can be used to knit ruched fabrics of this type.
Although these are most commonly used to knit pin tuck fabrics using the ribber in full needle rib, it is also possible to knit single bed fabrics.
Try, for example, a single colour fabric knitted from the design for Fig. 3.
This slips on the same two needles for 16 rows, producing a deep, sculptured fabric.
Another variation of basic slip stitch uses tuck and slip on alternate rows.
Sometimes called slick (slip and tuck), examples are included in the hardback punchcard books as ‘lace-like’ fabric.
It is possible to knit this stitch on Brother machines because there are two buttons for slip and tuck stitch.
Instead of using both part buttons, one part and one tuck button are pressed.
Fig. 1 shows this fabric knitted from the basic punchcard design used as an example of basic slip stitch in my last article.
The combination of tuck and slip produces a more textured fabric in which the design shows more clearly.
Only designs suitable for tuck can be used, since it is not possible to tuck two needles together even when tucking alternate rows.
To knit the fabric, choose a tuck design in which the rows are repeated in pairs.
Pre-select from right to left and press the right part button and the left tuck button.
The design will then be knitted as illustrated, the first row of each pair being the slip row and the second row the tuck row.
When knitting these designs, it is important to start each piece of the garment in the same way.
If the design is knitted as described, but with the pre-select row knitted from left to right, the first tow will tuck and the second row slip, which looks quite different.
Either can be used, but a garment should not combine both types of fabric!
Basic machines use the slip stitch setting as a method of knitting Fair Isle.
The two colours are knitted separately, so two movements of the carriage are necessary to knit one complete row of knitting.
This is the method of knitting Fair Isle on the older push-button machines and it is also used with the ribber and double bed colour changer for double jacquard.
To knit jacquard, the original design must be modified but basic tuck and slip stitch designs can be used without alteration to knit a wide range of multi-colour fabrics.
Fig. 2 shows the same design used for Fig. 1, knitted in multicolour slip stitch.
Cast on and knit a few rows, then preselect from right to left and press both part buttons 
Although the design knits a series of repeating triangles in single-colour tuck and slip, the two colour design is very different!
Experiment with a range of tuck designs.
The most suitable are those which tuck on the same needles for two or four rows.
Change colour following the sequence of rows in the design.
Most basic designs have two rows which are the same, followed by another pair of rows.
Arrange the colour changes so that each identical pair of rows is knitted with the same colour.
Some designs tuck for four rows on the same needle and the colours then need to be changed every four rows following the sequence of the design.
The range of designs which can be knitted from basic designs using this method is amazing.
The designs are colourful but have very short floats — when using tuck designs, floats are never more than one stitch long, making these fabrics ideal for children's garments.
Another group of multi-colour slip stitch fabrics can be designed to form mosaics, as described by  Kathleen Kinder in her ‘Mosaic Floatless Fair-Isle’ books.
The design which is to be knitted is graphed and then converted to the design for knitting the mosaic.
Like the basic designs, which are mainly of the maze type, it is very difficult to predict from the punchcard or design what will appear on the fabric.
A range of very attractive effects can be achieved using slip stitch and changing colour less frequently.
These designs are particularly suitable for knitters who do not own a single bed colour changer.
Fig. 3 shows an example which requires colour changes only every 16 rows.
It is knitted from the graph shown and slips the same two needles for 16 rows.
The position of the pattern then alternates, again slipping two needles for 16 rows.
To knit the design, preselect from right to left and press both part buttons.
Three or four colours can be also used for this design in several different ways.
Two possible three colour variations are:
Slip stitch can also be used to knit three and four colours into the same row of knitting.
The principle is similar to double jacquard, with each colour being knitted by one stroke of the carriage.
The design needs to be simple and arranged in identical pairs of rows.
For a three colour design, each pair of rows will be marked as six rows, two for each colour.
A design just 20 rows long will therefore become 60 rows.
To convert a design, use graph paper and mark out blocks of six rows.
Keep the same colour sequence throughout, marking in the first two rows any stitches knitted with col. 1, in the second pair of rows those stitches knitted with col. 2 and in the third pair of rows the stitches knitted with col. 3.
Punch or draw out the resulting design.
Note that one row can be punched for each pair of rows for electronics and punchcard machines with a double length facility.
If all three colours are not knitted in every row, the blank rows should be omitted for single bed knitting, but they should be included if the design is to be used for a double bed fabric.
Designs are quite difficult to convert and it is often easier to start with designs for this type of knitting.
Stitchworld pattern numbers 386 to 394 are for three and four colour in a row knitting, and for punchcard machines there are examples in the ‘Skip stitch patterns by KHC’ sections of Punchcard Vol. 3, 4 and 5.
There are also several examples in the ‘Harmony Book of Machine Knitting Stitches’.
Fig. 4 shows the right side of Stitchworld pattern number 388, which is also in the punchcard book.
Fig. 5 shows the reverse side of this fabric, to illustrate the problems of this type of fabric.
The three colours are not used throughout this design and areas of stocking stitch alternate with much thicker areas where the three colours are knitted; notice that there are quite long floats.
If the three colours are used for the whole fabric, the length of floats and buildup of these on the wrong side of the work can be a problem.
Three and four colour knitting is usually more successful using full needle rib and fine yarns with the ribber.
In the next article in this series, Diane will start to explore weaving, which as many uses and variations.
TALKING TOYOTA
LACE PATTERN AND ADAPTATION
Lace made on a knitting machine can be whatever you want it to be; it can be filmy and fine for evening wear, lightweight in fine wool for a layer of warmth or used as a break inserted into the stocking stitch of a warm, chunky sweater.
Above all, it is easily and quickly made on the K858.
THE LACE CARRIAGE
You may have put off beginning lace knitting because you know that it requires an extra carriage and one carriage is enough for you to master as a beginner.
However, once you understand what the lace carriage does you will realise that it isn't a separate mechanism so much as a supplement to your knitting carriage.
Look at the pictures for lace patterning with punchcards in the manual (page 28).
Cards No. 2 and 3 are examples that show machine knitted lace to be a series of holes between stocking stitch.
The holes are formed by transferring one stitch to the next needle to the right or left, leaving the empty needle in working position so that it picks up a stitch on the following row.
Before punchcard systems came in, single bed machines could not make lace automatically, the stitch transference had to be hand tooled.
You could still transfer stitches by hand tooling but, except when working small motifs, this would take more time than would be worth the effort.
Now that punchcards exist it is quicker and less troublesome to let your lace carriage transfer the stitch for you.
That is all it does, once the stitches have been transferred, the main carriage will knit the row.
There are other models that transfer stitches and knit at the same time but the K858 has a separate lace carriage to transfer stitches and the punchcards are treated accordingly.
THE EXTENSION RAILS
It is well worth spending a few minutes setting up the rails and lace carriage to see how it works even if you don't want to knit with them at present.
When you finally decide to make some lace you will then be familiar with the system and will be able to go ahead without trepidation.
Since the lace carriage does not actually knit the stitches, it needs a place to ‘rest’ while not in operation.
It lies to the left of the work while the main carriage needs a waiting place while the lace carriage is in motion and that is the reason for the right extension rail.
The main carriage operates from the right-hand edge and the lace carriage from the left-hand edge.
The rails not only provide a space for the carriages in their starting places but they need to accommodate both carriages sometimes.
As you have read, sometimes the lace carriage moves to the right to transfer stitches and, if the main carriage is there waiting to knit, the lace carriage and the main carriage are temporarily on the same extension rail.
All this becomes obvious once you have set up the machine to knit lace.
LEFT AND RIGHT TRANSFERRING
By following the punchcard instructions you will be moving the lace carriage sometimes to the left and sometimes to the right.
This is to balance the direction of the hole making.
If the stitches are transferred in only one direction all the time the finished work will have a terrible bias which no amount of blocking will eliminate and it will also develop curved side seams.
If you have any experience in hand-knitted lace you will perhaps recall that ‘K2 tog’ is generally balanced in the row with ‘sl. 1, K1, psso’— in layman's terms, transferring the stitches in opposite directions.
Now that you have read a little about the method why not get out the extension rails and apply these pieces of information to some lace making?
MAKING A START
Follow the method for attaching the extension rails according to the instructions in the manual on page 26.
Make sure before you begin, that you have enough space widthways, for the machine plus the extensions and that, should you decide to go further and decide to knit up a garment, you will not need to move.
Machines that are considered ‘out of the way’ in a corner of the room will be relatively more unsociable if they block off a doorway or interrupt television viewing.
Once you have completed a few rows of plain knitting, you can prepare to start.
Working the plain rows teaches you something further about lace knitting, the holes have to be isolated by at least one stitch and one row.
You cannot make lace on your first row and there has to be at least one stitch between each hole.
For the same reason you should place any edge stitches that are selected back to B position — the selector level will select the pattern of needles in working position, regardless of where they fall on the needlebed.
The manual suggests using Card No. 1 to start with.
This, as you probably know by now, selects alternate needles automatically.
With the lace extension rail and the main carriage on the right, insert and set Card No. 1 and the main carriage for plain knitting.
The lace carriage is going to transfer the selected stitches and the main carriage is going to knit them.
Adjust the tension wires and tension disc as directed and attach the weights and put a wax ring on to the pin if not already in place.
Knit two rows with the main carriage, which will now have returned to the right again.
Select the needles with the selector lever, pushing back to B position any end needles that have been selected to D position.
Now, with gentle pressure, move the lace carriage across to the right, push the knitting until it rests on the left of the main carriage.
The manual suggests that you move the carriage as if ironing and this is a very apt description.
If you try to move the carriage too lightly or too quickly you might not transfer the stitches firmly enough.
Take a look at the needlebed.
Those stitches that were on the selected needles have been transferred to the needle on the left.
This is about as ‘holey’ as the lace can get because you need at least one needle adjacent to a selected needle to accept the transferred stitch.
You might imagine that returning the lace carriage to the left will affect the previous transference, but this is not so.
It is necessary to have the lace carriage back on the left before you can knit any rows, so simply slide the carriage back to the left out of the way of the knitting.
No problem now with knitting two rows.
The first row will place a loop into the empty needles and the second row knits all the  stitches including the new loop, s creating stocking stitch with a row of holes.
If you wanted to you could work a few more rows of stocking stitch and just put in a single row of holes again, but for our practise piece it is better to carry on and make more holes.
The main lace carriage is on the right and the lace carriage is on the left.
All set?
You recall that we could not have the needles always selected in the same direction or we would end up with biased fabric?
Here is the chance to see the direction alternating for the first time.
Slide the lace carriage over to the right.
Nothing will happen, since you haven't yet selected any needles and this carriage cannot knit.
It is also very clear why you need extension rails, since the main carriage is already on the right and you need to leave space for the lace carriage to join it.
Select the next set of needles with the selector lever and take the lace carriage across to the left.
The main carriage is free again and can knit two more rows.
These initial exercises with the lace carriage and the main carriage are the basis for all the punchcard lace on the K858 model.
It may seem very elementary lace but it is pretty and can be worked in a variety of yarns and, in particular, it does demonstrate how the process works.
Notice by the way, that you should take care not to touch the knitting, cast-on comb or weights while you are taking the lace carriage across, to avoid dropping stitches.
Always work a sample for tension with these lace patterns, fabrics with holes in them tend to need fewer stitches because the work becomes more elastic.
Keep close watch on the stitches, it is worth working a little slower to make sure that all the stitches have knitted and should you find that an occasional loop stays over the needle after knitting the row, set the main carriage for EMPTY and move it across the knitting to knit any unworked loop.
Let us sum up the main points.
The format of the bed should be lace carriage at the left and main carriage at the right before selecting needles.
Each new selection is a separate movement.
If you have moved the lace carriage towards the right, followed by two knit rows, then you must move it towards the left after the next selection.
If the lace carriage is at the right and you need to knit with the main carriage, you must slide it back to the left.
It takes two movements to operate the lace carriage, once to the right to transfer stitches then back OR once to the right to prepare and then back transferring stitches on the return to the left, leaving the main carriage clear to work two rows; across, to place loops in empty needles and back to the right knitting all the stitches.
The observation about knitting having a bias is well shown in the picture at the top right of page 28 in the manual.
By sliding the lace carriage in the same direction for ten rows the knitting will have a distinct leaning in one direction, then by sliding it the other way for ten rows, the knitting will form a zig-zag lace effect which can be most attractive as an edging, or for shawls and scarves.
Notice that although this reads as ‘sliding the lace carriage for ten rows’, this is a brief way of saying ‘move the lace carriage to the right and back, knit two rows, repeat from to five times’, the rows referred to are the knit rows, since the movement of the lace carriage never constitutes a row.
After working Card No. 1 and understanding the basic method, Cards No. 2 and 3 should present no difficulties.
Card No. 2 is similar to No. 1, changing the direction of the lace carriage every ten rows to form a zig-zag pattern of holes between two sets of three stitches instead of two sets of single stitches.
Card No. 3 has a new instruction: you will pull the selector lever on occasions and no needles will be selected.
When this happens, knit four rows of plain knitting.
These are shown between the rows of lace knitting in the photograph on page 28 of the manual.
For this pattern you will need to change the direction of the lace carriage on every pattern row to prevent any bias.
Next month we shall explore some more elaborate lace patterns but meanwhile, practise with cards 1–3 so that the process of lace knitting becomes familiar.
SIMPLY SILVER
This month sees a new style for the Silver feature.
In fact it becomes two articles — one for punchcard machines still called ‘Simply Silver’ and one for electronics featured separately as ‘Silver Scene’.
I hope that this way, whichever machine you have, you will find something for you every month.
As a beginning, both features are a review of what machines and accessories are available to Silver knitters.
All Silver punchcard machines are very similar.
The punchcard patterning mechanism and the carriage controls are identical whatever the model.
The main differences are the gauge and the number of extras that come  with the machine.
The three standard gauge punchcard machines are the SK740, SK280 and SK210.
The SK740 is the top-of-the-range model.
It has a built-in KnitRadar (KnitContour), built-in weaving brushes and is supplied with a magic cam set for knitting motifs.
As supplied, it can knit stocking stitch, Fair Isle (including motifs), tuck, slip, punch lace, knit weave and plating.
Plating is knitting two yarns together.
The plating feeder holds them so that one yarn is always on the purl side and one on the knit side.
If you just knit two yarns together without a plating feeder, sometimes one yarn will be on the purl side and sometimes the other.
When the yarns are different colours, or different textures, this can lead to the knitting having a streaky appearance.
The plating feeder prevents this.
The only difference between the SK280 and the SK740 is that the SK280 doesn't have a built-in KnitRadar.
I believe the KnitRadar is an essential accessory, however, it doesn't have to be built in.
In fact, if you think you may end up wanting a second machine (of a different gauge) as well as a standard gauge, it makes sense to buy the model without a KnitRadar and then buy the KnitRadar as an add-on accessory which you can use with whichever machine you are knitting on.
The SK210 is the basic machine.
I hesitate to use the word ‘basic’, as a machine with a punchcard patterning system and which will knit Fair Isle, tuck, slip and punch lace is not a basic machine.
However, it does have the least number of extras supplied with it, so it is basic in that sense.
It will take the extras, so these can be added later.
Therefore if you have a limited budget, or you are not sure if you'll take to machine knitting, this would be a good machine to start with.
The main differences between the SK210 and the SK280 (the next model up in the range) are that the SK210 doesn't have the built-in weave brushes, nor is the magic cam set for motif knitting supplied with it.
It has ten pre-punched cards supplied with it, instead of the 20 that come with the SK280 and SK740 and it doesn't have a carrying case.
It does come packed in a box of course, but if you want to join a knitting club or class and are asked to bring your machine with you, you may wish you had a carrying case with a handle.
The absence of weaving brushes means that, as supplied, the SK210 cannot produce knitweave.
However, one of the accessories available for all Silver standard gauge machines is a weaving arm (AW1).
This is a sinker plate which temporarily replaces the standard sinker plate although as it is a sinker plate it is quite expensive, it is not like buying a pair of brushes.
The weaving arm has a special feed for the weaving yarn.
This moves the weaving yarn automatically to the leading edge of the carriage at the beginning of every row.
(With the built-in weaving brushes on the standard sinker plate, this has to be done by hand.)
If you're planning to do a lot of weaving, the weaving arm is a useful extra even if you do have built-in weaving brushes on your machine.
Finally, there is isn't a plating feeder on the SK210, so you cannot plate.
This is really the only difference (except for the case) between the SK210 and the other two models that cannot be changed by the purchase of an accessory.
Once you've got to grips with your machine (whichever the model) there are several accessories you can buy to extend your knitting.
I've already mentioned the KnitRadar, which is my favourite accessory.
You can draw the shape you want to knit (or use one of the printed shapes provided) and feed that, together with your tension measurements, into the KnitRadar.
It will then tell you how many stitches to cast on, how many rows to knit and when and where to shape and cast off.
It completely overcomes the problem of matching your tension to that given in a pattern.
You can also enter the shape you draw, to allow for any quirks in your figure!
There are now two versions of the KnitRadar — the mechanical version (KR7) and an electronic (KR11).
The electronic KnitRadar (KR11) can be used with any punchcard machine that has an add-on (that is,not built-in) row counter.
You will need to replace the standard row counter with the special row counter (RC15K) which has a socket (port) for the electronic KnitRadar.
As yet, the punchcard machines are still being supplied with the standard row counter.
The RC15K row counter is not included with the electronic KnitRadar either and has to be bought separately.
The major accessories for the three standard gauge punchcard models are:
The ribber, which knits not only welts but patterned ribs (for example, Fisherman's rib, punch tuck rib).
The colour changer, which allows you to change yarns automatically during either single- or double-bed knitting.
The lace carriage, for transfer lace.
Other accessories are the intarsia carriage (AG20) for picture knitting; the transfer carriage (RT1) for transferring stitches from the ribber to the main bed and the Automatic Linker (SC3)— this is not a large piece of equipment, but a small carriage that fits on the main bed.
Basically, it casts off.
It can be used for seaming garments.
The two pieces of knitting to be joined are replaced on the needles.
You then knit two rows, and cast off using the linker.
I find the Automatic Linker and Rib Transfer Carriage really speed up my knitting and save a lot of shoulder and neckache.
All these accessories fit all Silver standard gauge punchcard machines.
Finally, there is the extra ribber carriage, the RJ1.
This makes possible alternate needle selection on the ribber, so that(together with a colour changer) you can knit a version of double jacquard known as ‘bird's eye’ jacquard.
It is suitable for the SRP60N ribber and the earlier SRP50, but not for earlier models.
Top punchcard machine the Silver Reed SK740.
I hope over the next few months to be writing about all these accessories in more detail.
This month I've concentrated on the standard gauge punchcard models, but there are also finegauge and chunky models.
These have ribbers and will take the KnitRadars.
The fine gauge machine has a lace carriage, but as yet no one has developed a chunky machine that will take a lace carriage.
(Can you imagine those big widely-spaced needles being made to cross and transfer stitches!)
There is an intarsia carriage for the chunky machine and I'm told by Silver Reed that the colour changer can be adapted to the fine gauge.
Apart from these, the other accessories available for the standard gauge models are not available for the fine and chunky gauges.
On the chunky machine, since you are working with far fewer needles, casting off or transferring to the main bed from the ribber is not too much of a chore anyway.
This column has been set aside for the punchcard machines, but I'm not forgetting that some of you have manual machines and I hope in future issues in to include something for you from time to time.
SILVER SCENE
SILVER ELECTRONICS
This is our new feature for owners of Silver Reed electronic machines.
The punchcard machines will still be featured in Simply Silver but Liz feels she can be more helpful handling the two types of machine separately.
No doubt Silver knitters will be reading both articles for fear of missing something.
The Silver modular electronic system is now well and truly with us.
The standard gauge (SK840) and Chunky (SK890) models have been available for some time.
They have now been joined by the Double Knit gauge (SK860) and probably, by the time you read this, by the fine gauge (SK830).
The Silver modular electronics are unique in that the electronic pattern control system is outside the machine.
So you need only buy it once.
It can then be used with any of the needle-beds and their carriages that complete the system.
So what Silver have done is to make the electronic box a self-contained unit, or ‘module’, hence the description of the total range as ‘modular’.
By the way, you can't use the electronic pattern control system with a punchcard needlebed and carriage.
The carriage of the modular system is different (underneath) to the punchcard carriage.
There aren't any memory drums for example.
The needle selection for patterning is electromagnetic.
Silver Reed tell me that these (and earlier Knitmaster electronics) are unique in this respect.
I am sure that an engineer could tell you of other differences between the punchcard and electronic machines too.
The pattern control system itself is in two parts — the EC1 pattern controller and the Design Controller (PE1).
The EC1 pattern controller is the basic part of the system and it can be used without the Design Controller.
The EC1 pattern controller reads the mylar sheets and it has the pattern variation controls.
The Design Controller (PE1) extends the patterning possibilities.
It works with the EC1 pattern controller and can't be used on its own.
Patterns can be read into the Design Controller from a mylar sheet by the EC1 pattern controller or loaded from a memory card.
The Design Controller has three programs which extend the patterning facilities.
These programs allow you to a) combine two or more patterns into one and b) knit multi-coloured jacquard (that is, program patterns for knitting in up to seven colours in a row.
It is recommended for jacquard that you don't use more than five colours in a row, but I am told by Silver Reed that you use this program for programming intarsia, which is going to be knitted with the new electronic intarsia carriage.
The third program is for designing patterns which are larger than one mylar sheet.
The three programs can be used singly, or in combination.
For example, it is possible to combine the multi-coloured jacquard program with the program for designing a pattern more than one mylar sheet in size.
This would enable you to program an intarsia pattern for knitting in up to seven colours in a row and which is bigger than 60 stitches and 150 rows.
I wrote in some detail about the Design Controller, including combining programs, in the October 1991 to January 1992 issues and these are available from Machine Knitting Monthly .
As well as the programs for increasing the patterning facility, the Design Controller has programs for saving or erasing patterns on a memory card and of course loading patterns from the memory card into the Design Controller.
The memory card is a small plastic card about the size of a credit card.
A blank one for saving your own patterns is supplied with the Design Controller.
Memory cards pre-programmed with patterns can also be bought.
I find knitting from a pattern in the Design Controller even easier than knitting with a mylar sheet.
The pattern in memorised electronically when you start knitting.
This means that the pattern doesn't have to be scanned on every row.
So there is no possibility of knitting faster than the machine is scanning and you don't have to pause at the end of a pattern repeat.
Now there are four different gauges of electronic machines available, you may be wondering which machine (or machines) will best suit your needs.
The fine gauge machine will knit two, three and four ply yarns; the standard gauge two, three and four ply and double-knit; the double-knit gauge knits four ply, double-knit, finer chunky, and Aran and the chunky gauge knits Aran and chunky.
So there is some overlap.
However, while machines in theory at least knit quite a range of yarns, in practice they usually knit best with only one or two of those yarns.
So fine gauge machines are happiest with two-ply; standard gauges with three and four ply; double-knit gauges with double-knit yarns and chunkies with Aran and chunky yarns.
So if, for example, you buy a standard gauge machine, you can be sure it will knit three and four-ply yarns.
One is usually told that it will also knit double-knit.
However, yarns vary and the finer light-coloured double-knit yarns may knit on a standard gauge machine, but darker yarns may not.
If you knit with a yarn that is  too thick for your machine and it feels hard work to you, it is probably hard work for your machine too.
In other words you are putting undue strain on your machine.
Moreover, the knitting may turn out stiff and boardlike.
At the other end of the scale, if you knit with a yarn that is too fine for your machine, you may not be able to knit a firm enough fabric.
You may also find you don't have enough needles to knit the larger sizes.
The finer the gauge of machine, the more needles it has, so if you move down a gauge with your fine yarn, you will get a better fabric and have more needles with which to knit the larger sizes.
So while I'm not suggesting that you buy every gauge (though that would be many a machine knitter's idea of heaven, I guess!), when working out what machine(s) you want for the yarns you want to knit most, look at the optimum yarn for each gauge.
Now let's move on to the accessories that are available for these machines.
The three gauges (fine, standard and chunky) that are available in punchcard versions share many of the accessories — that is, the accessories suitable for both punchcard and electronic machines.
So if you are moving from punchcard to electronic (of the same gauge), your ribber, rib transfer carriage, colour changer and so on, will all fit your electronic machine.
The electronic machines (of all gauges) will take either the mechanical KnitRadar (KR7) or the electronic version (KR11).
The machines are supplied fitted with the special row counter which has a socket (port) for the KR11.
If you are new to machine knitting and the electronic is your first machine and you want to know more about these accessories, I've written about them in this month's Silver punchcard feature.
The one punchcard accessory that can't be used with the electronic is the punchcard lace  carriage.
The electronic carriage is the part of the modular system that actually selects the needles electromagnetically for patterning.
So you can't use a punchcard carriage on an electronic machine.
There is an electronic lace carriage for standard and fine gauge machines.
As I said in the punchcard article, a lace carriage for the chunky machine is not feasible, at least in the immediate future.
Crossing chunky needles to transfer stitches just isn't possible.
The double-knit gauge has the same limitation.
Silver Reed tell me that the fine gauge lace carriage has to be tuned to the needlebed.
Quite what this means in engineering terms I don't know, but as far as the knitter is concerned, it means that if you buy the fine gauge lace carriage separately from your machine, the machine and carriage will probably have to be sent away to be tuned.
When I spoke to Silver Reed about this (some months ago) they weren't sure whether this would cost the knitter extra.
They advise that if you want to knit lace you buy the lace carriage with the machine.
You will then be supplied with a lace carriage tuned to that machine.
The machine with a lace carriage is known as the KL830.
The standard gauge lace carriage doesn't have to be tuned to the machine, so can easily be bought at any time.
the standard gauge lace carriage (LC580) is suitable for both the SK580 and SK840.
There isn't a punchcard version of the double-knit gauge electronic machine, so there are no accessories to ‘share’.
Silver Reed tell me though that there will soon be a ribber for this machine.
Finally, one exciting development is the electronic intarsia carriage for use with the standard gauge electronic machine.
I understand that in conjunction with the Design Controller it will select the needles for intarsia knitting.
The manual intarsia carriage selects all the needles to the intarsia position on every row and you decide which needles take which colour and lay the appropriate yarn on the needles.
I understand that the electronic intarsia carriage selects the needles for only one colour at a time to the intarsia position, making it easy for you to lay in the appropriate colour.
This means you have one pass of the carriage for every colour on every row.
I believe the new electronic KnitRadar (KR11) is geared for this, so that it is possible to use the KR11 while knitting intarsia with the electronic intarsia carriage.
I hope to write about both these accessories in more detail in a later article.
This is the first time we've had a regular monthly feature in the magazine just for Silver electronics.
I should like to hear from you which subjects you would like me to write about and what problems you have had (and of course successes!).
Although I've been writing about the latest machines this month, I shall be including the older models in later articles.
So let me have your queries regarding these machines as well.
Please write to me, c/o Machine Knitting Monthly at the address on page 3 
‘I've knitted you a tracksuit, dear — now you'll be able to jog down to the shop when I need more yarn.’
MASTERCLASS
Moonlight becomes you
Once in a blue moon…
By the light of the silvery moon…
Moonlight becomes you…
…especially in June the romantic month
Last year I wrote about moonlight colours but mostly about June roses.
This year I've been thinking about the many faces of the moon and the wonderfully romantic and lovely patterns you can achieve with the moon as your theme, whether it's a slender crescent or full harvest, hunter's or honey moon.
A simple full circular moon makes a great decoration, equally effective knitted or in embroidered on afterwards.
A big pale blue moon, shimmering with lurex or a pale silvery one makes a lovely motif for the back of a sweater or jacket, or a fun one if you add a ‘man in the moon’ face.
Nice and easy for those of you just beginning to try your hand at intarsia and it's not too difficult to work out the chart for yourself with the many aids available.
Add hazy ‘moonbeams’ by adding circular  rows of running-stitch round the shape to give it a hazy halo for added interest — a beautifully simple motif on a very simple exquisitely knitted sweater or jacket in beautiful yarns — or just try a little one near the shoulder.
Rows of simple smaller moon shapes in Fair Isle make a very basic but very charming border, or arrange them as an all-over pattern.
This looks particularly good in eyelet lace and if you already own a ‘lace’ machine you will probably find one in your patterns with your machine.
I like this very much as an easy summer skirt — three pieces knitted right across your machine, hooked back on to fewer stitches for a small yoke to avoid bulk at the waist — equally becoming to the very slender or larger lady.
Such skirts are especially good worn over tights if you're young and dashing or over a strongly contrasting coloured slip if you don't fancy showing lots of leg — or try a mini length slip and a longer lace skirt as a happy compromise.
Try knitting your skirt with ‘handkerchief’ points for a very new look for more ‘dressed up’occasions.
The lace skirt with a plain top looks very new, but you could also use the lace for a summer top.
Both would be very pretty in shimmering pale blue or silver lurex for evening wear.
Again for sweaters, little crescent moons and stars scattered over the fabric makes a very pretty design, as does one big intarsia crescent moon which again can be classically simple or fun with a face on it.
Midway between serious and fun, a round moon shape, quilted and padded, with a face, makes a very eye-catching decoration on an anorak type jacket, or forget clothes for once and make a round ‘moon cushion’.
Several different coloured moon cushions would make a gorgeous present and it is fun sometimes to knit something different.
These could look very good with one knitted in very shiny and one knitted in very matt yarn and in fact this use of shiny and matt yarn makes a beautiful fabric for a sophisticated dress or sweater, just right for your moon theme as it works best in very simple patterns to give full value to the contrast in textures.
‘Woven in’ moons also make a super decoration.
Single motif procedures vary according to your machine, but I can do a very easy one on my Silver Reed machine by setting the machine to weaving, using an appropriate punchcard and moving the single motif cams in and out to make a big woven moon on a plain background.
This idea is almost more spectacular as a large eyelet lace moon, which you can leave simple or else thread ribbons through the eyelets with dangling fringe ends (I knitted a bead on the ends).
Now to move into the space age.
Everyone knows what moon craters look like and you can make some wonderfully coloured and textured patterns for these with holding position and partial knitting.
Last month I wrote about designing flowers this way but you can elaborate much more on this theme from simple streaky patterns to real ‘crater-like’ shapes.
‘Streaky’ patterns, though not strictly moon-shapes, have the same ‘out of this world’effect and they are the easiest way to start.
Try a sample first over about 150 needles.
Knit a few inches background.
Change colour.
Carriage at right.
Push 30 needles at left to hold.
Knit one row.
Push 70 needles at right to hold.
Knit about 10 rows on the remaining 50 needles.
change back to first colour and knit about 10 rows.
Repeat on different sets of needles, not in the same place, changing colours when you wish.
This is a splendidly versatile way of patterning so spend a little time trying it out before you start on ‘moon craters’.
Moon craters
These are made in the same kind of way but for each pattern shape you work on the same set of needles as if you were turning the heel of a sock.
A diagram is easier to follow than written instructions.
These can be placed anywhere on your knitting and can be big or small.
You could make a regular all-over pattern, but I think that they look best spaced out or in a patch or a group.
Completely all-over patterning would certainly not be practical if you are making garments for sale as it is fairly time consuming, but ‘at random’ or in a close group they are splendidly spectacular and make a wonderful splash of colour and pattern.
If you change the colours every few rows on the first part of the ‘turn’ and reverse the colours on the second part, you get a circular change of colour which is quite marvellous — worth the effort of sewing in the ends!
The beauty of this kind of patterning is that you can produce really exciting and elaborate designs with the simplest machines.
Even for those of us with more sophisticated machines it is very satisfying to ‘Do it yourself’.
SPOTLIGHT
It is heartwarming to know how important machine knitting can be.
To use it is a hobby, perhaps an additional income, sometimes a lifesaver when things are difficult but in countries where life is altogether harder it can make a startling difference to the family income and the quality of life.
You've read previously of Christine Morey's adventures in Romania and now we bring you Lori Adam's account of her experiences in Thailand.
My name is Lori Adams, but only my mother calls me that.
Everyone else calls me ‘L.A.’.
I am a US Peace Corps Volunteer (PCV).
This is a programme similar to your Volunteer Service Organisation and is requires a two year commitment to work in a developing country.
I am 36 years old and originally from New York State.
Prior to becoming a Volunteer, I was a cutter/draper/pattern maker in a professional theatre.
Many of the productions I did were huge and elaborate and eventually I felt ‘burnt out’— in need of a ‘reality check’.
So what better way to see the ‘real’ world that to join the Peace Corps.
My initial interview for Peace Corps was from a pay' phone in a theatre lobby during a coffee break.
That started the long and tedious process of being accepted and assigned.
Because of my skills, I was assigned to a small business project in Jamaica — a strange and wonderful place.
There, a group of 45 ‘trainees’ went through a seven week cross cultural and technical training in order to start work in late September.
Well I didn't make it that far.
At the end of week six, I had a medical interview where it was decided that due to hurricane Gilbert there was no medical facility adequate for my medical needs; I'm asthmatic.
During training I had no asthma-related problems, so I couldn't understand this decision at all.
Nonetheless, one very upset and hurt L.A. was put on a plane home.
Once there, I tried every avenue of appeal on the Jamaica decision.
Peace Corps was willing to send me off to Honduras, but I didn't feel right about it.
I decided that perhaps Peace Corps wasn't meant to happen for me, but kept on with the appeal over Jamaica.
During this time I had my first experience with a knitting machine.
I was living in a friend's attic workshop and in need of something to take my mind off my troubles.
There was an old knitting machine up there which beckoned me to keep myself occupied while I was waiting to hear about my appeal.
Through reading and experimentation, I made a couple of simple sweaters and decided that this form of knitting was ‘great’.
I found my knowledge of pattern making helped a lot with the knitting machine concept.
(With a little re-working I even found the sweaters I made were nice enough to give as Christmas presents!)
Still, I needed to find paid work.
For a change I was in the right place at the right time and got a job, with housing, at the Folger Theatre in Washington DC.
The craziness of the theatre business was apparent from day one and about three weeks into my ten week contract, I thought I ought to give Peace Corps another try.
I called and asked what was happening to my appeal.
I was told they would look into my case and get back to me.
Two days later they called me back and said that I couldn't go back to Jamaica, but offered me a place in the group going to Thailand, which was leaving in February.
I said ‘Yes’ immediately.
All in all, it was a crazy time — the months between my Jamaica dismissal and my Thai offer that is.
But on February 25th 1990, I left for Thailand.
I had never been to Asia before and really didn't know what to expect.
Bangkok is an amazing throng of people.
Here I started my three months training along with 43 other expectant trainees.
The three months went quickly and, as in Jamaica, it involved language, cross-cultural and technical training.
I was put in a Community Development programme with six others and only our ‘technical’ training differed from that of the others in the larger group.
By the end of May, we were finished training and sworn in as Peace Corps Volunteers.
We were all sent to different sites to begin our two year commitment to ‘serving the people of rural Thailand’.
I was sent to Nongkhai province in the North East of Thailand on the Maekhong River across from the capital of Laos.
I settled in pretty quickly, though suffering a bit from culture shock and more from the realisation that I was semi-illiterate in the Thai language: I had the ability to communicate verbally but at a child's level and almost no ability to read.
Nonetheless, I started going out with the Thai development workers, to visit villages and meet the people I would be working with for the next two years.
I developed a lovely friendship with a woman co-worker named Yawadee, who everyone calls ‘Dang’ which means ‘red’in Thai.
We really hit it off and I started working almost exclusively with her because we had found our own special form of communication called in ‘Tinglish’(a crazy mix of Thai and English).
What I didn't know was that a few months before we started to work together she had written a proposal to the Thai government to start a ‘machine knitting project’ in one of her districts.
Our destination and purpose at first unbeknownst to me, we went on a shopping expedition one day to a larger province close to Nongkhai.
Finally we stopped at a machine knitting company and I realised what she was shopping for.
She had 6,000 baht (£240).
The old machines that were shown to us were very simple, but they were asking 7,000 baht for them.
I asked Dang if she knew anything on the subject of knitting machines.
‘No,’ she said, then she asked me if I knew anything about them.
‘A little,’ I replied.
At which point she insisted I knew more (true enough) and therefore should take over the project!
I was thus, unceremoniously ‘thrown in at the deep end’.
At this point I saw for the first time, a really good reason for my being in Thailand as PCV.
I knew how to research this sort of project!
So, after a little research in Bangkok, I wrote a few letters and made a few calls and found a Brother distributer.
He sold us a KH588 with lace carriage for 6,000 baht.
What I discovered at this point, was that they, my Thai co-workers, also expected me to be the teacher for this newly organised project!
I hunted high and low for reference material about machine knitting; I wrote back to the States for help.
Most of the materials sent from home were actually from England, so I started to write to everyone there.
I got a great response from BSK Limited,Machine Knitting Monthly , Angela Gordon, Marion Nelson and, of course, Ann Kite.
I started to put together a little library and had to teach myself a lot more before I could teach anyone else.
Dang and I finally set out for the village where she wanted to start the ‘cottage industry’.
I met 15 women, all of whom said they wanted to learn machine knitting, but most of whom were afraid of taking responsibility for the machine.
At this point I also realised (and told Dang) that there was no way I could teach 15 people at one time, with one machine without boring the other 14 of them.
I proposed that I teach one woman what I knew so that she could teach the others after we got more machines.
This is how I met ‘Pi’ Arune.
Arune is a great hand-knitter and she was really thrilled at the thought of learning to use the machine.
She also felt it would be an honour to have custody of the machine.
We ‘took’ to one another right away and she had the patience to understand my own special version of Thai.
We set about our task.
She caught on pretty quickly, so I would go home each nigh to teach myself something new so I could share it with her the next day.
It was hard to keep ahead.
Soon, though, we hit a Catch-22: I could get funding for more equipment if there was a ‘group’ organised, but no village women wanted to be organised if they didn't have machines.
Also, there are instructors with the Minister of Industry of Bangkok who teach machine knitting, but they teach only if you have a group of ten or more.
Crazy! in search of machines to enable the group to form, I put together a solicitation brochure and sent it to people in the US.
I got no machines initially, but did receive a huge carton of magazines and books.
Every little bit helped and I was encouraged.
Meanwhile I  found other knitting groups right in ‘my’ province and took Arune with me to talk with the other women in it in the hope that they could answer the questions that I couldn't.
But they all had just more questions for me!
I was amazed to realise that some of them had been using their machines for five years and had no idea of the machines capabilities because all the instructions are written in either English, Spanish or Japanese; nothing in Thai.
I would read these books and show them what they wanted to know.
Next I had yet another idea, I wrote to the American Women's Club of Thailand and asked for the donation of a video player.
(Believe it or not, most Thai villagers have TV).
At the same time I wrote to Ann Kite Education Services and they sent me their basic Video Course.
To my utter surprise, Arune went home after one evenings viewing and produced the V-neck sweater with patterning that she had seen on the Video!
(Granted, there were a few flaws…but hey, ‘MY PEN RAI’(‘never mind’), as we say about 100 times here a day in Thailand!)
My guess was right when I thought they would get an awful lot from a Video Course,even though it wasn't in their language .
Ann Kite produces an excellent video, very clear and with enough repetition for understanding, not boredom.
Of course, our set is rather simple.
I carry the video player around on motorcycle!
Anyway, a machine was then produced by the Peace Corps Gift-In-Kind (per my solicitation) and another through Christian Children's Fund.
Slowly, but surely, the machine knitting project is taking on a life of its own.
Arune keeps amazing me with her quickness and eagerness to learn.
I keep watching the ‘diplomatic pouch’ for more machines.
I am dabbling in a costume jewellery project to help local youth groups earn money and I'm helping a couple of ‘city girls’ start a coffee shop for ‘world travellers’, which Nongkhai seems to have in ever increasing numbers.
My stay here is up in May 1992 and I am planning to get my master's degree in Knitwear/Textile design with emphasis on computer assisted design and manufacture.
It's a long road from here to there — at least as far as it was from there to here via Jamaica!
But before I take the first step out of here, I think I'll feel pretty good about the knowledge and inquisitive spirit I've been able to share and the doors I've helped open.
And this for my money is what Peace Corps is all about.
Richard Kite, Manager of Ann Kite Educational Services, adds ‘We were so interested in what L.A. told us about Arune that we arranged to mail her four more of our Video Courses!
‘We found L.A.'s news of particular interest because, as she says, the commentary on our videos is of course in English and is worthless to the local Thai women.
So all they learn comes entirely from the picture.
‘A unique feature of our Video Courses is that they are designed to tell a picture-story and we feel this is why Arune was able to learn so quickly.
As she showed the commentary isn't all that important.
In fact we record all our videos without sound in the first place.
We add the commentary at the very last minute and it is designed simply to strengthen the picture-story, not to add to it.
If you remove the sound, the bulk of the message can still be received by the student, as Arune has shown.
‘If a video producer records live sound when filming, then the ‘storyline’ is bound to be carried by the commentary and you end up with a talk illustrated by pictures.
If you take the ‘talk’ away (because it's in the wrong language!) it is actually quite difficult to learn from the pictures because the ‘storyline’has gone.
‘At Ann Kite Educational Services, we feel that to use the medium of video to its full potential means putting the ‘story’ into the pictures.
And we are fascinated to know that this approach has been shown to be so effective in a remote part of the Far East where our cassettes are transported on the back of a motorcycle!
We join MKM in sending our very best wishes to L.A., Arune and all the Thai knitters of Nongkhai province.’
Arune keeps amazing me with her quickness and eagerness to learn.
I keep watching the ‘diplomatic pouch’ for more machines.
LATCH ON
EXPERIMENTS
Recently I have been trying out Golfer cardigans.
Firstly a ‘cut and sew’ one, then one using Brother fine lace.
‘I had read that the knitters in Shetland Isles make all their beautiful Fair Isle garments ‘in the round’— this is hand knitting, of course.
Then they cut up the middle of the front to make a cardigan.
If they can do it in the far North, surely I can do it in the South?’
I can't say I set out to do a ‘cut and sew’ jacket.
It happened that I had come to ‘cut and sew’ necklines in class.
I normally knit two pieces of stocking stitch to represent a back and a front, or occasionally knit two backs suitable for a child's jumper.
But I had an exceptionally receptive class last year, so I decided to knit two adult size backs in Fair Isle, which is normally the fabric I use for ‘cut and sew’.
(Why isn't it ‘sew and cut’?
After all, you sew first, then cut afterwards!)
I had also made myself a promise that (a) I would use up some of the many cones in the cupboard and (b) I would try out more of the built-in patterns in the 950i machine.
So I settled on a fine bouclé in a tan colour and an equally fine yarn with a slight ‘whisker’ in cream.
I chose pattern 37 from ‘Stitchworld’, which looks most uninspiring in the book.
However, I was very pleased with the result, stripes running up and down in a sort of bird's eye pattern over two stitches, interspersed with ‘leaves’ and geometric trailing ‘flowers’.
Nice to look at, but difficult to describe.
I duly knitted two backs, marked the shape of the front neck and also a slight ‘dip’ on the back section and stitched two lines with the sewing machine using a long stitch.
I find a zig-zag tends to pucker the fabric, but this may differ with makes of sewing machine.
I always get one of the class to do the cutting — often with gritted teeth!
I try to encourage them by saying it is my material they are using, which sometimes makes the person more nervous!
But I have never had a disaster over 14 years and several classes per year!
I demonstrated the knitting of the ‘sandwich’ neckline but didn't actually sew it to the garment in class.
When I had got the whole lot home I had a think.
I really didn't need another jumper, but what I did need was a button-to-the-neck cardigan.
I do a lot of speaking to various organisations, in a variety of halls, some nice and warm, some freezing cold.
It is not easy, to say nothing of being undignified, to strip off a jumper in front of an audience!
I have several ‘V’ neck cardigans, but theses sometimes leave a vital spot on the chest unprotected, or at best covered only with a blouse.
A cardigan that buttons to the neck keeps this portion of the anatomy covered, but is easy to unbutton and remove if necessary.
I had read that the knitters in the Shetland Isles make all their beautiful Fair Isle garments ‘in the round’— this is hand knitting of course.
Then they cut up the middle of the front to make a cardigan.
If they can do it in the far North, surely I can do it in the South?
I studied the pattern.
Unfortunately the ‘bird's eye’ stripe did not come in the middle.
Instead it was the ‘trails’, which made it difficult to determine the middle line.
I took an end of a very bright contrast and tackled small stitches down the centre.
Then I sewed a straight seam on the sewing machine, or rather two, one on either side of my tacking stitches.
I then removed the contrast colour and cut along this line.
I may say I was almost as nervous as any of my students at this point.
It is one thing cutting a neckline which is on the bias, quite another to cut between stitches for the length of a front.
Then came the perennial problem — do I put the neckband on next, or the front bands.
I opted for the neckband, as I usually do, because I like to do these double, so if the front bands go on first I have to do two buttonholes on the double fabric of the neckband.
In this case I also wanted to get the cut edges of the neckband tidied up as soon as possible — remember this particular garment has been ferried to and fro to class and back.
So I applied my ‘sandwich’ neckline, then set about neatening the fronts.
In fact I did these in the same way as the neckband, doing the button band first; after that it is to mark where the buttonholes are to go, it's just a matter of arithmetic since the needles are numbered already.
I was very pleased with the finished result, but I must confess, after wearing it several times, a few of the cut floats have worked through to the front.
I spent a little time ‘fishing’ these to the back and either tying off, or sewing in.
If I do another cardigan in this way I shall do two or even three lines on the sewing machine.
I have the first one in front of me to help estimate how far in from the edge I can sew.
Inspired with this success I decided I needed a slightly heavier garment for the colder weather, I settled on our old friend ‘4-ply acrylic’, but not a ‘cut and sew’ this time.
Instead, I used what I consider an under value stitch — Brother fine lace.
I realise that knitters with other makes of machine cannot achieve this stitch, which, I suppose, is why one sees few patterns for it.
For anyone that has not seen this effect, the lace carriage is set to ‘F’ and instead of taking one stitch off and transferring it to the next needle, the carriage ‘hops’the stitch across from the one it is on and hooks it on to the next one.
The finished result is like a small cable.
The advantage of this over, say tuck or slip stitch is that the pattern appears on the right side of the garment.
I have used this quite a lot for cardigans for an elderly lady, who was a bit of a traditionalist and would not have tuck stitch, in which the ‘wrong’ purl) side is used as the right side.
In case any Brother knitter is interested, I chose pattern 194 from ‘Stitchworld’, partly because the pattern ran from North to South and partly because there were not too many strokes with the lace carriage before the two with the knitting carriage.
I have found that transferring too many stitches sometimes results in stitches being dropped.
This is not so with fine lace, of course, because the stitches never leave the original needle, but can happen when knitting normal lace.
I once helped a young design student with her presentation garments.
She chose pattern 137 from ‘Stitchworld’, which has more holes than fabric.
She also picked a shiny rayon for the yarn after dropping stitches right left and centre and making several false starts, I studied the pattern and taught myself how to latch up and darn in (when the work was off the machine) so that my ‘botching’ did not show.
She got a first class degree at the end of it all, so I can't have done so badly!
But I have gone a long way from my original fine lace and the number of strokes of the lace carriage.
I choose patterns with only a few passes with the lace carriage because all the time this carriage is in operation no inches (sorry centimetres) are being added to the length of the garment.
Another reason for choosing this pattern is that the strokes with the lace carriage follows a regular pattern.
That is, two with the lace carriage, two with the main one, four with the lace carriage then two as before and so on .
I find I can get up a rhythm with this simple notation, more irregular passes with the lace carriage make me lose count.
Yes, before you all write in, I do know that by pressing the yellow button on the machine I will be told when I need to knit with the main carriage, but (hand on heart) how many of you have got carried away and done one too many strokes with the lace carriage?
I know I have!
I well remember being very ‘taken’ with a punchcard which resembled the ‘Feather and fan’pattern much favoured by hand knitters many years ago.
This pattern had 12 strokes of the lace carriage to two with the main carriage.
I never attempted it because I am basically impatient, I suppose.
I cannot see it in ‘Stitchworld’ although number 177 has a similar sort of line.
How about pattern 148?
This has 20, then 16, then 12 then eight passes with the lace carriage, although to compensate somewhat when this marathon task has been undertaken, one knits eight rows with the main carriage.
It is a very pretty stitch when finished and definitely one of those to reserve for when one has plenty of time to spare.
As far as I am concerned, this will not be in the foreseeable future!
DUOMATIC UPDATE
When summer comes and I finally have to reluctantly discard my thermals, I knit myself a few cardigans just in case it is not hot enough for me — and come to think of it, our weather is hardly ever hot enough for me.
I managed to live in Africa for years without feeling too hot, so what hope is there for me in England?.
Photograph showing corded band with buttonholes
Thinking about cardigans reminded me how many knitters ask me about buttonholes, so I thought a few words about bands and buttonholes might not come amiss.
Bands usually look better if a few needles at the edges are knitted in stocking stitch which will roll and give a neat firm edge.
Cast on for full needle rib with a zig-zag and two tubular rows (Knitting Technique 2) then transfer the stitches marked X (see Diagram 1) to the back bed.
Put the empty needles in non-working position and knit on.
The needle rule has been broken to give a neat edge on both sides of the band.
Another very firm edge can be obtained by knitting a ‘cord’ or roll at each edge (see Diagram 2).
Again cast on in full needle rib then transfer the stitches according to the diagram.
This band is very neat and really does give a garment a professional finish.
If your yarn is too thick for full needle rib then use 1 × 1 setting (Knitting Technique 1) but keep the stitch size quite small.
If you want to use the stocking stitch edge (see Diagram 3) watch that the edge stitches knit off properly.
A little weight helps so I cast on, then drop a nylon cord (most machine knitting retailers will have them in stock) over the stitches allowing the ends to drop between the beds.
It is then possible to hold the cord down quite firmly.
As soon as the band is long enough I hold that instead of the cord.
A sideways knit band is good for a button-to-the-neck cardigan or jacket.
This will have to be calculated carefully so that you know how many stitches to cast on.
The band can be knitted using tubular knitting and joined on the machine using the Passap method, as used on tubular neckbands.
Some yarns will give a neat sideways band using full needle rib but others look very floppy so beware.
The two by one setting also knits a good sideways band.
If you find that it tends to ‘pull in’ too much then cast on for two by one rib.
Knit two rows N/N, two rows CX/CX (see Sample 2a) throughout, making the buttonholes after the first row of the centre two rows N/N on the band.
Try this out on a bit of spare yarn to see if you like the effect.
I'll just mention one more band before we go to buttonholes.
This was featured on a cardigan in an early Passap pattern book and I have used it lots of times bath as a band and a braid.
There are no buttonholes but you can push buttons through the ladders if you want to.
Set up as diagram 4 and cast on with racking (Knitting Technique 3).
Set lock to EX/EX, knit two rows, rack one full turn to left.
Set lock to EX/EX, knit two rows, rack one full turn to right.
These four rows to be repeated throughout.
Do not knit too quickly or you will find that you are racking as you knit, which will break or damage the needles.
You can leave more empty needles between the two groups of working needles if you wish (see Sample 3).
There are lots of different ways to make a buttonhole and here are some for you to try.
I have knitted  them on one strip of band for the photograph (see Sample 1).
a
Diagram 5.
Cast on, transfer edge stitches and knit a few rows.
Transfer stitch from needle 1 to needle 3 and from needle 4 to needle 2.
Leave empty needles in working position and knit on.
This gives quite a small buttonhole.
b
Diagram 6.
Move stitches from needles 1 and 2 out sideways by one place.
Move stitch from needle 3 to adjacent needle.
Leave empty needles in working position and knit on.
c
See Diagram 5 again.
Move stitches on needles 1, 2, 3 and 4 out sideways by one place leaving four empty needles, knit one row.
Drop nylon cord over the stitches and hold ends of cord down under the beds while you knit a few rows.
d
See Diagram 7, a) and b).
This is a vertical buttonhole and useful if you are using large buttons.
Average pushers as shown in 7A.
Set lock to BX/BX (E6000: use BX/LX), knit ten rows.
Arrange pushers as shown in 7B.
Break yarn.
Set locks to GX/GX and move yarn to the left of the bed.
Rethread yarn through bobbin.
Set lock to BX/BX (E6000: BX/LX), knit ten rows.
Return pushers to blocking rail.
Set lock to N/N and continue knitting.
When the band is removed from the machine there will be two ends of yarn to sew in for each buttonhole.
d
See Diagram 8 (Sample 2b).
This is suitable for a full needle rib band as in the diagram or the same method can be used on a tubular band.
Transfer the stitches from needles 1, 2, 3 and 4 to the back bed and, using a long length of yarn, cast off the four back stitches.
Using the same length of yarn make zig-zag row, by hand, over the four back and four front bed needles.
Then again by hand, knit two tubular rows on these same eight stitches.
Pull the ends of the yarn down between the beds and continue knitting.
I have used four stitches on each bed for the sample but you can vary this number to suit your button.
e
Diagram 9.
This is a small buttonhole to use with a 1 × 1 rib.
Transfer the stitch from needle 1 to needle 2 and continue knitting.
The methods used for samples a) and b) can also be used for a 1 × 1 rib band.
It is possible to make a stitch pattern drawing for the vertical buttonhole, shown in Diagram 7, for the E6000 machine.
I think that, unless you are going to knit a vast number of buttonholes of the same size, it is much quicker to select the pushers by hand.
I hope that you are all now inspired to knit jackets and cardigans galore just to practice buttonholes.
I have a theory that if we were all to knit enough really warm cardigans the summer would be incredibly hot, so it might be worth a try.
WORKSHOP E6000
PRINTING PATTERNS FROM WITHIN CREATION 6 — PART 3
In which George also uses Creation 6 for the Duomatic and Vario machines.
Last month we were printing patterns that were relatively small from within the Creation 6 programme, using the magnifying screen to obtain the printout of the grid.
We also saw that if a printout were made from the unmagnified drawing area, the grid lines would not appear.
In many instances this does not matter at all, because the full screen, ungridded printout will serve more than adequately as a reminder of the actual design which is stored in the Me \ directory computer memory.
Figure 1 shows a large non-repeating pattern that uses almost all the needlebed.
This is a design that I call ‘Bubbles’, which describes the overall look of the design, without exceeding the eight letters allowed for a name within the Creation 5 programme.
The printout is of the full design area and does not show the grid denoting how many squares wide and high the design is.
You may also have noticed that there are more than four grey shades used.
In fact there are six, including the background colour, which means that six colours have been used for this design.
At certain points within the pattern, all six colours are used within one row, so this means that it cannot be knitted with any of the normal multi-colour knitting techniques, automatically.
It can, however, be knitted as an intarsia design, using the PICTO.
The problem with this printout is that the grid doesn't show, making it almost impossible to see stitches and rows.
What we therefore need to do is to print it out in a way that will not only show the grid, but be big enough to follow easily whilst knitting.
The answer to the problem is quite straightforward really.
All we have to do is print the design from the magnified screen, but in sections, and it is not purely by accident that when you click on the Magnify icon, the area shown in the design screen is exactly 45 squares wide, or one quarter of the needle bed width.
So this is what we do.
Click on Magnify to enlarge the design.
Now use the four-arrow icon by holding down the left mouse button on the left pointing arrow, so as to make sure that you are as far to the left as possible.
Next hold the mouse button down on the downward pointing arrow, so to make sure that you are starting at square or row one.
(You can easily check that you have square and row one at the bottom left, by clicking on the pencil icon with the left mouse button and taking the cross pointer into the first bottom left square.
The figures in the icon box should both read 1.
If not, use the arrows icon until this does appear) Take the cross pointer to the last square at the right, you will see that this is column 45.
Take it ti the last row of squares at the top and you will see that it is in row 38.
So you are able to print out a section of the design that is 45 squares wide, and 38 squares high.
If we print all this area from within a rubberband box, as we have been doing, it means that four sections of the printout will make up the width of the design and the height will need the total height of squares used for the design, divided by 38.
These printouts can then be joined together in sequence, to create a very large, and easy-to-follow intarsia chart.
Before we move on the actual method of working out this printout, please take a closer look at Figure 1 and notice that, at the bottom left hand corner, there are some blocks of colour that appear to be part of the whole design.
This is correct, they do not form a part of the Bubbles design, but are my ‘colour key’, to use when knitting.
I draw this on to most designs that use more than two colours, before printing out.
It is not in the pattern as saved within the memory.
To make this colour key on a design retrieved from memory:
Call up the design and place it two rows up from the bottom of the design area, leaving two empty rows of squares along the bottom of the screen.
Now click on the pencil icon and, using the appropriate colour, fill in the first three squares on both blank rows with colour one, the next three squares and two rows with colour two and so on.
Don't forget to leave a three square by two row section in the same colour as the background as the key for this colour.
To put the colour key on a design from the start:
Draw your design starting in the third row.
Place the colour key in the first two rows as described above but when you save the design to memory, miss out the first two rows, placing the save box to start on the third row of squares.
Print the new design from the screen after saving, but before clearing the screen.
This way the pattern will be saved without the colour key, but it will still appear on your printout made from this screen.
Write, under the colour key squares, the colour that corresponds to each grey shade pattern.
You may not feel that this is always necessary with designs that can be knitted automatically, since they will appear on screen in colour, but it is a great memory jogger and, rather then going back into the programme to look at a design, the colours and design may be seen from the printout.
I also often attach a little shade fringe of yarn under the colour key too, as this helps me remember later what type and quality of yarn was used, as well as the actual colours.
Printout method for large, or intarsia, designs using a laser printer or inkjet printer and non-continuous single sheets of paper.
Having placed the design on screen and ensured that you are at Row one, Column one, within Magnify, click on to the printer icon with the right mouse button.
Make sure that enlarge, form feed, and centre image icons are on a white background i.e. ON.
Colour reverse and rotate icons should be off, with black backgrounds.
Click on the print within a rubberband box icon.
Draw a square around the whole design screen using the right mouse button to vary the box and click the left mouse button twice.
After a short while the printout appears from the printer.
Holding the left mouse button on the right pointing arrow to move the magnified area to the right.
You need to stop so that the first square at the left is number 46.
This takes a little adjustment, but it is not difficult.
When completed, click with the right mouse button on the printer icon, select boxed print and draw the squares as before, then click the left mouse button twice.
The second section will now print out.
Repeat the process for squares 91 to 135 then 136 to 180 and you will have the first 38 rows of squares printed over the full 180 needles, complete with your colour key.
Move the magnified area up by holding down the mouse button on the up arrow and stop at row 39.
Again a little adjustment may be necessary.
Starting at the left side, repeat the whole process for the four width sections.
Working in this way, with a little practice you will be able to build a complete chart very quickly.
Figure 2.
The first four 38-square-high printouts for the whole width of the pattern are shown.
Dot Matrix Printer with continuous stationery method.
This is set up in a very similar way to above, but the advantage of using continuous stationery, is that only the sections for the height of the design will need to be joined together, because we can print the width sections as one continuous piece of paper.
Start at Row one, Column one as before and area magnified.
Click on the printer icon with the right mouse button.
From the submenu, we need to switch ON (white background), the ROTATE icon (the circular arrow).
Switch OFF (black background), the large upward pointing arrow (the Form Feed icon).
This will prevent the continuous paper feeding forwards after each section is printed out, thus joining up the four printouts automatically.
Switch OFF (black background), the centre image icon (the four-arrow cross shape), to prevent the printer  centring the design on the paper.
The ENLARGE icon (two interlocking squares), should be left ON (white background).
Click the right mouse button on the boxed printer icon and draw the box around the whole design screen using the right mouse button.
Click the left mouse button twice and the design area will print out sideways.
The printer will stop after the last row and not move the paper.
Now take the second, third and fourth  sections as described for laser printing and print those.
The whole design will be one long piece of paper.
Because the design was printed sideways, each section joins on to the one previously printed.
Occasionally you will get a narrow white band where the sections join, but this does not cause a problem.
Before moving up the screen to print the next four sections, manually move the continuous stationery in the printer to the start of a new page, otherwise, the next section printed will join with this one.
Print the following vertical four-part sections in the same way.
The result is an intarsia chart that needs only be joined for the vertical sections.
NOTE: Some inkjet printers are also capable of using continuous stationery.
If your printer is capable of this function, then use the above method for large printouts, rather than the laser printer method.
Figure 3.
The complete ungridded design printed on dot-matrix printer
Figure 4.
The first four horizontal sections printed on a dot-matrix printer using continuous stationery.
Obviously, printing out large charted designs for intarsia applies equally to owners of the Duomatic machines and the E6000, as they are intended for use with manual selection.
In addition to this, there is no reason why owners of the Duomatic cannot use Creation 6 to create their own designs.
True, the programme will not actually run the Duomatic machine, since this is a mechanical selection knitting machine rather than electronic.
But the programme makes designing patterns and drawing Deco card designs an absolute dream, even those with more than two colours in a row.
It is fair to say that in the last instance, it will not actually produce a design with the colours separated out into their appropriate rows, but will make a card design showing the colours so that punching a  card from this is made easier.
But we are jumping the gun here.
First of all, let's look at using Creation 6 to design straightforward Deco cards.
Start up Creation 6 and choose ‘make a design’ from the main menu.
This bring you to the main designing screen.
Select the magnify icon, and click it on.
The grid screen is now shown, 45 squares wide and 38 squares high, as we saw for the intarsia chart printing.
This is the area to use for designing the Deco cards.
We will use squares numbered 2 to 41 on the width and squares 2 to 38 high, or multiples of this.
The reason we do not use Column one, Row one is that this often prints as an incomplete box on some printers, so it is best avoided.
Draw your design within a 40-square width, from numbers 2 to 41, starting at Row two.
The design may be more than 38 squares high of course, but will need to be printed in 38 square sections.
One big advantage of using Creation 6 for Deco card designing is that you can always check whether the pattern will repeat both side to side and vertically, very easily.
Select ‘all-over design’ from the bottom row of icons, draw the rubberband box around the design and click.
You will see at once if the repeat is, or is not, correct.
Click on UNDO LAST STEP to return to your original design and make any corrections if necessary.
When you are satisfied with the design, select the print icon with the right mouse button, and check that CENTRE IMAGE, ENLARGE and FORM FEED icons are on and select ‘print within box’ icon.
Draw a box from square one to 42 in width and the height required.
(If the design exceeds 30-right squares in height, you will need to print these sections separately.)
Click the left mouse button twice and your card design will be printed.
As it prints ‘larger than life’, it is very simple to transfer the design to a card and punch it out.
Figure 5.
A Deco card design printout, ready to be copied on to a Deco card.
Multi colour designs are made in exactly the same way.
When printed out, the colours will show as different grey patterns and you can copy these row for row on to a card, making one row for each colour in the normal way.
But the hard part of making the original design has been made easier by using Creation 6.
Figure 6.
A four colour Deco card pattern design.
Another big advantage of Creation 6 as far as the Duomatic user is concerned, is that the programme allows you to see your design in full colour and over the whole 180 needles, or however wide the knitting is to be, before committing punch to card.
How many cards have you spent hours punching out, only to find that you have a mistake and need to go back and stick tape over some holes to avoid the mistake being knitted.
Or worse still, there is a whole row of the design missing!
(I have done that in the past.)
Yes, it will still be necessary to punch the card but, with the pattern designed and checked within Creation 6, at least the design process is speeded up with mistakes rectified before the punch comes anywhere near the card.
See Creation 6 for yourself at your local Passap of Pfaff dealer or write for further details.
The distributors' address are:
FOCUS
DESIGNAKNIT 4 — PART 2
Anna continues her report on this software package for designing knitwear which comes from Soft Byte.
For more about the company itself, turn the following feature ‘Over to You’.
The STANDARD version of DESIGNAKNIT 4 is a complete knitwear design program which will produce both garment shaping instructions and colour stitch patterns to your own measurements and tensions.
The programme caters for sweaters, cardigans /jackets, sleeveless pullovers and waistcoats, with straight, raglan, set-in, or saddle shoulder sleeve styles and round, vee, straight or square necklines.
Skirts are also included and these can be straight or flared with anything from two to sixteen panels.
A very comprehensive manual, telephone help line and a full on-screen tutorial are all included in the price of the software.
Once you have the program up and running on your computer, you will be presented with a MAIN MENU screen.
The version and version number of the program that you have is displayed at the top of this screen, whilst at the bottom is your licence number and some guidance regarding which keys to press.
Whilst you are learning to use the package, pressing the F1 key whenever you are not sure what to do, will provide you with a help screen.
The whole program is based on a system of menus and sub menus, so whatever you select from the main menu will in most cases lead you to a sub menu, which may in turn lead you to another sub menu and so on, until the necessary choices have been made.
You will then be presented with the appropriate working screen.
To make a choice from any menu, the Arrow keys (or mouse if you have one) are used to move a highlight bar to the appropriate place before pressing the ENTER key to select the option.
If you press ESCAPE whilst on the main menu screen, you will be asked whether you want to exit from the Designaknit program.
Pressing the Y key at this stage will return you to DOS.
Pressing the ESCAPE key at any other time will lead you quickly back through the menu system until you reach the main menu again.
The seven options on the main menu provide the key to what the program can do.
In this article I will be taking a look at the four options relevant to the creation of garment shapes, namely FILE, SHAPING, PRINT, and ADJUST.
The remaining options of COLOUR, INTEGRATE and LINK are all specific to the creation and manipulation of stitch patterns which I will be covering in the next article.
ADJUST
Although this is at the bottom of the main menu, it is the first option that you need to select before you can begin to use the program for any serious work.
This is where you must enter information regarding the particular printer and knitting machine that you have.
The format of your print outs will be partly based on this information that you give here.
In order to print out stitch patterns templates for instance, the program needs to know whether you have a punchcard or electronic machine and how many needles your machine can pattern over.
Various other adjustments that enable you to configure the program to suit your own particular needs can also be made in this section.
For example, you can tell how you prefer to enter your tension details (the number of stitches and rows to ten centimetres or to four inches or to one inch and so on .)
SHAPING
Selecting SHAPING from the main menu will lead to a sub menu containing various options.
When starting a new garment, the first option to select from this menu will be TENSIONS.
Here you will be asked to enter the stitch and row details from your tension swatch.
If you want the program to calculate the stitches and rows for the welts, cuffs, neckbands and so on, as well as the main pieces, you can also enter a separate tension for these.
As I'm sure you realise, it is essential that you measure your tension swatches accurately, because the garment shaping instructions will be governed by this.
Any other information that you wish to include for your own reference such as tension dial settings, type, colour and brand of yarns for example, can also be entered on the TENSIONS screen.
When you have finished entering your tension details, pressing ESCAPE will take you to the sub menu.
To start designing your garment, select STANDARD from the sub menu.
A new menu will now appear on the screen, from which you can choose the style of garment that you require.
When you have made your selection from this menu, a second menu will appear on top of(but not completely covering) the first menu and you will be asked to select from this one.
If you selected SKIRT from the first menu, the second menu will show a choice of skirt types, otherwise it will show a choice of SLEEVE/ARMHOLE types.
Having selected your sleeve /armhole type, a third menu appears for you to select your FRONT NECK type, followed by a fourth menu for the BACK NECK type (see Fig 1) Should you wish to change any of the selections you have made, just press ESCAPE until you get back to the menu that you need to alter.
Having made all your garment type selections, you will then be asked to enter some of the basic measurements for the garment, such as the chest measurements, overall length, upper arm measurement, sleeve length and so on.
(see Fig. 2) These will be entered either in inches or centimetres, depending on how you chose to enter your tension details.
There are two columns of measurements to enter, the first column being for the actual body measurements and the second for the amount of ease that you wish to add to each of the actual measurements.
If you prefer to enter the finished garment measurements only,(taken from a diagram in a magazine for instance) you can put these in the first column and just enter zero each time in the ease column.
Entering the measurements is quite straightforward, except when it comes to the armhole measurement for set-in sleeves.
For this style, the current version of the program assumes that you are entering an arm scye measurement plus ease.
This is obviously correct if you are working from the actual body measurements, but it is of no use when you want to enter measurements taken from a diagram where only an armhole depth measurement is given.
However, I am very pleased to  hear that version 5 will allow you to choose to enter either an arm scye or an armhole depth measurement.
After the garment size screen comes the styling screen.
You will see a scaled drawing of the garment that you are working on, with a table of various measurements below it.
Detail of the sleeve head (if any) is shown separately, along side the garment.
(see fig. 3) You can now make various detailed adjustments to the garment, such as neck width and depth, welt, cuff and neckband depths and so on.
As you move down the list of measurements, the area that each measurement refers to is indicated by a red line on the garment.
If you enter a new measurement, the garment on the screen will be redrawn to show the effect of the change.
You can play about with any of these measurements as much as you like, until you are completely happy with the garment.
Because Designaknit is intended for use by hand knitters as well as machine knitters, the program does not warn you if a garment piece will require more needles than you have on your machine.
You will be advised however, if you enter an unworkable measurement, such as a neck width that is wider than the shoulder to shoulder width, or a sleeve head that is too big for the armhole for example.
In the case of a set-in sleeve style however, the program will allow you to design a sleeve head larger than the armhole, for the purposes of gathering or pleating in.
Raglan seams can be designed with the same number of rows on both the armholes and body pieces if required (so that patterns, stripes, decorative decreasings and so on, will match up at the seams), although a certain amount of trial and error with various measurements is necessary to achieve this.
The program also allows for tapered raglan and saddle shoulder sleeve tops.
Skirt panels can be symmetrical, asymmetrical or a combination of both and in the case of A line or flared skirts, the shaping for the hem curve can also be calculated for you if you require.
PRINT
When you create a garment shape with Version 4, you do have to print the pattern on to paper in order to be able to knit the garment.
Version 5 however, is expected to include a facility to ‘knit from the screen’, so if your computer and knitting machine are in the same room, you may find this more convenient than printing on to paper.
A very useful feature of the program is that you can also print out what is on the screen at any time,(commonly known as a ‘screen dump’ because the computer literally ‘dumps’the contents of the screen to the printer.)
This means that you can have a complete record on paper of each stage of the design process, making the program particularly suitable for exam course work.
When you have finished designing your garment shape, the pattern can be printed out by selecting PRINT from the main menu.
The details that you entered on the tension screen, together with details of the style and measurements of the garment, as referred to as the ‘main header’ and can be printed out with the shaping instructions.
There is a large selection of print out types to choose from and each one is fully described in the manual.
However, all of the shaping print out types are in the form of diagrams and charts…the program does not produce full written patterns like the ones you get in magazines and books.
The choice of printouts that are available at any time will depend on the type of garment you have designed and the way it is to be knitted.
Colour coded charts for instance, would not be available as an option if your garment shape has not been integrated with a colour stitch pattern.
In most cases you can choose whether to print the pattern at actual size or scaled to a percentage of actual size.
As an adult garment printed at actual size will cover many sheets of A4 paper, you will probably only want to print at actual size if the print is to be used in conjunction with a charting device or if you design intarsia.
For those used to working from  diagrammatical patterns, FORMAT E, the MINIATURE OUTLINE with Japanese notation is a good choice for garments that do not have any special stitch pattern details.
The Japanese notation can be edited to the format that you find easiest to follow in the ADJUST section.
Instructions for welts, cuffs, neckbands and so on are not included on any of the diagram printouts, but they can  be printed out separately in the form of BRIEF TEXT.
There are a couple of things regarding the printouts that I think new users may find a bit confusing.
The first thing is that although garments designed with the STANDARD version are symmetrical,(except in the case of a specially tapered raglan or saddle shoulder sleeve top), the actual shaping instructions are not always exactly the same on both sides of the diagram.
The reason why this happens would take too long to explain here, but it is not a fault in the program as you might be tempted to think!
The important thing to realise is that you should follow the shaping instructions from either the left or the right side of the diagram.
Don't try to follow both sets of shaping at the same time because it won't work and you will find yourself becoming totally confused.
It is up to you to decide which set of shapings you want to follow, but remember that as the garment is symmetrical, the shaping will be carried out on both ends of the work, except of course in the case of the sleeve tops that I mentioned earlier.
The second point that could cause confusion on the printouts is to do with the way in which stitches are to be cast on or off, increased or decreased and so on.
If you find that the shaping instructions don't seem to work for machine knitting, then you need to opt for the EASILY KNITTED STITCH LAYOUT.
This option is included in the ADJUST section of the program, together with other options that will determine how the program works out the knitting instructions.
FILE
Anything that you design within the programme can be saved on to disk for future use.
Selecting FILE from the main menu offers you a choice of starting a new design, loading an existing design from the disk, saving the current design on to disk or deleting a previously saved design from the disk.
In each of these cases, you will be asked for an appropriate name (up to seven letters) for your file.
Before you exit from the program.
Designaknit will always remind you to save your work to disk if you have not already done so.
The garment shapes will be saved to a default directory called SHAPES and the stitch patterns will be saved to a default directory called COLPATS.
You can however change the names of the default directories if you wish.
If you regularly knit different garments for the same people, you might like to have a separate directory for each person.
For anyone who does a lot of knitting, the initial time spent learning how to use the program will be more than compensated for, because once you have saved your work on to disk, the same garment shape and /or stitch pattern can be used time and time again.
If for example, you wanted to make a previously designed garment in a yarn or a stitch pattern that knits to a different tension, you would simply load the required file from the disk and enter the new tensions in place of the original ones.
The shaping instructions will then automatically be recalculated for the new tension, so a garment originally designed for stocking stitch could easily be converted for tuck stitch for example.
Similarly, a garment originally designed with one type of sleeve could be loaded from disk and altered to have a different sleeve type, or a sweater could be converted to a cardigan.
Designaknit 4 is suitable for any IBM or compatible computer with an EGA or VGA colour monitor running DOS version 2 or later.
A mouse can be used but is not essential.
You can install the program on a hard disk if you have one, or you run it from two floppy disk drives.
To be able to print your designs on paper, you will need a dot matrix, ink jet or laser printer.
The majority of the popular types of printer are supported, including 9, 24 or 32 pin dot matrix, IBM proprinters, ink jets and laser jets.
Some colour printers are also supported.
If you happen to own or have access to an Acorn A5000 computer, then you can run Designaknit providing you have at least 2 megabytes of RAM and version 1.7 of the PC Emulator.
More than 2 megabytes of RAM will be required on the A5000 if you want to run Archimedes programs at the same time as Designaknit.
At the time of writing, the Brother Link is still being tested with the A5000 nut it is hoped that it will be available soon.
OVER TO YOU
Introducing…
SOFT BYTE
Designaknit is simple enough for a child to use.
That's what makes it so popular, say Matthew and Sandra Bragg, the directors of Soft Byte, as their daughter shows them how to make a bunny pattern.
It all started several years ago when Matthew was commissioned to produce a graphics pattern for the film processing industry.
This was in the early days of the personal computer when graphics software was scarce.
He was pleased with the result and wanted to use it for something for himself and he adapted it for designing colour patterns for Sandra to knit on her machine.
When some designer friends saw it they persuaded him to get it ready to market and it was ready just in time for Esher 1990.
The response from designers and knitters included plenty of suggestions for improvement in the basic shapes and version 2 of Designaknit was born a few weeks later.
Now, Soft Byte has a group of professional designers and knitters who contribute ideas on a regular basis and provide expert advice.
They are currently planning version 5, and it won't end there.
‘The more it develops, the more possibilities suggest themselves for further development.
There's no end in sight,’ explains Sandra.
SCIENCE AND ART
Although having science degrees, Matthew always had a strong interest in art and design.
Interest in knitting began at the age of nine and resulted in many short  stripy scarves!
Water colours and oil paints took over, but now he prefers computer programs as a creative outlet.
‘A program is a thought which has become objectified into a sequence of computer instructions.
Either it works or it doesn't — it shows you whether you were thinking correctly and is a fascinating test of your own mind.
And how to think correctly?
The mind must be relaxed — the best ideas come out of silence.
Outer success comes from inner harmony.
All the great cultural traditions give us clues about how to find inner harmony.’
Although having worked as a contract systems analyst for ICI, Matthew believes that a small company can operate much more efficiently than a large one.
‘In a large software development team, you can spend a large part of your time on company politics and another large part on documenting when you're up to it.
You write reports on what the scope of the project should be and the various ways to tackle the project.
You communicate with other members of the team about how to do the project and at each stage you have to get some kind of agreement about what is going on.
And as time goes by you will probably have to document in detail why the project is behind schedule.
If a program is as complex as Designaknit was produced that way, it would have taken forever.
When one person has in their mind the whole range of the project from initial conception through data analysis and system design to sitting at the computer and typing the program lines into the computer, it's not only more efficient: the person is creating in freedom like an artist and is involved in the act of creation at a deeper level and as a result enjoys the whole thing.
Well, most of it anyway.
Organising the sales side is something I'm not too keen on’.
Sandra trained as a dancer and worked as a theatre set painter and then a trapeze artist.
Now Soft Byte's Sales Director, she describes how sales have expanded.
‘We started off doing everything ourselves but it became too much.
Now we have distributors in the USA, Canada, one for the Benelux and German speaking countries and now one in the UK too, along with a network of dealers.
We have people in to help and we're still rushed off our feet.
The Dutch version is selling well and we expect the German version to do even better.’
The business is run from their country cottage which is in Shropshire near the Welsh border.
It is half way up a hill and surrounded by fields and the view extends for nearly 30 miles.
Sandra explains: ‘We moved here because of the rural location and we love walking in the Welsh mountains.
We wanted to get away from it all but now find we're in daily contact with people all over the world!’
To be included in version 5
1
Knit — from — the — screen
2
Improvements to standard shapes (including trousers, armhole depth measurement).
3
More functions with prof shaping (model 2 pieces at a time)
4
Silver Reed link.
5
The optional use of standard measurements.
Priority will be given to items 1 & 4.
We have a list of around 100 smaller items too.
Inspirations
COUNTRYSIDE CELEBRATION
JUNE
In the ‘midsummer month’ of June, as pond and stream burst into life, I have chosen to feature the water-lily, dragonfly and bulrush for my design.
In the distance, between the bulrush plumes, a bridge across the stream can be seen among the foliage.
The water-lily area of the design can be repeated to produce an attractive all-over Fair Isle pattern as illustrated, or it can be incorporated into the complete landscape.
Yarns and colours
The ideal yarn for this type of design at this time of year, is cotton or another ‘smooth’ material.
As the designs have short ‘floats’ on the reverse side of the fabric, you can use 2-ply cotton for a beautiful lightweight summer fabric.
For the landscape design, I like to use a petrol blue, turquoise or green for the background to echo those colours associated with ponds and dragonflies, although any dark shade would be suitable.
Use white or cream for the contrast colour.
When knitting the water-lily pattern as an all-over design, I actually like black as the background and white or a pastel colour for the contrast, using the paler colour for the welts and details, as illustrated.
Landscape design
Knit welts and so on in the dark colour.
Knit in Fair Isle (120 rows) with the dark colour in feeder 1 and white in feeder 2.
Continue in plain knitting with the dark colour.
Water-lily design
Knit welts and so on in black or darker colour.
Knit in Fair Isle with black in feeder 1 and white in feeder 2 as follows:
Knit rows 1–35 inclusive from Card A. Reset card to row 1 but ‘change direction’ of the motif (for punchcard machines, turn the card over on to the ‘blank’side).
If necessary, memorize row 1 before continuing in Fair Isle so that there are no ‘plain rows’ between repeats.
Continue knitting these 35 rows, alternating the direction of the motif on each repeat.
For punchcard machines, you may find it easier to punch out two cards, turn one over to the ‘blank’ side and clip them together so that the design is continuous.
SINGERSPECIAL
TEXTURED FABRIC WITH SINGER SYSTEM MACHINES — PART 3
In the last two issues, we looked at single bed slip and tuck stitches and their ability to form surface texture, or interest, in our knitted fabric.
We also saw how closely related these two stitch formations really are, even though at first sight this may not appear to be true.
Before we go on to explore these pattern types, it is worth giving a thought to the reason why I have concentrated only on slip, knit and tuck stitch types so far.
The reason is simple, it is because virtually all stitch types and variations are based on one or more of these three simple stitches.
Even the most complex four coloured jacquards is in reality only a basic slip pattern, where colours are changed every two rows.
Yes, there are other buttons and settings to use on the machine or carriages, but these deal more with the needle selection of the design, rather than with the way the actual stitch is formed.
In our example of four colour jacquard, needles, once selected, will only either knit or slip, nothing else.
The same is true of almost all pattern knitting, from the most heavily textured designs to really delicate lace.
Needles either knit, slip, or tuck.
Even the simpler types, such as circular, or tubular, knitting is again a slip stitch.
One bed slips while the opposite bed knits and vice versa.
The finished effect is a knitted tube, the basis is a slip stitch technique.
The first cousin of circular is Fisherman's rib.
Here, one bed knits while the opposite one tucks and vice versa.
The end product is a very elastic form of ribbing, with a surface interest all its own, which may in turn be further patterned by using the electronic selection available.
So you see, there is nothing difficult about patterned stitches and techniques.
Once you have understood how the machine creates slip, tuck and knit stitches, the rest is just a progression of these, involving very little more than using the electronic pattern selection.
This is also one of the reasons that Singer System machines have so few buttons and so on, for various stitch types, with the carriage buttons being almost identical for both beds.
The four main ones, Slip, Tuck, Circular, and Knit, are capable of making all the patterns we require, either used singly or in combination.
The remaining ones (needle return levers, jacquard, LiLi), are concerned more with needle selection than the actual knitting of stitches.
Now we start to look at the same stitch types again, but this time used as a double bed knitting techniques.
Many of the rules for knitting these stitches on single bed go out of the window as soon as you bring the second bed into operation.
For example, the rule of not having two adjacent needles tucking.
With double bed work, this no longer applies, as the needles on the opposite bed will form stitches which hold the tuck loops in place on the patterning needles.
In other words, it is a whole new world of patterning, with far more patterns and types of design available to us as knitters.
This is simply because the second, or front, bed makes knit and purl knitting possible within the same row.
Double Bed Slip Patterns
Now that we are going to use both beds of the machine, the range of patterns is expanded a thousand-fold.
For these exercises, the front bed will be set to knit for most of the time and the back bed, with its electronic selection, will be creating the pattern.
Remember what a slip stitch is, it is where the patterning needle does not knit.
The yarn passes in front of the needle hook and on to the next needle which will make a knit stitch.
With single bed work, we saw how this created a float across the face of the work.
Now that we have the front bed working and set to knit, the yarn that is not taken into the slip needle hook no longer forms a float, but is taken up by the opposite needle and is knitted whilst the slip needle still retains  its original knitted stitch.
The best way to understand what is happening is to make a manual slip pattern on the machine, before we move on to electronic patterning.
Cast on in every needle rib, using 80 needles on both beds, using a yarn such as Bramwell Duomagic or Denys Brunton Duette, both of which are fairly thin acrylic yarns.
Knit several rows with both carriages set to knit.
Now set the back carriage to slip, by pressing the O button.
Make sure that all the other buttons on the back carriage are in neutral.
Leave the front carriages set to knit and knit slowly from right to left.
Watch what is happening to the needles on both beds.
The front bed needles are all knitting, but the back bed needles do nothing at all.
In other words, they are slipping.
Continue for six rows in total.
You have knitted six rows on the front bed, but none at all on the back bed and the back bed needles are still holding their original stitches.
If you continue to knit, you will end up with dropped stitches and probably jam the carriage after a very short time.
Set the back carriage to knit and knit four rows.
Then set to slip again and knit six rows.
Repeat these four rows knit and six rows slip several more times, until you have knitted a sizable piece of fabric, and are happy that you understand what is happening on the machine.
End with a four row knit section, and cast off.
When the fabric is removed from the machine, you will see that what you have knitted is a ridged pattern within the work.
The ridges are formed by the front bed knitting the six rows, while the back bed holds stitches.
The four row knit/knit section seals the ridges and holds them in place.
What you have made is one of the very simplest double bed slip patterns, which is confusingly known as ‘Pin-Tuck’.
It is not a tuck stitch at all, but the name comes from the same term used in dressmaking, where woven fabric is stitched, or tucked, into ridges that look much like this fabric.
It is also interesting to notice that although it was the back bed needles which were used to create this pattern, the design actually shows on the front.
This is true of many of the textured knits.
The design will often slowly on the fabric face that is away from the patterning bed.
SAMPLE 1
Now that we have seen how this very simple pattern is created, we can go on to fancy it up a bit.
Try using different colour yarns for each pin-tuck six row section and always the same yarn for the four row knit/knit section and you create coloured stripe ridges.
Vary the number of knit/knit rows, e.g. two, four, six and so on.
This will either make the pin-tuck closer together, or more widely spaced.
You can also vary the number of rows knitted for the pin tuck itself, but if you want more rows knitted with the front bed needles alone, you may need to use a thinner yarn and/or pushing down wheels to help knit the stitches correctly.
This type of patterning is often used instead of a hem for jacket edgings and cuffs.
SAMPLE 2
All double bed slip pattern are created in the way shown in this first sample, but instead of continually resetting the back bed, we can produce these patterns automatically by using the electronic patterning for the back bed.
The following samples are all knitted by using O on the back bed and V on the front bed.
SAMPLE 3
This is a variant of the simple pin-tuck, with short pintucks arranged in blocks, giving an overall bubbly effect.
It is a very warm fabric, as the construction traps a lot of air.
The pattern design is shown here and you will need to repeat it a number of times widthways to fit your pattern format.
Most double bed slip patterns are rather lavish on yarn, so you should allow twice as much yarn for a garment as you would for one of the same size in stocking stitch.
SAMPLE 4
This is yet another variation on doubled bed slip, but here the pin tucks are not arranged in definite blocks.
The pattern has more in common with the single bed slip pattern shown in the first article, although the construction of the fabric is the same as for the one above.
Try experimenting with designs of your own, making the pattern in almost any shape you like.
You do need to make sure that you programme all the back bed needles to knit periodically and remember to make sure that you do not have too many rows within the pin tuck area.
Extra weight in knitting is often a help, as are edge claws and pushing down wheels.
Next time, we shall be looking more closely at double bed tuck patterns and their variations.
PICTURE KNITTING
Butterflies AND Daisies
Large white daisies for me conjure up thoughts of warm summer meadows, the scent of freshly cut hay and the buzzing of busy insects.
Hopefully this month's design will have the same effect on you!
The daisies are knitted as a large motif (approximate measurements when knitted in 4 ply yarn 35 cm × 20 cm or 14 ″ × 8 ″).
The centre of the large flower is Swiss darned in yellow and orange.
The stem of the other flower is Swiss darned in green and the two opening buds are achieved with orange Swiss darning and white straight stitches.
Instructions for the embroidery are shown on the chart.
I deliberately reverse patterns which require an amount of hand stitching as the knitted picture will look the same as the chart and thus make following the embroidery instructions a lot easier.
Whilst the daisies look fine as they are, they will look quite stunning with the addition of a few butterflies and these are great fun to create.
We tend to think of these beautiful insects as being very brightly coloured but when I began experimenting I was unable to get convincing results.
It would have been sensible to consult my book of British butterflies before I started for I soon realised using authentic colours greatly improves the overall impression; if you can, I would suggest you refer to a book also.
For the patterned butterflies I used a small part of the leaf design.
This pattern is reversed when knitting the second wing.
The yellow butterfly has a block of six stitches Swiss darned at the top of each wing.
I used a grey yarn to embroider the body and antennae.
Wings can be firmly stitched down or left raised, this will make them look even more realistic.
These butterflies are so quick and easy to make the more enthusiastic amongst you will probably want to try your hand at producing various named species!
QUESTION TIME
Before I answer your questions this time, I would like to tell you of a couple of points that have arisen recently about machine maintenance.
Firstly I had a phone call from a very new knitter who complained she was getting loops at the end of her knitting and dropped stitches along the row all the time.
I asked her to look under the sinker plate, to see whether all the brushes and plastic gear were spinning freely.
She reported that she had already removed, cleaned and returned them as she had caught some wool under one of them.
Puzzled, I asked her to bring in both the carriage and the sinker plate to class.
This she did and the problem(s) were solved.
She had removed the brushes, but, both at once, instead of one at a time.
When she came to put them back, they were both put back upside down.
Moral — only ever remove one at a time so that you can see which way that have to be returned.
Do make sure too, especially on some of the brushes that have washers (plastic coverings), that they go back in the right order and that the screw is done up IN THE CENTRE of the washer.
In addition to the above problem, I discovered another.
Looking beneath the carriage, I noticed that there was a machine needle caught and laying flat across the magnets.
You may not notice this, as there is always a clearance between these magnets and the needles, but this obstruction can just touch the needles and cause slight grating.
Get into a jam with, for example, a knot in the yarn, bad knitting and so on and you will be in real trouble.
So every time you return the carriage to the machine, tip it up first to check that nothing metallic (pins and needles are great offenders, not to mention the double ended bodkin) has been drawn to these magnets.
Now a note for Brother owners.
I hate to have to admit it, but I had a disaster the other week at a class.
I must have done something stupid which caused a jam and I turned the knob to ‘Carriage Release’ and removed the carriage.
I got the yarn free and the needles went back to where I wanted them, returned the carriage and went across.
I had forgotten to turn the carriage release back to N .
Consequently, the carriage started to knit, then slid off and over the needles.
This caused a needle to bend to an angle at which I had never seen a needle before!
It looked like half a letter T. The needle was so bent that I knew I knew that I would not be able to remove it in the usual way, so I took my heavy pliers (the ones with which I behead the Passap/Pfaff needles when they got damaged) and cut off the top of the needle, below the bend.
I had to replace four needles in all after that disaster.
The carriage release is a great help at times, but must be treated correctly.
Put it back to N before returning the carriage to the rail, or immediately after you return it, to the rail.
One more ‘accident’ that happened when I was using the Brother cast-off linker.
I was getting a dropped stitch in same place, every time I used it.
When this happens, the first place I look for trouble is at the sinker posts.
If one of these have become bent, the linker can not work properly and will not be able to link off the stitch close to it, hence it drops.
But this time my posts were all standing up as straight as soldiers on parade.
I checked the needles, they all seemed undamaged.
Still the stitch continued to drop in the same area.
I checked the needles more thoroughly and discovered that the very tip of the latch of a needle was sheered off.
I could hardly see it, but it was enough to cause problems.
Well that's enough of mechanical problems lets have some questions.
Q ‘I knitted a stocking stitch garment the other day with dropped shoulders and no armhole shaping.
I finished the front, back and neckband and joined both shoulders.
I wanted the sleeves to be semi-full, with the ease taken in at the wrist.
I didn't want to take the time to work this out with my tension swatch (this had 30 stitches and 44 rows to 10 centimetres).
The width I require across the top of the sleeve was 44 centimetres altogether, so I marked 22 centimetres on the font and 22 centimetres on the back of the garment, which was were the sleeve was to fit in.
I held the jumper up to the machine, without stretching the work (that is, between the two markers) and picked up the ‘stitches’ within this area.
I cast on and knitted the sleeve downwards, decreasing one stitch at both ends, every 20 rows and again, I am afraid, guessed the length.
On completion, the top of the sleeve was not 44 centimetres.
Why was this?’
A ‘Unfortunately, whilst you can use this ‘guestimating’ method for the neckband and certain staple double bed fabrics, it is not suitable for stocking stitch.
Imagine this front and back with markers 22 centimetres down, indicating the armholes (top of sleeve).
Hold up this measured piece of work to the machine, neither stretching nor easing and you find you appear to need about 120 stitches.
But when you cast on and knit the sleeve, you find that when the work is removed from the machine, the stitches ‘shrink’ and in so doing, the depth of the armhole decreases.
I have recently done this myself and like you was very puzzled as to why my armhole was not the depth I had measured.
I am afraid that when working in stocking stitch, it is ‘back to the drawing board’; you must start the sleeve at the top (if you wish to knit downwards) with the correct number of stitches.
Your swatch was 30 stitches to 10 centimetres.
This means three stitches to one centimetre.
Multiply 44 by 3 which gives 132 stitches.
Cast on 132 stitches and knit downwards decreasing, as you wished, every 20 rows; remove the work on WY at the bottom.
Make a note of the number of needles so that when you have to return these stitches to the cuff you know how many you need to decrease evenly across the work.
Whilst thinking about the tension swatch, why not calculate the rows?
It's much easier than guessing! 40 rows = 10 cms therefore 4 rows = 1 cm.
The length you want is 46 cms, 46 × 4 = 148 rows.
That wasn't difficult was it!’
Q ‘This is not a question, but a report on the solution to my problem.
I have a Passap 6000 and when knitting a jacquard pattern with black and white yarns I was having ‘mispatterning’.
Every now and then there would be a rogue stitch, that is, black when it should be white and vice versa .
It did not appear to be caused by needle or pusher, because it was not happening in a regular line — just spasmodically.
I removed every front bed pusher, putting them in a bowl of the correct surgical spirit oil solution that Passap recommend, rubbed clean each pusher and very lightly oiled each one, returned them and, hey presto, knitted another ‘back’ with no problems.
Was I relieved — I though it was a fault in the console!’
Q ‘I have purchased a super ‘Cone Winder’ and have the couple of plastic ‘hats’that are provided.
I have heard that the empty cardboard cones can be used instead — is this true?’
A ‘They can indeed, Cut a cone down so that is has a diameter of five centimetres.
This now fits exactly on to the cone winder.
Pop the end of the yarn beneath this cone, threading it through the little arm as usual and away you go.
I cut mine with a special retractable knife, but do be careful how you cut, so that the knife does not slip towards you and you land up in the Accident Department.
That would be false economy!’
Q ‘I have seen some raglan sleeve garments that have fancy shaping.
Instead of regular shaping at the armhole edge, the decreased stitches seem to be bolder and less frequent.
How is this done please?’
A To do this easily, you really need the 7 × 1 transfer tool.
a) Bring out five prongs of the tool, take the first five stitches and place them two stitches in.
Return the two empty needles to NWP (this is like K3, K2 tog.
K2 tog.) and then knit four rows.
b) Bring out the seven prongs of the tool and take the last seven stitches three stitches in; return the three empty needles to NMP,(as in K4, K2 tog three times) and knit six rows.
This is a quick way of doing raglans and most attractive.
You will knit the same number of rows in all as when decreasing every alternate row, you just have to be careful to match all sides exactly and end neatly at the top.
Q ‘When sewing up a garment made in Hobby yarn, I find difficulty using it because the little slubs won't pull through the work easily.
I know I can use matching Silky, but do not always have the right colour’.
A ‘Until recently, I used to steam press Hobby yarn for sewing up, pulling it lengthways as I steamed.
That made it better but not really good enough.
Then someone suggested trying to manually separate the little ‘knops’, thinking them down.
Again, an improvement of a sort.
However, to date, the best method I have tried is to spray the lengths of yarn with silicone spray.
Lay the yarn on a sheet or similar (you do NOT want this spray to go on the carpet, it makes it slippery!) and spray it fairly well.
You can now use the yarn for sewing up and have no further problems with Wonderful!’
YARN GUIDE
These are the yarns we have used for our patterns this month.
If you want to use a different yarn and, especially for readers overseas who may not be able to buy the originals, the yarns shown are actual size so that you can compare your substitute yarn with the original.
If you need to use a different yarn here are a few tips.
Firstly, your garment is likely to be more successful if you use a very similar yarn so look for slubbed cotton, acrylic for acrylic, wool for wool and so on.
A change of fibre is perfectly possible but requires even more care in the checking tension, quantity and, above all, suitability in the resulting ‘feel’ and ‘hang’of the knitted fabric.
To compare yarns, hold the proposed substitute over the original and stretch it out until it is just taut, not pulled tightly.
A good match should fit the original very closely.
Now that you have a suitable yarn, how much do you buy?
Whenever possible buy the yarn by length rather than weight as different fibres and treatments can vary the weight of yarns a great deal.
A 500 gram cone of airy acrylic would have many more metres or yards of yarn on it than a 500 gram cone of much denser cotton.
After matching the tension, the garments in the original and substitute yarns would have much the same number of stitches knitted throughout and therefore need much the same yarn length.
When you cannot discover the length of the cone it is best to err on the generous side whilst using your previous experience to decide how many cones you would expect the garment to take.
It is possible to work out the length required for a garment by measuring the length used for a tension square and calculating the total area of the garment from the diagram but I think you would need to be addicted to mathematics to find this worthwhile.
However, those addicted to computers would probably enjoy the exercise.
Having bought your yarn, experiment with it until you have matched the original tension.
To achieve the best ‘handle’ it may sometimes be necessary to vary the number of stitches or rows a little.
This is no problem if you are using a charting device but will require extra calculation if you want to follow the written pattern where the numbers stated for rows and stitches will now apply.
If all this sounds like too much trouble, take care.
You should be lucky and knit a perfect garment in the first yarn that comes to hand but you could also be badly disappointed.
Time is precious to all of us so it is worth ‘wasting’ a little to avoid wasting a lot.
You will be rewarded by a successful result.