

PART ONE: JAZZBEAUX
I
Dying is easy , as her old man used to say,it's the coming back that's hard .
Inside her head, there was darkness.
A red darkness.
She was sinking slowly into it.
Her optic implant was dangling useless on her cheek, her durium skull platelocks were bent uncomfortably inside her head.
That wasn't supposed to happen.
They were under guarantee.
Doc Threadneedle had used only the best scav medtech from the Thalamus Corp.
There were dead people in the road with her.
The Feelgood Saloon was burning, and there were overturned ve-hickles all around.
The whole town was going up in flames.
All you need to be a freedom fighter , Petya Tcherkassoff sang on his ‘The World We Have Lost,’is a fiddle and a bow and a cigarette lighter .
Somewhere in the darkness outside her head, something — an animal or a person — was howling in pain.
There was a dull whumpf!as a gastank exploded.
Jazzbeaux felt specks of heat on her face.
The hardtop shuddered with the impact of flying debris.
She knew she was lucky not to have been cut in half by a razor-edged cardoor playing frisbee.
Her father, of course, was dead.
He had never come back.
The longer she lay here, the shorter the odds became…
…she tried to open her eye — the right one, the one that was still there — and found it glued shut.
She had blood on her face, dried-up and mixed with grit from the road.
The preacherman had hauled her out of the Feelgood and battered her face against the road.
That was how she lost her optic implant, how her platelocks got knocked out of shape.
The road.
All her pain came from the road.
Get your kicksssssssssssssssss , the preacher had hissed,on Route SixSixSixxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx ! *
She had a skullcracker of a headache, and guessed she'd been opened in several places by knifecuts, branded in others by dollops of fire.
Sicksicksick, sicksicksick, sicksicksick, sicksicksick…
…she kept losing herself, losing her train of thought.
She wished she had listened when Doc Threadneedle tried to tell her about her brain.
It's where you live , the Doc had said,you should take care of it .
Well, she had tried.
A durium skullsheath doesn't come cheap.
A year's worth of fenced scav had brought her the treatment.
It was supposed  to be like armour inside your head.
Guaranteed sound against anything up to a direct hit in the eyeball with a ScumStopper bullet.
But the preacherman had opened up a crack, and got into her greymass.
Somehow, he had wormed his way into her private self, the place where she lived.
And he had done a lot of mischief in there.
She knew her body could be fixed, but she wasn't sure about the important stuff.
Doc Threadneedle couldn't replace neurons and synapses.
Even the GenTech wizards, Dr Zarathustra and W. D. Donovan, could only reconstruct a ruined face; they couldn't do anything about a shredded psyche, a ruptured personality, a raped memory…
…somewhere in the distance, there was gunfire.
Shots were exchanged.
Then, nothing.
She could hear fires crackling.
The thing in pain was out of it now.
Spanish Fork, Utah, was another ghost town.
She was probably the only thing alive in it.
Soon, the predators would lope out of the desert for her.
On the road with the Psychopomps, she had seen some pretty weird critters, wolfrat coyotes, subhume vermin, sharkmouth rabbits.
They had to eat red meat one day out of seven.
Jessamyn.
Amanda.
Bonney.
She held onto herself, trying to come to the surface of her cranial quicksand.
Jessamyn Amanda Bonney.
Nobody called her that any more.
Nobody but cops and ops and soce workers.
Not since her old man.
Jessa-MYN, her Dead Daddy whispered in her inner ear,cain't you be more sociable ?
No, not Jessamyn.
She didn't live here any more.
Jazzbeaux.
She was Jazzbeaux.
That was her name in the  Psychopomps, that was who she was.
Jazz —beaux !
She brought her right hand up to her face.
A numbed pain told her two of the fingers were broken.
She rubbed her eye, and tried to open it again.
The blood crust cracked, and she saw the night sky.
Star light, star bright, first star I see tonight…
…pushing hard with her elbows, she half-sat in the road.
Her back ached, but her spine was undamaged.
That was something.
The Feelgood was a stone shell full of glowing ashes.
A half-burned corpse sprawled on the steps, the top of its head gone.
That had been the town's boss-man, Judge Colpeper.
A wind had come through with the Josephites, and blown away the man's whole world.
…
I wish I may, I wish I might …
…the starlight and the firelight went to her head like a blow, and she blinked uncontrollably.
Her damaged implant was leaking biofluid.
Delicately, with an unbroken thumb and ringfinger, she eased the ball-shaped doodad back into its socket.
The connections were loose, and the optic burner didn't respond to her impulse command.
No prob.
Doc Threadneedle could fix that.
At least, he could if the fault was in the machine rather than in the meat.
She found her eyepatch on the ground, and slipped it on over her optic.
She pulled her hair out from over the patchcord, and passed her fingers through it.
Blood, dirt and filth came loose.
Her broken fingerbones ground painfully.
…have the wish I wish tonight .
…she was more in control now.
Soon, she would be able to stand up, able to walk out of here on her own two legs.
The chapter was finished, she guessed.
Andrew Jean, her lieutenant for the past two years, was a few yards away, skin in shreds, orange beehive hairdo picked to pieces.
The corpse looked as if it had been attacked by dagger-billed birds.
The ‘pomps who weren't dead had gone off with the preacherman.
The preacher.
He was the start of it.
Seth was his name.
Elder Seth.
The Josephite.
He had seemed to be such a nothing , meek and mild in his black suit and wide-brimmed hat, calm behind his mirrorshades, surrounded by his quivering flock.
Such a nothing .
The motorwagons were pulled over to the side of the interstate when the Psychopomps’ advance scouts first sighted them.
Jazzbeaux was on her way to a pre-arranged duel of honour with the Daughters of the American Revolution.
There was a territorial matter to be settled.
It was an important fight, and she shouldn't have been conce with petty pickings like the hymn-singers.
She could have passed by without rumbling the Josephites, or just given them a light pasting and taken their food and fuel.
She had other business to cover, major league business.
There was no need to take the time to beat up on the new pioneers.
But there was Elder Seth, standing tall, and smiling just like her old man.
On sight, she knew she would have to take him down.
The scav was pathetic.
She took Seth's mirrorshades.
At first, she just wanted to look into his eyes, to taste his fear.
But there was no fear.
She hadn't been able to read anything from the ice-chips that stared back at her.
Not even when she had Andrew Jean and the others cut out a couple of the pioneers and pizza them across the two-lane blacktop.
She remembered the names of the dead.
Brother Akins, Brother Finnegan, Brother Dzundza.
She never forgot the names of her dead.
She could have killed him then.
Done it easy, shoved a  gun into his mouth and squeezed off a ScumStopper through the roof of his mouth, exploded his brain.
But she let him live.
She took his dark glasses, and let him live.
Two mistakes.
Bad ones.
…citizens, Psychopomps, Cav.
There were lots of casualties.
Jazzbeaux had been out of it for most of the fighting, but she could tell from the leavings that things had got serious.
Some of the people looked as if they had been torn apart by animals with more in the way of teeth and claws than the Good Lord intended for them to have.
Cheeks, a gaudy girl who had been riding with the ‘pomps for the last few months, was literally crushed flat into the road, dead eyes staring from a foot-wide face.
A farmer was burned to the bone inside his unmarked Oshkosh B'Gosh bib-alls.
A black US Cavalryman was slumped against the front window of the drug store, dead without a mark on him.
She unbuttoned his holster, and took out his sidearm.
She had lost her own gun back in the Feelgood.
The official killing iron was heavier than she was used to, but it would do the job.
She unbuckled the yellowlegs’ gunbelt, and cinched it around her hips.
Then, she picked up a half-brick and threw it through the drugstore window.
Picking the glass away from the display, she reached for a squirter of morph-plus.
She exposed her wrist, and jabbed the painkiller into her bloodstream.
Her head clearing slightly, she filled her jacket pockets with pills and ju-jujubes.
She popped a glojo capsule into her mouth, and rolled it around on her tongue, not biting into it.
The buzz seeped through her body.
Some of the pain went away.
Some.
There was something strange about the preacher's shades.
Jazzbeaux had been wearing them on and off for two days.
They were clearer than regular dark glasses, and did funny things to her.
Once or twice, she thought she saw things in the periphery of her vision that couldn't be there.
Indistinct things, but somehow unsettling.
‘Whassamatter, Jazzbie,’ Andrew Jean had asked, ‘you a loca ladybug?
You're spookola in spades this ayem…‘
After a while, she began to get migraines.
She took the glasses off, and thought about throwing them away, driving her cyke over them.
But she just slung them around her neck.
The world looked real again, but she found herself wanting to put the glasses on again.
It was like when she was eight, and Dead Daddy put her on Hero-9 to keep her under control.
She had had to wean herself off the dope over a period of years, and still felt the occasional urge for a H-9 hit.
This was an irrational longing too, but after a while it became irresistible.
She fought it for as long as she could, but it was such a silly thing.
She was a War Chief.
She wasn't afraid to wear a pair of glasses.
This time, the effect was different.
Colours were brighter, but less sharp.
There were shadows where there shouldn't be.
It was a little like a Hero-9 or Method-1 buzz, but without any of the elation.
Somehow, with the glasses on, she felt compelled to look back over her shoulder all the time.
Like one that on a lonesome road doth walk in fear and dread,Tasha sang on her Ancient Mariner Mambo album , and having once turned round walks on, and turns no more his head; because he knows a frightful fiend doth close behind him tread.
It was like that.
You didn't see the frightful fiend, but that didn't mean it wasn't there.
The preacher was coming after her, coming for his property.
That shouldn't have scared her.
But it did.
…
There was a well nearby.
Her waterdetector — now lost — had twanged when they crossed the Spanish Fork city limits.
She would need a drink soon, and food.
She couldn't find a ve-hickle that worked.
She supposed Elder Seth must have taken them all with him when he left in his motorwagon train.
He would be half-way to Salt Lake City by now.
Now, she was coming for him.
He had done his best to destroy her, and she was still here.
She was still Jazzbeaux.
She squatted by the mess that had been Andrew Jean, and said her goodbyes.
Andrew Jean had been a good ‘pomp, a good gangbuddy.
Nobody deserved to die like that.
Except the preacherman.
Elder Seth needed to die slowly.
He had been invincible earlier, when he had changed — the real self pushing out from behind his human mask — but now he was her meat.
The preacher had taken a girl out to kill her, but had made of her a weapon which could be used against him.
Jazzbeaux walked away from Andrew Jean.
Just off the main street, she found the first of the carrion creatures.
It was a bad one, a mew-tater.
There was some kind of housecat in there, but it was the size of a moose, had white skunkmarks down its back, and the buds of vestigial extra heads hanging in its neckfur.
It had gathered three or four corpses, and was playing with them, slicing them out of their clothes.
Its saliva was corrosive, and etched patterns in the pale, dead skin of its supper.
Jazzbeaux stretched her fingers and lightly rested them on the butt of her scavved gun.
The creature turned its head to look at her with slit-pupilled eyes the size of saucers.
It showed its needle-sharp teeth, and flared a furry ruff.
It could have leaped.
With her broken fingers, she probably couldn't have outdrawn the thing.
But she met its eyes.
It recognized a fellow predator, and backed down, returning its attention to its food.
She walked away.
For the first time since she iced her Dad, Jazzbeaux felt she really had a purpose on this dull earth.
She hoped the old man would be proud of her.
II
This is ZeeBeeCee, The Station That's Got It All, bringing you What You Want twenty-four hours a day, sponsored by GenTech, the bioproducts division that really cares…
In just five minutes, it will be time for Keep Fighting Fit With Arnie , and some helpful advice on the maintenance of muscle implants in the elderly.
Then we'll be bringing you Casey Kasem's Wide World of Executions , with some remarkable footage of garotting in Morocco, burning-at-the-stake in Thailand and, for the traditionalists among you, an Olde Englishe Publicke Hangingge from Tyburn Tree in London, England.
But first, tune into reality with Lola Stechkin, bringing you The Pre-Breakfast Bulletin from the comfort of her dancercise studio…
‘Hi, Early Birds of America!
It's August the 27th, 1995, and this is Lola, inviting you to stretch and strain and lose that pain.
Here it is, folks, all the news you can handle…
‘Washington, D.C. Last night, President North fielded tough questions concerning the controversial economic policies of his administration.
Accused by some factions of bringing the nation close to bankruptcy with the Big Bonus, his personalized combination of high spending, high unemployment and decreased taxation, the President claimed ‘we'll just all have to wait and see how it pans out, won't we?’
Dr Ottokar Proctor, head of the presidential think-tank, and widely believed to be the architect of the Big Bonus, was unavailable for comment, although he is scheduled to make an appearance at a film festival in Tampa, Florida, where he will give a lecture on the  Sisyphean influence of Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner on contemporary American culture.
‘Salt Lake City, Deseret.
The first wagontrain of Josephite resettlers, under the leadership of Elder Nguyen Seth, is due to arrive in the deserted conurbation sometime before noontime today.
Elder Seth has vowed to reclaim the wilderness from the elements as the Mormons did before him.
A bill providing, among other things, for the renaming of the State of Utah, has been passed unopposed through Congress.
The recent demise of Representative Osmond of Utah, who had planned to speak against the bill, is still unexplained.
‘The horror murders of the inhabitants of a quiet suburban estate within the Savannah PZ have been attributed by Ms Redd Harvest of the Turner-Harvest-Ramirez Agency to the serial murderer who signs himself ‘The Tasmanian Devil.’
T-H-R claim to be following several leads, and hope to make an arrest soon.
‘The Tasmanian Devil’ has claimed over 350 victims in all quarters of the United States in the last year, and is noted for the savage ingenuity of his frenzied attacks.
Surviving eyewitnesses are few in number, and give contradictory descriptions of the killer, but all agree on his unnatural strength and viciousness.
‘We'll get him,’ Ms Harvest has sworn.
More on this as it breaks.
‘Moscow.
Talks broke down today between the Soviet and Japanese delegations who have been negotiating over recent territorial clashes over culture-krill-harvesting operations off the island of Sakhalin.
Premier Boris Yeltsin has announced that he still hopes to come to an amicable agreement with the Imperial representative and the board of GenTech.
In an editorial statement later this morning, Akira Kobayashi, the Chief Executive Officer of GenTech East, will explain how unreasonable and inefficient the Soviets are proving on this issue.
‘Don't you think it's unfair of nature to insist that  humanity only have two dentitions?
The set-up was fine when life expectancy was barely thirty years, but with modern advances in medtech ensuring that all solvent citizens can enjoy a full and active life well into their 100s, one set of milk teeth and one set of adult teeth just isn't enough.
Well, thanks to GenTech, you can now have sown the buds of a third, fourth, fifth and even sixth set of genuine enamel-coated teeth.
For as little as $500 a tooth, we can get you great-grandpas back on the taffy and rare steaks.
GenTech, the biodivision that cares…
‘Glastonbury, England.
Prime Minister Archer today opens the state-sponsored popular music festival, showcasing the best of British culture.
He has announced that he will join patriotic singer Johnny Lydon, host of the popular British variety program The Johnny Lydon Band Show , in a rendition of the star's biggest hit, ‘God Save the Queen.’
Other British showbiz greats scheduled to appear include Matt Monro, Clive Dunn, Tessie O'Shea, Norman Wisdom, Mrs Mills, Valerie Singleton and the comic duo of Benny Elton and Ricky Mayall, with American guest stars Liberace and Conway Twitty reaffirming the Special Relationship.
Rumours that Ken Dodd plans to come out of retirement for this one last concert have been denied by the reclusive multi-billionaire entertainer's manager, Peter Hall.
John Lennon, the leader of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, who was briefly a member of an unsuccessful group called The Quarrymen back in the 1960s, was apparently asked if he wanted to reform to appear on the bill.
‘Nobody was interested back then,’ he told our reporter, ‘I don't see why they should be now, like.’
‘Manila, the Philippines.
President-for-life Imelda Marcos yesterday dedicated a new statue of her late husband, the former president-for-life, and announced, after singing twenty-eight patriotic songs to the assembled multitudes, that she would set in motion a new scheme to clear up the streets of the city by personally firing the first  bullet.
Rebel forces remain encamped in the North of the islands, apparently supported by a Chinese Guomintang warlord and a Swiss-based multinat.
Imelda will be guest-hosting the popular ZeeBeeCee show,You and Your Shoes , for the next three weeks.
‘Puerto Belgrano, Antarctica.
Following President Galtieri's 75% increase of the levy on non-Argentine mining interests around the South Pole, violence flared up again as British wildcat oilmen tried to even the score after their resounding defeat in the Malvinas War of 1981.
‘Wild’ Charlie Mander, the British consul, and Sheriff Felipe Almodovar, the self-styled ‘Law South of Tierra del Fuego,’met for talks in an attempt to reach a settlement, but tempers rose and shots were exchanged.
Ice Kold Katie, the Scottish esperado who has robbed several Argentine-owned banks and trading stores on the continent, celebrated the increase by ambushing and killing a troop of Argentine snowcat cavalrymen on their way to Esperanza.
‘Ladies, don't you wish you had breasts as nice as mine?
Well, thanks to GenTech biodiv, your wish can be granted.
Personally developed by Dr Zarathustra, winner of the Nobel Prize for Genetic Surgery, our pectoral pump treatments can yield astonishing results.
Even Warren Beatty won't be able to tell the difference.
This is Shiralee St Croix of Saginaw, Michigan.
We treated one of her breasts with the GenTech pectoral pump, and the other with a product manufactured by one of our competitors.
I think you can see the difference for yourself.
GenTech, the biodivision that cares…
‘Teheran, the Pan-Islamic Congress.
Today, the Ayatollah Bakhtiar, chairperson of the Sword of Allah Jihad Committee, sentenced to death in absentia graphic novelist Neil Gaiman author of the award-winning Tintin in the Land of the Ragheads , which has been widely interpreted as a personal attack on the Moslem faith and the continuing Islamic occupation of Greece, Albania, Macedonia, Kosovo and Montenegro.
Gaiman has gone into hiding, but claims to be still working on his next work, a reconstruction of the myth of Desperate Dan, portraying the comic cowboy as an Indian-hating mass murderer.
Viewers are invited to fax in with their guesses about where Gaiman is holed up.
The closest to the truth will win a thousand dollars credit at their local Titancorp comics store, a Captain Haddock T-shirt and an all-expenses-paid holiday for two in balmy Beirut.
‘Vatican City.
Petya Tcherkassoff, the Russian singing idol, today had a personal audience with Pope Georgi.
Tens of thousands of fans thronged St Peter's Square to glimpse the pair.
What was discussed between the two has not been revealed, although Tcherkassoff did modestly state to the press that ‘the cheloviek in the white hat has a bigger following than I do.’
Tcherkassoff's current album release,Songs for Suicidal Lovers , has been at the top of the musichip charts for six straight months.
‘The Isle of Skye, Scotland.
Sad news for children everywhere.
Despite the donation of more than thirty million European Currency Units raised by GenTech-sponsored concerts in America and the Soviet Union, Wally the Whale — believed to be the last cetacean in the Atlantic Ocean — died today of natural causes totally unconnected with the acceptable levels of pollution in the area.
Iain Menzies Banks, mayor of the island, has mooted a plan for the preservation of the whale as the centrepiece of Wallyworld, a luxury tourist preserve and family theme park.
The whale will be coated inside and out with acrylics, and Banks intends to open a restaurant called The Jonah Snackbar in its stomach.
Wally will, of course, live on in our hearts and minds, thanks to his continuing adventures on our Saturday Morning cartoon show Wally and His Whalesome Pals , and his smiling face will still appear on the packets of Wally's Whalefood, the popular krill-based breakfast cereal.
‘This has been Lola Stechkin at ZeeBeeCee, signing off.
If it's all right with you, it's all right with us…‘
Stay tuned to ZeeBeeCee, The Station That's Got It all, if you want to enter the competition of the day.
You could be the lucky winner of a free course of pectoral pump treatments, or a brand new Cadillac convertible.
All you have to do is answer three simple questions, complete the following sentence, ‘If I had bigger breasts, the first thing I'd do would be…,’ and send your answers in on a fax with coupons from any three GenTech products.
The questions are: a) Which former Vice-President of These United States had a sex change operation under the aegis of GenTech's own Dr Zarathustra? b) Who wrote the words to the ‘GenTech Merry Marching Song ’?
Remember, it's the lyrics we're interested in, we know Andrew Lloyd Webber wrote the music.
And c) What is transhumance?
As you heard on the news, we at ZeeBeeCee have been saddened by the tragic passing of Wally the Whale.
As a result, a three-hour tribute to the brave aqua-mammal will pre-empt tonight's scheduled address to the nation by President North, which will now take place after the eleven o'clock nightcap news.
A whole host of stars, including Drew Barrymore, the Mothers of Violence and Susan Sontag, will be coming into the studio to share their memories of Wally with English folk singer Gordon Sumner, who has composed a special ‘Goodbye Wonderful Wally ’ song to mark the whale's death.
But now, on a lighter note, heeeeere's Arnie…
III
The Katz Motel was a klick out of town, and hadn't been touched by the firefight.
There was an old wooden house perched on top of a small hill, and the featureless cabins were spread out across the property below.
The  Psychopomps had checked in and done some minimal damage two nights back.
Jazzbeaux had left some of her stuff in the cabin, confident that the twittering, birdlike manager would be too afraid of the ‘pomps to bother lifting anything from the gangcult.
On the road out of Spanish Fork, she had become aware of a wound just above her knee.
It was a deep cut, and made walking painful.
She bit down on the glojo capsule, and the pain went away.
She got stronger as she walked towards the motel.
Perhaps she should sleep a while, and recover some more.
Little girlie-girl, you've had a busy-busy dayyy , sang Petya Tcherkassoff in her head.
It was nearly dawn.
There was some light in the sky.
Nothing had come out of the dark to bug her.
Her knee felt like a wet sponge.
She was limping.
The glojo buzz faded away, and the pain trickled back.
She hadn't hurt this much since Daddy Deadest was around, playing his games with his willow switches and aluminium rods.
By the time she got to the motel, it was daylight.
The manager was waiting for her at the desk, deftly fidgeting with a half-stuffed peregrine falcon.
Herman Katz was a thin, youngish man with nervous eyes and a slight stutter.
He was wearing an apron which made him look like a housewife, and tinkering with glass eyes, taking them out of a box and holding them up to the empty sockets of the dead bird, trying to find a matching pair that fitted.
It wasn't Jazzbeaux's idea of a hobby, but there were more dangerous people in the world.
‘Morning,’ he said.
‘Quite a bit of noise, last night.
Nobody else has come back from town.’
She didn't feel like giving him the news.
He would find out sooner or later that there wasn't any Spanish Fork any more.
She wondered if he'd stay on in the motel business, or move out.
Not her prob.
‘Mother was upset.
She couldn't get to sleep, what with all the shooting and shouting and I-don't-know-what-all else.’
Herman kept talking about his mother.
She was an invalid, stuck in a rocking chair up in her room in the house.
Jazzbeaux hadn't met her, but she could imagine the type.
A bitter old biddy, eating herself alive with bile, pretending to be crippled to tie her son to the old place, sucking all the life out of him.
She knew all about demanding parents.
She'd learned about that back when she was Jessamyn Amanda and nine-year-olds had been worth a gallon of potable water on the streets of the NoGo.
Ma Katz could hardly be more of a monster than Daddy Dear, Bruno Bonney.
He had told her she would have to be an outlaw because of her heritage.
The old man had claimed kinship with Anne Bonney, the pirate queen of the Spanish Main, and William Bonney, Billy the Kid.
One thing she had to say about Dad, at least he had prepped her for the world she was going to have to live in.
Other girls graduated from the PZ high schools and got Senior Proms, but she had known she was a grown-up woman the day she ripped Bruno's rotten throat out for him.
She'd breezed through the courts, faking numbskull stupidity, and come out clean.
Everyone knew what she had done, but no one was really that conce with it.
A few looies spread around the Juvie Op Agency, and she walked free.
She had been with the ‘pomps since then.
Yesterday, she had thought she might have a healthy career in front of her.
She didn't believe she'd marry Petya Tcherkassoff and move to a dacha on the steppes any more, but she thought she might see twenty-five.
Now, things were different.
She would live as long as she had to to see Elder Seth dead, and then she would think again…
‘It was a rough night.
Don't worry about it.’
‘You want your room key?’
‘Chalet Number One.’
Herman fussed with his bird, needlessly wiping his palms on his apron, and took the key down.
Jazzbeaux took the key.
‘Is the shower working?’
‘Sh-sh-shower?’
Herman was spooked.
That put her on her guard.
‘Yeah.
I'm a mess.
I want to clean up.’
‘Sh-sh-sure, the shower's fine.
I checked the systems myself only a week back.’
‘Terrif.’
‘It's a special service.
Costs extra.
Water's expensive.
We have to get it piped in from town special.
We have to pay one-third of our turnover to Judge Colpeper for the privilege, so you'll have to dig deep into your purse.’
She pulled her jacket off her shoulders.
Some skin came away with it, and her back stung.
Her cutaway T-shirt was even more cutaway than it had been when she bought it.
Herman's eyes popped.
She couldn't work out whether he was ogling her breasts or appalled by the extent of her injuries.
He tried to say something, but she walked away, towards Chalet Number One.
‘I put in cuh-cuh-clean towels, mizz,’ Herman whined.
She ignored him, and unlocked her door.
Inside, the room was a mess.
She had partied with Andrew Jean, Cheeks and So Long Suin the night before last, and Herman hadn't even tried to clear up.
One of Andrew Jean's beehive combs lay on the dressing table in a spread of pills and lipsticks.
The pornovideo set was smashed, a high-heeled ruby pump lodged in the cracked screen.
Cheeks hated Billy Priapus flickies.
The ice sculpture had melted, leaving a tray of warm water on the floor.
That brought back interesting, if cool, memories.
There were bulletholes in the ceiling — which might have been there before the ‘pomps checked  in and the queensize bed was a tangle of ugly tie-died sheets and surplus clothing.
She remembered the night, the nights.
Andrew Jean on  top, Cheeks squealing, So Long rocking her to a cataclysmax.
She would miss her gangbuddies.
The days of fun and frolic were gone for good.
Freak, she was nearly seventeen.
She should be all grown up.
She'd never sign up for marriage and mortgage, that was for sure.
But there was an adult place marked out for her.
The bathroom was better.
Jazzbeaux took the rubber ducks and Wally Whales out of the tub and threw them away, then turned on the shower, letting the water run.
Getting naked was a long and painful process, and involved finding out just how much punishment her body had taken.
She had to cut her stockings off with nail scissors, and the fishnet pattern was stamped in red on her swollen knee.
She wasn't bleeding any more, but there were huge scabs on her face, chest and back.
She stretched, and little stabs of pain shot through her.
Jazzbeaux stepped under the shower, and sponged her wounds.
The warm water washed over her face and body.
She shook her hair, scraping the slime out of it.
The remains of her whiteface make-up came off with the clotted badges of blood.
The warmth made her sleepy, and she slipped down in the bathtub, lying under the shower jet, taking the water full in the face.
Between her feet, water swirled down the plughole, taking red and black threads of blood and dirt with it.
She thought of sleep, but was too tired to make a move for the bed.
Wearily, she sponged her torso and stomach, cleaning her wounds.
They stung, but it was a healthy, healing pain.
Doc Threadneedle had fixed her body up so she healed quick, and the stinging meant that the micro-organisms he had fed into her flesh were doing their good work.
What you want is a parasite that works for you, not on you , he had said.
Her head lolled to one side, and her eye fluttered shut.
Something moved, and she looked again.
There was a shadow on the shower curtain, a human-shape holding  something in an upraised arm.
The plastic dimpled, and a silvery point poked through.
It was a long knife.
The curtain tore, and the figure stabbed…
IV
Hawk-That-Settles, son of Two-Dogs-Dying, was waiting.
But he knew his wait was nearly over.
His people, the Navaho, had been waiting for nearly a hundred and fifty years.
Brutally suppressed by bluecoats led by Rope Thrower, known to whites as Kit Carson, in 1863, they had been out of the major Indian Wars because the Reservation lands given to them were so arid and dreary that even the white man didn't want to kick them off to somewhere else.
No gold, no oil, no food, no water: just Navaho, persisting as they always had done, getting drunk and stubbornly refusing to die out.
Now, the whole of the West and the Mid-West was like the Navaho Reservation.
Before Rope Thrower subdued the Great Chief Manuelito — among whose lieutenants was Hawk's many-times-great grandfather Armijo — the Navaho had been herders of horses and cattle, cultivators of corn, pumpkins, wheat and melons and famous for their groves of peach trees.
The Navaho had respected Rope Thrower as a warrior, but could never forgive the destruction of their prized orchards.
Removed from their fertile lands in what became New Mexico, the Navaho were transported to the Bosque Redondo and into the mountains.
Now, in Monument Valley, on the border between Arizona and Utah, Hawk pulled his stetson lower, to keep the glare of the sun from his face, and strode out of the drugstore to join the depressed knot of Indians at the roadside.
The motorwagons were passing them by, a battered parade.
Two-Dogs was slumped in his usual chair, with four legs of unequal length, sucking like a baby on the brown-paper-wrapped bottle he always carried.
Hawk nodded to his father, the man who had tutored him as a Dreamwalker, and was not acknowledged.
He knew all the others by name, by the names of their families for generations past.
It was his place to remember the ancestors.
He was the medicine man, now that Two-Dogs was the whisky Navaho.
Bowed, weary, and with deeply-lined faces, the Indians all looked ancient, even the children.
If possible, life was harder even for these ragged redskins than it had been for their forefathers after the war with Rope Thrower, when their livelihood had been deliberately burned away from them.
Only Jennifer White Dove replied to his greeting, with a tight smile.
They were of an age, Hawk and Jennifer, and had been close as teenagers, before Hawk joined up with the Sons of Geronimo and left the Reservation, intent on changing the world.
By the time he had been through that and was ready to return, Jennifer had been married and divorced and was almost a stranger again.
The motorwagons were full of smiling, unreadable pilgrims in black, presumably joyous at being so close to their destination, Salt Lake City.
The convoys had been coming through all week.
Hawk still had the shakes, although they were coming under control.
He had been doing road duty when the first wagons rolled past, with a US Cavalry Escort, and he had looked upon the face of the Josephite leader and known that these were the last days of the world.
Nguyen Seth was his name.
Hawk had read about him in the newsfax, but rarely watched teevee, and so had never seen his face before.
That is, not in the flesh.
From his childhood, he had known the face, had seen it in paintings and had drawn it himself.
It was the bone-white, dark-hole-eyed — sunglasses, he now realized — face of the Summoner.
Two-Dogs had not always been a whisky Navaho, and he had taught his son the stories his father had  taught to him.
The stories of the Last Days, when the Summoner would open up the Dark Reaches of the Spirit Lands and call down the worst of the manitous to lay waste the worlds of the white man and the red.
Since he had caught sight of the Summoner, he had not liked to watch the resettlers pouring through into Utah, knowing what it was they were really following.
He had talked with a plastic young couple in the Reservation Diner, listened to them enthusing about their new-found life and the dictates of their faith, but had seen the deadness in their hearts.
Some of the Reservation Indians had gone with them when they left, eager for a chance at something better.
The Navaho Jospehites were all young, as young as he had been when he joined the Sons and painted his face to strike a blow at the heart of the white man's world.
That had been a futile crusade, he knew now, but it was better than the lie Seth offered, the lie that concealed the end of all things.
The Indians of the Plains — Apache and Comanche — that he had known in the Sons of Geronimo had sworn that the white man's time was nearing an end, and that the buffalo would return.
But he knew these were dreams of sand.
The buffalo could do nothing against the deadweight of the Europeans.
He had been waiting for the spirit warrior his father had told him of in infancy, the One-Eyed White Girl.
If the Summoner was abroad, then he would soon be followed.
It was revealed in the series of pictures, drawn and redrawn in his family for generations.
Two-Dogs said the One-Eyed White Girl would have steel in her muscles and fire in her empty eye, and that she would come to the Navaho — to the family of Armijas — or her education.
It was the duty of the medicine man of the line of Armijas to tutor the spirit warrior through the Seven Levels, to prepare her for the final battle, in which she would stand with the other spirit warriors — the Holy Woman From Across the Great Water, the Man With Music in His Heart, the Red-Handed One, the Yellowlegs Who Has Lost Much, the Great Father in White, the Man Who Rides Alone — against the army of the manitous and the story would end.
Hawk had seen it told as a series of pictures on buffalo hides.
The last pictures were just darkness.
Much had been foretold, but the ultimate outcome was unknown, unknowable.
‘I envy you, my son,’ Two-Dogs had told him yesterday, ‘you will see the last pictures.’
Two-Dogs claimed his time was almost up, and was drinking even more heavily than usual.
He had foreseen his death so many times that Hawk no longer bothered much with such presentiments, but, this time, things were different…
The Sons of Geronimo had been a wash-out in the end.
Lots of fiery meetings and grand gestures, plenty of petitions to Washington and protests outside John Wayne movies, but in the end they had just been a bunch of dumb redskins battering their heads against the white man's bricks.
Their political campaign had been as ineffectual as their terrorist ‘outrages,’ which had harmed no one but the odd insurance firm.
Chata, their chief, had been shot dead by a bank guard in Wyoming during an attempted hold-up.
The Sons had been running short of funds.
Then Ulzana, the Apple Apache in his Gucci Ghost Shirt, would-be heir to the eagle-feathers, graduated from Berkeley, and set up a computer software firm.
Hawk had sent him a parcel containing a bisected apple: red outside, white inside.
The trickle of money raised by the tribes had dried up, the teevee crews stopped coming round, and the white girls all drifted away, with or without their pale-skinned babies, petitioning to rejoin the master race.
Hawk didn't know where the others were.
What had happened to Sacheen Littlefeather?
Sky Buffalo?
William Silverheels?
Two-Dogs-Dying had shrugged, and gone back to waiting for his monthly security cheques.
Only Hawk-That-Settles was there to carry the dream forward, to pass it on — if need  be — to his son.
Now, there would be no son.
The motorwagons were gone, and everyone was drifting away.
Jennifer White Dove smiled at him again, almost soliciting his interest.
On the Reservation, being a medicine man meant literally that these days.
He was in charge of the drugstore, and Jennifer's husband had left her with a habit or two.
Sometimes, he knew, she would bruise herself with a rock to get morph-plus out of him.
There were a lot of Indians like that, so used to the cycle of hurt and deadening that it was a snowballing addiction.
He didn't meet her eyes, and she drifted away with the others.
‘Father?’
Two-Dogs looked up, eyes not focusing.
‘Father, I must leave.’
Two-Dogs nodded his head, yes.
‘The Holy-Place-From-Over-the-Great-Water?’
‘Yes, father.’
It was the title of one of the pictures.
Two-Dogs had long ago found the real place, an abandoned monastery in the desert.
It was far south, near the Mexican border.
‘She will come to you there, the One-Eyed White Girl.’
‘So you have said.’
‘And so my father said before me.
So we have all said, back to the times of the peach trees.’
There was an  embarrassing pause.
Hawk always felt ill at ease in these conversations, as if he were forced to read the lines of a savage redskin in a Hollywood film.
He did not talk like this with anyone else, but his father would not laugh at talk of the Holy-Place-From-Over-the-Great-Water or the Yellowlegs Who Has Lost Much.
Beyond the road, Hawk saw the table mountains lumped against the sky.
They had made many Hollywood films here.
As a young man, Two-Dogs had fought with many armies of extras, firing off pretend guns at John Wayne in Stagecoach, Fort Apache, She Wore a Yellow Ribbon and  The Searchers .
Once, Hawk had found a faded snapshot of Two-Dogs dressed in the beads and paint of an Apache standing proudly between a smiling John Wayne and a one-eyed Irishman he guessed was the movie director John Ford.
Later, ashamed, Two-Dogs would picket screenings of the films he had appeared in, although he admitted in private that many times as a young man he had eaten well at a movie commissary when he would otherwise have starved.
Once, a message had been sent to Ford in Hollywood, entreating aid for the Navahos after a hard winter, and the director had found a Western script to make in Monument Valley simply to bring some money to the tribe.
Still, Hollywood had done an irreparable harm to the Indian, perpetuating the lies of the Manifest Destiny, the Savage Redskin and the Noble Bluecoats.
Two-Dogs took a swig on his bottle.
Hawk would never grow old like this.
‘Goodbye, father.’
Two-Dogs nodded, and Hawk turned.
He had a long walk before him.
V
The figure stabbed at the empty air.
Naked and wet, Jazzbeaux leaped out of the tub at the knife-wielder.
She didn't need this, but she was prepared.
She hadn't lived through the hell of Spanish Fork to be carved up by some common-or-garden psychopath.
The knife raked her side, but she ignored the pain and struck out with the flat of her hand at the psycho's chin.
It was the old woman, she assumed.
As the knife darted towards her like a hawk's beak, she glimpsed iron grey hair in a bun, and saw the swish of the long, faded dress.
Her blow connected, and Ma Katz staggered backwards, blade scraping the flower-pattern wallpaper.
Jazzbeaux  half-turned and launched a kick, punching with the side of her foot into the old woman's stomach.
The knife came again, and she chopped with both hands at Ma Katz's wrist, satisfied by the crunch of breaking bones.
Ma Katz shrieked like a wounded eagle, and the knife clattered to the floor.
The old woman's fingers curved into talons and she scratched at Jazzbeaux's face.
There wasn't much more Ma Katz could do to her face that Elder Seth hadn't, but lines of pain opened up, and Jazzbeaux felt her vision distorting.
She was used to having one eye, but now she knew she wasn't seeing what she should.
Ma Katz's face, twisted by hatred, was that of her son.
Jazzbeaux made a point with the fingers of her left hand, and jabbed it into the old woman's throat, twice.
Ma Katz coughed and spluttered, yellow tears coursing down her face.
Jazzbeaux grabbed the old woman's hair, and it came away in her hand.
Sobbing, Herman Katz sank to the floor, drawing in his arms and legs as he assumed a foetal ball, trying to return to the safety of his mother's womb.
Jazzbeaux threw the wig into the toilet, and reached for a towel.
She didn't fully understand the set-up at the Katz Motel, but she had been through the fires, and was surviving.
Bruno Bonney had been fond of quoting Nietszche.
That which does not kill me makes me stronger.
Of course, that was before she had killed him.
Herman?— Ma Katz?— whoever — had not killed her.
She was stronger.
Now, she wanted breakfast.
VI
In the deserted city, Roger Duroc waited for Nguyen Seth and the resettlers.
His prep crew had coptered in a few days ago, but it was psychologically important for the movement that the first arrivals turn up in the old way, like the Mormon pioneers who had first built by the Salt Lake and made the desert bloom.
Duroc's team had got the power on, and he had sent exterminator packs into the streets to begin the task of clearing out the vermin that still clung to the ruins.
He had picked up a group of experienced hunter-killers from the Phoenix NoGo, and turned them loose on the remaining sandrats.
There were less in Salt Lake than in most ghost cities, because of the lack of water.
For the first few years, that would be the big problem for the resettlers too, but a pipeline was being built that would bring a supply down from Canada.
Seth had it all worked out.
With the backing of President North, the Josephite Church was building its sanctuary in the former state of Utah.
Now, it was renamed Deseret, and was only technically a part of the United States of America.
It would have its own flag, its own judicial system, its own state religion, its own Great and Secret Purpose.
Duroc looked over the reports from the engineers he had sent down into the dry sewers.
Their casualties had been acceptable, and the cynogen had put an end to the indigenous subterraneans.
Tunnel-fighting.
That took him back to the ‘Nam, where he had joined up with the Summoner and later fought with the VC against the Ivans.
The lights flickered.
The power was still variable, but it was a start.
He had made his headquarters in what had been the presidential suite of the Hilton hotel.
A portrait of Trickydick Nixon glowered down at him.
Someone had shot its eyes out, perhaps a Comanche hoping to condemn  the Ex-President's incomplete spirit to an eternity of wandering between the winds.
He had come a long way with the Elder, as had his family from time immemorial.
He remembered the day in Paris, all those years ago, when his uncle had introduced him to the tall, quiet man to whom his life would be dedicated.
Nguyen Seth hadn't changed since then, Duroc knew.
But then again, the Elder was older than he looked.
Sometimes, he assumed the Elder had been around since the Creation.
Once, tens of thousands of years ago, he might have been remotely human.
Now, so close to the Last Days for which he had been prepared, Seth was what he was, and nothing less.
Sometimes, Duroc missed his uncle.
But the succession had had to take place.
Duroc had had to come of age and replace the older Duroc in the service of Nguyen Seth.
Blevins Barricune, the ex-Op Duroc had put in charge of the city limits, came through on the intercom.
‘We have a sighting, sir.’
Duroc lit up a gauloise .
‘Good.’
‘Twenty or thirty ve-hickles, moving slowly.’
‘The wagon train?’
‘Affirmative.’
Duroc blew a smoke ring.
‘Well, get the brass band out.
The Elder will need a welcome.
You know the hymns they must play.’
‘It will be done, sir.
By the way, we've found some children in the old tabernacle.
Five, between the ages of eight and twelve.
They have no speech beyond grunts, but they've been surviving out here.’
‘Children?’
‘Yes sir.’
‘How remarkable.
They must have endured many hardships to keep going out here.’
‘Yes.
They overpowered Vercoe and Wood.’
‘Vercoe and Wood?
What's their status?’
‘Both casualties, sir.’
‘The children?’
‘Unharmed, mostly.
Pouncey was Vercoe's squeeze, and so he cut loose a bit with the cattle prod.’
‘That's understandable.’
Duroc picked up his broad-brimmed black hat, and set it upon his head.
He examined himself in the mirror.
He looked very clerical.
‘I'll be down directly.
Have a car ready to take me to the city limits.
I'll want to see the Elder arrive.
The moment must be marked with all due ceremony.
The vid team will record it for posterity.’
That was a lie.
There would be no posterity.
‘And the children?’
‘Oh, you know what to do.
Hang them.’
‘Fine, sir.’
‘Let Pouncey do it.
The man deserves something for his loss.’
‘Very well, sir.’
Humming ‘All Things Bright and Beautiful,’ Duroc left his suite.
VII
With her wounds dressed and bound and clean clothes on, Jazzbeaux felt approximately like a human being.
That was dangerous, she knew.
Ever since she had looked through Seth's shades, she had been more than human.
Or perhaps less.
She felt an odd detachment that she would have to get used to.
Her humanity was something useless to her, something that came from the Denver NoGo and which should have died in Spanish Fork with Andrew Jean and the others.
She was still carrying it about, like a Mexican mother in a warzone still toting a dead baby at her breast.
Membership in the human race was a psychological crutch  she knew she could do without, but wasn't quite ready to throw away yet.
There would be time.
She had left Herman Katz in the bathroom.
He was verging on catatonia.
Yesterday, she would have casually killed him.
Now, she didn't see the point.
She was saving herself for Elder Seth.
There was no food in the chalet, so she went up to the house.
If there was no real Ma Katz to bother her, the place should be empty and Herman ought to have the makings of a breakfast.
She wanted a pint of recaff and a toasted cheese sandwich.
Perhaps a bowlful of Wally's Whale Food, and a jujube or two to give it a buzz.
Perhaps not.
Perhaps she didn't need drugs any more, didn't want the buzz.
There were enough new things going on in her mind.
She climbed the rickety steps set into the hillside and got up to the porch of the Katz house.
The door was open.
Inside, the hallway was musty and dark.
She saw an old French dresser with faded photographs in gilt frames under a bed of cobweb.
An embroidered sampler hung on the wall, A BOY'S BEST FRIEND IS HIS MOTHER.
Three identical aprons hung on a crooked coatstand.
A buzzard, wings outstretched, posed stiffly over the kitchen door, its glass eyes thickly dusted-over.
The kitchen was what she had expected, dominated by an antique cooker and a fridge the size of a Buick.
She found some reconstituted milk and some no-brand krill, which gave her a bowlful of mush to eat while the old kettle boiled.
There was a plastic model of Redd Harvest's G-Mek V12 ‘Nola Gay in the packet of krill, but the wheels fell off when she ran it across the table.
It occurred to her that most people, her former self included, would not walk away from an attack by a homicidal transvestite and sit down to a healthy breakfast.
She knew she was changing inside.
It was something to do with Seth's magic mirrorshades.
She hadn't slept, but she felt rested, calm, perfectly  balanced.
It was as if the fight with Herman had had the effect she would have expected from eight hours on a contoured mattress and a course of Doc Threadneedle's pick-me-up shots.
The kettle whistled, and she made herself some recaff.
Her father always swore while he drank the stuff, claiming to have been raised on real coffee before the CAC stopped exporting from Nicaragua, but she never understood his complaints.
She had had real coffee once or twice on the ‘pomps’ raids down into Mexico, but it hadn't seemed special.
She preferred recaff.
This morning, she could barely taste anything.
It was important to fill her stomach, and the warm liquid was nice in her throat, but that was it.
There was no pleasure in the old sensations.
On the kitchen table, there was an old, leather-bound book.
It had KATZ FAMILY ALBUM embossed on it in gold.
She flipped it open.
There was a plump baby with Herman Katz's shining eyes, trussed up in a blue nightie, perched unsteadily on the lap of a haggard young woman.
Herman and his mother.
The couple recurred over the next few pages, with Herman becoming a child, then a young man, but never losing his startled look, as if the camera flash were a slap in the face.
No one else intruded in the pictures, although someone must have been there to point the camera.
The book was half-full of perfectly mounted, perfectly posed snapshots.
Then, between two pages, she found about thirty polaroids loose.
They were of different people, all women, but from the same view, from behind the mirror in the bathroom of one of the chalets.
Women bathed, showered, brushed their teeth, sat on the toilet, peered at the mirror.
They were all naked, or nearly so.
The latest was no more than two days old.
It was Cheeks — dead Cheeks — squatting nude, snorting a line of zooper-blast from her pocket mirror, talking to someone in the bedroom.
It had been Jazzbeaux.
She remembered the moment.
She  had been talking about the rumble with the Daughters of the American Revolution, playing with Seth's glasses, putting them on and taking them off.
At the time, with the glasses on, she had imagined she could faintly discern the shape of a skull under Cheeks' plump face.
Now, the memory made her shudder.
She had seen too many ghost skulls, and all under the faces of people who were now dead.
For a moment, she vowed never to look in a mirror again, in case she should be able to trace the outlines of her own durium-laced bones.
Somewhere along the road, she had picked up a few extra senses, and she would have to learn to live with them.
This book, for instance, turned her stomach.
She could see beyond the snapshots, and feel the gradual destruction of little Herman's personality as his mother became ever more dominant, ever more demanding.
No wonder the kid had snapped.
Where was the real Ma Katz?
Jazzbeaux finished her recaff, and pushed the album away.
She left the kitchen, and looked up the stairs.
There was something up there beyond the landing, in one of the shuttered rooms.
She knew it for a fact.
It was calling to her, calling inside her head.
‘Jessa —myn ,’ it hissed.
It was a woman's voice, but it reminded her of her father's whining.
‘Jessa —myn .
Come upstairs, come upstairs.’
She found she was halfway up already, unconsciously obeying the voice.
She moved as if she were in a dream, wading through viscous liquid.
Nothing mattered, but the voice.
‘Jessa —myn , cain't you be sociable?’
Her headache was back, and her vision was disrupted.
With her right eye, she saw the staircase before her, and the landing above, but with the left side of her sight, she was seeing her past replayed.
There was her father, bleeding from the throat.
There was Andrew Jean, face close to hers, tongue flicking.
And there was Elder Seth, baring his teeth as he pushed her face into the asphalt.
She shook her head, and tried to rub out the impossible visions.
Her broken optic shifted painfully, and she realized she had been seeing out of her empty left eyesocket.
She had lost her eye when she was fifteen, in a brawl with the Gaschuggers outside Welcome, Arizona.
She had never missed it until now.
She grabbed the banister and dragged herself upwards.
She was under some kind of attack.
Nothing new there.
In the darkness inside, Elder Seth laughed silently, his eyes blazing through his mirrorshades.
Her face was in his eyes, distorted and shimmering.
She was on the landing now, and it spun around her.
She assumed a fighting stance, but couldn't remain balanced.
The door opposite hung ajar.
It creaked as it swung open.
The room beyond was mainly dark, but lines of pale daylight stabbed through the slats of battered shutters.
The creaking continued when the door was open.
Jazzbeaux recognized the noise.
It was a rocking chair, its weight shifting from the person in it.
‘Mrs Katz?’ she asked.
There was no reply.
Reflections flashed in the darkness.
Suddenly, Jazzbeaux knew whom she was about to face.
Elder Seth.
In the dark, Seth would be his true self, his human face off but his dark glasses still on.
The rocking carried on.
Things scuttled.
Rats.
The house was filthy, she realized, practically falling to pieces.
How could Herman and his mother stand it?
Jazzbeaux held onto the guardrail of the landing, and struggled to control her equilibrium.
When she first lost her eye, she had had trouble keeping her balance, but she had thought she had overcome that.
Obviously, any knock could send her mind spinning like a top.
She let go of the rail and stepped across the landing.
She tottered through the open door.
The smell hit her first.
It  was overpowering.
Many things had died in this room and left their stink behind.
There was a powerful chemical stench, and a psychic residue of pain and cruelty that was like a punch in the gut.
In the darkness, Ma Katz rocked.
Jazzbeaux saw grey hair as the figure's head passed through the knives of light, and a dress like the one Herman had been wearing in the bathroom.
‘Mrs Katz?’
She knew the woman had been dead for a long time.
She stepped around the rocking mummy, and pulled the shutters open.
Light streamed into the room, and caught the corpse.
It wasn't so bad, not after the things Jazzbeaux had seen back in Spanish Fork.
Herman's taxidermy was inexpert, but Ma Katz was desiccated rather than rotten.
The dead woman was wearing a pair of sunglasses.
They weren't anything like Seth's.
Pink, heart-shaped Lolita frames and pale blue lenses.
Jazzbeaux turned away and looked out of the window.
On the horizon, she could see Spanish Fork still burning.
Columns of smoke were drifting up into the sky.
That would attract the Road Cavalry soon.
She would do well to get out of the area before they turned up.
Some of the patrol who had been in the Feelgood could have radioed in a report before things started blowing up, or maybe even got away.
She had only seen one corpse in union blue.
There had been four in the cruiser.
The creaking behind her stopped, and Jazzbeaux spun around.
Ma Katz was shakily standing, impossibly animated.
Her glasses shone with reflected sunlight.
The creature which should not have been came for her, clawhands jerking.
‘Jessa —myn !’ it shouted from its dry mouth.
It had her father's voice.
It had Elder Seth's voice.
She cleared her holster, and put a shot into the thing's  chest.
A puff of ancient dust came out as the slug went in.
Her bullet tore through Ma Katz and spent itself against the wall.
The thing kept coming.
She shot again, trying for the head.
The glasses went wonky as the upper left quarter of the head flew apart.
The hair came off like Herman's wig, and the papery flesh flaked away from the exploded skull.
A glass eye rolled out of its socket.
Something gurgled in Ma Katz's throat, and the dead woman collapsed in a bony heap.
In her head, the echoes of Seth's laughter died away.
‘Mama,’ said a high-pitched voice from the landing.
Herman staggered in, his apron on again, a tray of breakfast things in his hand.
He shook, but didn't spill the milk.
‘Mama…‘
Jazzbeaux looked at the long-gone creature on the floor, and across to her son.
Herman had no adequate response in his emotional repertoire.
He set the tray down gently by the bedside, and picked up what was left of the mummy.
It came apart in his arms, but he bundled it onto the bed.
‘You've hurt mother,’ he said.
Jazzbeaux tried not to look him in the eye.
‘Once I tried to hurt mother, but she got better.
She'll get better this time, won't she?’
‘Yes, Herman,’ Jazzbeaux lied.
‘Everything will get better.’
She left him there, and went out into the desert, not knowing where she was headed, or what she was going through.
Inside her head, the lights went out one by one, systems shut down.
She walked towards the west, towards the point where the moon had just set.
The sand began at the edge of the property.
She walked out onto it, her boots sinking in with each step, and left the Katz Motel behind her.
Dead women didn't walk.
Dead women didn't talk with the voice of Elder Seth.
She knew that.
But Ma Katz had  got out of her rocking chair, and the preacherman had stared at her through the mummy's glass eyes.
Jazzbeaux walked, trying to reconcile what she knew with what she had seen, what she had felt.
As the sun rose higher into the morning sky, circuits went inside her greymass, flaring up and dwindling to ash.
She ignored her hurts, and kept walking, dragging her feet a little, but still walking…
In Spanish Fork, the fires began to burn themselves out.
PART TWO: THE SANDRAT
I
In his isolation tank in the Salt Lake City Tabernacle of Joseph, naked but for his mirrorshades, Nguyen Seth sampled Jazzbeaux's memories.
He had access to portions of her mind she herself was losing.
He could not tell why he was fascinated with this girl.
It had happened before, down through the centuries.
He would join in battle or in love so closely with a human that a link was established that worked both ways.
Usually, it was a woman or a very young man.
Sikander the Greek, Kleopatra, the Maid of Orleans, Aphra Behn, Emily of Haworth, Lizzie B, Rupert Brooke…
It took a peculiar collection of qualities to catch his mental eye.
It was a weakness, he supposed, but not one he could do anything about.
Especially vivid was the period in Jessamyn Bonney's life between her first meeting with the Josephite motorwagons and the burning of Spanish Fork, when she had worn his spectacles.
She had  left her imprint upon them, and now her mind overlapped with his whenever he wore the sacred lenses.
He felt himself sinking into one of the familiar vignettes…
The Daughters of the American Revolution had been racking up a heavy rep in the past few months.
They had total-stumped some US Cav in the Painted Desert, and some were saying they had scratched a Maniax Chapter in the Rockies.
But after tonight, their time in the sun was Capital-O Over.
And the Psychopomps would rule !
Jazzbeaux pushed a wing of hair back out of her eye, and clipped it into a topknot-tail.
She took off the snazzy shades she had taken from the preacherman they'd jump-rammed this morning, and passed them back to Andrew Jean.
No sense getting your scav smashed before it was fenced.
She beckoned the Daughter forward with her razorfingered glove, and gave the traditional high-pitched ‘pomp giggle.
The others behind her joined in, and the giggle sounded throughout the ghost town.
Moroni it was called.
The War Councils of the gangs had chosen it at random.
It was some jerkwater zeroville in Utah nobody gave a byte about.
The Daughter didn't seem concerned.
She was young, maybe seventeen, and obviously blooded.
There were fightmarks on her flat face, and she had a figure that owed more to steroids and implants than nature.
Her hair was dyed grey and drawn up in a bun, with two needles crossed through it.
She wore a pale blue suit, skirt slit up the thigh for combat, and a white blouse.
She had a cameo with a picture of George Washington at her throat, and sensible shoes with concealed switchblades.
Her acne hadn't cleared up, and she was trying to look like a dowager.
More than one panzer boy had mistaken the Daughters of the American Revolution for solid citizens, tried the old mug-and-snatch routine, and wound up messily dead.
The DAR were very snazz at what they did, which was remembering the founding fathers, upholding the  traditional American way of life and torturing and killing people.
Personally, Jazzbeaux wasn't into politics.
She called a gangcult a gangcult, but the Daughters tried to sell themselves as a Conservative Pressure Group.
They had a male adjunct, the Minutemen, but they were wimpo faghaggs.
It was the Daughters you had to be conce with.
‘Come for it, switch-bitch,’ Jazzbeaux hissed, ‘come for my knifey-knives!’
The Daughter walked forward, as calm as you please, and with a samurai movement drew the needles out of her hair.
They glinted in the torchlight.
They were clearly not ornamental.
She grinned.
Her teeth had been filed and capped with steel.
Expensive dental work.
‘Just you and me, babe,’ Jazzbeaux said, ‘just you and me.’
The rest of the DAR cadre stood back, humming ‘America the Beautiful.’
The other Psychopomps were silent.
This was a formal combat to settle a territorial dispute.
Utah and Nevada were up for grabs since the Turner-Harvest-Ramirez and US Cav joint action put the Western Maniax out of business, and Jazzbeaux thought the ‘pomps could gain something from a quick fight rather than a long war.
This was not a funfight.
This was Serious Business.
Jazzbeaux heard they did much the same thing in Jap corp boardrooms.
The Daughter drew signs in the air with her needles.
They were dripping something.
Psychoactive venom of some sort, Jazzbeaux had heard.
Hell, her system had absorbed just about every ju-ju the GenTech labs could leak illegally onto the market, and she was still kicking.
And punching, and scratching, and biting.
‘You know, pretty-pretty, I hear they're talkin' about settlin' the Miss America pageant like this next anno.
You get to do evenin' dress, and swimwear, and combat fatigues.’
The Daughter growled.
‘I wouldn't give much for your chances of winning the crown, though.
You just plain ain't got the personality .’
Behind her patch, the implant buzzed open, and circuitry lit up.
She might need her optic burner.
It always made for a grand fightfinisher.
Jazzbeaux held up her ungloved hand, knuckles out, and shimmered the red metal stars implanted in her knucks.
Kidstuff.
The sign of The Samovar Seven, her fave Russian musickies when she was a kid.
She didn't freak much to the Moscow Beat these days, but she knew Sove Stuff really got to the DAR.
‘You commie slit,’ sneered the Daughter.
‘Who preps your dialogue, sister?
Neil Simon?’
Jazzbeaux hummed in the back of her throat.
‘Unbreakable Union of Soviet Republics…
’ The ‘pomps caught the tune, and joined it.
The Daughter's eyes narrowed.
She had stars on one cheek, and stripes on the other.
The President of their chapter wore a Miss Liberty spiked hat, and carried a killing torch.
‘Take the witchin' slag down, Jazz-babe,’ shrilled Andrew Jean, her lieutenant, always the encouraging soul.
The DAR switched to ‘My Country ‘tis of Thee.’
The ‘pomps segued to ‘Long-Haired Lover From Leningrad,’ popularized by Vania Vanianova and the Kulture Kossacks.
The Daughter clicked her heels, and made a pass, lunging forwards.
Jazzbeaux bent to one side, letting the needle pass over her shoulder, and slammed the Daughter's midriff with her knee.
The spiked pad ripped through the Daughter's blouse, and grated on the armoured contour-girdle underneath.
The Daughter grabbed Jazzbeaux's neck, and pulled her off her feet.
Jazzbeaux recognized the move.
Her Daddy had tried it on her back in the Denver NoGo.
She bunched her fingers into a sharp cone and stabbed above the Daughter's girdle-line, aiming for the throat, but  the Daughter was too fast, and chopped her wrist, deflecting the blow.
Just what her Dad used to do.
‘Jessa- myn , cain't you be sociable ?!’
The low-rent ratskag.
Of course, one time his reflexes had been off, and now he was recycled organs.
She danced round the bigger girl, getting a few scratches down the back of her suit, even drawing some blood.
The Daughter swung round and Jazzbeaux had to take a fall to avoid the needles.
The ‘pomps were chanting and shouting now, while the DAR had fallen silent.
That didn't mean anything.
She was down in the dirt, rolling away from the sharp-toed kicks.
The DAR had good intelligence contacts, obviously.
The girl had struck her three times on the right thigh, just where the once-broken bone was, and had taken care to stay out of the field of her optic burner.
Of course, she had also cut Jazzbeaux's forehead below the hairline, making her bleed into her regular eye.
Anyone would have done that.
But Jazzbeaux was getting her licks in.
The Daughter's left wrist was either broken or sprained, and she couldn't get a proper grip on her needle.
There were spots of her own blood on her suit, so some of Jazzbeaux's licks must have missed the armour plate.
The hagwitch was getting tired, breathing badly, sweating like a sow.
She used her feet, dancing away and flying back, anchoring herself to the broken lamp-post as she launched four rapid kicks to the Daughter's torso.
The girl was shaken.
She had dropped both her needles.
Jazzbeaux caught her behind the head with a steelheel, and dropped her to the ground.
She reared up, but Jazzbeaux was riding her now, knees pressed in tight.
She got a full nelson, and sank her claws into the back of her neck, pressing the Daughter's face to the hard-beaten earth of the street.
Finally, the Daughter stopped moving, and Jazzbeaux stood up.
Andrew Jean rushed out, and grabbed her wrist, holding her hand up in victory.
‘The winnnnerrrr,’ Andrew Jean shouted, sloppily kissing Jazzbeaux.
She pulled her eyepatch away, and looked at the DAR.
They stood impassive as the optic burner angled across them, glinting red but not yet activated.
‘Is it decided?’
Jazzbeaux asked, wiping the blood out of her eye.
Miss Liberty came forward and stood over her sister.
The girl on the ground moaned and tried to get up on her elbows.
The veiled Daughter kicked her in the side.
The poison blade sank in.
The fallen Daughter spasmed briefly, and slumped again, foam leaking from her mouth.
‘It is decided,’ said Miss Liberty.
The DAR picked up the dead girl, and faded away into the darkness.
The Psychopomps pressed around her, kissing, hugging, groping, shouting.
‘Jazz- beaux !
Jazz- beaux !
Jazz- beaux !’
The Psychopomps howled in the desert.
‘Come on, let's hit Spanish Fork,’ Jazzbeaux shouted above the din, ‘I'm thirsty, and I could use some real party action tonight!’
Nguyen Seth smiled.
He remembered that party himself.
That was when he had been joined with Jazzbeaux.
It was a shame.
She was so interesting.
Too few human beings were.
But there was nothing for it, she would have to be killed.
He was too near the Accomplishment of the Purpose to brook any distractions.
Jazzbeaux would resist, of course.
She was growing since Spanish Fork.
She wouldn't be as easy to vanquish as she had been outside the Feelgood Saloon.
He would have Roger Duroc handle it.
II
Duroc had spent the last three months in France, dealing with the business of the Violent Tendency for Freedom.
Operating out of a tiny flat on the Left Bank, the cell had succeeded in spreading some interesting biochemical havoc across half of the United European Community.
They were only one of many small groups Nguyen Seth took an interest in, but Duroc knew the Elder saw Paris as an important flashpoint in the coming deluge and so they required more personal attention than similar factions in Johannesburg, Puerto Belgrano, Teheran, Shanghai, Mexico City, Malmo, Berlin, Belfast, Genoa or Birmingham.
In the time Duroc had spent with the group, Biron, their leader, had revised the Violent Tendency manifesto countless times, while the scientific wing of the movement, Neumann and Alix, had developed some intriguing ramifications on recombinant DNA which, when injected into a shamburger, would cause the meatoid pulp to meld with the enzymes of any given stomach and expand its mass one hundredfold.
Their attack on the Centre LePen hadn't been an unqualified success, but Duroc was pleased with the loss of life.
And, of course, time spent in Paris meant that he could buy a new wardrobe, visit his mother and put flowers on his uncle's grave.
Also, he had picked up some rare Charles Trenet and Johnny Halliday musichips.
Now, after thirty-seven hours in the air, he was touching down in Salt Lake City.
It had proved expedient to fly from Orly to Casablanca, from Casablanca to Lisbon, from Lisbon to Montenegro, from Montenegro to Sacramento, and, by carrier-copter, from Sacramento to Salt Lake, with changes of passport at each stopover.
He was used to such things, and he had been able to pass the time by fulfilling an old ambition, to read Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire in the original English.
He was  less concerned with the fate of the customs official in Uruguay whose spine he had had to snap than he was with the course of the ancient empire on its long, slow descent into barbarism.
Elder Seth had known Gibbon, and apparently given the Englishman a few insights into the fragility of civilization.
Occasionally, a sentence or a phrase would leap out, and Duroc could hear it issuing from the Elder's lips.
‘History, which is, indeed, little more than the register of the crimes, follies and misfortunes of mankind,’ for instance; or, ‘corruption, the most infallible symptom of constitutional liberty,’and, most chillingly, ‘all that is human must be retrograde if it does not advance.’
Setting aside the final volume as the copter's blades slowed, Duroc mused that Gibbon was sending a message to the end of the 20th Century, a message he had never realized was implicit in his text.
These were the Last Days, and soon would come the cleansing fire.
When civilization was no better than barbarism, the whole experiment of humanity was at an end, and it was time to clean the slate.
And afterwards…ah, afterwards, there would be such wonders…
The pilot flipped up the door, and Duroc bent to avoid the still slowly circling blades as he stepped down onto the tarmac.
Elder Beach and Elder Wiggs were waiting for him.
They were of the inner circle of the Josephite Temple, and knew more than most of the True Purpose of Deseret.
‘Blessed be,’ said Beach.
Wiggs nodded.
Duroc grinned, and shook their hands in turn.
Every time he came back to Salt Lake, things had changed.
More buildings were reclaimed from dereliction, more dormitories built for the resettlers flooding in daily, more facilities provided.
As they walked to the terminal, Wiggs ran through the latest developments.
The television station was up and  broadcasting locally, and the church was buying airtime on one of the national nets.
The computer interface was secretly operational, sorting through the Mormons' old listings of everybody who had ever left a record of his or her life on earth.
The water pipeline was functioning properly, and three attempts to destroy it — two by the Montana gangcults, one by Jesuits — had been thwarted.
The security set-up Duroc had designed was working perfectly.
They were dedicating a new runway at the airport.
Duroc took the time to watch as a stout, middle-aged man walked out onto the freshly-hardened tarmac, stripped to the waist and beaming a beatific smile.
The heat haze rose from the ground as he flagellated himself with a cat o' nine chains.
He had to be assisted as he flayed himself, but he got most of the skin off as easily as a cardigan, and the minister only had to help him with the last few strips.
He collapsed in ecstasy, and leaked blood as seven angelic Josephite children joined their voices in ‘The Path of Joseph.’
Beach nodded his approval.
‘It was well done,’ he said.
‘Brother Duroc, things proceed apace.
As thou canst see, the flock are dedicated, and willing.’
The honoured sacrifice was loaded onto a baggage-carrying cart and pulled away for disposal.
His shape was outlined on the runway like a shadow.
The choir finished the hymn, and each child in turn drew his letter in the blood.
J. O. S. E. P. H.
Old Joseph Shatner, founder of the church, would have been amused.
‘Joseph's work will be done,’ said Beach.
‘Yes, indeed.’
The three caught the shuttle bus from the terminal, and were driven into the city.
Duroc gave a brief account of his doings in Paris, and of his important visit to Berlin.
Wiggs smiled, and Beach nodded.
His news was digested.
‘How are things at the tabernacle?’
Duroc asked.
‘All is well,’ said Beach.
‘Elder Seth is under a great strain, of course.
The Dark Ones are demanding, but he has been bearing up remarkably.
He is much involved with the rituals these days.
Miracles and wonderments.’
Duroc knew what that meant.
He had lived with miracles and wonderments all his life, ever since his uncle had told him something about the family's history and the eternal presence of Seth in their lives.
He had made his first apport as a teenager.
He didn't like the demon stuff, was happier with a phosphor grenade than a geas, but he had to know his business.
Gateways were opening up here in Salt Lake, and things would be coming through the like of which had not been seen for thousands of years.
They were dealing with events of Biblical proportion.
Inside the tabernacle grounds stood an X-shaped cross, and upon that hung a ragged figure that had once been a man.
‘Jesuits,’ Wiggs snorted.
‘As thou canst see, Rome sends them out by the dozen.
If Seth could be bothered to use his influence in Washington, we should have Sollie Ollie protest to Papa Georgi.
The priests are becoming a nuisance.’
They got off the shuttle, and stood at the base of the crucifix.
There was a small gaggle of onlookers, mostly bored.
The crucified spy shifted, gargling from his crushed throat.
‘Three days he has been up there,’ said Beach.
‘His name is Rafferty.
Irish, of course.
Three days, and he has not died.
Jesus Christ himself did not last so long, I think.’
‘Jesuits are notoriously stubborn,’ Duroc mused.
An attendant from the tabernacle came along with a bucket and a sponge on a stick.
He first used it to wipe some of the filth from the priest, then lifted the sponge to Rafferty's mouth, forcing it in.
‘We can't have him dying of thirst before his flesh has been mortified enough to appease the Dark Ones,’ said Wiggs.
‘Indeed not,’ agreed Beach.
Rafferty tried to spit, but swallowing was involuntary.
He groaned, knowing each drop of water meant an hour or more of life.
Duroc was intrigued by the man's predicament.
Forbidden suicide by his religion, he could not induce death by, for instance, agitating his pierced hands and feet until loss of blood carried him away.
He could only await starvation, suffocation, exposure, simple fatigue or a merciful bolt of lightning.
Wiggs and Beach chortled, making some joke about the Jesuit.
Duroc considered reprimanding them.
One had to respect an enemy like this.
He was dying as well as the man at the airport.
That could not be denied.
Once, trying to resist his Destiny, Duroc had studied for the priesthood, but the vocation of his family had outweighed the call of Rome.
Duroc looked up at Rafferty, and the priest turned his head, meeting his gaze with pained, still-clear eyes.
Duroc saluted the Jesuit, and the dying spy turned his eyes skyward.
‘Come,’ said Beach, ‘Elder Seth is waiting.’
III
There was sand in front of her, sand behind her, sand to the left and sand to the right.
That's the way it had been for longer than she could remember.
It was dusk, and the cold was falling.
The murdering sun had dipped below the horizon, and this was the time when she could forage for food.
Alert, she stalked the jackrabbit, her stiletto poised for a deft jab.
There was plenty of game in the desert if you looked.
Small animals could live off the whisps of yellow  grass that persisted in growing, and large animals could live off the small animals.
She was a large animal, a sandrat.
She had been a regular person once, but that had been before the voices started up in her head, before the dead woman got out of her rocking chair, before the preacherman reached into her mind and gave it a sharp twist…
The Sandrat had more names than she could remember, and different people to go with each one.
She recalled her father's name.
Bonney.
It was a good name.
People who bore it came to her in her rare sleeping periods, and she learned from them.
There was Anne, in thigh-length leather boots, her ruffled shirt open to show a deep cleavage, a blood-greased cutlass in her hand, a rolling deck under her, warpaint on her face.
Billy, a smoking Colt in his left hand, a toothy grin on his face, dwarfed by his oversized chaps, a battered hat on his long, ratty hair.
And Bruno, sections of his undershirt cut away to emphasize his carefully-nurtured musculature — the result of long hours pumping iron, not expensive bio-implants — a cigar between his teeth, the flexible aluminium whip in his hand.
The Bonneys were a dangerous breed.
She found the rabbit, chewing on a stubby cactus, and stabbed it in the neck.
It kicked twice, and died.
She wiped the stiletto off on its fur and slipped it into the sheath in her boot, then sucked the warm, salty blood from the puncture she had made.
The meat she would dry out in the sun tomorrow.
Chewed steadily, it should last her for days.
As for water, that would come in minute drops from the cactus.
Sandside was only a desert if you were too used to concrete under your boots.
She didn't use her gun much any more — ammunition only came her way very occasionally — but she was skilled at knife-hunting.
Last night, she had taken one of the wolfdogs that had been  following her for weeks.
The rest of the pack had turned away.
She considered tracking them, but didn't feel the need to make any particular point of it.
There was honour among predators.
Strange voices had been talking inside her head forever.
Not just the the Bonneys.
Andrew Jean was back, beehive still in place, and chattering away like the old days.
The days before the sand.
And Mrs Katz, a gentle soul who held no grudge for the loss of her skull.
And all the voices of Spanish Fork.
The drawl of Judge Thomas Longhorne Colpeper, pompously expounding points of law; the gentle Detroit brogue of Trooper Washington Burnside, whose gun she still carried; the primal shriek of Cheeks, who had been maddened by the D.I.V.O.R.C.E.
from her body; comments about the weather from Chollie Jenevein, the gasman; chemical tips from pharmacist Ferd Sunderland, who knew the Latin name of every cactus, root and fungus in the sand, plus the effects it would produce if chewed, smoked or swallowed; too many others to distinguish individually.
She had seen the world as it really was, once.
Now, she was stripped down to the bare essentials of her person, trying to deal with her knowledge.
She was forgetting everything else — the sub-language she spoke, things she knew, chunks of her past, people she had killed — but she had a clear memory of the way the world really looked.
That was important.
By night, she walked, hunted, and fed.
By day, she put up a shelter against the sun and listened to the cacophony inside her.
One day in every seven or eight, she slept.
It was a good, clean life.
When she first came to the sand, a long time ago, she had had a pocketful of pills and squeezers, but she had lost interest in them.
They rattled as she stalked, sometimes alarming her prey, and so she scattered them into the sand, to be ingested by the things that lived below the dunes.
Her hair she had hacked short  with her knife.
She kept clean by washing in sand, and buried her stools well away from her nest of the moment.
She was a good animal.
She thought she might be in Nevada, but it was hard to tell.
It was just sand and rocks.
It could have been Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, California, or Deseret.
It was all the same, the Big Empty.
In her head, Burnside remembered someone calling America the United States of Sand and Rocks.
Sometimes she found things stranded surreally, left by God-knows-who.
The original pioneers had been forced to lighten the loads on their wagons by strewing all manner of excess baggage across the western half of the continent.
Bookcases, iron safes, furniture from the Old World, a diving bell.
And the new resettlers were no different.
They left their goods behind as they strove to find their Canaan.
Days ago, the Sandrat had found a huge jukebox, with a selection of hits from Sove musickies.
Petya Tcherkassoff's ‘The Girl in Gorki Park,’ Tasha's ‘Love, Sex, Love,’Vania Vanianova's ‘Long-Haired Lover From Leningrad,’Andrei Tarkovsky's ‘Happiness.’
She had pressed buttons, but nothing happened.
She polished the chrome, and wiped sand away from the stained-glass frontage, but it was finally useless, just another piece of garbage from a past that could have happened to someone else for all the trace it had left on her.
She had examined her curved reflection in the chrome mirror.
Her cheekbones were prominent, and the ridges of her eyesockets.
She saw a skull beneath her skin, but the image meant nothing, although somehow she thought it should.
Her hair was growing out again, black and clean.
She had been badly hurt some time ago, but her body was dealing with that.
She had bruises, but no fleshrot.
The moon shone overhead like a new dime.
The sand turned silver-grey, and the Sandrat wandered across it.
She had been moving in large ellipses, crossing and recrossing  her path in a complicated pattern.
The moon called to her, she thought, pulling her this way and that.
She went where it directed her, tracing a design on the face of the Earth.
The problem was the other Voice in her head, the one that could silence all the rest, the one that brought its pictures with it, the one that poured memories into her mind until she thought she would burst.
There was a face to go with the voice.
A face that wore dark glasses and was shadowed by the wide brim of a flat black hat.
A face that was white, but was often split by a red smile.
Red needlepoints glinted behind the shades.
When she left the desert, and the Sandrat knew she would eventually come to the end of the sand, the face would be waiting for her.
She knew too much about him to let him live.
His name was Nguyen Seth, and he was older than the United States of America, older than the Black Plague, older than the written word, older than cultivated grain, older than the wheel, older than human language…
Nguyen Seth was as old as Death.
Something came to her, a graffito she had seen on the wall of a burned-out Josephite temple in Denver, back when she was with the girlie gangcult.
‘Within strange aeons, even Death may die…‘
She hadn't known what it meant then, but now she knew it had been inscribed there just for her.
The moon was pulling at her even before Spanish Fork, leading her to her destiny.
Her whole life had been directed towards this one task.
The strange aeons were over, and it was nearly time for the Sandrat to kill Death.
In the distance, predators howled, wolf to coyote, mutant to mongrel.
The Sandrat opened her throat, and howled too, joining in their song of the chase.
With the taste of blood still hot on her tongue, she sang  in a long, keening cry of the joys of the kill…
Dropping to all fours, she bounded across the sand.
IV
ZeeBeeCee, The Station That's Got It All, feels it imperative to interrupt Screwing For Dollars , with Voluptua Whoopee for this important newsflash.
Here, direct from the Capitol Building, is luscious Lola Stechkin…
‘Hi, America!
It's April the 3rd, 1996, and this is Lola.
Here's some news we hope you can handle.
‘Ms Redd Harvest of the Turner-Harvest-Ramirez Agency has just announced that the suspect apprehended in Nome, Alaska, last week in connection with the thirty-eight-state murder spree of the serial killer known as ‘The Tasmanian Devil’ has been definitely connected with four hundred and eighteen of the Devil's six hundred and forty-two confirmed kills to date.
However, Washington has been rocked by the further revelation that the alleged killer is Dr Ottokar Proctor, the respected economist and adviser to President North, the man often referred to by the electronic media as ‘the architect of the Big Bonus.’
‘The president's office is keeping a silence on this one, although we are assured that a statement is being prepared.
Sources close to President North indicate that he is deeply shaken by the arrest of Dr Proctor, who has been a frequent guest at the White House and is known to be a close friend of the Norths, and was godfather to little Joey North and to Ollie Jr.
It has been suggested that the President will instruct the Attorney General to appear for the defence in any trial of Dr Proctor, so important is the doctor's contribution to the administration considered to be.
‘He's the only one who really understands the economy,’ President North said in a speech three weeks ago, ‘and I  figure it's safe with him.’
Opponents of the Big Bonus have been issuing handbills and vidmail shots featuring T-H-R scene-of-the-crime photographs from the horrific quadruple cheerleader-slaying in Columbus, Ohio, of last December.
The handbills bear the slogan, ‘He did this to Mary Lou, Betty Jo, Crissie Leigh, Rachael-Rose and the United States of America.’
‘Sonny Pigg, lead singer of the Mothers of Violence, who last month released a successful solo album dedicated to ‘The Tasmanian Devil,’ has issued a press statement in which he claims that ‘the Devil is a real gone guy, and we should go with the groove for him when the bloodtide comes round.
Doc Proc should be made freakin' Prezz immediamente ‘fore we lose this great country o’ ours to godless commies, hogfreakin' ragheads, vegetarian homosexuals and sovrock faghaggs.’
By a bizarre coincidence, Dr Proctor's last television appearance was on the popular Musichip Jury show, during which he described Pigg's ‘Tasmanian Devil’ as ‘the worst piece of ordure ever.’
‘Dr Ottokar Proctor, 42, was born in Venice, California, and graduated first in his class from Yale at the age of fifteen.
He is a world-renowned expert in Side-Demand Financing, post-Jungian psychology, American-made animated cinema, the history of Italian opera and medieval European history.
His publications include Giving It All Away: Modern Money Matters, Sylvester P. Pussycat: A Psycho-Sexual Case Study, After Puccini and The European Currency Unit: Paper Money or Solid Brass ?
He has been a popular guest in numerous network talkshows, and introduced ZeeBeeCee's Emmy-award-winning How to Get Rich in 80 Days last year.
Through a series of influential papers and reports, Dr Proctor was in the forefront of modern economic theory.
‘America has a lot of assets,’ he claimed in his last speech to congress, ‘we should cash in on them.’
The North administration has  reduced personal income tax to virtually nothing, while raising finance through hefty duties on imported items — as you know, a cup of real Nicaraguan coffee now costs $150 — and such daring schemes as the leasing-out of America's armed forces to Canada during the Quebecois uprising.
‘Dr Proctor has been kept in seclusion temporarily in the time-locked underground strongroom of the Anchorage branch of the GenTech Nomura Agricultural Loan and Trust Co, and has not as yet been able to confer with his lawyers or issue a public statement.
Ms Redd Harvest has made available to this network a volume of evidence that is still being sifted by our experts.
However, there would appear to be no chance at this time that the T-H-R conclusion will be proved wrong.
As Ms Harvest has said to us over a satellite link, ‘Dr Proctor…he was the Devil all right.’
We'll bring you more on this upsetting story as it develops.
In the meantime, this is Lola, handing you back to the scheduled program.’
But before we get back to Voluptua and the gas jockey from Bixby, Mississippi, here's a message from GenTech…
V
Through the sand, there was a road.
One day, Bonney decided it was time to return to the world of cars and concrete and people.
She had learned all that the moon and the sand could teach her, and she must search elsewhere.
Eventually, she would kill Seth, but in the meantime she had to change herself.
She was a walking weapon already, but Seth had only made her into a rough flint axe.
She must hone herself into the likeness of her beloved stiletto.
She would only have one shot, and she had to be ready to make it count.
She sat by the road and waited, for three days.
The sun  and the moon passed overhead, the one beating, the other whispering.
She heard the motorsickle coming from twenty miles away, and had time to prepare herself.
She stood up on her two legs, and purged the animal from her soul.
She must be a human person again.
Her face was still crooked, but her body was fully healed now, lithe and strong.
She set her torso at a provocative angle on her hips, arched her knee a little, and stuck out her thumb.
The cykesound became a speck on the road, and grew bigger as it approached.
From the engine noise, she recognized an Electraglide.
Out here, that meant the Maniax were back, or perhaps one of the minor biker gangcults, Satan's Stormtroopers, the Apple Valley Hogfreakers.
She knew what to expect from the cykeman, but she was counting on his not knowing what to expect from her.
The sickle slowed as it approached, and she imagined the biker licking his lips inside his helmet, anticipating a tasty morsel.
He was a Maniak all right, flying colours, with a pair of sawn-off pumpguns crossed on his back, and a long braided pigtail whipping out like an epileptic snake from under his horned skidlid.
She was wrong about the biker.
He was smarter than most.
When he got within twenty yards of her, something spooked him and he gunned the hog, speeding past her.
A shower of pebbles fell short of her shin.
He punched the air and yelled something as he weaved from side to side across the road, zig-zagging into the distance.
She realized he was expecting to be dodging gunfire.
She had been relying on her blade, her teeth and her hands for too long.
She had forgotten the sidearm, which she had kept sand-free but not discharged in months.
The next one, she swore, she would shoot for his ve-hickle and leave alive for the predators.
She had to wait four more days.
And this time, there was more than one rider…
VI
Duroc had never seen Nguyen Seth like this.
Usually, his face was as unreadable as a mummy's bandage mask.
Now, he seemed to be in pain, and the lines on his cheeks were almost cracks.
He took off his dark glasses, and Duroc could see points of blood in the Elder's ancient eyes.
They were in the private library, where Seth kept his books.
It was a unique collection of the forbidden, the outr, and the mystical.
Duroc thought the library was something very near to Seth's autobiography.
Through the pages of hundreds of books, many famous and some unknown, the undying one could trace his passage down the years.
Not since the fire at Alexandria had there been such a concentration of the world's True Knowledge in one building.
Here were the secret histories, the stories behind the stories, the truths so terrible they could only be written as fiction, the chronicles of the insane, the lives of the damned.
Somewhere here were the contributions of Duroc's ancestors: a series of articles co-written by Pierre Henri Duroc and Donatien Alphonse Francois, Marquis de Sade, speculating on the limits of the human mind when confronted with endless pain; some transcripts from the meetings of Robespierre's Committee of Public Safety, in which the fates of some of the first families of France were decided on a whim; a suppressed account of certain discoveries in a pre-human city that came to light in 19th-century French Equatorial Africa before the cyclopean stones mysteriously sank into the soft jungle earth;Cauchemar et Fils, Maitres des Mondes Perdues , an unpublished novel by M. Jules Verne that was purchased from the author by a Great-Great-Great-Uncle and consigned to obscurity because it described a steam-driven engine to open up a gateway to a world of dreams that bore  a remarkable similarity to a device that the Duroc of the time had indeed developed.
Sitting at his huge desk, surrounded by his books, Seth wore a Chinese robe, embroidered with dragon gods, and a black skullcap.
His hands were those of a week-old corpse.
‘The girl,’ he said, his voice uncommonly thin.
‘Jessamyn Bonney.’
Duroc remembered.
Elder Wiggs had told him all about Spanish Fork.
‘Jazzbeaux?
She must be dead, surely.
You took her out into the road and…uh…battered her fatally.
That must be an end to it.’
‘No,’ Seth said, raising a long-nailed finger, ‘she is not dead.
She is in the desert, changing.’
He pressed his finger to his forehead.
‘And she is in here.
She wore the spectacles, and now some fragment of her is inside my mind, just as some fragment of me is lodged in hers.
Tick-tock, tick-tock.’
Duroc was perturbed.
Seth rarely talked about the things that set him apart from the rest of mankind.
‘And is that serious?’
‘Roger, it could jeopardize all we have worked for…everything.’
Duroc remembered the files he had accessed from Bruyce-Hoare in Denver.
He made a point of checking up on people who got in the way of the Path of Joseph.
‘Jessamyn Bonney.
She's just a girl, a juvenile delinquent.’
Seth's thin lips assumed a configuration that might have passed for a smile.
‘She was, Roger, she was.
Now, she is turning into something else.
Through me, she has been extended.
I believe that she may be the focal point through which the Ancient Adversary will try to thwart the designs of the Dark Ones.’
Duroc had barely heard of the Ancient Adversary, but he knew this entity was one of the few Great Unseen Powers that stood in opposition to the Dark Ones, the  extra-dimensional masters to whom Nguyen Seth had dedicated his long life.
The Ancient Adversary had other names: Harry Half-Moon, Puitsikkakaa, The Dawn Reptile.
‘I made her, Roger.
Each man makes the sword which will kill him, and I made Jessamyn Bonney.’
There was something disturbing in all this, beyond the threat to the Great Work.
Duroc got the impression that Nguyen Seth was almost proud of the girl he feared.
For centuries, no one had come along who could make him afraid.
Perhaps the old man found that…stimulating?
Exciting?
Underneath it all, Seth was still at least partially a man.
Duroc could never hope to understand his master fully.
That was one of the challenges of his life.
Seth was paging through a book.
It was not what Duroc would expect, not the Necronomicon or some volume by Undercliffe or Karswell.
It was Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens , with illustrations by Arthur Rackham.
Duroc remembered the story.
His uncle had taken him to see the Walt Disney film when he was a child.
Could Nguyen Seth be identifying with the boy who never grew up?
‘I knew J.M. Barrie, you know.
I was there in 1912, when he unveiled the statue of Peter Pan that still stands in a London park.’
Suddenly, it clicked.
‘Tick-tock, tick-tock!
It's part of the story, isn't it?’
‘Yes, Roger.
One of the prophecies.
I am Captain Hook and she, the crocodile.
She has a part of me inside her, and I know she will come for me some day.
I can hear her.
She too has a clock ticking inside her.’
‘Tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock.’
Seth's smile soured, and he shut the book.
‘Bring me the head of the crocodile, Roger.’
‘I'll see to it personally.’
‘No, you are too important to the Great Work to get sidetracked on this thing.
Just make sure you secure the services of some capable people.
The longer we wait, the  stronger she gets.’
Duroc left Seth in his library.
In among the books, there was a long-case clock.
As its pendulum swung, it ticked.
Second by second, the world crept towards its End.
VII
It was a convoy.
An arvee and ten or twelve outriders.
The Sandrat recognized the set-up.
She had herself travelled with groups like this.
It was a gangcult war party.
There was a ninety-five percent probability they would be hostile.
Gangcults were in the hostility business, after all.
She dredged up her past, recalling the girl who had been Jazzbeaux, who had been a War Chief.
The Sandrat assumed the chapter was finished.
The business at Spanish Fork had left them dead or gone.
That would nullify all the treaties that protected them.
There would be an open season on scattered singletons.
She had none of her ‘pomp colours left, but she knew she was still recognizable.
The eyepatch was a give-away.
They were bearing down fast.
There wasn't time to find a sandhole and hide.
She would have to take her chances.
She unflapped her holster, and shifted it round so it hung behind her waist, out of sight.
Maybe they would want a girl for recreational purposes.
She could put up with that if it got her to a city, or within reach of a ve-hickle she could scav.
It would be no worse than she had lived through before.
The outriders were almost on her.
She stuck out her thumb.
It was worse than she could have imagined.
The arvee was painted red, white and blue, and had a Statue of Liberty hood ornament.
An ice cream truck musichip played ‘Yankee Doodle.’
The point rider wore tight white-and-blue striped pants, a red tailcoat, a dyed white beard  and a stars-and-stripes stovepipe hat.
On his cyketank was a bright legend, AMERICA?
DON'T FREAK WITH IT!
It was the Daughters of the American Revolution, with a few Minutemen thrown in.
And they remembered only too well who she was.
The pointrider turned and skidded to a stop, signing to the rest of the convoy to follow suit.
‘Well, looky-looky-looky,’ said Uncle Sam, ‘if it ain't that commie ratskag Jazzbeaux Bonney, late of the Psychopomps, late of the human race.
You look like somethin' the goat wouldn't rut with…‘
The Sandrat stood stiffly, wondering whether she had a chance.
The arvee doors opened up, and the DAR piled out.
Miss Liberty was there.
She tucked her unlit torch under her arm, and smiled.
She had more teeth than a game-show hostess on ZeeBeeCee, and breasts like udders.
‘My deah,’ she cooed, croaking like Katharine Hepburn, ‘it's been sempleah ages…‘
The Sandrat didn't give them any resistance as they took her weapons away from her.
Miss Liberty raised her veil and kissed the Sandrat on the cheeks.
The President of the DAR chapter was old for the gangcult game, twenty-three or -four.
It must be the politics.
It was late afternoon.
The light would be going soon.
A couple of Minutemen were binding together two cloth-padded lengths of wood.
They got their cross put together and planted in the sand.
‘Such a shame about President North's Big Bonus, wasn't it?’ said Miss Liberty.
The Sandrat had no idea what she was talking about.
‘Well, I've always said that Sollie Ollie was just a tad too radical to hold high office in these heah United States.’
A teenage matron squirted gasoline on the cross with a flyspray.
Uncle Sam brought out a box of marshmallows  and some skewers.
Three blonde-haired, freckle-faced children in immaculate overalls, with Old Glory on one tit and the swastika on the other, sang ‘Row, Row, Row Your Boat.’
‘I think we're gonna have us a regular patriotic cook-out here, Madame Prezz,’ said Uncle Sam.
Miss Liberty put her arm around the Sandrat.
‘My deah,’ she said.
‘You wouldn't happen to have a light, would you?’
The Sandrat spat in her face.
Miss Liberty smiled, and wiped the spittle away with a lace-edged hankie she produced from her sleeve.
‘Oh well, nevah mind.’
She took out her torch and twisted it.
A jet of flame shot out and fell upon the cross, which caught light immediately.
‘It warms your heart, doesn't it?
This used to be a hell of a country, before we started letting red slits like you run loose in the streets frightening the children with their hammers and sickles.’
The children joined hands with Uncle Sam and danced around the burning cross.
The Sandrat was shoved roughly towards the cross.
She felt the heat wafting across the evening air towards her.
‘I guess what we've got here, Jazzbeaux,’ Miss Liberty said, ‘is a triumph for Truth, Justice and the American Way…‘
VIII
In the Outer Darkness, the Ancient Adversary waited while the Dark Ones swarmed towards the light.
It had long since ceased to define itself except in terms of its enemies.
The game that was being played out in the shadows around the planet Earth was old beyond even its understanding.
For an eternity, it had been alone against the Dark, unsupported even by the fragile hopes of humanity.
Now, it was reaching out, spiralling its essence down towards the wormhole in the fabric of the Dark, ready to feed itself into the earthly plane, to become one with the Vessel.
It had observed the Vessel from afar, peering through the lens in the moon, tracking the human dot through the sandscape.
Without knowing why, it assumed a ghostshape.
Dimensions meant nothing in the Darkness, but it stretched its tail across the shadows, and thrust its snout towards the light.
Sharp teeth grew in rows, rough ridges raised across its back.
Flat toadlike eyes blinked, watering.
There was nothing to see yet, but that would come.
Clawing at the substance of the dark, it wriggled towards the Gateway, squeezing its eternal purpose into the elongated bulb of its lizard brain.
Without knowing why, it talked to itself.
‘Tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock…‘
Down on the Earth, the Vessel was waiting, and so was the Prey…
IX
Miss Liberty marched her towards the cross.
‘I just want to ask you one question,’ the leaderene said.
‘Go on,’ spat the Sandrat.
‘Are you now, or have you evah been, a member of the Communist Party?’
Flames licked the darkening sky.
The DAR stood around, waiting for the entertainment.
The children had stopped singing, and were lighting cross-shaped sparklers.
They waved them around, chanting ‘burn the commie, burn the commie’ until Uncle Sam cuffed one of them around the ear.
The Sandrat felt the old skills coming back.
Human speech returned, and her brain raced.
‘Like the man said in the song, ‘you have nothing to lose but your chains.’’
She twisted out of Miss Liberty's grip, and sank a foot into the woman's midriff.
The leaderene went down with a satisfying thump, her spiked coronet falling off.
The Sandrat darted back in time to avoid the spear of flame from the torch, and flung a handful of sand at Miss Liberty.
The Daughter dropped the still-burning torch and a pool of fire spread around her.
Her robes went up.
That put her out of the fight for the moment.
There were only twenty-five or thirty more of them.
Not easy, but she could do it.
After all, she had been given a brain to think with while these patriots were being force-fed The Thoughts of Spiro Agnew, The World According to William F. Buckley and Killing Commies for God and Country .
‘We hold these truths to be self-evident…’ she recited.
Uncle Sam came at her, long arms outstretched.
She kicked him in the face with her boot-heel, and he got a grip on her knee.
‘…indivisible under God, with Liberty…‘
Other hands grabbed her, and she was dragged towards the crucifix.
Miss Liberty was shrieking as she burned.
The Daughters wouldn't have enough water with them to waste on her, but the children were shovelling sand at the woman, trying to smother the flames.
The Sandrat bit into the wrist of one of the Minutemen, chewing until she severed the artery.
He fell away, blood gushing into her face, trying to stanch the flow with his fingers.
‘…and Justice for all!’
She spat a bloody froth at Uncle Sam.
She got one foot in the sand, and dragged it.
The patriots were having trouble holding her fast.
She scratched down a  face with her desert-hardened claws, and broke some ribs with an elbow.
‘I'm just exercising my right to Freedom of Expression.’
It was just her and Uncle Sam now.
She slipped behind him, pulling his arms back until his shoulders popped, and pushed him into the dirt.
He had a gun in his waistband, a long-barrelled Buntline special.
She relieved him of it, and made five bullets count, dropping Minutemen and Daughters where they stood.
‘Who wants the last one?’ she asked.
The remaining gangtypes looked at each other.
A tall, well-built girl in a star-spangled bathing suit knelt by Miss Liberty, and picked up the coronet.
‘No volunteers, huh?’
The Betsy Ross Bimbo settled the coronet on her Annette Funicello hairdo.
‘So you've just elected yourself Boss of the Beach, huh?’
The new leaderene tottered forwards on five-inch spike heels — not the ideal sandwear — rolling her hips.
She had a pair of batons with wickedly barbed ends.
She twirled them like a majorette, and did a few ninja moves.
‘Back off, prom queen!’
Damn, she needed her last bullet.
She would have to fight.
She slid the gun into her holster, and spread her hands in a sign of peace.
‘Can't we settle this constitutionally, with a debate and a referendum?’
The Beach Bunny swung her batons in a deadly arc.
‘Just you and me, commie,’ the Daughter said.
‘Miss Liberty was my den mother.’
‘It's always somebody's den mother, or sister, or brother, or pet rattlesnake, huh?
Why can't people just be dead and forgotten?’
A baton shot out, piercing the air where the Sandrat's  shoulder had just been.
The Daughter dodged an elbow thrust, and brought the majorette rod down on the Sandrat's back.
It was a good hit, and she had to use all of her concentration not to go down.
The Daughter was a Champion Twirl Tootsie.
To get around that, she would have to get in close, and go for some serious cat-fighting.
The Sandrat hugged the girl, and pulled her close.
The Daughter's face crinkled up in disgust.
The Sandrat knew she had an edge.
She licked the girl's mouth, tasting strawberry lipstick, and flicked her lightly freckled cheerleader's nose with the pointed end of her tongue.
The Daughter looked as if she were ready to give out with the old Technicolor Yawn.
‘What's the matter, saph?
Worried that you'd like it too much?’
The Daughter wriggled, trying to get a knee up into the Sandrat's stomach.
Her rock-hard hair was shaking.
‘Maybe you don't kiss on a first fight, huh?’
The Daughter grabbed a handful of hair, and yanked hard.
It hurt, but the Sandrat could handle it.
‘Hey, no fair!
Tammy's cheating!’
The Sandrat lifted the majorette up, and tossed her away.
She landed badly, and crawled away.
‘Nobody loves a sore loser, Gidget.’
The other Daughters were in a semi-circle around the Sandrat.
She drew her gun.
‘Remember the last bullet, everyone?
Good, there'll be a pop quiz after recess.’
She took aim, and shot the arvee in the gastank.
Uncle Sam was loaded with ScumStoppers.
The bullet punched through armour plate, the tank exploded, and the arvee rose up into the air in a whirl of flame.
The DAR must keep all their ammo in the bus, the Sandrat thought.
There was quite a fireworks display.
A flying wheel knocked the crucifix over, and chunks of wreckage rained down on a fifty-foot circle.
Two or three of the cykes blew up in sympathy.
Miss Liberty wasn't the only one on fire now.
Patriots were running all over the place, periwigs ablaze, screaming for help, burrowing into the sand and rolling.
‘See, whoever has the biggest gun gets to kick the crap out of everybody else.
It's the American Way.’
The Sandrat was untouched in the eye of the hurricane.
She knew the fire wouldn't hurt her.
It was destiny.
She picked up a few more guns from corpses, and didn't feel naked any more.
One or two still felt like fighting, and she shot them.
She left the children alone.
They would make good sandrat material.
Along with the majorette, whom she saw being helped away from the fire by the kids.
‘You'll be able to work on your tan tomorrow, surf sweetie,’ she shouted after the Daughter, ‘but don't hold your breath waiting for the tide to come in.’
She found an unburned six-by-three stars and stripes in the sand.
She picked it up and draped it over Miss Liberty's still-smoking remains.
She shot a salute at the cooked corpse.
‘Like I said, the American Way, sister.’
She found a cyke parked out of range of the explosion, and straddled it.
It was strange having a sickle between her legs after all these months, but the reactions came back.
You never forget.
She took a helmet from the handlebars.
It was starred and striped, but it would do.
She kick-started the machine, and drove away from the fires.
Someone took a shot at her, but missed.
She searched through the pannier for a musichip to put into the helmet's sound system, but only found Selections from John Phillip Sousa, The Best of Kate Smith , and John Wayne's America .
She threw the chips into the sand for the predators, and upped the speed.
In the panniers, she did find a supply of Good Ole Home Cooking — Oreos, Hershey Bars, Babe Ruths, Wrigley's Gum, Pork Popsicles.
She was back in civilization, at last.
Her hair flew out behind her, and the clean air struck her face.
She would have to do something about her face now.
Once she got her bearings, she could head for Dead Rat and get Doc Threadneedle to sort out her skullplates.
Maybe she should invest in a few more elaborate bio-amendments.
Her credit should be good.
Her wilderness years were over.
She wasn't hallucinating any more, she knew.
The voices were under control.
She wouldn't be seeing any dead women getting out of their rocking chairs.
Things were clear again.
She smiled, and her heart beat away the seconds, tick-tock, tick-tock, tick-tock.
PART THREE: JESSAMYN
I
It had taken Duroc at least three quarters of an hour to get through the Holderness-Manolo security system.
They had X-Rayed, palm-printed and eyeball-photographed him, then handed him over to a pair of clean-cut young men, name-tagged Lawrence and Skipper, for a friendly cross-interrogation.
While waiting for his stats to be confirmed, he was offered the services of a barbie doll ‘recreational secretary.’
He politely turned the girl down and waited to be admitted to Bronson Manolo's office.
They had never met before, but as soon as Duroc was inside the Agency's inner sanctum, the Chief Op looked up from his blondwood desk, flashed a monied piranha grin, and acted as if his visitor were an old college buddy who had happened to have walked in off the street.
‘Rog-babe, hi, can I have Kandi fix you some coffee?’
The Op produced a Mickey Mouse snuffbox full of white  powder.
‘You want some toot-sweet?’
Duroc was dressed in the black conservative suit and pilgrim hat of a Josephite Elder.
‘No thank you, Mr Manolo.
I have abjured stimulants.’
Manolo showed the even, white teeth again.
‘Take me out and shoot me down like a dog, old buddy, I was forgetting.
Grab some chairleather.
I hope you don't mind us weaker souls indulging the vices?’
‘No, of course not.’
‘Cosmic.’
He pressed a button on his desk-console, absent-mindedly dipping his pinkie in the cocaine and running it across his gums.
‘Kandi-cutie, decant me some Nicaraguan and pump it through.
Oh, I'll be brainstorming with Rog for a couple of tick-tocks, so hold all calls up to and including state government.
And have a nice day.’
In his business, Manolo was the coolest of the snazz.
He hadn't said ‘real coffee,’ but he made damn sure you got the message.
This office was expensive in a subtly ostentatious way, minimalist but designed to impress the discerning.
The undiscerning probably never got further than Lawrence and Skipper.
One wall was a picture window affording a pastoral view of Lower Los Angeles right down to the beach.
On the wall behind Manolo was a David Hockney original.
Mounted above the painting was a six-foot narwhal horn.
On the desk was an incomprehensible executive toy that buzzed and flashed occasionally, displaying chrome tubes, jewels and crystal lumps.
In the corner there was a discreet datalink terminal got up to look like a '30s radiogram.
Manolo leaned back in his chair, and patted his thousand-dollar blow-waved haircut.
His hairstyle consultant must throw in a Tom Selleck moustache twirl for free.
He was wearing a silvery Italian suit over a T-shirt which read HONK IF YOU LIKE HUNKS.
Duroc remembered why he tried, wherever possible, to avoid Californians.
A bust-enhanced beauty queen in a goldthread string bikini wandered in with Manolo's Nicaraguan, which steamed in an authentic 1919 World Series Commemorative Mug, and wandered out again.
Manolo's eyes followed her jiggle from the door to the desk and back.
Kandi took the time to flash a smile at Duroc; he supposed the company must have a charge account with the same high-flying Beverly Hills dentist.
Or maybe it was all the fluoride in the water.
‘Great ass, huh?’ said Manolo, licking his moustache.
‘Oh, I'm sorry, reverend, I was forgetting.’
‘Elder.
My title is Elder.’
‘Cheezus, what a maroon I am.
Elder.
I'll get it.
Say, are you French?’
‘Originally, yes.
I have been with the church for ten years now.’
‘Heyy, cosmic, man, cosmic.
I'm very spiritual myself.
I attend the Pyramid down at the Surfside Mall.
Gari — that's my Guru — says it's important to get in touch with your inner being.
I always take the time to meditate between my squishball practice and the tanning parlour.’
Sunshine three hundred and fifty days a year, and Californians fry themselves under microwaves.
There was a sign up at the airport — John Wayne Airport, naturally — that read CALIFORNIA: WE'VE HAD THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY HERE FOR TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.
Duroc had had to smile at that.
As a succession of paycops, stewardesses, diplomatics, immigration officials, armourcabbies, narcotics relay expeditors, hotel functionaries, arms dealers and hookers told him to ‘have a snazz day’ and shoved his credit card through their machines, he wondered whether they would like the real 21st century when Nguyen Seth rained it down on them.
‘Your agency comes highly recommended,’ he said.
‘Yeah.
Me and Bob Holderness are the most on the  coast.
At least, Bob was until the Surf Nazis got him.
You don't see that gangcult much these days, because we genocided them.
It got personal.
Nasty work, but the karma was right for it.
City cops looked the other way, and the Cal State Angels loaned us hardware.
Bob was a great buddy, and a great guy…
He had a lot of friends, no matter what you read in the trades.’
There was a framed picture on the desk.
Duroc had assumed it was a father and son shot.
There was the younger Manolo, plus an older man with the same teeth, hair and moustache.
They were standing either side of a surfboard, and there were some Kandi clones in the picture.
‘Back in the '70s, he worked with all the topster Ops — Matt Houston, Cannon, Banacek, Mannix, Lance White.
Those were the great days of the business in La-La Land, before we closed the state borders and tossed the immigrant filthos back into the desert.’
‘An impressive record, indeed.’
‘And could he surf!
We're talking radical in a tubular way!’
Manolo took a couple of hits of coffee, and picked up a wrist-exerciser that probably doubled as some kind of sex aid.
Squeezing away so that his biceps shifted in his sleeve, he asked ‘so, Rog, what's going down the chute?’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘What's the beef?
The case?’
‘Ah yes, the case.’
He put his briefcase on the desk.
‘Not that kind of case, pilgrim.’
‘I know what you mean.
I have some documentation for you.’
‘Zero-degree cool.’
Duroc took out the file on Jessamyn Bonney, and slipped off the electronic seal.
‘We want this woman.’
Manolo showed his dazzling choppers again, and took the file.
He flipped it to the photographs, and werewolf-whistled.
‘Okay if you like the type.
I'm a 3-B man myself, blonde bimbos with boobs.
Kid must want to be a Disney cartoon villainess when she grows up.
Look at that black eye make-up and the suspenders.
Is that hair for real?’
‘She's killed perhaps forty or fifty people.’
‘Ouch.
Antisocial lady.’
‘Among them, several Elders of the Josephite Church.
She attacked a wagon train two years ago.
We have been compiling this dossier ever since.’
‘The church don't forget, huh?’
A beady glint appeared in Manolo's clear blue eyes as he got his first scent of blood money and began to turn into a shark.
‘Something like that.
We are prepared to meet your regular fee.
On top of that, you will note that there are seventeen outstanding warrants filed by various state and federal authorities against her.
Should you be successful, you will be able to pick up a bounty on each of them.’
‘How much is this kid worth?’
He licked his moustache again.
Duroc wondered whether it was an implant.
‘It's in the file.’
Manolo flipped the pages until he came to the accounts.
He ran his eyes down the column of figures as if he were taking a good look at Voluptua Whoopee in a no-piece swimsuit and whistled ‘Dixie.’
‘A prize package.
You have us on the case,padrone .
And we never give up.
We'll have this…uh…
Jessamyn Bonney…behind electro-bars at Tehachapi just as soon as the schedule allows.’
He continued to page through the file absent-mindedly, fiddling as he did so with the snuffbox, making sure that the gold inlay buttons on Mickey's rompers caught the light.
‘No, you misunderstand.’
‘Run that round the block again, Rog, and see if you can sneak it by under the limbo-line this time.’
‘We in the church are not interested in the apprehension of Ms Bonney.
In Deseret, we adhere to a Biblical code rather than to the laws and statutes of the United States.’
‘Heyy, the Bible, man.
Heavy book.
I keep it right here in my desk with the I Ching, Illuminatus and my Castenadas.’
‘Then you are familiar with the saying ‘an eye for an eye.’’
‘Absolutamente , Rog.’
‘Then, you will work it out.
Jessamyn Bonney has killed members of the Church.
In turn, we would like you…‘
A real smile crept onto Manolo's face.
It didn't show off his teeth, but it told Duroc a lot more about the Op's character.
‘…to shut down the ratskag's terminal with massive overinvestment?’
Duroc nodded.
He knew Manolo would be taping this meeting, and he didn't want to say it out loud in words.
‘So, it's liquidation not incarceration that's your bag.
Fine.
We can handle that consignment.
Mucho extra dinero , of course, but if that's what you want…‘
‘The Tabernacle of Joseph is not poor.’
‘I can tell where you're coming from, Rog.’
‘You accept the commission.’
Manolo stuck out a hairy hand, and Duroc shook it.
Gold bracelets rattled.
‘She's somewhere in Arizona, we believe.
You might try to look up a Dr Simon Threadneedle in a township called Dead Rat.’
‘Dead Rat?
Downer of a handle.
Those vibes are negatory, Rog.’
‘I'm sure you can get on top of it.’
‘That's a charlie A-One breeze-from-the-freeze  affirmative-to-the-max topside positive situation in the black column roger, Roger,’ Manolo chirruped.
‘You mean yes?’
Manolo looked hurt.
‘Yes.’
II
This is ZeeBeeCee, the Station That's Got It All, and here with The Bathroom Break Bulletin is luscious Lola Stechkin …
‘Hi, America.
It's November the 9th, 1996, only 47 shopping days to Christmas, and this is Lola, inviting you to share a shower.
Here it is, folks, all the news you can handle…
‘Sunnydales, Iowa.
Dr Ottokar Proctor, ‘The Tasmanian Devil,’ today took up residence in the high-security wing of this semi-private mental hospital.
Experts remain divided on the question of Dr Proctor's state of mind during the period when he is confirmed to have been responsible for seven hundred and fifty-three homicides, but the Supreme Court has ruled him insane and irresponsible.
It has been suggested that President North intervened in the judicial progress with a plea for clemency on the grounds that Dr Proctor is too essential to the shaky economy of the United States to be executed.
Dr Proctor, already a wealthy man, has received an eight figure sum for the movie rights to his forthcoming autobiography What's Cookin', Doc ?, and director Kim Newman has already announced his intention to cast either Jeremy Irons or Steve Martin in the leading role.
‘The Sea of Okhotsk.
The sinking last week of the GenTech exploratory submersible Yukio Mishima remains a source of controversy.
The craft, designed to scan the seabed for mineral deposits, was raised today by a joint Soviet-GenTech team and brought ashore at Kitashiretoko  Misaki, Sakhalin.
Premier Yeltsin himself has announced that he intends to cooperate fully with the GenTech experts in an effort ‘to get to the bottom of this tragedy.’
Kentaru ‘Barracuda’ Ishii, GenTech's deepsea disaster specialist, has not as yet ruled out the possibility that the Mishima went down due to‘hostile action.’
The Blood Banner Society, the shadowy Japanese ultra-nationalist group, have issued a declaration to the effect that the Mishima , coincidentally named after one of the heroes of the movement, was lost through an unprovoked sneak attack, and that it would be avenged.
The 102nd Russian submarine fleet at Petropavlovsk has been alert ever since the international courts overruled the Soviet appeals and gave GenTech the right to conduct its surveys in the area.
‘Cloudbase, Earth Orbit.
Daniel Digby, provost of the G-Mek Orbital, has issued a formal denial to allegations by Ayatollah Bakhtiar that fugitive graphic novelist Neil Gaiman has been in hiding in the facility, and has requested that the Pan-Islamic congress stand down the Inter-Satellite Ballistic Missiles currently targeted on them.
‘You can come up and look around,’ Digby has said in a personal message to the Ayatollah, ‘he's not here.
I don't even like comic books.’
‘On a lighter note, the Battle of the Bands in Fairport, Rhode Island, during which heavy metal groups Deathtongue and the Mothers of Violence played simultaneous sets in the same auditorium for thirty-eight straight hours has been resolved in single combat between the rival lead singers.
Fuh-Q Charlie of Deathtongue and Sonny Pigg of the Mothers are expected to be out of the Reconstruction Wing of Cedars of Lebanon Hospital in time for their big Christmas ‘Freak the World’ concert at the Hollywood Bowl next month.
‘This has been Lola Stechkin at ZeeBeeCee, soaping my back and signing off.
If it's all right with you, it's all right with us…‘
Next, we go live to the Nikita Kruschev Ballrooms in Moscow for the semi-finals of The 1996 Warrior Chess Tourney , with a special guest appearance by the Samovar Seven.
But first, here's a message from GenTech…
III
Jessamyn lay flat on the contoured table as the Doc sliced away the facial bandages, still relaxed from the morph-plus shots she had been taking every day.
Doc Threadneedle was humming ‘The Girl in Gorki Park’ as he wielded his scalpel.
He was an artist with the knife, she had heard, and had apprenticed with the great Zarathustra at GenTech BioDiv before his ‘suspension.’
His field was bio-improvements engineering, and he had been placed in charge of some hush-hush military project that had racked him up a rep as the Frankenstein of his generation.
She had never heard the whole story, but apparently some of his ideas were considered a little too daring for the traditionalists in Tokyo, and he found the rug pulled from under him.
A few years ago, he had replaced her squished left eye with her first optic implant.
At that time, he had offered to give her more extensive treatments — apparently, he found her a promising  subject but she hadn't had the cold kish to lay out.
Now, after some shrewd scavving and a touch of inventive accountancy, she had more than the price of the pudding.
She had been undergoing treatment for over six months now.
She wondered how much of what she had been born with was left.
She probably wasn't even legally the same person any more.
A few weeks ago, she had spent her eighteenth birthday in a drug-induced coma, with her back opened up as durium shieldlinks were laid around her spine.
She had even let Doc Threadneedle into her greymass to plug a few loops, although she didn't want too  much done in there.
She didn't hear voices much anymore, but Seth was still whispering dangerously, and sometimes she would dream his memories, vividly recalling some trivial incident from the remote past.
In a mud hut on an endless plain, she sorted through the bones of unrecognizable animals.
Shackled to an oar, she strained in a galley as an oiled mountain of flesh beat a huge drum.
In the depths of a monastery, she toiled by candlelight, laboriously copying out a crumbling manuscript, translating from one unrecognizable language to another.
In a jungle whose oppressive steam-heat made sweat run inside her steel breastplate, she cut the throats of three befeathered priests.
On a battlefield, she robbed a dead general of a leatherbound book grasped so tightly in his frozen fingers that two of them came away with it.
In a shelter under London, while bombs exploded overhead, she coupled in a frenzy with a dead-faced young woman.
But that wasn't her.
That was him.
Nguyen Seth, the Summoner.
Elder Seth, the Unspeakable.
The more she picked up about his past, the more she realized how inadequate her vision of the world had been.
She had been born to a life of violence, desperation and death, but she had never believed corpses could walk, manshaped creatures could endure for thousands of years, or that another person's mind could leak into your own.
‘Don't open your eye yet,’ said the Doc.
‘I have the lights on.’
The bandages were lifted from her face.
Free at last, she wriggled her nose.
The Doc whistled through his teeth.
‘Hmmnn, even if I do say so myself, that is quite some job.
You could pass for a musickie model.’
Jessamyn raised her hand, and felt her face.
The dents in her forehead were gone, and her nose was reset.
There was some flesh over her cheekbones again.
Her chin was straight.
And the improved optic was a solid lump under  her left eyelid.
‘It's not just a burner,’ Doc Threadneedle had told her as he unwrapped it from its tissue like a sugared almond.
‘GenTech have upgraded the product to include a kind of bat-sonar, and a heat sensor.
You won't be able to see through it, but it will increase your field of perception.
One model contains a micro-camera for surveillance, and the DeLuxe Tripball can filter light patterns and transmit them to the brain as psychoactive impulses.
At last, a high with no side-effects.
You can trip on Christmas Tree Lights.’
She had picked out the combat model.
Psychedelics didn't interest her these days.
She had long since grown out of her disco dingbat phase.
‘'Kay, I've dimmed the lights.
Ready.’
She opened her eye, and blinked in the gloom.
She saw the Doc hovering by the table, and sat up.
Her spinesheath buzzed slightly as the bioservos went along with her nerve impulses.
Eventually, she wouldn't be aware of the hum, Doc told her.
She would accept it just as she accepted her heartbeat and her pulses.
‘Try the optic.’
She closed her real eye, and opened the other.
Her image of the room was clearer, now, like a line drawing.
Doc Threadneedle was a man-sized conglomeration of hotspots.
The blobs went from deep orange to bright yellow.
The radiator elements shone like the bars of an electric fire.
She could even see the faint heat pattern of the cat in the next room.
‘Interesting, huh?’
‘Snazz, Doc.’
Doc Threadneedle laughed.
‘What is it?’
‘Snazz.
You haven't talked like that since you got here.’
‘I suppose not.
You have to grow up sometime.’
‘Not if you can afford the Zarathustra Treatment.’
She eased her legs off the table.
Her blastic-augmented kneejoints were smooth.
She touched the floor, and pushed herself away from the table.
She was a little unsteady.
A touch of dizziness.
The Doc supported her with an arm around her waist.
‘Wait a moment.
The optic cyberfeed will kick in.
Your brain's been told what to expect.
It's just warming up.’
He walked her to the centre of the room, and let her go.
She tottered, and put her arms out.
The Doc pushed the wheeled table back against the wall, giving her some space.
It was like a click inside her.
The dizziness went away.
‘Try it,’ the Doc encouraged her.
‘The flamingo position.’
She tucked one foot into her crotch, sticking out her knee, and lifted her heel from the floor.
Finally, she was balanced in perfect comfort on the ball of her big toe.
‘How does it feel?’
‘Wonderful.
There's no strain.’
‘You should be able to stand like that for a week before the nerve implants get tired.
Here, catch…‘
He tossed a book at her.
She reached out and caught it without so much as wobbling.
‘You could take up ballet.’
She balanced the book on her head, and laughed, turning in a slow pirouette on her toe.
Doc Threadneedle slowly turned up the lights.
The line drawing faded, and she saw the colours as well as the warmths.
She looked down at herself.
Below her hospital gown, her legs were still as she remembered — although her reinforced thigh and shin bones made them two and a half inches longer.
She still had the faint white scar on her ankle, although the cross-hatch of scratches on her right knee was gone.
She dropped her other foot to the floor, and turned around.
She felt good.
The Doc's patented micro-organisms  were beavering away inside, keeping her at the peak of perfection.
She was hungry, not with a need for food but with a desire for tastes.
‘Makes you feel kinda sexy, doesn't it?’
She smiled.
‘Well…yes.’
‘Everything will be better, Jessamyn.
Food, sex, exercise.
You should develop an ear for good music.
Forget sovrock and get into Mozart and Bach.
You've got the greymass for it now.’
‘Doc, have you…?’
He grinned.
She realized she didn't know, couldn't imagine, how old he really was.
‘Yes, of course.
You don't think I'd do anything to a patient I wouldn't have done to myself?’
He put his hands out and fell to the floor, as if to do fingertip push-ups.
Tipping himself forwards, he touched his forehead to the tile and kicked into the air.
He straightened out, feet extended towards the ceiling, and rose into a handstand.
Then, balanced on the fingers of his left hand, he put his right into the pocket of his labcoat and brought out a packet of sweets.
He poured one into his mouth and offered the pack to her.
‘Showoff,’ she said.
He pushed the floor, and flipped over in the air, landing on his feet.
Straightening up, he was a middle-aged, rangy black guy again.
‘Yes, of course.
I don't get much chance to, you know, out here in the sand.’
‘Couldn't you…?’
‘Go back?’
Wrinkles appeared on his forehead.
The fun sapped out of him.
‘No.
GenTech doesn't forget.
Zarathustra won't forget.
One day, he'll try to take me out, you know.
That's the real reason for all these ‘improvements.’
One slip, and you're excommunicated.
He's not like he seems on the talkshows.
They called me a Frankenstein, but his ambitions go further.
He's a Faust, a  Prometheus…and, in the end, I'm afraid he's a Pandora.’
‘You've lost me.
Frankenstein I know from the videoshockers, but who are the others?’
‘It doesn't matter, Jessamyn.
I'm not like him.
I've changed your body, and I tried to rewire a few of your neurons, but I've left you alone where it counts.’
‘And Zarathustra?’
‘He doesn't want to improve the quality of an individual life.
He wants to recreate the human race in the image of his ideal.
Zarathustra isn't his real name, you know.
It's something German, really.’
‘He's a…what was that old gangcult called…
Nazti?’
‘Nazi.
Maybe.
There are still a few left.
The Mayor of Berlin, for instance, Rudolf Hess.
Zarathustra has certainly dosed himself on some of his own miracle rejuvenators.’
They left the surgery, and Doc Threadneedle locked up that part of the house.
He had a large place, with as many modern conveniences as a sandhole like Dead Rat could offer, but it wasn't what someone with his skills could rate in a PZ.
He didn't seem to miss the gadgets and gizmos, though.
His house was full of things she had only ever seen in old films with Rock Hudson and Doris Day: a vacuum cleaner, which did the work of a suckerdrone; a gramophone, which played unwieldy round black musidiscs with added scratch and hiss as part of the music; an electric kettle that took ages, maybe two minutes, to heat up enough water for a cup of recaff, and didn't do anything about the impurities and pollutants.
Buzzsaw, the cat, curled around Jessamyn's legs.
‘I've got you some clothes,’ said the Doc.
‘Your desert gear was more holes than hide.
Magda ze Schluderpacheru had something surplus down at the Silver Shuriken.’
He indicated a neat pile of drab-coloured garments.
‘The Silver Shuriken?’
‘It's the local saloon.
A yakuza operation, naturally.
They're the only people who can keep anything open out in the sand, and not be closed down by the gangcults.
Magda is a honey.
You should meet her.’
‘I'd like to.
It's been so long since…‘
The Doc grinned.
‘…since you saw anything but my ugly mug, I understand.
It's time you got out of the house.
You must be stir crazy.’
She wandered over to the chicken-wired window, and looked out.
It was a clear night.
The constellations twinkled.
‘You should be with young people your own age, get yourself back into the swing of society.’
‘Uhh?’
She had been distracted, looking out the chicken-wired windows at the half-disc of the moon.
‘I'm sorry.
You're right.
I need to…to do something.’
She felt funny, as if things were happening inside her.
‘I meant to tell you about that.
Your body is like an engine.
If you don't turn it over regularly, it will complain.
With all the alterations you've had, you'll need to take vigorous exercise for several hours a day.
I'd prescribe running, dancing, fighting, healthy eating and athletic sex.’
‘You could get to be very popular back in the city-states, Doc.’
Doc Threadneedle smiled sadly.
‘Yes, but not with the right people.’
Jessamyn picked up Buzzsaw, and felt the tingle of static from the cat's fur.
It was like a mini-rush in itself.
She realized she was down from the morph-plus, and that her senses were sharper than they had ever been before.
‘Suck your finger and stick it in a light-socket sometime,’ the Doc said.
‘You'll be surprised.’
She stroked the cat.
It squealed and struggled from her grip.
It disappeared upstairs.
‘You don't know your own strength yet.
You'll have to be careful.
Here, try one of these.’
He tossed her a thick yellow-covered book.
She held it  between her forefingers and thumbs and neatly tore it in half.
‘I lose more telephone directories that way.’
IV
Dead Rat, Arizona.
What a place for an Englishman to end up, don't ch'know?
Bloody buggering ha-ha-ha, eh what?
Of course, Sarn't Major James Graham Biggleswade couldn't exactly go back to Blighty and expect them to hang out the welcome mat in Fulham, not after that tricky bit of bloody buggering business down in the Falklands — oh, excuuuuse meeee, the Mal -bloody-buggering- vinas — back in ‘81.
Bit of a blooming sodding disgrace really, in actual fact, eh?
These fakenham days, nobody hupped, frupped and trupped when the older Mastsarge yelled.
Fact was, nobody knew who James Graham Buggered-to-bejaizus Biggleswade was.
The sandrats just called him Jitters.
His hands sometimes stopped shaking long enough for him to light a fag or give his teeth the once-over with Pepsodent, but that was every other Scumday in a month with a zed in it.
He sat in the corner of the Silver Shuriken, as far away from the bleeding video jukebox and bleeping zapper games as possible, sipping the foul antifreeze that passed for beer in the U.S. of Bloody A. He would have cut off his left doughnut and sold it to Johnny Galtieri for a pint of Six X Wadsworth, two bacon-and-cheddar sarnies and a packet of crisps with a blue twist of salt in them.
Mrs ze Schluderpacheru had taken pity on him, and gave him some sweeping-up chores in return for room and board and the occasional session with Fat Juanita.
The old lady was like that, big-bloody-hearted.
Jitters knew she was doing two people a favour, because Fat Juanita got depressed when the johnny-passing-throughs left her  downstairs in the parlour with her knitting and gave all the custom to Gretchen, Connie Calzone, Margaret Running Deer and the Games Mistress.
Fat Juanita was too bloody old, fat and stinky for the Game really.
Not exactly prime camp-follower material.
Bloody buggering lovely personality, though.
If Jitters didn't have a wife and kids back in the old country — which, come to think of it, he probably didn't these days — he might just have dragged Fat Old Stinky Juanita up before the padre and tied the old knot.
A soldier should be married, gave him a sense of what he was fighting for.
Difficult to get the old fire up for the Greater Glory of flag, Empire and Prime Minister Ian Paisley, but hearth, home and humping still meant something in this godrotten hellhole khazipit of a world.
Just now, the Silver Shuriken was pretty quiet.
Mrs ze Schluderpacheru was doing the accounts on her musical wrist-calculator, working how out much of her take would have to go to the yaks this quarter.
Gretchen, the new girl, was putting up the Christmas decorations, replacing the black crepe around the crush velvet portrait of Wally the Whale with sparkly tinsel.
The rest of the professional ladies were slumped around the telly in see-through armchairs, watching some kids’ show called Cyclopaths , about a bunch of motorsickle chappies who went around slaughtering people they didn't think much of.
That was one thing about America, the telly was crap.
Jitters missed the good old BBC, with the Light Programme and the Home Service.
It might not be in strain-on-your-meat-pies Trideocolor or go on all night like America's bloody buggering 119 channels, but at least some nice bint like his old French teacher came on at ten-thirty and said good night as you drank your bloody buggering Ovaltine and waited for the shipping forecast.
He missed the classic serials, with Great British actors in adaptations of the works of Great British writers like G. A. Henty, Dornford Yates, Sapper, Dennis Wheatley and John  Buchan.
They were on the Home Service, along with all the programmes about how to make do in the kitchen what with the rationing, and the fireside chats from the Prime Minister.
That had been old Ian Paisley last time he was in the old country, but he had popped his clogs of apoplexy while explaining the Fall of Port Stanley to Robin Day on Nationwide and it was that upstart Jeffrey Archer now.
And on the Light Programme there was The Black and White Minstrel Show , where Benny Elton and Ricky Mayall had got their big break;The Archers , with Richard Burton and Joan Collins as Dan and Doris, saving the Ambridge enclave from gypsies and travellers;Doctor Who , with Barry Humphries visiting Great Moments of British History;The Muffin the Mule Hour …
Most of all, he missed Jack Warner as the old-fashioned robocopper in Dixon of Dock Green , zapping the Frenchies with his bio-implant bazookas.
Should have had PC George Dixon at Port Stanley back in ‘81, Jitters thought.
Johnny Argie wouldn't have seen off the task force so bloody buggering easy if the old ‘evenin' all’ had been on the South Atlantic beat.
Gretchen was up a ladder now, sticking Bethlehem stars over the bulletholes on the ceiling.
She was wearing a meshfoil microskirt, a Miss Piggy wig and strawberry pasties, her usual uniform.
The swing-doors swung open, and Curtius Kenne ambled in, chewing tobacco.
He looked up at Gretchen, and spanged the spittoon with a jet of brown filth.
‘Nice view,’ he drawled.
‘Haw haw haw!’
Curtius was a cowboy builder.
His van was painted up with pictures of Gene Autry and Hopalong Cassidy, and he called his firm the Boot Hill and Laredo Double Glazing Company.
He guaranteed his windows against everything up to a BlastMaster minimissile, but you were usually too dead to complain if he supplied you with defective merch.
He loped across the bar, swinging his hips to show off his  twin Colts, and got his polished pseudoleather boot up on the bar.
‘Any chance of a belt of Shochaiku Double-Blend, Magda?’ he asked Mrs ze Schluderpacheru.
The owner looked up from her calculations and raised an eyebrow.
Her feathered hat bobbed.
‘Now, Curtius, honey, you know I keep that stuff only for my special customers.’
Magda ze Schluderpacheru was Romanian, originally.
Like Jitters, she had knocked around the world a bit and wound up in Dead Rat.
Bloody buggering shame if you asked him.
Nice people ending up clogging this plughole when the PZs were full of undeserving wankers, wallies, wasters and wooftahs.
‘Ain't I one of your special customers?’
‘Hell, not since you gave Hot Pants Hannah that dose of the Cincinatti Pox you ain't.’
‘That weren't me.’
‘You goddam prove it, and then maybe I'll dig out that bottle.’
‘Any time, Magda, any time.’
Curtius started unbuckling his gunbelt.
‘Hold on there, cowpoke.
I don't mean like that.
I mean with a medical certificate.’
‘Ah shee-it, I ain't going to no mad doctor and gettin' mah pecker all X-rayed.
Probably shrivel up like a cactus in a microwave.
Haw haw haw.’
Curtius Kenne thought he was funny.
‘Then, cowpoke, you better get used to having nothing but cows to poke for a while.’
‘Whisky, straight.’
Mrs ze Schluderpacheru poured Curtius a shot.
Even her sumpstuff was okay by Big Empty standards.
If you poured it on the table, it probably wouldn't even eat half-way through.
‘Thank you kindly ma'am.
That's a real nice dead bird  you got on your hat.
You kiss it to death yerself?
Haw haw haw.’
Curtius Kenn was a bloody nuisance, and sooner or later someone would put a ScumStopper under his heart and get himself free drinks on the house for a month.
The cowboy turned around, and surveyed the bar.
He looked at Connie and licked his nose.
She ignored him, and turned up the sound on the telly.
Disappointed, Curtius looked for amusement elsewhere.
‘Has anybody heard the one about the Maniak Chieftain and the six-weeks-dead camel corpse?’
‘You told us yesterday,’ said Margaret Running Deer.
‘Yeah, and the day before that,’ said Connie, touching up her lipstick with a finger to cover the razorscar under her nose.
‘And it wasn't funny then,’ said the Indian Girl, picking her nails with her scalping stiletto.
Having had no luck with the girls, Curtius finally noticed Jitters in the corner.
A mean look crept into his eyes.
‘Hey Jitters, you limey bastid, last Thursday I saw me some Argentinian fellers marching down Main Street with GenTech weapons.
You still runnin' away from that there South Atlantic battle?’
Jitters hadn't run away.
He had been ordered to make a tactical withdrawal.
It had been a rout, but that hadn't been his fault.
Nobody had known how well equipped the bloody buggering Argies would be.
He didn't say anything.
Curtius took his drink and carried it over to the corner.
He sat down.
‘Hell, you limeys are yellower'n a cat's pee on a canary.
We've bailed you out of two freakin' world wars, and you're still whinin' about it.
You oughtta get yourselves some backbone.
Get yourselves some real men , you know, maybe you could buy some of John Wayne's frozen sperm and impregnate some of your frigid women with it.
Get  yourselves a generation with cojones the size of key limes, eh?’
Jitters just smiled, and sipped his drink.
‘Leave him alone, zeroid,’ shouted Mrs ze Schluderpacheru.
‘Jitters is all right.
He never gave nobody no venereable diseases.’
Curtius grinned, showing off the diamond inset into his front tooth.
‘Me and old Jitters is just having a sociable little drink, Magda.
Chatting over old times.
He was like a war hero, y'know.
Got his ass peppered at Goose Green.’
Jitters had been wounded in the first landing, in the shoulder.
It hadn't been what they'd been told to expect by the Daily Mail .
They didn't know that the Argies had GenTech and G-Mek hardware.
They'd all gone over the side, singing Johnny Lydon's hit ‘Who Do You Think You Are Kidding, Mr Galtieri,’ and 98% of them hadn't made it to the beaches.
In five minutes, everyone he had been with on the long voyage over from Pompey was dead.
Jitters had been wounded early, and washed back to the landing craft.
They'd piled him in with the dead, and it was only later a naval ensign noticed him twitching.
That was when they started calling him Jitters.
He still twitched.
‘You're a blister on the behind, Curtius,’ Mrs ze Schluderpacheru shouted, ‘leave him alone or you're barred for life.’
Curtius took his drink, smiled slowly, and backed away.
‘So long, hero.
Hey, I heard me a new one.
What's red, white and blue and got piss all over it?
A British flag in Buenos Aires , haw haw haw!
Good ‘un, ain't it?’
Jitters drank his drink.
V
She ran the five miles from Doc Threadneedle's place in twenty minutes.
Not a world record, but acceptable.
She wasn't sweating, but there was a pleasurable sense of exertion.
Some time, she would have to push herself, to find out exactly how improved she was.
For a real work-out, she'd need an opponent.
She experimented with her new optic, shifting her patch to her right eye and perceiving the world through heat patterns.
She saw the sands cooling as the temperature fell.
She was wearing a black karate suit.
It was loose, but felt good.
She ran on bare feet.
Her heightened senses were working overtime.
She would have to get used to that.
She was sensing far more people and ve-hickles in the area than could possibly be there.
For a while, she would have to downscale her first impressions.
Doc Threadneedle had warned her about it.
He bicycled alongside her, keeping level, occasionally asking questions and nodding to himself.
‘No prob here,’ he kept saying.
He set her tasks, and she accomplished them.
‘That rock, vault over it,’ or ‘the old fence, run through it.’
It was easy.
‘When do I get to squeeze a lump of coal into a diamond?’
Doc Threadneedle laughed.
‘When I can stop a speeding locomotive with one bound.’
‘It's a deal.’
The town was just coming alive, as she got to the Silver Shuriken.
Sandrats were pouring in to fence their weekly scav.
A Maniak chapter had been through last week, and one or two of them were still around, enjoying the yakuza hospitality at the ze Schluderpacheru place.
The gaudy girls were being kept busy.
Doc Threadneedle parked his bike next to two Maniak  sickles, and chained it to the hitching post, setting the boobycharges in the padlock to blow if anybody tried to tamper with it.
They went into the saloon.
‘Doc, honey,’ said a large woman behind the bar.
Doc Threadneedle leaned over and kissed her.
Her mainly exposed bosoms wobbled over the top of her black corset.
Looking at her heat patterns, Jessamyn saw the cold outlines of the wavy dagger and the pepperpot charge-gun stashed in her garterbelt stark against the warmth.
‘Jessamyn, this is Magda.
She's a friend.’
‘Ohayu, sweetheart,’ said the woman.
‘Welcome to the Shuriken.
First drink is on the house.
Sake ?’
Jessamyn thought a moment.
‘Scotch and Canada.’
Doc Threadneedle was startled.
‘Not yet, Jessamyn.
You'll burn out your greymass.
Try a perrier.’
‘Okay, mineral water.’
Magda took a green bottle from the cooler and poured a tall glass of sparkling liquid.
Jessamyn took a swallow.
Her altered tastebuds tingled, and she felt a spasm of pleasure in her stomach.
‘Whew!
That's a kick!’
‘Get used to it.’
Magda fished out a bottle of Shochaiku, and gave Doc Threadneedle a shot.
He sipped it.
Jessamyn thought it out.
‘I get it.
It wasn't the alcohol you thought would hit me…‘
‘Of course not, your greymass could shrug off a concentrated squirt of pure smacksynth.’
‘…it was the taste.’
‘Right.
You've got a touch of extrasensitivity.
Work up to the extremes.’
She drank some more water.
It was beyond anything she had ever experienced.
‘I feel like a new girl.’
‘Jessamyn, you are a new girl.’
She began to relax.
This was fun.
She hadn't expected  to have fun ever again.
(In the back of her mind, the moonface tick-tocked, tugging her towards her responsibilities.)
She looked around the bar.
It was typical of the places she had been in during her Psychopomp days.
Half Oldstyle-Western, half Scavsurplus-High Tech.
The customers drank and drugged peacefully, trying not to make contact with each other, and the gaudy girls plied their trade quietly.
There was a cowboy song on the juke, ‘I Dreamed of a Hillbilly Heaven,’ and the two Maniax were  practising their fast draws against a GenTech Amusements Machine that zapped you insensible with a light voltage if the computer-generated gunslinger cleared leather faster than you did.
One of them lost a showdown, and slumped on the shockplate, dropping the gamegun.
His gangbuddy pulled out a real gun, and cocked it.
‘Whoa there, big fella,’ said Magda.
‘Them things are expensive.’
Jessamyn thought the Maniak might start a fight — she needed some action just now, her muscles tingled — but the heavy-set panzerboy backed down, and hauled his pal off.
‘Just natural high spirits,’ Magda said.
‘Them boys skinned a solo Op out in the sand last week, fenced his hide to the yakmen.
Well off his trail, this feller was.
Some fancy-pants search-and-destroy customer from Los Angeles, California.’
‘Which agency?’
Doc asked.
‘Holderness-Manolo.’
‘I've heard of them.
Glamour boys.
Industrial warfare, mostly.
The occasional movie star divorce.
High flyers.
They don't come in-country often.’
Jessamyn sipped her drink.
There must still be warrants out on her.
But it didn't mean anything.
There would be paper out on nine-tenths of the people in the room, including the gaudy girls and the town drunk.
This was a townload of fugitives.
Buzzsaw the cat was probably high  on the FBI's Most Wanted Felines list.
‘Any idea who the solo was gunning for?’
‘Nahh, could've been anybody?
The Red Baron was through a month or two back, racking up his score.
And an esperado by the name of Al Amogordo took Buck Standish out on Main Street Wednesday last.
Crossed his eyes and exploded Old Buck's head in some quarrel over a high yaller lady, then hit the trail in Buck's G-Mek convertible.’
‘There'd be a price on him.’
‘Yeah.
The solo was probably after Al.’
Doc Threadneedle ordered another drink, and tipped a few drops into Jessamyn's water.
‘Try that.’
It was astonishing.
‘This is better than sex.’
‘Have sex, and then see what you think.’
Jessamyn cooled out her mouth.
A cowboy sauntered over to the bar, and sidled up next to them.
‘Hey, beaut, you in the market for some home-baked Western-style lovin'?’
She looked him over.
‘Come on, Wyatt Earp’ she said, ‘do I look like a hog-tied sheep to you?’
The cowboy pushed his stetson back onto the crown of his head.
He had thick-oiled hair, and old acne scars.
‘Well, hell, lady, if that's your attitude, perhaps you'd better just sew it up, sister, cause there ain't no better stud bull than Curtius Kenne in the whole territory.’
Magda laughed.
‘Ignore him, Jessamyn.
He just won the election.
The town hasn't had an Official Asshole for too long.’
Curtius smiled, and a gem sparkled.
‘Jessamyn?
That's a real purty name.
Is that for real?’
‘Yes.
Excuse me.’
She grabbed him by the back of his neck, and scraped her empty glass across his smile.
He screeched, and she let him go.
He was bleeding from the mouth.
She looked at her glass.
It was not scratched.
‘Paste, huh?
I thought synthetic stones were getting better these days.’
‘Why you…‘
He drew his hand back, and she reached out to stop the punch.
It was as simple as catching a falling cup.
She pushed a little too hard, and Curtius shouted.
‘My shoulder.’
Doc Threadneedle stepped in, and gave the cowboy's arm a wrench, setting the joint back in true.
‘Sorry.
Don't know my own strength.’
Kenne was mad now.
Everyone in the bar was looking.
‘You're…you're one of them things, ain't you?’
There was fear and hatred in his voice.
‘What do you mean?’
‘One of the Doc's monsters.
You ain't human.
Hell, Doc, your packagin' gets better and better, but what you put inside stinks to high heaven, you know.
It's gettin' so a fella don't know where he's dippin' it.
I take it all back, sister.
You're just a sexclone with steel teeth, and I ain't interested.’
The drunk in the corner, who wore what was left of some kind of camouflage outfit, came over, pulling a revolver out of his britches pocket.
Jessamyn tensed, ready to shear his head off his neck with a karate move.
Magda shook her head, and Jessamyn relaxed.
The drunk plonked his gun down on the bar.
‘You've got a quarrel, settle it this way.
Best of seven.’
‘This is Jitters,’ Magda said.
‘He's British.’
The drunk saluted smartly.
His hand vibrated.
She didn't need to be Sherlock Holmes to know how he had picked up his nick-name.
Jessamyn hefted his gun.
It was a seven-shot model, a Webley and Scott.
38 Bulldog, standard British Army Issue.
A toy next to a ScumStopper Magnum, but it could do the job.
She broke it, and slid five slugs out, leaving two consecutive bullets chambered.
She sighted down the barrel.
It was off, but it would do for a round of  roulette.
‘You game, cowboy?’
Kenne gulped, and looked around for a way out.
‘Guess I am, Mizz Frankenstein, guess I am.’
‘Ladies first?’
She pointed the gun to her temple.
‘Toss you for it.’
Magda dropped a one-armed bandit token on the bar.
Kenne guessed lemon, and won the first pull.
Click.
He sighed with relief, and passed the gun over.
Then, he took a shot of whisky.
Magda refilled his glass.
It vanished down his throat, by-passed his stomach and stood out on his forehead as droplets of 90% proof sweat.
‘The good stuff, huh?’
‘Fella deserves Shochaiku if it's gonna be his last drink.’
Jessamyn slipped the barrel into her mouth, and sucked it like a lollipop, fluttering her eyelashes at Kenne.
His eyes popped.
Click.
‘Your move.’
‘Good thing it's Curtius,’ Magda said, ‘if'n he blows his brains out, at least we won't be all day scraping them off the floor.
Just my dainty little hankie will be enough to clean up that kind of a smeared speck.’
Kenne's adam's apple was bobbing up and down.
Jessamyn looked him in the face, smiling pleasantly.
Shutting his eyes tight, he jammed the gun against his skull, and…
Click.
‘Give it here.’
He was reluctant to let it go.
She raised the gun, and pulled the trigger.
Click.
‘Bang,’ she said.
Everybody jumped.
Kenne spilled his drink.
‘No, really, just joking.’
Kenne took the gun.
‘Have you worked it out, cowboy?
Three chambers, two  bullets.
Short odds.’
They'd turned the music off now.
Jitters was sucking at a bottle.
Only Doc Threadneedle was apparently uninterested in the game.
Kenne looked at the saloon door.
The Maniax were standing between him and it.
That was his bad luck.
The gangboys were in the entertainment mood tonight, and nothing appealed to them more than watching some asshole respray the ceiling with greymass.
He looked down at the gun, which must be feeling pretty heavy.
‘Two chances out of three, cowboy.’
He did it quickly.
Up to his head.
Pull.
Click.
He let out a whoop, and slammed the gun down onto the bar, breaking glasses.
‘Whooo-eee, I thought I was gonna fill my britches fer sure, sister.
Looks like I win, eh?
Unless you want to play on, Mizz Frankie Stein?’
Jessamyn picked up the gun.
‘You can go home now, sister.
It's all over.
Buy us all drinks, and it'll be forgotten.
Ain't nobody gonna hold it against you.’
She put the barrel to her temple.
‘You don't have to do it,’ said Magda.
‘That would be crazy.
Even Curtius ain't that big an asshole.’
Her finger tightened.
‘Hold on there,’ Kenne pleaded.
‘Two out of two, remember.
Them's crazy person's odds.’
‘Jessamyn…’ said the Doc.
‘Stop it.’
Everyone in the saloon was looking at her.
Their heat-patterns flared, as if they were blushing all over.
She pulled the trigger.
VI
Cocooned inside the air-cooled cockpit of his DeLorean ‘Snowbird’ SandMaster, Bronson Manolo checked the dispositions of the Holderness-Manolo forces surrounding Dead Rat.
Within five minutes, they should all be in place.
Once the spotman reported back that Jessamyn Amanda Bonney was in Dead Rat, Manolo had called in Holm Rodriguez from Denver and Susie Terhune from Phoenix.
Terhune was an assault specialist solo who had sub-contracted for H-M on several occasions, and Rodriguez was their top Colorado Op, further qualified because he came from the quarry's home turf.
When he was with the Denver paycops, he had busted little Jessamyn on some juvie beefs.
Truancy, stealing lollipops, pulling PZ brats' pigtails, whistling commie songs in church, assault with a deadly weapon: kidstuff like that.
‘One good thing about this action,’ Terhune claimed, ‘at least nobody in Dead Rat could possibly be classed as an ‘innocent bystander’.’
H-M had enough field Ops to handle the sanction, but Manolo recognized his limitations, and had had Rodriguez and Terhune augment his forces with some local soldiers who knew the sand.
Most of his full-scale skirmishes had been in NoGos or Urban Blight areas.
Out here in the Big Empty, the situation was quite different.
Less cover, more miles.
This was sandrat heaven.
He was quite willing to delegate field command to Terhune until the objective was obtained.
He checked his GenTech digital chronometer against the dashdial.
He was synchronized with the machine.
‘Ommm,’ he said to himself, shifting his level of psychic awareness, ‘ommm.’
Gari the Guru had given his blessing on this sanction down at the Pyramid.
‘You can't destroy, Bronson, you can only convert a thing's form.’
That was true, converting  forms was Manolo's business.
He took nasty live people, and turned them into nice dead ones.
Bob Holderness would have been proud of him.
When this take-out was over, he was looking forward to a session in the hot-tub with Kandi, maybe a few snorts of cocoa, and some radical waves to ride out in the bay.
The pollution didn't kill the ripple, and couldn't get through to you in a skin-tight SCE unit.
Manolo didn't groove to the Big Empty.
He was a cityguy.
He didn't like to breathe anything he couldn't see.
‘In place, Bronson,’ said Terhune.
Her light blinked green on the mapscreen.
‘Mortars ready to ride.
Let's nuke the spook.’
‘Rodriguez?’
Manolo tapped the screen, and Rodriguez's light flared.
‘Okay for sound, chief.
We're in place.’
‘The quarry?’
‘We tracked her from the Threadneedle site.
She's in the Silver Shuriken now.
We've given her enough time to get blasted out of her skull.’
‘Excellent.
Judicious.
Righteous.’
‘Thanks, bro.’
Manolo pulled his seatbelt across his lap, and plugged it in.
The console lit up, and he flicked some buttons.
The inboard computer flashed stats at him.
The weapons systems gave him some readiness read-outs.
‘Okay Jos, let's spread some karma…‘
VII
The bullet flattened against her temple.
She felt as if someone had taken a swing at her with a sledgehammer, but didn't fall off her stool.
Her arm flew out, wrenching her shoulder, but she kept a grip on the gun.
She shook her head, and the spent slug fell to the saloon floor.
‘Let's look at that,’ said the Doc, prodding her sore spot with his fingers.
‘Hmmnn, more bruising than there ought to be.
Your steel-mesh underflesh hasn't quite knitted properly.
The durium platelocks are fine, though.
You might have done something less drastic to test my handiwork, but everything seems to be holding up properly.’
Curtius Kenne was staring at Jessamyn as if Jesus H. Christ himself had ridden into town on a donkey, walked into the bar looking for trouble, and kicked him in the gazebos with steel-spiked sandals.
‘Freakin' hell,’ he said, almost in reverential tones.
Jessamyn handed him the still-smoking gun.
‘Didn't I mention that I had a bullet-proof skull?’
He took the weapon and looked at it.
The barrel was blackened at the end.
‘Silly me.’
One bullet, one chamber.
‘Your turn,’ she said.
He held the gun as if he didn't know what it was, and looked at her.
She smiled pleasantly.
‘You heard me, cowboy.
It's your shot.’
Jitters laughed and clapped his hands, then slapped Kenne on the back.
‘Yessir, now it's time to see some bloody buggering Yankee guts and glory spread out all over this pub, eh what?
That do-or-die Davy Blooming Crockett spirit.
Come on, Ragtime Cowboy Joe, take your medicine.
The bint did her bit, now it's up to you to show us what you're made of…‘
Kenne swallowed his spit.
Tears leaked out of his eyes.
Jessamyn knew what the cowboy was made of.
Flesh and blood and bone, just like everyone else.
No blastic, no durium, no implants, no steel, no diamond-chips.
Just chemicals and 78% water.
They weren't even the same species, Kenne and her.
She  couldn't feel anything for him.
But she helped him.
She took the gun, and put it into his hand properly, wrapping his fingers around the butt, shoving his forefinger through the trigger-guard, and held the barrel to his ear.
She thumb-cocked the piece, and stood back, admiring her handiwork.
Kenne stood like a statue, Rodin's Old Cowhand Blowing Brains Out.
‘The game ain't over ‘til the whistle's blown.’
The cowboy was sobbing now, the gunbarrel shaking against his flesh.
‘That cracker-ass pussy ain't gonna do it,’ said one of the Maniax, turning away in disgust.
‘Never no good entertainment out in the sand.’
Kenne was shaking all over.
He lowered the gun, and it hung limp in his hand, barrel to the floor.
‘Just a bloody buggering knee-trembler, eh what?’
Jitters jumped up and down, face red with excitement.
Jessamyn picked up her perrier and finished it.
The moment was over.
Magda poured her another drink.
Later, she would pick up the misshapen bullet from the floor.
It would make a nice souvenir for her charm bracelet.
Kenne turned, and staggered towards the door, his chest heaving as he cried.
A dark stain was spreading from the crotch of his Levis.
‘Got your arses whipped in Nicaragua, and now you've lost it all in bloody buggering Arizona,’ Jitters shouted, keeping up with the broken American.
‘Oh, say can you see, by the dawn's bleeding light, what so proudly we turn into spineless gibbering jellyfish with no dickybirds at the twilight's last gleaming…‘
Kenne struck out at the drunk, but Jitters stepped back.
‘Whose broad bums and shite cars through the perilous night, as on the ramparts we cowered in abject and pathetic fear was so chicken-livered streaming…‘
The cowboy was nearly out of the door now.
People were back to their drinking, drugging and whoring.
Tcherkassoff was on the video-juke, with ‘Siberian Sayonara.’
‘Oh the rockets’ red glare, the bombs bursting in the air made us manufacture chocolate in our underpants through the night though our god-rotted yellowstain rag was still there…‘
Kenne sagged against the doors.
‘Oh, say does that star-strangled banner yet flap…‘
Jitters leaned close and spat at the cowboy.
‘O'er the land of the Yanks, with their heads full of…‘
Then, the explosions started.
VIII
As the mortar-flashes lit up Dead Rat, Holm Rodriguez signalled to his soldiers to move in.
They were all people he could trust, unlike that Angelino pendejo Manolo.
This wasn't a surgical strike, this was a massacre.
All well and good, and he had no real objection to anything that rid the world of a townful of sandrat trash, but it was a pretty inelegant manoeuvre.
He sent Mostyn out on point, giving him Lucy Cheadle as back-up.
Mostyn's M-29 spat, and somebody rolled down the dunes.
The soldier gave Rodriguez the thumbs-up.
First kill.
That gave him dibs on the scav, not that there would be much worth looting in this sandhole.
Susie Terhune's crew laid down some heavy fire.
Buildings started burning.
The incendiary charges Manolo's experts had set up earlier in the day went up on schedule.
By the time they got to town, most of the heavy stuff should be over.
Despite his bulky Kevlar Hell-and-Back suit, Rodriguez moved fast.
He jogged every morning with lead weights slung on his chest, back and thighs to get him used to the extra poundage of the armour.
The IR visor of his helmet  showed him the desert as if by the light of an overcast day.
His team looked like a gang of astronauts in desert-camouflage kit.
‘Ve-hickle coming,’ Lucy Cheadle's voice crackled in his earchip.
‘Cyke, two riders.
Can't be our girl.
The reading's wrong.’
‘Take them.’
‘Done, sir.’
The cyke came up over a dune, and Mostyn and Cheadle caught it in a crossfire.
It exploded in mid-air, and the two riders somersaulted to the sand.
Haggett got in there with his bayonet, and speared the two as if they were straw figures.
‘Down and out,’ Haggett shouted.
That had lost them precious moments.
‘Come on, team,’ Rodriguez ordered, ‘let's move it.
We're expected at the Silver Shuriken in 78 seconds.
Manolo will ream our butts if we're off-schedule.’
The soldiers jogged at full speed, M-29s jiggling in their arms.
Rodriguez thought they must all look like big, hairless teddy-bears romping over the dunes.
They tore in formation down the main street, firing at anyone in sight.
The gas station was an inferno.
Someone dashed out of an alleyway, pumping a shotgun.
Haggett's sandy expanse of chest was splattered red.
‘I'm hit, I'm hit,’ he said, sinking to his knees, his communicator crackling as he faded.
Mostyn reacted, and brought the sumpsucker with the shotgun down with a burst of fire.
It had been an old-timer, with a long white beard and a Gabby Hayes hat.
They jogged round a corner, and found themselves in what passed for the town square of Dead Rat, Arizona.
There was a disused town hall, an abandoned Sheriff's office, and a still-operational five-customer gallows.
And the saloon.
‘Make the play,’ Rodriguez shouted.
‘Now!’
Mostyn and Cheadle humped themselves up the stairs, and crashed into the Silver Shuriken, guns discharging.
IX
She would have to learn to trust her new senses.
There had been people out in the desert.
And now they were in town, and she had to assume they were after her.
It was just like the good old days.
Cops and Ops and Soce Workers, all after her pretty little head.
Part of the ceiling had come down, and everyone was panicking.
‘Magda,’ she said, ‘give me a gun.’
‘Sure thing, honey, take your pick.’
The older woman pulled out a tray of handguns, and used it to push the glasses and drinks off the bar.
Jessamyn picked a Smith-and-Wesson semi-automatic pistol, and jammed a couple of extra clips into her waistband.
‘Good choice,’ said Magda, taking a Colt Python police special.
Some of the sandrats were milling around.
Some of them weren't, because they were dead.
‘Guns on the house,’ Magda shouted.
‘Come and get ‘em.’
Jitters and Curtius Kenne had been knocked flat by the first blast.
They stumbled to their feet.
Kenne had a proper grip on Jitters's gun now.
One chamber, one bullet.
Doc Threadneedle tugged her sleeve.
‘Remember, don't be too confident.
Jitters’ revolver was just a pop-gun.
Your underflesh won't stand up to depleted uranium or armour-piercing rockets, and you still burn and bleed like the rest of us.’
Magda ze Schluderpacheru was unslinging a rocket-launcher from under the bar, and passing it across to the Maniax.
Jitters was trying to wrestle his gun out of Kenne's  grip.
‘You got your Colts, yankee bloody doodle.
Give me my gun back.’
Two hefty figures in combat suits thundered through the doors, spraying the saloon with fire.
The pointman steadied and looked around.
He saw Jessamyn and took aim.
She was right.
This was all for her benefit.
The pointman pulled the trigger, but his shot went wide.
The Maniax had the launcher readied, and put an anti-tank missile into his stomach.
He was torn backwards, his hands flailing, and he got a grip on the doorjamb.
He was completely impaled, his combat suit stoved in, the trefoils of the missile sticking out of his gut.
The rocket fizzled, and shot through him, exploding against the gallows on the other side of the square.
Jessamyn could see right through the hole in the dead man.
His sidekick froze, and was cut down by fire from all quarters.
A phosphorus grenade rolled in through the door, and everyone dived for cover.
She could see the explosion through closed eyelids.
Her heat sensor sent pain signals to her greymass.
‘Freak,’ she swore.
‘You realize, of course, that this means WAR!’
X
Manolo was pleased.
It was all according to the plan.
Casualties so far were acceptable.
As far as he was concerned, the loss of all personnel in the field with the exception of Bronson Manolo could be classed as an acceptable casualty rate if it got the job done.
Not that he was callous.
H-M had a hefty policy with General Disaster  to provide for the dependents of those lost or handicapped in the service of the Agency.
His mapscreen was lighting up all over.
Terhune had laid down all the fire they needed, and Rodriguez's team was in town, cutting loose.
‘Gas station, saloon, hotel, town hall…
’ He checked off the targets as they flared.
He flicked the counter.
0347.
Within a five mile radius of the town square of Dead Rat, there were 0347 warm people, excluding the H-M personnel in their combat gear.
Ooops, 0345.
No, 0341.
The number fell, as the people cooled.
He dug a brew out from the cooler under his chair, and flipped the ringtop.
This was proving to be a stroll.
As balls of fire filled the interior of the Silver Shuriken, Jessamyn dived for a window.
She crashed through a tinsel and spray-snow Christmas decoration and, curled up tight, turned head over end through the air, landing neatly on her feet in the street.
One of the soldiers stood in front of her, presumably awestruck behind his or her faceplate.
She shot through the helmet, and the soldier sagged to the dirt.
Two more of the space invaders skidded around the building, bringing up their guns.
She got them both with a single burst, and sprinted away, zig-zagging down a side-street.
It was a clear night.
The half-moon shone down placidly.
0326.
Jitters had his gun back, with just one bloody buggering round left in it, so he would jolly well have to put it to  freaking good use, wouldn't he, by jove.
Curtius Kenne was cut in half by a falling beam, worse luck, so he couldn't use his one shot to spread the cowboy's greymass on the wall.
There was no place like the thick of battle for settling an old score.
So many people were dying that no one would notice a few more.
Jitters had been splashed with some of the liquid fire from the grenade, but he was lucky enough to have been blown through a hole in the wall by the blast.
He rolled in the sand, until most of the flames were out.
There were troops yomping down the main street of Dead Rat.
It was like being back at Goose Green.
But he wasn't going to withdraw tactically this bloody buggering time, no sir, not with brass knobs on…
He held his gun up in readiness.
His hands weren't shaking now.
0318.
Gretchen Turner knew she should never have left Des Moines with Barry, the electrofence salesman.
Her mama had said as much, but D-M was such a zeroville.
Barry had been a rat, all right.
He'd left her in a town just like Dead Rat.
Since then, those had been all the places she'd known.
But Magda ze Schluderpacheru was better than the other madams, the Silver Shuriken could have been a nice place with a little work.
The girls were nice.
They had a nice team.
Gretchen couldn't feel anything below her chin, and she knew that wasn't good.
She couldn't see either.
There was fire all around.
As she blacked out, she thought it was a pity she hadn't gotten round to finishing the Christmas decorations.
0317.
An armoured ve-hickle trundled slowly through the town, searchlights revolving on the roof.
That would be some kind of command module, Jessamyn knew.
That gave it a high spot on her list of things to put out of commission.
0314.
Simon Threadneedle, late of GenTech, switched off his pain with the circuitbreaker he had inserted into his own greymass.
The combat unit had sprayed napalm or some napalm analogue into the Silver Shuriken, and he was clothed in fire.
Nothing would get the stuff off him until it burned itself out.
This was the sort of juice that burned even underwater.
It was amazing what modern technology could accomplish.
The GenTech labs couldn't do anything about the common cold and no government had been able to develop a workable public transport system, but when it came to deathware, why, there were wonderful new toys on the market every fall, just in time for Christmas.
His blastic-laced flesh melted away, and the durium bonesheaths heated up.
He didn't know how high a temperature they could take before they went into shut-down, and he supposed he wouldn't get a chance to record his findings if he did pursue the experiment to the end.
His clothes had burned away instantly, as had all his bodily hair and most of his skin.
Tarnished metal shone through his musculature as he walked through the fire.
He stepped out of the wall of flame onto the steps of the saloon, and strode, still burning, into the street.
A soldier tried to shove a bayonet into his throat, but the steel buckled against his adam's apple superconductor.
With fiery hands, he lifted the besuited killer off the ground, and bent his back until it snapped.
Gunfire rattled against his pectoral shields, and he staggered backwards  from the blast.
He was holding up even better than he had hoped.
0307.
‘Large concentration of bodies coming our way,’ said Danny Riegert from the monitor.
‘Looks like a lynch mob.’
‘Get ready to rock and roll,’ Susie Terhune snapped, taking the controls of the chainguns.
The command unit was in its strategic position in the town square.
The roofguns swivelled.
‘Forty or fifty, armed and angry.’
‘Wait till you can distinguish their heartbeats on the sensor.’
‘Yes, ma'am.’
Her husband had left her the year before for some Tex-Mex bitch, claiming that she was too boring to live with.
Chuck and Benny, her kids, whined that she was never home.
She had just had painful surgery to remove an ovarian cyst that had turned out to be benign.
And she had never seen the Pacific Ocean.
She tapped keys, and flicked switches.
‘A hundred yards, and closing…‘
‘Tell me when they get to fifty.’
‘Yes, ma'am.’
The computers hummed, as the smart bullets picked their targets.
Once locked on to a heartbeat pattern, they would whizz around like fireflies until they found the precise biosignal that would allow them to explode.
What do you know, these babies really did have your name written on them.
‘Fifty.’
She turned on the maxiscreamers, and the riot-control noise boomed through the town, shaking teeth loose, bursting eardrums, bringing rickety buildings down.
‘Spot on.
They're running around like chickens at a geek convention.’
The smartguns locked, and flashed READY at her.
When she was out of this, she'd check out a sexclone with a moustache like Bronson Manolo and a body like Stallone, rent herself some clean water and a whirlpool bath, and have herself a party and a half.
She initiated the firing sequence.
‘They're about to scatter, ma'am.’
‘So much the better.’
The guns started spitting intelligent death into the night.
0235.
Jessamyn saw a crowd going down, those damned smugslugs spinning through the air like midges.
GenTech had developed the little bastards.
But once they were on the market, the corp had spent a lot of R and D money coming up with a way to beat them.
And Doc Threadneedle had access to that technology.
She took a deep breath, and a tiny sponge inside her heart — a bioengine — inflated, changing her heart's signature.
It was peculiarly like having the hiccoughs.
Thanks to the little organism, her life signal would change every twenty seconds for anything up to half an hour.
People she didn't know died around her, but she was untouched.
0199.
Bronson Manolo hummed a Butthole Surfers number to himself, and touched up his hair, using the rearview mirror as he patted his coiffeur.
He wanted another beer, but Gari had him on one-a-day for as long as his organic rice diet was holding up.
Dammit, he deserved another brew.
He  was working hard.
Let the Pyramid Pooper take a hike just this once, eh?
0196.
What the hell, people in Africa were gasping for a beer, and he had a whole case stashed here.
He reached for a can.
0188.
‘You can be a success,’ he chanted to himself, ‘your mind is a chisel, your will is a hammer, and life is a rock.’
He focused on the miniature plastic pyramid on the dashboard, and willed this mission to succeed.
0179.
Rodriguez took up a command position in the old jailhouse.
It must have closed down when the state police pulled out, abandoning these backwaters to the gangcults.
His crew were in pairs, going on a house-to-house, and he was ticking off the cleared locations on his streetmap.
He had taken off his helmet and gloves for the job, and was stabbing with a stub of lightpencil at the screenmap Manolo had given him.
Half the town was down by now.
But still no Jessamyn.
He remembered their girl as she had been when he first had her through the system in Denver.
She could have been hardly eleven then.
But with a clown-white face and fetish-chains, she looked older than sin.
‘Livery stable clear,’ Baldrey barked in his ear.
He checked the building off.
He also remembered Jessamyn's Old Man.
Now, there was a seriously disturbed individual.
No wonder his precious had ripped his throat out.
‘Any sightings of Jessamyn?’ he asked on the open channel.
‘Don't worry,’ Terhune said.
‘She hasn't got a chance.’
She had had big, sad, green eyes.
Two of them, then.
‘No, Susie.
You're right.
She's never had a chance.’
0156.
The Argies were coming for him, bloody buggering bastards of dagoes that they were.
He could hear the grease on their hair frying from ten miles away.
Sarn't Major Biggleswade signalled for his troops to follow, and made a dash across the burning street.
‘Forever England,’ he shouted, ‘the Falklands are Forever England.’
Teddy-bear shaped Argies rushed at him, firing ineptly.
He was over the top like PC Dixon taking out a French terrorist cell.
‘Come on lads, we can whip ‘em.
Corned beefeaters!
Pansy Sanchos!
Gaucho gauleiters!’
He was hit in the legs, but he backed out of the line of fire.
Where was the Union Jack?
Someone was supposed to be carrying it.
‘For England, God and St George!’
0134.
Jessamyn fell to a crouch, and clambered across the square on all fours, recalling her sandrat days.
She was a good animal again.
A soldier loomed over her, and she rolled, firing upwards in an arc.
The suit punctured and bled, the faceplate cracking.
Wriggling her shoulders and pushing with her feet, she covered the last ten yards.
Her karate jacket ripped, but the skin of her back was unabraded.
She got to the command ve-hickle, and spread herself against its treads, firing across the square at some stray  killers.
0086.
Simon Threadneedle was almost burned out now.
His eyes had popped, but the sensors inside his skull fed him heat patterns that were clearer than any visual input.
Most of the tissue was gone, but the bio-implants still functioned.
And he still had his greymass.
Magda ze Schluderpacheru was dead, had died near the beginning of it.
That was a shame.
She had been soft and warm, the last of his meatform's attachments.
Curtius Kenne was dead too, and most of the other citizens.
He hadn't kept track, but he thought he had sensed Jitters going down.
Where was Jessamyn?
She should survive.
She had been a walking ruin when she came to him, and he had made her better.
Better than anyone.
Better, even, than he had made himself.
Should he have told her, he wondered?
Should he have mentioned the strange symptoms and side-effects he had been observing in his own case?
The detachment.
The languor.
His feelings were heightened, but his drives had been running down.
He could barely relate to people.
Before Jessamyn had come to him, he had sometimes spent days at a time sitting in front of the windows in his bedroom, looking at the unchanging, unmoving desert as the sun and the moon did their daily dance.
The moon…
0050.
Manolo belched, and excused himself.
0049. 0048. 0047. 0045. 0043. 0039.
‘Ma'am,’ said Danny Riegert, ‘we've got a weird reading, close to the ve-hickle.’
Susie Terhune slipped the lase to automatic, and let it continue slicing up the rooftops.
‘Specify.’
‘Down low, by the treads, in actual contact with the module.’
‘Our girl?’
‘Hard to say.
The heartbeat doesn't match, but it also keeps changing.
I think it's some kind of systems error.’
‘Idiot, don't you read Guns and Killing ?
She's had a heartsponge implant.
Let me think, let me think…‘
Terhune's fingers flew over the keyboard, pulling a close-range weapons menu out of the memory.
1:
MINISCREAMER
2:
CLOSE-RANGE SMARTGUN
3:
ELECTROCHARGE
4:
GAS GRENADE
She punched in a Code 3, and a Confirm.
The ve-hickle buzzed, as it discharged.
‘See how you like that, hagwitch!’
0036.
Jessamyn felt her body arch as the electricity hit.
She sucked in a double-lungful of air and screamed, but not in pain.
It was her predator's howl of triumph.
She remembered Doc Threadneedle suggesting she try sucking her finger and sticking it in an electric socket.
Every nerve in her body came alive.
She had never felt stronger.
How long would this last?
She scrambled up onto the top of the ve-hickle, still feeling the hyperbuzz.
Sex could not be better than this.
She came to the smartgun mounting, and ripped the  multi-barrelled weapon out at the roots.
It came away as easily as a dead treebranch.
Metal tore.
Wires shorted out.
The screamers started again, and she let the durium shields up inside her ears.
There was a battened hatch on top of the ve-hickle.
This was going to be like opening a can.
0029.
Biggleswade saw the British heroine climb up onto the Argie tank, and cheered.
He dragged his dead legs behind him, and pulled himself towards the battle.
The girl was bloody buggering Victoria Cross material, and he wanted to be there to see her run the Union Jack up the flagpole at Port Stanley.
Puerto bloody buggering Galtieri in-bloody-buggering-deed!
The girl got a good grip on the hatch, and pulled it away, tossing it across the square like a dustbin lid.
0027.
The girl-thing was in the command centre.
Susie Terhune scrabbled under her seat for the handgun stashed there.
Riegert was gone, out the hatch, screaming.
He had made a dash when the quarry had dropped through.
Terhune got a shot off, but the quarry leaned to one side and the slug missed.
It ricocheted off a bulkhead, impossibly loud in the confined space, and buried itself in the fleshy part of Terhune's thigh.
Blood filled her lap.
She was strapped into her seat.
She tried to raise her hands, tried to surrender, but she couldn't move, words wouldn't shake loose of her mouth.
The quarry came for her.
Jessamyn Bonney looked so young.
The screen flashed up a weapons menu, requesting operator input.
The quarry took her by the scruff of her neck, and shoved her face into the screen.
The glass cracked, and Terhune felt something go inside her skull.
Sparks showered out of the ruptured system.
The quarry rammed her into the screen again.
Terhune's face pushed through the window into the workings of the command module.
Currents crackled around her, and she smelled her hair burning.
She continued to twitch like a headless chicken long after she was dead.
0019.
Manolo pulled another tab, and sucked the beertube.
He sensed the pyramid vibrating.
The Argie came flying out of the tank, running from the British heroine.
Jitters took careful aim, and got him with a headshot.
The foreigner stumbled on a few steps, his brains leaking out around his earphones, and collapsed in a heap.
Bloody buggering serve him right!
He tried to sing ‘God Save the Queen,’ but blood came up from his chest.
He realized he was due for shipping home to Blighty.
With these scratches, he was out of the rest of the war.
Bloody shame.
He hoped the rest of the lads would do him proud.
There'd be free drinks for him for years in the Wise Serpent in Micklethwaite Road, Fulham.
The burning building behind him settled, and a triangular slice of wall slid out of place.
Bricks rained around him, crushing him into the street.
‘God Save…‘
0018.
Manolo flicked a switch and brought up the other figure.
0012.
There had been 75 Holderness-Manolo personnel at the outset of this engagement.
Now there were 12.
He thought about that.
He had expected losses, but this was above even his guestimate.
Terhune wasn't answering.
‘Rodriguez, do you copy?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Your position?’
‘The jailhouse.
It's pretty hairy down here.’
‘Have you terminated the quarry?’
‘I cannot confirm or deny that.’
0017–0012.
‘There are seventeen hostiles left alive.
Do you have reason to suspect that Jessamyn Bonney is among their number?’
There was a pause.
‘No reason, sir.
But she is.
I know she is.
She'll be the last.’
0017–0011.
H-M had just lost another man.
The reparations on this were going to be cosmic.
General Disaster would be upping the Agency's premiums next year for sure.
The accountants would bum out on that one.
‘Don't pull out until you've taken her down, Rodriguez.’
‘I don't intend to.’
‘Good man.’
0016–0011.
Manolo decided to ride the vibes for the moment.
Jessamyn left the dead woman with her face in her terminal, and climbed onto the top of the command module.
There was less gunfire now, but the whole town was on fire.
The streets were littered with the dead.
It was like Spanish Fork all over again.
Like too many towns.
A crazy man, someone she had never seen before, took  a shot at her from a rooftop.
The slug rang against the armourplate of the ve-hickle.
She took aim at the sniper, but his roof collapsed under him, dropping him into the fire.
The only thing still standing in town was the gallows.
There wouldn't be much use for that in the morning.
0011–0010.
They nearly had parity.
0010–0010.
That was a comfort.
One H-M combat Op in full kit should equal four or five sandrats.
0010–0008.
Maybe desperation brought out survival instincts in the gangscum.
Rodriguez was still in place.
Nevertheless, it was time to take a little precautionary measure.
Manolo pulled the security systems keyboard out of the dash, and entered the lock-down programs.
Durium shields slid down the windows, blanking out the moonlight.
The interior lights flickered, and came on.
The wheels retracted, and the shutters closed their apertures.
The DeLorean settled on the sand like a beached powerboat.
Multiple locks slid into place, sealing the ve-hickle tighter than the Bank of Tokyo.
Explosive bolts sealed shut the cardkeyholes in the doorhandles.
The only way in now was through the computer palm-recognition slab, and that was programmed only to reverse the lock-down upon the authority of executive-level Holderness-Manolo personnel.
0007–0004.
It was quiet in the DeLorean now.
The LED figures blinked in silence.
Manolo heard his own breathing.
0006–0003.
Simon Threadneedle walked down the main street.
He knew he must look barely human, a robotic skeleton with a few charred scarecrow tatters hanging from the steel.
‘Jessamyn,’ he called.
She looked round.
She did not register any shock.
‘Doc?’
‘Yes.
I'm in here somewhere.’
‘Doc…‘
‘I know.’
They stood, looking at each other.
She was bearing up well, a few bruises but nothing serious.
Her clothes were torn, and her hair was a mess, but there was no damage.
He could feel proud of himself.
‘Is this over?’ he asked.
‘Nearly.
No one 's shot at me for a minute.’
‘So, we won?’
She made a gesture, indicating the scatter of bodies.
‘If you call this winning.’
‘You're here.
That's what's important.’
‘It doesn't feel important.’
0002–0002.
Manolo had the cast of characters worked out.
H-M still had Rodriguez, and himself.
The others would be Jessamyn Bonney and the doctor, Threadneedle.
That would be the last of it.
They were the improved humans.
0002–0002.
The Doc was in bad shape.
Only now did Jessamyn realize just how completely he had transformed himself.
His face was a melted-tar smear, with durium highlights.
She saw the wires threaded through his limbs.
‘Jessamyn, there are things you have to know about the treatment.’
His voice was still the same, although she could see the  silver ball in his throat where it was generated.
‘Zarathustra closed down the project for good reasons, by his lights.
There are…side-effects.
Psychological, I think.’
A cold hand caressed Jessamyn's metal-sheathed spine.
‘You'll have to work at it, work at remaining human inside…
I'm not sure that I've managed it all that well, myself.
Sometimes, I just sit and stare, forgetting…for weeks, Jessamyn, for weeks.
I can do almost anything with this improved body, but my mind has got blas about it.
When you're superhuman, so little seems worth the bother.
You must resist that.
You must…‘
‘Doc?’
She was almost pleading with him.
Don't die, don't die !
The servos in his cheeks made a smile, although there was no flesh to pull.
His teeth grinned perpetually.
‘You're crying.
That's good.’
Jessamyn put a hand to her face.
There was moisture around her optic.
‘Biofluid.’
‘No, I gave you back some tearducts when I inserted the new model.
I had some to spare.’
The town hall collapsed, sending a cloud of ash and sparks across the square.
0002–0002.
Rodriguez watched from the jailhouse.
Jessamyn was talking to the tall thing.
He hadn't been able to raise Manolo for minutes.
It was down to him.
The house-to-house had been called off.
He didn't think he had any soldiers left, but himself.
He pulled on his gauntlets, and picked up his helmet.
It locked into place.
He picked up his M-29, and silently slipped a new clip  into the magazine.
0002–0002.
His left arm hadn't moved since he walked out of the Silver Shuriken.
He detached it, and dropped it in the street.
‘Let this be a lesson to you, Jesse Frankenstein's-Daughter.
You are not invincible.’
He didn't know how long he could live like this.
His skullplates were leaking biofluid.
That meant his greymass would be affected.
There was always the Donovan Treatment, but he didn't think much of the idea of being a disembodied brain in a jar.
‘Jessamyn, you have things to do.
You'll know, when the time comes, what they are.’
He looked up at the half-moon.
‘I don't understand myself, but I've been dreaming again.
We don't dream, you know.
Us improved humans.
We use up all that brain capacity that's left dark in normals, and there isn't any room for dreaming.
But I've dreamed since you came here, since I began work on you.
I've dreamed of the moon, and of a plain of salt.
I don't know what that means, but it's important.’
There was dismay on her face, now.
For the first time, she looked her age.
‘Doc?’
‘Goodbye, Jessamyn.’
He had built a suicide switch into his brain.
Blinking in a pattern initiated the shut-down sequence.
A vial opened, and a biospunge filled with mercury, then burst…
0001–0002.
Hooray for our side.
Rodriguez must have scragged one of the things!
Jessamyn looked down at the smoking remains.
The Doc was gone.
She hadn't understood everything he had tried to tell her.
Again, she was all alone, as she had been after her father's death, and after Spanish Fork.
Alone with the dead.
He had called her Jesse Frankenstein's-Daughter.
She was not alone.
A soldier came out of the old jailhouse, rifle held lightly in one hand, barrel pointed down.
‘Jessamyn,’ his voice was amplified by something inside his helmet.
‘Do you remember me?’
She laughed.
‘In that get-up, I wouldn't know you if you were my father.’
‘I'm sorry.
It's Rodriguez.
Holm Rodriguez.
From Denver.’
She did remember him.
He was with the Bruyce-Hoare Agency.
After she had killed her father, he had been one of the interrogating officers.
And before that, she had seen him several times.
He had raided the downtown warehouse arena the night she defeated Melanie Squid in the Kumite.
As cops go, he had been okay.
She tried to recall his face, but got it mixed up with the actor, Edward James Olmos.
Swarthy, Hispanic, sharp eyes.
‘I know you, Rodriguez.
You're a Juvie Op.
In case you hadn't heard, I turned eighteen last month.
I'm grown-up now.’
‘I'm not with Bruyce-Hoare any more.
I accepted a position in the private sector.
Holderness-Manolo.’
‘Fancy.’
He was edging towards her, slowly.
‘Look,’ she said, stopping him in his tracks.
‘You gave me a break over Daddy.
I'll return the favour.
Just turn around and walk out of here.
You don't have to die.’
She wished she could see his face.
‘No, really.
You can live to an old age, have kids, rent a house on the beach, get into politics.’
The rifle wavered.
She knew he wasn't going to bite on  it.
‘Rodriguez, you don't have to be an asshole.
It's not a contractual obligation.’
The gun jumped, but she wasn't in front of it when it went off.
She extended the forefingers of her right hand in a V, and jabbed at Rodriguez's faceplate.
The reinforced darkglass shattered, and she felt warmth around her hand as her durium-laced fingerbones stabbed through the man's skull.
Wiping her fingers off on her trousers, she told him, ‘you didn't have to die.
You didn't have to.’
0001–0001.
She knew the procedure.
There would be some top cat out there in the desert, sealed up tight in his High Performance Auto, sitting out the slaughter and counting the expenses.
Mr Holderness or Mr Manolo, she expected.
There was supposed to be no way to get at the bastard.
But she felt she had to try.
She needed some leverage to help her attack the Op's ve-hickle.
She looked around for a tool, and found a soldier's dropped bayonet.
It still had a good edge.
It would have to do.
0001–0001.
Manolo stabbed the dashbuttons, intending to blank the reading.
Only one figure disappeared.
0001.
It was 0001 in blue.
His own reading.
As long as the number was there on the dashscreen, he was alive.
He would have to sit it out, but he would live.
He'd spend hours down at the Pyramid talking through his emotions on this one.
There would be untold anguish to  purge in the group sessions.
But Gari would help him cope with it.
Guilt was no good, he knew.
He had to quash that, and learn to feel good about himself again.
That was the main thing, to feel good about yourself.
He wished he hadn't blasted so many beers.
His bladder was full to straining, and there was no catheter-tube in the DeLorean.
He would have to piss in the backseat, and that was imported Argentine leather hand-tooled by a specialist flown in from Tijuana.
He should never have taken on this penny-ante bounty hunt.
Bob Holderness wouldn't have touched it.
He had wanted the Agency to specialize in political cases.
That was probably why he wasn't around any more.
Manolo had always known there were men in suits behind the Surf Nazis, but he'd never carried the vendetta to them.
When he got out of here, he would make that up.
He would track down the boardroom where the orders were issued, and he would declare all-out war on whichever Japcorp or state authority had been behind the singe.
The car shifted, and something clanged.
She was out there.
Jessamyn Bonney.
She couldn't get in, but she was out there.
The ve-hickle rang with her blows.
She would get frustrated soon, and go away.
Bronson Manolo could wait her out.
He had chewed his moustache ragged.
His teeth were clogged with hair.
That wasn't supposed to happen.
His barber-surgeon had guaranteed the attachments against all eventualities.
The banging continued.
0001.
Manolo muttered to himself.
‘Home freeee, you can't get meee…‘
She would have to be an H-M exec to get through the DeLorean's brain, and unseal the system.
The banging stopped, and there was peace for a moment.
She must be giving up, walking away.
Manolo  had pressed his bleep-alert.
The Insurance people would be here within minutes.
There was a hum of machinery, and a hiss of expelling air.
It wasn't possible.
The car was rolling over and kicking its legs for her.
The doorseals receded, the shutters vanished.
Manolo squirmed, pushing himself back against the seat.
He didn't even have a gun.
A breeze passed through, as the doors raised like beetle-wings.
‘Ommmmm,’ Manolo said, trying to attune his thoughts.
Positive thinking could make this go away.
‘Ommmmm.’
She was a dark silhouette outside.
She threw something onto the seat beside him.
It was a human hand, raggedly severed at the wrist.
‘Open sesame,’ she said, slipping into the car.
0001.
0000.
0000.
0000.
PART FOUR: JESSE FRANKENSTEIN'S DAUGHTER
I
The Monastery of Santa de Nogueira had been imported stone by stone from Portugal to the Gila Desert, Arizona, in 1819, and abandoned after the Mexican-American War.
Parts of it were eight hundred years old, the basements were half-filled with fine sand and whatever lived there, lived alone.
When the heart of America dried up and blew away, things didn't change much in the Gila Desert.
But the sand was thinning: the bones of dead monks were drifting to the surface of the pit that had once been a graveyard, while the headstones sank slowly towards the bedrock.
This was the Holy-Place-From-Over-the-Great-Water.
It was exactly as it had been drawn in the family for generations.
Hawk-That-Settles knew it at once.
He was struck by the way that the buffalo hide pictures from the  last century, drawn by his great-great grandfathers, showed the monastery as it was now, in 1997.
This was not only the place, this was the Time.
He had walked the length of the state, his waterskin slung over his shoulder, keeping away from the roads and the gangcults.
The Navaho had long since learned that the best way to live was to stick to the land no white man would want to take from him.
Taking his direction from the moon and the stars, he had kept on course.
By day, under his sunshade, he had Dreamwalked ahead, learning where the sandrat nests were, divining which waterholes were safe.
Once, he had sensed a presence following him on the trail.
A man on a horse.
Perhaps a ghost, perhaps not.
For two full days, Hawk and the horseman travelled the same course, just out of each other 's sight, but then, one evening, the presence was gone.
Hawk almost missed the stranger.
They had been a match, an Indian and a cowboy.
There had been no Darkness in the stranger, and Hawk recalled that one of the spirit warriors who would stand with the One-Eyed White Girl in the last battle was called the Man Who Rides Alone.
Otherwise, it was an uneventful trek.
Hawk slept with his guards up, and was not much bothered by spirits.
Of course, there was great agitation in the spirit world as the Last Days drew nearer.
He half-expected to be set upon by demons — the God of the Razor, Tartu or Misquamacus — but his part in the developing story was ignored.
Once, a wendigo , straying far from its Northern haunts, brushed by riding a freak wind, but it took no interest in the lone Indian.
Everywhere he went, he felt traces of the One-Eyed White Girl.
She was fighting her battles elsewhere, hauling herself out of the rut of common humanity to the point when she would be ready to accept the training the medicine man of the line of Armijah was destined to give  her.
He arrived at Santa de Nogueira three days before the spirit warrior.
He passed the time Dreamwalking.
He travelled, sensing the works of the Dark Ones everywhere.
Wars raged, famines spread, diseases ran unchecked.
Death enveloped the world, seeping from boardrooms to battlefields.
Those who could commit suicide, directly or indirectly, were doing so; in this War, suicide was the only way to resist the call-up.
Everyone alive was being influenced, Hawk knew.
Everyone would have to take sides.
He was very much afraid that the side he had chosen would be outnumbered forty to one by the minions of Darkness.
Then, at nightfall, she came out of the desert in a sleek automobile with bloody upholstery.
He saw her dust devil from a long way away, and knew that she had been led here by her own dreams, by the pull of the moon.
Her picture was titled the Moon and the Crocodile.
She would be confused, but he would have to deal with that.
The machine slid to a halt inside the courtyard, and Hawk stepped out of the shadows.
The car's door raised, and the One-Eyed White Girl emerged.
Her hair was long and black as a raven's feather, untied so one wing partially covered her patch-covered missing eye.
She wore loose black pyjamas, moccasins and a black brassiere.
She wasn't tall, she wasn't obviously muscled, and she was young, a girl not a woman.
She didn't look like a great warrior, but Hawk sensed her strength immediately.
He knew some of her past, and he would learn more.
Her eyepatch apart, she bore no obvious scars, but she had fought many battles, vanquished many foes.
He opened his mouth, and sang the song of the One-Eyed White Girl, the song his father had taught him.
Her hand went to the holstered gun slung on her thigh.
She had polished black fingernails, a single touch of ornamentation.
He spread his empty hands to show her he meant no harm.
His song continued, echoing through the monastery as once the chanting of the monks must have done.
The devout were long gone, but the Sacred Purpose remained.
The girl's hand relaxed, and fell away from her weapon.
The moon rose, and her pale face glowed.
II
This is ZeeBeeCee, The Station That's Got It All, bringing you What You Want twenty-four hours a day, sponsored by GenTech, the bioproducts division that really cares…
And now, as part of our public service program, we hand you over live to Lynne Cramer and Brunt Hardacre in our Beverly Hills Studios…
‘Hello, America.
It's June 16th, 1997, and it's Lynne again, welcoming you to SnitchWatch USA , the program in which you, the viewer at home, can help fight crime for cash money and prizes by interfacing with our datanet on your home peecee.
Remember, GenTech is offering goods or the credit up to the value of ten million dollars for any and all information leading to the arrest of ever-so-desperate felons.
Now, over to our Op from the Top, Brunt Hardacre…‘
‘Thank you, Lynne.
Last week, you'll remember, we put a bounty out on the head of that scuzzbo, Jimmie Joe Jackson, South-Western Sector Venerated Warthog of the Maniax.
Well, we've sorted through the heads that were sent in to the studio, and we're real pleased to report that Jackson's was indeed among them.
He's positively been identified by F.X.
Wicking of the T-H-R agency and by Colonel Younger of the United States Cavalry, and those bio-implanted replacement lungs are winging their way to a viewer in Phoenix who has asked us, for reasons we fully understand, not to reveal his name.
Thank you, public-spirited  do-gooder, whoever you are, and good luck with your tar-free windsacks…‘
‘Say, Brunt, what do you think?
Would someone with terminal cancer have a better life expectancy than someone who was publicly known to have ratted on the Maniax?’
‘That's a good question, Lynne.
Of course, we'll never know the answer because ZeeBeeCee absolutely guarantees the confidentiality of all our informants.
Not one has ever fallen victim to a gangland-style hit after coming forward with solid information.
Some other stations don't have such good security, you know, and their crime-fighting shows rack up pretty heavy casualties.
But with ZeeBeeCee, you can snitch in safety…‘
‘Phew!
Say, I sure feel safer now that Jimmie Joe Jackson is out of business, Brunt.’
‘There are a lot of people who feel like that, Lynne.’
‘I'm sure there are.
Tell me, who's the scumbag for today?’
‘Well Lynne, today we're giving equal time to the ladies and throwing the spotlight on one of America's Most Wanted Femme Criminals, Ms Jessamyn Amanda Bonney, sometimes known under the aliases of Jazzbeaux or Minnie Molotov.
Guns and Killing magazine currently rate her as the sixth most dangerous solo outlaw in the Americas, and she is the highest-ranked woman on the list, coming in at thirty-seven places above the Antarctic esperado Ice Kold Katie.
Formerly affiliated to the Psychopomps gangcult, her chapter was broken up in 1995 during a pitched battle with the Road Cavalry in Spanish Fork, Deseret, Jessamyn is now believed to be working alone.’
‘What kind of a girl gets to the Most Wanted list, Brunt?’
‘Jessamyn was born in 1978 in the Denver NoGo, Lynne.
She got off to a bad start on the streets as the child of Bruno Bonney, convicted pimp, pusher, armed robber and bilko artist.
ZeeBeeCee has gained a court order  allowing access to Jessamyn Bonney's juvenile records, stored in the central infonet of the Bruyce-Hoare Agency, and we can exclusively reveal for the first time on national television that evidence which has come to light since her 1992 parricide hearing has suggested that she was indeed guilty of the murder of her father, a crime for which she was acquitted in court on the testimony of one Andrew Jean, since deceased, a gangcult associate and known perjurer.’
‘Well, that's just a thrilling revelation, Brunt.’
‘You said it, kiddo.
After knocking off her old man, Jessamyn rose through the ranks in the Psychopomps, and racked up quite a score.
Then, after Spanish Fork, our information gets a bit shaky.
We have uncovered evidence that suggests she was working in league with famed mass murderer Herman Katz in the Spanish Fork area…‘
‘That's the guy who stuffed his mother?’
‘You got it, Lynne.
Now, sources close to the receivers of the H-M Agency of Los Angeles suggest that it has been conclusively proved that she was involved in the massacre at Dead Rat, Arizona, last year, during which a peaceful force of process-servers were murdered by members of the Maniax gangcult, who then razed the community to the ground.
It will be remembered that popular Los Angelino Op Bronson Manolo lost his life in that engagement.’
‘I remember it well.
Bronson Manolo was a personal friend of mine.
We were co-worshippers at the Surfside Pyramid.’
‘Tough break, Lynne.
It is believed that Jessamyn underwent extensive bio-engineering under the scalpel of Dr Simon Threadneedle, the disgraced GenTech surgeon who was also among the dead in the Dead Rat Incident.
Details are not yet available, but it is possible that Dr Threadneedle turned her into some sort of cyborg death machine.’
‘That's not good news for law-abiding citizens, is it?’
‘Certainly not, Lynne.’
‘So, is Jessamyn Bonney in fact the Most Dangerous Woman in the World?’
‘Well, we asked that question to Redd Harvest of the T-H-R agency as the Op was on her way to face a cadre of the Trap Door Spiders.’
‘And what did Ms Harvest say?’
‘I can give you the exact quote.
Her reply was ‘not while I'm alive, she isn't.’’
‘So, what's Jessamyn up to these days?’
‘Little has been heard of her since Dead Rat, but she is believed to be in the South-Western United States.
Her known associates are all deceased, although a sighting which has not been discounted would put her in the company earlier this year of Hawk-That-Settles, a Navaho medicine man and dealer in controlled substances.
Hawk-That-Settles left the Navaho Reservation last year and is classed by the US Cavalry as a ‘renegade,’ having been associated in the '80s with the militant Native American terrorist organization, The Sons of Geronimo.’
‘Scary people, Brunt.
What does Jessamyn look like?
Is she pretty?’
‘You don't have anything to worry about, sweetheart.’
‘Flatterer.’
‘Well, Jessamyn's appearance has changed over the years, from her first arrests as a pre-teenager to this last photograph — please excuse the quality, it's a blow-up from a spysat picture taken from an orbital pass over Arizona last December — which shows her as we must assume she is now.
She is identifiable by her missing left eye, and her green right eye.
Her hair has usually been black, and worn long.
She is, of course, dangerous, and should not be approached.’
‘And what's the damage, Brunt?’
‘Rewards on her total over one million dollars, for offences that range from felony bank robbery to first  degree murder.
Bounties on her head have been filed by the United States Government, the Holderness-Manolo Agency, Turner-Harvest-Ramirez, GenTech, G-Mek, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Hammond Maninski, the Winter Corporation, Westinghouse, Co-Cola, the Tabernacle of Joseph, the National Enquirer , Interpol, the Government of the Republic of Mexico, Walt Disney Enterprises, the Denver Civic Improvements Committee, the Colorado Diocese of the Roman Catholic Church, and this station, ZeeBeeCee.’
‘And in addition to those rewards, Brunt, we know that anyone coming forward with information leading to the apprehension or termination of Jessamyn Bonney will be entitled to one hundred thousand dollars’ worth of bio-improvements supervised by Dr Zarathustra himself, a duplex apartment in the PZ of your choice, a fully-guaranteed and pirate-protected Caribbean cruise, this complete household computer hook-up and two thousand hours net-time on the interface of your choice, one of our new range of Venus-Adonis model companions, and a further one hundred thousand dollars in the currency or negotiable bond of your choice.
So, viewers at home, do not hesitate, if you have even the slightest piece of useful data, hook up that modem and call, in complete confidence, our unmonitored SnitchLine on the number that is flashing at the bottom of your screen…
‘The lines will remain open for three days, until the next edition of SnitchWatch U.S.A .
Until we next meet over the airwaves, this has been Lynne Cramer…‘
‘…and Brunt Hardacre…‘
‘…saying Keep America Safe for Americans, and have a snazz day…‘
III
This was where the moon had brought her.
The moon, and Hawk-That-Settles.
He had explained it to her, explained that there were great forces in the universe and that she was destined to serve them.
She didn't yet know how she felt about that.
Serving great forces was not what she had signed up for this trip, but somehow it felt right.
The gang-girl she had been seemed as remote from her as the child she had been before that.
Doc Threadneedle had warned her that the alterations he had made would affect her mind, so she could be confused without realizing it.
But actually, she felt her thinking was clearer now.
She had been at her worst between Spanish Fork and Dead Rat, when Elder Seth and the voices of the dead were arguing inside her head.
Now, she had that under control.
The monastery of Santa de Nogueira was a peaceful place, and she was working through her life, straightening out the kinks in her psyche.
Hawk did not look like a soce worker or a shrink, but he was getting to her in a way the juvie officials never used to.
They sat at the great wooden table, drinking a little water out of earthenware bowls, chewing cactus.
She had given up meat.
The taste was too strong, and brought the memories of martyred animals into her mind.
She could live on water, and a little cactusflesh.
She felt all the better for it.
Doc Threadneedle had turned her into a human perpetual motion machine, like one of those dipping birds her father had bought her as a child.
If she kept her beak wet, she could go on forever.
There were seven levels of spirituality, Hawk had told her, and she must ascend through them all before she was readied for her appointed task.
It was all new to her, but the Indian seemed to know what he was talking about, and so she had gone along with him.
The Navaho knew what the moon wanted of her.
On their first night in the monastery, with a silver crescent faint in the sky, Hawk gave her a gnarled root, and told her to smear a little of the juice of it onto her tongue before sleep.
Frankenstein's Daughter though she was, she still dreamed.
That night, she dreamed of the Great Crocodile in the Moon.
Then, she dreamed she was the Great Crocodile in the Moon.
Finally, she was herself and the crocodile at the same time.
When she told Hawk of her dream, he told her she had reached the First Level.
She didn't feel any different.
By day, she exercised her body as Doc Threadneedle had advised.
Hawk joined her, and, clad only in breechclouts, they ran through the sands, wrestled to a standstill — Hawk was wiry, but strong, and agile enough to compensate for her bio-improvements — and climbed the outer walls of Santa de Nogueira.
She continued to surprise herself with the capabilities of her augmented flesh.
By night, they made love and shared their dreams.
Doc Threadneedle had been right about the sex.
At last, she realized what all the fuss was about.
She could experience the pleasure of lovemaking with every nerve-ending in her body.
Sometimes, she thought she disconcerted Hawk with her love, but he kept apace with her.
She told him about the Elder, and of the eternity of memories he had poured unasked into her head.
He taught her a position for sleeping that placed the forepart of her brain at the apex of a pyramid.
Nguyen Seth's past faded, and became the memory of a memory.
Without realizing it, she had reached the Second Level.
‘Your body has advanced beyond the human, Jesse.
Your spirit must catch up with it, or you will fail the moon.’
Hawk was a Dreamwalker.
That meant he could project his spirit as he slept, and wander the material world and  even the spirit lands.
She asked him to teach her the trick, but he said that she was not ready yet.
She must keep spirit and flesh wedded.
She was to be a Spirit Warrior.
He showed her old pictures, drawn with pigments on hide, and she recognized scenes from her life.
There she was, being battered into the roadway by Nguyen Seth, struggling with the reanimated corpse of Herman Katz's mother, wandering the desert on all fours, tossing Holm Rodriguez's severed hand into Manolo's DeLorean.
All these had been drawn before she was born, and yet they were exact prophecies.
The pictures of her life yet to come were as vivid, and yet she could see no meaning in them.
The background of one was recognizably Santa de Nogueira, and she was locked in struggle with an ordinary-looking man about whom a dark cloud was gathering.
Others were disturbingly abstract, and Hawk could give her no clue as to their exact meaning.
There were other Spirit Warriors, she was told.
Even now, they were following their own destinies, being drawn towards some Last Battle in which they would stand against things Hawk called the Dark Spirits, whose front man on Earth she recognized as Elder Seth.
If she survived, he said, she would eventually meet the others, but there were many possible destinies.
Several of the pictures were ominously ambiguous.
Jesse found it hard not to see in them versions of her death.
In one, a woman with red hair and red hands — another Spirit Warrior, Hawk said — was throttling her, face turned into a mask of hate.
In another, she was a small speck overwhelmed by a vast and writhing darkness that reminded her of nothing so much as pictures she had seen on the cover of Tcherkassoff's album Black Holes, and Other Singularities .
Sometimes, Hawk was like the masters she had seen in Chinese martial arts movies, talking in parables, and drawing out his pupil's skills through subterfuge.
But, at other moments, he was as lost as she was, another slave to the whims of the moon.
This frightened her.
She needed no  doubts.
She learned about Hawk's life as he learned of hers, and they became close.
She had never had time to think about love before, had thought that Bruno had burned that out of her.
Now, she wasn't sure whether she truly loved the Navaho, or whether he simply happened to be the only human being she had contact with.
Love used to be just something she heard about in sove songs or followed in picstrips.
The songs came back to her now, and she thought of all the things she hadn't had: a junior prom, dates, valentines, flowers.
All the things that Tuesday Weld and Debbie Reynolds had in the movies, she had missed.
When Tuesday and Debbie were arguing with their Moms whether they should wear a strapless dress to the dance, she had been carving up gang-girls in warehouse arenas, then picking out some cock-for-the-night from the stud line.
She was eighteen now, and it was too late to be a teenager.
She became pregnant, but lost the baby in the fourth month.
At first, she hadn't wanted it, but the miscarriage devastated her.
Somehow, she knew it had been her one chance to reproduce, and that it had passed.
There were other things she had to do in her life, things forces beyond the reach of her mind deemed important.
That night, for the first time, she cried uncontrollably.
Her tears seeped through the cotton mattress of her cot and fell onto the European stones.
Hawk was gentle, and she sensed his feeling of loss was even greater than hers.
Red-eyed and hollow inside, she was appalled when he told her she had reached the Third Level.
‘You have found your heart, Jesse.
You will bear no more children, but you can now travel into the spirit world in safety, anchored by your heart in the world of men.
Now, you can be a Dreamwalker.’
Her tears had been the pathway.
The Doc had told her something of the sort as he died.
But, once the flood was dried, she could cry no more.
A month passed.
The moon swelled, filling out as her belly ceased to, and then dwindled again.
She spent a lot of time thinking about her father.
She was sure he had told her the story of the Moon and the Crocodile when she was a child, but she couldn't remember it.
At the time, she had thought he had made it up himself.
Now, she wondered whether the moon crept into his mind too, driving him to pick up his rod and mark her back.
Those woundings had been steps on the path that brought her to Santa de Nogueira, she realized.
Everything in her life — all the pain, blood and death — had been pushing her onwards and into the desert.
When the time came, Hawk mixed up the blood of her menses with peyote , plain brown sugar, mescal, ground-to-flour stonechips from the oldest walls of Santa de Nogueira, water, his own seed, whisky, buffalo grease and an ampoule of smacksynth.
He told her to shut her eyes, and smeared the paste over her face, leaving breathing holes over her nostrils.
It hardened to a mask, and she lay under it for three days, wandering inside her body.
She appreciated Doc Threadneedle's handiwork, but also she learned to love what had been done for her before the biowizard came along.
He had just provided some polish for a machine that was already a miracle of design.
When the mask came off, she knew she had reached the Fourth Level.
Hawk built a fire in the courtyard, and kept it burning for a week, producing dried wood from God knows where.
Jesse sat and stared into the flames, seeing faces in the patterns.
There was Seth, and Doc Threadneedle, and Hawk-That-Settles and her father.
There was Mrs Katz, impossibly animated, chopping at her mind.
And others she didn't recognize: a young woman from over the sea, sometimes dressed in a nun's habit, sometimes holding a clear-handled gun; a foreign man, dark-complexioned and  dangerous, his hands red with blood; a beautiful young-old man with generous lips, picking up a guitar and smiling; and a man in a tropical suit, with a deathshead skull behind his smile.
But, most of all, there was the crocodile, full moons in its eyes…
The faces twisted, and scenes were played out.
Some, she recognized: the NoGo walk-up she had shared with her Dad, Spanish Fork, the Katz Motel, Dead Rat.
Others were obscure, yet-to-come images that meant nothing to her.
A gathering darkness over a white plain.
Graves opening to spew the dead.
An ocean as smooth as glass closing over things vast, alive and hateful.
When the fires burned down, Jesse was afraid.
She had reached the Fifth Level, and she could no longer go back.
She could not turn from the destiny that had been alotted to her.
She looked and looked at the place where the fire had been, searching for the future, but could only see ashes.