

A FABULOUS THING HAPPENED ON MY WAY TO THE FORUM
Tribute from the ‘son’ Frankie Howerd wanted to adopt
‘He said he'd always wanted to be a dad’
ANTON ANTONOWICZ
OUR recent series commemorating the life of comedy king Frankie Howerd brought a flood of readers' letters.
Most were from fans telling their happy memories of the comedian, who died in April.
Many were ex-Servicemen whom Frankie toured the world to entertain.
But one man's story stood out.
It is a tale of simple kindness which Frankie Howerd offered to a lonely teenage boy during one short summer.
A kindness the boy never forgot.
The boy Frankie wanted to adopt….
ANDREW BELL explains that he may not pronounce all his words distinctly.
He may have to ask you to repeat some of your own words, too.
‘I suffer from high-tone deafness,’ he says.
‘There are certain sounds I can't pick up.
‘Had to go to special schools because of it.
Couldn't have a normal education.
Just so you know while we talk.’
And so his story unfolds.
His father George, a consultant engineer, went out to Kuwait in 1978.
Rather than have his son and his wife Anne endure the desert country, he found them a rented villa in Malta.
‘Across the road was a detached house — white, marbled, single-storeyed, with a pool and a 6ft-high wall,’ Andrew remembers.
‘It was called The Forum.’
Frankie Howerd had bought it in the early Seventies.
He chose its name from the play A Funny Thing Happened On The Way To The Forum, which had helped to save his flagging career.
Andrew, now 29, was 15 that summer when he knocked at the door and introduced himself.
‘Denis Heymer, Frankie's manager, answered and said Frankie would be only too obliged to see us,’ he recalls.
‘It was the start of a genuine friendship.
‘I told Frankie about my deafness and my Dad being away.
And we would go for walks together or just sit in the garden, talking.
‘I told him how I had to go for special lessons and how other kids would sometimes laugh or pick on me.
And he would listen and try to talk up my confidence.
‘I was a lonely chap and I think he thought he could help.
‘He didn't crack jokes.
He didn't put on an act.
‘He just listened…this big star, the famous comedian, who was ready to try to understand all the mixed-up feelings of a teenager.’
Frankie, a lifelong bachelor, often spoke of his longing to have children of his own.
‘One day,’ says Andrew, ‘he said he had always wanted to be a father.
That he had it in mind to adopt a child.
‘How would you feel if I were to adopt you?’ he asked me.
There was something serious but sad about his question.
I already had a father, after all.
‘But it meant a lot to me.
Here was someone to whom I could confide.
My first real grown-up friend.
A man who made me laugh and feel better.’
He recalls the car trips across Malta with Frankie firmly lodged in the passenger seat.
‘Denis or my Mum would drive.
Frankie never did.’
His fear of driving stretched back to his wartime days when Sergeant Howerd, a novice driver, was put in charge of a lorry-load of squaddies.
‘He said he lost control of the truck within seconds and crashed it into a tree.
No one was hurt, but he hadn't ventured behind the wheel of a vehicle since that day,’ Andrew says.
‘His usual spin took him to a private beach at the Dragonara Hotel in St Julien with Denis and Frankie's sister Betty.
‘They would go through the hotel kitchen to avoid the public, and that beach was the one place where he would take his toupee off.
‘We were the last people Frankie visited before flying home.
He told us he dreaded having to stand in line in the airport while people giggled and pointed.
But he just shrugged.
‘Then he told me to ‘keep on fighting’ and keep in touch.
I still see him, holding his hair against the wind, waving goodbye.
‘We left Malta shortly afterwards and my Dad's job took us to Japan.
‘But I kept on fighting like Frankie told me.
Now I'm finishing a college course as a book-keeper and ready at last to have a career.
‘I have a steady girl-friend.
And I've pretty well beaten my disability.
But I'll always remember being that lonely kid.
‘And that kind man, who desperately would have liked to have children, who took the time to listen and help.’
REAL PALS: Andrew Bell (left) was helped by Frankie as a lonely and mixed-up teenager
MEMORIES: Mirror salute to a much-missed star
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
BOBBY BROWN and Whitney Houston have had their first lover's tiff…over a pair of pet pooches.
Brown, who wed Whitney at a glittering ceremony last month, says: ‘Whitney has two dogs she adores.
But I won't go near them.’
Bobby, at No. 18 with Humpin' Around, says: ‘When I was young I had a cute little collie dog, but one day he bit me real bad.
I've hated dogs ever since.’
DOG FIGHT: Whitney
BRAKES ON SKID ROW
WILD rockers Skid Row were banned from a club in Peterborough, Canada, after throwing condoms at the crowd.
Singer Sebastien Bach, at No. 22 with Youth Gone Wild, says: ‘I wanted kids to know it wasn't just junkies or gays who get that disease.
So I threw the condoms.
‘But the club management caught four people making love in the bathrooms — safely, I might add — so we were banned.’
He adds: ‘It's a drag that a place where teenagers were listening to music wasn't considered appropriate to talk about AIDS.
That's plain ridiculous.’
MY  MARVELLOUS MASIE
JULIE WALTERS ON THE HEARTBREAK OF FIGHTING HER DAUGHTER'S LEUKAEMIA FOR A SECOND TIME
‘When she's tired I worry like mad.
I think it might be something else’
HILARY BONNER
IT SHOULD have been a great year for Julie Walters.
Her career has hit new heights and she has a movie due out soon.
But success has been overshadowed by fears for her much-loved daughter Masie.
It was discovered in 1990 that Maisie, now aged four, had leukaemia.
And earlier this year Maisie suffered a shock relapse.
Masie had responded brilliantly to treatment and seemed fighting fit.
Then tests showed that the leukaemia was no longer in remission.
A panic-stricken Julie immediately cancelled a planned visit to the Cannes Film Festival to promote her new movie, Just Like a Man.
Maisie was put back on intensive chemotherapy treatment.
Within weeks she had overcome her setback and astounded doctors with her good health.
For her mother the suffering goes on.
‘You don't ever stop worrying about everything,’ says Julie.
‘All parents worry, but when you have a child with something like Maisie has the worry is obviously more.
‘Whenever she is tired I worry.
I know all kids get tired, but with her I always think it might be something else.
‘With leukaemia in a child they say that if they are clear for five years, then all is well.
Five years — it just doesn't bear thinking about.
I just concentrate on the fact that Maisie is fine at the moment.
‘We're OK.
She can lead an almost totally normal life.
She is at play school and she will go to full school in January.
‘The only different thing about Maisie at the moment is that she has to go to hospital to have treatment.
It's not a problem for her.
She accepts it and copes with it, the way children do.
‘The chemotherapy has affected her hair — it's very thin — but she does have hair, blonde hair.’
Julie, her boyfriend Grant Roffey, and Maisie live in West Sussex.
Their home is a country retreat which Julie finds harder and harder to leave.
For 42-year-old Julie all the usual conflicts of being a working mother are heightened by her daughter's illness.
Former policeman Grant, a sociology student when Julie met him six years ago, stays at home, looks after Maisie and keeps house.
Julie goes out to work.
The set-up makes sense.
Few men could match super-talented Julie's earning power, and she does a job she enjoys — most of the time.
But it's a way of life which Julie admits can bring stress and strain to a partnership.
‘Since Maisie was taken ill I have found it even more difficult to leave her at home sometimes,’ she says.
‘And then Grant gets that primeval male thing and he thinks he should be doing more.
It's not heavy.
It's not a problem.
But we do go through those kind of phases.
‘Grant is so good with Maisie.
Sometimes Maisie went to him instead of me because he was the one who was there and I was the one who went away.
That really hurt.
‘I tried to do far too much last year.
I was away from home a lot and ended up collapsing with exhaustion.
I got really ill.
I had a kind of ear infection which caused giddiness and I had to come out of the West End play I was appearing in at the time, The Rose Tattoo.
‘While the play was on I would get home in the early hours of the morning and then Maisie would wake me up really early.
She tried not to.
‘I am talking very quietly so as not to wake mummy,’ she would say in a very loud voice.
‘Mummy would soon be wide-awake.
I tried staying in town overnight and then driving home during the day to spend time with Maisie.
It was exhausting.
And her being unwell added to the strain.’
During last year Julie made a film for BBC2 with Joan Plowright and Jeanne Moreau called The Clothes In The Wardrobe, to be shown next year.
And she filmed Just Like a Woman, on general release later this month, in which she plays a woman who falls in love with a transvestite.
It's lighter and funnier than it sounds, but this was no gentle role.
The film is based on the real life of a woman called Monica Jay.
‘It was such a smashing role I couldn't resist it, but it was demanding, and I have taken things much easier this year,’ says Julie.
‘I was determined to have time with Maisie.’
Her relationship with Grant is a close one.
‘All relationships go in phases,’ she says.
‘And after the first few years, when you get over all that being in love, then it's: ‘Oh, this is the person I am living with.’
You get to know that person then.’
I sat next to Grant at a private screening of Just Like a Woman.
‘Whenever I watch Julie act I always want to cry,’ he told me.
‘She is very funny, but she always looks so vulnerable.’
While Julie was still in hospital after Maisie was born, Grant went to see the film Buster in which Julie played Great Train Robber Buster Edward's wife.
In the film Julie is seen suffering a miscarriage.
She was pregnant with Maisie when she filmed the scene and found it very disturbing to have to act out the motions of a woman losing her baby.
‘A midwife went through it all with me and I actually asked her to reassure me that nothing I was doing could harm my own baby,’ she remembers.
Grant was even more upset.
‘When he came to the hospital after seeing Buster he was in floods of tears, heaving great sobs.
He said he had run out of the cinema.
He just couldn't bear it.’
Julie met 36-year-old Grant in a wine bar.
She invited him home for a coffee and he set about trying to find out what was wrong with her washing machine.
She noticed that he had a cute bum — and the rest is history.
Grant never really left.
They set up home together.
Their love grew stronger by the day and then Maisie was born, a healthy, bonny baby.
It seemed they were the couple with everything.
Then, while Julie was making the film Stepping Out with Liza Minnelli in Canada, tragedy struck.
A series of minor ailments led Grant and Julie to take Maisie to a doctor, and tests revealed leukaemia.
Julie carried on working on Stepping Out.
There was no point in her dropping out and wrecking the film and, in any case, for as long as she worked the film company would pick up Maisie's crippling Canadian hospital bills.
‘It was hard for both of us,’ Julie remembers.
But Maisie proved to be a real trouper — just like her mum.
AT HOME: Julie loves country living Picture: BRENDAN MONKS
SUPPORTING ROLE: Boyfriend Grant and Julie
LIKE MOTHER, LIKE DAUGHTER: Illness has proved that Maisie, like her famous mum, is a fighter
VOTE FOR YOUR TOP VIDEO HOT SHOTS
Select your award winners and you can join in our £40,000 draw
NEIL MURRAY
GIVE us your hitlist for the top videos of the year and you could drive off in a SEAT Ibiza 1.2 SLXi.
It's time once again for the Daily Mirror British Video Awards you can share in our £40,000 prize line-up.
Stars to set your sight on include: Anthony Hopkins in Silence of the Lambs, Robert De Niro in Awakenings, Kevin Costner in Robin Hood Prince Of Thieves and Dances With Wolves.
Actresses who could hit the target include Cher in Mermaids.
Maybe Geena Davis and Susan Sarandon in Thelma & Louise, Julia Roberts in Sleeping With The Enemy or Jodie Foster in Silence Of The Lambs.
These are the seventh annual Awards, sponsored by the Daily Mirror and Sunday Mirror with the British Videogram Association, will be presented at a star-studded dinner in October, hosted by Jonathan Ross.
To encourage you to tell us your favourite videos we've some  marvellous prizes to give away.
They are:
A SEAT Ibiza SLXi, worth £7,500.
It is designed for maximum pleasure and harnesses the power of a System Porsche 1.2 fuel-injected engine, complete with three-way catalyser.
For more on the SEAT range call free-phone 0800 521 382.
PLUS there are 10 TurboDrive VR422 video recorders to be won.
At £349.99, these offer market-leading picture quality and the fastest performance of any VCR on sale.
PLUS £30,000 worth of videos (£75 each) not due out until October or November.
 These include Basic Instinct, Joe Pesci in The Super and Robert De Niro's chilling Cape Fear, the excellent Wayne's World, the dazzling The Lawnmower Man, the hilarious Don't Tell Mom The Babysitter's Dead, Chevy Chase's Memoirs Of An Invisible Man and the menacing The Hand That Rocked The Cradle.
PLUS FIVE winners and partners will each get £100 tickets to the award dinner at London's Grosvenor Hotel.
HOW TO VOTE
TO CAST your vote, PRINT the numbers 1 to 13 on a postcard and against each number enter the video of your choice for that particular category from the list here, compiled by the BVA.
For example, if Silence Of The Lambs is your choice for Rental Video Of The Year write: 1 — Silence Of The Lambs, and so on .
It is NOT necessary to fill in something for every single category.
Complete your voting, add your name and address, and send to: British Video Awards, Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London, SE99 7TW, to arrive by Sept 18.
Standard Mirror contest rules apply.
All cards go into our grand draw.
First out wins the Seat 1.2 SLXi, the next ten the VCRS, the next 50 the sets of video cassettes, and the next five the pair of invitations to the Video Awards evening.
SURE-FIRE WINNER: Susan Sarandon star of Thelma and Louise
ON TARGET: Jodie Foster in Silence Of The Lambs
ANNE ROBINSON
HARD TO TAKE
THERE is an absurd suggestion going round that GCSEs and A-levels have become easier.
They have not.
As any mother will tell you, it hasn't been one jot less exhausting and emotionally draining to live with a morose, depressed, melodramatic, self-obsessed exam-taker this year than any other year.
When the saints go marching on
EVERY time there's a hint of trouble, have you noticed, how every time there's a hint of trouble Princess Diana hits another hospice?
Whoosh up to Blackpool last week for a fix of caring, sharing and public admiration; a respite from the nasty, unappreciative, eightsome-reeling in-laws at Balmoral.
Thus proving the theory that charity work is always more beneficial to charity workers than to those they appear unselfishly and unstintingly to assist.
It was the unfortunate Bishop of Norwich, hereinafter referred to as The Bloody Bishop, to quote Her Royal Highness, who had trouble grasping how quietly she became a hospice star.
And as a not-particularly-modest Squidgey told her friend in that most revealing of telephone calls, you have to have been to Hell and back yourself to know how to behave nicely with the dying.
There are, of course, those who have infinitely more experience that Squidgey when it comes to caring and sharing with people who are spending their last days in AIDS wards and/or hospices.
They are the nursing staff, who not only comfort but also empty the bed pans, wash bed sores, clean up the vomiting, often for an NHS wage which wouldn't keep Her Royal Highness in French blue mascara.
It is to the credit of such workers that they rarely feel animosity towards a member of the Royal Family who puts on a designer frock, gets into a chauffeur-driven car, spends a couple of hours meeting the afflicted and, as a result, has her picture on the front page of most national newspapers with the word caring prefacing every mention of her name.
Ropy
And who as a result has acquired a rather topsy-turvy view of her own importance.
To the extent that she's now confusing the show business quality of performing well in public— at which she excels — with spirituality and saintliness.
If suffering a ropey marriage automatically led to that sort of state of grace, half the women in the country would be walking round with an outsize halo above their head.
HOSPICE VISITOR: but is our Princess turning a sanctuary for the dying into a sanctuary for DI?
People who live in glass palaces…
QUITE what happens to the Royal Family in the long term is anybody's guess.
For the short term I have a few suggestions.
From now onwards I do not wish to be lectured about smoking, drinking, the environment or what architecture I should admire.
I do not wish to know how to bring up my children, what view to have about drug addicts, how much Shakespeare should be taught in comprehensive schools or how much I must marvel at the achievements of members of the Commonwealth countries.
There is not even a tiny bit of me that is curious to learn the Royal Family's views on wildlife, horse-racing, horticulture, the ozone layer, organic farming, spelling for seven-year-olds, ten-pin bowling or the Save The Children Fund.
Since I, without the benefit of tax relief, am paying as much as I am for the Monarchy, I would like them to do what they have to do in silence.
They can plant trees, visit old people's homes, unveil plaques, inspect soldiers, watch Maori dancing, attend memorial services and open new motorways.
But at all times I would prefer them to act as if they have non-speaking parts.
Enough has been revealed about the antics of the Monarchy in the past few weeks to suggest that people in palaces should not be trying to tell the rest of us how to behave.
Particularly when their time can more usefully be employed helping the Queen to complete an income-tax return form.
And work out a suitable figure to be paid in back tax from 1952.
TAXING: The Queen
LAST LINE
‘THIS is regurgitated garbage dressed up as something new,’ said Frank Bough when confronted with the error of his ways.
Well, not really, Frank.
Miss Whiplash was in fact dressed up in thigh boots and a tightly-laced bodysuit while seeing to the likes of you in her torture chamber.
And at £80 an hour, she quite wisely doesn't call it garbage.
She calls it corrective training.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
WIN rock goodies galore
HERE'S another monster competition — courtesy of The Limit.
A feast of rock goodies are up for grabs — including albums by  Nirvana and Guns N' Roses.
The prizes, supplied by Geffen records, are worth more than £3,000 and you could be one of our lucky 100 winners.
Your rock haul will feature Nirvana's first album, Bleach — not widely available here before and packed with great tracks such as Blew and Floyd The Barber.
The Limit's 100 lucky readers will also win Guns N' Roses' smash-hit album Use Your Illusion 1 and 11, which features Knocking On Heaven's Door and November Rain.
PLUS…we have 100 copies of a new EP, Addicted, from Irish rockers Little Fun House.
To be in with a chance of winning, just name the lead singers of Guns N' Roses and Nirvana.
Phone your answer on 0891 525528 by midnight on Thursday, leaving your name, address and daytime phone number.
Calls cost 36p a minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
Calls should cost about the same as a first-class stamp.
OVER THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
ESKIMO women still observe the age-old tradition of inviting male guests to join them in bed — even if they're married.
It's thought bad manners not to offer a visitor a night of passion after tramping round the icy far north.
Play or we shoot!
CHINESE GUNMEN FORCE MARX BACK ON STAGE
RICK SKY
HEART-THROB singer Richard Marx was left shaking with fear after being held up at gunpoint by Chinese gangsters.
The incident happened when the American star threatened to pull out of a rain-drenched open-air concert in Taiwan.
He was terrified of being electrocuted if he went on stage at the show in Taipei.
Marx, at No. 13 with Take This Heart, admitted: ‘I decided to cancel the show because it was pouring with rain and I knew I could be electrocuted.
‘I told the promoter it was too dangerous to play.
But what I didn't know was he was a member of the local mafia and didn't want to see his chance of making a fortune disappear into thin air.
‘A few minutes after I had told him I wasn't going on, a gang of his thugs suddenly appeared and pointed machine-guns at us and ordered us to get up on stage.
‘I was terrified.
They looked as though they meant business.
There was nothing I could do but go on.
‘It was the most frightening experience of my life.’
TERROR: Marx
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
SCHOOL STUNNER
GETTING the kids kitted out for the new school year can cost a packet.
A uniform, like the one worn by sixth-former Ruth Botting (above) can set you back up to £400, according to our sums.
But a few lessons in long-term planning can save you a caning.
If you had put £25 per month into a savings plan with the Pru when your child was born TEN years ago it would be worth £5,661.
Doing the same now could provide £4,450 in 2002.
Picture: JOE BANGAY
BEAT THE COLLEGE CASH CRISIS
BARCLAYS' student business officer, Karen Corrigan, offers these handy hints: TAKE extra care in the difficult first term.
DIVIDE your grant by the number of terms.
CARRY as little cash as possible — especially if you're near the student union bar!
IF you have valuables insure them with a special student scheme.
IF you hit problems keep in touch with your bank.
Most now offer free counselling.
Banking on YOUR future
STAMPEDE TO CAPTURE STUDENT CLIENTS
ANDREW KEENAN /JOHN HUSBAND
WHILE banks are threatening to reimpose charges one group of customers is sure to escape them.
They have always offered special deals to attract students because they know that they are tomorrow's higher earners.
And once caught they usually remain customers for life.
This year's Great Grant Grab is now under way as thousands of school leavers prepare to start degree courses.
Suzanne Sheppard, from Enfield, Middlesex, is one of those teenagers being targeted.
Suzanne, 18, will be starting an art foundation course at Middlesex University this month.
Although her maximum grant is only £2,845 a year, the banks still see her as a good catch.
Banks are offering more perks than ever.
But don't be fooled by the freebies.
Canny freshers will weigh up service and what they'll be paying AFTER they graduate.
Here's what's on offer:
NATWEST: £400 free overdraft, £25 cash, 4.6 per cent interest on savings.
MIDLAND: £400 free overdraft, cheap contents insurance policy, £15 cash, commission-free foreign money and travellers' cheques, 6 per cent on savings.
LLOYDS: £400 free overdraft, free railcard (worth £16), free Eurocheque card, commission-free foreign money and travellers' cheques, 5 per cent on savings.
BARCLAYS: £300 free overdraft, £10 Our Price voucher, 4 per cent on savings.
ABBEY NATIONAL: free driving lesson, 25 per cent discount on next five, or BP petrol vouchers worth £15 for 16 to 20 year-olds, 2.55 per cent on savings.
ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND: £400 free overdraft (first year only), £20 cash, commission-free foreign money and travellers' cheques, 1.5–3.0 per cent interest on savings.
TSB: £400 free overdraft, £15 Olympus sports voucher, discounts on sports goods, free driving lesson, 7.5 per cent interest on savings.
But college life is no picnic, admit Barclays, who sign up nearly a third of students.
With the average student expected to run up a £1,765 overdraft, those freshers' perks soon fade.
TARGET: Fresher Suzanne Sheppard
Escape an electric shock
JOHN HUSBAND
SHAREHOLDERS in the 12 regional electricity companies are being asked to cough up their third and final instalments of 70p a share next week.
And you're set to lose a small fortune if you forget to pay.
That's because while some of the shares can be sold for nearly £4 a time you'll only get a MAXIMUM of £1.70 per share back if you miss the deadline.
Everyone with shares should have had a payment notice saying how much they owe.
Cheques have to arrive at the registrars by Thursday 10 September so post them by next Tuesday at the earliest.
And remember — you're responsible for the money even if you haven't had a notice.
CALL the registrars if any problems.
Helplines are: 021 433 4466 for East Midlands, London, Northern, NORWEB, SEEBOARD and Southern, 0272 465522 for Eastern, Midlands, South Western and Yorkshire, 071 329 6732 for MANWEB and South Wales.
Cast your video vote now
IF YOU vote for your top videos of the last year and you could be driving a brand new SEAT Ibiza 1.2 SLXi!
Vote in the Daily Mirror British Video Awards for a chance in our £40,000 prize line-up.
We're also giving away 10 Philips TurboDrive video recorders, 400 videos and 10 Awards evening tickets.
The seventh annual Awards, sponsored by the Daily Mirror and Sunday Mirror with the British Videogram Association, will be presented at a star-studded dinner hosted by Jonathan Ross at London's Grosvenor Hotel in October.
To encourage you to vote, we're giving away a SEAT 1.2 ALXi, worth around £7,500, which has a System Porsche 1.2 fuel — injected engine with three-way catalyser.
For more information call free-phone 0800 521 382.
The market-leading Philips TurboDrive VR422, worth £349.99, has the fastest performance of any VCR on sale.
We've also got £30,000-worth of video sets, worth £75 each.
There are 50 sets of eight tapes up for grabs, all of films that won't be available in video libraries until the autumn.
In October there's Basic Instinct, The Super and Cape Fear.
November winners will get Wayne's World, The Lawnmower Man, Don't Tell Mom The Babysitter's Dead, Memoirs Of An Invisible Man and The Hand That Rocked The Cradle.
FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT: Anjelica Huston
NOW WILL THEY ACT
CHILDREN PLAYING ON POISONED BEACHES
New Sellafield probe shows radioactivity OUTSIDE breaks the safety limit INSIDE
BARRY WIGMORE
BEACHES where children play near Britain's controversial nuclear dustbin ARE dangerously radioactive, independent tests have revealed.
Scientists at Germany's Bremen University found cancer-causing plutonium — the world's deadliest poison — caesium and americium in mud samples taken from around Sellafield in Cumbria.
And the contamination levels were higher than would be considered safe for staff working INSIDE the giant nuclear reprocessing plant.
Last night shocked conservation groups demanded that British Nuclear Fuels Ltd clean up their act…and the environment.
But a Sellafield spokesman dismissed the high radioactivity as a ‘red herring.’
He said: ‘It is there — but the fact is it is not doing anyone any harm.
‘The radioactivity is within acceptable levels.’
The contaminated mud was scooped off public beaches by members of local pressure group CORE — Cumbrians Opposed to a Radioactive Environment.
Smuggle
But they had to smuggle it to Germany in the boot of a car.
For Sealink Ferries claimed it was too dangerous to carry as cargo.
Yet, ironically, the raw nuclear waste originally came from Germany.
And it was transported to Sellafield by Sealink.
But, the Bremen scientists discovered, the fears were well-founded.
For, under Germany's strict nuclear laws, the highly-contaminated mud would need a licence before it could be moved around the country.
CORE campaigner Martin Forewood said: ‘Surely something is wrong when these levels of contamination are considered acceptable in Britain.
‘Levels that were thought safe ten years ago are now considered highly dangerous.
‘What will Sellafield be saying about this mud in ten years time?’
British Nuclear Fuels earn millions of pounds a year by taking in highly-dangerous nuclear waste from round the world.
As well as Germany, Japan, Switzerland, Sweden, Spain, Canada, Italy and Holland all dump the deadly stuff here to be converted back into more nuclear fuel.
It is not known exactly how much the reprocessing costs.
Now a massive new reprocessing plant — Sellafield 2 — is planned for the Cumbrian site.
But, the Daily Mirror revealed in May, it will pump deadly Krypton gas back into the atmosphere.
And experts have warned that this could kill at least ten people every year.
There was a furious reaction when we broke the news.
Greenpeace campaigners called on the Government to halt the work immediately.
Spokesman Simon Boxer said: ‘It was dreamed up 20 years ago when scientists believed nuclear power would save the world and feared we would soon run out of uranium.
‘But the world has changed since then.
‘There are not as many nuclear power stations as expected, there is more uranium than was thought, and the fast-breeder reactors which used the  reprocessed fuel have been abandoned as a failure.
‘Reprocessing — as Sellafield executives have publicly admitted on television — is not  necessary .
‘So why do they carry on with it?’
Highlight of the protest campaign was a concert by pop supergroup U2.
They donned anti-radiation suits aboard the Greenpeace ship Solo before striding across the Sellafield beaches — the same beaches where the contaminated mud has now been found.
BNFL chiefs got an injunction against U2 threatening them with arrest if they turned up at the plant gates.
But lead singer Bono vowed: ‘We won't let them gag us.
‘Sellafield has made the Irish Sea the most radioactively contaminated stretch of water in the world.
‘Radiation is invisible.
It's hard to see the enemy.
Posters ‘But people are dying.
What cost benefit can you link with human lives?’
Greenpeace make regular checks on the Cumbrian beaches with their geiger-counters checking for radioactivity.
And in the past they have put up dramatic posters warning the public: ‘Danger — Radioactive.’
Sellafield officials normally insist that everything is safe.
But at the end of 1983 they were worried enough to close 25 miles of beaches for six months.
And environmentalists have warned that plutonium, the deadliest poison known to man, lasts for at least 25,000 years.
OUTRAGE: U2's stars donned anti-radiation suits in protest over Sellafield
Pictures: NIGEL WRIGHT
FEAR: Sealink said beach mud was too dangerous to carry as cargo
FLASHBACK: We exposed the Krypton scandal in May
GEMMA HAD TEN TIMES THE RISK
The pictures that shocked the nation
CHILDREN living near Sellafield are TEN TIMES more likely to develop cancer than anywhere else in Britain, a new government report has found.
And it is ‘highly unlikely’ that this is due to pure chance, it says.
Researchers from the influential Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment spent FOUR YEARS examining case histories of child deaths in the area and comparing them with the rest of the country.
Their report is the most comprehensive yet on the extraordinarily high incidence of leukaemia among children living near the nuclear plant.
But they STILL cannot say that radiation is to blame.
They admit they are baffled by their findings because they have been unable to discover a common link to all the tragic cases.
The report, to be published in the British Medical Journal, was welcomed last night by grieving Sue D'Arcy, mother of six-year-old Gemma who died in 1990 after a painful six-month battle against leukaemia.
She said: ‘More and more evidence is piling up against Sellafield, but they keep trotting out the same old thing — that the radiation levels are within acceptable standards.
If they'd listened to the warnings years ago perhaps Gemma would be alive today.’
Gemma was the third pupil at Cleator Moor infants school — 10 miles from the plant — to die from leukaemia in two years.
She spent a lot of time on the beach before she became ill.
Her parents were out walking there just before she was born.
The latest report looked at 74 recorded cases of childhood cancer in the area between 1950 and 1985.
An earlier study, by top researcher Prof. Martin Gardner, suggested that a mutation in the father's sperm might be the cause.
A Sellafield official suggested that employees should not have children if they were worried.
The nuclear industry stuck to its claims that cancer clusters near their plants were ‘coincidence.’
Some experts suggested they were due to other industries nearby — like chemical factories and oil refineries.
One said last night: ‘In reality, every worker in the nuclear industry is a guinea-pig and the same goes for those living around the plants.’
British Nuclear Fuels refuse to discuss individual cases, and say they will not comment on the latest report until it is published.
SO HAPPY: Gemma at school
SO TRAGIC: In her final days
THIS IS NO PEACE AND LOVE SCENE
The agony of Ecstasy
Nightmare for families as killer drug claims new victim
JILL PALMER /SYLVIA JONES
WHOLE families have been devastated by Ecstasy, the so-called trendy designer drug suspected of killing 17-year-old rookie soldier Robert Jeffery at a weekend rave.
Young partygoers wanting to dance frenetically without fatigue regard Ecstasy as an essential part of their fun.
But its effects on users can be horrifying.
And it is leaving behind a tragic toll of death, heartache and despair throughout Britain.
Gavin McQuaid was just 16 when he was dragged unconscious from an East End night club.
None of his friends admitted knowing him and it was two weeks before his mother knew of his death.
He was a regular abuser and no-one how many Es he had swallowed.
But 18-year-old Lawrence Brown died after swallowing just ONE tablet.
He collapsed in a coma at a London club and died hours later in hospital from massive internal bleeding…in front of his devastated mum and dad.
Parents of young users have watched helplessly as their children, their bodies overheating uncontrollably, suffer a painful and harrowing shocking death.
As the victim's temperature rises higher and higher, they suffer internal heatstroke and all their organs gradually fail.
Severe
Sixteen people have died within the last two years.
But for every death there are at least 100 other people who suffer severe mental disturbances.
There can be a lifetime of after-effects.
Relatives have to cope with mental illness that so often changes the personality of their loved one.
Some parents have even had the anguish of having to commit a child to a mental hospital for its own safety.
Users claim Ecstasy gives them a buzz and an energy high.
The only instant adverse side effect is a desperate thirst, stiff aching muscles and a loss of appetite.
But after the high comes the low.
The sweating, the agitation, and incoherence.
One million youngsters are estimated to take the £10–£15 a time pills.
They are sold, along with other drugs like LSD by pushers who prey on raves — such as the weekend event at Popham airfield near Basingstoke, Hants, Britain's biggest ever legal rave.
Ecstasy is also available at schools and at clubs, where often special ‘chill-out’ rooms are provided for users to recover from the effects of the drug.
Many users swallow the pills even before arriving.
Although Ecstasy is not physically addictive it is unpredictable.
Regular users can suddenly find that their normal dose will give them extreme and dangerous side effects.
‘Ecstasy is widely misrepresented as being a safe drug,’ said Dr John Henry of the National Poisons Unit at Guy's Hospital, London.
‘In truth it is extremely dangerous.
What is particularly frightening is that in the long term it may cause irreparable brain damage.
‘It is the only drug which damages the nerve terminals in the brain.
‘In 10 to 15 years time we could have thousands of people suicidally depressed because they took Ecstasy earlier in life.
Tough
‘And there will be nothing we can do to help them.’
And now street pushers are peddling impure tablets which could be even MORE deadly than Ecstasy alone.
Tough action by police and customs in Britain and on the continent has smashed some of the biggest illicit labs, which can earn up to £250,000 a day.
So desperate dealers are mixing the drug with heroin and cocaine to eke out their supplies.
‘The Ecstasy scene is not a hippie style love and peace movement to make teenagers happy with the hug drug,’ said Det Chief Supt Tony White, head of the drugs division of the National Criminal Intelligence Service.
‘The people behind it are white, middle-aged, career criminals, real toe-rags who will stop at nothing to make a profit.
‘They are not interested in the helping the kids enjoy themselves.
‘They are not interested in the rave culture, they are not interested in the damage they do to the people who swallow their pills.
They are only interested in what they can make out of it.’
And as long as drugs maintain their trendy image, youngsters will keep falling for them.
Comment: Page 2.
DEADLY PROMISE: A handful of Ecstasy and LSD tabs.
The highs can last all night — the lows a life-time.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
THE Pet Shop Boys walked two miles in the rain to get to the massive Vision rave near Winchester.
The duo took to their heels after getting caught — along with headliners The Prodigy — in a 20-mile traffic jam around the site.
More than 40,000 fans turned up for the 12-hour event, Britain's biggest-ever legal Rave gig.
PRINCE has been blasted by chart rival David Was over his raunchy stage antics.
Was who scored a recent hit with Shake Your Head, says: ‘Prince is just a self-serving hedonist.
His exploration of eroticism and sexuality is boring.
‘It seems his whole life is  centred on sex — it's sad.’
WHY GOLDIE WANTS A BABY AT 46
Hollywood's bubbliest blonde yearns for an even bigger family
‘We have got to have more kids…it's just too much fun not to!’
KEVIN O'SULLIVAN
GOLDIE Hawn breaks into one of her famous giggles.
It wells up her perfectly tanned throat and finally she starts to shake, honey blonde hair cascading over slim shoulders.
The girl just has to laugh.
She's talking about her new role in comedy film, Housesitter, opposite funnyman Steve Martin.
And how she only got the part because first choice Meg Ryan was pregnant.
To Goldie, a mother of three and 15 years older than Meg, it's a perfect irony.
‘It was funny that me, a woman with all these kids, should get a part because someone else was having a baby!
The giggles die down as she adds: ‘I'm already depressed about it.
I said to Kurt, ‘What are we going to do?
‘We have got to have more kids…
I mean it's just too much fun not to!’
Hollywood's favourite funnygirl — wife of movie hunk Kurt Russell — clearly believes her child-rearing years are far from over…even at the age of 46.
Her eyes mist over as she says: ‘Kurt and I have four children between us.
I thought that once I had kids of my own I would stop oohing and gooing about other people's children on the street.
‘But I haven't.
I have always loved children…
I guess I'm stuck with it.’
The still stunning star of classic hit films like Private Benjamin and Shampoo has two teenage children, Oscar, 15, and 16-year-old Katie — Goldie's children by her marriage to musician Bill Hudson — and five-year-old son Wyatt, by Kurt.
Kurt's 14 year-old son Boston, by his former wife Season Hubley, is also a regular visitor.
Goldie still oozes little girl charm, but admits she's a family woman at heart.
‘I feel lost without my kids.
I love to have them around me when I'm working.
‘In fact I love to have them around me all the time!’
For the three months of location filming here in Boston, Goldie was constantly surrounded by her beloved brood.
As Gwen, an endearing liar and fantasist, Goldie literally invades Martin's home — and ends up stealing his heart.
In reality Goldie is a shrewd operator who is proud to have made it to the top on her own merits.
She is one of Hollywood's longest-lasting leading ladies, said to have been paid more than three million dollars for Housesitter which is  released in Britain next week.
But even in the Sixties, during her hard-up days as a young Broadway dancer, before she found fame in Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In, she promised herself she would never, ever rely on a man for her money.
She says: ‘It was always a very important thing to me to be financially independent.’
Her first attempt at marriage, to director Gus Trikonis in 1969, ended in divorce.
Her second, to musician Bill Hudson, brought a bitter custody battle.
Now she is completely devoted to Kurt Russell, the 40-year-old tough guy star of recent hit films like Backdraft and Unlawful Entry.
The happy couple live in a  cosy house overlooking the sea in the posh Los Angeles suburb of Pacific Palisades.
It's the perfect American family — minus the marriage certificate.
‘Kurt and I don't need to get married,’ she says.
‘We are married in every sense.
Maybe we will go through the actual ceremony at some point.
‘But when you feel perfectly happy with something why change it?
‘As far as I am concerned I have the perfect man — the best guy in the world.
‘He's brilliant, he's happy, he wakes up every day joyous and he never holds a grudge for more than about three minutes.
I love him.
‘My family is the most important thing in the world to me.
‘Unless everything is all right at home I am no good in all the other areas of my life.’
Goldie clearly is in good enough shape to take on another young one.
There is barely a line on her face.
And, dressed in cowboy boots, tight jeans and a black T-shirt, she could easily pass for someone half her age.
She still oozes little girl charm.
‘It's not just luck that I look OK,’ she says.
‘Believe me I really work at it.
‘Being a dancer it would be sacrilege to have worked your whole life and then just let it go.
I love to work out.
My physical exercise makes me feel so good inside — whether I'm on my stairmaster, whether I'm out running, dancing to music like a crazy person, riding up hills on my bicycle or just taking a brisk walk.
‘I make sure my heart is beating well and the oxygen is pumping to my brain every day.’
You sense that, at 46, even the demands of a new baby wouldn't slow this lady down.
FAMILY GIRL: With Kurt and son Wyatt
FUNNY GIRL: Goldie shares the laughs with Steve Martin in her latest movie.
But the stunning star is serious about her private role as wife and mother.
THE LIMIT
OVER THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
LOVE-HUNGRY fellas in Californian colleges wear jockstraps outside their trousers in a desperate bid to woo the girls — and women like the daring new look.
A student spokesman says: ‘Women show off their bras, so why can't men do the same with THEIR underwear?’
WHIT'S GOLDEN SECRET
UGLY Kid Joe singer Whitfield Crane faked being a student to get money from his mum.
The American star, at No. 37 with Neighbour, pretended he was still at college even though he had left to lead the life of a beach bum.
Whit says: ‘My mum thought I was getting an education and was sending me £200 a month for rent and food.
But I was just lazing around on beaches.’
DEMI BATTLE
HOLLYWOOD beauty Demi Moore once spent 30 days in hospital battling a rare kidney disease which brought her to the brink of death.
Demi, 29, star of new movie The Butcher's Wife, reveals: ‘For a whole month my parents were convinced I was about to die.
The doctors said I was desperately sick.
Finally, I was given an experimental drug and I managed to pull through.’
The actress went through the ordeal when she was just six years old.
She says: ‘If it wasn't for the dedication of the medical team I wouldn't be here today.’
SAVED: Demi Moore
TEEN idols Take That nearly didn't come together — because of singer Mark Owen's mum.
She was convinced her 18-year-old son's pop dreams would come to nothing and pressured him to accept a job offer from a bank.
Manchester-based Mark, at No. 19 with I Found Heaven, reveals: ‘My mum didn't want me wasting my time trying to be a pop star and I came very close to quitting the group.
‘All my friends were going to college or getting jobs.
But now she is one of our biggest fans.’
PAP SNAP
HERE'S top comic Vic Reeves with his biggest fan.
And it's such a bubbly one that even the normally brash and loud dandy from Darlington has come over all bashful.
‘The monkeys are on your cars today.
They could be in the lab tomorrow’
HORRIFYING TRUTH BEHIND A GREAT DAY OUT FOR THE FAMILY
LUCK RUNS OUT FOR SHAMROCK
FRANK THORNE
TO the thousands of kids and their families who flock to Britain's two top safari parks, the cheeky monkeys who clamber over their cars are part of a delightful day out.
But today the Daily Mirror reveals the shameful secret behind the innocent animal antics at Longleat in Wiltshire and Woburn in Bedfordshire.
Dozens of the rhesus macaque monkeys have been sold to a firm which breeds animals for medical research.
They are condemned to a life of misery in cramped breeding colonies.
And when they have outlived their usefulness, they are slaughtered or sold cheaply for lab experiments.
Smiley and Ernie, two of the sad monkeys from the Woburn Wild Animal Kingdom, are still at Shamrock Farms of Small Dole, near Brighton.
The Mirror has been handed harrowing pictures of the plight of other monkeys.
They were taken by animal welfare worker Terry Hill, who worked as a technician at Shamrock for nearly a year.
Shocked
Terry, a former keeper at London Zoo, was shocked by the state of some of the animals.
He said: ‘Members of the public are not going to be told that some of the monkeys they see climbing on their cars today could be in a lab tomorrow.
‘But people should know monkeys are rounded up year after year and sold — all in the name of profit.’
One monkey, a female called Gena, ripped off her own tail after being returned from a dental research project at Guy's Hospital in London.
She would spend hours rocking herself in her cage.
Terry saw other apes biting themselves and each other and gnawing at the bars, all classic signs of distress.
Terry, 26, worked undercover for the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection.
During his time at the farm, four baby monkeys were sent to a lab in Israel.
He said: ‘The babies are sold on and shipped round the world as soon as they are weaned from their mothers at about a year or 18 months.
‘Some of the breeding monkeys had been at Shamrock for seven or eight years.
‘Rhesus macaques have a strong pecking order.
‘So when you put several males and females in a small pen the dominant males tend to fight.
‘At Shamrock, animals needed constant patching up.’
Longleat safari park boss Roger Cawley, a member of the famous Chipperfield circus family, is the man behind the vile trade.
He claimed NO animals have been sold for medical research for more than 12 years.
But the Mirror has documentary proof that since the mid-1980s, a total of 83 rhesus monkeys have been sold to Shamrock from Longleat and 32 from Woburn.
The last recorded batch, of three female monkeys from Woburn, was sold to Shamrock on December 4, 1990.
Shamrock's own detailed arrivals book shows regular receipt of monkeys from both
Longleat and Woburn in addition to other sources.
Mr Cawley is general manager of Longleat safari park and a director of Woburn Wild Animal Kingdom.
When the Mirror confronted him over the damning documents, he said: ‘Somebody could easily falsify records.’
 Appalled 
But Alan Smith, a director of Shamrock's parent company, confirmed the accuracy of documents in our possession and admitted: ‘We did receive three rhesus females from Woburn for breeding purposes.
I do not dispute the rest of the records.’
The farm can hold up to 700 monkeys.
Steve McIvor, campaigns director for the anti-vivisection association, said: ‘The public who support safari parks should be outraged by the shameful sale of monkeys for the lab trade.
‘We want cast-iron guarantees that this trade will end.’
Bosses at Woburn said they had no idea the monkeys were being used for medical research.
Silent
Sandra Merritt, spokeswoman for the Duke of Bedford's family, said: ‘They are appalled.
‘As far as the family are aware, the only place monkeys have gone to from Woburn is Longleat.
‘The Chipperfields are responsible for that side of the business.’
The new Marquess of Bath, who recently inherited the vast Longleat estate, was on holiday with his family in France.
He said: ‘I think under the circumstances I'd better keep silent.’
INNOCENCE: A family of macaque monkeys at Longleat
PLAYFUL: Safari park macaques like these are being sold off for breeding or research — and then destroyed.
Picture: BRENDAN MONKS
GUILTY MAN: Roger Cawley is behind the vile trade
MISERY: Woburn's Smiley in his Shamrock cage
AGONY: Gena tore off her own tail after being used in research
DISTRESSED: An ex-safari park monkey awaits its fate
YOUR MONEY
ROAD TO RICHES
JOHN HUSBAND
SACRE Bleu!
Publishing group Haynes has started selling French car manuals — and seen annual profits rise NINETY fold to £2.4 million.
Haynes now does a French language version for their 20 biggest selling cars, including Renault and Citreon.
And the group is big in gas-guzzling America, where there are an incredible 125 million cars on the road.
PICK YOUR TOP VIDEOS OF ‘92
Cast your vote or you could win cash in our £40,000 prize list
Is Mr B. a winner or a has bean?
VOTE for your favourite videos of the year and YOU could win a brand new SEAT 1.2 SLXi!
It's part of a £40,000 prize bonanza to encourage you to take part in the seventh annual Daily Mirror British Video Awards.
Today, we're concentrating on the videos you might have bought in the last 12 months.
Did The Amazing Adventures Of Mr Bean with Rowan Atkinson make you laugh enough to vote it Sales Video of the Year?
Or do you think Billy Connolly: Live, Home Alone or Only Fools And Horses: The Yellow Peril should take that title?
Would In Bed With Madonna get your vote for Film of the Year or should it go to Die Hard 2, Ghost or Robin Hood: Prince Of Thieves?
Cast your votes in the the Awards, which are sponsored by the Daily Mirror and Sunday Mirror in conjunction with the British Videogram Association, and you could win one of these stunning prizes:
A SEAT Ibiza SLXi, worth around £7,500, which has a System Porsche 1.2 fuel-injected engine, complete with three-way catalyser.
Its bold design allows for more efficient engine cooling, and the superb instrument panel, precise steering, smooth gear shift and progressive-action pedals ensure an effortless ride.
For more info on the SEAT range call free-phone 0800 521382.
TEN TurboDrive VR422 video recorders, worth £349.99 each, from Philips.
With market-leading picture quality, ease-of use and operation speed, the VR422 has the fastest performance of any VCR on the market.
PLUS £30,000-worth of videos, worth £75 each, that won't hit your video libraries until the autumn.
There are 50 sets of tapes, which include: Basic Instinct, Cape Fear, Wayne's World, The Lawnmower Man, Memoirs Of An Invisible Man and The Hand That Rocked The Cradle.
FIVE winners and their partners will get £100 tickets for the Awards dinner at London's Grosvenor Hotel.
HOME: Macaulay Culkin
ROBIN: Kevin Costner
VIDEO STARS: Sexy Madonna (top) and Mr Bean
CLOSED
Nobody is spared as firm goes bust every ten minutes
‘This is not about losing jobs.
It's about losing everything’
GEORGINA WALSH
IT'S been a bad week for a bunch of well-connected folk who probably thought they were immune to the worst ravages of the recession.
Art dealer John Bowes-Lyon, a cousin of the Queen, was declared bankrupt.
Top West End antiques dealer Arthur Davidson — son-in-law of the late showbiz millionaire Leslie Grade — had his business closed down by the receivers.
And former Tory party treasurer Lord Beaverbrook admitted he was broke, with huge debts, as his £40,000 BMW was repossessed.
Their problems all hit the headlines.
But you won't have read about the difficulties of Roger Thornton-Brown.
He is one of the less famous victims among the tens of thousands of small businessmen who are suffering all over the land as a Tory dream turns into a nightmare.
He and his wife toiled almost round the clock for seven years to make a success of their T-shirt design and print business — only to land on the scrapheap.
The firm they had nursed so devotedly was wrecked by a series of hammer blows:
MASSIVE rises in interest rates under the Tories;
THE uniform business rate, which almost tripled Roger's rates to £6,250 in two years;
LATE payments by customers; and
A LOAN freeze by the banks.
A £6,000 fine for VAT arrears was the last straw.
Folded
The business folded last year — and Roger, his wife and business partner Joan and their four staff in Wimbledon, South London, were left with nothing.
The couple's flat in Wandsworth was worth £64,000 against a mortgage debt of £83,000 when the bank gave notice of repossession.
Roger and Joan, struggling on income support and unemployment benefit, became another DSS statistic and an unwilling burden on the State.
Roger, 36, and a Tory supporter, estimated that after those years of slog and sweat they had debts of £20,000 they had no hope of paying.
He says: ‘It's sheer madness.’
The same madness is spreading everywhere as the small business crisis deepens.
In the first six months of this year nearly 30,000 small firms went to the wall — a third up on 1991.
One is going bust every 10 MINUTES.
Yet small businessmen were the toast of the Eighties.
Margaret
Thatcher, daughter of a Grantham grocer, believed fervently that Britain would be safe in their hands.
So she took up their banner when she was Prime Minister, tempting people to start up on their own with tax and cash inducements.
The response was enthusiastic.
During the 1985-1987 boom, small firms created more than a million jobs.
But the enterprise economy went sour, and now failure and disillusion is everywhere.
Ian Handford of the Federation of Small Businesses says: ‘The Chancellor of the Exchequer is acting like a kamikaze pilot.
‘He seems prepared to let this country bleed to death while those on guaranteed incomes just look on.’
The growing number of empty shops and commercial properties in the High Street testifies to the depth of the slump and the misery in its wake.
Sport-shop owner Adrian Pointer has watched firms all around him go under — a butcher, a florist, a gift shop, an electrical shop.
He has not paid himself a proper wage for four months.
At his two shops in Reigate, Surrey, and Beckenham, Kent, he has had to replace full-time staff with part-timers and made a manageress redundant last year.
Adrian, 33, who started up in 1986, says: ‘The Government do not appreciate what is happening in the High Street to small independent businesses.
‘You see them lying empty and derelict, a blight on the rest of us.
Shops that are vandalised or set on fire.
Despair
‘For us, it is not about losing your job.
It is about losing everything…job, house and the years spent in trying to build a business.’
Labour shadow Industry minister Derek Fat-chett says: ‘Small businesses are bearing the brunt of John Major's recession.
‘The Government's high interest rate policy has pushed thousands of our fellow citizens into bankruptcy and despair.
‘It is an absolute waste of talent, initiative and enthusiasm.’
The little men and women Margaret Thatcher admired are squeezed until the pips squeak.
Prime Minister Major once said: ‘If it isn't hurting it isn't working.’
As he and Chancellor Norman Lamont remain deaf to the pleas of the small businessmen, the Government's policies are hurting all right.
But they are not working.
LOSER: Roger Thornton-Brown fell victim to Tory policies and the slump
STAR TREATMENT
WHY FAMOUS NAMES QUEUE UP TO BE AMBULANCE CASES
HILARY KINGSLEY
Stars are queueing up for treatment at Holby Hospital — the setting for the controversial BBC series Casualty.
A host of big names will be on the critical list when the wards reopen next Saturday.
Howards' Way star Jan Harvey appears in the new series as the mother of an abused child while Rula Lenska whips up some action as the ringmaster of a circus.
Also pacing the wards during the 24 50-minute episodes are Susan Penhaligon, Dora Bryan, comedienne Helen Lederer, Shelley star Hywel Bennett, Amanda Redman of El C.I.D.
fame and former Coronation Street star Shirin Taylor.
Jesse Birdsall escapes the heat of Eldorado for an appearance and Specials beauty Kim Vitani appears in a bitter sweet story of a pregnant Asian girl who won't come out of the loo.
The Mirror can reveal that there will be dramatic changes in the lives of the favourite characters that have regularly pulled in 16 million viewers over the last six years.
Handsome new Dr Robert Khalefa is so arrogant he makes fatal errors.
Sister Duffy becomes a patient and suffers agonies over the fate of her love-child, little Peter.
The work of ever-capable nurse Ash begins to suffer.
We learn he has beautiful white girlfriend but money and then baby problems threaten his concentration.
Viewers will see what makes nasty Norma, the receptionist so nasty.
It's the strain of caring for a parent with Alzheimers disease.
And the secret past of  stony -faced consultant Julian Chapman emerges in the shape of a failed marriage and a drink problem.
But there are compensations.
He begins an affair with Scots' nurse Sandra Nicholl.
Romance off-screen on the series has turned into something of an epidemic.
Derek Thompson, who plays nurse Charlie, met his partner Dee Sadler when she came on the show to play an injured potholer.
‘I dragged Dee out of a cave in the Cheddar Gorge and bought her lunch — what more could she want,’ Derek jokes.
Their baby Charlie was born in 1989 and has himself been one of the show's stars.
He played Duffy's son Peter.
Jason Riddington had no sooner arrived to play the ward's dark-haired dashing young doctor when drama student Claire Laurie arrived to play an extra.
He speedily diagnosed a mutual attraction and the pair are now happily together.
Nigel Le Vaillant who plays Chapman, fell for pretty Nicola Jeffries arrived to play assistant receptionist Jenny, the pair clicked immediately.
Both have decided to quit after this series and take their chances in the job market together.
The new series will tackle subjects ranging from the sexual abuse of children, surrogate pregnancy, organ donation, wife battering and a chilling nuclear power accident.
It will also tackle the way a big city hospital adapts to becoming a Trust under the Government's controversial scheme.
The new system so outrages the hospital's casualty consultant — Nigel Le Vaillant — that he resigns.
He takes his stand on learning that a piece of basic equipment for patients with broken necks cannot be afforded but money is found to make the board room more lavish.
The series is bound to further annoy Tory stalwarts like Norman Tebbit and Edwina Currie who have accused the show's bosses of left-wing bias.
But producer Geraint Morris says: ‘We're not trying to make political statements.
The programme attempts to reflect what is actually happening.’
The stories are suggested and checked by doctors, nurses and ambulance experts.
‘every story is based on something that actually took place.
TRAGIC MUM: Howard's Way star Jan Harvey is in anguish over her abused daughter in the series
GORE!
TAKE A LOOK AT THIS
Gushing blood, throbbing innards, surging vomit, torn flesh and smashed bones — some would say these are the true stars of Casualty.
But the show takes pains in more ways than one to produce them, courtesy of the make-up designers, Jan Nethercot and Sue Kneebone.
They fake bloodcurdling moments in what's nicknamed ‘The Offal Room’, full of medical text-books with graphic illustrations of nightmarish wounds and boxes of severed dummy arms and legs and a dead ‘baby’ or two,
‘As soon as we see the scripts, we start planning, look in our nasty books or ask Peter Salt our nursing advisor,’ says Jan. skin for stitching scenes is made from a gelatine based substance which is coloured and moulded on to the actor.
If an actor has a very hairy body it can be too much to pull off afterwards.
Sometimes we shave them, other times we have to sit them in the bath with hot water up to their necks and soak it off.’
says Jan.
‘For the operations, we make gallons of blood from gelatine and red food colouring with a dash of green or blue, depending on the lighting,
‘Vomit?
My basic recipe is chicken broth and Weetabix.
I don't like vegetable soup — the carrots are diced too neatly.’
Jan had one problem with an actress who was due to throw up in a scene.
‘She told me she was vegetarian at the last minute, so no chicken broth.
I had to rush out to Tesco's for a vegetarian soup.’
IN STITCHES A make-up girl conjures up false skin while above, the blood on the hunt saboteur in one episode is made from a food colouring mix
THE LIMIT
INXS STAR HIT BY CAB
RICK SKY
ROCK heart-throb Michael Hutchence was knocked down by a taxi as he left a Dutch nightclub.
Girlfriend Helena Christiansen screamed as the INXS singer writhed in agony at her feet after the accident at 5am outside Copenhagen's Jazz House Club.
Hutchence was rushed to hospital suffering from shock.
But the star, who also had a number of bruises, later discharged himself.
A source close to Hutchence, at No 32 with Baby Don't Cry, said: ‘Michael and Helena spent the night together dancing and appeared very happy.
‘They'd just started walking down a narrow street outside the club when all suddenly a taxi hit Michael and knocked him down.
‘Helena screamed for someone to help as she tried to drag Michael from the of the road.
‘Luckily an ambulance arrived quickly and he was rushed to hospital.’
‘He asked hospital staff to keep the accident details secret — he didn't want to make a fuss’
But last night his record company  admitted :’ Michael was a bit concussed but thankfully he was not badly hurt.
AGONY: Hutchence
OVER THE LIMIT
THE ancient Incas of South America scoffed potatoes spiced with cinnamon to boost their sex lives.
It helped them keep their end up in battle, too, claim historians.
K.W.S., at No. 10 with Rock Your Baby, missed a big party in their honour after being mobbed by hysterical fans.
The band were about to fly from Ibiza to the bash in their Nottingham home-town, when the fans spotted them.
Keyboard-player Winnie Williams, said: ‘They chased us all over the terminal.
We were worried we might miss the mayor.
‘We were really annoyed at missing out on our own party!’
GREEN singer Sinitta heads for the country to launch a flower-power revival.
Swap the rose for a microphone, Sin, then we'll understand what you're singing about.
ACTRESS Laura Petty who co-stars with Geena Davies and Madonna in A League Of Their Own is left heartbroken when she finishes making movies…because she keeps falling in love with her leading men.
Stunning Laura, who shot to fame alongside Patrick Swayze in Point Break and Robin Williams in Cadillac Man, admits: ‘I'm forever falling in love with my co-stars.
But they're always married or spoken for.
At least you get to learn who's a good kisser!’
MORE CHAT, LESS CHART
Pop fans forgotten in Radio One rescue plan
AFTER failing to give the kiss-of-life to Top of The Pops the Beeb now seem hell-bent on wrecking Radio One.
The national pop station that once boasted it was ‘One-derful’ is to get a long-awaited shake-up.
But bosses plan to KEEP the patronising comments of DJs, their never-ending phone-ins and cringe-making jokes.
The Beeb's director-general Sir Michael Checkland announced the less-chart-more-chat news yesterday.
And already fans are up in arms.
Fourteen-year-old Jes-sie Mason from North London said: ‘I put on Radio One in my room when I get home from school to hear Steve Wright's show.
‘If all I'm going to get in the future is more talk and less music they can forget it.’
But the station's spokesman Jeff Simpson said last night: ‘It's a direction in which Radio One has been going for a couple of years.
We have been doing more heavyweight interviews.
‘They have been introduced to Nicky Campbell's show and in fact Steve Wright did the first interview with John Smith when he became Leader of the Opposition.
But Radio One will always be first and foremost a pop station.
Just occasionally we will be more serious.’
WRIGHT: More chat
HEART SHOCK FOR GYM STAR
HOLLYWOOD hunk Jean Claude Van Damme was rushed to hospital after suffering a suspected heart attack.
The pin-up star of hit movie Universal Soldier collapsed at his home in Los Angeles’ San Fernando Valley after a strenuous work-out session in his private gym.
Reveals the star: ‘I was gasping for breath and convinced I was going to die.’
Van Damme was taken to a nearby hospital where tests showed he was okay.
‘Luckily it wasn't a heart attack — I'd simply overdone it in the gym.’
adds Jean Claude
Doctors have advised the star to tone down his vigorous daily work-outs.
LUCKY: Van Damme
We unmask furtive Felix
THE Limit can today reveal chart star Felix's REAL name.
The Essex-based dance star has gone to extraordinary lengths to mask his identity since storming the charts with his debut single.
But now we can reveal that the man behind No. 7 smash Don't You Want Me is…
Francis Wright.
‘Frank’, 26, lives with his parents in Chelmsford and wrote his 100,000- selling hit in their attic.
Yesterday we rang Frank at home only to be told by his mum: ‘Oh No.
He'll be furious when this gets out.’
NEW MOVIES
PAULINE MCLEOD
No Bobby dazzler
DON'T get me wrong.
Jonathan Demme makes amazing movies.
But fascinating as his COUSIN BOBBY (Cert PG; W.E.) is, only a film-maker whose Silence of the Lambs won five Oscars could get away with releasing what at best is a TV documentary and at worst a home movie.
The long-lost cousin of the title is Episcopalian minister Bobby Castle — a sixties Black Panther sympathiser and now, at 60, still a right-on activist.
Knights of darkness
CHARACTERLESS thriller KNIGHT MOVES (Cert 18; General) will leave you guessing who-dunnit until its macabre checkmate.
Christopher Lambert stars as cold-hearted chess grandmaster Peter Sanderson who becomes a serial-killer suspect.
A trainee psychologist, played by Lambert's wife, Diane Lane, is drafted in to help track down the real killer and — you guessed it — takes a more than passing professional interest in Sanderson.
SHRINK: Diane Lane
DESERT FOXED
WHITE SANDS IS A REAL TWISTER
WHITE SANDS (Cert 15; General) weaves such layers of confusion, you might just lose the plot completely!
Don't worry, because this intriguing thriller is still VERY watchable.
It is set in Mexico's magnificent White Sands National Park — and anyway, any movie starring Willem Dafoe is worth looking at!
Even Mickey Rourke, after an abysmal run of roles, makes a respectable ‘comeback’ as a charismatic arms dealer.
Dafoe plays small town redneck sheriff Ray Dolezal, who discovers a body in the desert, shot through the head, a .38 special in one hand and, just beyond his grasp, a briefcase stuffed with bank notes.
Half a million dollars worth.
Was it suicide?
Was it murder?
Dolezal decides to play detective in a one man undercover operation, wandering naively into deathtrap after deathtrap.
I don't know where he did his police training, but it doesn't seem to have been in any  recognisable academy.
Except maybe Police Academy.
He assumes the identity of the dead man, apparently an undercover FBI agent, gets mixed up with an FBI sting operation AND a seductive mystery woman of independent means.
Lane Bodine (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio), former lover of arms dealer Rourke, appears to be making her loot as the go-between in the arms scam.
But then she also appears to be ‘legit’ with her society-filled fund-raising events.
Shifting sands might have been a more apt title!
SANDS STORMERS: Willem Dafoe and Mickey Rourke are top guns as sheriff and arms dealer
SUDDEN LOSS OF POWER
EVEN if you haven't read the enchanting novel on which THE POWER OF ONE (Cert PG; General) is based, I think you'll still be disappointed.
Somewhere the story has lost its soul in the translation to the big screen and one is left with the fairly black and white conclusion that white  Afrikaners in wartime South Africa hated everyone but their own.
It is based around an English boy, P.K. — played by Brendan Deary as an infant, Guy Witcher as a seven-year-old, Simon Fenton at 12 and Stephen Dorff as an 18-year-old.
Frankly, it's a tall order to expect a major character to have depth when played by a series of unknown kids.
Against a panoramic backdrop, we see orphaned P.K. growing up in a hostile environment.
Soon he is befriended by the kindly German ‘Doc’(Armin Mueller-Stahl) who is interned in the local prison And we see him taught to box and fend fro himself by a likeable petty thief (Morgan Freeman).
BATTLER: P.K. (Stephen Dorff) boxes clever
VIDEO BONANZA
CHOOSE YOUR TOP VIDEOS AND PICK UP A CLUTCH OF GOODIES
£40,000 IN PRIZES FOR LUCKY VOTERS
JOIN our prize trail and drive off in a brand new SEAT Ibiza 1.2 SLXi!
Not only that, but you can WIN one of TEN Philips TurboDrive video recorders or 400 new videos.
It's all part of an incredible £40,000 prize line-up.
Just  tell us YOUR favourite new videos in the last 12 months.
Your vote will go help pick the winners of the seventh annual Daily Mirror British Video Awards.
WAS The Cream Of Eric Clapton your favourite Music Video of the year or would your vote go to Wonder Stuff's Welcome To The Cheap Seats?
DID Bill & Ted ‘s Excellent Adventure make you laugh enough to be Comedy Video or do you think it should be Blackadder's Christmas Carol?
Cast your votes in the the Awards, which are sponsored by the Daily Mirror and Sunday Mirror in conjunction with the British Videogram Association, and you could win from our stunning prize line-up: A SEAT Ibiza SLXi, worth around £7,500, which has a System Porsche 1.2 fuel-injected engine, complete with three-way catalyser.
Its bold front design allows for more efficient engine cooling, and the superb instrument panel, precise steering, smooth gear shift and progressive-action pedals ensure an effortless ride.
For more info on the SEAT range call free-phone 0800.521.382.
TEN sensational TurboDrive VR422 video recorders, worth £349.99 each, from Philips.
With market-leading picture quality, ease-of use and operation speed, the VR422 has the fastest performance of any VCR currently on the market.
£30,000 worth of videos, worth £75 each, that won't hit your video libraries until the autumn.
There are 50 sets of tapes up for grabs — Basic Instinct, The Super, Cape Fear, Wayne's World, The Lawnmower Man, Don't Tell Mom The Babysitter's Dead, Memoirs Of An Invisible Man and The Hand That Rocked The Cradle.
Invitations for five winners and their partners to the £100-a-ticket Awards dinner hosted by Jonathan Ross.
GUITAR MAN: Is Eric Clapton your music choice?
WIN 10 SEGA MEGA DRIVES
PLUS TERMINATOR GAMES AND VIDEO ACTION
OUR great Terminator contest is out of this world.
To celebrate the release of The Terminator video game we are giving away £5,500 worth of prizes.
Ten lucky winners will get a 16-bit Sega Mega Drive video games console, plus the game which is from Sega's movie games range AND a video copy of the 1985 Terminator film.
The next 40 winners will each receive the Mega Drive game from Virgin Games plus the film, released by Vision Video Ltd.
And there are 150 lucky runners-up who will get a video of the blockbusting 18 certificate sci-fi thriller.
The £130 Sega Mega Drive is Britain's best-selling 16-bit video games machine and there are masses of games available for it to keep the family happy.
The Terminator game, which costs £40, has jumped straight into the Top Ten best-selling list.
And the £10.99 Terminator video is an all-time classic from Vision Video Ltd, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger in the title role.
To enter you must be over 18 and answer this simple question: What type of video games console is a Mega Drive.
Is it a) 8-bit; b) 16-bit; c) 32-bit?
If you missed yesterday's question, here it is again: Who plays The Terminator in the film?
Put the answers to both questions on a postcard, with your name, age and address, and send to: Terminator Comp., Blackhorse Road, London, SE99 7TY.
Usual MGN rules apply.
The first 200 correct winners out of the postbag on Monday, September 14 will receive prizes.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
Yankee dollar dandy!
NOW'S the time to buy your dollars if you're planning a trip Stateside.
For the first time in 11 years you can get nearly two dollars for every £ because the American dollar is so weak.
But it cannot last for long because at this level our exporters can't compete for sales across the Atlantic.
And you needn't be going just to America to cash in on the two dollar £.
Most countries accept dollars as readily as their own currency.
And in some places, they PREFER fistfuls of dollars.
In Eastern Europe and the Middle East, dollars are gold dust to the locals.
That's because popular holiday destination countries like Bulgaria and Turkey are desperate for ‘hard’ currency.
And in Moscow you'll get more roubles for dollars so change your sterling for the US currency before you leave Britain.
You could HALVE the cost of insuring your home simply by shopping around according to the October issue of Which? magazine.
Editor Simon Hinde warns that some insurers have increased their premiums by as much as 20 times the inflation rate to pay for past losses.
SCOOP OF A LIFETIME
THE Daily Mirror's exclusive pictures of a topless Duchess of York and her financial adviser John Bryan cavorting by the side of a pool in the South of France broke all daily newspaper records.
Never before has a news story triggered such sensational sales.
The first day's publication of the photos produced an incredible increase in sales of 482,118 more than the same day the week before.
The second day went through the roof with a whopping 573,604.
But wait for it.
Day three, when the Mirror published the whole Fergie holiday snaps album, went up even more — by 583,647.
That's an amazing 1,639,369 EXTRA copies over the three days — more than the whole circulation of the Daily Express and bigger than the combined sale of the Daily Star and Today.
Never before in the whole history of Fleet Street has there been anything like it.
Trust the Mirror to get in first — we always keep you right in the picture.
DAY ONE: First revelations
DAY TWO: Second sensation
DAY THREE: The full album
Time please, ladies
Women hit the bottle as pressure of work gets too much
‘THEY'RE MORE LIKELY TO LIE ABOUT DRINK HABITS’
STEPHEN WHITE
MORE and more women are hitting the bottle — but they don't like to admit it even to themselves.
And the biggest female fibbers about what they tipple are high-flying career women who turn to drink to help cope with work pressures.
The number of women who drink heavily soared by more than 20 per cent between 1984 and 1990, according to a report on Britain's changing lifestyles.
One woman in ten now drinks more than the recommended safe limit of 14 units a week, with a unit being a glass of wine, a half pint of beer or a pub measure of spirits.
A breakdown of the figures shows 14 per cent of women in professional groups exceed the limit, compared with six per cent of female unskilled workers.
Increase
The number of women who claim they drink moderately — consuming between eight and 14 units a week — has risen by 31 per cent since 1978, with half that increase taking place over the last eight years.
And Yorkshire girls top the female tippling table with women in Scotland — if the figures are to be believed — hardly touching a drop.
Experts say an analysis of the figures shows women are more likely than men to lie to themselves about the amount they drink.
Nearly half the women questioned in the General Household Survey, published by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, who drank between eight and 14 units a week claimed to drink hardly at all.
Another factor driving women to the bottle is that more and more are having to cope with the problems of bringing up a child alone.
The survey's research into family life shows a distressing rise in the number of one parent families.
One in five families with children are now being cared for by a single parent — nearly all of them women — compared with one in 12 in 1972.
Almost three quarters of married women are now looking for work, 21 per cent more than in the early 70s when mum's prime concern was caring for her children.
Over half the lone mothers pull in less than £100 a week.
The survey's investigation of male drinking habits found that they are showing no signs of sinking fewer pints despite warnings that drinking more than 21 units a week is bad for them.
Heavy Over a quarter of men questioned in the survey of 20,000 people top the safety limit — an 11 per cent increase on 1984 figures.
Decline
The increases were most marked among those aged 45 to 64, with one in four being heavy drinkers, a rise of 19 per cent over six years.
Men in the North still drink the most with East Anglian males hardly touching a drop.
Smoking is on a steady decline among both men and women — but men pack up at a faster rate than women.
But for both sexes general sickness is on the increase with a third of all the men and women questioned complained of long-standing ill-health.
Women go to their doctors six times a year compared to four visits to the surgery by men.
In the last two decades the number of people saying they could no longer do jobs about the house or enjoy their hobbies because of sickness has steadily risen.
Perhaps the reason lies in their keep-fit routine.
When they're not watching TV — 99 per cent admitted watching the box every night — over half those questioned said their only  exercise was to take the  occasional stroll.
And among everyone's favourite sports the fitness-testing darts and snooker ranked in the top six.
AND ANOTHER PLEASE: Women drinkers are on the increase
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
WHAT YOU THINK ABOUT THE PAST SEVEN DAYS
Tories' blackboard jungle
POLITICIANS seem to forget that children are the losers when they keep fiddling around with education, as is shown by this week's fiasco over GCSE results.
Only a week ago youngsters were cock-a-hoop over their record exam achievements.
Now their successes have been tarnished in a report by school inspectors who say that educational standards have fallen and the marking was far too lenient.
The Tories desperately want to claim their befuddled education policy is working while schools running their own budgets strain to publicise exam results, hoping to attract pupils.
That is no way to educate youngsters.
—
NO wonder heads have rejected plans to pay school staff by results.
It shows just what dunces the Tories are when it comes to education.
Anyone with an ounce of sense knows that results depend on factors other than staff efficiency.
— T. Baines, Oxford.
AS a teacher with 12 years in the firing line, I think grading schools on the amount of exam passes they get is dangerous.
Under the present GCSE system, it gives schools the opportunity to exert undue influence on exam results, particularly in the marking of course work.
—
ENOUGH TO DRIVE US ALL BANANAS
HOW stupid of the EC to order cuts in our traditional imports of bananas from South America and the Caribbean so we have to buy smaller greener Euro bananas from Italy, Greece and the Canary Islands.
We should boycott their fruit and tell the Brussels bureaucrats: ‘Yes, we have no bananas.’
—
SO Tory MPs thrown out by the electors in April are finding it difficult to get jobs.
There is some justice in the world, after all.
—
IT seemed a sick joke by John Major to send Lord Owen to help bring peace to Yugoslavia.
David Owen has been a failure in all his political activities.
The only thing he seems to be good at is denigrating Labour, the party that brought him political prominence.
—
Give greedy banks the boot
IT'S disgusting that the big banks plan to charge fees to people in credit.
They got themselves in a mess by losing millions on loans to foreign countries and dubious borrowers at home.
Now they want prudent customers to pay for it.
I hope they lose their accounts to building societies.
—
WHILE not condoning TV presenter Frank Bough's visit to a vice den, at least he found a release for his fantasies, unlike some people who turn to rape.
What he did is morally wrong, but he has hurt no-one but himself.
—
YOUNG women are getting the chance to escape the war in Croatia by being placed as au pairs in Britain.
But what about the young men?
Are their lives less precious?—
Marvel Matt
HOW proud Karen Costen must be of her two-year-old son who battled on after being given two weeks to live and has finally had a kidney transplant.
It was a story that must have touched the whole nation's hearts.
—
True Brit
BRITISH Bulldog, alias Davey Boy Smith, flew the flag with passion when he bulldozed his way to win the golden belt of champions at the world SummerSlam wrestling spectacular.
What I liked best was his pride in his Union Jack shorts.
It's good to see such national pride.
Carry on the good work, Davey Boy.
—
Ears we go
WHAT a delight to see my childhood hero Noddy dancing with presenter Anthea Turner to celebrate his return to TV.
But goodness knows what Big Ears will think when he hears Noddy speaking with the voice of actress Susan Sheridan.
And it's enough to make Noddy's car go parp-parp. —
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
EVEN Gary Cooper in the classic film duel in High Noon would have been a'feared of gun-toting grannie June Greaves.
How wonderful that at 62 she won Britain's speed shooting championships.
—
TWIT OF THE WEEK
HOW silly of comedy writer Carla Lane to try to save a pit bull terrier which faces an automatic destruction order after being unmuzzled in public.
Bread writer Carla should know that being an animal lover is one thing, but these dangerous dogs are bred to fight not to become children's pets.
—.
WIN a tenner for your Twit of the Week.
CARLA: Load of bull
My life on a bungy thread
The  Mirror's new tip on how to reduce staff in times of recession
BARRY WIGMORE
IT'S BEEN a hell of a day at the office…so what better way to end it than hanging around upside down and 200ft up.
Everything looks so much smaller from up here looking down than it does down below looking up.
The cradle swinging in the wind from a crane is small.
Turn around.
Stand on the edge.
Don't look down.
Not again, anyway.
Once is enough.
You are as high as a 10-storey building.
The white air cushion 200ft below is a postage stamp.
You couldn't hit it if you tried!
And if you did, the concrete beneath it is more likely to stop you.
Still…too late now.
Your mates are down below, looking at you.
Ages ago, on the way up, you wondered: What am I doing here?
This, Bungy Jump International proudly announced yesterday, is Britain's first permanent bungy site — an old Thames-side gasworks yard in London.
You pay £25 and sign your life away, agreeing no one else is responsible, especially not Bungy Jump International.
They tie you into a body harness and clamp on ankle straps.
The bungy cord is fixed to these and a safety rope goes on to the harness.
A man called Steve welcomes you into the cradle.
At the top he'll turn you into the wind, count to three and you're off.
Outside the cage the photographer's saying: ‘When you jump, spread your arms and legs so I can see you.’
Steve took my specs away and I felt much better.
I couldn't see a thing.
Standing on the edge is the worst moment of all.
It's a long way down.
And then you dive.
Arms and legs splayed out — for the pictures.
There's a rush of wind, like sticking your head through a car sunshine roof at 70mph.
And then you're going up again on a surprisingly gentle rebound.
You stand upright in mid-air, weightless for a moment, then bounce down again, like a yo-yo about 100ft up, and the crane winds you gently to the ground.
Just another day at the office.
WARNING!
Do not try bungy jumping unless with a company like Bungy International.
They are professionals with equipment which meets rigorous safety standards.
GOING: Bungy-jumping Mirrorman Wigmore takes off from the cradle 200 ft up
GOING: He spreads out his arms and legs, just as the photographer requested
GONE: It's a long way down for a reporter whose life is hanging by a thread
STRAPPING LAD: Wigmore is tied up at work, wearing a harness
HANGING AROUND: He gets the chance to put his feet up for a moment before the jump
HEIGHT OF EXCITEMENT: Wigmore gets a spectacular view from the top — but his interest starts to fall off
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
AT A drive-in church in Los Angeles religious motorists toot once for Amen and twice for Hallelujah.
Mon Dieu!
This big daddy is no hero
WHO is that luscious young girl posing on the beach in romantic Mauritius?
Her name is Marie Gillain.
And if, like us, you've never heard of her, we should tell you that she plays his 14-year-old daughter in a romantic piece of ooh-la-la entitled My Father The Hero.
Fourteen?
Those who have seen advance screenings tend to scoff, and suggest this Lolita looks more like someone in her mid-twenties in some scenes.
Either way, the meaty hunk of French boeuf, who we rate as the screen's answer to Ian Botham, seems considerably ill at ease as a father trying to fend off the local romeos from his daughter while holidaying on the enchanted island.
It's heavy breathing — and heavy going for the French superstar, who looks to us dreadfully overweight, with a beer belly suggesting he indulged rather too much in the culinary delights of Mauritius.
NEWCOMER: Marie Gillain co-stars with Depardieu
ACCORDING to the British Medical Journal, ‘If you want to be happy for a night get drunk, for a year get married, and for a lifetime get a garden.’
A PASSER-BY paid £4 to take part in a police video identification parade of a robbery was given the police photographer's expensive leather jacket to wear and asked to jog down some steps and round a corner.
He must have taken a shine to the jacket because he turned the corner — and never came back leaving the police red-faced.
PLANE RIDICULOUS
WE were out for an airing with Air Hanson this week.
As we bopped up and down over Hampshire in the world's quietest helicopter, the McDonnell-Douglas 520, we were told the story of a former Luftwaffe pilot, now aged 65, who still ferries little propeller craft across the pond from America to England.
He is Dieter Schmidt and his secret recipe keeps him awake for the 20-hour flights.
Apparently, he drinks two pints of milk and, as soon as he feels drowsy, he drinks two pints of orange juice.
The two don't mix and the indigestion makes sure he is still alert enough to touch down at Blackbushe.
M1 drivers, please take note.
BELIEVE it or not, there's a take-out Chinese restaurant in Charlton, Massachusetts called, Khant Gho Wong.
No knight at the opera
THE determined but unpopular Jeremy Isaacs, yet to achieve a gong, has been upsetting the Establishment with his high-handed behaviour at the Royal Opera House to such an extent that there is now a new saying doing the rounds, namely: ‘This is one knight that won't happen at the Opera!’
Just thought you should know, Jeremy.
Sorry, I'll say that again…
A FRIEND, Marie Louise Gilman, collects odd exchanges in court.
Among her favourites:
Q: What happened then?
A: He told me, he says, ‘I have to kill you because you can identify me.’
Q: Did he kill you?
A: No.
Q: Do you know how far pregnant you are right now?
A: I will be three months on November 8.
Q: Apparently, then, the date of conception was August 8?
A: Yes.
Q: What were you and your husband doing at the time?
ROBERT DE NIRO has been spending the summer working as a bus driver.
It's all part of his preparation for his new movie, A Bronx Tale.
All clapped out
IN HIS book, All the Presidents' Wits, Gerald Gardner quotes Ronald Reagan remembering a speech he gave in Mexico City as Californian governor which created so little applause he was embarrassed when he sat down.
Says Reagan: ‘The speaker that followed me spoke in Spanish and he was being applauded about every paragraph.
To hide my embarrassment, I clapped before everyone else and longer than anyone else until our ambassador leaned over and said: ‘I wouldn't do that.
He's interpreting your speech.’’
THE cast list of L.A. Law recently included the actor Raynor Scheine.Get it?
Rain or Shine…
El Fatso named
FORMER Goon Harry Secombe, who has had a second home in Majorca for the past 15 years, reckoned he had finally been accepted by the locals when they gave him the Spanish name El Gordo.
‘I was rather chuffed — then I found out it meant the fat one,’ reveals Sir Harry.
CLASSIC QUOTES
I DIDN'T know whether I was coming or going.
— Peter Sellers, telling reporters of a heart attack he had while making love to Britt Ekland.
Wet and wonderful
LAP UP LUXURY IN THE LAKE DISTRICT
ANNE GRAHAM
UK HOLIDAY XTRA
STEER clear of the Lake District if a few drops of rain sends you scurrying for cover — it has one of the highest rainfall levels in Britain.
But, thanks to all that water, it boasts lovely lakes, babbling brooks and some breathtaking waterfalls.
From chocolate-box pretty Windermere to the decidedly spooky atmosphere at Wastwater there is water, water everywhere.
Sailors and swimmers as well as fell-walkers, climbers and haversack-touting hearties have always been drawn here.
But if you fancy a spot of luxury, too, you won't be disappointed.
The area has some of the country's best hotels and restaurants, many with spectacular views.
The Sharrow Bay Hotel on Ullswater and Miller Howe at Windermere, have delicious food in outstanding surroundings.
And Michael's Nook near Ambleside is another shrine to good food and an ideal spot to retreat to after a visit to Dove Cottage and the Wordsworth Museum in Grasmere.
Kendal, to the east of Windermere, is just outside the Lake District National Park and so makes a good base to visit the rest of the region.
It has some wonderful friendly pubs as well as more historic places to spend a bit of time, such as the ruined Norman castle where Catherine Parr, sixth wife of Henry VIII, was born.
It is also the home of one of its best-known exports — Kendal mint cake.
FOR more information and details of where to stay write to: Cumbria Tourist Board, Ashleigh, Holly Road, Windermere, Cumbria, LA23 2AQ.
Or you can phone them on 05394 44 444.
Lucky readers strike it rich
YOU’ RE always onto a winner with the super Daily Mirror!
These readers have all struck lucky!
Christine Carswell of Devon netted the top prize of £10,000 in Daily Mirror Bingo Game 219.
YOU’ RE always onto a winner with the super Daily Mirror!
These readers have all struck lucky!
Christine Carswell of Devon netted the top prize of £10,000 in Daily Mirror Bingo Game 219.
And J Southall, Tyne and Wear; Ernest Taperell, Paignton and L Tobin, Romford shared £1000.
In Game 220 the lucky £10,000 winner was Jean Westcott of Surrey.
Six winners shared £1000.
They were P Cates, Worcs; M Martin, Ayrshire; J Heath, Stoke on Trent; R Turney, Plymouth; F Breeze, Kent and A Butler, Uxbridge.
The lucky winners of our Win a Metro a day contest in August will all be driving away brand new J-Reg motors.
They were S Jones, Stafford; W Dawson, Farnworth; K Redfern, Doncaster; V Rolston, Co.
Antrim; L Taylor, Bromsgrove.
Gripping stuff
NEIL MURRAY /DAVID KERR
WHO needs white-knuckle theme parks when Corsica's waiting to be explored?
The French island where Napoleon was born can satisfy even the most thrill-hungry with nerve-racking clifftop drives, a bone-shuddering single-track railroad ride and an exhilarating helicopter flight.
And if they don't take your breath away the scenery certainly will.
We flew with Corsican Gold to Bastia on the Mediterranean isle's north-east coast before the short drive across country to the  delightful harbour town of St Florent.
And that 15-mile trip, cutting through the mountains on a twisting, turning road that has your nerve ends jangling, was a wonderful introduction to Corsica's stunning scenery.
St Florent is an excellent family base with a mile-long, shallow beach that's cleaned every morning.
It boasts plenty of water sports, including windsurfing, speed boats and aqua-jets, and a relaxed atmosphere that oozes into your bones the minute you hit the town square.
The harbour was filled with sleek, modern yachts berthed in front of countless restaurants serving up pizzas (Italy is only 50 miles from Corsica's east coast) or fresh fish caught that morning.
Meals for the three of us — two adults and a child — ranged from around £22 to £35, depending on what tickled our fancy.
Once a week a ten-minute helicopter flight (£20) soars over the harbour, heads out to sea to hover over inviting beaches and then on its return trip swoops down between the mountains, close to the hang-gliders.
Lodo beach, with its crystal-clear sea and wonderful white sand, is one of the beaches you can see from the air.
It is reached by fun-boat Le Popeye which takes half an hour, runs four times a day and costs £5 for adults and £2.50 for children.
While you could manage a holiday in St Florent without transport, that would rob you of the chance to see more of the wonderful Corsican scenery.
We headed north to Port de Centuri on a trip that was only 35 miles yet seemed like 135 as a result of the sheer concentration needed on the mountain roads but it was worth every second because of the incredible views.
We stopped off at Nonza where the only sound to be heard in the morning air was children singing.
And there can't be many better ways of passing time on holiday than a long, lingering lunch at the Vieux Moulin restaurant overlooking delightful Port de Centuri harbour.
But if you want to see the beauty of Corsica without worrying about driving over a cliff edge, try The Trembler.
That's the nickname given to the bone-shuddering, single-track railway.
It rivals any Disney ride as it rattles through valleys, races round sheer-drop corners and roller-coasts its way from Bastia to Ile Rousse and Calvi.
We paid £16 return per adult (half-price for children ten and under) for the three-hour ride and were greeted by the Foreign Legion parachuting out of the sky as we approached their home base of Calvi.
Although it's centuries since Corsica was last under Italian control, the citizens of Calvi claim that Christopher Columbus was born there while the town was under Genoese rule.
This town, is a bustling holiday resort with a large, busy harbour and a jam-packed beach.
Half an hour along the coast on The Trembler is Ile Rousse, a more manageable town than Calvi with a beach ringed by the railway line.
Then we headed back to St Florent to hear local heart-throb Philippe  Guiseppi singing about Corsica, L'Ile de Beaute…the Isle of Beauty.
He couldn't have said a truer word.
FACT BOX
DAVID KERR
A TYPICAL Corsican Gold package costs £780 for a family of four (two adults and two children) to spend two weeks B&B at the Maison Viola, Calvi.
For details, phone 0293 511125 
HIGH SPOTS: Remote Nonza and (inset) relaxing St Florent
FOR many, the winter months bring sunny days and exotic food!
At least that's what's in store for the thousands of over-50s who head south on long-stay holidays.
Belleair, the Malta specialists, now offer 40 hotels, ranging from three to five star, and 17 self-catering apartment complexes.
Prices for 70 nights start at £449 per person.
For more details, phone 081-785 3266.
BOOK a holiday with British Airways and get a regional flight to Heathrow for £25 return — the cost of a cab to the airport for the majority of people.
The offer applies to BA flights from Aberdeen, Belfast, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Jersey, Manchester and Newcastle, connecting with its intercontinental services to the Far East, Africa, America, Australia and the Middle East.
For more information, phone 0293–572821.
YOUR MONEY
NEIL SIMPSON
BRITAIN'S slump-hit shopkeepers gave the City a shock yesterday — by announcing some GOOD news.
Iceland Frozen Foods — opening a new store almost every week — rang up a 19 per cent RISE to £24,200,000
BRITAIN'S slump-hit shopkeepers gave the City a shock yesterday — by announcing some GOOD news.
Bookies Ladbrokes landed a 5 per cent profits INCREASE to £103,000,000
And bookseller Pentos saw sales SOAR 16 per cent on a year ago.
THE news cheered share dealers already celebrating the Government's decision to defend the pound in the Exchange Rate Mechanism by spending £7.25 billion on Euro-currency ECUs.
YOUR SHARES
HERE'S how to call up the latest Stock Exchange prices of the shares listed below.
FIRST dial 0891 34 52.
THEN dial the two numbers to the left of each share.
Calls cost 36p a minute, cheap rate, and 48p at all other times.
Roam with the Romans
ANDREW SHAW /DAVID KERR
TAKE the Circle Line to discover the ancient city of Chester at its best.
No, the walled Roman city hasn't unearthed an Underground among its excavations.
But a circular tour on top of a double decker bus.
Cost is £3.50 a person — or £8 for the family — and the guided tour holds a hidden bonus.
Tickets are valid all day enabling you to alight at one attraction before re-boarding a later bus and heading to another.
Chester is renowned for its historic Rows.
Drop off at Lower Bridge Street, a gem of an old-fashioned byway, and browse among fashionable shops and restaurants.
Explore the cathedral heritage centres, Roman ruins.
Enjoy a walk along the city walls and a stroll beside the Dee.
Or take an inexpensive trip on a Mississippi-style steam boat.
Our trip was arranged by Rainbow Holidays, Britain's second biggest short break company.
We stayed at the Saint David's Park Hotel, Ewloe, Clwyd, which boasts excellent food and an impressive sports complex to work it all off.
FACT BOX: Prices of Rainbow short stays range from £28.50 per night b&b to £49.50 half-board at the Saint David's Park Hotel.
If two adults share with two children under 16, the children stay free — you pay only for their meals.
For brochure, more details and reservations call:(York) 0904 643 355 
OLDE TIMES: In Chester
Just TWO more cornettos
AND A BIG DOLLOP OD CULTURE IN FLORENCE
GEORGE THAW /DAVID KERR
THE proud citizens of Florence will show you the most beautiful painting in the world and the most beautiful statue in the world.
But you have to find Vivoli's yourself.
Vivoli's sell the best ice cream in the world.
It is mind-blowing, and I speak as an expert.
During a weekend break in this beautiful Italian city I had chocolate, hazelnut, raspberry and even cream ice cream.
(Don't ask, enjoy.)
In between scoffing, I packed in a lot of sightseeing too, thanks to a direct flight to Florence itself.
Museums
The airport is 20 minutes from the middle of town and you are in your hotel in less time than it takes to get your luggage at Heathrow.
From there you can walk everywhere.
Entry to the major museums is around a fiver but worth it to see THAT painting, the Primavera by Botticelli and THE statue, Michaelangelo's David.
And being in the centre means you're near the shops and the markets — almost a great a free show as the ancient, romantic buildings.
There are famous names like Gucci and Armani — stylish, and impressively expensive — and markets selling good-value bargains in leather, silk and straw.
It is quality stuff which the city has been making well for hundreds of years.
You can visit, and buy from, workshops in the corners of ancient squares.
River
Or walk along dozens of stalls offering a huge choice (the street near the central food and fruit market is particularly good).
Don't miss the Ponte Vecchio — a whole street of gold and jewellery shops perched along one of the bridges over the river — or the Duomo, one of the loveliest cathedrals you'll ever see.
Stroll along the banks of the River Arno, sit in the Boboli Gardens by the fountains, eat hearty pizzas or huge dramatic sandwiches stuffed with cheese, tomato and salami for around £3.
Dinner for two should run to around £30 for a starter, a pasta dish, sweet, coffee and a bottle of good wine.
We stayed at the Rivoli, which was cool, organised and comfortable with hearty cold buffet breakfasts and-great plumbing.
Each room has a colour TV — ideal for checking out if Italian football is as good as it's cracked up to be.
A two-hour bus tour takes in the main sites and ends at a peak overlooking the city.
Peak
It's well worth the money for the Home Counties English spoken by the very expert guide.
At the peak, you can't quite see Vivoli's but it is on the right, near the Verdi Theatre.
Go back and have a zabaglione ice cream.
Mr Walls has met his Jericho.
FACT BOX
FLORENCE is one of the 17 destinations featured in Crystal's Premier Cities programme.
Lead-in price is £229 for a two night stay at the 3-star Centro Hotel.
PREMIER Cities offers direct scheduled flights between Stansted and Florence on Air UK, avoiding the one hour transfer by train from Pisa airport.
PRICE includes:free entrance to the magnificent National Museum.
return scheduled flights to Florence or Pisa.
hotel transfer on arrival in Florence.
FOR Pisa arrival return second class rail tickets to and from Florence city centre are also included.
Plus you get a city information guide and services of a Crystal-appointed local agent.
FOR further information, brochures, reservations call Premier Cities direct on: 081 390 9900.
DREAMY: Florence is a city of inspiring views, lovely old buildings and fascinating markets.
The ice cream's not bad either…
CREAMY: Cool off with a Vivoli special
GARDENING
CHARLES LYTE
Light up with a 60 bulb pack
MINIATURE bulbs, such as Dwarf Narcissi, give enormous pleasure.
They are bright and enchanting and look superb in a rock garden, at the front of a border or in pots.
Best of all, they are easy to grow.
Now you can buy a collection of Dwarf Narcissi — 60 bulbs — in four varieties.
Our special Daily Mirror Dwarf Narcissi Collection is: 24 Narcissi Minnow, lemon yellow; 12 N. Jack Snipe, creamy-white and primrose yellow; 12 N. Jenny, white; and 12 bulbs of the Polyanthus Narcissi (N. tazetta Canaliculatus), white petals and orange cups.
The collection costs £12.30, including p&p and VAT, instead of £16.90.
Orders to: Daily Mirror Dwarf Narcissi Collection, Van Tubergen (UK) Ltd, Bressingham, Diss, Norfolk, IP22 2AB.
Make cheques and postal orders payable to: MGN Dwarf Narcissi Collection.
Name and address on the back, please.
Allow 28 days for delivery.
Raising the roof
RON'S PIECE OF PARADISE IN THE CONCRETE JUNGLE
A KESTREL swooped for a refreshing stop at a waterfall in a little garden paradise high above a busy South London road.
The paradise was created by Ron Turk on a flat roof above a chemist's shop at Camberwell Green.
Disabled Ron started it all off in 1990 when he planted some window boxes so his friend Robert McIver would have something attractive to look at outside his window.
Robert, known as Mr Mack, suffered a stroke and is bedridden.
Pinch
Then Ron said: ‘I asked Mr Mack what he would like next.
He said: ‘A waterfall.’‘
With a pinch of ingenuity, he built one from Thermolite blocks rendered with cement and sand.
Now there are three waterfalls and a fountain.
The big one in the centre tumbles down into a pool where goldfish swim.
Pigeons and sparrows also shower in the waterfalls.
Down-to-earth Ron, who says he knows nothing about gardening, proves that you don't have to be an expert to make a super garden.
Every little bed and gap is packed with plants.
There are forty varieties he has bought or was given.
Among them are: Nicotiana, busy lizzies, lobelia, Michaelmas daisies, chrysanthemums, honeysuckle, jasmine, azaleas, hydrangeas, hebes, junipers, skimmia, calceolaria, and heather.
Some wild flowers have just appeared and Ron says many of his annuals, like petunias, self-seed.
He grows his plants in a mixture of growbag compost and soil.
Rampant
He did feed them at one time, but they became so rampant he had to stop.
Along with the mass of plants and flowers, there is still room for tables and chairs and a small barbecue.
Now he plans to produce a poster of the garden to sell.
Ron wants to raise money for disabled children, whom he has worked with for many years.
FLOWER SHOW: Ron Turk, the Camberwell Green finger Picture: JULIAN BROWN
SHELF LIFE
JAN WALSH
LOOK OUT THERE'S A CHILD ABOUT
THE WORST KIND OF HAZARDS ARE NOT SO OBVIOUS
TODAY a child will die because of an accident in the home.
And tomorrow.
And the next day.
Each year around 350 children die in household accidents in the UK — almost as many as road fatalities.
But while most of us are fiercely protective when we shepherd young children across the road, we ignore many of the risks in the home.
It's not just the unguarded fire, or the unlocked medicine cupboard which can kill.
There are dozens of other dangers.
YOUR bedroom may look pretty safe.
But if you leave a child for a few minutes he may find the pills you keep in the bedside drawer and poison himself.
HALLS and stairways sometimes have bannister rails so wide that toddlers squeeze through and fall.
CHILDREN are equally in danger in their own cots.
If mattresses don't fit the frame properly children can get caught and suffocate.
EVEN innocent-looking teddy bears could put your child at risk as they are used to help toddlers clamber over the side.
‘The worst hazards aren't always the obvious ones,’ says Mike Hayes, spokesman for the Child Accident Prevention Trust.
‘People generally realise the kitchen is a dangerous place.
By contrast a child's bedroom seems safe.
‘But there are a lot of hazards which could kill or seriously injure a child.’
The Trust is leading a campaign to make parents more aware of the hidden dangers.
If you've got young children take another look at your house, room by room.
It could save a life.
Hall and stairs.
1)
Cover old glass in doors and low windows with safety film.
2)
Fit a barrier or gate at top and bottom of stairs.
3)
If bannister rails are more than four inches apart board up the space.
4)
Beware of loose carpet and slippery steps.
5)
If a child can open the front door, fit an extra lock.
Sitting room
1)
Use heavy furniture or plastic covers to keep tiny fingers away from unused plug socket holes
2)
Don't leave matches or cigarette ends lying about.
They may start fires.
3)
Use a fixed fireguard and put guards round gas and electric fires.
4)
Keep the mantelpiece clear so that children aren't tempted to climb.
5)
Clear away all small objects, such as coins.
They could choke a child.
6)
Children have choked to death on pen-tops, so make sure any tops have air holes.
7)
Wind away cords and flexes — they could strangle a child.
Kitchen
1)
Don't put baby bouncers on tables or work surfaces and use a harness to keep them strapped in a high chair.
2)
Beware of the chip pan, the commonest cause of kitchen fires.
Use mats not tablecloths.
which children can pull off and get scalded.
4)
Use short or curly flexes on kettles and irons.
5)
Use the back rings of the cooker whenever you can and turn the handles out of sight.
6)
Store sharp knives out of the way, preferably in a locked drawer.
7)
Put cleaners and bleach together in a cupboard with a child safety catch.
And keep medicines up high, also with a catch on the cupboard.
Your bedroom
1)
Beware of windows.
If a child can open them more than four inches he could fall out.
Don't put beds or chests in front of them and fit a safety catch so that they'll only open a little way.
2)
Clear all medicines and pills out of your bedside drawer, especially birth control pills.
3)
Keep jewellery out of reach.
Earrings and beads could easily choke a child.
4)
Put scissors, hairspray, perfumes, etc, out of reach.
Your child's bedroom
1)
If the windows open, fit them with safety catches.
2)
Don't use duvets or pillows for under-ones.
They could suffocate.
3)
Take cot bumpers away once baby can sit up.
And don't pile soft toys in the cot.
They could help baby to climb out.
4)
If you use a changing table keep everything you need close by.
Even tiny babies might roll off.
5)
Position heaters carefully so that nothing can overheat and catch fire.
The bathroom
1)
Never leave young children alone in the bath.
They could drown.
And don't rely on older children to look after them.
2)
Don't attach fragrant blocks to the toilet rim.
Children chew them.
3)
Put bleach, toilet cleaner, deodorants, after shave, scissors and razors out of reach in a locked cupboard.
4)
Think about the lock.
You want privacy, but you don't want your child to lock himself in.
Preferably, fit a bolt high up on the door.
5)
Turn down the temperature of your hot water.
Then if your child does turn on the hot tap by accident it might hurt but it won't scald.
£½ MILLION IS FOREVER
NEW DIAMOND BINGO STARTS NEXT WEEK
FEAST your eyes on this little dazzler — a gem in a million.
And it's sparkling just for you.
This diamond is worth a cool £500,000.
And that's how much we're giving away in our new dazzling Diamond Bingo.
But that's not all…
Diamonds are a girl's best friend.
And to prove the Mirror is your best friend we're giving our winners REAL diamonds in our sparkling new contest, as well as BIG cash prizes.
Whether it's a skinny sliver of a thing or a rock the size of a cherry, that sensational stone is what all women want on their finger.
But the most precious gem of all does not come cheap.
This ravishing heart-shaped 25 carat rock, at London-jeweller Graff, comes with a millionaire's price tag.
It's the sort of gem Richard Burton might have bought for Liz Taylor.
Or Onassis for Jackie Kennedy.
So security was extra-tight as we visited the exclusive Knightsbridge store.
And it took our model's breath away when she tried on the ring…its facets sparkling like a waterfall around the dimly-lit room.
Graff has one of the world's best collections of rare and large diamonds and other gems worth millions.
And, despite the recession, trade is brisk in the pricier ices.
They are under orders not to reveal the identities of their clients or what they are prepared to pay.
But you can bet a pound to a penny that some of the biggest showbusiness names are among their customers.
Now we want YOU, our readers, to feel like a million dollars too.
So, instead of splashing out for the big one, we've got a number of gorgeous jewels to give away.
Here's what to do — ignore the fakes and stick with your romantic Mirror next week.
We're the one that outshines the rest.
DAZZLING: This little beauty is worth half a million pounds…the size of our super jackpot
THE WORLD'S GREATEST ADVICE COLUMNIST HELP!
HELP!
MARJE PROOPS
SUCH is the power of coincidence that while I was actually writing the letter published on this page today — the one from a sad widow who's beloved dog had died — a press release plopped onto my desk.
‘What do you do if your best friend is injured or ill and the vet's fees mean trouble for you too?’
In a new scheme, supported by Blue Cross Animal Care, Age Concern Pet Insurance pays for cost and treatment in excess of 10 per cent(minimum £20) and up to a total of £1,250 for each accident and illness.
For full details of cost and cover, send for the Age Concern Pet Insurance application form to: ACIS, Garrod House, Chaldon Road, Caterham, Surrey CR3 5YZ.
Girls!
This could be your best friend
DON'T miss out on the Mirror's new gem of a contest.
We're giving away thousands of pounds…and lots of dazzling diamonds too.
BUT remember — you're got to be in it to win it.
You'll get your glittering new card in Monday's Mirror — and that's when the new game starts.
OUR half a million Diamond Bingo is the biggest playing game around.
You can WIN every day of the week.
There's more £10,000 to be won each week in the Daily Mirror — and a chance to win even more prizes in in our sister papers, the Sunday Mirror and The People.
PLUS there are those gorgeous jewels we've lined up for you.
AND it's so easy to play.
Just check the Diamond Bingo numbers printed every day.
Tick them off as they appear — until you can call Diamond full house.
YOUR new Diamond Bingo card is in the Daily Mirror on Monday.
Our readers in Ireland, North and South can pick up their cards at their newsagent.
Order your copy today.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
ABBA stars Benny Andersson and Bjorn Ulvaeus are working on a secret comeback album.
The Swedes, at No. 16 with Dancing Queen are working together for the first time in seven years.
Says a pal: ‘They are keeping quiet about what kind of material they are producing.’
RICK SKY
SEX-STARVED women in Japan blame their husbands' bosses for working them into the ground and leaving them limp and lifeless in the bedroom.
Wives in the land of the Rising Sun enjoy half as many nights of passion as their Western sisters.
PAP SNAP
ACTRESS Emily Lloyd shows off new boyfriend Nick Savalas, son of Kojak star Telly Savalas at a Hollywood barbeque.
But as the night drew in Emily gave Nick her tea-cosy to keep his head warm.
CHEQUE IN, GERRY
POP bosses are desperate to track down Seventies star Gerry Rafferty who wrote chart smash Baker Street.
Newcomers Undercover have stormed to No. 2 in the charts with their dance version of the track after 40,000 Mirror readers voted the original their fifth favourite song of all time.
Rafferty, 45, is due for a huge royalty cheque.
But his former agent Richard Wootton says: ‘Gerry's disappeared.
His friends have no idea what he looks like nowadays, let alone what he's up to.’
Snap snap up a girl!
SNAP is set to be fronted by TWO girl singers.
Current leader Turbo B leaves at the end of the year after a row with the band's producers.
Producers Luca Anzilotti and Michael Munzing chose an unknown American singer to front the group — Number One for six weeks with Rythym Is A Dancer — after auditioning hundreds.
Luca says: ‘We were keen to have a female singer, but Snap will sound the same.’
Snap, with Turbo B, are set to tour Britain next month.
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
‘HIS racket's this size,’ says Lauren Hutton at Jimmy Connors' 40th birthday bash.
MARLA sucks a lolly.
Usually her hands are full of it.
NO KIDDING, NICOLE
START spreading the news — a little Cruiser may be on the way.
We can reveal exclusively that when Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman were in London a few weeks ago they went shopping for baby clothes.
And when Nicole, looking radiant, was asked if the clothing was, perhaps, a gift for a friend who was expecting, she glanced shyly away.
The shopping expedition came after the couple — Hollywood's hottest property — met Princess Diana at the West End premiere of their film, Far And Away.
The following day they trotted off to Laura Ashley's trendy King's Road branch and selected a number of outfits and T-shirts for infants aged up to six months.
If Nicole is pregnant, it won't come as a surprise.
The couple are probably the most lovey-dovey in the movie world these days, forever cuddling, holding hands and behaving in a manner that makes you want to squirm.
SARAH Jessica Parker is making waves.
She's just a cross we have to bear.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
Profits slump
TOP industrialist Lord Blakenham predicts that the recession will last another two years.
And he should know.
He's the chairman of the slump-hit Pearson Group, which owns everything from the Financial Times to Madame Tussauds waxworks.
Profits have dropped by a fifth to £34.8 million in the first half of this year, and he's not expecting an early recovery.
PREDICTION: Blakenham
THE SECRET WAR
How the SAS dared and won the big battle for the desert
‘GENERAL PETER CAN BE TRUSTED NOT TO GIVE MUCH AWAY’
ALASTAIR MCQUEEN
ONE group of men turned the tide of the Gulf War against Saddam Hussein — and they did it by tying up thousands of Iraqi soldiers in a deadly, sophisticated and top secret game of cat and mouse in the desert.
These warriors in the shadows, the Special Air Service, created such havoc that at times a battalion of Iraqis — a thousand men — was chasing a group of just four or six soldiers.
One by one they picked off Iraq's mobile Scud missiles and, gradually, Scuds stopped reaching their targets.
The threat of Israel entering the war dwindled.
The SAS, once again, had done its job.
And once again, its story went untold.
But now, as British airmen are back on active service in the skies over Iraq, the secrets of the SAS are coming out.
The man lifting the veil is General Sir Peter de la Billiere — now retired — who commanded British forces in the Gulf War, a former Commanding Officer of the SAS and director of special forces.
His ghost-written book, Storm Command: A Personal Account of the Gulf War, hits the bookstalls next weeks.
But it won't tell the whole story.
‘General Peter is ‘in-house’.
He can be trusted not to give too much away,’ a former regimental commander says.
Sir Peter tells of men who, once in the desert — even now the location is not revealed — formed into small groups.
Some clambered aboard helicopters crewed by members of the RAF's special forces.
Others roared over the sands in newly-designed Land Rovers, on revolutionary dune buggies and motor bikes.
Their mission: to locate Iraqi troop and tank positions, communications centres and, most importantly, find the mobile Scud missiles.
Their hand-held satellite navigation systems told them their exact position to within 15 metres.
With their sophisticated radio equipment they were able to use satellites to call up airstrikes, then talk the pilots right on to their targets with devastating accuracy.
At other times they blasted missile crews, radio  communications centres and ammunition dumps with Milan anti-tank missiles or plastic explosives.
Against the SAS successes must be measured the cost.
The daily battle against bitterly cold weather, exposure, the crippling liver pains caused by drinking bad water and the ever-present fear of discovery by nomadic tribesmen.
Outstanding is the amazing feat of endurance by a corporal who dodged patrols and walked 200 miles on blistered feet, suffering from exposure, with only two packets of biscuits to eat.
His incredible journey to safety took eight nights and seven days and beat the record of SAS founder-member Jack Sillito, who walked 150 miles in the Western Desert during the Second World War.
In the end, the men returned with the praises of the generals ringing in their ears.
But back in their headquarters in Hereford last night the ones who know ALL the stories were staying silent.
For the men of the SAS are gagged.
The full power of the Official Secrets Act and the threat of prosecution and loss of pension is ranged against any man who dares to speak out.
Sir Peter tells of his job persuading General Schwarzkopf and senior US officers of the usefulness of the SAS.
‘We had to make sure they didn't think we were a bunch of supermen and that they were aware that things could go wrong,’ said a source.
At the same time, he was trying to calm the nerves of the British Government.
An insider said: ‘Remember, in an ideal world special forces have to be behind the lines before the first shot is fired.
If a patrol is captured before the war starts, the international political fall-out is enormous.’
And the former commander added: ‘The Army doesn't really want the regiment mentioned at all, but we lost guys out there and others were injured.
‘At the very least we owe it to the families of the dead and the wives and children of the soldiers.
‘They must know why their husbands and fathers were away so long — and why they had to face such dangers.’
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
WIN top movie hits
MOVIE fans will go goggle-eyed at our latest super competition.
The Limit is giving away 100 new movie albums packed with hits from the hottest stars.
We've got 50 copies of the soundtrack for new comedy film Honeymoon In Vegas packed with cover versions of top Elvis Presley songs.
Tracks include Can't Help Falling In Love by U2 star Bono, Billy Joel's chart hit All Shook Up and Are You Lonesome Tonight sung by Bryan Ferry.
We've also got 50 copies of Romancing The Screen featuring 17 top movie themes and six number ones.
The album features a string of well-known tracks including The Commitments' Try A Little Tenderness, Berlin's You Take My Breath Away and Chris De Burgh's Lady In Red.
To enter simply answer this question: WHO was the leading actor/singer in The Commitments?
Write your answer, name and  address on a postcard and send (by September 14) to: The Limit's Vegas competition, 1 Thavies Inn, London, EC88 1AB.
First correct entries out of the bag win.
Extreme measures
EXTREME star Paul Geary stunned his fiance by taking a vow of celibacy.
The millionaire drummer has slapped a no-sex ban on their relationship til they wed in a year's time.
Geary, at No 15 with Rest In Peace says: ‘I told her it would be more fulfilling if we waited.
She didn't like the idea, but now she's coming round to it.
Holy smoke!
Pregnant Annie's flaming video…
IT TOOK experts three days to restore a 300 year old building after Annie Lennox filmed her latest video there.
The 36 year old former Eurythmics star — who announced yesterday that she is expecting a baby in the New Year — and a 20-strong film crew hired a Grade 1 listed building in central London to shoot her latest video.
Annie, who with husband Uri Fruchtman already has a 20-month old daughter, spent two days filming the £40,000 video with co-stars Hugh Laurie and John Malkovich.
The video for the smash hit Walking On Broken Glass — this week's No. 9, features stunning period costume — and hundreds of candles.
They hammed it up in the spectacular 17th century building unaware that smoke from the candles was blacking up the beautiful hand-painted ceiling.
Video producer Rob Small reveals: ‘When we took down the lighting rig at the end of the shoot soot from the candles left black patches on the ceiling.
‘Experts worked for three days to repair the ceiling.
At one point it looked like we'd have to restore the whole room.
It would have cost the earth.’
THE BLUE PETER CHALLENGE
How BBC picked their new kids' show star
Do an interview on a trampoline…then tell us your love-life secrets
PAULINE WALLIN
JOINING top children's TV show Blue Peter proved far from kids' stuff for new girl Anthea Turner.
She was picked from 300 other hopefuls for the coveted presenter's job.
Then came Test No 1.
Anthea was told to interview someone while bouncing up and down on a trampoline.
But Test No 2 was potentially the most embarrassing.
BBC bosses wanted to know about her love life…and if she had ever posed for sexy photos.
Fortunately, like the other tests, the 31-year-old convent-educated beauty passed with flying colours.
The trampoline was more unnerving.
‘It's a legendary Blue Peter challenge,’ said Anthea, who joins John Leslie and Diane-Louise Jordan on the programme next week.
‘You have to do it to prove you can hold a conversation and take part in physical activity at the same time.
‘I'd got the hang of jumping up and down when I was told I had to do twists and turns as well.
It was a nightmare.’
Down-to-earth Anthea didn't mind a bit being asked about her sex life.
She is married to former Radio One DJ Peter Powell and only had one previous boyfriend.
That was Radio One DJ Bruno Brooks.
They were teenage sweethearts in Stoke where they grew up.
When Bruno landed his Radio One job, she followed him south, a move which put her on the road to showbiz fame when she was signed up to host Saturday morning kids' show, Going Live.
Bruno and Anthea's romance lasted ten years and marriage was talked about.
But to his dismay, she left him and fell in love with Peter.
They married two years ago.
‘My time with Bruno was pretty well documented so there was no scandal there,’ said Anthea.
And has she ever stripped for the cameras?
‘My clothes have always stayed on except when I have a bath,’ she laughed.
Anthea — tall, slim and breathtakingly pretty — is nearly ten years older than previous Blue Peter girl Yvette Fielding.
Plenty of time for her to have had a string of boyfriends and perhaps kiss and tell lovers…
‘To some extent Blue Peter presenters are role models for young viewers,’ said Blue Peter editor Lewis Bronze, ‘and we like them to have a girl or boy next door image.’
So BBC bosses have to be ultra careful about who they hire for the wholesome, long-running show.
Unfortunately there have been presenters who became better known for hitting the headlines than their ability to turn washing up bottles into handy household objects.
The biggest scandal in the show's 34-year history was when it was revealed presenter Michael Sundin had once taken part in a raunchy gay sex show.
Sad Michael, who died of liver cancer at 27, was lashed with leather thongs in front of a packed audience at a West End Theatre just two days before joining the show.
And early presenter Chris Trace, who died at the weekend, fell from grace when, during his last year on the show in 1967, he had an affair with a pretty Norwegian teenager.
Boyish-looking presenter Peter Duncan starred in a soft-porn video earlier in his career.
And Janet Ellis caused an outcry by announcing she was pregnant but had no intention of marrying the baby's father.
MPs demanded she should quit and Janet was replaced by 18-year-old Yvette Fielding, straight out of school and utterly untarnished.
Anthea has only just stepped into Yvette's shoes but has already made pals with the other presenters and, course, Bonnie the dog.
Now she wants to become as popular as Blue Peter's previous greats, Valerie Singleton and Lesley Judd.
‘I looked up to Valerie and Lesley when I was a kid and I hope today's youngsters will see me as a role model.’
Worried sick
How NHS managers feel about their own reforms…
‘The changes are not delivering the goods’
JILL PALMER
THE Government's cash-before-care NHS shake-up has come under fire — from sickened hospital managers.
The men in dark suits put in charge of the changes don't like their new look health service.
Most health chiefs believe the reforms have gone too far and too fast according to a report published yesterday.
The survey of district managers — who are responsible for buying health care for the people in their area — by the National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts showed that: FEWER than half support the system of opt-out hospitals.
ONE in three does not think the market-style NHS is necessary.
MORE than half say the new system imposes excessive administrative work.
AND two thirds complain that underfunding is still a major problem.
Critics of the reforms reacted sharply last night.
Labour party health spokesman David Blunkett said the report showed the Government's failure to address health care problems in its NHS overhaul.
Attacked
‘The changes are simply not delivering the goods.
it is time for the Government to completely reassess the impact of their reforms on the quality of the nation's health services,’ he said.
‘Conservatism can never deliver good health.
It can certainly continue to provide an under-funded and under-valued ill health service and create an increasingly expensive new layer of bureaucracy.’
The NHS reforms have been continually criticised by doctors, nurses, patients, union leaders, and Labour politicians since they came into effect in April l991.
But this is the first time they have attacked by the very people supposed to be the most enthusiastic about them.
Hospitals now sell patient care including operations, X-rays, and blood tests, charging for everything.
Districts have contracts with individual hospitals to buy these treatments.
But when the money runs out and they can't afford to pay for any more care patients have to wait for the next financial year.
Hospitals are also encouraged to opt out of the NHS and become business-style ‘self-governing trusts’ competing for patients on a profit basis against other hospitals.
The managers are part of a growing army of health service administrators that has expanded from 700 to 13,200 in the past five years.
Shock Government statistics published on Friday showed that NHS bureaucracy is blooming while the number of nurses and midwives is falling.
Fears
Meanwhile the bosses' wage bill is soaring.
The amount of taxpayers' cash that goes into paying top managers has gone up 900 PER CENT from £25 million in 1987 to £251 million last year.
But the bill for nurses' and midwives' pay rose by just 60 PER CENT in the same period.
The figures prove that managers taking part in the survey were right to express fears that the new-look health service has increased admin costs and added bureaucracy.
All this diverts money from patient care.
One manager felt the changes had been rushed through for political reasons, had overwhelmed staff and brought ‘no major instant successes’.
Many claimed that opt-out hospitals were showing signs of ‘ditching patients that were difficult or costly’.
Others criticised the changes as reducing patient choice.
The report went on: ‘The concentration on short-term gains as a result of the politicisation of the NHS was seen as a distinct drawback’.
When the Government introduced the NHS shake-up opponents forecast: ‘Hundreds of millions of pounds will be spent on the extra bureaucracy needed by these changes while thousands of beds will be closed for lack of cash’.
Tragically this forecast has come true — although it has taken managers 18 months to realise it.
UNDER PRESSURE: Casualty at Bristol Royal Infirmary pools hard-pressed resources to handle an emergency
ANNE ROBINSON
A RAW DEAL IN THE ROMP STAKES
DAVID MELLOR has apparently promised to tackle ‘elitism in the arts’.
You can understand why.
He who goes to work wearing a Chelsea football kit under his suit and later makes love in the team socks while quoting Hamlet clearly has no truck with cultural snobbishness.
Further evidence of the Heritage Secretary's right-on attitude can be seen from his attendance at Glyndebourne.
‘Daahling, it's David, I'm calling you from behind a tree,’ he cooed into his ministerial mobile, refusing to be daunted by the haughty stares of the opera world.
Meanwhile, back at the ranch there was Antonia — busy dreaming of her days at No. 10, her chauffeur-driven car, her designer millinery and all the social skills she could bring to the job of Prime Minister's wife.
But for the moment, alas, there was only a ropy old futon on which to do it four times a night and the prospect of another day filled with sweet governmental messages of the ‘I want to lick you all over’ variety.
The whole point about this absurd saga, however, is not so much the wonderfully comic detail but the fact that from start to finish it takes all the predictable twists and turns of your classic affair.
There must be armies of males squirming uncomfortably at the breakfast table, feeling they've been in a similar movie.
HE who's getting past his best meets HER who's half his age, can't believe his luck and can't get enough of it.
SHE who's bowled over by the attentions of a powerful, successful man begins by enjoying herself but, fatally, moves on to fantasising about their future together.
He, who wishes to continue getting plenty, goes along with the plans for a better tomorrow.
But tomorrow never happens — and, worse, the wife does the one thing absolutely guaranteed to put the kibosh on the whole matter.
She says she'll forgive him.
Thus leaving the mistress with only her memories.
Or, in the case of Antonia, her fame, her futon, her cheques from the newspapers and the cry: ‘I wish I'd never got involved with him.’
HANG-UP THAT WON'T HELP CHILDREN
IF I were one of the millions who good heartedly subscribe on a regular basis to the NSPCC, I would, at the moment, be seriously considering whether my money was in sensible hands.
Last week the society took the incredibly high-handed decision to refuse a cheque for £50,000 because it came from the profits of the famous Dianagate tapes.
If the tapes were illegal or pornographic, turning down the money would have made sense.
But for a committee of aristocratic do-gooders, who are in the business of saving children from violence and abuse, to summarily dismiss a massive cash injection on the flimsy grounds of taste suggests they shouldn't be in a life-and-death business but rather running their local Girl Guides or church fete toffee-apple stalls.
THANK you to the great many readers who have written to me in the past couple of weeks about the Royals.
It is only a pity your correspondence can't be read by the Palace.
The Queen has adopted her standard practice of ignoring all the criticism and dissatisfaction in the belief that it will eventually go away.
Whereas your letters indicate that loyal subjects who have previously supported the Monarchy now feel that mistakes need to be acknowledged and if Her Majesty is not to be seen as hopelessly out of touch and out of date it is time she stood up and publicly said sorry.
BAD SNOOZE FOR GIRLS
THE British Snoring and Sleep Apnoea Association set up last year by a Mr Alan Davy has declared a membership of 1,300.
I'm not surprised.
A snorer's partner is easily tempted by the idea of a new solution.
But I fear she — and it usually is a she — will only be disappointed by what Mr Davy has to offer.
For the snorer he suggests: ‘Losing excess weight and taking exercise is most important.
So is not smoking or drinking at night.
‘If you only snore on your back,’ he advises, ‘then a tennis ball sewn into your pyjamas may do the trick.’
All this is true, but it entirely misses the point, which is that snorers either drink too much, smoke too much or eat too much.
And quite often they do all three.
They are, therefore, the last people in the world prepared to lose weight, take exercise or be persuaded of the wisdom of going to bed each night with a bloody tennis ball bouncing around their neck.
What a player
LAST YEAR HE WAS A TOY-BOY NOBODY
…
NOW HE'S THE SENSATION OF THE 90s
‘I want to keep an air of mystery’
MARY RIDDELL
THE hype began some time before we met.
Tim Robbins, it was rumoured, might wish his American publicist to sit in on the conversation.
He could, furthermore, be difficult about having his picture taken.
Oh, and finally, might it be an idea for a political writer to do the interview?
Given that Tim Robbins — and the name may not ring instant bells — is a film star, the last notion is rather like suggesting that an industrial correspondent be despatched to debrief Lemmie from Motorhead.
But then Tim Robbins is not just any old movie star.
Some have compared him to Orson Welles.
Others call him Oliver Stone with a sense of humour.
No one with half an eye on current trends is mentioning that his main claim to fame used to be as Susan Sarandon's toy boy.
Too obscure last year to merit a listing in Who's Who In Entertainment, this year he is, quite simply, a sensation.
Being named Best Actor at Cannes for The Player was merely a warm-up for the adulation induced by his latest film, Bob Roberts.
A stinging satire on American politics, it contains one of the shorter credit lists in film history, since Tim Robbins wrote it, directed it, stars in it, co-wrote the songs with his brother and sings them.
He also plays guitar a bit like Bob Dylan.
It is very easy to build up quite a dislike of The-Most-Important-Film-Star-Of-The-Nineties before ever clapping eyes on him.
The back view is faintly reassuring.
In a hotel corridor, a very tall man in a vest, braces and crumpled suit is stooped next to a door, demonstrating that he has no more notion of how a Savoy room key works than your ordinary mortal.
Once inside, he settles uneasily on an overstuffed armchair and peers politely, if a little wearily, through gold-rimmed granny glasses.
Considering how many times he must have been through this script, there are a lot of ‘ums’ and ‘you knows’and pauses, but eventually we get there.
‘Fame?
It's a little intimidating.
They set you up, they say you're hot, and it's only a matter of time before they're saying you're cold.’
On the show business thermometer of fame, Tim Robbins is currently somewhere around the temperature which sets jam.
He is 33, he appears unstoppable, and he is perfectly aware that he came back from the grave.
‘I hadn't worked for about a year and a half, and I was about to compromise — to take a part in a stupid comedy.
Then I met Robert Altman.’
Altman was about to direct The Player.
Robbins, he decided, must star in his Hollywood satire.
‘I was very lucky to be saved by him,’ Robbins says now.
‘It's rare to find that sort of integrity in Hollywood.
He said, ‘It's him or no one.
I'm out if he's out’.’
And so Tim Robbins, slightly to the chagrin of the moneymen who wanted a big name, was in.
In and poised for his latest triumph — a political satire so close to the heart of American electioneering that pundits believe it could affect the outcome of the presidential election.
Bob Roberts, which opens in Britain on Friday, will play in 1,000 cinemas across the US in the crucial last stages of the campaign.
In every foyer will be a voter registration desk.
‘Use your vote’ is the message of the film.
But not for Bush is the unwritten sub-title.
What Robbins has, very cleverly, done is to drop a match into the murky kerosene of American politics and wait for the explosion.
The film, a mock-documentary, follows the progress of would-be senator Bob Roberts — a clean-living, anti-drugs evangelist not altogether unlike, so Robbins has said, ‘the young George Bush with a guitar’.
But behind the sanitised exterior lies a murky world of shady housing deals, the spectre of Irangate and a system tarnished and corrupted.
‘You can draw whatever similarities you like,’ says Mr Robbins innocently from behind his granny glasses.
‘Personally I think politics is already that bad.
But the movie is raising questions.
It's not trying to provide any answers.’
Easy, of course, to light the blue touch-paper and run.
But he is genuine in his mission.
Do not imagine, just because the discovery of Tim Robbins has caused a stir not seen since
Columbus stumbled upon America, that he has got rich on the profits.
Far from it.
‘Right now I'm two months away from being broke.
I did The Player for a third of what I can get for films I don't want to do.
‘I did Bob Roberts for about one twentieth.
I'll get by by the hair on my chin because I have another job starting in November.
If not, I wouldn't be bankrupt but I would be taking out a second  mortgage on the house.’
He lives in Greenwich Village in New York with Susan Sarandon, who is 45, her daughter from a previous relationship, Eva, seven, and their sons, Jack, three, and Miles, newly-born.
They have a simply-furnished home, a Volvo estate car and a loathing for being in the limelight.
Only the suggestion that his career, once eclipsed by hers, is now vastly brighter stings him into reacting.
‘I don't agree.
I have never viewed it in this way, and neither has she.
Push him, and he will tell you — slick appearance to the contrary — that he is too hard up to buy fancy clothes.
‘I get all my suits from the movies I've been in.
This one's from The Player.’
Prod him, and he will start to tell you how hard he worked to make his low-budget block-buster.
‘We'd film for 12 hours, then we'd watch an hour or two.
After that I'd spend a couple of hours on the script.
It was three hours’ sleep — maybe five on a good day.’
And now it is all over, Tim Robbins wears the armour of the Hollywood superstar.
Friendly, urbane but careful.
‘Yeah, I'm shy, reserved.
Most of all I want to keep an air of mystery.’
A mild man, Mr Robbins.
Bland even, in his perfectly-tailored, borrowed suit and granny glasses.
The sort of man who wishes only to shift the political future of his country.
Nothing too ambitious.
ACCLAIM: Tim Robbins
VOTE-WINNER: Tim's the centre of attention in his hit movie Bob Roberts
LIVE-IN LOVER: Sarandon
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
SAVE OUR SAM
PRINCE has come to the aid of a DJ who was fired for playing tracks from the star's raunchy new album.
He pleaded with New York station WBLF to reinstate presenter Sammy Mack who had featured songs banned from the airwaves — including recent hit Sexy MF.
After complaints from radio bosses Prince has been forced to release TWO versions of his forthcoming album.
The ‘dirty’ version will feature parental X-rated warning stickers while the ‘clean’version has the same songs with the offending swear words edited out.
BANNED: Prince
THE CURE have pulled out of the MTV Awards — because they've got flu.
The band, tipped to win an award for their video Friday I'm In Love, were forced to cancel a planned satellite link-up from London to LA at the last minute.
A spokesman for the group, currently on a world tour, said: ‘They picked up a nasty virus in Australia.’
BUBBLY dance stars En Vogue prepare to battle it out with superstar Madonna for Best Female Video award.
They reckon a bit of practice on L.A's Malibu Beach is all they'll need to scoop top prize.
A GALAXY of the rock world's biggest stars will shine tonight when they appear at the pop world's most spectacular prize giving ceremony.
The event — pop channel MTV's annual video awards — looks set to be a who's-who of rock greats.
Stars taking part in the Los.
Angeles spectacular include Guns N' Roses, Elton John, Mick Jagger, Eric Clapton, U2, Def Leppard, Bryan Adams, Bobby Brown and Nirvana.
‘Mellor was besotted with me because he'd never had sex like it’
THE UNAUTHORISED VERSION NEITHER OF THEM WANTED YOU TO READ
Antonia fantasised about chauffeur-driven cars, wearing big hats and being waltzed through the doors of Number 10
FIONA McINTOSH
HE WOOED her with skew-whiff quotes from Shakespeare, pranced about in Chelsea football kit — minus the shorts — then bedded her on a futon with all the stamina of an 18-year-old.
David Mellor was a furious lover who could use four different positions a night.
But it was his position of power which really sent Antonia de Sancha's pulse racing.
‘Wouldn't it be funny if I was the next Lady Mellor?’ she giggled to a friend in the heat of her affair with the Cabinet Casanova.
‘Can you see me as the Prime Minister's wife living in Downing Street?’
Antonia's friend said she grew heady thinking about her future life with the 43-year-old Yuppie MP for Putney.
‘She was totally overcome.
I think she was swept away by the power of the man and his importance.
She loved fantasising about being his wife, wearing big hats, being chauffeur-driven and waltzing through the door of Number 10 if he got to be Prime Minister.
‘She liked to believe he was in line to be the next PM.
She's somebody who is quite obsessed with power and powerful men and she loved the idea that Mellor would one day be Premier.
It was Mellor's political clout, rather than his pale and interesting physique, which became 31-year-old Antonia's aphrodisiac.
And in return she made his hormones race.
‘Antonia told me he was besotted by her because he had never had sex like it.
He was the powerful one, in terms of being a Cabinet minister, and that was the main thing that attracted her.’
But when it came to their sex life, Antonia was boss of the futon frolics.
‘She had him behaving like a schoolboy.
It was like he had discovered sex for the first time,’ said a friend.
‘It must have been like a drug to him.
He sounded completely obsessed.
He adored her long legs.’
Antonia made no excuses about why she was attracted to the bespectacled father-of-two.
When she first confided the name of her secret love to a friend she said: ‘You'll never believe it, but it's David Mellor.
I know he's not brilliant looking, but he's got a fantastic mind and you know that's what I really like.’
He also knew how to live well by dining at expensive restaurants and going to the theatre, and as the Heritage Secretary he had invaluable contacts in the acting world.
‘Antonia said Mellor told her he would like to help her career.
He said he would ask Sir David Attenborough to help her, which he did by checking out her agent and saying he would look out for a film part for her.’
Sir David also asked her to submit a number of stills for him to look at.
Mellor's office in life may have been the big attraction, but it also got in the way of a good time.
In a long conversation to another close friend near the end of June, Antonia said she was upset and worried she wasn't seeing enough of her Minister.
He was so very busy at work.
‘But she told me she tried to be understanding of a life that perhaps she might have to lead one day,’ said her friend.
‘She desperately wanted to play the wife role and would spend an afternoon cooking a beautiful meal for him and he would arrive with an expensive bottle of wine and they'd settle down for a cosy evening.’
But when Mellor upped and went home to his wife and two young sons in Putney, Antonia became enraged.
Judith Mellor stood, unwittingly, between Antonia and her dreams of becoming the smiling First Lady of Number 10.
‘She said he kept promising to marry her, but by mid-May she had got very frustrated that the relationship wasn't accelerating as quickly as she wanted, said Antonia's friend.
‘It lead to huge rows.
Antonia could be very foul-mouthed and rang me about 20 times, sometimes in tears, saying ‘that bastard hasn't left his wife yet’.’
She became particularly angry when Mellor wouldn't extend his love-making motions to an all-night sitting.
‘When he was unable to spend the night with her she said she felt used and abused.
She once said, ‘I don't want to be his f-ing mistress, I want to be his wife.’
Antonia went to great lengths to impress her ministerial lover.
‘She became very keen on politics,’ recalls a friend.
‘She used to read The Times from cover to cover.
‘She told me she and Mellor had long chats about politics, and that it had been suggested by the Prime Minister that at the end of the year Mellor would be made the new Party chairman.’
‘From what she told me, Mellor was tipped to go to the top.’
The thought of becoming a leading Tory matron was tantalising.
But one sacrifice Antonia could never see herself making was to exchange her jeans and cowboy boots for the frumpy frocks and sensible shoes of a Tory wife.
Her clothes became a sore point.
‘David didn't like them at all and promised her a clothing allowance,’ said her friend.
‘He wanted her to go and buy some presentable clothes she could wear to the sort of smart restaurants he was taking her to.’
But sometimes the cowboy boot was on the other foot.
‘She told him his clothes were awful and that she didn't like his schoolboyish haircut.’
Even before Antonia had admitted meeting the Minister for Fun, Antonia told a close friend she knew he was to play an important part in her life.
‘Antonia told me she had been watching Mellor on TV in the run up to the General Election and said she had suddenly been taken over by this incredible desire for him and that she badly wanted to meet him.
‘She just knew she was going to have a mad, passionate affair with him.
Antonia is very into fate, star signs and things like that.
Antonia gets what Antonia wants.’
Before she met the Minister at a party, through her Private Eye journalist friend Paul Halloran, the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art graduate was leading an uncertain lifestyle bouncing from one boyfriend to the next and one downmarket job to another.
Almost broke, she had worked as a telephonist at an escort agency whispering secret promises to paying clients, and as a hostess in a Soho club catering for Japanese businessmen.
‘She made several false starts,’ said Amanda Tooth, 29, an actress friend who shared flats with Antonia in London and New York.
‘She was always very impressed with anyone famous or powerful.
‘She had always admired Robert De Niro's work and she phoned him repeatedly when we were living in New York, using the name of a mutual friend.
He finally agreed to meet us for lunch at the Mayflower Hotel, but nothing happened between them.
‘She is not so much a stargazer as someone who is interested in power — other people's power, which is possibly the only reason she was attracted to David Mellor.
He's certainly not her type.
ANTONIA men who are slightly less conventional, more erratic, more uncontrolled and certainly a different look.
She got involved with him because of the power element.
‘He was able to introduce her to a lot of people but her real ambition is to be a movie star, not an actress on the stage.
Novelist Graham Roos, 26, who has known Antonia for eight years, said: ‘She comes from a cosmopolitan background and she is quite sophisticated.
‘She didn't find it unusual to sleep with a minister because there is a whole tradition of courtesans which this country doesn't understand.
‘Very grand women who were prized for their minds as much as their bodies were taken on board by powerful individuals.
Amanda Tooth said that hard times made Antonia set her sights on someone who could help her make a name.
‘After her parents died about a year apart she suddenly got a survival instinct which knew no boundaries at all because she had no longer had a family,’ said Amanda.
‘She lost everything, really.
‘She has very little regard for other people's property and other people's lives now, which wasn't how she was a few years ago.
‘I FINALLY evicted her in April last year for non-payment of rent.
I had no money and she was being highly irresponsible.
She owed me £1500 but when she did have money, I didn't see any of it.
Antonia made soft-porn movie The Pieman — about a one-legged hooker who has a romp with a pizza delivery man —‘because she hadn't been working much for nearly two years and had no income,’ said Amanda.
‘She got a job as a hostess at the Wisteria Club in Beak Street, Soho, to pay some of the rent she owed.
It was a do-or-die situation.
‘The customers were mostly Japanese and the girls sat in a damp back room waiting to be called to join a man at his table.
‘She was paid £15 a night to turn up and £15 for every man she sat down with.
I picked up her pay packet once and she got just £45 for three nights’ work.
‘She drinks very little and she never prostituted herself.’
Antonia has now written off Mellor as ‘an impossible love’.
‘I know it can never be.
The best thing I can do is forget all about him,’ she told a close friend.
Mellor has been left to squirm in a mire of new allegations raised by the Mirror, but Antonia has walked away a household name.
Her legacy from the hot three-month affair is fame — the very prize she was striving for before she played bedroom games with the Minister for Fun.
The girl who wanted to make movies is watching her dream come true.
She is lined up to play herself in a Hollywood movie about a sex scandal MP.
A script which should require very little rehearsal.
THE DREAM: ‘She had him behaving like a schoolboy.
It must have been like a drug to him because he sounded  completely obsessed.
He adored her long legs’
THE REALITY: Mellor with wife Judith
PUBLIC OPINION
TIME TO WIELD THE BIG KNIFE
THE Tories have created a monster in the health service when top managers have had a 900 per cent pay rise in five years.
Instead of the doctors and nurses we so urgently need, we have an army of bureaucrats which has expanded from 700 to 13,200 in the same time.
It's a national scandal that senior managers now take a bigger share of the NHS pay packet than the entire ambulance staff.
Nobody can have any faith in Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley who says that the NHS needs good managers to get patients' waiting lists down.
Waiting lists for managers with their cushy jobs and inflated salaries must be growing every day.
— T. Rowlands, Birmingham.
My congratulations to the Daily Mirror for exposing the horrors in Britain's safari parks.
I can't understand why monkeys from Longleat and Woburn are used for research.
— Ms S. Geach, Sevenoaks, Kent.
BANK ON BANKS
BANKS may be money grabbers but they are still the safest places to leave your money, as the mother and son found when £29,000 was stolen from their parked car.
Perhaps that will be a thought for people who foolishly keep money under the mattress or in a jam jar.
— K. Phillips, Brighton.
SWEET CHARITY
ACTRESS Louise Lombard shows such compassion by helping to serve food to London's down-and-outs.
After filming TV's House of Eliott, she works hours for the homeless in the crypt of St Martin-in-the Fields.
That's Christianity.
At 21 she is set for stardom, but she still finds time for people who have fallen on hard times.
What a wonderful girl.
— Mrs C. Wills, Birmingham.
Retire gracefully
IT WOULD be bad to raise women's retirement age to 65, as proposed by the Social Security Advisory Committee.
If a higher age is fixed, women would be denied free prescriptions and bus passes at 60.
Women's Retirement Age Protest (WRAP) supports a common retirement age of 60 with an option of continuing employment up to 70. — V. Stevens, J. Eaton and J. Conron, WRAP, Manchester.
YOUR MONEY
Debt chasers coin it
JOHN HUSBAND
BRITAIN'S biggest debt collection company is laughing all the way to the bank.
Profits jumped by a third to over £6 million in six months.
Intrum Justitia — latin for ‘Justice for All’— employs 1,600 people to chase up debts on the doorsteps.
They work on the principle that most people pay up if they're pestered for long enough.
It makes its money by charging commission to creditors of up to half the value of the debts it recovers.
Most of the money is owed by people whose homes have been repossessed and sold for less than their outstanding mortgage.
But there's a growing market in unpaid water, gas and electricity bills.
Since Intrum first offered its shares to investors two years ago the Stock Market has slumped while Intrum's shares have risen from 81p to 87p.
To improve its image, the firm is splashing out £3 million on sponsoring a boat in the 1993 round-the-world yacht race.
DID YOU KNOW?
FOUR asteroids found in space in the 1980s are called John, George, Ringo and Paul after the Beatles.
LIVELY LETTERS
, writes: WE HAVE heard at college two popular beliefs.
One is that the monarchy in Britain will end when the ravens leave the Tower of London.
The other is that at the end of time there will only be the kings of Hearts, Spades, Diamonds, Clubs and England.
Can you tell us where those strange ideas came from?
King Farouk of Egypt, deposed in 1952, said a year later, ‘One day there will only be five kings left, Hearts, Spades, Diamonds, Clubs and England.’
He borrowed the quotation from an earlier Scandinavian monarch.
Bran the Blessed — some say he was a Celtic God, some a virtuous king — is really responsible for the legend of the ravens.
His head was cut off, buried on Tower Hill facing France in the belief that so long as it remained there, Britain would be safe from invasion.
Bran means raven.
Charles the Second (1630–85) created the post of Raven Master to keep nine ravens in the Tower to ensure the monarchy survived.
A master, nine ravens and the Queen are still in office.
SEER
, writes: TWICE in recent weeks I have heard of a character which sounds like Notre Dames and they say he was played in a film by Orson Welles.
Who was he?
You mean Nostradamus, the astrologer, who in 1955 wrote a book of rhymed prophecies called Centuries.
He is supposed to have foretold the execution of Charles I, the Great Fire of London, the abdication of
Edward VIII, the rise of Hitler, and World War Three which will last three years and seven months and bring about the end of the world.
Orson Welles played the part in the 1980 film The Man Who Saw Tomorrow.
KETTLE
, chairman, Surrey Street, Croydon, Traders Federation writes: YOU should have another ‘butcher's hook’(look) at Cockney rhyming slang.
Kettle is the Cockney word for watch because ‘kettle on the hob’ rhymes with fob (which went with a fob watch) hence ‘kettle’means watch.
Thank you and all the other  rhymesters , including those who thought that kettle is a watch because it rhymes with metal!
ORGAN
, writes: FAIRGROUNDS used to have organs which I think were called coliepes.
Is this so?
The word is calliope, Greek for ‘beautiful-voiced.’
It was the name of the ninth Muse, who presided over eloquence and heroic poetry.
Mississippi steamers all had the instruments which could be heard for miles.
TODAY'S THOUGHT
Flattery makes friends and truth makes enemies.
— Spanish proverb 
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
BARCLAYCARD holders can get some great goodies under the Profiles scheme, which gives a point for every £10 spent on plastic.
Points can be swapped for prizes ranging from a trip in a hot air balloon to a day out in the Champagne region of France boozing bubbly.
The only hiccup is that you need to shell out £12,500 to get the champers treat, £1,900 for five paint brushes and £3,900 for a bathroom scales.
Big deal!
SKY RIDE: £12,000 per ride
GIRLS GET A FAIRER SHARE
Despite the economic gloom, City types are feeling quite skittish now that the former men-only Marks & Sparks in London's Leadenhall Street has let the ladies in.
This lovely pin stripe looks a lot sexier on our slinky slicker than stretched across some tycoon's big tum.
BEAT THE FIRING  SQUAD 
HOW TO COUNTER AN ATTACK BY THE BOSS
JOHN HUSBAND/JOHN COPPOCK
THE staff at the Rovers in were worried sick about their jobs when Alec Gilroy decided to quit Coronation Street and go South.
So they breathed a sigh of relief when Bet Lynch, his missus, said she'd stay behind as manager.
For Bet is not the sort of woman to fire old faithfuls like Betty Turpin and Jack Duckworth.
But a change of management can be a nightmare if a new boss starts to streamline the business by sacking staff.
Should this happen, you may be entitled to compensation providing you have been with the firm for more than two years.
IF you think you have been fired unfairly here's what to do: CLAIM compensation for unfair dismissal in an industrial tribunal.
It is then up to the employer to prove you were fired fairly.
The tribunal can award you up to £14,000 compensation or order your reinstatement.
It generally takes six months to get a tribunal hearing and it's FREE.
But you'll have to pay your own legal costs if you lose.
Legal aid is NOT available.
Workers with less than two years service CAN have their case heard if they were fired on grounds of sex or race.
IF your new boss forces you to leave by deliberately making your life hell you can claim Constructive Dismissal even though you resigned.
Constructive dismissal includes demoting you, reducing your salary or making you do demeaning chores without actually sacking you.
But you have to prove this — NOT the employer.
IF a firm is taken over, staff with more than two years are covered by the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act.
In such a case you are entitled to keep your contractual rights although many new owners will try to renegotiate these.
If you you don't agree and are fired, you may take the new owner to an industrial tribunal.
YOU can also sue in the courts for breach of contract if your new employer breaks your terms and conditions, even if you have only just joined the firm.
Unfortunately legal action is expensive, but you can insure against taking bully bosses to court.
For £180 a year the Legal Protection Group policy will pay up to £50,000 of  lawyers' bills in a single action.
DETAILS: 081 661 1491.
You may also be able to get legal insurance as an add-on to a household policy for as little as £12.50 per year, but it may not always cover you for a battle with the boss, so check before you buy 
Calling Diamond Bingo players
SORRY, folks, but some readers didn't get their new Diamond Bingo card in yesterday's Daily Mirror.
To make amends we're inserting the card in today's paper AND keeping yesterday's Bingo Hotline open so that those of you who missed out on our Diamond Line bonus can still play Game 228 Day 1 and claim your prize if you're a winner.
Look at the numbers on your card and match them against those following for Game 228 Day 1.
The numbers are: 80 13 32 66 43 22 79 3 30 14 55 72
If you cross off all five numbers on any one of the three horizontal lines on your Game 228 Bingo card, you win a nine-carat gold diamond cluster ring from Elizabeth Duke worth £149.
If there's more than one winner, they EACH get a ring.
To claim your Diamond Line prize, ring the Bingo Hotline in your card between 10.30am and 4pm TODAY.
And you can play today's Diamond Bingo game by turning to Page 8.
GOOD LUCK TO JULIA…
ANNE ROBINSON
JULIA SOMERVILLE is recovering well from the removal of a brain tumour.
This is excellent news which will be made even better if, in the next few days, her colleagues and headline writers refrain from prefacing every mention of her name with the words brave, courageous, etc. etc.
Her tumour, thankfully, was not malignant.
Others are less fortunate.
And it is surely dying from cancer with dignity which requires bravery.
Whereas discovering you have a lump which is non-cancerous and operable means you are lucky rather than heroic.
THE LIMIT
CHILLI BLAST
RICK SKY
SINGER Anthony Kiedis slammed superstars Guns N' Roses, who appear alongside him tonight.
Says the Red Hot Chilli Peppers star: ‘I don't listen to them.
They're not my cup of tea.
‘They might have a big following, but then so does George Bush.
It's safe to say that in a few years time they will be playing Las Vegas.’
Why I said NO to Madonna
SEX SYMBOL?
NOT ME, SAYS SHY LUKE
‘I didn't want to be naked on a coffee table…‘
RICK SKY
LUKE PERRY flashes a smile that sends teenage girls wild…and explains why his most famous fan, Madonna, will NOT be seeing as much of him as she'd hoped.
The pop superstar has made no secret of her lust for the 27-year-old bad-boy star of hit TV series Beverly Hills 90210.
She bet — and lost — £100,000 to record company mogul David Geffen over exactly how tall Perry was.
And the first time she met Luke she stepped up and kissed him passionately on the lips.
But when she wanted him to pose for her book of erotic fantasies, wearing just a g-string, Luke declined.
There are some things even the man voted the sexiest person in the world by Just Seventeen magazine wouldn't do.
And this was one of them.
‘It's a bit too raunchy for my taste,’ said the reluctant sex symbol ruefully.
‘I didn't want to be seen naked on anyone's coffee table’.
Luke had been taken aback, anyway, by that kiss, at an AIDS benefit.
‘I was a bit overwhelmed when she kissed me like that because we'd never met before and it was in public.
It shocked the country boy in me.
‘But it was exciting too,’ he admits.
‘I didn't exactly fight her off.’
The star has been getting used to the infatuations of Luke-crazed girls.
He gets 3,000 letters a week from fans.
One girl wanted to cover him in whipped cream and honey and then slowly lick off every bit.
His first reaction had been to hide.
He flicks the ash off his faded blue jeans and lights up another cigarette.
The man who's been called a reincarnation of the legendary James Deans sighs and admits:
‘For a long while I didn't go out that much.
I used to rely on delivery people.
I couldn't go out to eat because I'd be recognised.
I learned to love delivery food.
‘At it's worst I just felt that I couldn't go anywhere that I wanted to.
I lived an existence just like a hermit.
‘Then one day it dawned on me that I was running scared and it was silly.
‘I didn't want to become a prisoner of my own fame or become pushed into a corner by success and just sit at home.’
So he got out and about and the result is a movie, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, which will make him even more sought after.
But fans of his macho Dylan in Beverly Hills, are in for a surprise.
Luke plays Pike, a young man terrorized by vampires, who is rescued by a FEMALE vampire killer, played by his actress girlfriend Kristy Swanson.
Says Luke: ‘I'm really the damsel in distress in this one.
It really is a role reversal and that is cool for me.
‘Kirsty plays this real strong girl who does all the protecting and I am the one who gets protected.
‘The script is really wacky and that's what I wanted.
I wanted to do a comedy because I don't get much chance to play for laughs in Beverly Hills.
‘I don't really worry about not being a macho kind of guy for my fans because that is not really the kind of person I am.
‘When I decided to take the part I was looking for a role that was the opposite of my character Dylan.
And Pike is exactly that.
‘I have always been in touch with the female side of my personality ever since I was a kid.
‘I was always close to my mother and I like being around women.’
He didn't have ‘a particularly happy childhood,’ he recalls.
‘I had a lot of problems because of my father.
He was a drunk and he abused my mother.
‘It used to get me so angry and I really wanted to protect my mother and help her, but I was only six at the time and there was nothing I could do.
I still carry a lot of anger towards him.
‘Eventually they got divorced, which was so good for the family.
But I remember those times with my father as being very traumatic.’
He seems in no hurry to start a family of his own and is shy about discussing beautiful Kristy, who he has been linked with romantically.
He says: ‘I met Kristy through an old boyfriend of hers.
It was at a Superbowl party and we just got talking.
‘I couldn't help notice how pretty, charming and intelligent she was and we just clicked.
‘But there's no truth in the rumours that we are engaged.
I don't know where those kind of stories start.
‘Even my mum called me up one day and congratulated me!
It was just so weird.’
Just like his sex symbol status, apparently.
‘I do find it hard to take it all seriously,’ he says.
‘Besides, I can't help but feel that this time next year all these girls will probably be for someone else.
‘Yes, of course, it is flattering but I couldn't let it rule my life and I won't.
‘If you did it would drive you crazy.’
Luke wants to keep a cool head…even if Madonna calls.
SPOT THE HERO: Luke's not so macho with new co-star Kristy
COVER GIRL: Madonna on  Vanity Fair
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
HAMBURG-based DJ Alex Christensen has spent three years restoring a vintage Cadillac.
Alex, leader of dance band UB96, at No 18 with Das Boot has invested £8000 in the car, and says: ‘I bought it on the spur of the moment after spotting it in Los Angeles.
‘It took years to get it roadworthy.
The trouble is it only does ten miles to the gallon.’
Anita in drag act
SEXY singer Anita Dels had to be rescued by security guards after fans tried to drag her offstage during a packed gig.
Anita, who fronts hot dance band 2 Unlimited, was performing at a Liverpool club when excited members of the audience made a grab for her.
The star, at No 19 with The Magic Friend, says: ‘It was really scary.
People were pulling at my clothes.
It took ten security men to calm the crowd down.’
STAR STUDENT
HOLLYWOOD stunner Darryl Hannah is taking a year-long break from movies — to go back to school.
The curvy actress, who shot to fame in hit films Splash and Wall Street, is attending classes at New York University in a bid to become a director.
She says: ‘I have to write, produce and direct my own short film.
Luckily, if it's really bad no one will get to see it, except my teachers.
‘I want to prove there's more to me than blonde hair and long legs.’
CLASSES: Darryl
RIGHT ON ROCKERS
ALL-GIRL band L7 are teaming up with wild rockers Nirvana in a bid to promote women's rights.
The Los Angeles-based stars have set up a pressure group, Rock For Choice, to defend the right to abortion.
Guitarist Donita Sparks, at No 33 with Monster, says: ‘We wanted to do something because no one in the music industry seems to care about our vanishing civil rights.’
PRESSURE GROUP: L7
Mind your tongue
SONIA LASHES EURO LYRICS
RISING star Sonia has blasted The Eurovision Song contest because entrants do NOT sing in English.
The Liverpool-born singer has beaten off hundreds of hopefuls to be chosen to represent Britain in the annual Euro-bash.
But she reckons more people would watch the ailing show if organisers banned foreign singing.
Redhead Sonia, currently enjoying a Top 40 hit with Boogie Nights, says: ‘One of the problems is no one can understand the foreign songs and the contest is suffering as a result.
‘If everyone sang in English more people would enjoy the music and want to watch.’
Despite being a launchpad for bands like Sweden's Abba and producing a string of hits the  Eurovision Song Contest has been panned by fans in recent years.
Critics reckon the £2 million cost of the show — seen by 150 million in 39 countries — could be better used.
A Eurovision spokesman hit back: ‘If everyone sung in English it would destroy the idea behind the show.’
BRIT HIT: Sonia champions our language
A world ruled by pygmies
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
ON THURSDAY
HAS there ever been a period when world leaders, as Premiers and Presidents so love to be called, were such second-raters?
Their real status, as opposed to the status they imagine for themselves, is in inverse proportion to the size of their motorcades and the cost of their suits.
.
Let's start with America, a giant country run by a giant nerd who has neither the will nor the know-how to deal with problems of his making.
If George Bush survives the Presidential elections in November it will be because the Democrats can produce nothing better than Bill Clinton whose appalling record on capital punishment (he likes it) is reason enough not to want him.
In Russia, whatever big Boris Yeltsin may be — and you only have to look at him to know more about that than you want to — he is no Gorbachev.
So can we look to China for a real world leader?
Only if we like geriatric killers.
Is Helmut Kohl, the Chancellor of mighty Germany, the man to restore our faith in world leadership?
Botched
Not when he has botched reunification and his country's interest rates cripple home-owners and industries far beyond his own borders.
In Europe, only French President Francois Mitterrand gets anywhere near to the status of political giant.
Yet with two huge provisos.
He is unpopular.
And a SOCIALIST who presides over three million unemployed deserves to be.
That is to take nothing away from Mitterrand's remarkable three-hour TV performance last week when he took on — and beat — a TV interviewer, three editors, 12 members of the public and a leading anti-Maastricht politician.
Here was a back-to-the-wall President who BELIEVED in what he was saying and who shifted opinion overnight with a high-risk tour de force which seems to have swung next week's referendum.
Compare that with the fence-sitting gutlessness of Honest John Major, our very own world leader and ‘EC President’ who refused to take part in the French TV debate for fear of upsetting Tory rebels.
The same Honest John who once described his Treaty negotiation as Game, Set and Match and who now prays at night the French WILL reject it so all the blame can be piled elsewhere.
Power
Not that our world leaders have much to worry about.
As Baroness Barmy has shown, once you're on the circuit, you've got it made.
Indeed, provided you can keep the bodyguards and the cars, it doesn't really matter whether you're in power or out of it.
You just write WORLD LEADER in your passport, charge a fortune to expound views rejected by your people, and let the world, and the people, go to hell.
CAROLINE OFFERS A LESSON TO OUR ROYALS
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
ON THURSDAY
PRINCESS Caroline of Monaco is sending her children to local state schools.
So why can't our Royals do the same?
It would transform the image of State education, and do the tattered Royal image no harm either.
The Royal children might even pass a few exams which is more than their expensively educated Mummies and Daddies managed.
STATE SCHOOL: Caroline
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
FISONS TAKES BITTER US PILL
AMERICA'S food and drug regulations are heap bad medicine for Fisons, the pharmaceuticals giant.
It was forced to withdraw two drugs from the States this year because they failed to meet US standards.
This virtually halved six-months profits to just £40.4 million.
AN L OF A SAVING
NEW drivers have TWICE as many accidents as old-timers in the first two years after passing the test.
As a result they pay sky-high premiums.
But now motorists can take the Qualified Driver test, which has been organised by the British School of Motoring and insurance giant General Accident.
The £95 course deals with all the problems of driving solo.
If you pass, your first year's car cover is cut by a quarter.
DETAILS: BSM or GA.
HOTLINE TO SHARES
THE FTSE index of shares slumped 34.5 to 2337.7 yesterday as the £ came under a new attack in the Euro-currency battles.
BT fell 11p to 335p on news that it may face more competition in the future.
YOUR WINNING LINE-UP
THE best prizes are in your fun-packed Daily Mirror — and her are some of the happy readers who have snapped them up.
The four pictured each won a K-registration Citroen AX in our May TOTAL contest.
The cars were presented by Mr P. De Boos Smith, managing director and chairman of Total Oil Great Britain Limited.
Winners pictured left to right Mr M. Mullalley, Cheltenham; Mrs M. Clist, Bournemouth; Ms J. Riordan, Plymouth and Mr D. Fisher of Liversedge West Yorks.
Mr P. Branch of Mottingham in London also won a Citroen AX.
Fifty Super Nintendo Entertainment System plus Scope lightgun and six Blast-Em-Up games from the August Power Up Pete contest were won by: Richard Kavanagh, Southampton; Stephen Mahoney, Port Talbot; Philip Gray, Barrow-in-Furness; Lisa Smith, Cwntillery; Kevin Latham, Preston; P A Lean, Southport; Mrs H Gilbertson, Leeds; Mrs L Phillips, St Albans; Michael Tierney, Great Yarmouth; C Clark, Wolverhampton; Andrew Beasley, Walsall.
Nick Walters, Wolverhampton; Mark Wilding, Preston; K Kinmont, Hale; Richard Huxley, Lincoln; W S O'Grady, Plymouth; Lloyd Fennell, Gwent; Mrs B Parkyn, Newquay; Darren Wyse, Southampton; Alison Jones, Newport, Daniel Smith, Huntingdon; Mr N C Dowson, Lofthouse, Wakefield.
David Barber, Eastleigh, Hants; Darren Long, Brandon, Suffolk; Irene Nicklin, Worsley , Manchester; L G Charles, Nottingley, W. Yorks; Terry Pierce, Brighton; Craig Taylor, Liverpool; D Woodhouse, Blackpool; A G Nicklen, Farnborough; L Ball, Watford; Phillip Randall, Clapham Park, London; Nicky Goult, Bury, St Edmunds; Mrs A Yau, London SE16.
Paul Hewlett, Gloucester; K Elliott, Derby; Frances Burke, Co.
Galway; Thomas Chapman, Spalding; Colin Nairn, Dunblane; Peter German, Telford; Mrs Laine, Huddersfield; F Sexton, Upminster, Essex; Mary C Tann, Luton; David Cartwright, Hulme, Cheshire; Lesley Hands, Wembley; Adam Szymura, Portsmouth; Mark Liddle, Lowestoft; Gavin Bisch, Farsham, Surrey; Dean Walmsley, Clitheroe.
POLE POSITION: Four of our winners with their K-reg Citroen AX prizes
WIN A JET SET WEEK ON ST LUCIA
LIVE LIKE A MILLIONAIRE
TODAY we're giving you the chance to sample the carefree life of a pools winner — in the fabulous West Indies.
It's all part of our great series of free contests to show what life would be like if you landed the jackpot.
Our partners are Vernons who are experts in such matters.
Last year alone they had over 400,000 winners and paid out more than £40 million.
And by the way, don't forget to cash in with the great Vernons offer in your new Diamond Bingo card.
Today we're off to the charming isle of St Lucia where our winner and a friend will enjoy seven nights at the Le Sport Hotel, full board in a private air-conditioned room.
Le Sport is surrounded by tropical gardens on a secluded bay of golden sand.
A separate building of charming courtyards, shimmering pools and fountains houses the Oasis restaurant.
Other facilities include two swimming pools and nightly entertainment featuring steel bands, limbo dancing and calypso music.
Down on the beach there is a wide range of watersports with tennis nearby.
The prize includes return scheduled flights from either Heathrow or Gatwick, unlimited daily free bar, beauty and fitness treatments and fully comprehensive travel insurance.
For your chance to sample life at the top, just unscramble this word to reveal a West Indian music style.
SPYCOAL
Write your answer on a postcard, add your name and address and send the card to: Vernons contest (4), Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE88 7TY.
Closing date is September 23.
The winner will be the first correct entry drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply.
There is no cash alternative.
You must be over 18 to enter.
The holiday is not avail between December 16-24.
For full information about Vernons Pools, phone FREEPHONE 0800 369369.
SORRY folks our picture on Tuesday was of Hereford City Museum and not of Hereford Mount Hotel.
TOMORROW: Let's have a party.
WIN A FUTURISTIC TRIP TO FRANCE
PLUS FREE Plumrose Delifresh Slicing Roll
TAKE a trip into the future with yet another great Daily Mirror contest.
Our five lucky winners will each receive a family weekend in France for two adults and two children at Futuroscope, the European Park Of Moving Image.
The park is near Poitiers just 90 minutes from Paris by TGV, the famous high-speed train.
The prize includes return air travel to Paris from Heathrow or Gatwick and return travel by TGV to Poitiers.
Winners will stay two nights in the Futuroscope Hotel and be given a three-day pass to the park.
Our super Plumrose offer and contest was featured in yesterday's Mirror Woman.
For a FREE Plumrose Delifresh Slicing Roll, any variety, just add this token to the coupon we gave you yesterday.
Take it to your nearest Plumrose stockist and collect.
Now for the contest.
Yesterday we asked you how many varieties there were of Plumrose Delifresh Slicing Rolls?
Today's question is: What is the name of the famous French express train?
Write the answers to both questions on a postcard and send it to: Plumrose contest, Daily Mirror, Dept P1585, NCH, Corby, Northants NN17 1NN.
Closing date is September 21.
LE PRIZE: winners get a Futuristic weekend at the European Park of Moving Image
B is for bungle
Shake-up in English as Government admit they got it wrong
RICHARD GARNER
A BACK-to-basics drive is to put spelling, grammar and punctuation at the heart of the school timetable once again, the Government announced yesterday.
It will be the biggest upheaval for nearly 40 years in the way English — spoken and written — is taught in our schools.
But yesterday's announcement really amounts to an admission that the Government badly bungled its first attempt to lay down by law how English should be taught in schools — only two years ago.
Just listen to what yesterday's report, by the Government's new National Curriculum Council and blessed by Education Secretary John Patten, had to say about that one.
The new law didn't stress how children should learn to speak standard English — or state how they should be taught to read.
And a section on teaching children how to write did not ‘offer a clear definition of basic writing skills, the grammatical knowledge pupils must master if they are to become effective writers and the variety of ways in which competence in spelling can be developed’.
Clock
In addition, many schools were failing ‘to venture beyond undemanding popular authors or books associated with favourite television characters’ when it came to encouraging children to read novels.
The new-look lessons will turn the clock back to the 1950s — the days before learning by rote ceased to be popular in schools.
They will consist of more spelling games in the classroom and teaching reading by a mixture of phonetics and old-style A is for Apple, B is for Boat and C is for cat reading books.
And teachers will try to ensure correct ‘standard’ English is spoken, not only in the class-room but in the playground and out of school, too.
Anyone who listens to the language of our lager louts on the football terraces could not help but agree with them.
But yesterday's new blueprint came coupled with a chilling warning that there may not be enough teachers left to carry out the Government's new wishes.
A worrying report, published by three teachers' unions just a few minutes before national curriculum boss David Pascall issued his ‘back to basics’ clarion call, revealed a staggering 80,000 teachers — one in five — want to quit their jobs.
Said Peter Smith, general secretary of the Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association: ‘There will be a haemorrhage of highly qualified teachers who just can't stand the conditions under which they're required to work.’
In blunt terms, they're fed up with having to chop and change the way they do things with every twist in Government policy.
Remember, only last year the Tories admitted they bungled the introduction of tests for seven-year-olds — by making them too complicated and time consuming.
Farce
Only a month ago we were told by the Engineering Council that technology lessons under the national curriculum were a ‘farce’— and teachers didn't have a clue what they should be doing in the classroom.
Now we are told by Mr Pascall that the original plans for teaching English in schools left a lot to be desired.
Small wonder then that yesterday's new dawn was greeted with scepticism at the chalk face.
Anne Barnes, general secretary of the National Association for the Teaching of English, said: ‘Teachers will feel very confused and disappointed to hear that changes are going to be made and the ground will shift from under their feet again.’
Labour's Shadow Education Secretary Ann Taylor agreed with her.
‘John Patten seems to have learnt nothing from the faults of his predecessors,’ she said.
‘We bitterly oppose all the chopping and changing and all the experimentation in education over the past 13 years.’
Serious doubts are beginning to emerge about the new blueprint already.
For instance, it gives the Secretary of State — John Patten or his successor — the power to prescribe which books should be studied in the classroom.
Signs
Okay, the first signs are that schoolchildren will be studying a mixture of Shakespeare, Dickens and Jane Austen.
All very sensible — but there are no safeguards to stop a future Secretary of State drawing up a more political booklist.
But just supposing yesterday's clarion call is the answer to the serious concerns which exist about reading standards in schools.
The first new-style lessons won't come in until September, 1994.
By then many of today's teachers will have upped sticks and left the classroom for good.
And so will more than a million of today's pupils.
Mirror Comment — Page 2  
WRITING ON THE WALL: Teachers are going back to basics to encourage pupils to learn English
DAILY MIRROR SHOCK ISSUE
‘HIS LEGS ARE THINNER THAN THE WALKING STICK HE CARRIES.
HE HAS JUST WALKED 60 MILES TO GET HERE.
ANOTHER CHILD SUCKLES AT HIS MOTHER'S EMPTY BREAST.
THE WHOLE FAMILY IS LIKELY TO DIE’
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
IT IS a once wealthy town the size of Bolton in Lancashire.
Today Baidoa's main street resembles the land that time forgot.
In between the shelled-out buildings, people shuffle like the walking dead — thousands thronging to the feeding centres hastily set up by relief agencies.
Behind a bullet-battered wall we find Issak Mohamed.
HE IS two years old.
As he strains to suck milk from his mother's shrivelled breast, his flesh wrinkles like a wizened old man.
To exhausted to comfort him, Syleyma holds her head in her hands and surveys her dying family.
Out of camera-shot lie her five other children — all rigid with hunger — and her crippled husband Ali.
‘Every day, we go to the feeding centres.
Every day we queue, and most days, we get nothing,’ she weeps.
They are too weak to be pushy.
And in a hungry nation, only the strong survive.
Human degradation is everywhere.
Walk up to the gates and you feel like you have been sandbagged in the stomach.
Laid out on the ground are the dead of the day so far.
It is 11 am and we count 43 shrouded bodies — 12 of them babies, another eight young children.
Close by are four more being washed down and wrapped for burial.
No-one knows how many are dying daily in Baidoa — some say 350, others say up to 1,000.
As many as 300,000 people, many of them farming families who have flooded in from the villages, are clamouring for survival.
There are 30 feeding centres now, but it is still not enough.
Outside they queue for hours.
Inside, they queue again.
By the time the Unimix — a high protein gruel — is dished out of the cooking drums, they will have waited in the stagnant, heavy heat most of the day.
Men with sticks beat back the scramble.
Phoebe Fraser, 26, a relief worker with the international agency CARE winces.
‘I hate to see them do that, but it is better than the children being trampled underfoot in the rush.
That is what happened on our first day here.’
CARE is feeding 900 children and breast-feeding mothers at its centre.
Only the most malnourished can have their precious bowl of Unimix — they are marked with an orange wrist band.
‘We just don't have enough food to go round,’ says Phoebe.
‘We are turning away hundreds every day.
They are all no more than skin and bone but somehow we are having to draw a line.’
CARE nurse Mary Jane Hammond moves along the lines, wiping the infected eyes of children beyond tears.
Dysentery, malaria and dehydration are rife.
‘We have set up a clinic over there,’ she says.
‘But we have so little medicine here that basic first aid is a struggle.’
In the queue stands six-year-old Hussein Ibrahim — his legs thinner than the walking stick he holds in his hand.
His mother Halima, 30, tells how they walked 60 miles to reach the town.
Before setting out she had buried her husband, two sons and a daughter — all of them having starved to death.
The clever children have worked out a way to milk the system.
Watch the queues for long enough and you see them emptying their bowls and going back, not twice, but three times.
But then there are those who never reach the front at all.
We watched as a boy no more than ten slumped forward.
For a minute it didn't register.
Then two others beside him prodded him and rolled his head back.
The eyes were open, the mouth parched and breathless.
One of the men with sticks came over and carried his corpse away.
DESPAIR Starving little Issak tries in vain to get milk from his mother Syleyma's shrivelled breasts.
He can still stand.
But her five other children lie nearby waiting to die
THE PILGRIM Hussein Ibrahim walked 60 miles on matchstick legs with his mother in the hope of escaping the fate of his two brothers, sister and father who starved to death
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PAP SNAP
VETERAN ravers Macca and Garry Glitter are caught rehearsing their new karaoke double-act.
The pair had star quality  written all over their faces as they hammed it up at a Buddy Holly tribute.
ELTON JOHN and Axl Rose teamed up for a spectacular duet at the MTV awards in Los Angeles.
Elton, a surprise addition to the show, took to the stage with the wild Guns N' Roses singer to perform the band's hit November Rain, backed by a 40-piece orchestra.
The pair have been keen to work together ever since they duetted at the Freddie Mercury tribute concert in April.
She doesn't like her bum
The Catherine Zeta Jones secret is out
(BUT SHE'S THE ONLY ONE WHO DOESN'T)
MARTIN TOWNSEND
CATHERINE Zeta Jones sees herself as the new Barbra Streisand.
But she hasn't quite got the hang of pop-star posing yet.
‘These leggings are from Marks and Spencer,’ she says, doing a neat twirl in the middle of her hotel room.
Then she corrects herself with a laugh.
‘Oh, sorry…
I should have said they're from Gianni Versace!’
But at least I'd had a chance by then to check out the bit of her which Catherine likes least.
‘The TV crew on The Darling Buds Of May know that I hate my backside, so they're always making little comments,’ she revealed in an exclusive interview.
‘Like: ‘Who's the girl who doesn't like her bottom?’
They think it's really funny to call it my pinkie.
I really get ribbed.’
The crew also teased Catherine after she opened a fashion shop last year.
She says: ‘It was the only personal appearance I did, but now some of the crew call me The Opener.
‘They say: ‘Catherine's opening a can of beans today.
Fetch a journalist!’
They all take the mickey out of me.’
Clearly, the 22-year-old star is as popular with her colleagues as she is with viewers everywhere.
Catherine is on a high these days.
Building on the TV success that rocketed her to overnight fame, she is set to make TWO movies and is launching a promising pop career.
Her first record — from American composer-producer Jeff Wayne's double album epic Spartacus — is out next week.
So she has plenty to be pleased about — in addition to being the beautiful butt of the TV men's admiring jokes.
But twice recently things have happened to wipe the smile off Catherine's face.
She is incensed by reports that her blossoming career has left The Darling Buds Of May in the lurch.
She told me: ‘I was really upset to read that an ‘insider’, whoever that might be, had said I was so busy creating an image for myself in the music industry and trying to be a film star that I could only do four episodes of the latest series.
‘My feeling — and Pam (Ma Larkin), David (Pa) and Phillip (Charley) agreed — was that it was better to do four episodes really well than six halfheartedly.
‘If I had done all six, my new film would have got in the way and I never would have wanted to hold the Darling Buds cast up.
‘Why should they wait for me?
They are my friends, they've supported me and I'd never want to let them down.’
She denies there is any resentment from the rest about her fame as Mariette.
‘Not at all,’ she says firmly.
‘Their attitude is: ‘All the best to you, look after yourself and don't forget to eat!’‘
Catherine's anger was also aroused when a photographer took pictures of her topless on the French Riviera and sold them on to a men's magazine.
She felt utterly betrayed.
‘I bathe topless in the South of France, I bathe topless in my garden — it's just something that I do,’ she says.
‘I've been offered a sum that would buy my house twice over to pose for topless pictures like that and I've turned every offer down flat.’
Catherine, who lives in a £130,000 town house in
Fulham, London, adds: ‘If I ever met the person who did it, I'd say: ‘I hope you have a daughter and I hope someone does that to her one day.’‘.
But her annoyance over the pictures could not distract Catherine from her latest — and biggest — ambition.
She wants to take the pop charts by storm in the multi-talented manner of her heroine, Barbra Streisand.
‘Barbra is the one,’ she says.
‘She was my hero as a kid.
I used to watch and think: ‘She can do everything.’‘
Catherine's debut single, For All Time, is certainly worthy of La Streisand.
She got on so well with composer Jeff Wayne that he is also producing her first solo album.
Catherine says: ‘I don't want to call Spartacus a stepping-stone, but it's the first record people will hear from me and I think it's a classy piece of work.
‘When The Darling Buds Of May became a success a lot of people approached me to make a record, saying: ‘Well, it doesn't matter if you can't sing — let's just do SOMETHING.’
‘But I'd wanted to do music for such a long time.
It was my dream, and I didn't just want to bash out songs and see how it went.
‘I wanted to have my own artistic input into it and not be dictated to or told what to do.’
Catherine has sung before — she took over the lead role in the West End musical 42nd Street as a teenager.
But Wayne says he was amazed at how well she took the singing part of Palene, lover of the warrior Spartacus.
‘I allowed about 11 days to do the first chunk of recording — and she did it in five,’ says the 49-year-old composer.
Now Catherine is about to hit the movie world, too.
She has a small part in a new Christopher Columbus movie, due out in February, and a lead role as a brewer's daughter with ambitions in Monty Python man Eric Idle's new film comedy Splitting Heirs.
How did she get the part?
Catherine shrugs: ‘I haven't got a clue.
‘I suppose it's because I've got a naughty face.’
CHIC: New-look Catherine.
Picture: BRIAN ARIS
REAR FEAR: Catherine worries about her shape, but she still leaves her rivals behind.Picture: SYGMA
CLASSY CLASSIC: Catherine in her pop role as a Roman warrior's love
WHY SHE WON'T TRY DRUGS
MARTIN TOWNSEND
THE link between dance music and drugs such as Ecstasy is a big worry to Catherine as she plans the next moves in her budding pop career.
Her solo LP, due out next year, will have plenty of dance tracks.
But she hopes they will be enjoyed for the music and not simply used as background at drug raves aimed at tempting gullible youngsters.
She says: ‘I've never flirted with drugs.
As a 16-year-old in the theatre, pot was always being smoked around me, but I never wanted to do it.’
Catherine's opinions about drugs are much firmer than those of another pop star her own age — Aussie actress turned singer Kylie Minogue.
Kylie once refused to go on Australian radio to condemn drug use and recently admitted that she has experimented with drugs in the past.
Catherine says: ‘I'd like to say that I'm definitely against drugs.
I wouldn't want to do that to my body.
‘But kids, especially young ones, are fickle in a way.
They want to try new things.
They say: ‘I've done it — haven't you?’
‘It's like drinking, it's like smoking.
I don't think it's a pop song that dictates to them.
It's what they have in their heads.
They hear a song and it's rave, rave, rave.
‘Someone will say: ‘Oh, someone told me that they take drugs at that party.’
Then another kid will say: ‘Oh, do they?
I'm going to do it, then.’
‘It's like these people who commit suicide over a song.
It's what's passed around, it's not what's said in the music.’
My Twiggy gets better with age
LEGAL EAGLE KINSEY'S VERDICT ON A MODEL WIFE
‘At the airport she looked so lovely I caught my breath’
PAULINE WALLIN
SHE was the face of the Swinging Sixties, a pale, waiflike figure who captured the mood of an era.
Now, at 43, Twiggy has matured into the breathtaking beauty of the Nineties.
Although the man passing judgment may be a tiny bit biased.
He's her actor husband Leigh Lawson, alias TV legal eagle Kinsey.
‘I think she is very beautiful,’ he says.
‘She gets better with age.
When I met her at the airport after she flew in to London from Los Angeles recently, I caught my breath when I saw her because she just looked so lovely.
‘The first time we met I thought she was gorgeous but I didn't ask for her phone number because I imagined every man must do that.
‘Not long after that I was out buying a paper when a big blue Jag with a beautiful blonde in it pulled up by me.
It was Twiggy and she shouted, do you want a cup of tea?
She pulled me off the streets really.’
Leigh is sitting in the sunshine in Spain, taking a break from filming a new series of his BBC TV drama Kinsey, which goes out next month.
A couple of episodes have been shot there — mainly because it makes a nice change from Birmingham where maverick lawyer Kinsey and his partner Trish (Serena Gordon) have their offices.
It's not hard to see why Twigs, as he calls her, would want to drag this slim six-footer off the street.
He had the same effect on actress Hayley Mills by whom he has a 16-year-old son, Ace.
They parted nine years ago and the split distressed him so much he vowed not to get seriously involved with another woman for a very long time.
He threw himself into the making of ITV series Travelling Man and was rewarded with huge success in the ratings.
But then Twiggy, who by now had switched from modelling to acting, came along and stole his heart.
She was trying to get over the death of her husband, Michael Whitney, from a heart attack.
Leigh says: ‘I honestly thought I was going to be on my own for at least a decade but I didn't know the Twiglet was going to come on the scene.
‘It happened very gently.
Neither of us wanted to rush things but after a while I told myself, don't be stupid, she's special — go for it.’
That was seven years ago and they married in 1988.
Now one of the things Leigh admires most about his missus is her ability to bounce back.
‘We don't go round laughing all the time but Twiggy's enthusiasm is contagious,’ he says.
He has bought the rights to a steamy book by Darling Buds Of May author H. E. Bates and plans to turn it into a TV movie starring his wife.
She will play a bored wife who scandalises her village in the 1920s by having a passionate love affair with a young pianist.
‘Twigs and I have formed a little company called Mask to get several projects off the ground,’ Leigh says.
‘The H. E. Bates book is called Sleepless Moon and it's in development at the moment so I can't say too much about it.’
Both Twiggy and Leigh are in demand in Hollywood.
He's made three films in the past year and she flew back to London recently after finishing a movie.
They have a house in Los Angeles and enjoy the lifestyle but Leigh says Britain will always be their home, even though Twiggy's talents as an actress have largely been ignored here.
TO MANY she's still the chirpy Cockney who made it on her looks and has little else to offer.
Ever-loyal Leigh says that's grossly unfair on a woman who proved she could act in the movie Madame Sousatzka and that she could sing and dance in the film version of Thirties musical The Boyfriend.
‘Twiggy's talents are definitely more appreciated in America than in Britain.
She'd never have had a smash hit on Broadway if she'd stayed here to work.
‘But she's not a complaining sort of person.
She just gets on with things.
‘It's wonderful being married to her.’
LEIGH'S LOVE: At 43, actress Twiggy is more beautiful than ever for her husband Picture:BRIAN MOODY/Scope
SIXTIES GIRL: Twiggy, symbol of a decade
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
WITH the road to recovery blocked, profits of hauliers NFC stayed jammed at £66 million in the first nine months of this trading year.
There are fears they could fall a further four per cent.
Shipping giant P&O dipped 9p to £3.40, despite a £28 million surge in half-year profits to £101 million.
Skipper Lord Sterling warned of storms ahead unless interest rates are slashed.
Home cover hits the roof
THE man from the Pru is shelling out more than £10 million a DAY on insurance settlements and maturing savings plans.
But the increasing number of claims have to be paid for.
Pru motor premiums have gone up three times this year and house contents insurance rose by 20p in the £1 this July and further increases cannot be ruled out.
But the price hikes helped Pru first-half profits soar by 46 per cent to £249 million.
THROW A PARTY FOR 100 PALS AT STRINGFELLOWS
IF YOU won the pools, it's a cert you'd celebrate with a slap-up party for friends — and that's how we're winding up our great series of free contests.
We've been showing you what life would be like if you landed the jackpot.
Our partners are Vernons who are experts in such matters.
Last year alone they had more than 400,000 winners and they paid out more than £40 million.
And talking about the pools, don't forget your chance to cash in with the great Vernons offer in your new Diamond Bingo card.
Champers
If YOU are our winner today you'll be able to take up to ONE HUNDRED friends on an unforgettable night out at Stringfellows, the world-famous London nightclub.
The prize includes up to £500 travelling expenses for you and your party.
Stringfellows will welcome you and your friends with drinks on the house the moment you all get there.
There will be Bucks Fizz to get the party spirit going.
Spirits, mixers and minerals will also be waiting, just as a pools-winner would expect.
At 8.30 you'll take your places for a three-course meal which will include Smoked salmon.
If you feel like bopping after all that, the disco starts at 11pm so you can dance the night away.
For your chance of a night to remember, just unscramble this word to reveal what might be on the menu.
MOSNAL
Write your answer on a postcard, add your name and address and send the card to Vernons Contest (5), Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE88 7TY.
Closing date is September 23.
The winner will be the first correct entry drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply.
There is no cash alternative.
You must be over 18 to enter.
FOR full information about Vernons Pools, phone FREEPHONE 0800 369369.
NEW MOVIES
PAULINE McLEOD
TOP TEN MOVIES
1 (1)
Lethal Weapon 3
2 (2)
Alien 3
3 (-)
Knight Moves
4 (3)
Beethoven
5 (4)
Far And Away
6 (-)
White Sands
7 (-)
The Power Of One
8 (5)
Universal Soldier
9 (6)
Peter Pan
10 (8)
Basic Instinct
Compiled by MRIB
ALL AT SEA
Chris's crossing hits rock bottom
YO HO HO me hearties!
You'll need more than a bottle of rum to get through this disaster of a voyage!
Whoever was the ‘brains’ behind CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS: THE DISCOVERY (Cert 15; General) should be made to walk the plank.
Not wildly entertaining, but with  unintentionally wildly funny moments, this recollection of the first crossing of the Atlantic by Christopher Columbus 500 years ago, is more round the bend than round the world.
Columbus is played by unknown George Corraface, a handsome young thing in the time-honoured, clean-cut movie mould.
He's the sea captain in charge of this sinking ship whose character switches from Mr Nice Guy to raging megalomaniac to hero of the day — all in less than two hours.
Catherine Zeta Jones is the token buxom wench, pregnant by our Chris.
And Tom Selleck as King Ferdinand of Spain?
Give me a break!
It would be kinder if this film were taken away and buried at sea!
SINKING: George Corraface
One long chuckle
DESPITE myself, I fell for HOUSESITTER (Cert P.G.; General).
It's a gentle romantic comedy in which Boston architect Newton Davis (Martin) builds a dream house for the girl of his dreams, Becky (Dana Delaney), only to discover he doesn't even figure in her grand game plan of life.
So the luxury home in New England remains empty — until he winds up on a one night stand with vivacious manipulator Gwen,(Goldie Hawn).
SITTING IT OUT: Steve Martin and Goldie Hawn in Housesitter
A BRIDGE TOO FAR FOR LOVE
YOU'D be forgiven for thinking that LES AMANTS DU PONT NEUF (Cert 18; W.E.)— translated it means ‘Lovers on the Pont Neuf’— would be all hearts and flowers.
Not a chance!
In its very individual and grimly realistic way it is very romantic, but this is not pretty cinema!
Visually breathtaking, gritty, emotional and moving, it tells the highly personal love story of a couple of vagrants who live on the Pont Neuf.
French actress Juliette Binoche plays Michele, an artist from a wealthy family who is going blind and lives rough out of choice.
She falls in love with fire-eating street punk Alex (Denis Lavant).
DAILY MIRROR SHOCK ISSUE
LITTLE MOHAMED ALI, TO US HE WAS THE GREATEST
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
THEY found him clinging helplessly to his mother's corpse.
His mouth was clasped to her breast but she had long since run out of milk to feed him.
Looking at her emaciated body, it was a miracle that she had given birth to him in the first place.
Now she was being carried off.
Another wasted corpse in yet another unmarked grave.
Mohamed Ali — who cries out at you from our front page today — is just 10 days old and the latest orphan in famine-stricken Somalia.
The slaughter of Somalia — a former British and Italian colony — began in January 1991 with the overthrow of ruthless dictator General Siad Barre.
He responded by setting his murderous forces on the people — plundering their homes, their crops, their livestock.
In March this year, he fled.
And so began the brutal battle for power between the new, clan-dominated forces of General Mohamed Farah Aideed and his rival Mohamed Ali Mahdi.
As that battle rages on, the United Nations is dithering, the entire western world procrastinating and the innocent suffering.
Famine does not discriminate.
The young, the old, the frail are all sucked into its sweeping tide.
Just two hours after being wrenched from his natural mother, we watch little Mohamed Ali being cradled by another mother.
Abo Mukhtar will adopt him, she says, wrapping him in a swaddling cloth to protect him from the dirt and dust.
His arms come out, his fists tightly clenched.
He has been born into this world and gone straight to hell.
He's facing the fight of his life.
IF THE FAMINE DOESN'T GET YOU THE BULLETS WILL
THEY are almost too painful.
Pitiful images of a desolate people.
Yet these pictures need not exist.
There is food to fill the feeding bowls of Somalia.
So why are they empty?
Why does the agony endure?
In the capital Mogadishu we find the answer.
We go to Digfer Hospital where 15-year-old Abdul Kadir lies in the so-called recovery ward.
He is living proof that if the famine doesn't get you, the bullets will.
He had been sitting quietly in his hovel of a home when stray gunfire smashed into his jaw and blew half his face away.
Doctors bandaged up his wounds, but they don't have the tubes to feed him.
Incapable of taking food through his mouth, he is starving to death.
Around one million men in and around this city carry arms.
All have families to feed.
If they have to shoot to kill so that their children live, they will.
The food to feed this hungry nation has been coming in through Mogadishu's port.
With food a more valuable commodity here than gold, the port is a flashpoint between marauding gangs of looters and bandits.
Now it is barricaded by 30ft high containers.
We saw 10,000 tons of cereal — enough to feed 800,000 people for a month — stuffed to overflowing in warehouses on the quayside.
It has been there for two weeks and cannot be released because the 3,500 troops promised by the United Nations to secure food convoys and get them moving have not arrived.
Julian Hopkins, national director of international relief agency CARE, who travelled with the Mirror team, said: ‘To see that huge amount of food lying idle in Mogadishu while thousands of babies and young children are starving to death is an outrage.
‘It is a scandal that leaves relief agencies drowning in frustration.
We are having to stand by and watch a needless massacre because the UN can't get its act together.’
As we walked along the quayside, gunmen shadowed our every step.
At one point, laughing, they fired off a couple of rounds, ricocheting the bullets against a wall.
You hear the rattle of gunfire here as often as you hear cars tooting their horns.
Mogadishu, once known as the pearl of the Indian Ocean with its whitewashed buildings, leafy streets and pretty pavement cafes, is now more bullet-battered than Beirut and about as safe as a saunter through an Iraqi minefield.
A trigger-happy city where children as young as 10 roam the streets brandishing Kalashnikovs.
Technicals — trucks carrying cannon, anti-aircraft missiles and rocket launchers, cruise the city centre.
A round of bullets costs less than a packet of cigarettes.
Everywhere we go, we are escorted by three guards carrying AK-47s.
Our Toyota Land Cruiser comes fully equipped with a 50 calibre machine gun on the roof and a rocket launcher in the back.
Few people have jobs.
There is no one to work for.
No government, no schools, no police force, fire brigade, ambulance service.
Every office block, every hotel, every shop is a shell.
There is no electricity supply, no running water, no sanitation.
‘This was once the safest city in Africa.
You could walk around at 3am without fear.
Now it is the most dangerous,’ says Carl Howorth, co-ordinator for CARE, as he gives us a guided tour of the city.
Relief workers have never seen anything like it.
Carl has been jumped on, shot at and held hostage.
He and his staff work out of a compound guarded 24 hours a day by 20 armed ex-Somali policemen.
‘All our vehicles carry our flag to show we are a charity, and gunmen to show we mean business,’ he says with a wry smile.
Around 3pm is the most dangerous time of all in Mogadishu.
This is when the gun-toting kids on the street are high on qat — a bitter-tasting leaf that acts as an amphetamine.
They stuff it into their cheeks like hamsters.
Combine it with the cheap, readily available heroin and cocaine on the streets and you have an explosive mix.
The other focal point for tension in this shaky city is the Green Line.
It divides the north, controlled by warlord Mohamed Ali Mahdi, and the south, which is in the hands of his rival General Mohamed Farah Aideed.
Crossing it, through 500 yards of no-man's land, is one of the most nerve-racking moments of our trip.
Back at Digfer Hospital, the toll of casualties gives lie to the UN ceasefire.
This centre for the war wounded, holding up to 600 patients at a time, makes an NHS ward look like a palatial five-star hotel.
People are littered along the hospital's dark, dirty, blood-splattered corridors.
The stench of rotting, wounded flesh is enough to make you vomit.
Dr Mohamed Hussein, the doctor in charge, says: ‘We're getting one-year-old babies in here with their stomachs blown out by bullets.
We are having to amputate the arms and legs of three, four and five year olds — without anaesthetic.
No one can tell me they are not victims of war.’
Downstairs in casualty Diriham Ali, 21, patient number 35 in the log book, is being treated for four gunshot wounds.
The blood is pouring from his body, through the cracks in the table and onto the floor below.
His eyes have the glazed look of imminent death.
‘He will be dead by the morning,’ says Dr Hassan Abshir flatly.
‘And tomorrow there will be another lying here, just like him.
‘It is wholescale slaughter here every day.
And that is the way it will stay until the food gets through.’
TRAGEDY There is no food — and little hope — for 16-year-old Abdul Hussein in Bardera
GUN LAW Mirror's Catherine on charity patrol
DESPAIR A  starving girl breaks down in tears as the search for food ends with an empty jar
AGONY Hopeless end to yet another day
HOW YOU CAN HELP
FOOD that should be feeding Somalia is barricaded in the port of Mogadishu.
But there is a way to help the starving — by flying the food in.
Both the famine-hit areas we visited, Baidoa and Bardera, have airstrips ready to take immediate aid.
So does Huddur — another badly hit town.
CARE, the international agency that specialises in transportation, is planning an urgent programme of relief flights to all three places.
It hopes to mount 15 flights a day — carrying enough food to feed 500,000 of the most desperate famine victims.
The cost of chartering 15 Hercules aircraft, filling them with food and organising distribution on the ground is £6.6 million over three weeks.
No charity can raise that sort of cash single-handed.
It has to come from the overseas aid budgets of governments.
But you can help.
No donation is too small when just 4p buys a meal for a starving child, 84p feeds one person for one week and £8.72 is the weekly shopping bill for a family of four.
CARE will also fly in seeds and tools needed before the rains come at the end of the month.
A hoe costs £2.50.
Enough seeds for a farmer to replant his crops costs £8.50.
So send your donations.
It all helps.
WHERE TO SEND YOUR DONATION S
DONATIONS can be sent to Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal, P.O. Box 232, Melksham, Wilts, SN12 7SB.
Or telephone the Somalia Appeal credit card hotline on 0800 666 808.
TAKE YOUR KIDS ON A MAGIC TRIP TO CAMELOT THEME PARK
AND SAVE £16.80
BY EXCALIBUR!
Escape to the magic of Camelot and cash in on our fantastic offer.
Use the cost-cutter coupon and you get a big discount on entry to the Camelot Adventure Theme Park — a group of four saves £16.80.
AND there's fun for all the family with unlimited use of more than 100 rides and attractions.
You'll find the magic kingdom a short drive off the M6, between Wigan and Preston (M61 junction 8).
ONCE there you can ride on the thrilling Tower of Terror roller coaster -rise one hundred giddy feet into the air then plunge headlong into the ruined castle where you're sure to meet a fiendish surprise.
Dare to enter the terrifying Beast's Lair or cheer your favourite knight in the spectacular jousting tournaments.
WATCH out for the jugglers, jesters and minstrels thronging through the courtyards — and be sure not to miss King Arthur's colourful Daily Parade, the Royal Falconers and the Marionettes show.
The coupon printed here is your ticket to Camelot.
It allows four of you entry for just £3.75 per person instead of the usual £7.95.
The coupon is valid for weekends until Sunday October 18 and then daily until Sunday November 1.
Methinks It would make a right royal half-term treat for ye kids.
What's in a name
FASCINATING STORIES BEHIND OUR HOUSEHOLD FAVOURITES
ANTON ANTONOWICZ
FOR 60 years a Mars bar helped you work, rest and play.
But now that faithful old slogan has been dropped.
And the old bar will have a new taste.
BUT will the new Mars succeed?
When Coca Cola tried to tinker with the taste of Coke an outraged public forced them to return to the original.
WE value traditional brands like Hovis, Kellogg's, Brooke Bond.
But how did they come about?
And why are they so popular?
Author Maurice Baren has has uncovered some surprising facts about these household favourites…
AVON: David McConnell used to give away cologne as a come-on for his door-to-door book sales.
He soon discovered the fragrances were more popular than the books.
Now over 1.6 million reps in more than 100 countries sell a range of over 700 products.
BASSETT'S ALLSORTS: In 1899 Charlie Thompson, a Bassett Traveller, knocked over his individual sample boxes in front of a wholesaler who like the look of the ‘the mix.’
Bertie Bassett, a character formed from allsorts, was based on the Michelin Man in the 1920s.
BIRD'S CUSTARD: In 1837, Alfred Bird hit on the formula for Bird's custard because his wife had digestive troubles and could not tolerate eggs.
The new invention was nutritious, palatable, cheap and simple to make.
Bird's profits began to sing.
And they have never stopped.
BIRDS EYE: During 1912-15, Clarence Birdseye, an American fur trapper and biologist, went into the wilds of Labrador.
He noticed that frozen fish and caribou meat tasted as good frozen as fresh.
It took him eight years to recreate the lesson of nature.
Now Birds Eye is the largest such company in the world.
COCA COLA: In 1886 pharmacist Dr John Pemberton of Atlanta, Georgia, produced a syrup in a three-legged pot in his back yard.
It went on sale for five cents a glass.
For the next eight months only 13 drinks a day were sold — compared to 600 million bottles a day now.
DR MARTENS: In 1945 Dr Klaus Maertens, a German orthopaedic surgeon, damaged his foot in a skiing accident.
Because of this discomfort he set about developing an air-cushioned sole with his engineer friend Herbert Funck.
In the late 50s William Griggs, a Northants shoemaker, bought ‘sole rights’ to the product in the UK.
He anglicized the name to Dr Martens, and invented the brand name ‘Air Wair’.
GOSSARD: Henry Gossard of Chicago was always into ladies underwear.
During one of his many trips to Europe, the women's foundation-wear manufacturer saw 56-year-old actress Sarah Bernhardt playing a 21-year-old.
He was fascinated by the corset which gave her a youthful figure and set about reproducing it.In 1968, they invented the Wonderbra which has been a best-seller for more than 20 years.
HEINZ: When Henry Heinz was 16 he began to dry and grate horseradish and sell it in glass bottles — with a reckless money-back guarantee.
By 1896, his enterprise had become big business and he had more than 60 products.
But the number 57 appealed to him.
The slogan has never changed.
KELLOGG'S: Physician Dr John Kellogg wanted to develop an easy-to-digest breakfast to replace the heavy meal normally taken in 1870's America.
With his brother he invented a paper-thin malt flavoured toasted flake of maize — the Corn Flake.
Today the range extends to 20 different products, but Dr Kellogg's Corn Flakes are still the most popular.
LEGO: Ole Kirk Christiansen, a jobless carpenter in Denmark, had the idea to make good toys that would appeal to children's imaginations and stand up to rough handling.
He created the name in the 1930s by putting the Danish words ‘leg godt’(play well) together.
MONOPOLY: In 1929 after the Wall Street crash, jobless Charles Darrow dreamed up a property game based on the streets of his native Atlantic City.
The tokens were charms from his wife's bracelet.
By the time he died at the age of 78, he was a multi-millionaire.
Today Monopoly has been translated into 17 languages.
OVALTINE: Dr George Wander, a Swiss chemist, developed a malt extract drink which was launched in 1904 under the name Ovomaltine or Ovaltine.
Nowadays 100 million cups of Ovaltine are drunk each year.
PEARS: Andrew Pears, son of a Cornish farmer, set up shop as a hairdresser in Soho in 1789 and began developing a more gentle soap than the harsh ones then used.
It was of high quality, and was also perfumed with the flowers of an English garden.
Skillful marketing has led to it becoming the most famous soap in the world.
ROBERTSON'S: James Robertson, a Paisley grocer, hit on the idea of making marmalade from a barrel of bitter oranges he could not sell.
Demand grew rapidly until sales extended from Scotland to the whole of Great Britain.
The famous ‘Golly’ originated just before the first world war from an American design.
SCOTCH TAPE: The tape was launched in America in 1931.
The story goes that an angry auto body painter noticed his masking tape only had adhesive along its edges and told the salesman: ‘Take this tape back to your stingy Scotch bosses and tell them to put more adhesive on it.’
The name has stuck ever since.
TUPPERWARE: Earl Tupper of New Hampshire founded his plastics company in 1938.
Sales of his containers took off after some direct sellers had demonstrated them.
Tupper immediately took all his products off the store shelves and created the direct selling system with parties, games and contests to promote sales.
Worldwide, a Tupperware party starts every 2.7 seconds.
WALL'S: The company's great breakthrough came when they decided to buy trikes to sell their ice-cream around the streets in the 1920s.
The phrase Stop me and Buy one became a household phrase.
Y FRONTS: The world leader in branded underpants were inspired by a pair of swimming trunks worn by a bather on the French Riviera.
How It All Began, the stories behind those famous names, by Maurice Baren (Smith Settle, £8.95p).
FEET FIRST
START-RITE: The famous Start-rite twins were the brain wave of the shoe firm's advertising agent in 1947.
Children have since constantly complained that the twins should not be walking in the middle of the road.
Start-rite say it is a private road in a traffic-free park.
HOVIS: Richard Smith, a Staffordshire miller, thought of lightly cooking vitamin-rich wheatgerm in steam to preserve its goodness.
The word Hovis was the invention of Herbert Grimes, a London student.
He merged a Latin phrase ‘hominis viris’— the strength of man.Hovis loafs appeared in 1890.
Smith himself died 10 years later, buried in Highgate Cemetery close to the grave of Karl Marx.
His discovery of the Hovis process is recorded on his gravestone.
EYE, EYE CAPTAIN Clarence Birdseye developed the Birds Eye foods group.
Bertie Bassett and the Allsorts selection began as a mistake.
HEINZ: Why 57 varieties?
MARS: The taste will change
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
I WAS amazed by Harry Page's picture of three steeplejacks casually reading the Mirror while perched 170ft up on Nelson's column in Trafalgar Square.
My boyhood hero Nelson must have been equally impressed.
—
WIN £10 if we use your Picture of the Week
TWIT OF THE WEEK
CBI leader Howard Davies told the TUC that workers should curb their pay claims.
But he got a 50 per cent rise for taking the £120,000 CBI job.
What a hypocrite. —
WIN £10 for your Twit of the Week 
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
ALL THE WINNERS
HERE are the stars who took top honours at the MTV Awards.
Best Video of Year: Right Now — Van Halen.
Best Male Video: Tear In Heaven — Eric Clapton.
Best Female Video: Why — Annie Lennox.
Best Group Video: Even Better Than The Real Thing — U2.
Best New Artist in a Video: Smells Like Teen Spirit — Nirvana.
Best Rap Video: Tennessee — Arrested Development.
Best Dance Video: Cream — Prince.
Best Hard Rock Video: Enter Sandman — Metallica.
Best Alternative Video: Smells Like Teen Spirit — Nirvana.
Best Video from a Film: Bohemian Rhapsody — Queen.
Best Breakthrough Video: Give It Away — Red Hot Chilli Peppers.
ZANY rockers The Red Hot Chilli Peppers left MTV bosses fuming after causing chaos at the awards show.
Band leader Flea Balzany managed to upstage bad-boy rivals Guns ‘N Roses by:
Stripping to his underpants.
Simulating sex as he performed.
Inviting scantily-clad girls onstage.
Furious MTV bosses watched stunned as the band — who scooped three top video awards — created mayhem onstage.
Said Balzany: ‘Award ceremonies are boring.
We wanted to liven things up.’
Rockers cause a stink
NIRVANA — banned from playing their X-Rated anti-rape song, Rape Me — got their own back by playing a few bars, before launching into their latest hit, Smells Like Teen Spirit.
Later, frontman Kurt Cobain caused thousands of pounds of damage by smashing his guitar, wrecking an amplifier and falling on a drum kit.
UK HOLIDAY EXTRA
PUTTING ON THE GLITZ
BLACKPOOL LIGHTS UP A DIAMOND EXTRAVAGANZA
DAVID KERR
THEY call it ‘the greatest free show on earth’— but then there has never been anything modest or half-hearted about Blackpool and its Illuminations.
This year's Illuminations are the 60th and for the diamond jubilee the town is celebrating with bigger and better displays than ever.
The main display has 18 special features, with many more at the South Shore and Cliffs locations.
Blackpool is the biggest seaside resort in Europe, attracting around 17 million visitors a year.
The Illuminations, which cost nearly £2 million to stage, attract around eight million of these and extend the season until November 8.
The first Illuminations were in May 1912, to celebrate the first Royal visit to Blackpool — by Princess Louise — who opened the section of the promenade now known as Princess Parade.
The lights went out during the two world wars and the austerity years which followed, so although this year is actually the 80th anniversary, it's only the 60th display.
For more information and details of  accommodation call Blackpool Tourist Information Centre on: 0253 21623.
ILLUMINATING: Blackpool
GARDENING
XENIA FIELD /CHARLES LYTE
FIELD NOTE
LAMB'S Lettuce or Corn Salad is an  excellent winter and early spring salad vegetable.
Sow it now in an open, sunny position.
Crack the mould
IN my greenhouse tomato leaves have curled and become powdery.
Could this be caused by something in granite chippings which are used for drainage in the bed.
A  Unlikely — your description suggests Leaf Mould, a fungus that thrives in moist, warm conditions.
Burn all infected leaves and spray plants with fungicide.
When the crop is finished thoroughly disinfect the greenhouse to destroy mould spores.
Q WHEN'S the best time to move rose bushes?
A Once all the leaves have fallen and the plants are dormant.
Q WHY are the leaves on my runner beans turning yellow and white?
A They have probably been attacked by a virus introduced by aphids.
Spray with an insecticide.
Some viruses are also introduced through seeds, particularly home-saved seeds, or from growing runner beans on the same spot year after year.
Put them elsewhere next year and make sure they have plenty of organic matter to draw on.
You are less likely to have problems if the beans have plenty of nourishment.
Q HOW should I revive my sickly Barberry bush?
A The Barberry (Berberis) hates waterlogged soil.
A moist loam is ideal with a sunny position to produce plenty of berries.
Old bushes can be brought back to vigorous life by cutting them down to a foot from the ground at the end of winter.
Then feed with a fertiliser in the spring.
Cut above the rest!
IT will soon be time to prune apple trees and many shrubs and a good pruning saw is an essential tool.
This week Daily Mirror readers can buy a super, folding pruning saw for £11.95, including packing, postage and VAT.
The hollow- ground blade, made from chrome-plated carbon steel, will cut cleanly through branches of up to three-inches in diameter.
It can also be used to cut frozen food, formica, perspex and plastic piping.
Send your orders to: Daily Mirror Pruning Saw Offer, Consolidated Marketing, Haland House, York Road, Weybridge, Surrey KT13 9ET.
Make cheques and postal orders payable to: MGN Pruning Saw Offer and put your name and address on the back.
Allow 28 days for delivery.
SOUPING UP YOUR VEG PLOT
A POTAGER was just a grand name for a plot, where vegetables were grown to make soup (potage), but now it means an ornamental vegetable garden.
Rosemoor, the Royal Horticultural Society's garden at Torrington, Devon, is a superb example of how beautiful vegetables can be.
This can be created by planting coloured and oakleaf lettuces, parsley and chives as edging in front of groups of red and green Swiss Chard, gold and purple podded French beans, red-purple flowered Asparagus Peas and yellow courgettes.
Further in can be small spring, summer and winter cabbages, Curly Kale, Calabrese and Purple Sprouting  Broccoli .
Place something statuesque like Sweet Corn or French Artichokes in the centre.
All plants must be raised in a greenhouse from seed The ground should be well dug and manured with Growmore added.
POTS OF COLOUR: Vegetables at RHS Rosemoor
WIN trips of a lifetime
DREAMS CAN COME TRUE
WE'RE giving you another chance to sample life at the top with Vernons Pools — an extra route to enter our five free contests themed on what it would be like to win the pools.
This week's five super contests were:
1
Trip for two to the Beverley Hilton, Hollywood.
Question: Unscramble VENSORN.
2
Flying lessons.
Unscramble WATHEL
3
Trip to the Breeders ‘Cup races in Florida.
Unscramble DILRAFO
4
Trip to Le Sport Hotel, St.Lucia.
Unscramble SPYCOAL.
5
Night out at Stringfellows.
Unscramble MOSNAL.
Write your answers on a postcard, add your name and address and send the card to: Vernons contest (1,2,3,4 or 5), Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE88 7TY.
Closing date is September 23.
The winners will be the first correct entries drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply.
There is no cash alternative.
You must be over 18 to enter.
For full information about Vernons Pools, phone FREEPHONE 0800 369369.
FOR full information about Vernons Pools, phone FREEPHONE .
DAILY MIRROR SHOCK ISSUE
‘HE'S BEEN IN HOSPITAL FOR 19 DAYS.
GOD KNOWS WHAT HE LOOKED LIKE WHEN HE ARRIVED’
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
TOO weak to stand, he unfolds his limbs like the legs of a flimsy wooden table.
His skeletal body is draped in a blanket, not to keep warm, but to conceal his shame at being incapable of fending for himself.
Once a self-  sufficient farmer, Ahmed Mahlim, 53, has been stripped of all dignity.
We found him huddled on the floor of a makeshift hospital in Bardera.
He has been there 19 days — God knows how he looked when he arrived.
He fixes us with his glazed brown eyes and tells how five of his 10 children have died.
Outside, he wife waits in the food queues to feed the living.
Bardera, once a thriving market town in the heart of Somalia's most fertile region, is one of the worst hit famine areas.
Hard-pressed gravediggers are burying as many as 100 people a day.
Help has been available here for less than a month, but already word has spread and swelled the starving population from 10,000 to 30,000.
There are five feeding centres, A, B, C, D, and E.
We go first to C — the town's former prison.
We arrive to witness a near riot — the dull hungry eyes of the children having been lit up by fear that the food is about to run out.
Then we go to A, where Ahmed languishes.
Next to him lies Mohamed, suffering from tuberculosis as well as malnutrition.
Dr Ayue Yaroa, a Somali who trained in Liverpool, shakes his head in despair.
For most of his patients, he can hold out little hope.
‘We have some drugs, but not enough to help the critical cases.
Most of all, we need multi vitamins to help supplement the food and stave off the sickness,’ he says.
Back outside, children are weeping, mothers are wailing and a thousand haunted, hungry eyes bore into you.
Despite the heat, the acrid stench that catches on the back of your throat is dry.
The dust hangs heavy in the air, on the rag-covered bodies and over the scabied skin of the children.
Spend half an hour in a feeding centre and you walk away feeling as though a nightmare has flashed before you.
Spend hours, as we did, or days and weeks as the struggling relief workers do, and it is harrowing in a way not even the most graphic television pictures can show.
Ethirajulu Krishnan, director for CARE, in Somalia says: ‘We are trying to deal with all this and still we know that we are only reaching the tip of the iceberg.
‘There are thousands, maybe tens of thousands, who are dying out in the rural areas, or as they make their way to the towns to get help.
‘People think this is just another African famine.
Tell them it is much, much worse.’
HOLIDAY
DAVID KERR
Raffles — everyone a winer
LESS than 200 years ago Singapore was a swamp, infested by man-eating tigers, murderous pirates and mosquitoes.
Then along came an entrepreneurial Yorkshireman called Thomas Stamford Raffles.
He realised that this steamy tropical island with its huge natural harbour, just 80 miles north of the equator, was perfectly placed to become the British Empire's power-base in the East.
Within a few years Raffles had realised his dream.
The swamps were drained and the pirates were chased out.
The tigers had to go, too — although not before one had terrified drinkers by leaping into the bar of the famous hotel named after the city's founder.
Today, Singapore's exotic mix of cultures — mostly Chinese, Indian and Malay — makes it a fascinating holiday destination.
You can shop for bargains in clothes, cameras and electrical goods in modern malls.
You can visit colourful Chinese and Indian temples and cool mosques, or watch a game of cricket from the shade of a palm tree.
In the evening, sip a Singapore Sling (gin, cherry brandy, lime and loads of ice) or a cold Tiger beer in the colonial-style Raffles Hotel.
The cheapest way to eat — and the most fun — is at the open-air food markets, where you find a table then pick from a huge variety of Chinese, Indian and Malay dishes.
You can eat until you're bursting for around £3.
Singapore's strict laws make it a clean, safe and efficient place for tourists.
The downside for the three million Singaporeans is a lack of political freedom and a strictly-controlled press.
Should you tire of shopping and eating, Malaysia is just across the water, with hundreds of miles of perfect beaches and a fascinating culture of its own.
FACT BOX
KUONI Travel can offer trips to Singapore for as little as £599.
For more information and to request a brochure call Kuoni Travel on 0306 740500.
Over-60s specialists Saga offer long-stay wintersun holidays to Singapore from £999 a month for Saga members, £1089 for non-members, including return flights, accommodation and travel insurance.
Call free on 0800 414 383 or write to Saga Holidays Ltd, FREEPOST, Folkestone , Kent CT20 1BR.
OLD AND NEW: The Singapore skyline
LAZY DAYS: Beach on Singapore's Sentosa Island
Back in the real world, Eurocamp Independent have cut the cost of canvas holidays throughout September.
Stay at one of eight campsites in France for as little as £234 — that's £59 per person for a family of four.
Price includes ferry crossing and insurance.
Details: 0565 755399.
Your money or your wife!
‘Throw in a goat and two carpets…and she's yours’
DAVID KERR /JO BECKERLEY
I'LL geev you three camels for your wife,’ said the toothless street vendor with a lecherous look on his face.
I didn't know if I should be flattered by the offer but I was most put out when my companion said: ‘Throw in a goat and two carpets and she's all yours!’
And he wasn't even my husband.
But that's typical of Cairo's famous Khanel Kalili bazaar where haggling is the name of the game.
The street market is a real Aladdin's cave of goodies where you can pick up anything from hand painted papyrus pictures or exquisite glassware to jewellery or fine rugs at ridiculous prices — if you stand your ground.
Most street sellers will drop to at least half price if you shout and wave as much as them.
I came back with scent bottles at £2.50 each, which I've seen in British stores for over £50.
In complete contrast, nothing will prepare you for the jaw-dropping experience of taking the desert road out of the city for the first time.
One minute you're surrounded by the modern bustle of Egypt's capital — the next you come face to face with ancient history as a sprawling housing estate is replaced by the stately pyramids and sand as far as the eye can see.
At the pyramids, if you shop around, you should get a good half-hour camel trek into the desert for as little as £1.
Beer
And with a decent meal including large bottles of local beer for around £5, there's no reason why you can't treat yourself to the colourful ‘Egyptian night out’ with cabaret, belly dancing and a multi-course meal held regularly at the plush Ramses Hilton for about £25.
Getting around the city on a sightseeing spree to the Tutankhamen Museum, the Sphinx monument or laden with bargains from the shops, is very cheap by taxi.
Now take note.
The term ‘gippy tummy’ didn't originate in Egypt for nothing.
I avoided ice cubes, salads and water — I even cleaned my teeth in mineral water — and I still fell prey to a stomach bug.
Even so, I would go back to the exciting clamour of Cairo  tomorrow .
FACT BOX
BRITISH Airways Worldwide Holidays offer packages to Cairo from £392 for seven nights B&B at the Chateau des Pyramides hotel.Details: 0293 611 611.
Hayes and Jarvis offer packages to Cairo staying at the Salma Hotel where prices start at £329 for three nights with additional nights at £8.
Going upmarket, three nights at the Ramses Hilton is £369 with additional nights at £24.
The Nile Hilton is £379 for three nights, with additional nights at £26.
Details: 081 748 5050.
BAZAAR LIFE: Bargains galore — if you haggle
LIKE IT OR HUMP IT: Camel rides come cheap if you shop around
AT THE THEATRE
TONY PURNELL
HAVE you heard the one about the Englishman, the Irishman and the Yank?
It's no joke, because they occupy a dingy cell in war torn Beirut in Someone Who'll Watch Over Me at London's Vaudeville theatre.
But the trio — brilliantly played by Alec McCowen, Stephen Rea and James McDaniel — also share a lot of laughs.
It is what helps keep them sane, chained to a wall not knowing if they are going to live or die.
But the humour cannot hide the heartache the unlikely companions feel locked away from their loved ones as they cope with their plight in their different ways.
McCowen's middle class Brit worries about his mum and attempts to keep his stiff upper lip from trembling by reliving tennis star Virginia Wade's Wimbledon triumph.
Rea's Irish rebel dreams of soccer, racing and his wife and kids.
And McDaniel's hunky  American resorts to a strict keep-fit routine for inner and outer strength.
It is a compelling night out and the stark bare set and the absence of even the sight or sound of a jailer serves to hammer home the isolation, the boredom and the feeling of helplessness.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
TURKEY king Bernard Matthews has had the stuffing knocked out of his profits in the last six months.
They were plucked by two thirds to little more than £2 million.
The traditional Easter turkey boom — the second biggest after Christmas — was a damp squib because hard-up families bought cheaper chickens.
THE hot early summer meant sweet sales for soft-drinks giant Cadbury-Schweppes.
Profits fizzed by an eighth up to £126 million in six months.
GILLETTE is buying the Parker pen company for £300 million.
It already owns Papermate.
HERE'S a mystery for Agatha Christie's super sleuth Hercule Poirot.
LWT, which screens his adventures, boosted half-year profits by a recession-busting 40 per cent to £13.7 million.
SHELF LIFE
JAN WALSH
Rattling the food chains
NEW SUPERSTORE IN CUT-PRICE OFFENSIVE
FOR more than a decade Sainsbury's has been top of the shop parade.
With their nearest rival, Tesco, they've become far and away the most popular places to do the weekly shop.
They both have good facilities, helpful service and a wide range of goods.
But do they make us pay over the odds?
A new superstore chain says they do.
Food Giant claims we're all spending far more than we need to when we shop at the well-known supermarkets.
We could shop at one of their 19 superstores around the country and save a fortune.
They point out that when you hand over your housekeeping at the Sainsbury checkout, more than seven per cent of your money is pure profit for the store chain.
Tesco make just under seven per cent.
Yet Food Giant only takes around four per cent profit.
And they say that's plenty for a healthy business.
If the chain proves popular you could soon have a Food Giant near you.
They don't have to build their stores from scratch.
They just convert stores from Gateway, their parent company.
Discount supermarkets like this are nothing new.
Britain's most successful discount chain is KwikSave.
And there are also foreign firms, Netto and Aldi, who are trying to get a toehold here.
But none of them have really rattled the big chains until Food Giant came along.
It doesn't look much like a traditional Sainsbury's or Tesco's, with its warehouse-style shelves and handwritten signs.
But it's the same size.
And unlike the other discount stores, it has all the normal branded products, AND own-label groceries through Gateway, AND a full range of fresh foods, fruit, veg, and meat, just like its big rivals.
The difference, according to Food Giant, is that everything is a lot cheaper.
Since Food Giants are spreading so fast around the country — they've opened more than one store a month since they started last year — we've put their claims to the test.
We chose a shopping basket of 29 items to compare them with Tesco and Sainsbury.
And we carefully chose some unusual groceries, such as mango chutney and batteries, as well as the obvious basics, so that it was a really thorough test.
In each basket we compared like with like — so there were no cheap and nasty products with brand names you've never heard before.
Our conclusion?
Food Giant is incredibly cheap.
Their shopping basket was £2.43 cheaper than in Sainsbury's, and £2.46p cheaper than in Tesco's.
That means the average shopper who would normally spend £60 could save a fiver a week on their groceries.
SUM TOTALS: The Mirror's Jan finds that the six items, right, came to £7.76p at Sainsbury's and Tesco's, but only £6.83p at Food Giant — a saving of 93p on these few items
CASEBOOK 1
DO YOU have a washer-drier instead of a normal washing machine?
Is it a Candy?
If so, it could kill you.
Thousands of dangerous Candy machines are still in use despite a recall by the manufacturers.
A fault in the drying cycle means that the machine overheats and can catch fire.
One Candy owner, Eleanor Bellamy, has already died, and others have escaped from their smoke-filled homes just in the nick of time.
None of them had heard about the recall.
More than 40,000 of these lethal machines were sold between 1986 and 1988.
Newer washer-driers have been modified.
When the problems were first noticed in older machines last year, Candy blamed owner misuse.
But at Mrs Bellamy's inquest in Rotherham the coroner accepted that the machines were at fault.
Since then the importers have run more advertisements asking owners to contact them.
But there are still around 20,000 Candy machines which haven't been found.
If you think you might have one in your home, here's what to do.
Ring 0800 373240 and tell them the serial number on the back of the machine.
Meanwhile, don't use it on the drying cycle.
If it's a dangerous model Candy will send an engineer within 10 days to fit a safety device.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
BELINDA IN WILL BATTLE
BELINDA CARLISLE is locked in a legal battle over her husband's family fortune.
She is helping hubbie Morgan Mason — son of movie-star James — fight for his share of his father's millions after everything was left to his stepmother.
Said a pal: ‘It's heartbreaking when families fight over money.’
LEGAL FIGHT: Belinda
Janet loves her Freedom
JANET JACKSON has dumped record producer boyfriend Rene Elizondo after a make-or-break holiday in London.
They spent 10 days here recently in an attempt to patch up their stormy two-year romance.
But the reconciliation bid failed, with close pals saying the pair have ‘grown apart’.
The break-up comes after The Limit revealed that Janet's current bid for Hollywood fame had strained their relationship.
Friends say the singer, at No. 6 with The Best Things In Life Are Free, has dedicated herself 100 per cent to her role in the new movie Poetic Justice, leaving little time for Rene.
Now Janet, recently linked with rap star Tone Loc, has taken up with millionaire singer Freedom Williams.
The love-struck pair have been spotted kissing and cuddling at parties, concerts and  restaurants in Los Angeles.
Pop heart-throb Freedom, former singer with hit band C + C Music Factory, says: ‘Janet's a lovely girl.
We get on well together.’
STRAINED: Janet
SHAMEN WAR AID
THE Shamen are shelling out £10,000 in a bid to help victims of the war in Yugoslavia.
The group, at No. 1 with Ebeneezer Goode, are sending a consignment of albums, tapes and relief aid to the country after receiving letters from fans saying Shamen music is helping them through their troubles.
Singer Colin Angus said: ‘One letter came from a kid stuck in a shelter in Zagreb.
‘He said he was listening to our track Move Any Mountain on his Walkman while the city was being shelled.
‘It's humbling to think our music can make people feel better in such a terrible situation.’
PAP SNAP
BANANARAMA'S Keren Woodward wipes away a tear at seeing her single Movin' On drop down the charts.
Never mind, Keren.
There's always next time.
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
THE tooth about smiling George Corraface, star of the £30 million epic Christopher Columbus — The Discovery, which opens on September 25: he brushes his teeth with sandpaper.
Bernie has a ball
HERE'S Bernard Cribbens…with a good gag for a change.
Meanwhile, above, that bloke with the awful tie's picked me up again, moans BETTY KITTEN WOSS.
Fly-drive to save Di's marriage
CHARLES and Diana will be together for a long time to come.
We can reveal in a world exclusive that they are already looking for more places to fly to — together.
In November the Royal couple will fly to Korea.
Together.
Now they are checking out a number of other countries for a spring 1993 visit.
Together.
‘So far there are four options being looked at,’ we are told.
‘Others may follow.’
Which will bring a huge sigh of relief to the millions who are willing the couple to patch things up.
Things really do seem to be looking up, and we can now discount all those gloom-merchants who assured us it would all be over before Christmas.
Of course, people who saw the ill-starred couple on parade in Nottingham this week weren't exactly knocked out by the body language.
They behaved towards each other like a couple of newly-frozen ice-cubes.
‘But they're doing their best,’ we're told.
‘They're probably trying harder with that marriage now than they've ever done.’
Diana has 59 public engagements between now and Christmas.
And now she's seen Prince Harry safely off to boarding school, she's asking for more.
Charles is his usual hard-working self.
Marriages — take it from us — survive worse catastrophes than they've experienced.
We shall see Queen Diana on the throne yet!
DI: She'll stick with Charles after all
LETTER LOUT'S REVENGE
MICHAEL Caine's supersmart London caff, Langan's Brasserie, recently shelled out £2,000 towards two smart black cast-iron litter bins.
It was part of a local scheme to tidy up the streets around Piccadilly.
The bonus to the restaurant was that its name would be emblazoned on the side of the bins in smart gold letters.
Three burly workmen duly arrived, complete with truck and mini-crane, to hoist the heavy bins into position.
But suddenly the restaurant's sharp-eyed head waiter called a halt.
‘Oi,’ he said.
‘There's no ‘H’ in Langan's.
‘OK, boys,’ said a sheepish workman.
‘Back on the truck with ‘em.’
He phoned to tell his bosses the bad news.
‘Allo, guv,’ he yodelled.
‘I'm phoning from Lanagan's.’
CHRIS TARRANT (left) holding court…and caught holding.
ALL BETS ARE OFF
ON SCREEN they were magic.
But in real life Rovers Return couple Roy Barraclough and Julie Goodyear — who played Alec and Bet Gilroy — didn't get on.
His former Coronation Street co-star wasn't in evidence when Roy's stage play Feed had its premiere in Bolton, Lancs, this week.
For they had little in common, and Roy was furious with Julie when he was tricked into appearing on ITV's This Is Your Life.
He was on holiday in Spain when the producers asked him to return early to reshoot one or two scenes.
But Roy had thrown away his script, and he spent an anxious plane journey trying to remember his lines.
At the airport Julie's Rolls ‘broke down’, leaving Julie standing there as Roy's car sped past.
When his driver said: ‘Shall I stop?’
Roy snapped: ‘No — drive past her.
Ignore her.’
When he realised it was all a put-up job, he tore a strip off Julie.
‘A few choice words were uttered,’ he says.
Toe fast for Thommo!
WHAT Makes Johnny Bryan run?
Calling out his name is enough to do the trick.
Our former colleague Peter Thompson co-author of a book, Sarah's Story, in which Bryan stars spotted the American in Mayfair the other day and shouted out his name.
‘He took off at once, at a fast gallop towards Claridge's,’ said Peter.
‘I only wanted to ask him a few questions.’
Ms cox is a pippin!
SHE lives with Batman star Michael Keaton, she danced with Bruce Springsteen on his video of Dancing In the Dark, she's just been seen in the movie Cocoon: The Return.
So we couldn't think of any reason to keep Scope's stunning new snap of Courteney Cox from you a moment longer.
And Public Plonker No. 1 Bobby Davro (right) reveals his secret vice.
He likes a big bar.
CLASSIC QUOTE
DEEP Throat?
I thought it was a film about a giraffe — Bob Hope
LESLEY JOSEPH (centre)— sex-mad Dorien from Birds Of A Feather, always enjoys a sixpenny one.
CHAT show host David Letterman offers these signs that your marriage isn't working: YOUR wife is always leaving the dinner table to go on dates.
YOUR counsellor has a nude picture of your husband on her desk.
YOUR wife keeps introducing handsome young guys as her brother.
YOU ARE dating your stepdaughter.
YOU are married to a member of the British Royal Family.
TWO left-wing women berated a hapless male delegate who stupidly used ‘Hello, gorgeous girls’ at his opening fraternal gambit at the TUC in Blackpool.
‘You're a male chauvinist pig,’ yelled one.
And the other sniped: ‘That's condescending sexism.’
‘Oh,’ said the bewildered male, ‘I suppose sex is out of the question?’
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
YOU don't have to be greedy to make money in banking.
The Co-op pledged yesterday that it has no plans to re-introduce charges.
And it revealed that profits jumped from just £700,000 to £3,500,000 in six months.
US bid tastes sweet
SHARES of United Biscuits, the McVities and KP snacks group, jumped 24p to 259p on rumours of a bid, possibly from Philip Morris, the American cigarettes giant.
That's despite a drop of one sixth in its half- yearly profits to £70m yesterday.
Morris, which has more than £10 billion cash to spare, would not comment.
But McVitie's top brands such as Digestive and Jaffa Cakes would fit nicely with its Kraft cheese and Suchard chocolates offshoots.
DID YOU KNOW?
The term, ‘minimum lethal dose’, is defined as the smallest amount of a substance needed to kill a nine-ounce guinea pig within four days.
FREE Kinder Surprise AT WOOLWORTHS
START COLLECTING YOUR TEENY TERRAPINS NOW!
WORTH 39p
HEY kids!
Here's a sweet treat just for you.
With this great Woolworths offer you can collect a famous Kinder Surprise, the milk chocolate marvel, worth 39p — and it won't cost you a penny.
In every Kinder Surprise you will already find one of 100 neat little toys, easy-to-assemble kits featuring locos, cars, lorries, ships…you name it.
Now, exclusively in Kinder Surprise, you can meet the Teeny Terrapins.
There are 10 individual hand-painted Teeny Terrapin characters to collect, lovable little creatures from Terrapin Island, ready for the beach, surfing, swimming and scuba diving.
You can get them only in Kinder Surprise.
They are hiding in one of every three of the delicious chocolate eggs.
So start your collection NOW.
Today we are printing a special voucher which includes a token.
There will be another token tomorrow to complete your voucher.
Take the completed voucher to any of the 796 Woolworths stores nationwide and they will be happy to help.
These toys are not suitable for children under five and the offer is available only while stocks last, up to and including Saturday September 26.
September 26 is also Grandparents Day — so while you are in Woolworths why not buy them a special card or gift?
Woolworths has supported Grandparents Day since it started in 1990 and is donating 10 per cent of all sales of Grandparents Day greeting cards to Age Concern.
Shopping a Woolworths is fun, for they offer offer everything from records, tapes and videos to household gifts and chocolates, all at big value prices.
Watch out for the special Kinder Surprise token tomorrow.
DUCHESS OF SCANDAL
At last amazing inside story of Fergie's shattered marriage…by James Whittaker, the man who brought you THOSE pictures
‘I just couldn't get the Queen to talk about the situation, she seemed to find it impossible to get involved’
JAMES WHITTAKER
FERGIE trudged along the banks of the Dee with all the right words on her lips…and despair in her heart.
As she strolled by the river bank near Balmoral that day, she tried to pour out her pent-up feelings to her companion, this powerful woman who was her last hope.
No one but the Queen herself, she had decided, could do anything now to help her save her crumbling marriage.
But the Duchess of York was to be cruelly disappointed.
For all her mother-in-law would talk about was…her dogs, the horses and the weather.
Yet the Queen knew perfectly well what Sarah, wife of her much-loved second son Andrew, REALLY wanted to discuss.
Their marriage was in serious trouble — and Fergie was in turmoil.
Just for once, the headstrong Duchess who had so often flouted royal convention was asking for help and guidance.
But the Queen, horrified to learn that her favourite son's marriage was heading for the rocks, could not utter the words of comfort the agonised redhead most needed to hear.
The Queen had already heard rumours about the couple's problems — but it really sank home just a year ago when Sarah asked if she could talk to her about ‘a very personal matter’.
THE Queen has always liked Fergie and gets on much better with her than she does with her other daughter-in-law, Princess Diana.
So it was natural for Sarah to turn to her for help in her troubles — and last year's annual royal holiday pilgrimage to Balmoral seemed the perfect opportunity.
After all, she and the Queen had always happily nattered away for hours while out riding around the castle estate that runs along the River Dee.
But this time the conversation was less relaxed.
The Queen had been briefed about the true state of affairs by her personal staff, including her private secretary Sir Robert Fellowes.
She knew Sarah wanted to discuss her marriage — and she was shocked.
As a result, when the two women went for that walk — which was followed by several others — the topic Sarah was so anxious to discuss just never came up.
The Duchess was desperately looking for help.
A little understanding of her plight — allied to some gentle but firm pressure — could almost certainly have persuaded Fergie to make a much greater effort to get back with Andrew.
She tried repeatedly to bring up the subject of her rapidly-disintegrating marriage.
But, as she told friends recently: ‘It was terrible.
‘We walked and walked…and I kept dropping hints, but there was never once a response from the Queen.
‘She would talk to me about everything but the subject that mattered.
‘We discussed the dogs, which were all around us as we went across the fields and mountains.
‘We talked about the weather, the beauty of the surrounding countryside and her animals, particularly her racehorses.
‘But we never got round to discussing Andrew and me.’
Fergie did not give up easily.
She said: ‘We had lots of walks together, lots of tea parties on Sunday afternoons at Sunninghill (the home near Ascot which was a wedding present to the Yorks), and lots of other moments when we could have at least started discussions.
BUT it just never happened.
I just couldn't get the Queen to talk to me about the situation.
‘She seems to find it impossible to get involved in anybody's emotional problems — not even when it comes to saving her own family.’
Eventually Andrew himself went to his mother and said that they should all sit down and at least talk about the situation.
Fergie says: ‘Finally something did happen, but it soon became clear that the Queen was just not capable of getting involved in emotional, personal problems — even though it involved her own flesh and blood.’
The Duchess, now heading fast for a divorce, says there WAS a vague discussion about how bad things were between herself and Andrew but ‘it was useless’.
Andrew was no better at getting to grips with the worsening situation, Fergie complains now.
Their marriage went rapidly downhill…until that fateful day on March 19 this year when Buckingham Palace announced that the Yorks were to separate.
By a cruel irony, it was the sixth anniversary of their engagement.
How did things go so badly wrong so quickly?
After all, it was not much more than five years since the Westminster Abbey wedding that thrilled the nation, if not the world.
The truth is that the seeds of disaster were sown early on: THE Duchess spent far too much of her marriage wanting to have fun.
She revelled in the benefits of being married to the Queen's second son and did not spend enough time on her duties.
AS Sarah's mother, Susan Barrantes, was quoted as saying the other day, Andrew behaved like a wimp.
He has always been a mummy's boy, and he has always been arrogant.
Even in his early days, when I did an end-of-term ‘report’ on Andrew at the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth, I learned he was nicknamed ‘The Great I am (the Prince)’.
AND the Prince was never master of his own household.
All too often he was away at sea on naval duties.
Sarah complained that in 1990 they only spent 42 nights together — and that was a recipe for trouble.
Fergie loves the social status that being married to Andrew brought her.
She likes being escorted around smart spots and having money spent on her.
Most of all, she wants to have fun, fun, fun.
It proved a catastrophic cocktail.
Looking back on years that the Yorks were together, it is easy to pick out the really bad moments that led to the complete breakdown of their marriage.
When the final scenes were played out in a villa near St Tropez in the South of France just a month ago, I was left open-mouthed at the level of stupidity — or was it arrogance?— displayed by the Duchess and her balding ‘financial adviser’ John Bryan.
But it all started long before that.
The first crunch time for Fergie came after the birth of her daughter Beatrice in August 1988.
Up until then the marriage had been a triumph of togetherness.
But not long after this happy event Fergie became depressed that Andrew would be away in Australia for some months and that she and her baby were being ‘abandoned’.
A solution was found.
A mini-royal tour for the Yorks was fixed.
This meant the Duchess got a free air ticket to Sydney, Australia, and could spend time with Andrew while his ship was in southern waters.
On this trip the Duchess was the target of a barrage of outraged criticism.
The accusers said she was wrong to leave Beatrice, then just a few weeks old, behind in England.
She was said to be callous, selfish, irresponsible.
But the attacks were not only hurtful to the Duchess — they were unfair.
All along, as I reported at the time, Sarah had wanted to take her baby with her.
Her father advised against this — and so did Andrew.
But it was Sarah who was left to take the flak.
In the summer of 1989 things began to happen fast.
Sarah was told that Andrew had started flirting again.
She said little, but she was seething inwardly and vowed to fight back.
With Andrew away, the travel-loving Duchess accepted an invitation to attend a British Festival in Houston, Texas.
It was a fatal few days.
Fergie was five months pregnant with her second  daughter , Eugenie — but came under the spell of millionaire's son Steve Wyatt.
She was feeling vulnerable and neglected, he was fun and rich and she clearly enjoyed his company.
They attended an opera together and flirted at a ball.
When she left America to return to England the chemistry continued.
Then, in two extraordinary days at a stately home called Constable Burton Hall the smouldering embers were ignited.
At a shooting party at the Yorkshire home of Charles and Maggie Wyvill and attended by Steve Wyatt, the Duchess made a dramatic late-night entrance during a lively dinner party.
Her royal plane, she explained, could not get her back to Sandringham that early December night because of bad weather.
Could she stay?
Nobody, even if they had wanted to, dared say no.
The following morning was even more bizarre.
The Duchess, still wearing a dark-blue velvet evening dress from the night before, posed for pictures on the outside steps with the shooting party all around her.
She sat at the feet of Wyatt.
The next year, 1990, was even worse for their flickering marriage.
Andrew was away at sea for weeks on end, while Fergie, pregnant with Eugenie, went out of control.
She shot off on holiday, spending time with Wyatt…and feeling sorry for herself that her husband was away so much.
At the end of the year Wyatt was a special guest of Fergie at the Buckingham Palace ball to celebrate the birthdays of the Queen Mother, Princess Anne and Andrew.
But before this, Wyatt had dined privately at the Palace with Fergie and the Iraqi oil minister.
The Texan wanted to impress him to clinch a business deal.
Later that night the Duchess took Wyatt on to a dinner party at top nightspot Annabel's, where the two refused to be separated.
Steve, asked to sit at another table, astonished their host, Lord McAlpine, with the reply: ‘Mah woman and I sit together.’
This was scandalous behaviour, and the word was that Buckingham Palace began telling Fergie to cool her relationship with the Texan.
By the spring of 1991 this advice was beginning to have some effect.
But by that time Wyatt had introduced Sarah to ‘my friend and distant relation’.
This was Johnny Bryan, another Texan who was wrongly reputed to be a millionaire.
Johnny was a show-off — a balding braggart who was later proved to be a liar.
But he held a strong attraction for the the Duchess — and by now she was totally out of the Palace's control.
Bryan assured Sarah that if her marriage to Andrew could not be saved he would act for both of them in any settlement.
He quietly assured her that his major interest would be in her welfare.
She believed him and still does.
Even then, Sarah had not given up on her marriage.
But her desperate attempt at Balmoral to enlist the aid of her mother-in-law ended in abject failure.
Early this year, intimate pictures of Sarah with Wyatt and Wyatt with the little princesses, Beatrice and Eugenie, were made public.
By this time the Duchess was at screaming pitch — not only with her husband but also with the Palace courtiers and staff, who had never liked her.
She fought for a separation…and her wish was granted.
With Bryan at her side, Fergie forsook almost everybody else.
Johnny — who firmly believed he had fooled Fergie's family, her lawyers, Prince Andrew and even the Queen about his intentions — arranged for Fergie and the two little princesses to holiday in Thailand and Indonesia.
Smugly, Bryan came back early from this holiday and coolly assured Prince Andrew that his wife was well and in good hands.
Even as Andrew was assuring journalists at Sunninghill that he was hopeful he and Fergie could get back together, the Texan was in the next room, phoning around Fleet Street.
Johnny knew Fergie was in love with him, and he felt this made him virtually untouchable.
He crowed to me: ‘The Queen won't allow any negotiations between Andrew and Fergie and their lawyers to go on without me being present.’
But then he booked one trip too many.
He fixed up a holiday for himself and Fergie in St Tropez.
The rest, of course, is history.
PROUD A royal wave from Fergie as she shows off Princess Bea.
Prince Andrew was home from naval duties to share this joyful family moment — but too often he wasn't around and the couple's happiness turned sour in five brief years.Picture: KENT GAVIN
NEW MAN John Bryan is there as Fergie hits the social scene yet again
WORLDS APART Fergie and the Queen often rode together, but the troubled Duchess quickly found that her mother-in-law would shy away from anything too personal
SCANDAL: Fergie's relationship with Texan millionaire's son Steve Wyatt towards the end of 1989 absolutely horrified Buckingham Palace
Soap that can be silly and sad
HILARY KINGSLEY
I COULD have told those baffled boffins that there are three simple facts behind the success of Neighbours.
FACT ONE: It can get to you, however silly it seems 90 per cent of the time.
Just look at the death of Harold Bishop.
This funny fat fool, this symbol of old-style decency was drowned at sea the other day just after declaring how happy he was to be alive.
So he won't be back running the Ramsay Street coffee shop, huffing and puffing over his vegetarian quiche — and I'm sad.
The writers have weaved their magic again.
FACT TWO is that soap stars like Ian Smith, who played Harry, and Anne Charleson, who plays his rasping-voiced widow, can throw in some real acting when it matters.
FACT THREE is that by this time next week umpteen other life-changing events will have shaken the respectable residents of the comfy Melbourne cul-de-sac.
Tears will have been dried, rows will have been resolved, mysteries will have been solved.
No storyline drags on.
Neighbours also provided a missing ingredient in our diet of soaps when it became a five-times- a-week fixture back in 1988.
We had realism in EastEnders and comedy in Coronation Street — but we had no soapy saga for kids, about kids and their problems.
On screen bounced Kylie Minogue and Jason Donovan.
The nation's youngsters took to them and a successful soap was born.
That's why Neighbours became good friends
WE ANSWER THE QUESTION THAT BAFFLED THE BOFFINS…
FIONA McINTOSH
SOME of the world's finest minds were feeling decidedly brain-washed today — by an Australian soap opera.
For three days 150 international boffins gathered in Britain to try answer this extremely perplexing question: ‘Why is Neighbours so popular?’
And their answer?.
Much scratching of heads followed by: ‘We haven't a clue.’
But where the mighty minds of the world failed dismally, the Mirror got it right.
THEY were cooped up in a university conference chamber listening to Ian Harley, head of the British Australian Studies Association, declare: ‘This is an earnest academic meeting and the next few days will be strenuous and demanding.’
WE simply went out into the street and got the answers from the people who matter — Neighbours fans.
Like 13-year-old Joey Papineau, who could have told the baffled university dons: ‘Neighbours is great because it's not like real life.
It's always sunny, so it cheers you up.
And the characters are so stupid you can laugh at them.’
Like 11-year-old Hatty Miller: ‘There is always a happy ending.
We laugh at it and with it!’
Like Jimmy Murphy, aged 14, who told us: ‘I'd like to live like people in Neighbours — and spend all my time outdoors with all that sunshine.’
Even the stars of the show were willing to help the collection of great minds at Exeter University find out why 16 million viewers a day tune in to Neighbours.
‘The reason why it was such a success was because of the sunshine, the innocence, and opportunities people had,’ says original cast member Kylie Minogue.
Kristian Schmid, alias Todd Landers, told us: ‘Neighbours not only has its own style, it makes people feel good.’
AT LEAST one person at the seminar almost had it right.
Graduate Kate Bowles, who is studying soaps at Exeter, delivered a paper on why Neighbours and Home And Away were so successful in Britain.
‘The struggles of the poor and the honest are always rewarded,’ she told the collection of blank faces before her.
She said its classlessness also had a strong appeal with ‘business people and gardeners living side by side and talking to each other.’
Perhaps it was the title of Kate's paper that befuddled their senses — The Nightmare of Ramsay Street; Neighbours and sub-cultural imagination.
The British Australian Studies Association says it organised the conference to get a greater understanding on Australian culture.
Some of the delegates spent more than £2,000 travelling to Britain to try to solve the mindboggling soaps problem.
Again the Mirror could have offered each of them a solution that would have saved them time and money.
Next time just stay at home and switch on the telly, clever clogs.
PIONEERS: Kylie and Jason grabbed young fans
SUCCESS FORMULA: Fresh air and fresh faces
SUNNY STARS: Young fans identify with characters like Josh Anderson and Todd Landers
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
BILLY Ray Cyrus is shelling out £500 a week hiring a minder to protect his hair!
The heart-throb country and western singer, at No. 6 with Achy Breaky Heart, is fed up with female fans grabbing and pulling at his famous ponytail.
WIN OUR EXTREME GOODIES
EXTREME are storming the charts with their latest single, Rest In Peace — and to celebrate we've lined up a super give-away.
We've got a bundle of pop goodies, including:
TEN special limited edition CD box sets of their latest single.
FIFTY copies of Extreme's new double album.
TEN pairs of tickets for the band's forthcoming UK tour.
Ten lucky winners will each get a box set, album, AND a pair of tickets — while 40 runners-up will get a copy of Extreme's new double album.
The prizes, valued at £1,000, are courtesy of A & M Records.
To enter, simply answer this question: What is the name of Extreme's heart-throb lead guitarist?
Write your answer, name and address, on a postcard, to: The Limit's Extreme competition, 1, Thavies Inn, London EC88 1AB.
First correct entries out of the bag win.
GENESIS CLIP GABRIEL'S WINGS
PETER Gabriel has launched an amazing attack on former rock pals Genesis.
Gabriel, who split from the supergroup in 1975, claims his career has suffered because of his association with the band.
The talented singer has won acclaim for speaking out against injustice with hard-hitting songs like Biko and Shock The Monkey.
And he's won a legion of fans for his anti-establishment views and work with campaigning groups like Amnesty International.
Genesis meanwhile have netted more than £200 million with mainstream pop songs and sponsorship from major corporations.
Gabriel, at No 31 with new single Digging in the Dirt, says: ‘I've never been part of the rock ‘n roll machinery.
‘You can't find inspiration from a popstar lifestyle or by being part of the establishment.
‘Genesis, though, are as establishment as you can get.
My career has been held back — especially in Britain — because of my association with them.’
ATTACK: Gabriel
CHART star Freddie Jackson is a secret clothes junkie who blows thousands of pounds each month on new threads.
The sharp-dressed singer, who's at No. 37 with Me And Mrs Jones, spent more than £1,000 in stores during a recent visit to London — only days after a £2,000 clothes spree in New York.
He admits: ‘If I see something I want, I just have to have it.’
WHAT A WINNER
Kim dazzles 'em
PATRICK MULCHRONE
NURSE Kim Leach seemed every inch an angel when she swept down the aisle as the Daily Mirror's Bride of the Year.
And, beaming with joy, she said: ‘Winning the title has made my special day very special indeed.’
Kim, 28, wore a dazzling full-length £1,000 ivory satin gown by Pronuptia.
It was part of her prize — along with £1,000-worth of dresses for her four bridesmaids and another £1,000-worth of Young's clothes hire for husband Paul Wrigley and his attendants.
The couple also got £2,000 cash that helped to make their wedding reception a feast to remember.
And today they will jet away for a dream honeymoon in Barbados sponsored by Caribbean Gold.
Joiner Paul, 30, said after the ceremony at Oldham, Lancs: ‘Kim looked a picture.
The dress was a knockout.’
His elated bride, who cares for mentally-ill old folk, smiled at his side and said:
‘How grateful we are.
What a start to married life…‘
DAZZLING: Kim in her £1,000 satin gown.
Pictures DENNIS HUSSEY
HAPPY: Bride and groom
It's no laughing matter
WHY I'M GOING STRAIGHT — BY STEVE MARTIN
‘I'll never again be a stand-up comic’
HILARY BONNER
HIS latest film is one of the funniest he's ever made, and his training as a stand-up comic and magician stretched over hard years on the tough American nightclub circuit.
Yet Steve Martin, the shy master of American comedy, has finally revealed his true ambition.
He wants to be taken seriously.
In his next film, Leap of Faith, a grim drama, he will play the villain, a conman evangelist.
And there won't be a laugh in sight.
In a rare interview, he told me: ‘In the future I would like to concentrate on drama.
Leap of Faith will be my third completely straight movie and I want to do more of that and less comedy.
‘I will not give up comedy completely, but I will never go back to being a stand-up comic again.
Not ever.’
Yet Martin is remembered as one of the best stand-up men in American history.
He used to be described as ‘wild and crazy’.
Nowadays, anything less wild and crazy than this thoughtful character in designer-creased linen suit and immaculate silk tie is difficult to imagine.
‘Stand-up comedy is just too hard,’ he says.
‘You are up there on your own and you have to do it all.
Nowadays, I like to have a script.
In any case, I feel I have moved on from there.’
Nobody is better placed to understand the pain and loneliness of the stand-up comic better than Steve Martin.
It was the TV show Saturday Night Live which originally made Martin a huge hit in the States.
Then, in 1980, he decided to concentrate on his film career, and he has had his ups and downs.
The 1987 hit Roxanne — in which he plays the Cyrano de Bergerac character of a fire chief with a huge nose — followed five flops.
But Steve Martin did not change course for a second.
Six years ago he met his wife, English actress Victoria Tennant, best known for Winds of War with Robert Mitchum, when they co-starred in the film All Of Me.
Since then they've made LA Story together, and she has encouraged him as an actor rather than a comic.
His work-load is staggering, yet he claims he is not a driven workaholic.
He and Victoria divide their time between their apartment in Manhattan and a luxury home in Beverly Hills, which houses an impressive collection of 20th Century art — his passion.
They love to travel, he says.
I talked to the 47-year-old silver-haired performer at the Deauville Film Festival in northern France.
It was his first visit to a film festival anywhere in the world.
So why had he chosen this one?
‘They gave us a free trip over,’ he said.
It was the nearest he got to a joke during our chat.
He is a born introvert.
Even in his latest film, the hilarious Housesitter which opened in Britain last Friday, it is the bubbly Goldie Hawn, his co-star, who plays for laughs rather than Steve.
Says Steve of former Laugh In star Goldie: ‘We both started in the same place, on television.
‘Goldie is a very warm, honest person.
I'm the fake.
But we have the same view of comedy.
We want to make the joke work, regardless of who gets the laugh.
‘It's a bit like dancing.
Sometimes you lift and sometimes you jump.’
He does not believe that it is necessary to like or even respect your movie co-star.
‘It makes it better for you if you do, but it probably doesn't matter to the film,’ he says.
‘Although if there are two people at odds you may lose a bit because they are not going to get their ideas together.
‘In Housesitter we stuck mostly to the script.
But there is one scene where I fall over a sofa, which we added on the day of the shoot.’
As a boy growing up in Orange County, California, Steve Martin's life of showbusiness began with Disneyland.
‘That's when I started to learn my craft,’ he says.
‘I went along as a 10-year-old and watched the shows four times a day.
‘I used to dream that one day they would call out for a 10-year-old from the audience to give them a hand.
It never happened.’
At 14 he took an evening and weekend job in a magic shop.
There he learned his second craft, that of magician.
He did not come from a showbusiness family.
His father sold real estate and his mother was a housewife.
Steve was brought up as a strict Baptist.
Yet he took to show-business like a duck to water.
He began writing jokes and scripts for TV shows and sending them off to producers and stars.
By the time he was 21 he worked full-time as a comedy writer, writing material for the American TV show The Smothers Brothers.
Now, in Housesitter, he plays the part of a jilted architect who has built a house for the girlfriend who no longer wants to marry him.
A one-night stand with a waitress, played by Goldie Hawn, leads to her taking over his empty home.
It sounds crazy — as crazy as Steve Martin used to be.
But it works, and it will be a shame if Martin does not continue to find time for pictures like this.
He says: ‘It was a happy film to make.
We laughed a lot.’
It's difficult these days, when he talks so seriously, to imagine Steve Martin laughing while he works.
CO-STARRING PARTNERS: Goldie Hawn and Steve in new film Housesitter
BEST SUPPORTING ACTRESS: Steve and wife Victoria Tennant
That'll brew nicely
JAN DISLEY
DELIGHTED Don Shaw toasted a £10,000 Mirror Bingo jackpot yesterday — with a cup of tea.
The 59-year-old teetotaller declared: ‘It sure beats champagne any day.’
Dad-of-two Don, a steel inspector from Chapeltown, South Yorks, called House on No 68 in Game 228.
Don, who plans to buy a new car, added: ‘I heard the news on my late wife's birthday.
It must have been a lucky surprise from her.’
Today's Numbers — Page 24 
WINDFALL: Don
FREE KINDER SURPRISE WORTH 39p AT WOOLWORTHS
EGGSTRA SPECIAL TREAT FOR ALL OUR READERS
TODAY'S the day, kids.
You are now all set for that sweet treat we've been promising you.
With this great Woolworths offer you can collect a Kinder Surprise, the milk chocolate marvel, worth 39p — and it won't cost you a penny.
In every Kinder Surprise you will already find one of 100 neat little toys, easy-to-assemble kits featuring locos, cars, lorries, ships…you name it.
Now, exclusively in Kinder Surprise, you can meet the Teeny Terrapins.
Delicious
There are 10 individual hand painted Teeny Terrapin characters to collect, lovable creatures from Terrapin Island, ready for the beach, surfing, swimming and scuba diving.
You can get them only in Kinder Surprise.
They are hiding in one of every three of the delicious chocolate eggs.
So start your collection NOW.
Today we are printing a special token to complete the voucher we gave you yesterday.
Take the completed voucher to any of the 796 Woolworths stores nationwide and they will be happy to help you.
Gift
These toys are not suitable for children under five years and the offer is available, while stocks last, up to and including Saturday, September 26.
By the way, that's Grandparents Day — so while you are in Woolworths why not buy a special card or gift.
Woolworths has supported Grandparents Day since it started in 1990 and is donating 10 per cent of all sales of Grandparents Day greeting cards to Age Concern.
Woolworths stock everything from records, tapes and videos to household items and chocolates, all at big value prices.
Exciting promotions currently in Woolworths include:
Buy a special pack of four half-pound boxes of Roses Chocolates and pay for just three.
Buy a one-pound box of Quality Street and get 25 per cent extra free.
A gift from Woolworths is guaranteed to make Grandparents Day a day to remember.
FABULOUS BUTLIN'S HOLIDAY WORLDS HOLIDAYS
LOOK WHAT YOU GET Star studded cabaret…funfairs…sport…films…keep-fit…sub-tropical fun pools
FUNCOAST WORLD
BOB'S your hilarious uncle at Funcoast World, where Bob Monkhouse, TV's favourite comedian, will top the bill for the weekend break from Friday, October 16, to Monday, October 19.
The entertainment continues in a sparkling mid-week special between Monday, October 19, and Saturday, October 24.
During that you can enjoy a fabulous line-up, including Billy Pearce, The Dreamers and Derek Batey.
Dynamite
Crazy funnyman Freddie Starr, one of Butlin's most popular Holiday World entertainers, will keep you laughing at the big star weekend, Friday, October 30, to Monday, November 2.
That's not all.
You can also catch The Temptations, the five-man packet of pop dynamite, who appear in the November weekend break between Friday, November 6, and Monday, November 9.
Other attractions which are included in the price of your stay at Funcoast World are: Sub-tropical waterworld Funsplash; live cabaret; kids' clubs and entertainment; funfair rides; Busby's teen-only venue; sports activities; discos and dancing; feature films; Beach Club indoor swimming pool; nursery/playgroup; Night Owl service; child-listening patrol.
There's also free entry to: Broadway family cabaret venue; Rick's Place family bar and entertainment; Showboat adults-only showbar; Moonshiners alternative family venue; Gaiety Theatre family shows; Merrie England adults-only entertainment bar; Gaiety Parisienne quiet bar; Beach Club family bar; Rendezvous relaxed, adult-only venue.
PRICE £16.50
STARCOAST WORLD
YOU'LL discover the best of US and UK entertainment during a break at Starcoast World.
Enjoy the tops in transatlantic music when the Stylistics fly over to star with Suzi Quatro on the week-end of Friday, November 13, to Monday, November 16.
Alternatively, catch the Hooked On The Sixties show, from Friday, October 16, to Monday, October 19.
The bill includes Keith Harris and Gerry and the Pacemakers.
Family entertainment is non-stop between Monday, October 19, and Friday, October 23.
Roger de Courcey appears with Nookie Bear, the Black Abbotts and Jim Bowen while, if you like spectacular shows, you can pick Ready, Steady, Go! for adults or Little Darlings and Smart Alec for youngsters.
Winners
That dynamic comedy duo Little and Large will have you splitting your sides with laughter when they turn on their magic, along with Irish singer Rose Marie, between Friday, October 30, and Monday, November 2.
On the other hand, why not spend a weekend with Ireland's Eurovision Song Contest winners Johnny Logan and Linda Martin, from Friday, November 6, to Monday, November 9?
If you love nostalgia, Friday, November 20, to Monday, November 23, is the Festival Of The Forties, featuring the big band sound of the George Bradley Orchestra, Joan Regan and the Minting Sisters.
Finally, get in the mood for family fun with the Pre-Christmas Cracker Break between Friday, December 18, and Monday, December 21.
What's included at Starcoast World: Starsplash sub-tropical waterworld; live cabaret; funfair rides; kids' clubs and entertainment; Jimmy D's teen-only venue; sports centre; sports activities; discos; dancing; video films; chairlift (weather permitting); nursery/playgroup; Night Owl service; child-listening patrol.
Not all funfair rides will be available between October 30, 1992, and March 13, 1993.
You also get free entry to: Broadway family cabaret venue; Stars adults-only showbar; Little Darlin's singalong bar; Sportsman's Bar; Sundowners adults-only wine bar; Sir Billy's adults-only bar; Rendezvous adults-only venue.
PRICE £16.50
 WONDERWEST WORLD
THE best of Country and Western music comes to Wonderwest World, Scotland's premier holiday venue, with a host of top names lined up for Daily Mirror readers.
There are two C & W breaks on offer, both in October.
The first is from Saturday, October 17, to Tuesday, October 20, and stars Stella Parton, The Hillsiders, Carol Silver, Lemon Grass, Dez Walters, Silver Sun, Texas Gun, Ann Breen and Old Spice PLUS 15 other top entertainers.
Supreme
The second takes place from Tuesday, October 20, to Saturday, October 24.
The Nashville sound will reign supreme once again as great bands and singers take the stage — Dominic Kirwan, Gambler, Desperado, Diamond T, Circuit Judge, Band Named Sioux, Old Spice and many, many more.
What's included at Wonderwest World:
Wondersplash sub-tropical waterworld; live cabaret; funfair rides; kids' clubs and entertainment; Busby's teen-only venue; dancing; sports activities; chairlift (weather permitting); children's adventure playground; nursery/playroom; Night Owl service; child-listening patrol.
Free entry to: Harlequins family cabaret venue; Castaways family bar and entertainment; Showboat adults-only showbar; Gatsby's adults-only disco bar; Chuckles family singalong bar; Rendezvous relaxed, adults-only venue.
SIMPLE STEPS TO A SUPER OFFER
CUT OUT the holiday offer tokens as they appear.
You will need THREE tokens to bag your bargain break.
The first was printed yesterday and here's another, right.
DON'T delay — start collecting today.
There will be more tokens later this week.
BUT HURRY!
This offer is subject to availability and must close on November 12.
HOW TO MAKE YOUR BOOKINGS
YOU can book your fantastic Butlin's break now!
Phone  immediately, quoting ‘Daily Mirror offer’.
Calls are charged at local rate.
There are 100 telephone lines and they are open between 9am and 10pm, seven days a week.
When you ring, Butlin's will make a provisional booking and request that you send in a booking form, available in a Butlin's Holiday Worlds brochure.
Alternatively a copy will be sent to you by post.
Fill in the booking form and return it with the full payment due.
You will need to attach three Daily Mirror tokens to take up the special offer.
You can also visit your local ABTA travel agent.
Quote ‘Daily Mirror offer’ and they will be able to make your Butlin's booking for you.
For readers who live in the Republic of Ireland and want to book, just phone one of Butlin's Dublin agents.
Their numbers are given below.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS
PLEASE read carefully the Terms and Conditions on your booking form:
1.
The promotional prices are £16.50 per person self-catering, based on four sharing.
Or £40 per adult half-board (children under 14 half-price).
2.
Butlin's reserves the right to allocate an accommodation grade of its choice.
In most cases this will be Budget, as detailed in the Butlin's current Breakaway brochure.
To give you an idea, Budget self-catering units offer a fully-equipped kitchenette with an electric or gas cooker, fridge, cooking and dining equipment, colour TV, pillows and blankets or duvets.
The half-board accommodation includes free electricity and heating, colour TV, tea- and coffee-making facilities, maid service, pillows, bed-linen, blankets or duvets.
3.
This offer may not be combined with any other offer or discount and is subject to Butlin's normal terms and conditions as detailed in the current brochure.
4.
The offer is subject to availability and closes November 12, 1992.
STARR PERFORMER: Crazy comic Freddie will have you roaring when he appears at Funcoast World
FINE FOLK: Chas ‘n’ Dave put on their Cockney show and there's also rock, pop, jazz and musicals
DOUBLE DELIGHT: Loads of laughs are in store when Little and Large appear with songstress Rose Marie
ANNE ROBINSON
BOB'S THE BOY FOR RACY REMARKS
TELEVISION viewers waiting for the result of the 3.10 race at Doncaster last Wednesday heard director Bob Gardam called Lord Howard d'Warden  an ‘Old Fart’ after his lordship wandered in front of the camera and Mr Gardam thinking he was safe in the privacy of the TV scanner, for some reason came over loud and clear on the course's PA system.
In fact Mr Gardam has been deserving of a larger audience for sometime.
He and I worked together last year when I chaired TVS's political programme Questions.
‘Hello girlies!’
Bob cried as he wandered into the make up room on the first day.
Please do not refer to me as a girlie, I demanded of Bob, it's insulting.
‘Okay,’ said Bob affable, from now on I'll call you the old tart.’
and he did.
ENGLISH EXPERTS' DOUBLE DUTCH…
In the past week any number of interested parties have been granted the 30 second television sound bite in order to voice an opinion or two about the way English should be taught in our schools.
It is disturbing to think any of them are in a position of influence in the education field since to a man they seem only capable of talking in cliche-riddled sentences or civil service speak.
Poodle
If Nigel de Gruchy of the National Association of Schoolmasters and Women Teachers (and there's a catchy title if ever there was one) cannot weave any more magic into his protest than ‘The national curriculum has become a political football being booted up and down the right wing of the Conservative Party,’ he doesn't deserve to be taken seriously.
Likewise David Hart, General Secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, who came up with the poetic gem: ‘The Council is being made more and more the poodle of centralised government.’
Worse, David Pascal, chairman of the NCC, turns out to be a devotee of that well-known rightie novelist Tom Clancy, who presumably never splits his infinitives since this, along with a desire to train schoolchildren not to say ‘He done it’ appears to be the main components of Mr Pascal's plans for a more grammatical tomorrow.
Useful
Yet if children are to be taught a love of literature and language, they surely need to be inspired by those whose love of literature and language is apparent and infectious.
How much more useful if some of the country's most distinguished writers, journalists and Shakespearean actors were to decide to involve themselves in community service by visiting schools on a regular basis.
If such help was countered by generous tax concessions it might become a very attractive proposition indeed.
Charming state of affairs
ONCE or twice a year in some television studio or other I find myself bumping into Lord Parkinson.
We now greet each other like old friends.
Cecil, as I am now apt to cheekily address him, has an extremely clever knack of making you believe you are the one journalist he can really trust.
The one who understands what a simply horrid time he's had and how he now deserves to be understood and adored.
Charm is a very suspect quality.
Cecil has lorry-loads of it.
His autobiography is shortly to be published and its timing is impeccable.
How useful to reflect on a scandal of yesterday's Cabinet minister and observe how time plays a variety of interesting tricks.
Cecil, you will recall, did not choose as his mistress a bit-part actress with a silly surname.
Cecil chose what is generally believed to be safe stock.
His secretary and devoted Tory Party worker, Sara Keays.
He promised to leave his wife and marry her.
He changed his mind.
She not only got pregnant but also found it impossible to further her career in the Tory party.
So the formidable and fearless Ms Keays did what safe stock are not meant to do.
She fought back.
She revealed her side of the story to The Times.
Cecil resigned from the Cabinet and ever since has been playing to full houses when he addresses the Tory faithful.
Sara Keays has continued to fight her corner.
Any deviation from the truth of her tale which appears in a newspaper or magazine and a writ on behalf of Ms Keays is likely to follow.
Flora, the child of her union with Cecil, has been constantly in need of expert medical care.
The money Sara has received from newspapers as a result of libel actions has helped to pay for that care.
Charisma
Yet years on how come that it is Cecil who is regarded mostly as a flawed but well meaning sweety-pie and Miss Keays as someone who has all the charisma of an old battleaxe?
I suspect because Cecil, unlike David Mellor, worked out early on that appearing vulnerable was a far better ace card than a contrived display of clever-clogs defiance.
CECIL: Trusting
SARA: Safe stock
Maddening for Fergie
The Duchess of York is reported to be receiving psychiatric help and has therefore fallen victim of the classic dilemma.
If you are known to be seeing a shrink you are deemed to be going round the bend.
But if you are going round the bend and resist seeking any help you are deemed to be perfectly okay.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
STRIPTEASE was invented on February 9th 1893 when artist's model Mona removed her clothes for the entertainment of students.
She was fined £10 and caused a riot when crowds  besieged the police for stopping her performance.
PAP SNAP
AAAHH, poor Dave Stewart suffers from an unhealthy obsession.
Obviously, he believes everyone he meets is a doctor.
And without even waiting to be asked ‘what's up?’ he laps up the attention.
Prompting some to suggest that it's not only his tongue that should be examined.
Colin's agony over ecstasy
SHAMEN star Colin Angus has furiously slammed claims that his No. 1 hit is an advert for the dangerous drug ecstasy.
The frontman for the rave band has denied that the song, Ebeneezer Goode, is another name for ecstasy and that the lyrics glamorise the drug.
On one line of the song the group seem to be singing what sounds like: ‘E's are good.’
Fumes Colin: ‘We never intended the track to be an advert for ecstasy and it makes me really angry that people have taken that attitude about the song.
‘I am totally against unnatural substances.
I don't even smoke cigarettes or touch alcohol.’
Adds Colin: ‘What the song is about is this shady character, based on a lot of music people, who is the life and soul of the party.
And the line we sing is actually: ‘Ezeer Goode, Ezeer Goode, He's Ebeneezer Goode.’
‘People who think the song is about ecstasy have got the wrong end of the stick.’
Ecstasy, which has been illegal since 1977, is used by many on the rave scene.
Over the last three years it has killed at least 20 people.
NO DRUGS: Colin
DRILLER KILLER
CHART star Dr Alban trained for five years as a dentist — but gave up after a horrific teeth-pulling session.
Stockholm-based DJ Dr Alban — who has shot to No 4 with It's My Life admits: ‘I was drilling this guy's tooth when all of a sudden blood started spurting everywhere.
It's something that still gives me nightmares.’
Adds Dr Alban — real name Alban Nwapa: ‘After that I decided to quit working on teeth and start cutting records instead.
It's safer.’
LOAN QUEST
EAST 17 star Anthony Mortimer ran up debts of more than £2,000 in a bid to get a record deal for his band.
After taking out a bank loan, the 21-year-old DJ came close to quitting his pop quest when he was rejected by TEN record companies.
He says: ‘I gave up my day job to make the band a success.’
Despite riding high at No 14 with House Of Love, the star is still battling to pay off the loan.
Jason horror
TV  heart-throb Jason Priestly is haunted by the death of a close pal who was killed in a drink-driving accident.
The Beverly Hills 90210 star says he hasn't touched booze since attending his friend's funeral.
Reveals Jason: ‘He was thrown through the windscreen and decapitated.
At his funeral you could see where his head had been stitched back onto his body.
It taught me a lesson about drinking and driving that I'll never forget.’
‘Wherever Steve went Sarah would find him.
It was embarrasing’
FERGIE'S FLOOD OF PHONE CALLS TO HER SMOOTH TALKING TEXAN FRIEND
JAMES WHITTAKER
IF STEVE WYATT was taken aback by the Duchess of York's first phone call, he must have been even more surprised by her message.
Yes, Fergie told him, she wanted to to stay in close touch.
And she meant it.
On both sides of the Atlantic, friends of the smooth-talking Texan still remark on the flood of calls that poured in to Wyatt from the Duchess.
‘Wherever Steve was she would find him,’ one recalls.
‘Calls came thick and fast.
It was embarrassing.’
Even at work he was besieged.
‘It became a standing joke that if Steve walked into an office and the phone went within a couple of minutes, it meant the Duchess had tracked him down,’ a business colleague recalls.
‘Invariably we were right.’
Wyatt, son of a store company heiress and a father who served six years for the manslaughter of an 18-year-old student, would never have dreamt of complaining.
For the Jewish boy from Houston to be pursued by a duchess was a real feather in his cap.
It was good for business, too, not to mention socially.
So the lines between them stayed hot.
Meetings were arranged, outings were planned and tempting offers were put to a woman who felt neglected by a husband whose naval duties seemed to be more important to him that his wife.
The Prince knew about the liaison.
But he trusted Sarah implicitly and never suspected the relationship would develop the way it did.
When Wyatt sent a plane to take Sarah to the fabulous Gazelle D'Or hotel in Morocco for a long expensive weekend with their mutual actress friend Priscilla Phillips, Andrew did not object.
As it happened, Steve did not join Sarah that weekend.
But he was very much with her later that year when the two flew privately to the South of
France for the 60th birthday party of Steve's mother, Lynn, at a villa once owned by writer Somerset Maugham, which the Wyatts regularly rent.
Once again, Andrew happily approved the trip.
Such excursions spelled glamour and excitement for Fergie, something that the duke seemed incapable of providing at the time.
She was smitten with Steve — and showed it.
Naturally, the man who had wooed the beautiful Denice Lewis and could also count the exotic Pamella Bordes among his friends was delighted at this turn of events.
Particularly when Fergie — to the astonishment and great displeasure of Buckingham Palace staff — arranged for him to dine at the Queen's official London residence with the Iraqi oil minister.
The Duchess had never been liked by many courtiers and members of the Royal Household since the day of the engagement.
Now she was thoroughly distrusted too.
Not that Fergie cared.
She and Wyatt continued to party together, chat regularly on the phone and meet up at friends' weekend homes.
Discretion meant nothing to her.
Indeed, at times she even seemed to go out of her way to draw attention to herself.
One such occasion was on an outing with Steve to the Apollo  Theatre in London's Shaftesbury Avenue to see Peter O'Toole in Jeffrey Bernard Is Unwell.
Not for Fergie creeping to her seat with her escort after the lights had gone down and slipping out again just before the final curtain.
Rather she seemed determined to draw attention to herself — and to wreck the night for other theatregoers.
‘The Duchess had obviously seen the show before,’ a member of the audience recalls, ‘because every time a good line was begun by one of the actors she would finish it off quite loudly.
She completely ruined the evening for many of us.
‘But, more than that, she seemed to want everyone to know that she was sitting with somebody other than her husband.
‘She never stopped chattering through the entire performance and of course that made everybody look at her.’
Her liaison with Wyatt continued apace until late in 1990 when the Duchess finally came under official pressure to cool it.
For once she took notice and Wyatt faded from the scene…only to be replaced by another.
John Bryan was not just Steve's good friend but also a distant relation.
Wyatt had introduced Sarah to him and, as her relationship with Prince Andrew disintegrated, Fergie came to rely on Johnny more and more.
By now she was fatally flawed.
Those who hold the royal family dear could hardly wait for her downfall.
In January this year those photos of Wyatt with Fergie and her children were conveniently found in an apartment once rented by the Texan and ended up with a newspaper.
The end was near.
It came in March with the announcement that the Duke and Duchess were to separate, coupled with a vicious personal attack on Fergie by the Queen's press secretary Charles Anson.
By now Johnny Bryan, her ‘financial adviser’, was the man constantly at her side.
They thought they were untouchable.
Bryan even came to my home and scoffed at me for suggesting that he and the Duchess were lovers.
Without blushing, he told me in my own drawing room: ‘I am a financial adviser to both the Duke and Duchess.
‘The Queen herself has insisted that I get involved in all aspects of the negotiations at all levels.
‘They have asked me to do what I can to help and I am happy to do so.’
When I tackled him on stories that he and Fergie were having an affair, he dismissed the suggestion as ‘completely absurd’.
‘I am acting in a purely professional manner.
I really don't care if people think I am having an affair with her.
We know what is what.’
Andrew and Fergie, he told me, falsely, were still trying to get back together.
I asked him if he thought there was a chance of this.
He replied: ‘No, zero.’
Well, at least he got that right.
And what does the Duchess think of Johnny this morning?
Says a friend: ‘She's besotted with him.’
CLOSE TOUCH Steve Wyatt with Princess Bea.
He was seeing so much of Fergie he was almost one of the family
EXPOSED: The topless Duchess enjoys a kiss and a cuddle with her Johnny.
These Mirror's pictures were to rock the world
CLOSE FRIENDS: For a while, Fergie was seldom far away from Steve Wyatt
The truth about THOSE pictures…
JAMES WHITAKER
IT WOULD be fun to let the stories grow about how I obtained THOSE pictures of the Duchess of York cavorting topless with her ludicrously self-styled ‘financial adviser’ Johnny Bryan.
They get more entertaining by the day.
Some say that Bryan, the photographer (who many believe was Daniel Angeli) and I were in league and that a deal was struck whereby Bryan would kiss Fergie, the snapper would take the pictures, I would provide publicity.
Then we would share the profits — nice because, worldwide, they must be more than £1 million.
Others claim that I went to St Tropez on a tip-off, bumped into Angeli and only then struck up a deal for the Daily Mirror to have exclusive pictures.
Most intriguing, perhaps, is the theory put forward by the Duchess of York herself.
It is that Lady Susan Hussey, the Queen's senior lady-in-waiting, rang me to give directions to find the fateful villa, 12 miles from St Tropez.
Wrong — although I know Fergie still doesn't believe me.
The truth is much more simple.
Out of the blue, I received a phone call from an old, trusted contact.
I was asked if I was interested in pictures of Fergie, topless, in the arms of a man believed to be John Bryant (yes, my contact didn't know how to spell his name).
I said I was.
Sometimes I can be quite bright.
We talked pictures, we talked price, and we talked about flying to Paris next day to see them — and then see where they were taken.
I arrived at the villa at about 5.30pm and was led straight to the spot.
We were some 4-500 yards from the villa, not in the garden as has been repeatedly suggested.
And our view was perfect.
Forget all those tales of our taking our position at dawn and staying there hardly daring to move.
Our cover was terrific and neither Scotland Yard bodyguard had a chance of spotting us.
We were even able to come and go as we pleased, taking full advantage of the splendid local restaurants.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
LLOYDS Bank apologised yesterday after its cash machines blew a fuse on Saturday and refused to take Access cards.
A computer error knocked out the system for the second time in a month.
It follows similar problems with NatWest's Access network.
Shares of Clarke Foods'- the Lyons Maid ice cream firm- plunged from 64p to 21p after the company cancelled a divi increase.
Poor weather since late July has frozen ice cream sales leaving it with large unsold stocks.
TYRE SALES TAKE A SLIDE
The recession is forcing hard-up motorists to cut corners on safety.
So says Tom Farmer, boss of Kwik-Fit, Britain's biggest car tyres and exhaust fitter.
Sales have slumped which, he says, means ‘there are a lot of cars out there using illegal tyres,’
This slashed profits by 41 per cent to £9,700,000 in six months.
But the company is hoping tougher tyre laws coming into force next month will boost sales.
Predators prey on pensioners
BEWARE of predatory pensions salesmen who have collected fat fees by wrongly advising workers to swap company schemes for private ones.
They cynically target the newly redundant and suggest a complete break with their old firm.
Other workers frightened that they might become victims of a Maxwell-style rip-off have been told that a personal plan is ‘safer’.
This has started the industry's watchdogs Fimbra and Lautro barking.
Growls Fimbra: ‘Pensions advice should benefit the investor and not the adviser.’
Steve Bee, pensions boss of the Pru, warns: ‘It's absolute madness to move from a company scheme to a personal scheme.
‘You lose the value of an employer's contribution and often other benefits as well.
‘Before you change to a personal plan you must compare like with like:
‘DOES the personal scheme look after the wife and kids?
Is it inflation proof?
HOW firm is the guarantee of the final pension?
Sun Life's pensions manager Tony Tollerton agrees that people over 40 are usually better off with their company pension.
‘Personal plans are best for youngsters who plan a number of career moves,’ he says.
FIGHTING FOR OUR OLD FOLK
BRITAIN'S State pensions are among the lowest in Europe, but now a new, Devon-based, pressure group called Linkage is campaigning for old folk.
Chairman Peter Hawes, 33, says: ‘We shall fight for the basic rights of our elders.’
DETAILS: Linkage: 89 Mount Pleasant Road, Brixham, Devon TQ5 9RU.
Tel: 0803 854157
Building a dream
HOW TO GET KITTED OUT WITH YOUR CUT-PRICE IDEAL HOME
JOHN HUSBAND /WILLIAM KEENAN
THERE has never been a better time to build a dream home at a bargain price.
The recession has sent the cost of materials tumbling and skilled tradesmen are queuing for work.
John Cleland, 40, a garage proprietor and professional racing driver for Vauxhall bought a plot of land with his wife Stephanie, for £10,000 at Peebles, near Edinburgh four years ago.
Even though the recession had not started to force prices down then, they spent only £68,000 erecting their four-bedroomed tower house, which overlooks a salmon river and rolling countryside.
On completion it was valued at £120,000.
The Clelands live there with their four children and John reckons the property is now worth £250,000.
John and Stephanie used a kit home, which included plans for the traditional Scottish tower.
Their builder clad the tower in old stone to give it an ancient appearance.
Self-build is the cheapest way to get a dream home to your own specification.
You should save at least a third on the cost of an equivalent  conventionally built house.
But before raising the money you must decide how much work you are going to do yourself.
Then talk to a building society at the planning stage.
Abbey National offer self-build mortgages, which can either be straight repayments or endowment or pension linked.
You can do everything from digging the foundations building the walls and putting in the plumbing and electrics.
But that's the hard way and takes a long time.
Or you can design your home and act as site manager, hiring tradesman to do the job for you.
The easiest way is to buy a kit house, like John and Stephanie.
They come in all shapes and sizes, from spacious Queen Anne farmhouses to two-bedroom bungalows.
Kit-house companies will help you design your home and provide useful advice.
Many will also help you find the site and get planning permission.
When you have decided what you want, a kit company will build the parts in its factory and then supply a complete weather-proofed structure, including the roof.
Depending on size, this takes around a week to erect.
All you or your workmen have to do is supply a concrete base and clad the outside walls in brick or stone and give it the finishing touches.
You can see the latest kits at the National Self-Build Homes Show, which opens tomorrow at London's Alexandra Palace and continues until September 20.
Adults £5, children, students and pensioners £2.50.
HALF-PRICE entry for Mirror readers using the coupon below.
TOWERING PROFIT: The Cleland's super kit home
SAVING GRACE: Cut costs by doing your own building work
Bones of contention
Russia set to give up one of its last grisly secrets…
TESTS MAY CLEAR UP THE MYSTERY
GEOFF SUTTON
A BAG of muddied human bones and hair could hold the key to one of the greatest mysteries of the 20th Century, it was revealed yesterday.
Scientists believe remains dug up in a Siberian forest could be those of the last Russian Tsar and his family who were butchered by rebel guards after the 1917 communist revolution.
The bones were last night flown to Britain for forensic tests.
And if they are genuine it could open up old wounds in Russia where there is still bitter feeling over how the execution has been constantly covered-up by communists, including leader Boris Yeltsin.
Overthrown Tsar Nicholas II, his wife Alexandra and three of their five children were slaughtered on July 17, 1918, to stop them becoming a focal point for opposition to communist leaders Lenin and Trotsky.
The Romanov family were marched into the basement of a house then turned to face a dozen executioners jostling in the doorway for room to shoot.
For 20 minutes the death squad blazed away, but most of the bullets failed to penetrate their victims' heavy vests of jewels and medals.
So the executioners finished them off with bayonets.
The bodies were then cut up, burned, doused in hydrochloric acid and dumped in a pit before hand grenades were tossed in.
Hopes
The Communist government kept the whereabouts of the mass grave secret from the Soviet people.
But many leading scientists are convinced the find at Yekaterinburg will end the mystery.
They pin their hopes on DNA tests — genetic fingerprinting — in which the bones will be matched to blood and hair from the Tsar's surviving relatives.
The tests at Aldermaston Forensic Laboratory, near Reading, Berks, will be like those used to identify the remains of Nazi death camp butcher Josef Mengele last year.
The DNA in the Angel of Death's skeleton was matched to his son's.
Aldermaston scientists will try to do the same with hair from Anna Anderson who claimed, until her death in America eight years ago, that she was the Tsar's daughter Anastasia — the sole survivor of the massacre.
The Tsar's great nephew, London banker Prince Rostislav Romanov, has also volunteered to be used as a guinea pig.
Even the Royal Family could be asked to take part.
The Queen is related to the dead Tsar through her grandfather King George V, who was a first cousin.
And Prince Philip's ties are even closer — his great grandmother was the murdered Tsarina's mother.
But despite the excitement among scientists, many historians are not impressed.
Lies
British investigative writer Anthony Summers says: ‘I think we have to be extremely cautious.
Hundreds if not thousands of people were shot and buried in the woods where these bones were found.
‘Among them were rich aristocrats who would have had the same fine dental work with gold fillings seen in these so-called remains of the Imperial family.
‘Russian history has been totally rewritten, with lies upon lies and even with this DNA testing, there is unlikely to be a definite conclusion.’
Back in Russia, the find has stirred up royal fever — but not everyone is enjoying it.
Like Russian president Boris Yeltsin who still stands accused of continuing the cover-up over the execution while he was a local Communist party boss in the 70s.
When the surviving Romanovs asked for the house where the Tsar was killed to be turned into a museum, Yeltsin and his Politburo colleagues had it demolished.
But royalists are determined the same thing will not happen to the grave.
authorities in Moscow plan a showpiece funeral for the family — and even a ‘theme park’ on the site where they were dug up to commemorate the atrocity.
And plans are already afoot to to build a church there called the Cathedral On Spilt Blood.
Edvard Radzinsky — an author who spent 25 years researching the Tsar's life — says: ‘There is also a huge nostalgia for the monarchy.
The people want something to believe in.’
The tsar's great nephew Prince Rostislav Romanov agrees.
‘If the bones are my family's I'd like to see them have a decent Christian burial in a Russian Orthodox church.
They were murdered in cold blood.
‘It will close a terrible chapter of history and we can get on with better things.’
VICTIMS: The killing of Nicholas II and his family shocked the world.
Now scientists believe they have found their remains
MIX ‘N’ MATCH FOR NORMA
ANNE ROBINSON
WHEN Mrs Norma Major first came to our attention, she was reported to either make her own clothes or buy them off the peg from John Lewis.
Maybe she did both.
One method, frankly, being barely indistinguishable from the other.
After that, as I recall, she moved on to Windsmoor and Alexon.
Now she is truly in her stride on the front of the October Tatler in a mixture of Nicole Farhi, Mulberry and Jasper Conran.
One does not wish to be discouraging, but Nicole Farhi, Mulberry, Conran or whatever — it all somehow looks like Windsmoor on Norma.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
Boy!
George is ‘married’
BOY GEORGE has revealed that he and his lover see themselves as a married couple.
‘My boyfriend's called Michael and we've been together seven years.
That's married, isn't it?’ he said in The  Independent .
‘I didn't think we'd be together for so long but we've grown up together and been through some brutal things.’
Meanwhile, vegetarian George has turned down £20,000 to sing at a wedding in Paris because the bridegroom is a butcher.
He says: ‘It would have been very bad to perform at a butcher's wedding.’
Clint is charged
INSPIRAL Carpets keyboardist Clint Boon had the shock of his life while rehearsing with the rest of the band.
Clint, at No 28 with Generations, says: ‘I was playing my keyboard when I felt this jolt of electricity soar through my body.
‘As it didn't hurt too much I thought it would be fun to experiment a little more.
I decided to see what would happen if I pressed my lips against the microphone and placed my hands on the stool.
‘I got thrown across the room and everything went white.
It was painful and very terrifying.
‘I'm lucky to be alive.
I won't be doing any electricity experiments ever again.’
Jennie's terror
TV ACTRESS Jennie Garth was pulled unconscious from the water after a hair-raising film stunt backfired.
The blonde Beverly Hills 90210 beauty was racing on a powerful jet-ski at Malibu Beach when she suddenly lost control of the machine.
‘It was terrifying,’ she reveals.
‘The jet-ski shot out of the water and hit me on the head.
I was unconscious in the water for several seconds before a rescue team arrived.’
TALES LASHED
TOP model Claudia Schiffer has slammed gossip alleging she posed for a series of kinky snaps.
Claudia, 21, reportedly the highest-paid model in the world, says: ‘Those stories that I was pictured with whips are complete rubbish.
‘I did work with photographer Helmut Newton but there were no whips involved.
That's just not my style.’
GOSSIP: Claudia
U2 were left red-faced with embarrassment in Berlin when they joined a demo celebrating German reunification.
Bono says: ‘We were walking along with all these sad, dour-looking people.
Then we realised we were in the WRONG parade.
We'd joined a demo of people who wanted to put the wall back up and return to communism!’
We're going to put the bite on Bulldog
Gladiators take on grunt ‘n’ groan brigade in a giant head to head
TONY PURNELL
MOVE over The British Bulldog, Hitman Hart, Ultimate Warrior and the rest of the grunt and groan hulks…the Gladiators are on the march.
The new breed of super heroes are set to wrestle the macho crown from the champions of the World Wrestling Federation even BEFORE they start taking on all comers in telly's toughest endurance test next month.
They have already got a fan club.
T-shirts and posters are selling like hot cakes, and books, stickers, videos and even a monthly magazine are on the way.
A multi-million pound mass merchandising machine is behind the spectacular Gladiators series and plans include action toys of the Do-or-Die Dozen.
Six of the best bicep-bulging blokes and six knockout girls were hand-picked from body builders and bodies beautiful to star in a British version of the smash hit American Gladiators.
They will do battle in a series of daredevil duels with 24 volunteers from all over the country chosen for their speed, stamina, fitness and agility from over 2,000 hopefuls.
All the Gladiators have in common with the canvas kings of grapple are comic book names.
Muscles
The leader of the pack is the 6 ft 4 ins tall Shadow an international weight lifter described as 19 stone of sheer muscle and the rest of the he-men are Saracen, Wolf, Hawk, Warrior and Cobra.
The girls answer to Scorpio, Lightning, Flame, Phoenix, Jet and Panther.
The showdown will be hosted at a respectable distance by TV weathergirl Ulrika Jonsson and soccer ace John Fashanu.
Events include Hang Tough — a gruelling game of aerial chess — and Atlaspheres, a battle fought in giant globes.
Says Rear-Of-The-year Ulrika who keeps in shape swimming and horseriding:
‘We want viewers to look on and say ‘I could do that.
I could take on a Gladiator and probably beat them!’’
One of the surprise contestants who have a chance to win £5,000 and a trip to Hollywood to take part in American Gladiators is Derek Collett from Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire who weighs in at a mere 11st 10lb.
The relatively puny father-of-three could have been forgiven for having second thoughts when he was picked.
Victim
He found himself sandwiched between man-mountains Saracen and Hawk.
But Derek, 33, was quietly confident when they met and vowed: ‘I'm determined to give them a run for their money.’
Meanwhile, Hawk — 6ft tall with a 56in chest — an inspector for Welsh Water when he's not beating innocent victims to a pulp, spends 12 hours a week in the gym to build up those biceps.
‘I have worked hard to build a body like this,’ said the 26-year-old from Caerphilly in South Wales.
And as for Derek's hopes?
‘Well he might be a bit faster because he's lighter — but in most of the games he doesn't stand a chance, said Hawk.’
Viewers will get a chance to see how little Derek gets on when the six-part £2 million London Weekend Television series hits the screen next month.
Producer Nigel Lythgoe is confident it will be a big success.
‘The reaction when we filmed at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham was fantastic he said.
Mobbed
The girls are just as popular as the guys.
Scorpio, a former school high jump champ, gymnast and one time Miss Isle of Man said: ‘We couldn't believe it.
We were mobbed wherever we went.
The 5ft 9in model and actress with a 38-23-36 figure said it made a change for women to be seen as tough and strong.
‘Most of the action you see on TV is reserved for tough guys like Sylvester Stallone.
‘Women are usually the weak ones who get rescued all the time.’
TIGHT FIT: It's a bit of a squeeze for Derek between Hawk and Saracen, left, but sexy Panther muscles in nicely between Saracen and Shadow
SWINGING IN THE PAIN: The super-fit American Gladiators get to grips with their challengers on the rings and in the Duel
MESSING ABOUT AT NO. 10
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
THANKS to the economic miracle, we've sold our house after two years of trying.
We've spent the first month in our new house with an assortment of builders, damp-proofers, wood-wormers, plasterers, plumbers and painters.
So for once I have some sympathy with John Major, who is enduring similar torture at Number 10.
It may explain why he is making such a mess of the job.
How can he be expected to run the country when half his time is spent waiting for people who never turn up?
When they do, he's probably so busy making tea, answering their demands for more sugar, and looking for his favourite mug in the debris that he can't concentrate on his red boxes.
The ‘phone is another problem.
Helmut Kohl's calls to brief Major on the British economy are doubtless answered by a builder screaming at the German Chancellor to speak English, or ordering him to get off the line so they can deal with the other jobs they've got on the go.
Mr Major must also be wondering why, if the recession is so bad, so many firms never bother to finish the job and so give themselves a chance of being paid.
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
EVEREST CASHES IN ON CHIPS
BRITS seem to be coping with the recession by eating more cheap nosh — egg and chips.
Everest Foods, Britain's second largest supplier of frozen chips and a big producer of fresh eggs, yesterday reported record end-of-year profits of £3.31 million, up 26 per cent on sales of £33.81 million, which had risen 12 per cent.
They sold an amazing 43,000 tons of frozen chips last year, a 25 per cent increase on the previous year.
Despite a very difficult market, Everest's fresh eggs brought in £400,000.
As a result, Everest have now invested £6 million in a new plant — so they can turn out even more frozen chips.
Kicking up a big stink
BUMPER sales of Ladybird kids’ clothes boosted half-year profits for the Kingfisher group by four per cent to £64.9 million.
This is despite a stinking row after the perfume industry cut off supplies to Superdrug for slashing scent prices by nearly a third.
Kingfisher owns Superdrug  and Woolworths and hopes a government investigation will sort out the mess.
CHILD'S PAY: Ladybird kids' clothes are booming
THE miserable weather of the last two months hit ice-cream sales at Thorntons, the sweet shop chain.
But it seems we consoled ourselves by scoffing more chocs.
Summer sales of new brands were five times higher than expected.
WIN Ringside seats for Eubank fight
SECONDS out for another great boxing contest!
We're looking for 20 winners and they'll each receive a pair of £50 ringside tickets for Saturday's Daily Mirror-sponsored clash between Chris Eubank and Tony Thornton at Glasgow's Scottish Exhibition Centre when Chris defends his WBO super middleweight title.
Punching postman Tony Thornton says he's going to stamp on Eubank — but Eubank plans to return the challenger to sender.
For YOUR chance to see the action just phone this number 0891 111 993.
You will hear two simple questions.
Leave your answers plus your name, address and daytime telephone number on the line.
The winners will be chosen at random by our computer.
Lines close at midnight tonight.
The winners will be notified tomorrow and they can pick up their tickets at the box office.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute all other times.
TICKETS can be purchased from the box office on 041 204 2220.
EUBANK
Break away to Butlin's for £16.50
See the stars and have fun at a bargain price
ROLL UP, roll up, for fun-packed, star-studded autumn or winter breaks with Butlin's — for just £16.50.
Together with Britain's top holiday company we're offering a staggering 125,000 three to five night breaks at a price that won't break the bank.
All the holidays are designed to offer non-stop entertainment.And the price — just a sparkling £16.50 per person.
Take a look at what is included in the special price…sub-tropical waterworlds, sports, children's clubs, karaoke, feature films, bars, dancing, cabaret and fabulous shows.
It adds up to unbeatable value.
PLUS Butlin's has lined up a galaxy of stars.
Some of Britain's top comedians will be appearing, as well top singers like the Stylistics, Chubby Checker and Ben E King.
These superb breaks will be available for just £16.50 per person self catering (based on four sharing) or £40 per adult half board (children under 14 half price).
Butlin's has five spectacular Holiday Worlds so there's sure to be one near you.
They are: Southcoast World, Bognor Regis, West Sussex; Somerwest World, Minehead, Somerset; Funcoast World, Skegness, Lincolnshire; Starcoast World, Pwllheli, North Wales; Wonderwest World, Ayr, Scotland.
IT'S so easy to claim one of these amazing star breaks, exclusively with the Daily Mirror.
Just cut out and keep today's Token No. 4.
You will need three  separately numbered tokens to take up the special offer at Butlin's Holiday Worlds.
If you missed the special Butlin's guide in Tuesday's Daily Mirror make sure you get tomorrow's for booking details and the special offer dates.
LAPPING IT UP: Head for one of five spectacular Holiday Worlds where the good times never stop
DAMNED
by their own words
DAVID BRADSHAW
FOR almost three years John Major and Norman Lamont have been trotting out smug assurances that all was well in Tory Britain.
They didn't quite tell us that we'd never had it so good, but the impression they gave was that if we trusted Honest John and Uncle Norman to look after the nation's piggy bank, all would be well.
This morning, those words from the men who betrayed Britain have a hollow ring…
There is no recession.
— Major, November 15, 1989
I don't expect we will have a recession.
— Major, December 24, 1989
I am confident the period of low growth will be short-lived…no one need have any doubt about that.
— Major, March 20, 1990.
I don't see any particular reason to panic because what we knew had to happen is now beginning to happen.
— Major, November 4, 1990.
Britain will probably be in a modest recession in the second half of this year, but should recover by the second half of 1991. — Major, November 11, 1990.
There is reason to think that the recession will be relatively shallow and short-lived — Lamont, December 12, 1990.
There is certainly no question of a slump or the economy going into free fall.
— Lamont, January 2, 1991.
There are good reasons to expect the recovery will begin around the middle of this year, although initially it may be slow.
— Lamont, March 19, 1991
Britain's position is strengthening month by month, while other countries face rising inflation and rising interest rates.
— Major, April 12, 1991.
Rising unemployment and the recession have been the price that we've had to pay to get inflation down.
That is a price well worth paying.
— Lamont, May 16, 1991
The economy will begin to pull out of recession in the second quarter.
— Lamont, June 4, 1991
Better economic news is on the way.
Recovery will come this year.
— Lamont, July 24, 1991
We are now seeing the economy turn round.
The country is coming out of this difficult recession and moving into a more stable situation.
— Major September 6, 1991.
It is clear that  Britain is coming out of recession and confidence is returning…the green shoots of economic spring are appearing once again.
— Lamont, October 9, 1991
There is every reason to believe that the recession is coming to an end.
— Lamont, November 8, 1991 All the classic ingredients for recovery are now in place.
— Lamont, December 20, 1991.
It is grotesque to portray me as some sort of blue-eyed optimist.
— Lamont, December 31, 1991
We are now seeing the first signs of recovery and all forecasters expect to see our economy growing again in the coming year.
— Major, December 31, 1991
There is good reason for believing that the recovery will be firmly established in the course of 1992. — Lamont, January 22, 1992
Britain is poised for a strong recovery.
All it needs is the confidence a Conservative victory would bring.
— Major, March 3, 1992
We are now seeing the economy turn round.
— Major, April 6, 1992
Britain is now ready to move forwards when are others are sliding backwards.
All around us the signs are there…so vote Conservative on Thursday and the recovery will continue on Friday.
— Major April 7, 1992
I am more confident than ever that recovery is under way.
— Major, April 28, 1992.
I think you can see we are on the road to recovery.
— Major, June 18, 1992.
Clearly we have come through the worst of the recession.
— Major, July 8, 1992.
I don't want to do something that will be acclaimed today and turn out to be disastrous next year.
— Major, July 12, 1992.
Comparisons with the 1930s are ridiculous.
— Lamont, July 26, 1992
PAUL FOOT
MAJOR'S PAIN IN SPAIN
ANIMAL rights campaigner Vicki Moore was so upset by cruelty to cows and bulls during the festivities at Candelada, near Avila, Spain, that she wrote to the Prime Minister about it.
She reminded Mr Major that he had spent the festive weekend in the village.
The villagers, she wrote, ‘felt that the presence of yourself and your family gave a mark of approbation to all village activities.
Unfortunately, this included their abuse of animals.’
Her letter was passed to the Foreign Office, and quickly answered by the Minister for Europe, Mr Tristan Garel-Jones.
The Minister droned on at length about all the things Britain was doing for animal welfare in Europe.
Somehow, he forgot to deal with the allegation that the Prime Minister's stay in Candelada gave the ‘mark of approbation’ to the animal abuse.
Could this forgetfulness possibly be connected with the identity of Mr Major's generous host in Candelada?
Mr Tristan Garel-Jones.
NOT GUILTY: FIVE YEARS IN JAIL
IN JULY last year I wrote about the brothers Peter and David Mason and their father Peter, who had been banged up in Liverpool jail for more than a year, though they hadn't been convicted of anything.
I was impressed by a deluge of letters from the Masons which assured me that both men were entirely innocent of importing cannabis as the police alleged.
Why were the men not bailed, I asked.
No one would reply.
Now consider what has happened since.
The trial started 13 months after the men's arrest.
It was abandoned after eight weeks because the jury saw papers they shouldn't have done.
The second trial was going well for the Masons when it, too, was stopped after 11 weeks.
A juryman alleged he had been paid money.
The third trial started in February this year, and lasted until the end of July.
Peter Mason, senior, Peter Mason junior and his brother David were all acquitted on all charges.
The three innocent men spent a total of five years in jail.
Peter senior spent the last 16 months in the prison hospital.
Before a word of evidence was heard against him, his restaurant, Masons, was flogged off for the Crown Prosecution Service by receivers Touche Ross, who pocketed £73,000 in fees.
UNJUSTLY JAILED: Peter Mason with sons David and Peter
THE THINGS THEY SAY
‘FEMINISISM is not about equal rights for women.
It is a socialist anti-family political movement that encourages women to leave their husbands, kill their children, practise witchcraft, destroy capitalism and become lesbians.’— Pat Robertson, US TV evangelist and campaigner for the re-election of President Bush in the Los Angeles Times, August 27.
FINGERS ON THE TRIGGER
I WAS amazed at the way almost all the British newspapers combined to blame the shooting of peaceful demonstrators in the Ciskei, South Africa, on the dead demonstrators.
Just in case anyone believes the propaganda that the Ciskei is a ‘homeland’ and its puppet dictator Brigadier Oupa Gqoza are ‘independent’of white racist South Africa, here are a few facts about the Ciskei army.
Commander: Brigadier Marius Oelschig, seconded from (and paid by) the South African army.
Second-in-  Command : Colonel Dirk van der Bank, seconded from (and paid by) the South African army.
Chief of Military Intelligence: Colonel Ockert Swanepoel, seconded from South African military intelligence.
Chief of Staff (Finance): Colonel Raymond Williams, seconded from (and paid by) the South African army.
Chief of Staff (Logistics): Colonel Marti duToit, seconded from (and paid by) the South African army.
Commander of the Air Force: Colonel r.
Penhall, seconded from (and paid by) the South African air force.
KUNG PHOOEY!
Karate evidence in Wallace case set for the chop
STARTLING new evidence in the case of former Army information officer Colin Wallace goes to the Home Secretary on Monday.
It casts more doubt on Wallace's conviction in 1981 of the killing of his friend, antique dealer Jonathan Lewis.
It is backed by opinions from two barristers — one a QC — calling on Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke to refer the case to the Court of Appeal.
Jonathan Lewis's drowned body was found in the river Arun on August 8, 1980.
That same evening Home Office pathologist Dr Iain West carried out an autopsy.
Sussex police put out a press statement that they had ‘ruled out foul play’.
But Dr West carried out two more autopsies in the next fortnight.
He concluded that Lewis had been knocked unconscious before he drowned.
Colin Wallace, who had seen Lewis on the day he vanished, was charged with murder.
He was convicted of manslaughter and sent to prison for 10.
Nose
After a chance conversation with an American military policeman, Dr West concluded that Lewis had probably been hit by a ‘karate blow’ with the heel of the hand to the base of the nose.
At Wallace's trial, Dr West said the force of the blow had fractured Lewis' skull.
The ‘karate’ theory was accompanied by press pictures of Colin Wallace in full Army parachute uniform, wearing an SAS badge.
Though Wallace had no training in unarmed combat, the impression remained that he knew all about karate.
Now two experts totally reject the ‘karate’ theory.
In a special report for Wallace's lawyers, senior Home Office pathologist Professor Bernard Knight, of the University of Wales, writes:
‘I have never seen a fracture of the anterior fossa of the skull due to a blow on the nose…
I find it almost impossible to accept that such an injury…could have occurred without extensive bruising and swelling of the nose and probably fracture or disruption of structures within the nose and associated tissues.’
Lewis's nose suffered no such damage.
Professor Knight concludes that it was ‘far more likely’ that the injury was caused ‘from a fall on the back’.
Mr Adrian Sugar, consultant oral and maxillofacial surgeon at St Lawrence Hospital, Chepstow, who has dealt with thousands of facial injuries, concludes:
‘I find myself in complete agreement with Professor Knight and would go further in saying that it is not credible that a karate chop to the base of the nose could cause a fracture of the anterior cranial fossa without considerable damage to the nasal structure.’
Frank
Both experts discussed the case with Dr West before writing their reports.
In a long, frank interview with me this week at Guy's Hospital, where he is now the head of Forensic  Medicine , Dr West stuck to his original view.
He told me:
‘I've never held the view that the karate blow was the only explanation of what happened to Mr Lewis.
And anybody who says he's absolutely certain is a fool.
I admit that there must be some degree of doubt, because I've never seen this injury anywhere else in isolation.
‘I've seen one other case — where a woman fell on her face — but in that case she had other facial  injuries which Lewis didn't have.
‘But I just can't accept any other explanation of what happened.
I can't accept Professor Knight's theory of the fall on the back.
Dr West was supported at the time by Professor Keith Mant, who is now retired.
He told me this week that he was convinced by West's ‘karate theory’ at the time.
He also agreed he'd never seen a skull fracture caused by a blow to the nose.
Thus four of the leading experts in this field — Knight, Sugar, West and Mant — with a combined experience of more than 100 years of forensic medicine, have never seen or read of a single case of an injury like the one which the jury were told knocked out Jonathan Lewis.
In a strongly-worded opinion, endorsed by Peter Thornton QC, barrister Stephen Irwin points out that if Lewis was knocked out by falling on his back, the whole case against Wallace was destroyed.
‘It seems very likely,’ concludes Mr Irwin, ‘that had this evidence been available to the defence team at the time of the trial, the outcome would have been different.
I believe the matter should now be ventilated by an appeal.’
Colin Wallace, who two years ago got £30,000 in compensation for being wrongly dismissed by the Army, says, simply:
‘I did not kill Jonathan.
I want the case re-opened, so we can find out who did.’
COLIN WALLACE: Determined to discover who really killed his friend
EMPHATIC: SUGAR
STILL SURE: West
HOW YOU CAN HELP
YOUR donations have been flooding in since we launched our Mirror Woman Rescue Chiswick Appeal in July.
The grand total now stands at £16,000.
But more money is needed to guarantee the future of its four refuges, which annually help 400 desperate women and children, and its 24-hour crisis line, which receives 10,000 calls a year.
You can help by sending a donation to: Mirror Woman Chiswick Appeal Fund, Mirror Group  Newspapers ltd, 33 Holborn, London EC1P 1DQ.
Why do these men have this need for control?
DI PAYS SECRET VISIT TO BATTERED WIVES' REFUGE…
AND ONLY THE MIRROR IS INVITED
QUESTION FROM SHOCKED PRINCESS
NOREEN TAYLOR
IT WAS one of the Princess of Wales's private working days — the sort of day she likes best.
So on Tuesday morning she popped into an ordinary-looking terraced house in West London and, over a cup of tea at a kitchen table, sat listening as a group of battered wives confided their problems to her.
This is the kind of visit Diana now sees as her proper work — meeting people in need in conditions that are as simple and informal as possible.
At the Chiswick Family Rescue in West London — a centre that almost closed but has survived thanks to the donations of Mirror Woman readers — she heard how abused women had sought and found sanctuary.
There with the Princess's permission as the only journalist, I found it a fascinating insight into how Diana conducts a part of her life that has until now been comparatively secret.
As the Mirror revealed last month, Diana sent a cheque to the Chiswick Rescue.
Then, two weeks ago, her private secretary, Patrick Jephson, rang the Rescue's director, Sandra Horley, asking if the Princess could come round and find out about their work.
There was only one condition.
Could Sandra please not say a word to anyone, not even the women or the other rescue workers?
The Princess, uncomfortable with her Diana The Goddess image, has found a way of working that depends on a low-key approach, without cameras, excited crowds, and all the pressures the usual public engagement involves.
So when her car drew up outside the refuge house on Tuesday there wasn't a soul around.
With her were only her private secretary and the ever-present detective.
Diana dashed to the front door wearing the kind of understated clothes appropriate for meeting women who are practically penniless — an ordinary black blazer over a plain white top and a black and white striped skirt.
Sandra was waiting at the door.
She asked: ‘Would you like to come up to the top of the house, to my office?
It's not very glamorous, I'm afraid, but I'll explain everything to you.’
The Princess had spent the previous day reading Love and Pain, Sandra's book on violent relationships, and was able to speak with some understanding about domestic violence.
They sat together for around 20 minutes while Sandra outlined some of the worst cases of brutality.
Occasionally, the Princess would wince in horror as she heard how women often arrived, their faces swollen, their ribs broken.
‘It's not only the physical side,’ Diana said.
‘It's their self-esteem that suffers, too, isn't it?
Why do these men have this need to control?’
In a small adjoining room next door a group of women who act as counsellors and administrators were waiting to meet her.
‘Now tell me what you all get up to,’ Diana greeted them.
And it was obvious that she really cared.
When she meets those who, through no fault of their own, have become the victims of society, the Princess behaves quietly, sensitively, trying hard not to overwhelm.
For instance, sitting down with some of the battered wives, she leaned across the table, chin on hand, asking each woman in turn: ‘How long can you stay here?
Are you worried about finding a place to live?’
One woman told how her husband constantly berated her, calling her ‘a fat bitch’ when she weighed 5 1/2st.
The Princess groaned in horror.
Another said: ‘I thought no one had suffered like me until I came here.’
‘Yes,’ Diana nodded, ‘isolation is a terrible thing.’
She went on to talk to children in the refuge creche and to ask the helpers if they managed to leave work problems behind when they returned home in the evening —‘otherwise, it must get so depressing for you.’
Her visit lasted just over an hour and a quarter, and she left holding a birthday card for Prince Harry that had been made by the refuge children.
One battered wife said: ‘She doesn't say much, but it's all in her eyes as though she understands.’
Sandra Horley agreed that Diana had all the makings of a professional counsellor.
‘She is a great listener,’ Sandra said.
‘She is non-judgmental and, most importantly, she has a big heart.’
CARING: Diana sees helping others as her proper work
SHARING: The Princess is happiest when she can shed her ‘goddess’ image
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
HERE COMES THE BRIDE — AGAIN
Paula weds star for a second time
POP queen Paula Abdul is marrying hunky Hollywood star Emilio Estevez tomorrow…for the second time.
The dark-haired beauty will walk down the aisle wearing a lavish £20,000 traditional silk wedding dress at a Catholic Church in Santa Monica near Los Angeles.
After the church service there will be a splendid reception for 200 showbiz pals and family at the Sherwood Country Club.
Paula is tying the knot again because she wasn't happy with marriage No.1.
Friends
The couple, who met only seven months ago, first wed in a hush-hush civil ceremony in Los Angeles in April with just a few friends as witnesses.
The 28-year-old singer did not even wear a wedding dress for the service, which she kept secret from most of her friends.
Said a source close to Paula, who is reported to be expecting their first baby in December: ‘They had a whirlwind romance and just wanted to get together straight away.
‘All her friends were knocked sideways when she rang them and told them she had got spliced.
‘But Paula, like most brides, always hankered after a traditional white wedding.
‘They want to share their happiness with everyone they know in a big celebration.’
WHITE WEDDING: Paula
LEAGUE OF HER OWN
HOLLYWOOD stunner Geena Davis missed out on dates at school because she was too tall.
Leggy Geena, star of top movie A League Of Their Own, remembers: ‘Everybody was going out on dates except me.
I was very self-  conscious around boys because of my height.
I was 14 when I had my first date.
I thought, ‘At last!’
But the boy never asked me out again.’
SOLO: Geena
FLY TO THE U.S.
WIN the holiday of a lifetime in America!
That's the terrific prize in our awesome £4,000 Limit competition.
We have teamed up with Phonogram records to fly you and a guest to the States and put you up in a swanky hotel for a week's luxury holiday.
We can't let you know yet where exactly you will have your wonderful week, because we want to keep it a surprise.
But you can be sure that you'll have the time of your life.
This wonderful prize celebrates the latest release of the new single Somewhere In America by top U.S. band Was Not Was.
To be in with a chance of winning, just answer this question:
WHICH Hollywood actress appeared with the band on their smash-hit Shake Your Head?
Phone in your answer to 0891 666686 by midnight tomorrow, leaving your name, address and daytime phone number.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times, and should cost around the same as a first-class stamp.
DAVID WAS New hit
Kylie makes tracks
KYLIE MINOGUE has split from her record company — because she got fed up of being treated like a money-making machine.
The tiny Aussie star, who scored 17 smash hits with svengali Pete Waterman's record label PWL over a period of five years, admits: ‘I was bored with being told to smile and go out and make money.’
Kylie, speaking in an interview with FHM magazine added: ‘Now I can work with lots of different people.’
A spokeswoman for the singer confirmed that she had ended her contract with PWL and added: ‘She is now busy considering other offers.’
OVER THE LIMIT
PROSTITUTES in ancient Greece advertised their wares by wearing sandals with the words ‘follow me’ cut into their soles in mirror writing.
When they walked along the streets, they left a trail of ‘come-ons’ that would-be clients could follow.
Voters ate the rotting carrot
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
CHRIS PATTEN, the architect of the Tories' glorious election victory, was in London this week, seeing the Prime Minister about his plans for Hong Kong.
Mr Patten, you remember, was the Tory chairman who masterminded the campaign of lies, smears and false promises which helped his party hang on to power.
Central to that campaign were the warnings that a Labour win would mean a run on the pound, a sterling crisis, a property slump, HIGHER interest rates and possibly, dare we even speak the word, devaluation.
Their poodles in the press held out the carrot of LOWER interest rates as reward for re-electing the Tories while their pals in the City put round the word — a Labour Government would mean HIGHER rates.
Higher, if you remember, by TWO PER CENT.
Did Major and Patten discuss any of that, I wonder, in their brief meeting this week?
Brief because Patten — worried voters might spot him and rip him limb from limb — was only here for a day before flying back to the homes, yachts, Daimlers, helicopters, butlers and £152,000 tax-free salary Major gave him when making him Hong Kong Governor as reward for losing his seat.
Recovery
Not that Patten was alone in lying his way back to power.
Vote for us on Thursday, said Major, and the recovery goes on on Friday.
Recovery?
And how well I remember the tawdry Dave Mellor castigating me for ‘snorting and sneering’ at his apocalyptic view of what a Labour Government would mean.
And what about wee Norrie Lamont, the so-called Chancellor of the Exchequer, now being set up by Downing Street as a future former Chancellor in an attempt to save Honest John's career?
How many times did wee Norrie tell us that the only thing standing in the way of recovery was the uncertainty caused by the election when in truth the economy was wrecked after years of mismanagement, the pound weak because our manufacturing base had been  destroyed ?
Lies
Thousands of words of lies and not one word of apology from any of them.
If Chris Patten lies to the people of Hong Kong as much as he lied to the people of Britain, then God help them when the Chinese take over.
Sorry, but the battle goes on
My hopes and mistakes — by ROY CASTLE
ANTON ANTONOWICZ
IT HAD been a lousy week for Roy Castle.
The brain scan, the chest scan, the throat and bone scans all said the cancer had gone.
But his doctors were still cautious.
‘Another three or four months,’ they said.
‘Keeping a close eye,’ they said.
And then the letter came.
It was from a woman in Maidstone, Kent, whose husband recently died from the disease.
It accused Roy of using his very public fight to beat lung cancer as a way of furthering his career.
Worse, she said.
Roy's scorn for this ‘bully disease’ had belittled the efforts of brave men like her husband.
The unsigned letter was the first to attack Roy in this way among the 6,000 he has received since his cancer was diagnosed in March.
‘What can I do?’ he says as we walk in the fields near his home in Gerrard's Cross, Bucks.
‘I never sought publicity.
But I did decide to simplify things by coming clean from the start.
‘It will go on until either the cancer gets me or I survive.
But I apologise to all the people who may be getting fed up with it.
‘My feeling was that if this was the last thing I was going to do, I wanted it to be of some value.
‘I may have been over-enthusiastic.
I said cancer is not a killer when I should have said it is not the killer it used to be.
‘But specialists tell me so much depends on attitude.
If you fight, you stand a better chance.
I have tried to encourage others to do battle.’
Roy went to his specialist thinking he'd cracked it.
But the doctors cautioned against blue skies forever.
At the outset he was given at most a one-in-10 chance of survival.
The doctors didn't think he would see the summer, let alone celebrate his 60th birthday at the end of August.
Both are milestones passed.
‘It is not the time for vaulting that five-bar gate,’ he says.
‘But at least I have walked through it.’
He smiles.
‘I was pretty saddened when I came away from the doctors.
Some of those feelings returned — I might not see the leaves again, I might have to leave my wife Fiona on her own.
‘But it was not as bad as when I was first diagnosed.
Then it was like an out-of-control lorry coming straight at you and knowing you've only got seconds to make your peace.
‘Now I wouldn't let that feeling take hold again.’
The day after doctors gave him their cautious opinion Roy gave away prizes for yet another cancer research fund-raising effort.
He was given a belated birthday cake with 60 candles.
He blew out 59 with his first breath.
‘There was just one little fella left burning,’ he says.
‘That's pretty much the same thing that is  happening in my body.’
So Roy Castle's life proceeds a day at a time.
This week he records the first two programmes for his 21st series of TV's Record Breakers.
You will soon see him alongside Chris Boardman, the Olympic cycling champion, and Jamie Reeves the strongman.
You will see Roy, too, ‘as bald as a bladder of lard’ because of chemotherapy, hosting the world record indoor Aerobathon at Earl's Court earlier this year.
His hair has since grown back.
WHEN he was having his treatment, Roy told me through a mouth full of ulcers that he dreamed of having a Madras curry.
Two weeks ago Roy and Fiona went for a curry.
They ate early, before the restaurant got too full — and before too many other diners lit up cigarettes.
Some of the smokers were aware of his campaign against passive smoking — the kind that gave him cancer in smoke-tarred clubs.
He knows he has sounded off again.
And he returns to that one angry, unsigned letter.
‘If my enthusiasm for fighting cancer and its causes offended anyone, I am sorry,’ he says.
‘But I shall remain enthusiastic — for the sake anyone following in my footsteps.’
STILL FIGHTING: Recent scans detect no cancer — but doctors have warned Roy against being over-  optimistic 
FEELING FIT: Roy has already returned to work Pictures: BILL ROWNTREE
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
CRUEL BODY BLOW FOR ANITA
AROUND £58 million was wiped off the personal fortunes of Body Shop founders Anita and Gordon Roddick yesterday, when shares in the toiletries chain slumped £1.12 to £1.54, following a shock warning from the company that it has been hit hard by the slump.
Profits for the six months to August are expected to be down to £8 million compared with more than £9 million in the same spell a year ago.
The group sees no quick end to the high- street gloom.
RACAL, the electronics giant, is splitting off Chubb, its security arm, next month.
For every five Racal shares investors will receive one Chubb share and an extra Racal share.
Savings pounded
READERS are rightly worried about the fate of their savings if the £ is devalued.
Should you hang on to your cash or clear your debts?
A housewife has asked us if she should pay off her mortgage now, while she can still afford to do so.
She has £20,000 savings and owes £10,000 on her repayment mortgage, which costs her £78 a month, or £930 a year after she has received the tax allowance.
Her money is spread over several different building society accounts earning her only 5.7 per cent or £1,140 a year.
If she put it all in one account she could step up the return on her £20,000 to 6.45 per cent or £1,290 after tax.
In strict cash terms she is paying a higher rate on her mortgage than her  savings are earning.
So it might make sense to pay off part of her mortgage.
But it is also a good idea to keep a nest egg for emergencies.
Devaluation threatens all our savings.
But only about a quarter of goods are imported, so a ten per cent devaluation would add 2.5 per cent to the cost of living.
Not as bad you might have thought, but bad enough.
TAKE A BREAK AT BUTLIN'S £16.50
See top stars free with your super Mirror
HERE'S how to escape those autumn blues — take a break at a Butlin's Holiday World at an unbeatable price.
The Daily Mirror and Butlin's — Britain's top holiday company — have teamed up to offer 125,000 breaks available from the rock bottom price of just £16.50 per person!
You can book your fantastic Butlin's break now.
Telephone 0345 700 700 (calls charged at local rate) immediately, quoting ‘Daily Mirror offer’.
There are 100 telephone lines open between 9 am and 10 pm all week.
When you call, Butlin's will make a provisional booking and ask you to send in a booking form, available in a Butlin's Holiday World Breakaways brochure or send you a copy.
Be sure to read it thoroughly.
Dates
Complete the booking form, and send with full payment due.
You must attach three separate Daily Mirror Tokens, printed this week, to take up the special offer.
Or visit your local ABTA travel agent, quoting ‘Daily Mirror offer’, and they will make your Butlin's booking for you.
Here are the breakaway dates with highlights of the free  entertainment .
STARCOAST WORLD, Pwllheli, North Wales: Nov 13 to Nov 16 — Stylistics and Suzi Quatro; Oct 16 to Oct 19 — Gerry and the Pacemakers; Oct 19 to Oct 23 — Jim Bowen; Oct 30 to Nov 2 — Little and Large; Nov 6 to Nov 9 — Johnny Logan and Linda Martin; Nov 20 to Nov 23 — Festival of the Forties; Dec 18 to Dec 21 — Pre-Christmas Cracker Break.
FUNCOAST WORLD, Skegness, Lincolnshire: Oct 16 to Oct 19 — Bob Monkhouse; Oct 19 and Oct 24 — The Dreamers, Billy Pearce and Derek Batey; Oct 30 to Nov 2 — Freddie Starr; Nov 6 to Nov 9 — The Temptations.
SOMERWEST WORLD, Minehead, Somerset: Oct 20 to Nov 2 — Ben E. King and The Shirelles; Oct 16 to Oct 19 — Chuckle Brothers and Stan Boardman; Oct 19 to Oct 24 — Brotherhood of Man; Nov 13 to Nov 16 — Chas ‘n Dave; Dec 18 to Dec 21 — Pre-Christmas Cracker.
WONDERWEST WORLD, Ayr, Scotland: Oct 17 to Oct 20 — Country and Western with Stella Parton; Oct 20 to Oct 24 — Nashville sounds.
SOUTHCOAST WORLD, Bognor Regis, West Sussex: Nov 6 to Nov 9 — Butlin's recreate Last Night of the Proms; Oct 19 to Oct 24 — Stan Boardman; Nov 13 to Nov 16 — Marti Webb; Dec 4 to Dec 7 — Chubby Checker; Dec 11 and Dec 14 — Richard Digance.
1.
The promotional prices are £16.50 per person self catering, based on four sharing.
Or £40 per adult half board (children under 14 half price).
2.
Butlin's reserves the right to allocate accommodation grade of its choice.
In most cases this will be ‘Budget’ as detailed in the Butlin's current Breakaway brochure.
3.
This offer may not be combined with any other offer or discount and is subject to Butlin's normal terms and conditions as detailed in the current brochure.
The offer is subject to availability and closes Nov 12, 1992.
RULES
Readers in the Republic of Ireland can book by telephoning one of Butlin's Dublin agents:B & I Line Tel: Dublin 778271.
Sealink Tel: Dublin 2808844.
Solar Tel: Dublin 731133.
PAB Tel: Dublin 733411.
FREE: Bullseye Bowen
ANGRY COLUMN
TOP THAT
PETER SHAW
WE are looking for some one-cap wonders of soccer this week with a query that wins £25 for Mr F. Stillwell of Basingstoke.
He asks you to give details of the current football managers who have made only one appearance for England.
The second £25 award goes to Mr A. Smart of Cambridge.
His was the first correct solution selected and he knew the Premier League teams who have not played in European competitions are Crystal Palace, Wimbledon, Oldham, Norwich, Sheffield United, Middlesbrough and Blackburn.
Two flee killer car fire
A YOUNG couple scrambled out of a blazing car's hatchback as their two friends died in the front seats.
The two men and two women -who have not been named — were in a VW Scirocco which smashed into a wall in Normanton, West Yorks.
Seconds later it burst into a ball of flame.
People rushed to help but could not reach the dead couple.
The two who escaped are in hospital.
The man has a broken thigh and the woman severe concussion.
And the Bulldog bites back
WIN TICKETS TO THE WWF RAMPAGE
GET to grips with this great FREE contest.
You could be one of the 10 winners who each receive a pair of tickets for the WWF Rampage — live — at the NEC Birmingham on Tuesday September 29.
You'll see the superstars of the World Wrestling Federation — including Macho Man Randy Savage, Bret Hitman Hart and Legion of Doom — in terrifying action.
AND you'll be chauffeur-driven to and from Birmingham to play a tournament of WWF Wrestlemania-Super Nintendo Version on a Super Nintendo entertainment system.
The final of the Acclaim Wrestlemania tournament will be shown on a huge video screen in the main arena as a prelude to the BIG event.
Wrestlemania is the newest Acclaim game and the overall winner will be presented with the WWF/Acclaim Trophy by a WWF superstar.
The runner-up will get a Super Nintendo machine.
The eight other players will get an exclusive copy of SummerSlam ‘92 on video from Silvervision — not due for release until mid-October.
to enter just answer this question on a postcard.
1.
WHICH is The British Bulldog's home town?
Add your name, address and daytime phone number and send the card to: WWF/Acclaim contest, Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TS to arrive by first post Wednesday September 23.
The winners will be first correct entries drawn.
Normal MGN rules.
No cash alternative.
FIGHTING CHANCE: Free seats at the sold-out Rampage
DAME FOR A LAUGH
Introducing the game show where nobody wins
‘Privacy is a thing of the past’
TONY PURNELL
SHE persuaded Charlton Heston to wear a pinny, abandoned hunky Mel Gibson in a sauna with nothing but a towel to cover his embarrassment and left Tom Jones stuck in a lift shaft.
She was rude to Larry Hagman, snubbed Joan Collins and poked fun at the skinny figure and revealing frocks favoured by Cher.
But yesterday, possums, Dame Edna Everage revealed that she was fed up with rubbing shoulders with the rich and famous.
When the multi-millionaire megastar from Moonee Ponds lifted the lid off her hush-hush new spoof game show — there was not a celebrity in sight.
Holding court London's plush Savoy Hotel, the Dame: ‘I'm sick of celebrities, their entourages, agents, pretensions and absurd vanities.
‘Call me old-fashioned, and you can shoot me down in flames if I'm telling a fib, but I'm pretty much upfront and hands on when it comes to megastardom.
‘I was getting tired of the rich and famous.
They bored me to death.
Give me ordinary people every time, because I am an ordinary woman.
Embarrassment is the name of the game in Dame Edna's Neighbourhood Watch — and ordinary folk are the victims.
It is not only stars who are out.
MEN get the elbow as well, with women ‘homebodies’ aiming for spectacular prizes in front of an all-female audience.
‘It is a dame show, not a game show’, giggled Edna who sometimes uses Aussie funnyman Barry Humphries as an alias.
Three women are plucked at random from their seats by the great Dame's magic purple possum plucker to nose around someone's house.
One of the excited trio discovers to her horror that the home being filmed in secret is HERS.
She has to squirm with embarrassment as the others answer questions about her lifestyle.
‘I aim to prove that privacy is a thing of the past’, says Dame Edna.
‘I prod and pry in all the little nooks and crannies — but it is all done in a caring way.’
Miserable Madge — Dame Edna's long-suffering bridesmaid, played by still silent Emily Perry — takes viewers on a guided tour with Edna at her bitchiest revealing the victim's most intimate secrets.
No cupboard is left unopened, no room is left unlocked, and no smell unwhiffed thanks to an enormous ‘scratch ‘n’ sniff’screen.
The first to go under Dame Edna's beady eye is luckless Linda, whose home in Southend houses a large selection of teddies, including a huge one on her bed.
Asks Dame Edna: ‘Spooky.
Does your husband sometimes dress up in it?’
Edna, whose catchphrase is ‘Say Your Prayers, We're Going Up Your Stairs’, makes no apology for the intrusion.
‘I'm just a curious woman with a ceaseless intellectual curiosity.
‘Mind you, I've been shocked by some of the secrets I've uncovered in ordinary bedrooms.
Luckily I did not know what half the appliances were…‘
The prizes on offer in the six-part ITV series, which starts tomorrow, include a flash sports car, jewels, a yacht and trips on Concorde.
Needless to say they are not what they seem.
Contestants need hundreds of points to carry them off, but are lucky to get into double figures!
‘The most a contestant has won so far is a small jar of face cream’, said  Edna  caringly .
The contestants don't seem to mind.
‘They go away with very warm and happy feelings.
Women who have been probed wish they could come back for more.’
She admitted being a little nervous following Blind Date's Cilla Black as TV's second female game show host.
‘Little Cilla is a hard act to follow.
I have not yet had a telegram of congratulation or even good wishes from her, but I bet I will.
‘I know Cilla would love my dresses.
She would envy them.
If she were several sizes larger she could have them.’
Edna wont be letting viewers peep behind HER lace curtains.
She fixed me with a big smile and gave a flirtatious wink from behind her diamond encrusted specs and said: ‘But I would be happy to invite YOU in Tony.
You can put your slippers under my bed anytime.’
At which point, possums, I made my excuses and left…
BEAR CHEEK: Edna exposes the bedroom secrets of luckless Linda
ALL AT SEA: Madge shows off a great, but unwinnable, prize
PRYING: Edna's out to probe every nook and cranny
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
DEF'S DEFT DRUMMER
Def Leppard, at no 34 with Have You Ever Needed Someone So Bad, are fuming over rumours that one-armed drummer Rik Allen did not play on their latest hit.
The brave star, who lost an arm in a car crash eight years ago, now uses a specially adapted kit.
Says furious singer Joe Elliott: ‘He's a great drummer.
There's not a band that can touch us when it comes to performing.’
PAP SNAP
BETTY BOO and Boy George make a very Hattractive pair…even if one of them needs to cover up a lack of locks more than the other.
Still hats off to the both of them for agreeing to work as shop assistants for the day to raise money for AIDS charity, the Terrence Higgins Trust.
NOW that's he getting on a bit, Eric Clapton is steering clear of his flashy Ferraris and Alfa Romeos.
These days he is quite happy travelling by trolley.
OVER THE LIMIT
ANY WOMAN getting wed, gains more than a husband.
She usually piles on some extra pounds too.
Researchers at Atlanta's Emory University claim brides put on an extra 5lbs in the weeks before marriage.
However divorce is as effective as dieting for shifting stubborn weight!
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
I WAS so moved by the picture of Cherry Roomes with Benjamin, born after seven miscarriages, four still-births and the deaths of two other babies.
— Mrs I. Ballard, Stourport, Worcs.
WIN a tenner for your Picture of the Week.
GARDENING
CHARLES LYTE
Hit that sticky patch
Q Why are the leaves of my laburnum and laurel covered with a sticky black substance?
A It is caused by honeydew, exuded by aphids, which then becomes the host to a fungi giving the foliage a sooty look.
Next year spray with a systemic insecticide.
Q ALTHOUGH there is a good fruit crop, I have lost almost all the leaves on my apple tree.
Why?
A I think your apple tree is being attacked by Fruit Tree Red Spider mite.
Next year spray with mancozeb when the buds begin to swell.
At the first sign of trouble, spray with malathion.
Q I have bought a plant called Impatiens congolensis, but can't find out anything about it.
A This Busy Lizzy must be grown in a temperature that never drops below 55F.
But don't stand it in direct sunlight.
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
WELL, the Carry On dialogue doesn't change much.
In the latest movie, Carry On Columbus, a female member of the cast screams: ‘The sharks wouldn't eat me whole?’
‘No,’ she is told in reply.
‘They spit that bit out.’
Jack's crowning role
WE LEARN of some interesting cosmetic dentistry carried out on Jack Nicholson for his title role in the £25 million film Hoffa, a gritty saga about Sixties Teamsters boss Jimmy.
Nicholson, who is being paid a handsome £5 million, is reported to have immersed himself so completely in the part that he wanders around the set mumbling the notorious Hoffa's favourite phrases — even after the cameras have shut down for the night.
Director Danny DeVito says: ‘Jack's so far inside the role I wonder if he'll ever come out of it.’
Nicholson will be glad when he can remove for the last time the putty nose, hairpiece and false front tooth the make-up wizards gave him each day to make him a mirror-image of bully-boy Hoffa.
Even though DeVito has extracted a toothsome performance which insiders predict could win Jack an Oscar nomination.
WAR OF WORDS
FINAL proof that South Africa is clinically schizophrenic.
What book has Pretoria now placed on its set reading list for trainee high-fliers in the country's diplomatic service?
Till Babylon Falls, a thrilling, true account of an ANC guerrilla unit, by my Mirror colleague Bryan Rostron.
SINGER Bobby Brown, asked this week whether he's intimidated by new wife Whitney Houston's vocal prowess, said: ‘Let's just say I don't sing in the shower any more.’
AFTER a show in Los Angeles, Paula Abdul returned to her dressing-room to find her husband, Emilio Estevez, sitting on the sofa next to old flame Demi Moore.
‘Demi came backstage to tell you how much she enjoyed your show,’ Emilio announced with smooth diplomacy.
Paula smiled sweetly and said: ‘Get the hell out of here.’
Star-grazer
CHARLTON Heston was at a Republican party rally when he was asked by one of those ghastly eight-year-old American kids for his autograph.
The boy examined the signature closely, then asked: ‘Are you a politician?’
‘No, I'm an actor,’ said Heston.
‘Are you a famous actor?’ asked the cherub.
‘I guess you could say I was famous,’ answered Chucko, patiently.
‘Okay,’ said the boy, leaving.
‘If you say you are, I guess you are.’
Barbra's just the ticket, Bill
MARK DOWDNEY
IS THIS the dream ticket America has been waiting for — presidential hopeful Bill Clinton and superstar Barbra Streisand?
Sorry, Clinton only switched running mates for the evening to poke fun at Republican rival George Bush.
Barbra brought the house down at a California party when she sang her version of the classic ‘It Had To Be You.’
One verse ran:
‘George Bush and Dan Quayle, They golf and they sail, One doesn't look well, The other can't spell, These fellas won't do, It has to be you.’
Dozens of other Hollywood stars, including Warren Beatty, Dustin Hoffman, Michelle Pfeiffer and Dionne Warwick turned out to back the Democrat challenger.
Barbara told Clinton: ‘There is a shift in the political wind and I feel that it's blowing our way.’
LOVE-TUG KIDS SNATCHED BY ‘DANGER MAN’ DAD
Terrified tots dragged away in gun drama
GORDON HUGHES
A DISTRAUGHT mum last night begged her ‘danger man’ husband to free their two young children after he snatched them at gunpoint.
Sobbing Julie Moore, 45, pleaded with estranged husband James: ‘Please bring them back.
I promise I will help you and stick by you all I can.
I'll do anything you ask, but please don't hurt them.’
Scar-faced Moore, 33, dragged two-year-old Clare and David, four, from their mother's arms after threatening her with a sawn-off shotgun.
Then he bundled them into a stolen car in their nightclothes.
Police have launched a nationwide hunt for Moore, who has served a jail sentence for armed robbery.
They say he is dangerous and warned the public not to approach him.
They believe he and girlfriend Trina Powell, 24, may try to take the youngsters abroad.
Officers say Moore planned the abduction with ‘military precision’.
He earlier stripped the couple's marital home in Grimsby, Humberside and sold the furniture.
Then he held two men friends of his estranged wife at gunpoint and forced them to drive him 200 miles to her secret address at Barrow-in-  Furness , Cumbria.
Julie split with Moore several months ago.
MISSING: Clare, two
MISSING: David, four
Disaster boat clue
NEW clues to the mystery sinking of a fishing boat with the loss of six crew were revealed yesterday.
Trawler boss Alan Ayres, who has accused the Navy of a cover-up, said he had found some schoolchildren who could help him prove the Pescado was sunk by a submarine 18 months ago.
The Navy has denied his claims.
But later a spokesman admitted there had been TWO surface subs in the area around that time.
Mr Ayres had earlier told how the youngsters sketched the sub in Falmouth Bay, Cornwall, from a castle.
The boat wreckage is to be raised next week.
Hard road
SEVENTEEN Scottish prison officers start a charity jog from John o'Groat's to Land's End today, staying at prisons on the way.
Two deny drink death
TWO Manchester men told Spanish judges they had nothing to do with the death of an English holidaymaker.
Stephen Wade, 41, of Macclesfield, died after he was slipped a Micky Finn.
Eugene McQuaid, 47, a builder, and John Stubbs, 29, a demolition worker, denied doctoring Stephen's drinks and stealing property from his Costa del Sol hotel room in 1988.
‘Poor deal’ on schools
PARENTS have fewer rights over their children's schooling under the new Parents' Charter, says a report out today.
Complaints about opt-out schools now go to the Education Department, which has a poor track record, says the National Consumers Council.
Entering a different world…
A BIG smile on your child's face is the best holiday treat of all.
And for fun-around-the-clock, there's nothing to beat the good old British holiday park.
Not so much of the old, though.
Today's sites are bang up-to-date — they've got to be to match the amusements offered to youngsters on their own doorstep.
We tried out the firm that started it all, Butlin's.
And their flagship, Somerwest World at Minehead, is certainly tuned in to the tastes of 1992.
Whether you're a toddler or a teen — and for mum, dad, gran and grandad — the list of activities is endless.
Our teen, a boy of 13, is a fan of the new lasershooting game Quasar, and he soon had the Butlin's version in his sights.
Then he had a blast at some clay-pigeons, again laser-style.
You pay for these on-site extras, but most of the fun is free.
Somerwest is super for swimmers.
There's Sunsplash centre and the separate Oasis pool, both with shallow play areas.
The fairground, too, has rides to suit all ages — some scary, some sedate.
A trip by cable car or monorail gives the best view of the 180-acre site, four miles from Exmoor.
One relaxing way to see the countryside is on horseback.
An hour's peaceful plodding, setting out from stables in the village of Horner, is just one of the off-site activities.
It was our first time in the saddle and it had daughter, 11, champing at the bit for more.
Two-thirds of Somerwest's guests go self-catering.
But we sampled half-board, and ample portions of breakfast and dinner with individual tables for each family kept up the energy levels.
Another statistic — 64 per cent of Somerwest's 320,000 customers last year were paying a return visit.
That's as near as you'll get to a guarantee of a good holiday.
FACT BOX
A WEEK'S self-catering in a Standard room at Somerwest in August will cost a family of four £504.
Children aged two14 go half-price.
Half-board in a higher range County room is £723.
A six-night ‘half-term special’ in October, Standard self-catering, drops to £207 for a family of four.
A half-board County room for the same period costs £339.
October weekends are from £99 to £128.
Call: 0345 700 700 
MAKING A SPLASH: Butlin's Somerwest centre
AUSTRAVEL has launched a new two-week fly-drive package to New Zealand with a lead in price of £999.
The deal includes return flights to Auckland, 14-days Hertz car hire, 7-nights accommodation (additional accommodation is available from £16 a night per person, sharing a twin room, for those not visiting family or friends).
Departures November 4, 18, December 12, 30, January 13, 27, February 10; Austravel Kiwi Special: £999.
Departure December 16: £1,249.
For reservations contact Austravel on 071 734 7755.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
TIMES are tough in the world of luxury and art.
Christies International, one of the world's leading art auctioneers, yesterday revealed their profits for the last six months had been hammered by £1 million down to £2,112,000.
Realism
And the profit drop came after £51 million of sales — £1 million UP on the same period last year.
A Christies spokesmen said yesterday: ‘The art world is rather like the property market.
There a new realism and prices are coming down to sensible levels.
They are not going to go back to those of the heady days of the late 1980s.’
Sir Anthony's pure genius
ONE way to survive the slump is to put yourself in your customers' shoes.
That's what the bosses of master brewer Guinness did a few years ago.
Chairman Sir Anthony Tennant rightly predicted that many of us would be too hard up to stand a round of drinks in the pub anymore — but that we'd still fancy a cheap tipple at home.
So he put the black magic in a can — and Guinness recently sold its 100 millionth tin.
The move means booze sales are still rising.
But sky-high interest bills kept the lid on profits, up just one per cent to £353 million in the six months to July.
IDEA: Sir Anthony
RMC, the building materials and ready-mixed concrete giant, has fallen foul of the slump.
It has been forced to slash prices, with the result that profits dropped 11 per cent to £62 million in the six months to June — even though sales were up £120 million.
So has Bentalls stores.
It has slumped £1 million into the red in the last six months after making a £207,000 profit the previous year.
War on hole-in-wall crooks
BARCLAYS Bank is to spend £100 million over five years in a bid to beat credit card cheats.
Barclays' boffins are busy testing two space-age anti-fraud machines.
And the bank hopes to introduce one of them in a year's time.
Last year plastic fraud cost Barclays £36 million, with 274 illegal transactions taking place EVERY HOUR.
But it reckons the introduction of ‘smart cards’ will change all that.
The Star Wars devices can store your fingerprint on a microchip or electronically check the way you sign your name.
Barclays, which has over a third of Britain's credit card customers, says its new system should catch 19 out of 20 plastic cheats.
The bank has already introduced a novel way of detecting credit crime.
Called ‘Fraudwatch’ it uses a ‘thinking’computer to detect unusual spending patterns.
The micro-chip sleuth is already detecting 2,000 dodgy transactions a year which happen BEFORE the customer even knows a card is missing.
WHILE some folk have won their currency gambles, many more aren't so lucky.
Now one firm offers a free guarantee that you won't lose out.
Bureaux de Change operators Travelex — with booths at airports and ferry terminals — will let you change back any currency you bring back home with you at the rate you bought at if the markets move against you.
And it won't charge any commission either.
Details at Travelex booths.
WIN A WEEK IN VEGAS
PLUS 100 SUPER BUGSY VIDEOS
PLACE your bets with Bugsy — and you could be jetting off for a week in Las Vegas the gambling capital of the world.
PLUS there are £6,000 worth of videos up for grabs.
We've linked with 20.20 Vision for this prize giveaway to mark the video rental release on September 30 of Warren Beatty's Oscar-winning gangster movie Bugsy.
Our lucky couple will fly with USAir to Las Vegas for their six-night stay in the sensational Excalibur Hotel.
They will see the hotel's show featuring jousting knights, plus the stunning illusions of Siegfried and Roy at the Mirage Hotel.
Bugsy (18) tells the story of star-struck gangster Bugsy Siegal,(Warren Beatty), who falls for a Hollywood starlet (Annette Bening) and dreams of creating a magnificent hotel in the Nevada desert.
As costs mount his mobster mates become concerned about their money.
he 100 runners-up win the video, worth around £60
TO ENTER: Name the cartoon hero Warren Beatty played on screen:(a) Superman;(b) Batman;(c) Dick Tracy.
PRINT your answer on a postcard with your name and address and send to: Bugsy Video Contest, Daily Mirror, PO Box 1793, Maida Hill, London W9 by October 5.
LOVERS: Beatty and Bening
GAMBLING MAN: Beatty, below left.
TOWERING BEAUTY: The Excalibur, where our winners will stay
LUCKY STRIKE FOR MADONNA
PAULINE McLEOD
NEW MOVIES
WHEN America joined World War II in the 1940s a serious shortage arose — of baseball.
Most players were in the Army.
And the fans faced years deprived of their number one sport.
With typical American ingenuity the problem was solved — by forming the All American Girls Professional Baseball League.
That's the opening pitch of A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN (PG, General) a buddy-buddy picture with a female slant.
Director Penny Marshall, who made the joyous Big and the very moving Awakenings, has crammed as many cliches as is possible into this feel-good little film.
The film is sentimental, but is saved by some smashing performances, in particular the statuesque Geena Davis as down-to-earth Dottie Hinson, star player and backbone of the team, who completely overshadows kid sister, Kit (Lori Petty).
Show-off
As soon as hubby returns from the war, Dottie plans to walk away from the game — which irritates her competitive sister, a pitcher in the team, even more.
Madonna plays to type as the centre fielder, Mae Mordabito, a man-hungry show-off.
Actually, she is not bad as ‘All the way Mae’— a character which becomes her more than some of her other movie roles.
And Tom Hanks bravely piled on the pounds to play the part of Jimmy Dugan, a tobacco-spitting drunk and played-out former star brought in to manage the girls.
A worn out slob, he cannot accustom himself to the idea of women playing the sport seriously.
But he eventually sees their potential and cleans up his act just in time.
By the way, it helps if you like — and understand — baseball.
There's an awful lot of it in this film.
But, overall, it's pretty soft-centred stuff, it packs no punches, and it's pretty predictable.
HOME RUN: Madonna scores a hit in her role as All The Way Mae in A League of Their Own
RIDING HIGH
PAULINE McLEOD
NEW MOVIES
IT'S brutal, sombre, anti-heroic, relentlessly unforgiving and stars a bunch of guys who are practically pensioners.
But Clint Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN (Cert 18; General) is a truly great Western.
A classic.
Sensational cinema.
Mesmeric performances all round.
A must-see-at-least-twice movie!
There are no heroes.
Even Little Bill Daggett (Gene Hackman), sheriff of the miserable town of Big Whiskey, is a man of dubious ethics.
He's arguably as dangerous as William Munny (Eastwood), ex-hired killer and now broken-down hog farmer who comes out of retirement for one last job.
The opening scene is so shocking it will leave you gasping.
A worn-looking hooker is getting her face slashed in the local whorehouse for laughing at her cowboy customer's ‘teensy little pecker’.
Meanwhile Munny, once the most feared killer in the West, has promised his dying wife — an honest, God-fearing woman and the mother of his two children — he would never return to his former life.
But hey, there's a bounty out, he could do with the loot and you can tell from the narrowing of those famous Eastwood eyes that he's bored rigid with being a decent human being.
And, of course, there is the moral issue at stake.
A woman has been wronged.
Surely his dear, departed wife would approve!
Into the frame comes his only friend and ex-partner in crime, Ned Logan played by Morgan Freeman, a chap with no stomach for killing, and Jaimz Woolvet as The Schofield Kid, a young punk of a gunman who dreams of glory and pay day.
Then there's Richard Harris as the flamboyant and lethally elegant English Bob, a hired hit-man who arrives in Big Whiskey with his own biographer.
The gags fly as fast as the bullets.
One terrific running joke through the film involves Munny, who is so rusty in the saddle he can't even mount up any more.
However, sixty-two-year-old Eastwood, directing his 16th picture, is still sitting as tall in the saddle as The Man With No Name did nearly 30 years ago.
HIRED GUN: Clint on the vengeance trail again
SAVED
Mirror's Somalia fund reaches £300,000
Little Issi is just one of 25,000 who are alive because of YOU
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
HIS cheeks are tear-stained and his eyes are hungry, but his face, for now, is focused on the hope he holds in his hands.
Issi Abdul, six, clutches tightly onto his feeding bowl as though it contained liquid gold.
The high-protein gruel inside is far more valuable than that.
Issi is one of thousands of children being fed in famine-stricken Somalia — thanks to YOUR help.
It is 10 days since our shock issue highlighting the plight of the starving in Somalia — 10 days since we launched an urgent appeal to help them.
And today we can reveal the staggering total of your generous donations so far — a record-breaking £300,000.
Already that money has been put to good use.
No sooner have you been sending it in than we have been sending it out again.
It is being channelled through CARE, the international relief agency that travelled with the Mirror team in Somalia.
Last night CARE's British director, Julian Hopkins, said: ‘It is not an exaggeration to say your readers have already saved 25,000 lives.
In the past week, thanks to the money they have sent in.
We have been able to feed 300,000 people in some of the worst hit areas of Somalia.
Starving
‘Of those, at least 25,000 were at such a desperate level of starvation that they would have died had the food reached them any later.
‘That is how vital the help of the Mirror has been in this crisis.
‘It has been a fantastic effort thanks to the wonderful generosity of your readers.
We thank them from the bottom of our hearts.’
For the past week, with your donations, CARE have been able to mount six airlifts a day to Baidoa and Bardera — two of the towns featured in the Mirror's shock report.
In Baidoa, we told how 300,000 people were flooding into feeding centres hastily set up by relief workers.
Another 140,000 are starving in the outlying villages.
But in the last few days the food supplies from CARE alone have fed at least 150,000 people.
Other agencies, including the Red Cross, UNICEF, Irish Concern and Save the Children are also running kitchens.
And in Bardera, where the population has swelled from 10,000 to 60,000 as the hungry arrive in search of food, huge sacks of maize and cereal are reaching thousands more.
It hasn't been easy.
CARE workers on the ground are constantly shadowed by armed guards.
In this country that has been ravaged by civil war even more than by drought, security is shaky.
Bandits
‘Until we can get enough food through to stop people starving to death, you won't be able to stop those who are prepared to kill for the few precious supplies,’ said Julian.
The CARE airlifts are carrying in more than 100 tons of food a day.
Most importantly, they are by-passing the port in Somalia's capital Mogadishu.
Although there is enough food there to feed 800,000 starving people for one month, most of it cannot get through because of looters and bandits.
Last week, CARE did manage to get 53 trucks full of cereal to the starving, but progress is painfully slow.
As well as carrying food, the CARE airlifts, which will soon be taking in enough seeds and tools for 50,000 families so that people can begin to help themselves.
These must reach Somalia within the next 10 days so people can plant the seeds in time for the rainy season.
Back in Baidoa, little Issi knows nothing of the complex politics behind his hunger.
Gruel
He does know that two weeks ago, his mother has died of starvation.
Before her, they had buried his eight-year-old sister Hobiba.
To get his precious bowl of gruel, Issi had walked 30 miles from his village of Lusulas with his father Abdi, 29.
Once Abdi was a cattle farmer.
Now he is struggling to save his only surviving child.
Today Issi and thousands of children like him have hope where they once had despair.
And for that, on behalf of them, we thank you.
KEEP IT COMING FOLKS
TWO million men, women and children are facing death by starvation in Somalia.
Yet a little goes a long way.
One meal for a starving child costs just 4p.
And for £8.72 a family of four can be fed and clothed for a week.
So please keep your cash coming in — no amount is too small.
Send your donations to Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal, PO Box 232, Melksham, Wilts, SM12 7SB.
Cheques and postal orders should be made payable to ‘Daily Mirror/CARE Somalia Appeal.’
Or you can make a credit card donation on the Somalia Appeal hotline.
Telephone 0800 666 808.
Apologies to readers who could not get through to our hotline on Friday morning.
A computer fault put the line out of action temporarily, but it is now up and running again.
MOVING: The Mirror's shock issue
HOPE: This bowl of gruel means life for six-year-old Issi
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
MURDER ON  ALPHABET STREET
Dr Alban closes club in  disgust at slaying
CHARTBUSTING Dr Alban has shut his Stockholm nightclub after a horrific murder.
The Swedish-based performer was so sickened by the brutal slaying of one of his bouncers that he immediately closed his plush hot spot, Alphabet Street, and vowed to stop club work.
The killing occurred as he was welcoming people into the club.
‘It was the most gruesome thing I've ever seen,’ said Nigerian-born Dr Alban — real name Alban Nwapa, who this week has shot to No 2 with It's My Life.
‘There was a brief scuffle between a bouncer and a drunk who was trying to get into the club.
‘Suddenly the guy pulled a knife on the bouncer and stabbed him to death-right in front of my eyes.’
Former dentist Alban, 29, added:
‘I lost a fortune by closing the place down, but there was no way I wanted to carry on the business.’
SICKENED: Star Alban
ALL PALS AGAIN
THE Christians came close to splitting up after they were hit by a massive £2 million lawsuit.
Last month the Liverpool-based band were forced to pay huge damages to the estate of Irish songwriter Sean O'Rieda for using his instrumental, Women Of Ireland on their last hit, Words.
Christians singer Henry Priestman, at No 33 with What's In A Word says: ‘We spent two years trying to sort it out and relationships in the band suffered.
‘After a big row which cleared the air we decided to carry on.’
DEF DEFIES ‘EM
GOODY-GOODY rocker Joe Elliott refuses to copy the wild antics of fellow rock stars such as Guns N’ Roses.
The Def Leppard singer, at No 10 with Have You Ever Needed Someone So Bad, admits: ‘I could never get into a plane and smash things up like some stars do.
It's just not in my nature.
I come from Sheffield — where people are raised properly.’
OVER THE LIMIT
People soon be able to programme erotic dreams from fantasies claim Californian therapists.
Research in sexology shows that men and women have sexy thoughts in their sleep every 90 minutes.
PAP SNAP
NEW Kid Donnie Wahlberg is still very close to his mum, which is nice.
But obviously not close enough for her to have any say in the way he dresses.
Which is a pity.
BAKER ST.
GRAVY TRAIN
PETE Waterman, the Svengali pop boss behind Undercover's Baker Street smash, has splashed out £40,000 on an historic train engine called the Thunderer.
Says train-mad Waterman: ‘I was desperate to buy it because it was made in Newton Le Willows, where I now live.
I'm going to be running it on the East Lancs line from Bury — and I fancy driving it myself.’
SHELF LIFE
SEE THROUGH THE WINDOW PAINS
JAN WALSH
THE best way to find a good fitted kitchen firm, or double glazier, or any other costly service is to ask your friends for a recommendation.
But if that fails, many of us are influenced by the testimonials we see in brochures.
Seeing a smiling Mrs W of Grimsby telling us ‘my beautiful Brand X kitchen was fitted in a day and is a dream come true’ can be very persuasive.
But the Advertising Standards Authority warns that we shouldn't be taken in by these glowing testimonials.
Although some may be true, they deal with constant complaints about testimonials which turn out to be from people connected with the firm.
In some cases that smiling face belongs to the wife of the managing director!
So treat anonymous testimonials with a pinch of salt.
PAYING THE PRICE FOR A FREEBIE
Don't get duped when you book that bargain break
WHEN money is tight, how do you persuade people to spend?
Easy — offer them a free gift.
That's why hundreds of top companies now offer cheap hotel breaks when you buy their goods or sign up for their services.
But beware.
These offers may not be as wonderful as they seem.
One of the most popular incentive schemes is run by Manchester company, Great Escapes.
If you've signed up for a Barclaycard recently, or joined the AA, you will probably have been tempted by the offer of ‘free accommodation’ in a ‘superb range of hotels in the UK and Ireland’.
Hundreds of smaller businesses, such as Clydesdale stores, use these hotel vouchers, too.
Extras
The idea is to spend a few days at a hotel and all you have to pay for are the meals and any extras, such as wine.
But the hotel may well bump up the bill with all sorts of spurious charges.
The Great Escapes brochure lists more than 250 hotels where you can use the vouchers.
Their brochure claims: ‘All you have to pay for are your meals at the prices specified and any extras such as drinks, wines and spirits.’
What they don't tell you is that the price of those meals may be artificially inflated.
When we tackled Great Escapes they warned us about ‘making damaging remarks or besmirching the company in any way’.
Deputy managing director Paul Scrimshaw told me: ‘One of our remedies with hotels that inflate prices is to remove them from our listings.’
At present though, anyone can get caught out, even consumer editors of national newspapers!
When I stayed with my husband and children at the Holcombe Hotel in Oxfordshire on the Great Escapes scheme this summer I was told I would get free accommodation as long as I stayed for two nights and paid for dinner and breakfast at a cost of £33.20 each per day.
Yet the set dinner at the Holcombe only cost £17.95 and breakfast cost £6.50 — a total of £24.45.
Hotel staff explained the extra £8.75 per person, per night, was for ‘sheets’.
Normally, we would have paid £46 for dinner, bed and breakfast.
We saved money, but not nearly as much as expected.
It's a similar story at other hotels in the Great Escapes scheme.
The Whitehaven hotel in Hove charges £13 for dinner and £8 for breakfast.
But with Great Escapes you'll be charged £31, not £21, for your meals.
The extra £10, they explain, is a ‘bath supplement’.
The Woolacombe Bay hotel in Woolacombe, Devon, charges Great Escapes customers £35 for their meals.
But other customers would only pay £17 for dinner and £8 for breakfast, a total of £25.
They say the extra £10 is to cover facilities such as a sauna and pool.
Great Escapes' Paul Scrimshaw explained: ‘It has always seemed to us that as long as the hoteliers play the game fairly then all parties have received a reasonable benefit.’
Clydesdale stores, with electrical shops in the Midlands, the North and Scotland, are currently offering four days' bed and breakfast at any hotel in the Stakis chain for the price of one.
The offer means a couple can get four days' bed and breakfast at the Stakis Newbury hotel for £108.
Clydesdale's promotional leaflet claims this gives a saving of £324 off the normal twin-room plus breakfast rate, which is supposed to cost £432.
Claim
In fact, a four day stay at that hotel costs only £240, so a couple would save £132 by booking with Clydesdale — nothing like the saving they claim.
Instead of comparing their offer with the normal rate, Clydesdale have used the business rate — paid by guests who stay mid-week and don't expect to book and pay in advance.
As you'd expect, the price they pay is much higher.
‘Obviously it is possible to stay cheaper than the price we quoted, but we felt it was impossible to show that in our leaflet,’ said Clydesdale marketing director Stuart Laing.
And Martin Wright, sales and marketing director for Stakis, said: ‘Generally, a normal person booking and paying in advance wouldn't be quoted those rates.
They would pay less.’
MISLEADING: Clydesdale's offer isn't all that it seems
HIDDEN COST: Sheets cost an extra £8.75 a night at the Holcombe Hotel
TIMELY ADVICE FOR GARDENERS
THE gardening death toll for this summer has just been published.
Four people were killed when mowing their lawn with an electric mower.
As you prepare to give your patch of grass its final once-over, it's a good time to make sure you aren't going to be a tragic statistic next year.
Go and buy a residual current device.
They will protect you from a fatal accident when using electric gardening equipment.
They're not expensive.
Most portable types are around £20 — that's half the price they used to be 10 years ago.
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
And, Faith Brown (centre)— what a pair!
But we prefer your melons Faith.
Kissing Julian Clary (right) on the lips is not advisable, chaps.
WELL, would you buy a used car from this shifty-looking guy in the slow lane?
BEEF WITH BOTHAM
AFTER Ian Botham's bit of bother in a curry house this week, we hear of another incident involving the nation's greatest cricketer.
In Darlington a couple of weeks back, he came up behind Steve Raine, editor of Darlington FC's aptly-titled fanzine, Mission Impossible and growled: ‘When you insult me, you insult the Queen!’
He then told Raine, 37, where he intended to stick various parts of his anatomy.
Beefy's wrath had been provoked by a swipe Raine had taken in Mission Impossible at Durham County Cricket Club.
‘I was fed up with Durham's sponsors signing has-beens, just for their names,’ said Raine.
‘He only tries when there's an England selector watching and I said his OBE stood for ‘Overweight Bag of Excrement’.’
No wonder Beefy got a little agitated.
NOW our very own Kathy Lloyd has made a get fit video (Beauty and the Bust, being released on October 26 by MIA).
Unlike the contortions in books by Jane Fonda and others, this one concentrates on shaping the top half of the body.
The proof of the puddings, they say, is in the eating.
CORN CIRCULAR
A COMPUTER company recently sponsored a contest posing the question: ‘If you had the chance to send one message into deep space, what wisdom or important information would you share?’
Their offices were flooded with faxed responses ranging from predictable replies like, ‘Hi, Mum,’ to ‘You never call, you never write.’
But the publisher's favourite remains the first reply he received.
It read: ‘Use the small fork for your salad and please don't land in Uncle Gilbert's wheat field any more.’
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
THE recession has shunted model train makers Hornby into the sidings.
The company, which also makes Scalextric, saw profits crash by 70 per cent to £158,000 in the first half of this year.
Now Chairman Jack Strowger is banking on a bumper Christmas to get profits back on the fast track.
Hornby, founded in 1908, has now moved on from trains and cars to sell dolls and video games.
HOPES that the Government will slash interest rates next week kept shares boiling yesterday.
The FTSE index of leading shares jumped 83.1 points to 2567.0 yesterday — a net gain of 196 points on the week.
Pfennigs from heaven!
THE devalued pound is bad news for most Britons going abroad.
But for one of our biggest industries it's a positive godsend.
Last year 17 million foreign tourists spent £7.2 BILLION over here.
According to the British Tourist Authority that figure could rocket even higher thanks to the lower pound.
‘Keeping the pound high meant tourists were forced to make their money go further,’ said BTA Chairman Bill Davis.
‘But with the deflated pound giving the big-spending Germans more pocket money, it could be raining pfennigs from heaven.’
To reinforce the point the BTA is to spend £2.5 million telling foreigners what good value Britain now has to offer.
AT THE THEATRE
TONY PURNELL
THE new musical Valentine's Day at London's Globe Theatre opens in a dentist surgery which proves a bad omen.
A lot of what follows is as painful as pulling teeth.
Fortunately for some in the audience the soppy songs in Benny Green's reworking of George Bernard Shaw's 100-year-old romantic comedy You Never Can Tell act as an anaesthetic and they are put out of their misery long before the interval.
This is music to nod off to.
Starry eyed lovers, spoilt brats and feuding parents may be just the ticket for the maiden aunt but what the old fashioned bit of Victorian nonsense is doing surfacing in the West End in recession-hit 1992 is a mystery.
It's certainly not for the spectacle which peaks with three dozen chinese lanterns and a sprinkling of fairy lights in the stalls.
Only Edward Petherbridge shines as a butler serving up some of Shaw's witty observations on life.
You never can tell with musicals of course but another My Fair Lady?
Not bloody likely!
FASH BASH
Birthday blast for England striker
Shearer told: You're still not the best
TONY STENSON
JOHN FASHANU last night told Alan Shearer: ‘You are still not good enough for England!’
Wimbledon's 20-goals-a-season striker will today witness Shearer's claim to be part of Graham Taylor's 1994 World Cup squad when Blackburn face the Dons at Selhurst Park.
But hit-man Fashanu used his 30th birthday party to dismiss Shearer and call for the international return of Arsenal's Ian Wright.
Fashanu, ignored since being capped twice by Bobby Robson three years ago, said: ‘Alan has had a good start but that doesn't put him in the class of Ian.
We should not get carried away.
‘When you talk about records and scoring ability at the top level then Wright is by far ahead.
‘Scoring at this level is not a one-season thing.
Robert Fleck, although a Scot, Gary Lineker and Wright have done it consistently.
Fast
‘Has Shearer?
Just what did he do last season?
‘Thirteen League goals was it?
I am not saying he might not one day be the best player for England — but at the moment he isn't.
It's all gone too fast, too soon for him.
‘He must feel he is walking on water at the moment, but come Christmas when the goals don't go in, what happens then?
‘Talk of quality, then talk of Ian Wright.
Even when we played and beat Arsenal two weeks ago, Ian still scored twice.
‘He was superb and still wasn't fully fit.
Can Shearer do the same?’
And Dons boss Joe Kinnear reckons the time has come for Fashanu to be reconsidered by England in time for next month's World Cup qualifier against Norway at Wembley.
‘Fash is the best in the business as a target man,’ says Kinnear.
‘He would be feared by most international teams for his ability in the air and wouldn't let England down.’
Ironically, Kinnear believes Fashanu would be the perfect partner for Shearer.
‘Fash would be a great foil for Shearer,’ added Kinnear.
‘He's one of the best headers of a ball in the League.
‘Fash is also a great man to have around in the dressing room.
England's young players would benefit enormously from his presence.’
Vinny Jones makes his home debut today after spells with Leeds, Sheffield United and Chelsea.
BIRTHDAY boy John Fashanu reckons the party's over for Blackburn's England ace Alan Shearer.
SHEARER: Under fire
WRIGHT: Support
HEY NUDE
Linda's glimpses of family paradise
New father Paul barely hides joy
STEVE ATKINSON
INTIMATE shots from Paul McCartney's family album are revealed this week — including one of the rock star naked.
The tender study of Paul with newborn daughter Mary is one of many moments captured by his wife Linda.
Another shows the proud dad quickly introducing Mary to rock ‘n’ roll — with a lesson on Ringo Starr's drums.
And the family fun shines through again when Paul's stepdaughter Heather tries to climb on the car roof.
Linda's photos — taken in Paul's early heady years of fatherhood — were not intended to be published at the time.
They reveal a soft and relaxed side of the ex-Beatle away from the harsh glare of fame.
Her black and white study of proud Paul holding Mary is the most surprising.
Linda, 51, says: ‘I took this picture for myself — for the beauty and the magic of it.’
Today, Mary is 23 and a music publisher.
Heather is 27 and a potter.
Fifty-year-old Paul's other children are fashion student Stella, 21, and James, 17, still at school.
Linda's £30 collection — Sixties: Portrait Of An Era — shows the darker side of life too, as the Beatles broke up.
YOU CAN CLIMB MY CAR: Paul with Heather on a Greek trip
BEAT THAT: Baby Mary gets to grips with Ringo's sticks
LAST STRAW: Paul enjoys a drink
FATHER'S PRIDE: Linda captures naked Paul's gentle joy as he holds his new baby Mary close
GROWN GIRLS: Mary, left, and Stella as they look now
Picture: DAVE BENETT
SNAPPER: Linda
How Lynne got her man
WHEN LIFE WAS JUST A CABARET FOR POISON IVY
Love surrounded me.
That's what's given me strength
HILARY BONNER
THE gritty determination that took her to the top as Coronation Street's Ivy has always been there.
If Lynne Perrie wants something she believes in going all out to get it.
That's how it was with her husband, Derrick.
They met at a dance.
Lynne was just 15 and it was love at first sight.
Four years later, Derrick faced National Service and Lynne two years' separation.
The way to avoid that, she reasoned, was to marry him.
And the way to make sure of that was to get pregnant.
In those days being an unmarried mum was a great disgrace.
But Lynne, then 19, didn't give a damn.
‘Derrick and I went to Blackpool and booked ourselves into a hotel,’ she recalls.
‘It worked.
I fell pregnant immediately.
‘But when I told my father I was ashamed of myself.
He broke down and wept.’
The wedding went ahead.
And so did Lynne's stage career — first as a singer and then as a comedienne.
Cabaret — not acting — was then her great love.
And she learned her skills the hard way — working the clubs and pubs of the North of England.
‘I loved it,’ 4ft 11in Lynne says.
‘In fact, I think I was born for it.
I've never been afraid of an audience.
All my life I have been a 7ft woman trying to get out.’
Her irrepressible nature was reflected in her early stage names.
The Little Ball Of Fire, they called her, and Miss Personality.
Lynne had an idyllic Yorkshire childhood.
Her foundry worker father adored his family, and her parents' marriage was a happy one.
‘I was surrounded by love.
Sometimes I think that's what gave me the strength to deal with all that's happened to me since,’ she says.
Neither of her parents was ever a professional performer, but both were fascinated by showbusiness.
‘My father was the driest comedian you ever heard, and my mother had a wonderful singing voice — much better than mine,’ Lynne says.
‘But she could never have been like me with an audience.’
Lynne remembers being taken when young to Nottingham Goose Fair where children were being asked to volunteer to sing on stage.
‘I went up and sang and then I called my mother up to join me.
She sang beautifully, but she was shaking all over she was that frightened.’
Lynne — then just plain Jean Dudley — was a teenager when she made her professional debut.
The turn booked by her uncle at a local club failed to appear.
‘He said to me: ‘You sing a bit.
You'll do.’
I died in my astrakhan collar.
‘I was paid £3 10s, and I didn't deserve it that night.
But the band stuck by me, worked out a routine with me, and busked through it with me for the rest of the run.
‘I got the taste fast.
‘Soon afterwards I went to one of those Sunday auditions where agents used to sign up turns.
I got 27 bookings and never looked back.’
She switched from singing to comedy because it was better paid.
And she had a sure-fire way of handling the tough Northern audiences.
‘The trick is to kill them,’ she says.
‘It's you or them.
‘I used to say: ‘I'm being paid 35 quid a night to stand up here.
What's your excuse?’‘
As a singer, she joined the Beatles and Rod Stewart.
In cabaret, she teamed up with Freddie Starr and Adam Faith.
In pursuit of her dreams Lynne travelled the world, leaving her young son Stephen in the care of Derrick and babysitters.
She wanted to be a star — and they came second.
‘In those early days I didn't even stop to think how Derrick felt,’ she admits.
‘But he never complained.’
Her acting began by accident — and at an extraordinarily high level.
Director Ken Loach was looking for someone to play the mother in his award-winning film Kes.
After a day of unsuccessful auditions, he went to a Barnsley nightclub, saw Lynne and knew at once this was the woman he wanted.
Lynne was overawed.
But she proved to be a natural and her performance won rave reviews.
It led to her initial guest appearances in Coronation Street and to the offer of a major role in the film Yanks which Street commitments forced her to turn down.
‘That was heartbreaking,’ she says.
‘But Ivy has turned out to be so good for me I must have done the right thing.
My bank manger loves her, too.’
She smiles at that.
Ever the trouper.
Ever the pro.
Over the next few months Ivy is at the heart of a gruelling Street storyline.
And that's the way Lynne likes it.
As she says herself, this is one lady born to be centre stage.
KING OF HEARTS: When Lynne met Derek it was love at first sight
QUEEN OF CLUBS: Lynne still loves cabaret
Yo ho bingo!
Old Ebenezer salts it away
OLD salt Ebenezer Jones has an extra £10,000 to sprinkle around — thanks to Mirror Bingo.
He scooped the jackpot and a diamond ring prize after calling house on 52 in our big money game number 229.
Lucky Ebenezer, 74, and his 75-year-old wife, who has been fitted with a heart pacemaker, will now be taking life much easier at their home in Aberystwyth, west Wales.
Ebenezer, who spent 25 years in the navy, said: ‘We're not the kind of people who want to go racing round the world.
‘But we'll be treating my daughter and our four grandchildren who live next door.’
Today's game — Page 25
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
GOLDIE YAWN
WHAT have Kevin Costner, Tom Hanks, Goldie Hawn, Michelle Pfeiffer and Kim Basinger got in common?
They have all been voted the most boring people in America, according to a poll in Mademoiselle magazine.
Beyond a croak
COUNTRY star Daniel O'Donnell sets out on a 46-date UK tour next week…after fears that he might never perform again.
The singer, at No. 20 with I Just Want To Dance With You, woke up one morning to find he couldn't speak.
Says O'Donnell: ‘It was terrifying.
Music is my life.
It's all I want to do.’
Doctors ordered the star, who had been playing up to 150 gigs every year for the last 10 years, to rest or maybe wreck his voice for good.
‘I spent three months working out in the gym and having voice therapy,’ O'Donnell says.
‘Now I take life a lot easier.’
BIG DEAL, PRINCE
PRINCE'S new £50 million record contract is not as good as it seems.
The deal, with Warner Bros Records, easily beats the £30 million contracts signed by rivals Madonna and Michael Jackson.
But Prince only gets £5 million per album if he sells 5 million copies — or a new fee is agreed.
To date Prince has averaged 4.1 million sales per album.
Only three of his 13 LPs have topped 5 million.
BIG SALES: Prince
PAP SNAP
AXL ROSE proves that even lanky ginger hair and a wispy beard can't put girls off — provided you're famous enough for them to think you're a really big Gun.
JON'S STORE WAR SHOOT-OUT
POP heart-throb Jon Secada escaped death by seconds during a shoot-out in Miami.
The Florida-based star, at No. 10 with Just Another Day, was out shopping when two rival street gangs opened fire outside the store.
Reveals Jon: ‘I was just paying for my shopping when the gun battle started.
‘A couple of minutes later and I would have walked right into it.’
FORMER Queen star Roger Taylor has launched a new career playing drums with…
Shakin' Stevens.
Taylor teams up with Elvis sound-alike Shakin' on the Welsh singer's new single, Radio, and is also featured in his video.
Cup fans dash down Baker St
CHARTBUSTERS Undercover are set to rake in £500,000…for just three hours' work.
Pop duo Steve Mac and John Matthews finished their smash hit Baker Street — now at No. 3 — in record time because they were desperate to watch the FA Cup Final.
Soccer-mad Steve, whose up-dated version of the Gerry Rafferty classic has sold more than 300,000 copies, reveals: ‘We started work at noon and rushed to get the track finished before the game's 3pm start.
‘Then we got on with watching the match.’
Producer Steve, 20, who recorded Undercover's version on a £1,000 keyboard adds: ‘I just can't comprehend why some bands take so long to produce records.’
Singer John Matthews says: ‘If we'd have spent more time on the record we probably would have ruined it.’
DESPERATE: Matthews
Marje
THE WORLD'S GREATEST ADVICE COLUMNIST
MARJE PROOPS
She can't forgive his years of cheating
MY DAUGHTER and her husband have got themselves into a ridiculous situation and, though I could happily bang their heads together, I feel I've got to help them.
My son-in-law came home a few weeks ago and confessed he'd been having an affair with a girl in his office.
That was bad enough, but when he told my daughter it started three weeks after they married and lasted until three months ago, she threw him out and she's changed the locks of the house and says she will divorce him.
They've been married for 11 years and they've always been so happy.
Surely she could forgive, if not forget.
He has told me he loves my daughter and bitterly regrets the affair which, he says, he couldn't stop because the girl was blackmailing him and threatening to tell his wife.
That's why he finally confessed.
My daughter says that as far as she's concerned he no longer exists.
What can I do to patch things up for them?
NOT a thing, I'm afraid.
All you can do is hope they'll sort themselves out.
But don't be too optimistic and don't imagine that your advice to your daughter will be acceptable.
You are asking a lot of her.
Your son-in-law has been sleeping with this girl at work for the best part of 11 years and presumably he's been having his conjugals in the matrimonial bed, too.
It's reasonable to hope a wife could manage to overlook a casual, brief dalliance.
Or a drunken one-night stand.
If a woman can make an excuse for a man she loves and wants to hang on to, she will.
She'll blame pressure on him at work, or his being led astray by boozy colleagues, or even kid herself some sleazy bimbo seduced him.
And she'll forgive him just this once and it had better not happen again.
Or else.
But your daughter has been consistently betrayed over years.
The girl is his longtime mistress.
I think the blackmail threat was probably a load of eye-wash.
Why should this female start putting the frighteners on him now, after all this time?
The more likely explanation is that she was pressurising him to leave your daughter to marry her.
Maybe he figured the only way to get her off his back was to confess.
I doubt if it ever dawned on him that his patient wife would tell him to get stuffed.
I hope she won't relent, for there can be life after divorce and it would be great for her to find a man who would value her and be faithful.
There are still a few of this dying breed around.
But if you did manage to get her back with her husband again, I'm sure she'd end up forever suspicious, bitter and soured.
You want better for her than that.
Which is why I suggest you button your lip, except to mention that whatever she decides, you are on her side, supporting her through what's going to be a painful experience.
BOUQUET OF THE WEEK
A GRATEFUL reader who would like to thank her daughter for the surprise of a lifetime has nominated her for this week's bouquet.
She writes…
It was my 85th birthday recently and out of the blue, a letter arrived from my daughter containing tickets for a four-day trip to Paris, passes for Euro Disney, and tickets for a cruise down the Seine.
I'd never been abroad before, so it was a wonderful gift.
I didn't have to pay for anything.
She'd saved up for many months.
When we got to the airport at Stansted, she'd even arranged for the Captain to escort me on to the plane.
It was a treat I will always remember.
Please thank her for me.
I'm sending a bouquet to this loving and generous daughter from Loughton, Essex, with my best wishes and her mother's most grateful thanks.
Disturbed by dreams of a butch lover
I'M A healthy 23year-old girl, very happy with my present boyfriend, though we are not going steady.
We often have sex and it's great, nothing kinky or weird.
I like and respect him.
But recently I've been thinking a lot about a person I see once a week at a club.
She seems very masculine, with short hair, jeans and heavy boots and she has a sort of butch look I can't describe.
My secret problem is I fantasise about her making love to me.
It's ridiculous because I couldn't ever bear to kiss another girl or anything like that.
I certainly don't have feelings for this girl who I hardly know, I just have these really disturbing desires.
Obviously I can't talk to anyone about it.
If my friends knew they'd shun me and my boy-friend would leave me.
Please tell me what's wrong with me.
I am very worried.
You are worried, aren't you, because you think you might be a lesbian.
If you were, it's no big deal and you could have a perfectly happy life with the right partner.
Which goes for straights as well as gays.
But I don't think your sexual fantasies about another woman prove you are homosexual.
There is fair evidence that you aren't.
There's the frequent sex with your boyfriend and your shuddering rejection of the idea, even, of kissing a girl.
But let's go back to the sex with your boy-friend.
Do I detect a wistful note when you mention the ‘respectable’ aspect of this relationship?
You emphasise that nothing kinky or weird goes on.
Is there, perhaps, a vague wish that there was more excitement than there is?
I have a feeling that your attraction towards the girl in the club is a symptom of your sexual frustration.
You want your nice boyfriend to do naughty things — the things this girl does in your fantasies.
Perhaps this link hasn't occurred to you, and perhaps when you consider it, it'll make sense to you.
I wouldn't agree that your fantasies are disturbing — or they shouldn't be.
They're merely the result of a feeling of dissatisfaction.
The fact that you fantasise about a woman rather than a man is neither here nor there in these circumstances.
Anyone to latch your restless dreams on to would do.
Countless people — both men and women — enjoy fantasies.
I can reassure you that your sexy dreams are nothing to worry about.
You simply want more lusty sex.
Tell your boyfriend, if you can bring yourself to.
If you can't, it's as well you're not going steady.
The next one might bring you greater satisfaction as well as a more frank and open relationship.
HELP!
HELP!
THERE'S a generally held view that it's almost always females who are victims of sexual abuse.
Not so.
A recent study by the North London Polytechnic shows that about 27 per cent of men have been victims of some unwanted sexual contact before they are 18, compared to over 50 per cent for women.
There's been less help available.
though, for male victims.
But help is there for those who need it and seek it.
A registered charity called Survivors can arrange confidential personal counselling in London.
For an appointment, call 081 340 6118.
Or ring the telephone helpline, on 071 833 3737, which is open on Tuesday and Thursday, 7pm-10pm.
For a free leaflet which lists the services Survivors provide, send an SAE to: Survivors, PO Box 2470, London W2 1NW.
He's so sorry she's always too late
IS THERE a ‘being late’ illness?
If there is, my fiancee suffers from it and she makes me suffer because of it.
She ‘just misses’ trains, turns up hours late for dates, makes sure we're the last to arrive at parties, dawdles getting ready to go out, then tears around hysterically, taking her irritation with herself out on me.
She is the ultimate, disorganised ‘last-minute’ person.
I, on the other hand, am organised and punctual and trying to get her to be organised wears me out.
If it is an illness, is there a cure — or any hope, do you think, of a happy future for us?
Or should I, reluctantly, end the relationship — which, apart from the aggravation and the havoc, is very good and loving?
She is not an irresponsible teenager.
She's 32 years old.
PITY you didn't sign your letter.
I'd lay odds your name is Mr J Spratt.
Perhaps you don't recall the old nursery rhyme, which went: ‘Jack Spratt could eat no fat, his wife could eat no lean/and so between them both you see, they licked the platter clean.’
Sadly, I do not foresee a blissful future for you with this Mrs Spratt-to-be, any more than I see a joyous life ahead for her with you.
For while it's true to say that opposites attract, it's also true that the attraction wears very thin when intense non-stop aggravation takes over.
Then the anger builds up, the quarrels intensify and what little charm there was in the relationship finally erodes.
Your fiancee's lighthearted disregard for timekeeping isn't exactly an illness which could be dealt with by a GP's prescription, but although your question was flippant she has, it seems to me, a slight personality twist which could bring her problems.
Like her failure to realise, or even to care, that her indifference to other people's convenience and comfort could eventually leave her friendless in a cold world.
But you, too, are not above criticism.
You appear to me to be fussy and pedantic.
You would drive her as potty as she's driving you.
You are as wrong for each other as any two people could be.
But love can sometimes conquer a multitude of faults.
Is yours powerful enough to spend the rest of your life in a rage, looking at your watch?
And is hers strong enough to marry a man who regards unpunctuality almost as a mortal sin?
Somehow, I think not.
I'm sorry, Mr Spratt, that I know of no cure for either her disorder or yours, except, perhaps, tolerance.
Get a prescription for that and you're in with a chance.
Work?
It makes you sick
THOUSANDS of people are made ill by work, claim experts.
Up to one in four allergies may be connected with the workplace.
Cases include builders with asthma caused by dust from cement, joiners allergic to sawdust, cashiers with eczema from handling coins, and librarians with rashes from books.
Researchers at Birmingham University say it sometimes takes years for an allergy to surface and it can be triggered by stress or overwork.
Most sufferers stick with their jobs and take medication but others have to quit.
SLUMP BUSTER CHECK OUT OUR £25,000 BONANZA
BUCK UP THE MARKET WITH YOUR FUN-PACKED DAILY MIRROR
100 CHANCES TO WIN £50
KEEP smiling and the slump won't beat you — that's the message in our great £25,000 series of contests aimed at helping you laugh in the face of Lamont.
Today we're offering 100 prizes of £50 to help you do just that.
Some new clothes?
Something to cheer up your home?
A slap-up meal?
We're all penny wise these days.
Our prizes give you the chance to be penny foolish for once.
Today we're taking a stylish trip down memory lane.
Our three pictures, marked A, B and C, show fashions from three decades.
The decades are (1) the 1950s,(2) the 1960s and (3) the 1970s.
We want you to decide which decade is featured in each picture.
For instance, if you think picture C is the 1970s, write down C3 and so on .
Then phone this number: 0891 311 095 (From the Irish Republic 1550 123 592).
You'll hear two simple fashion-related questions.
Leave your answers, your name and address PLUS your decade decisions on the line.
The winners will be chosen at random by our computer.
Lines close on October 2.
CALLS cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute all other times.
From the Republic of Ireland, 48p per minute peak, 36p off-peak, 24p economy.
Sentenced to life
Mercy death case raises change in the law…
…
But should doctors have licence to kill?
MARTIN PHILLIPS
THE trial and conviction of hospital consultant Dr Nigel Cox for the attempted murder of a terminally-ill patient has intensified a long-running debate about ‘mercy killing’.
His conviction appalled many people who supported the actions of a doctor who, everyone involved agreed, was a compassionate man who had acted in what he considered his patient's best interests.
But his sentence — 12 months in prison, suspended for a year — was regarded as much too light by those who believe that deliberately to take a human life is always wrong.
More and more doctors are facing the same sort of dilemma, as the proportion of elderly people increases in Britain and medical advances make it possible to keep alive patients who would previously have died.
So should the law allow mercy killing —‘euthanasia’— to be available to those patients suffering incurable diseases who do not want their painful lives to be prolonged?
The last major opinion poll in this country, by NOP in 1989, showed 75 per cent support for legalised euthanasia.
Smaller polls since have shown up to 95 per cent in favour.
Literally translated, euthanasia means ‘easy death’— but there is nothing easy about ending the life of a patient for whom pain has made existence intolerable.
Treatment
Families dread sentencing loved ones to death, doctors hate being forced to play God and lawyers fear the minefield of legislation that would be needed.
‘The law leaves us in a very curious condition,’ former consultant Alan Dixon told the Cox case jury.
‘We are allowed to give drugs to relieve pain, even if they shorten life.
We are not allowed to give drugs to shorten life, even if they relieve pain.
‘That's the sort of predicament we are in.
It's a razor's edge.’
‘Non-intervention’ is routinely practised in British hospitals, where life-prolonging treatment is halted at the request of patients who have had enough.
Some doctors may even hasten death with the pain-killing drugs they administer at this time, but their ‘intent to kill’ or otherwise, is rarely tested in a court.
Holland's liberal attitude is held as a model by many pro-euthanasia campaigners.
Though mercy killing is still officially illegal, the law turns a blind eye to the 2.4 per cent of Dutch deaths which are accounted for by it.
In Britain, however, patients on life-support machines or in a ‘permanent vegetative state’ cannot ask for the machine to be switched off.
Doctors are obliged by law to keep them alive while there is a chance of recovery.
This autumn the House of Lords will be asked to give people a legal right to choose between life and death in advance of any injury or illness that would leave them in a ‘permanent vegetative state’.
The Advanced Directive, or ‘living will’, could be filled in by anyone over the age of 18 and lodged with their GP.
It could become enforceable in a court of law.
Debate
Active euthanasia, where intent to kill can be shown, still remains strictly illegal, whatever the wishes of the patient, and that is the cause of the fiercest debate.
‘Many people are dying with great indignity and with great suffering,’ said John Oliver, general secretary of the Voluntary Euthanasia Society.
‘It is a human right to die with dignity.
Surely it is not beyond the wit of man to devise laws with suitable safeguards so that legalised euthanasia is not abused.
‘As long as euthanasia is very much a last resort when everything has been tried and has failed, I can see no difficulty.
‘We want to see it properly regulated with guidelines for doctors.’
But Keith Davies, spokesman for the anti-euthanasia Life campaign, said: ‘We reject any suggestion that the law concerning euthanasia needs amending.
Society should never allow doctors to be licensed to kill.
‘Good doctors do not kill patients — they kill pain and alleviate suffering.’
He said the hospice movement in this country is envied around the world for its success in alleviating the pain of terminally-ill patients.
‘In my opinion euthanasia is a crime against humanity which one should never consent or cooperate with.
Care
‘Even when the sick are incurable they are never untreatable.
Whatever their condition, they should always be given appropriate loving care.
‘Any legalisation of euthanasia would be a minefield which would lead to terrible abuses.
‘It would lead to numerous elderly, handicapped or socially difficult people being nominated as involuntary candidates for death.’
The British Medical Association continues to defend current laws.
In its latest report to doctors it concluded:
‘Patients have the right to decline treatment — but they do not have the right to demand treatment which the doctor cannot, in conscience, provide.
Patients cannot and should not be able to require their doctors to collaborate in their deaths.
‘The law should not be changed and the deliberate taking of a human life should remain a crime.’
The widespread sympathy in Britain for Dr Cox may add weight to the argument of the pro-euthanasia campaigners.
But no change in the law will ever make this life-and-death decision easy.
DR COX: Believed he acted in patient's best interest
ANNE ROBINSON
Tears of a clown
THE weeping Duchess of York, attending the annual meeting of the Motor Neurone Disease Association last Saturday, was quoted as saying she will not rest until a cure has been found.
Which is marvellous news.
Since it presumably means we will not for some time to come be seeing her again stretched horizontal on a sun lounger.
TRADING BLOWS
BANK clerk Helen Egan who swapped jobs with Terry Wogan on Trading Places Day, has sadly been made redundant.
But then, so has Terry…
A licence to kill is no cure
TOWARDS the end of her life my mother was in hospital, a victim of Alzheimer's Disease, a severe diabetic, unable to walk and increasingly unable to remain conscious for more than a few minutes at a time.
One Sunday, when my father and I went to visit her, we found her condition had worsened.
Overnight she'd caught a chill which showed every sign of developing into pneumonia.
The nurse in charge called us into the office, where a young female duty doctor was waiting.
The only way of halting the infection, explained the doctor, was to give my mother antibiotics.
It was clear she was very reluctant to do this.
I couldn't understand why.
We must have spent at least five minutes talking round the subject.
Hang on, I finally said.
If antibiotics are likely to clear up the infection, why are we having this long discussion?
What is it about antibiotics, I demanded, that you consider a drawback?
She was left with no alternative.
‘Antibiotics,’ she replied slowly, ‘will prolong your mother's life.’
Give them to her immediately, my father ordered.
Her condition improved but a week later the infection returned and she died.
Had we agreed to medication being withheld, could the doctor or the nurses have been charged with attempted murder?
Apparently not.
Humane
Easing the passing, as it is often euphemistically described, is not unlawful.
What a doctor cannot do is  administer a drug for which the sole purpose is to end life.
But supposing we were in the same distressing condition as Mrs Lilian Boyes, whose pain was so intense she was described as ‘howling and screaming like a dog?’
Would not any of us wish, in the circumstances, that the courageous and humane Dr Nigel Cox was on duty to do the same for us as he did for Mrs Boyes?
Almost certainly.
So should not the law be changed immediately to prevent the likes of Dr Cox ending up in the dock?
Almost certainly not.
Because it might not be the compassionate, caring Dr Cox who is at our bedside.
We might instead be in the hands of Dr Desperate, Dr Impatient, Dr Needabed or Dr. About-to-go-on-holiday.
I do not want legislation which would give less conscientious members of the medical profession permission to confuse expediency with compassion.
The right to die and the right to help someone to die are surely matters which are best left to discretion and commonsense.
COURAGE: Dr Nigel Cox
SEX WAR'S REAL LOSERS
JOURNALIST Neil Lyndon has just published a book which is a fierce attack on women entitled No More Sex War.
In it, he argues that women are free to be as nasty, rude, insulting and vicious as they like about men, but the reverse is not true.
And, therefore, these days it is men who are oppressed, not women.
The argument is nonsense because it fails to take into account the way women are treated as a matter of course.
Particularly mothers of young children.
They know better than anyone that all the badmouthing of men they could manage would not begin to balance the inequality they experience when it comes to the job market — fewer opportunities, low wages, nonexistent child-care facilities and a hopelessly uneven battle to survive if, for example, the father of their children jumps ship and fails to pay any maintenance.
Victim
Ironically, Mrs Neil Lyndon has now revealed she was abandoned by her husband last year and only managed to receive child support for their six-year-old son by obtaining a court order.
Perhaps Mr Lyndon will add a chapter to his book to explain how in circumstances such as his own, which are pretty typical, he is the victim rather than his wife.
Great untouchables
HE insisted that the Church has never ruled that a priest should not have sex, only that he should not marry,’ says Monika (sic) Kocanek by way of explaining how she ended up in bed with Fr Christopher O'Neill and then found herself pregnant.
This, I'm afraid, doesn't wash.
Anyone brought up a Catholic will tell you the vow of celibacy is the only really lively bit of the Church's teaching.
And from the moment young girls learn about it, priests in general, and good-looking, charming ones in particular , are regarded with a mixture of awe and excitement precisely because it is understood they don't do it, never have done it and, regretfully, never will.
LAST LINE
POOR Squidgy has been forced to return her borrowed £70,000 Mercedes sports car.
But then, as she said herself, you can't help other people unless you yourself have suffered.
‘He screamed at me, calling me an evil bitch who had tried to trap him’
PRIEST'S FURY AT THE WOMAN HE MADE PREGNANT
NOREEN TAYLOR
FATHER Christopher O'Neill's baby daughter Jennifer is now four months old and still the priest, aided by the Catholic Church, remains in hiding.
He has not spoken to the child's mother, Monika Kocanek, nor made any attempt to see the baby since her birth.
And while Monika has been told unofficially that she is no longer welcome as a teacher of religious studies at St Thomas More School, Bedford, Father O' Neill continues to enjoy the protection of the church as a practising priest.
Albeit a fugitive one.
Roughly translated, it would appear that this single mother is not fit to guide the spiritual education of Catholic children, while the priest still enjoys its blessings.
No wonder bitterness pours forth when you ask Monika how she feels about the father of her child and the faith she once embraced.
‘He is a shit,’ comes the  uncompromising reply.
‘As for the Church, I want nothing more to do with them.
‘When I told Chris I was pregnant, I expected panic certainly, but not the hatred that came pouring from him.
He screamed at me, calling me an evil bitch who had tried to entrap him.
Yet he knew I had been taking the Pill every day.’
The priest's hysteria was later to switch to a mood of calm practicality.
He told Monika there was only one way out of this nightmare.
‘It's very simple,’ said the priest.
‘You'll have to get rid of it.’
Monika was stunned by his words.
Nothing made sense to her.
This man of the church was, for his own protection, advising her to terminate the life of their own child.
Days, and nights of tears and recriminations followed until he finally understood that she would never abort their child.
Then his approach changed.
‘He told me he would leave the priesthood and find a home for us near his parents in Bolton.
He told me to leave my job, to put the house on the market.
We even went up to Bolton to break the news to his family, while my family started to pack up here.’
A telephone call with the most devastating news followed.
‘I'm not coming back, Monika,’ he said.
‘Please don't try to find me.’
Frightened, but believing this was only a passing sense of panic, Monika ran to the church hoping she could calm him.
She remembers running up the aisle, but mass had ended.
So she dashed into the disrobing room behind the altar — and into another priest, Father Derek Laverty.
‘Father O'Neill has gone — it was for the best,’ he told her.
He had chosen to remain in the priesthood.
It was useless trying to contact him.
‘Babies should be wanted and planned,’ added Father Laverty.
‘It might be a good idea to start thinking about adoption.
And what's more  Monika need not worry about her future.
The Church would take care of everything.
‘I realise now that I was being told to get lost, but that Chris didn't have the guts to tell me himself,’ she recalls.
Aside from her parents, Monika felt isolated.
School colleagues were suddenly thin on the ground.
Father Patrick Lynch, vice-principal of Father O'Neill's order, told her to ‘keep quiet’ and that the problem should be sorted out between and herself and her lover.
And yet he refused to divulge Father O'Neill's  whereabouts .
Added to which was the emotional harassment of fellow priest Laverty whose idea of support was to visit and then accuse her of trying to wreck the life of a good priest.
He described her as unfit to be called a Catholic and certainly unfit for motherhood.
Says Monika: ‘I thought the head of the diocese, Bishop Leo McCartie, might force Chris to face his responsibilities.
But he simply listened, said he was sympathetic, and that Chris could not be expelled, only moved away from the parish.’
There was to be one last visit from Father O' Neill.
One full of recriminations and bitterness.
‘You could have had an abortion and nobody would have known.
Now the Bishop has had me kicked out of the parish and it's all your fault.
‘Why, have you done this to me?’ he cried on his knees.
Monika cried too.
She begged him to stay so that they could start life afresh as a family.
Despite everything she still loved him.
But he left anyway.
Promised her he would be in touch, and to be with her for the birth of their baby.
Letters, and telephone calls followed.
Calls full of anguish, of him confessing his love for her, while imploring for time to explore his spiritual struggle.
The calls ended in January.
He was entering a clinic for errant priests in order to be counselled.
‘Lucky him,’ is Monika's caustic response.
‘I've been left here holding the baby, jobless, practically penniless, worrying how I'm going to meet mortgage repayments.
All I've had from him are two cheques totally £600.
‘No one has offered me counselling or sympathy.
As far as the Church is concerned, Jennifer is a mistake best forgotten and not worth sacrificing a priest for.
‘Father Laverty came to see me in hospital two days after the birth and had the nerve to look at my beautiful baby and ask me to put her up for adoption.’
Through the courts, Monika will now force the priest to meet child  maintenance payments.
She has already written to the Superior General of the Dublin-based order, and to Cardinal Cathal Daly, the Primate of Ireland.
Both have replied saying while they are sympathetic, they can do nothing about her situation.
Meanwhile, Father O'Neill's quest for self-discovery continues.
But Monika has a quest of her own.
What exactly is she going to say to her daughter when she starts asking questions about her father?
Monika asks: ‘Do I answer ‘Sorry darling, but Daddy is a priest and he chose to put God and his Church before you’?
‘The awful part of it is, I still have strong, unresolved feelings for him.
I want to go and rebuild my life, but I feel I can't until he contacts me.
‘All I want is for him to come here, take Jennifer in his arms and face me.
‘Then, let him tell me he still wants to forget his child and return to the priesthood.’
HYSTERICAL: Father O'Neill
OUTCASTS: Monika with baby Jennifer outside the Holy Cross church which Father O'Neill joined as an assistant parish priest Pictures: BRENDAN MONKS
MIRROR MONEY
NEIL SIMPSON /JOHN HUSBAND
Rent with grief
BLAMELESS TENANTS ARE BOOTED OUT AS LANDLORDS GO BUST
AS THE slump bites harder more and more families, who cannot afford huge mortgage repayments, are being forced out of their own homes into the arms of landlords.
The law protects tenants from being ripped off by rack-rent thugs.
But if you are not careful you can still end up on the street and losing money, even when your rent is fully paid up.
That happened to Catherine Lane when she moved out of a London flat.
For rental agencies, like any other firms these days, can go bust without warning.
Says Catherine ‘My flatmates and I were expecting the return of our £780 deposit when we were told the agency had gone bankrupt.
‘I need that cash for a deposit on my new place, but it looks like it's gone for good now.’
Family man Danny Grabauskas, who lives near Axminster, Devon fared worse.
He found a place through a reputable lettings agency.
But although Danny paid the rent in full each month the owner wasn't paying the mortgage and the lender didn't know Danny was a tenant.
‘We suddenly heard the place was being repossessed in 14 days,’ says Danny.
‘We went to court but it was too late.’
Danny, his wife and two kids were forced to lodge with friends while they searched for new digs.
But you can reduce the risk of this sort of tragedy by following these tips: NEVER hand over cash without getting a receipt saying what it's for.
You'll need this as proof if the landlord or agency hit trouble.
TRY to deal only with firms that belong to the Association of Residential Letting Agents.
Because even if an ARLA member goes bust its clients are covered for loss by insurance.
FOR your local ARLA agent phone 071 734 0655.
IF an agency goes bust ask your landlord to refund cash you are owed.
Although your tenancy agreement may be with the agent many courts are making landlords pick up the debt.
You have nothing to lose by taking action in the small claims court.
IF the property is on mortgage make sure the lender knows you are the tenant.
Then you will be given fair warning if the borrower defaults on repayments.
TO check who holds a mortgage on a property get the Leaflet On The Open Register from: The Land Registry, 32, Lincolns Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3PH.
SLUMPBUSTER £25,000 PRIZE BLITZ
Laugh all the way to the bank with the DAILY MIRROR
Win £150 and blast those bills
DON'T let the depression depress you.
Instead, have fun with our great £25,000 series of slump-busting contests and laugh in the face of Lamont.
In Day Three of our series, we're offering 30 prizes of £150 to help with those bills that never go away…gas, electricity, the telephone.
When they thud through the letter-box, £150 will go a long way to ease your mind.
A tankful of petrol wouldn't come amiss.
And what about that wretched poll tax?
Both cost money.
Today we're taking a look at the telly.
Chosen
Our three pictures marked A, B and C are taken from three TV commercials which feature three different services.
They are (1) gas,(2) electricity and (3) telephones.
We want you to decide which utility is featured in each picture.
For instance, if you think picture C is telephones, write down C3 and so on .
Then phone this number: 0891 311 096 (From the Irish Republic 1550 123 593).
You'll hear two simple questions.
Leave your answers, your name and address, PLUS your utility decisions, on the line.
The winners will be chosen at random by our computer.
Lines close on October 2.
CALLS cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute all other times.
From the Republic of Ireland, 48p per minute peak, 36p off-peak, 24p economy.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
IF you are desperate to sell your home then get the price right.
That's the message from Bryant, the building firm which has increased its house sales by a quarter in the past year despite the housing slump.
Finance chief Michael Chapman says: ‘Price is the key — gimmicks are a waste of time.
The average cost of a Bryant home was cut from £90,000 to £86,000 last year.
Good housekeeping by Bryant elsewhere in the company helped double profits to £20.3 million in the year to June.
SHOE firm Church is doing its bit to balance the yearly £200 million we spend on Italian footwear by opening a shop in Milan tomorrow.
Poor relations
EXPOSED The sham of Major's ‘classless’ Britain
RICHARD GARNER /ROGER TODD
PRIME Minister John Major's ‘classless society’ was revealed as a second class sham yesterday — from the school playground to the factory floor.
First the Government's handling of our children's schooling was condemned as ‘divisive and unacceptable’ by the man who advises Prince Charles on the state of education in Britain.
Then a European Commission report showed that British workers do the LONGEST hours in Europe — for FIFTH RATE pay.
The Government's caning began at a conference of 230 headmasters from the country's top public schools.
They sat astonished as Sir Claus Moser, head of the National Commission on Education, told them: ‘The majority of our children are in schools which you wouldn't want to be associated with.
‘We have very many secondary schools which are simply unacceptable in terms of physical conditions.
Thirty per cent of them are unfit to be used for education.
‘They have leaking roofs, libraries which are a joke and unacceptable teaching conditions.
‘Having wonderful schools at the top and so many poor schools — both primary and secondary — in which so many of our children are taught, is a big dilemma.’
Division
And in a week when European unity is in the spotlight, Sir Claus told the conference at Bruges in Belgium: ‘We remain, sad to say, probably the most divisive society in advanced Europe.
‘We have always been a class-dominated nation, and we remain divisive with unacceptable inequalities and disadvantages for many families.
‘Our educational world is also divisive.
We have some of the very finest schools to be found anywhere in the world — but we also have many which are simply unacceptable.’
The scathing attack came just two years after Sir Claus had caused a storm by warning our crumbling schools were in danger of turning out the dunces of Europe.
Millions of children were getting an education ‘not worthy of a civilised nation,’ he said then.
Yesterday he told the heads of such toffs' schools as Eton and Marlborough that nothing had changed.
Sir Claus pointed out that one in seven children still left school without being able to read or write properly.
And he urged the heads to think how they could bridge the gap between Britain's best and worst schools.
Sir Claus was once asked to advise Prince Charles for a major speech in which the Prince warned we were in danger of producing a ‘culturally illiterate’ generation.
Now Sir Claus's National Commission on Education — backed by industry — is expected to deliver a damning indictment of education standards next autumn.
But it's not only in the classroom where Major's classless vision is torn to shreds, as a new EC report — Europe in Figures — showed yesterday.
When it comes to pay and conditions at work we're nowhere near being in the same class as our European counterparts.
British men work on average five hours more per week than their counterparts in
France, Germany and Italy — putting in 45.4 hours.
Women fare little better, working an average 40.1 hours here, compared to the Euro average of 38.9 hours.
For all that effort — the sums in the wage packets don't add up, with British employees earning less than those in Denmark, Germany, Holland and Luxembourg.
The report offers no explanation for our figures being wide of the mark.
But Philip Pearson of the independent Low Pay Unit said: ‘It's because we have lower pay rates AND less productivity.
‘Industry can't afford to invest in modern technology because of the Government's high interest rates, so it is less competitive.
‘It doesn't matter how hard people work.
It's a serious problem.’
Even when British workers manage to get the cash in their hands, they find it is being eaten up faster.
Grocery prices in Britain went up 26 per cent between 1985 and 1990 — compared with five per cent in Germany and 16 per cent in France.
Beaches
Miserable at being a second class citizen?
You'll be displeased to know that you can't even avoid the tag if you try to get away from it all to cheer yourself up.
For instance, a trip to the seaside is out for a start.
When it comes to good quality bathing beaches the EC report shows we trail in a poor seventh behind Italy, France, Denmark, Germany, Spain and Holland.
It all goes to prove one thing.
Wherever you go there is no hiding place in John Major's second class society.
BOTTOM CLASS: Leaking roofs are common at Britain's sinking secondary schools
TOP CLASS: Eton offers a good education — for those who can afford it
You know who your friends are
AFTER THE DEAFNESS, JACK NOTICED DINNER INVITATIONS WERE SCARCE
‘In the good old days David Owen would have asked me to join him’
PETER DONNELLY
A MINOR ear operation in 1967 left Jack Ashley totally deaf.
His career as an MP seemed over.
But less than six months later he fought back with a Commons performance that impressed the House and Prime Minister Harold Wilson…
JACK'S return to the Commons had been a triumph.
But the close friendships he had formerly enjoyed there began to dissolve.
One night, he recalls, he sat alone in the Commons library when David Owen passed by and returned a few moments later with David Marquand.
‘As they approached I hoped they would ask me to join them for dinner as in the old days,’ he recalls.
‘They nodded, smiled affably and walked past.
‘I turned to look at the retreating  figures of my two friends, feeling unbearably isolated, and went to eat alone in the cafeteria.’
They weren't the only ones who snubbed Jack.
Some MPs, or their wives, amended their guest lists.
‘Invitations to their homes for formal and informal lunches, dinners and parties became notably scarce,’ he says.
‘I consoled myself that the quality of friendships was more important than the quantity.’
One woman helped Jack carry on, the woman he has dedicated his autobiography to — his devoted wife Pauline.
‘Without Pauline’, he says, ‘it would have been impossible to carry on.
When Pauline was around, the problems of total deafness were never insuperable.’
They met at Cambridge when she —‘a lovely young woman with dark brown hair and blue eyes’— went to interview him for the university newspaper.
They married in 1951.
Throughout his personal battles, and those for others, she has been his ears on the world.
She helps out when lip-reading proves difficult.
And she discovered a telephone ear-piece extension which allows her to listen and repeat the words of a caller to him.
He lip-reads her, and answers accordingly.
And she got Palantype equipment in the Commons, which helped him follow proceedings.
Shy and modest, Pauline Ashley says only: ‘I just do what a wife has to.
That's what wives are for.’
But she admits: ‘Yes, there have been times of anger and frustration for me as well as Jack.
He seemed to be bound for such great things…
‘Then, when we realised and accepted the situation, I just got on and helped him with his fight.’
At first that fight was an uphill struggle.
Most MPs and Minister were just not interested.
It made him all the more determined to do something.
He got his chance when Manchester MP Alf Morris won the ballot to introduce a private member's Bill in Parliament.
‘He was an MP whom I could lip-read without difficulty,’ recalls Jack.
Together they planned a comprehensive Bill to help disabled people.
‘It soon became clear that disabled people were neglected, depressed by disability, oppressed by poverty and hidden behind closed doors,’ he says.
Beginning with a few notes on the back of an envelope, the Bill expanded rapidly.
It became law on May, 29 1970 — creating many new rights for the disabled over a wide field and elevating the subject in Parliament.
‘My involvement, entailing more work than I had expected, pulled me out of the isolation of deafness,’ says Jack.
‘It was a psychological tonic which helped me to cope with a silent Parliament.
‘I was at last certain that, despite total deafness and the cacophony of tinnitus, I could continue as an MP.’
Now in the House of Lords, Jack continues his fight.
He has an important new ally — Princess Diana.
Says Jack: ‘She learned to sign — one of the many ways she helped deaf people.
‘Her royal example has meant a great deal.’
A jet plane inside my head
AS Jack lay in hospital he heard the sound of Liverpool trams clanking and roaring past.
Then he looked out of the window…there were NO trams or tramlines.
The screaming and shriek were noises in his head.
That was Jack's introduction to tinnitus, the head noises which are a deeply distressing by-product of some forms of deafness.
And they are incurable.
He wakes to his ‘noises’ every morning.
‘On rare occasions when it is unbearable, with a jet engine noise screaming inside my head, and combining with other roaring noises, I take sleeping pills and try to go back to sleep.
Most days when it is severe, I simply get up and immerse myself in work.
But for me, tinnitus is as disturbing an affliction as total deafness.
‘And if, by some magic wand, I was to be offered an overnight cure for just one of them, I am not sure which I would choose.’
WHOSE LINE IS IT?
Pauline acts as Jack's ears on the phone — mouthing the caller's message for him to lip-read
PEOPLE'S JACK: Talking with the disabled — and his election victory in 1974
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
FORGET about toe-sucking, good lovers lick knees.
Sexologists claim the inside of the knee is a prime erotic area and acupuncturists confirm a cluster of sexual points there.
Now we know the real meaning of going weak at the knees.
Wire on the wagon
WILD rocker Nicky Wire has quit boozing…after too many hangovers.
The star from Manic Street Preachers — who have shot to No.7 with Theme From M.A.S.H.
— hit the bottle with a vengeance when the group made the big time.
But the bass player claims that he's now put his beer guzzling days behind him.
Says Wire: ‘When we started out, I was like a kid in a candy store.
I drank all the booze I could lay my hands on.
‘I did a lot of crazy things like smashing up hotel rooms.
But booze made me really depressed.
That and the hangovers have turned me teetotal.
I'm hoping the rest of the band will cut down now I've stopped.’
BATTY BATMAN
HOLY nutcase…
Batman is going bonkers.
DC Comics plan to turn the Caped Crusader into a drunken buffoon.
And foes like the Penguin and Joker will be seen as mere alcoholic hallucinations.
DRUNK: Batman
On his Todd
WHY EX-NEIGHBOURS STAR KRISTIAN IS HAPPY TO BE SINGLE
…apart from the 65-year-old minder who washes his red undies
‘I haven't got the time to meet girls’
TONY PURNELL
HE'S the heart-throb thousands of schoolgirls want to date — but they'll have to get past the secret woman in his life first.
Because former Neighbours star Kristian Schmid now shares a luxury flat in London with a lovely lady called Marci.
But there's no need to be too  heartbroken , girls.
Even though Marci gets to give him a cuddle from time to time and wash his favourite bright red undies.
For Kristian is still on his Todd romantically — and Marci is his 65-year-old grannie.
‘I am very happy with my gran.
We are more like room mates than grandmother and grandson,’ says Kristian who makes his debut as a presenter on hit BBC kids' show Going Live! on Saturday.
‘It is great to have someone to come home to.’
Marci came with Kristian from Australia when he quit his part as Todd Landers in the hit soap earlier this year and headed for Britain.
And his parents back home in Fiji were right behind her decision.
‘They said they would not allow him to come otherwise so here I am,’ says Marci.
‘It would have been difficult for him on his own in a strange country on the other side of the world.
The arrangement suits me fine and Kristian is happy because I spoil him rotten.
I look after all his needs.’
Marci also helps with his fan mail — and keeps the girls at bay.
‘Kristian is very good with fans when they see him the street and ask him for autographs.
But he gets very angry if they come up to him in a restaurant when he is eating or if he is busy talking to someone else,’ says Marci.
‘He gets lots of letters from girls telling him how wonderful he is and even proposing marriage.’
But so far they have all fallen on stony ground.
Kristian admits he is a bit of a loner.
‘I have never had a serious girlfriend.
I just think it is odd at 17 to spend all your time with one person.
I would have to be in love with someone to do that.
‘It is not that I haven't got time for girls.
I haven't got time to meet girls.
There is a big difference.’
Hard work has been one of the main reasons — and Kristian is back in the swing with no regrets about leaving Neighbours.
He quit after four and a half years because he feared he would get tagged as a soap star.
‘I guess it was a big gamble to turn my back on Neighbours but I felt I had already been in the show too long,’ says Kristian, who will still be seen in the soap in Britain for another 12 months.
‘I had a lot of fun making the programme but it can get boring after a while.
Now I want to be an actor.’
So as well as joining Phillip Schofield and Sarah Greene on Going Live!, he's busy filming a new five-part sci-fi series for TV.
And Kristian has his fingers crossed that Thames Television's £1 million children's series The Tomorrow People will be a hit.
In the drama Kristian plays Adam the leader of a new generation of youngsters who discover they have special powers.
Their adventures begin when an ancient space ship is discovered on a remote island in the Pacific.
Some of the scenes were filmed in the unlikely Pacific setting of Bournemouth sands — where onlookers caught a glimpse of those red underpants as Kristian changed out of wet clothes after beach scenes.
After emerging from the sea for the fourth time he groaned about his physique.
Arnie Shwarzenegger he isn't.
‘I keep on growing up instead of growing out.
I am nearly 5ft 11ins tall and should be around 11 stone but barely weigh 9st 7lbs’, he complains.
‘I've tried and tried to put on weight but in the end I thought bugger it.
If people can't accept me as I am that's tough.
They can take me or leave me.’
A legion of schoolgirls would dearly like to take up that offer — if it wasn't for Marci.
GRANNY'S BOY: Kristian is happy to share a flat with 65-year-old Marci.
‘It's great to have someone to come home to.
We are just like room-mates,’ says the star
KID'S STUFF: Kristian is teaming up with Phillip and Sarah Picture: JOHN ROGERS/RADIO TIMES
RISING STAR: Kristian as Todd with girlfriend Cody
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
WIN TICKETS TO SEE ELTON IN NEW YORK
REACH for the sky with yet another Limit fly-away competition.
We've arranged to take two readers to NEW YORK to see superstar Elton John perform at the city's famous Madison Square Garden.
The lucky winner and a partner will get FREE return flights to New York, tickets to the show on October 3rd, an overnight stay at a luxury hotel AND $300 spending money.
The dream trip comes courtesy of Elton John and his video company, Warner Music Vision.
And for 50 runners-up we've got copies of Elton's great new video, Live In Barcelona.
To enter, simply answer this question: What is Elton John's REAL name?
Phone your answer on the following number (…to come…) by midnight Friday September 25 leaving your name, address and daytime phone number.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times and should cost around the same as a first class postcard.
ELTON: gig
Thanks, but no tanks
HARRISON FORD IN SWIMMING POOL RESCUE DRAMA
HOLLYWOOD superstar Harrison Ford was left gasping when a spectacular film stunt went wrong during the making of his latest hit movie.
The tough-guy actor — filming smash hit movie Patriot Games which is released in Britain to-morrow — had to be rescued by emergency crews after a tough underwater fight scene left him exhausted and close to drowning.
Ford, whose new £35million movie is a box office smash in America had spent all day shooting the physically demanding scene in a huge water tank in Hollywood.
‘I thought I'd done well by managing to last two and a half minutes without coming up for air he said.’
But director Phil Noyce called for the scene to be re-shot time after time.
As the hours wore on the superstar actor became more and more exhausted.
Says Harrison: ‘I was thrashing about in the water with all my clothes on and ended up being dragged down.
It was one of the most demanding scenes I've ever done.’
Ford plays adventurer Jack Ryan in the movie based on a top selling Tom Clancy book.
GASPING Harrison Ford
NATURAL CHARM
MADCAP guitarist Nick Seymour rollerskated down New York's Fifth Avenue starkers…after a video shoot got too hot.
The Crowded House star, at No 27 with It's Only Natural, stunned onlookers.
His impromptu striptease took place while the band were making a £30,000 promo for the hit.
Says a video worker: ‘The director kept on re-shooting the scene and Nick was getting hotter and hotter.
‘After the third retake, he threatened to take off a bit of clothing every time the scene was done again.
‘When the director ordered the tenth run through Nick  peeled off his undies.’
Eagle-eyed viewers of the video can just see a clip of the star skating down the street in his underwear.
MICHELLE'S EX-LOVE IS LOST
MICHELLE Pfeiffer's boyfriend Fisher Stevens says he has been left shattered by the break-up of their three-year relationship.
Says Stevens: ‘Now it's over my nerves are jangling and I'm hurting, I'm a raw wound.
Relationships are difficult.
I never had one before that lasted more than nine months.’
EX: Michelle Pfeiffer
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
Knickers keep Next quids in!
SEXY bras and  knickers like these have helped to keep Next quids in, despite the recession.
The Next Directory is doing good mail-order fashion business and savage cost-cutting in the group's buying policy and its high-street shops have all helped to produce profits of £8.3 million in the six months to August.
But it's still a far cry from the Eighties when Next made £10 million a MONTH.
Bite out of Tesco food bill
JOHN HUSBAND /IAN MILLER
SUPERMARKET giant Tesco yesterday claimed that the slump is forcing us to spend £3 a week less on food than we did last year.
Chairman Sir Ian McLaurin said shoppers are tightening their belts and ‘trading down and buying cheaper food -such as bread, lemonade and frozen chips’
More customers are flooding into Tesco's 401 stores, where they spend an average £30 a week, but that's a three per cent drop on last year.
Everyone is hungry for bargains and two-for-the price-of-one offers helped to boost sales nine per cent to £3,649 million.
Tesco's profits in the 24 weeks to August were up nine per cent at £253 million.
This compares with a 22 per cent increase over the same period last year 
WIN a holiday in Las Vegas
BET YOU CAN'T RESIST OUR SUPER BUGSY CONTEST
PLUS £6,000 worth of videos
PLACE your bets with Bugsy and you could be jetting to Las Vegas for a week in the gambling capital of the world.
To mark the video rental release on September 30 of Warren Beatty's Oscar-winning gangster movie Bugsy, we've linked with 20.20 Vision to give away a fabulous holiday in the States and £6,000 worth of videos.
Our lucky couple will fly with USAir to Las Vegas where a limousine will take them to the sensational medieval-style Excalibur Hotel for their six-night stay.
The biggest hotel in the world, the Excalibur has a nightly show called King Arthur's Tournament.
Our winners will see it and the stunning illusions of Siegfried and Roy at the Mirage Hotel.
PLUS they will be given $250 worth of gambling chips.
Bugsy (18) tells the story of star-struck gangster Bugsy Siegal, played by Warren Beatty, who falls for a Hollywood starlet and dreams of creating a magnificent new hotel in the middle of the Nevada desert.
For 100 runners-up we have copies of the video, worth around £60.
To enter, name the cartoon hero Warren Beatty played on screen:(a) Superman;(b) Batman;(c) Dick Tracy.
Print your answer on a postcard with your name and address and send to Bugsy Video Contest, Daily Mirror, PO Box 1793, Maida Hill, London W9 by October 5.
Sender of the first correct entry drawn wins the trip, the next 100 the videos.
Standard Mirror contest rules apply.
PLACE YOUR BETS: In Las Vegas
SLUMP BUSTER £25,000 BONANZA
YOU'RE MILES BETTER OFF WITH THE DAILY MIRROR
TODAY £50 off your petrol bill
FORGET the slump when you drive to the pump.
You can enjoy miles of smiles with our great £25,000 series of slump-busting contests to help you laugh in the face of Lamont.
In Day Four of our series we're offering 100 prizes of £50 to fill up your car and step on the gas.
And speaking of the high cost of living, don't think we've forgotten the Poll Tax — that's the subject for tomorrow.
Today we're taking to the road with the stars.
Cars
Our three pictures marked A, B and C show three well-known TV personalities — A is Jim Bergerac, B is Inspector Morse and C is the Larkin family — and the cars they drive in the TV series that made them famous.
We want you to tell us in what part of Great Britain each of the famous shows are set.
For instance, if you think picture A, which features Jim Bergerac, is set in Jersey, write A = Jersey and so on .
Then phone this number: 0891 311 097 (From the Irish Republic 1550 123 594).
You'll hear two simple questions.
Leave your answers, your name and address PLUS your car decisions on the line.
The winners will be chosen at random by our computer.
Lines close on October 2.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute all other times.
From the Republic of Ireland, 48p per minute peak, 36p off-peak, 24p economy.
PAUL FOOT
BREWERS WALLOP TENANTS' DREAM
WHEN the Government accepted the Monopolies Commission recommendation that the big brewers should sell off some of their pubs, many publicans hoped they would be able to become independent landlords.
Lois and James Tibbets had that dream.
They applied to buy their pub, The Town Brewery, Emsworth, Hants, from Whitbreads.
At first Whitbreads agreed.
Then, suddenly, they changed their minds.
They announced the sale of the lease to a brand new company called Inn Business Ltd.
The managing director is Alan Jackson, former tied trade director of Whitbread Restaurants.
The operations director is Bob Dixon, former operations director for Whitbread Tied Trade.
The tenanted trade manager was at first Mike Bryan, a former area manager for Whitbreads.
He has been replaced by Tim Wakelin, former area manager for Whitbread on the South Coast.
The freehold of the pub stays with Whitbread and the beer is still supplied from the same Whitbread depot.
Tied
Says Lois: ‘We are still virtually tied to Whitbreads.
It's a greater monopoly than ever.
‘There are 14 pubs in this town.
At one stage we had six separate pub owners.
Now there are three.’
Bob Dixon from Inn Business says: ‘Our core business is our managed houses.’
That's odd.
They have six managed non-Whitbread houses and 85 tenanted pubs, all of them formerly Whitbreads.
Mr Dixon says Inn Business is ‘entirely independent of Whitbreads’.
Asked about the Whitbreads background of his top staff, he said:
‘Its pure coincidence.
Its not a Whitbreads old boys’ club.
I would prefer to employ someone I know — wouldn't you?’
STILL TIED: Lois and James Tibbetts in the pub they wanted to buy
HEROES OF THE 80's
CHRISTOPHER GILES, flamboyant former Brighton Tory councillor, dynamic entrepreneur and friend of David Mellor, has gone bankrupt this month, owing £289,000.
His company (called, inevitably, Invincible Finance) went into liquidation owing £200,000.
The company was lending money at interest rates of 1,142 per cent.
SPOT THE DIFFERENCE
1.
HELEN JARVIS was homeless in Brent, North London.
Brent council put her and her baby daughter in a ‘bed and breakfast hotel’.
They offered her a flat in the Stonebridge estate, Wembley, which she refused on health grounds.
The council have a very strict rule that homeless people are only allowed one offer of a council house.
They promptly chucked her out of the bed and breakfast hotel and she and the baby are sleeping on a relative's floor.
FACT TO REMEMBER: Helen Jarvis is not a Brent councillor.
2.
JUDITH HARPER was homeless in Brent, North London.
Brent council put her and her children in a ‘bed and  breakfast hotel’.
They offered her a flat in the Stonebridge estate, Wembley, which she refused on health grounds.
The council have a very strict rule that homeless people are only allowed one offer of a council house.
They promptly referred her to a housing association which has found her a three-bedroomed house.
FACT TO REMEMBER: Judith Harper is a Brent councillor.
She was elected for Labour, but is now voting with the Tory majority.
NORMAN'S LAMENT
IN Norman Lamont's constituency, Kingston upon Thames, the Tory council (backed by the Liberals) spent a  quarter of a million quid persuading council tenants to vote for flogging off their houses to an unelected housing association.
The vote in a high turnout was: FOR the sale: 2,463 AGAINST the sale: 3,207
DON'T FOLLOW THE HURD
I AGREED very much with Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd when he said on his visit to Somalia this month that the world has been ‘collectively too slow’ to respond to the wars and famine there.
Here's an example.
Only two weeks before his visit, the Home Office had replied to Sheffield Labour MP David Blunkett, who had asked about an application from his constituent Mrs Fadumo Said.
Mrs Said, a refugee from Somalia, was asking permission for her two sisters and their children in a refuge camp in Ethiopia to join her here.
Both women lost their husbands in the war.
The application was made in January 1990.
Two-and-a-half years later it has now been turned down.
THE SUN'S MAN OF STRAW
THE SUN was delighted with an ‘exclusive’ on Wednesday (copied from the Doncaster Star on Tuesday) about the sacking of BR clerk Alex Bryson for having a farewell shandy with office colleagues.
Alex, 63, whose application against the sacking failed yesterday lost £20,000 redundancy.
The Sun devoted an angry leader to the subject, demanding: ‘The jumped-up jackass who sacked Alex Bryson should be tied to the tracks.’
I agree.
And I am happy to name the jackass.
He is British Rail's Doncaster area manager, Eric Straw.
Straw got the MBE in the 1985 Queen's Birthday Honours.
Mr Straw's achievement as British Rail general manager at Worksop was to defy industrial action by engine drivers in solidarity with the miners strike.
Men like Mr Straw won the enthusiastic admiration of Mrs Thatcher and her fans, including The Sun 
ALEX: Sacked
JOB FOR THE BOYO
Tory suspends hospital chief who made Telly NHS protest
HERE'S good news for all those who shed a tear on election night for Ian Grist, the debonair Welsh Tory Minister who lost his seat at Cardiff Central.
Mr Grist has a new job, thanks to his former boss, the Secretary of State for Wales, David Hunt.
Only a few weeks after the election, the Tory Mr Grist was appointed chairman of the South Glamorgan District Health Authority (£19,285 a year for a three-day week).
Mr Grist started work last month.
On Monday he approved the suspension of Alan Trew, general manager of the Cardiff Royal Infirmary group of four hospitals.
Mr Trew believes his crime was to go on local TV to protest about the grim prospects for his hospitals.
Mr Grist tells my colleague Bryan Rostron: ‘A number of factors gave rise to the suspension, but the very fact that the authority itself lost confidence in him shows it wasn't one particular thing.
‘The interview hardly features in it.
‘I mean, it might be there, I suppose, but no one gets into trouble for an interview, you know — not serious trouble.’
Mr Trew was suspended by the District Health Authority General Manager, Mr Gordon Harrhy.
His acting successor is the authority's planning director Mr John Harrhy, brother of Gordon.
Gordon told Bryan Rostron: ‘The appointment of my brother was decided by the Health Authority, not by me.
That's nothing to do with him being my brother.’
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
SEE JACKO FREE
MICHAEL JACKSON is taking his spectacular Heal The World stage show to Romania — and YOU can be there!
The Limit has teamed up with the Care For Romania charity to offer one reader and partner the chance to see Jacko perform in Bucharest on September 30.
Two lucky winners will get: FREE flights, FREE tickets, THREE nights' accommodation and a two-day trip to Transylvania to visit Dracula's Castle.
PLUS there are 50 special anti-vampire prizes for runners-up!
To enter, complete the title of this Michael Jackson hit: Black Or — Phone your answer on 0891 525 507 by noon on Sunday, September 27, leaving your name, address and daytime phone number.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p at other times.
Your call should cost about the same as a first-class stamp.
Cash raised from the phone line is being donated to children's charities in Romania.
You can also help by sending unwanted albums, CDs and tapes to: Care For Romania, PO Box 111, Whitstable, Kent CT5 2UU.
JACKO: Romania gig
PAP SNAP
WHAT'S the meaning of the revealing swimsuit?
Is Beverly Hills beauty Shannen Doherty switching to Baywatch?
We couldn't get a straight reply — she'd only answer in sign language.
BEJING SPRING beauty Katrina Stevens once played Chris Quentin's screen girlfriend in Coronation Street.
But never in real life.
Says Katrina, whose debut song is called We Can Keep This Together: ‘He kept on asking me out.
I found him arrogant and creepy.’
AS Bill Wyman has made noises about quitting the Rolling Stones, Ron Wood threatens: ‘If he's not in the studio when we start on a new album we'll replace him with a woman.’
TOP 10 ALBUMS
1
THE BEST OF BELINDA CARLISLE VOL 1 Belinda Carlisle
2
III SIDES TO EVERY STORY Extreme
3
BOSS DRUM The Shamen
4
TUBULAR BELLS II Mike Oldfield
5
BACK TO FRONT Lionel Richie
6
DIVA Annie Lennox
7
AM I NOT YOUR GIRL?
Sinead O'Connor
8
UNPLUGGED Eric Clapton
9
TOURISM Roxette
10
KYLIE GREATEST HITS Kylie Minogue
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
JACK THE GOOD IS A RAY IN THE DARK
IT'S not just because we're serialising it that I recommend Jack Ashley's autobiography.
It is also because it is a well-written, intensely moving story which shows that MPs can and do achieve things, that true love can and does exist, and which restores one's faith in politicians at a time such restoration is badly needed.
MOVING: Jack Ashley
QUIZ CORNER: Whatever happened to the Citizen's Charter?
If anyone has spotted it, or knows anyone whose life has in any way been affected by it, would they please let me know?
I fear it may have gone the same way as Honest John's other great idea, the hard ecu.
Remember that one?
Nor does he.
SO David Mellor never learned to swim.
Pity really.
He's about to learn how to sink.
SMITH TAKES SOME HAMMER
IF today's emergency Commons debate is a huge test for John Major, it's pretty big potatoes for John Smith too.
The Labour leader's low profile through the summer has led to rumbles of discontent.
And not just from out-of-work professional whingers who take the Tory Press shilling to say Labour is dead.
Real supporters too worry that the disarray and the division in the Government is so clearly mirrored in the Opposition.
The biggest mistake Smith made was to reveal himself ‘relaxed’ in the face of Bryan Gould's early skirmishes over devaluation and Europe.
It was as green a light as you could get for the never-ending demands for U-turns from Mr Gould, followed by several Shadow Cabinet colleagues.
The relaxation period was too long, the precedent set a bad one.
One of Mr Gould's followers, health spokesman David Blunkett, urges Labour not to go for the unity of the graveyard.
But when the dust on these rows settles, the public won't remember what they were about.
They'll remember the division and the disarray.
Disunity, in short, IS the graveyard.
IF ONLY GRANDMA COULD BE WITH US NOW
Wexford star George Baker meets the grandson born days before his wife died
‘Sally said: Isn't it extraordinary, I go and Sam arrives’
PAULINE WALLIN
CORAL O'CONNOR
PRIDE and joy shine in his craggy face as he cuddles the baby close.
‘Sam is a very, very special boy,’ George Baker says.
And he wipes away a tear.
For with the happiness there is sadness, too.
Sally, the wife who was like a second mother to the Inspector Wexford star's four daughters, can't be with him in Australia to share this moment.
She died of cancer just a few days after Samuel George was born.
The bouncing baby grandson — George's first — will do much to ease his heartache.
But now, more than ever, he feels Sally's absence deeply.
‘It was wonderful that Sam was born before Sal died,’ George says.
‘They were able to speak to each other on the phone — he made gurgling noises to her.
‘Sally said, ‘Isn't it extraordinary — I go and Sam comes?’
‘She was very philosophical and happy about it in that way.
‘It would have been horrid if he had been born a few days after she died.’
George and Sally had been planning to fly out to Australia for his daughter Candy's wedding to novelist Robert Drewe two years ago.
But, just as she never saw Candy's baby, Sally was denied that, too.
The trip had to be cancelled when Sally was told the cancer she thought was beaten had returned.
She spent the next 18 months putting a brave face on her illness, with lots of loving support from George.
Missing, too, from this family reunion Down Under is George's first wife, Julia Squire — Candy's mum.
She died three years ago in a tragic fall down a flight of stairs.
‘I was very sad that Julia didn't see the boy,’ George says.
‘But she saw one of our granddaughters.
‘Still, that's life.
It isn't as pretty as we are given to understand in fairy tales.’
He brightens.
Rather than dwell on the past, he wants to talk about his grandson.
‘He's enormous,’ he says.
‘He was 10lb when he was born.
‘I hope he is not going to be taller than me.
I was 6ft 4in when I was 14 and 6ft 2in when I was 12…that doesn't help at all.’
George's love for this happy, chuckling child is just as giant-sized.
‘This is the first fella I have had in my family.
I have five daughters and two granddaughters, so it is pretty exciting, as you can imagine, suddenly to have a boy.
‘I've been used to playing dolls all these years.
Now I'll have to learn to play football.’
Such thoughts and many others went through his mind on his journey to Australia.
He was thrilled about the prospect of seeing Candy, 37, for the first time in three years.
It was also a chance to see another daughter, Charlie, 29, who has also made her home in Sydney.
And, of course, there was baby Sam to dangle on his knee.
George loves kids.
The 60-year-old actor has two granddaughters, Rose, 5, and three-year-old Kim by daughter Ellie.
Naturally, he spoils them rotten.
But the day before he boarded the plane the pleasure of the reunion was tinged with sorrow.
Sally wasn't with him.
And he knew he'd be more keenly aware of her loss than ever because he wouldn't be able to bury himself in his work.
The Ruth Rendell Mysteries re-established George as a household name.
It was Sally's dying wish that he should throw himself into his role as country copper Inspector Reg Wexford — and that he has done with a vengeance.
Six months of 12-hour days, six days a week — that's what it has taken to film the only four Wexford stories not previously adapted for TV.
George put the finishing touches to the last episode just over a week ago, and the new ITV series starts next Sunday.
Unless Miss Rendell writes any more Wexford adventures, he has played the man from Kingsmarkham for the very last time.
‘Now,’ he says, ‘I can do my grieving in peace.
‘I only hope I did everything Sally would have wanted me to do.
‘I got on with the work, tried very hard to stay jovial, and kept a smiling face.
Now I might sit down on the beach and have a good blub.’
Candy, a journalist who settled in Australia 15 years ago, offers comfort.
She feels the loss of her mum and Sally too.
‘I have missed them very much since Sam was born.
There is not a day which goes by when I don't think of them,’ she says.
‘I was very close to Sally.
We have always been a close family although there are 12,000 miles between us.
‘I was so pleased she lived until just after Sam was born.
It was a bright moment in a dark time.
‘Sally was dad's lynch-pin and her death was a great shock, especially coming so close to the loss of my mum.
‘The trip will help him get over Sal's death.
It will also give him a chance to recharge his batteries and have a look at where he is going next.’
George will make the most of the chance to unwind in the Australian sunshine — it's spring over there.
But his dedication to work will be in evidence too.
He has already written the pilot for a new series called Dead On Time
It's about a London-based detective and his TV bosses are eager to have the rest of the scripts.
‘I'm a total puritan about work,’ he confesses.
‘If I go on holiday and don't do some work, I feel it is quite reprehensible.
‘So I plan to do a couple of hours’ writing in the morning then go off and have a swim in the afternoon.
‘That's when I'll do my thinking about Sal and Julia and the days I shared with them.’
But George is a realist.
He knows that life goes on.
Little Samuel is testimony to that.
So his focus is on the future — Sam's future.
‘My daughter and her husband have asked me to be his godfather as well as his grandfather,’ he says.
‘That means I'm responsible for his spiritual welfare.
‘And that means I shall have to live longer to be around when he needs me.’
Determination shows on his face.
Sally would have wanted that.
THAT'S MY BOY: George wins a chuckle from little Sam…and new hope for the future Picture:STUART BRYCE
SO CLOSE: With Sally, the wife George loved and lost Picture: BILL ROWNTREE
HAPPY REUNION: George shows off Sam, alongside Candy and her husband
TOP COP: As TV's popular Inspector Wexford
NEW MOVIES
Gerald's a man's lady
GERALD'S wife is understandably miffed when she arrives home in London earlier than planned from a trip back to the States and finds another woman's underwear in their bedroom.
She kicks the high-flying American banker out of the family home and he winds up renting a room in the home of lonely divorcee Monica.
She fancies her handsome American lodger like mad and, as he seems equally keen, she is devastated when another woman starts creeping into his room late at night.
Warmth
So, in JUST LIKE A WOMAN (Cert 15; General), it's a bit of a relief when Gerald (Adrian Pasdar) finally admits he gets his kicks out of dressing as a woman — and proves the point by making himself up into the gorgeous Geraldine in front of her.
Julie Walters as Monica is all warmth and tolerance in the face of what many might see as  absolute abnormality.
She continues her affair with Gerald, whose problems with his arrogant boss (Paul Freeman) are worsening.
But one day Gerald, dressed as Geraldine, is caught for speeding.
The humiliation proves too much and he plans to move back to America.
Based on a true story, this movie is lightweight but compassionate.
SEX MIX: Gerald gets his kicks dressing as a woman
YOU MUST BE MAD
FOR a thriller to really thrill there should be moments when you are gripping the edge of your seat wondering if the star is indeed going to go down in a hail of bullets — one more dead hero.
Well, that's the first problem facing the competent but unenthralling PATRIOT GAMES (Cert 15; General) because it is common knowledge that Harrison Ford has already signed a mega deal to make five more of these movies based on Jack Clancy novels.
So it's hardly likely they're going to write off their star when the ink is barely dry on his $50 million contract!
Still, the ending is stomach-churning stuff and Ford — resurrecting the role which Alec Baldwin created in The Hunt for Red October — is accomplished as CIA analyst Jack Ryan, horrified at terrorist extremes.
Hero
He is on vacation in London with daughter Sally (Thora Birch) and wife Cathy — played by Anne Archer who seems increasingly typecast as the loyal spouse.
Soon the family get unwittingly caught up in an attempt by an extreme IRA faction to blow up a limousine carrying one of the Royal family.
Jack thwarts the mission to murder Lord Holmes (James Fox).
But while he becomes an instant hero, he is also the instant target of terrorist Sean Miller (Sean Bean) whose baby brother has been killed in the attack.
A deadly game of cat and mouse follows and Ryan is faced with an even deadlier challenge when he gets home to the United States.
Protecting himself and his family from fanatic Miller hellbent on revenge.
TERROR TARGETS: Ford and family take cover as fanatics open fire
POTTER GOES TO POT
SECRET FRIENDS (Cert 15; W.E.) is a babbling mess of a movie which marks controversial author Dennis Potter's directorial debut.
Alan Bates stars as a middle-aged illustrator going through the worst mid-life crisis I have ever witnessed.
He is plagued by demons which go back to his childhood and his torment intensifies as a train hurtles him away from or maybe towards a crime.
Gina Bellman stars as the girl who may or may not be his demure wife — and who may or may not be a hooker he meets in a hotel.
GRIM TALE OF DEADLY DUO
SWOON (Cert 18; W.E.) is based on the true story of two Jewish law students in Twenties Chicago who kidnapped and murdered a young boy.
Later it formed the basis of Alfred Hitchcock's Rope starring James Stewart.
Depressing, bleak, told in black and white documentary style, this is not a Friday night at the flicks with your favourite date sort of a movie.
TOP 10 MOVIES
1 (-) Unforgiven
2 (-) A League Of Their Own
3 (1) Housesitter
4 (2) Lethal Weapon 3
5 (3) Alien
6 (7) Beethoven
7 (4) Knight Moves
8 (6) Far And Away
9 (8) Bob Roberts
10 (5) Christopher Columbus: The Discovery
Compiled by MRIB 
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
HOLIDAYS giant Airtours has bought the Pickfords travel agents' chain, Britain's third biggest, for £16 million.
THANKS A MILLION, NORMAN
HOUSEBUILDER Sir Lawrie Barratt lowered interest rates long before the Chancellor got round to it.
His fixed 8.5 per cent mortgages — he subsidises the building societies' normal rates — have worked wonders.
In just a year, Barratt's has turned round from a £106 million loss to an £11,300,000 profit.
PROFIT: Barratt
BRITISH AEROSPACE dived 87p to 113p on its shock £129 million loss in six months.
Most other shares were upset by the chaos on currency markets.
The FTSE index of leading shares fell 5.5 to 2,580.5.
FASHION and furnishings group Laura Ashley has boosted profits by not cutting prices.
They jumped from £500,000 to £1,700,000 in the six months to July.
And are still climbing.
HOTLINE TO SHARES
HERE'S how to call up the latest Stock Exchange prices of the shares listed below.
FIRST dial 0891 34 52.
THEN dial the two numbers to the left of each share.
Calls cost 36p a minute, cheap rate, and 48p at all other times.
Sour day for Sugar…
THE man who licked the Japanese at their own game has finally been beaten — by the markets.
Electronics millionaire Alan Sugar, who made a fortune selling hi-fis and computers at prices even the Japanese could not match, is planning to buy back his Amstrad company from investors.
For the City has not been prepared to back his business with hard cash.
In the Eighties, Amstrad was the darling of the Stock Exchange.
Anyone who first bought shares in 1980, had by 1988 turned each £100 invested into a cool £14,000.
But when the Thatcher boom went bust Sugar's business declined with it — and so did Amstrad's market rating.
Today, Amstrad shares have dropped from their peak of £2.34 to just 28p — less than half what its assets are valued at.
So now, like Virgin founder Richard Branson before him, Sugar has decided to throw in the towel and buy his firm back.
And who can blame him?
YOUR LAST CHANCE TO JOIN OUR GREAT £25,000 BONANZA SLUMP BUSTER
Laugh in the face of Lamont with today's DAILY MIRROR
Today £300 off your Poll Tax bill
TAXES can be enough to drive you up the pole — and today we're offering you the chance to ease the pain of paying.
This is the last in our great £25,000 series of slump-busting contests to help you laugh in the face of Lamont.
And there are 30 prizes of £175 to go towards paying the dreaded Poll Tax.
The money raised by the Poll Tax is used to finance various public services and that's the theme of today's contest.
Our three pictures marked A, B and C show scenes from three popular TV soaps which are based on three public services.
Decide
The services are (1) Education;(2) The Fire Brigade and;(3) The police.
We want you to decide which service is featured in which picture.
For instance, if you think picture C features the police write down C3 and so on .
Then phone this number: 0891 311 098 (From the Irish Republic 1550 123 595).
You'll hear two simple questions.
Leave your answers, your name and address PLUS your picture decisions on the line.
The winners will be chosen at random by our computer.
Lines close on October 2.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p per minute all other times.
From the Republic of Ireland, 48p per minute peak, 36p off-peak, 24p economy.
TOP THAT!
THERE are a handful of clubs who know what life is like at the top and the bottom.
Mr R. Melbourne of Loughborough wins our first £25 award by asking you for a list of those clubs who have won the old First Division title and also played in the Fourth Division.
Our second £25 prize goes to Mr J. Mullarkey of Maidstone.
He provided the first correct solution selected to last week's query and knew that Brian Little (Leicester) and Steve Perryman (Watford) are current Football League managers who have been capped just once by England.
A FRIEND OF THE PRIME MINISTER
…
REJECTED BY HIS PEERS
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
YOU only had to walk into the members' lobby of the Commons yesterday to know what you'd suspected for days.
David Mellor was about to resign.
You could find any number of MPs willing to attack the Press.
But you couldn't find any to say he should stay in the Government.
For all Mellor's protestations that the tabloids brought him down in an attempt to dictate to the Prime Minister who should be in his Cabinet, the truth is that the Heritage Secretary was rejected by his peers.
They could just about tolerate his seedy affair with Antonia de Sancha.
But they couldn't stomach the never-ending barrage of damaging revelations — particularly the suggestion that he had broken ministerial rules by accepting lavish holidays.
When the story of his affair first broke in July, there was even sympathy in Tory ranks.
In any case, when the Prime Minister supports a colleague in the way Mellor's friend John Major has done, ministers have a habit of falling into line.
But the truth is that if Parliament had been sitting, Mellor would have gone weeks ago.
He may have the friendship of the Prime Minister, but he has few other Cabinet supporters.
His memos in his days as Treasury Chief Secretary were described by Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd as the rudest in Whitehall.
He was rude to officials and contemptuous of backbenchers less successful in their careers than he had been since becoming MP for Putney in 1979.
It was in advance of yesterday's recall of Parliament, to discuss the economic crisis, that Government whips felt duty-bound to consult widely to see whether the Tory Party still supported him.
In the past few days they have detected a slide in that support.
The last straw was the court revelation that Mona Bauwens, the daughter of a PLO official, paid for a luxury holiday for Mellor and his family.
Then came news of more freebies, rumours of worse stories to come, and Tory ministers and MPs realised what some had been telling them for weeks.
He had to go.
He was becoming an embarrassment to the Government.
The remarkable loyalty of the Prime Minister was beginning to damage Mr Major, under fire already for what more than one Tory MP has called ‘a Cabinet of cronies.’
There was a general view — confirmed when Major remarkably rejected claims that Mellor had broken ministerial rules when quite clearly he had — that the PM's judgement was being clouded by friendship.
The good name of Government, ministers feared, was being damaged.
Now that he's gone, there will be the usual hypocritical outpouring of support, and ministers will join in the attempts to blame it all on nasty tabloid newspapers.
But whatever his considerable political, publicity and debating skills, Mellor's downfall will not cause too many real Tory tears.
His arrogance, his pompous manner, and the way he trades on his friendship with Major has offended colleagues perhaps jealous of his natural talents as a Commons and Whitehall performer.
Jealous because Mellor, just 43, has enjoyed a remarkable rise — and not just because of that friendship.
Mrs Thatcher didn't like him — particularly after he offended the Israelis with his famous attack on an Army officer on an official visit to the occupied Gaza strip.
But she couldn't ignore his abilities.
At the Home Office, he impressed opponents and civil servants alike by the way he piloted intensely complex Bills through Parliament.
He made colleagues of similar rank jealous for the way he could generate publicity.
That is a talent that followed him to the Foreign Office and to the Department of Health, where he helped Ken Clarke take on hospital doctors attacking their tales of long hours as ‘fishermen's stories’.
Similar outspoken attacks on Tory rebels over charges for eye and dental checks once boosted a revolt — and made him more enemies.
But still he rose, moving back to the Home Office as minister of State charged with pushing the Broadcasting Bill through the Commons.
It was that experience, allied to his next job as arts minister, that made him an obvious choice to become Major's first Heritage Secretary.
It was his second Cabinet job.
The first — Treasury Chief Secretary — given to him as soon as Major became Premier partly as thanks for helping to run his leadership campaign.
He was also given a key role in the last election campaign as the Tories' Mr Nasty who could be called upon to make all kinds of claims about Labour's plans.
The election duly won, he got the job he wanted.
His self-promotional skills combined with his love of sport and the arts made him a popular choice in his new fields.
The tragedy of his downfall is that he was tailor-made for the job.
He was not lying when, in Wednesday's rather pitiful TV interviews aimed at persuading his party not to dump him, he said he had been inundated with letters of support from the world of music, opera, theatre, films and sport.
And even the BBC, the Tory Party's favourite whipping boy, know that whoever replaces Mellor is unlikely to be as sympathetic.
Likewise the Press.
Mr Mellor, unlike his Prime Minister, was opposed to shackling the Press with privacy laws.
And despite the pounding he has taken, he has not changed his views.
But the truth is that Mellor was always riding for a fall.
In the end it was his weakness for women and his love of the good life, particularly if sponsored by others, that proved fatal.
They revealed a poor judgement which damaged the Government and destroyed his career.
Tories now fear, however, that the whole sorry episode has damaged the Prime Minister too.
As one minister said some days ago: ‘The Prime Minister's loyalty is to be admired but there must be limits.
‘Would he have gone out on a limb for anyone other than David?
I fear not.’
PAUL FOOT
COSTLY MISTAKE FOR DOROTHY
LIKE thousands of others who have suffered from ‘tranquilliser’ drugs, Dorothy King wanted to sue the drug company.
Two years ago she got legal aid, and her case went forward.
In January this year, the Legal Aid Board decided they had made a mistake, and withdrew legal aid.
The deadline for suing the drug companies came and went — and she had to drop out.
She is now liable for the wasted costs of her abandoned case — more than £1,000.
The Legal Aid Board told my colleague Margaret Renn: ‘WAUTCOIC’(’ we are unable to comment on individual cases’.
ANOTHER RUTTER ROTTER
WHAT a charitable place is my favourite resort Southend.
Ambitious Essex Young Conservatives chairman Christopher Rutter has been convicted of stealing.
In the police canteen last Christmas, he collected £110 for  handicapped children, and charitably ran off with the money.
And can anyone help Southend CID find ‘Sir’ Michael Cayley-Torrington?
Milton ward Tories were so impressed by his la-de-da-accent and gold-plated walking stick that they made him social secretary.
Then he became Treasurer of the fund to save St Erks church — and ran off with the £1000 in the appeal fund.
Save £11.50 at Blackpool Pleasure Beach
LIGHT UP YOUR LIFE WITH THE DAILY MIRROR
TREAT ALL YOUR FAMILY TO THE FUN OF THE FAIR
THIS is the time when Blackpool sparkles in the bright lights and when the world and his wife pays a visit to the Queen of Resorts.
When YOU go there you won't want to miss the world-famous Pleasure Beach amusement park which teems with fun and excitement for everyone.
And don't forget to take our special, exclusive voucher with you.
Hand it over when you buy a big value Shows'n'Rides sheet of 12 individual tickets and you get another one worth £11.50 FREE.
The
Shows'n'Rides sheet is your personal passport to pleasure.
Head for the roller-coasters for a spine-chilling ride.
You can try the Grand National, a twin-track racing coaster and the really brave can loop the loop on the Revolution.
Shows'n'Rides sheets give you three white-knuckle rides.
And after that you can relax on some gentler pace rides before taking in a show or two, such as the Hot Ice Show in the Arena which runs until November 7.
Our voucher is valid until November 8, the day the season ends.
And it goes out in a blaze of colour — a spectacular firework display which starts at 6.45pm and goes on into the night.
Go on — have fun.
SAVE £11.50 BLACKPOOL PLEASURE BEACH BUY ONE — GET ONE FREE SAVE £11.50
This voucher entitles the bearer to one free sheet of Shows'n'Rides tickets (12 individual tickets) when one Shows'n'Rides sheet is purchased.
This voucher to be redeemed at Guest Relations North, by Noah's Ark, Blackpool Pleasure Beach.
Valid for use today, then daily thereafter until November 8, 1992.
Not to be used in conjunction with any other promotion.
For further information telephone 0253 41033.
GLOWING: Enjoy the Blackpool sights
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
SUPERSTAR Cher always pays for her purchases with cash…because she can't write cheques.
The dyslexic singer says: ‘I can't spell.
Everybody stares at me and I don't want to look a fool.’
OFF LIMITS
U2 LAST night unveiled their stunning new video Interference at a spectacular bash at London's Planetarium…
Chart star TASMIN ARCHER hates her first name and prefers to be called Angela…
DR ALBAN met his girlfriend when she tried some clothes on in his Stockholm boutique…
ALBUM REVIEW
III SIDES TO EVERY STORY — Extreme
EXTREME'S second hit album combines the pomp of Queen with the power of Metallica.
The unusual three-sided disc lasts 78 minutes and even features a 70-piece orchestra.
Highlights include their chart hit Rest In Peace and their next single, Stop The World.
OVER THE LIMIT
IF your husband or boy-friend forgets your birthday don't leave him…it may be biological.
Researchers at Ohio State University have discovered that men have much more difficulty remembering dates than women.
PAP SNAP
CLIFF Richard looks like he could use a Summer Holiday as he limbers up for his next sell-out UK tour.
Thirty-four years after his first hit Cliff has dumped his nickname — The Peter Pan Of Pop.
He's now known as plain Ol' Turkey Neck.
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
WHAT YOU THINK ABOUT THE PAST SEVEN DAYS
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
WHAT a wonderful picture of Jack Ashley, now Lord Ashley of Stoke, one of Britain's most caring politicians, with his six-month-old grandson Ben.
Despite his personal battle against deafness he fought to help battered wives and rape victims.
— WIN a tenner for your Picture of the Week
No crime to end the agony
SOON after leaving hospital following an urgent operation for cancer of the stomach I read about the ordeal of Dr Nigel Cox who gave a lethal injection to a suffering patient.
Dr Cox was given a 12-month suspended sentence and may be struck off.
After my operation I was told I would eventually be 100 per cent fit.
But my father died from cancer following a ‘successful’ operation in 1936 and my mother died in 1963 after another.
I only hope that if my operation leaves me suffering as they did, there will be someone at hand with the strength of character and compassion of Dr Cox to help me. —
IF some of the jurors had suffered from rheumatoid arthritis, as I have done for 33 years, the verdict would have been emphatically in favour of Dr Cox.
—
I BELIEVE Dr Cox should have been given a long jail sentence.
That would have acted as a deterrent to any other doctor who thought he had a God-given right to take life.
-
WHAT a sad monument to this inept government that British Aerospace is to close its Hatfield factory, where the Mosquito fighter and other famous planes were made.
But that was when Britain was great.
The Tories have ended all that.
—
Chris whizz
I'D love to think Olympic cycling champion Chris Boardman could whizz down our street delivering the letters on a new Royal Mail mountain bike.
I'll pin Harry Prosser's great picture on my front door to give our old postman the idea of how it should be done.
—
WHAT a moving tale of true grit you told of Coronation Street's Lynne Perrie.
Her sufferings were enough to fill a few episodes of the soap and showed that career success isn't a guarantee of happiness.
Keep fighting Lynne.
—
Issi's joy
WHEN a bowl of gruel is all that stands between a toddler and death, it was wonderful to see little Issi gain his salvation in Somalia.
It made me feel we should redouble our efforts to help CARE, the relief charity that is getting the food through.
—
FRANCS A LOT, PALS
WHILE the pound was suffering, the French gloated at our humiliation.
Then France's President Mitterrand and Germany's Chancellor Kohl met to sort out their own version of the future of Europe.
Now the French franc is under pressure.
That may teach them a lesson for kowtowing to the Germans and it should warn us to be wary of both countries.
—
WHAT a futile gesture for Princess Di to send back her Mercedes to show the Royal family is pulling in its belt.
If it was to make a gesture against Germany, in support of the Tory attempt to divert attention from their home-made disaster, it's pathetic.
—
MIRROR editorials are always first class, but the one entitled ‘The Lion that squeaked’ was brilliant.
Every word was a true indictment of this Prime Minister.
—
GALES OF LAUGHTER
WHAT lunacy!
While we're bailing out our basements and replanting the trees in the garden after the floods, the nuts at the National Rivers Board tell us we're still in a drought.
They say we need more rain because most of the downpour will run down the rivers to the sea.
I don't know where else it would run —
I HOPE all Roman Catholics note the Pope's declaration that gambling is a sin.
When I tried to place a bet at the Tote at Cheltenham not long ago, I found myself behind a queue of Irish priests.
I changed my own selection to that called out by a priest ahead of me.
It lost.
—
TWIT OF THE WEEK
HOW ridiculous of Prime Minister Major's son James to flare up and get sent off in a public school friendly football match.
How about showing the red card to his dad instead?— WIN a tenner for your Twit of the Week 
SENT OFF: James
LOW DIVES AND HIGH PLACES
‘I'm not the slightest bit  embarrassed by my holiday arrangements’— And of course that was the trouble
‘He got his kicks playing away scoring a spectacular own goal’
ANTON ANTONOWICZ
DAVID MELLOR'S political career ended on Monday September 14 in tiny Court 11 in the High Court.
A simple sentence spoken by his pal Mona Bauwens spelled out that she had ‘paid for everything’ on that now-notorious Spanish holiday.
Until then, Mellor had stood in the face of the scandal as each new wave rolled in, sucking the ground from beneath those famous toes.
Antonia de Sancha could kiss and tell.
Headlines about sex in a Chelsea strip.
Pictures of that futon on the floor.
The bottle of bedside Sainsbury's brandy.
An empty wine bottle.
Two cloudy glasses.
Mellor hung on.
But once Mona, daughter of the PLO's chief fund-raiser, had admitted that he had enjoyed a summer holiday on her money at the time of the Gulf crisis, the gap-toothed Lothario was on his bike.
No one had known until then that Mona had footed the bill for the Mellor family at the Marbella villa.
But on the libel trial's first day, from the witness box, 36-year-old Mona admitted without prodding that she indeed had shelled out.
‘I paid for the rent for the villa, which I arranged myself with a Belgian count who owned it, and also paid the air fares for all the Mellors,’ she said.
Those 29 words sealed the portly politician's fate.
Despite the Prime Minister's declaration of undying support and Mellor's own brassnecked arrogance, the end was nigh.
‘I am not the slightest bit embarrassed by my holiday arrangements,’ Mellor had told a reporter from the People.
‘Go ahead and publish and be damned.’
But HE was the damned.
Before long, his judgment was called into question over ‘favours from friends’.
A property millionaire had given him the key to the Mayfair pad where he squired Antonia.
He had lent him a chauffeur-driven car and expensive office equipment during the General Election.
The daughter of the PLO's chief fund-raiser had paid for his holiday.
And he did not declare it according to Commons rules.
Then it emerged that the Heritage Secretary and his family enjoyed two other luxury holidays courtesy of Middle East friends.
One was with the billionaire ruler of Abu Dhabi, Sheik Zayed.
The other was at the Cannes flat of Mrs Bauwens's cousin Zaki Nusseibeh, a financial adviser to the sheik.
And the game was up.
David Mellor, the man who warned journalists they were drinking in the Last Chance Saloon, was about to call last orders on himself.
His dream had finally run out in an Arabian nightmare of high living and questionable favours.
The Swanage grammar-school boy who dreamed of being Prime Minister was dispensable after all.
‘He was a slimy people-pleaser,’ said a barrister who trained with Mellor after the embryo politician had graduated from Cambridge.
Mellor was 30 when the voters of Putney in West London elected him their Tory MP in 1979 — the election that swept Margaret Thatcher to power.
His credentials seemed gold-plated for the new face of Toryism.
He had married Judith Hall, a parliamentary research assistant, five years earlier.
They have two sons, 12-year-old Anthony and Freddie, eight.
Mellor's star climbed.
He became a Minister in the Foreign Office and during a trip to Israel in 1988 condemned the Israelis over the inhumane treatment of Arab refugees.
His words created a furore there.
The same year, he found himself in the company of Mona, who described herself in court as an ‘apolitical pacifist’ who spread her huge family wealth in a series of film, TV, stage and property ventures.
There were splendid parties at her parents' home in The Bishop's Avenue — Hampstead's ‘Millionaires’ Row’.
There was tea and coffee at her palatial apartment in Mayfair's Chesterfield House.
And then there was that holiday at the six-bedroomed, six-bathroom pink villa in Marbella for which Mona paid $20,000 in readies.
The guests enjoyed cool drinks on the arched terrace beside the gently-lapping pool.
They played tennis, wallowed in the whirlpool bath, and went on trips on a 38ft motor yacht called Fidelity.
The villa's owner, Count Robert de Beaumont, was a willing tongue.
He was, he said, amazed by Mellor's readiness to accept freebies.
‘My first impression of Mellor was that he didn't need to put his hand in his pocket.
Mellor likes wine.
He ordered.
Mona paid.
‘He was very impressed with Marbella.
‘I wish I could live like that,’ he told me.
‘I am really jealous.’
‘But Mona looked up to Mellor like a god.
She told me he could be Prime Minister.’
And there, while the Gulf war loomed, the Minister of Fun worked on his suntan.
It was the sweet life he had always craved.
The ambitious politician was awash with power, the friendship of the Premier…but without the money to gild it.
Then suddenly, this summer, a different woman entered the scene.
One ready and willing for sex.
Antonia de Sancha happily hopped into his life.
The Heritage Minister who liked to say: ‘I'm just a football supporter’ was getting his sexual kicks, playing away.
And, of course, scoring a spectacular own goal.
By July the Minister's secret trysts were laid bare.
His father-in-law accused him of breaking his marriage vows and questioned his integrity as a Privy Councillor.
Antonia went on to kiss and tell.
Mona's court case brought a rotten smell.
There was, in the end, no such thing as a free lunch.
David Mellor's long, hot summer was finally over.
And he was out.
MINISTER'S PET: The spotlight's on actress Antonia de Sancha — but she's coping
SEEDY: Rumpled bed and empty bottles in the borrowed Fulham flat where Mellor and Antonia met for their steamy love sessions
PALMY: The holiday villa at Marbella
WORRIED: Mellor leaves the Fulham love nest
NICE WORK: Mellor says goodbye to generous holiday hostess Mona Bauwens at Malaga airport
BUBBLY: Fun-loving Mona, daughter of a Palestinian chief, sparkled at some great parties
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
BOWIE GETS CRAFTY…
MARRIAGE to beautiful Somalian model Iman, has inspired David Bowie to take up sculpting again — something he has not done since he was unknown art student David Jones.
Boyks is stumped
THE ROW at Yorkshire over the signing of West Indies captain Richie Richardson is, we hear, just the start of a winter of discontent up there with Geoffrey Boycott centre stage, as usual.
Will he get loads of support?
Well, the spinner and former England coach, Don Wilson, in his new book, Mad Jack, writes:
‘Geoff Boycott was the most selfish, egotistical individual I have ever met.’
There's one vote you can count on then Geoffrey.
TOP THIS CHAPS…
THE Bald-Headed Men of America, a national organisation with 20,000 members, hold their annual convention at an appropriately named location, after combing the country.
This year it is being held, can you believe it, in North Carolina at Morehead City.
What a spectre, it's Benny!
THE ghost of Benny Hill is alive and well — and causing havoc!
We have this on no less an authority than Golden Girls actress Bea Arthur, who has been chased by Benny's spirit around her London flat.
Bea, 68, wants to move to London from Hollywood, and has been trying out future homes over here.
One flat she leased recently, previously occupied by Mick Jagger, suddenly turned cold during the day, then a coffee machine fell off the wall.
‘I didn't think much of it at first, but then something started to waft around the corridors,’ shudders Bea.
‘At first I thought it was steam from the coffee machine.
Then I realised it must be a ghost.
‘It ran through the living room.
I looked closer and I suddenly recognised who it was — Laurence Olivier's first wife, Vivien Leigh!’
as if that wasn't frightening enough, Bea started to hear strange music in the night.
‘Again I took no notice of it,’ she says.
‘But it got louder and louder until I recognised it as Benny Hill's voice.
‘He was singing Ernie — then he chased me round the flat.
Just like those Hill's Angels.’
Bea came clean after Benny's star-studded send-off at a memorial service in London's Covent Garden this week.
She has now called in an exorcist from Beverly Hills to get rid of her celebrity ghosts.
BENNY: Return visitor?
BEA: Strange goings-on
A CAFE ROYAL…
WHEN pressed to name some rich and famous people who are customers at his London restaurants, Viscount Linley replied: ‘As I was telling the Queen the other night, I just hate name-dropping.’
A biker's lament
LIFE magazine followed up on an odd ad in a North Dakota newspaper from a woman offering to swap her engagement ring, wedding dress and veil for a Harley-Davidson motorbike.
The ad led them to Jennifer Vettel, who told the magazine that when her husband objected to her bike, she sold it.
Now, she says: ‘I wish I had gotten rid of him back then instead.’
DAVID Letterman says: ‘This is a very busy week for Woody Allen.
A nasty custody trial and back-to-school shopping for his girlfriend.’
Smile, please
A NEW computer keyboard art-form — Smileys — has emerged.
Examples:: ' (I'm crying.
+- (:-) I'm the Pope.
:-))) I'm overweight.
‘:-) I'm wearing a Walkman.
d:-) I'm a baseball player.
: 8) I'm a pig.
3: -o I'm a cow.: -E I have dental problems.
(PS: If you don't get it, turn the page 90 degrees to the right.
If you still don't get it, you're a dummy).
GRAFFITI
NOTICE scrawled on a board at Australia's Bondi Beach: Girls — do not bother the lifeguards unless you are drowning.
CAR STICKER: Puberty is when little girls become women and boys become bastards.
ON A BILLBOARD: Rally drivers do it in stages
CLASSIC QUOTE
MY mother couldn't cook either, but at least her gravy moved.
— Tony Hancock.
ONE MORE THING
GOVERNMENT boffins have discovered a deadly new weapon that destroys people but keeps houses intact.
It's called a mortgage.
SNAP JUDGEMENT
FLEET Street photographers, a pretty twitchy lot at the best of times, were in a right state at the Olympic Stadium in Rome this week.
They were kept waiting for four hours before being given clearance to cover the Match of The Century (starring Paul Gascoigne).
When they finally entered the ground they made a dash for the lift.
And got stuck.
The man from The Sun started to bang his head against the cage yelling ‘They'll never believe this in Wapping’, and two others said they suffered from claustrophobia and tried to kick open the lift doors.
Only one man used the situation to his advantage.
He produced a book of blank bills and asked an Italian snapper to help him with his expenses.
WHY can't you take a photo of two or more Russians?
Because as soon as you say ‘Cheese’ they begin to queue up.
Set on change
A STORY doing the rounds at Buck House is that one of Her Majesty's television sets recently packed up.
The Queen summoned one of the hired help and instructed the minion: ‘Order a new set — from Sony or Toshiba.
We definitely do not want a Ferguson or a Philips.
We've had too much trouble from them already.’
Meanwhile, the Queen is considering a relaxing trip next spring to one of her favourite spots: Kentucky.
She has several mares in the Blue Grass State, and has visited top stud farms there, accompanied by her racing manager, Karl Caernarvon.
FIELD NOTES
GARDENING
CHARLES LYTE /XENIA FIELD
IF you have been giving you house plants a summer airing in the garden, it is now time to bring them in again.
A sudden, unexpected frost can cause devastation.
MIRROR PLANT
THE Passion Flower (Passiflora caerulea) is the most popular of this large family of 500 species, because it has proved to be remarkably hardy in many parts of Britain.
It is a vigorous climber bearing masses of exotic flowers followed by yellow, plum-like fruits.
Its name was given to it by Jesuit missionaries in South America who saw the flowers as a representation of the Crucifixion — the corona is the crown of thorns, the anthers the five wounds in the hands, feet and side of Christ, the three styles, the nails, the five petals and five sepals 10 of the disciples, less Peter and Judas, the hand-shaped leaves and tendrils the hands and whips of Christ's torturers.
The purple passion fruits on sale in shops come from P. edulis, which needs to be grown in a greenhouse, as does the really spectacular scarlet P. coccinea.
P. caerulea is easy to propagate from cuttings taken in July and August.
DON'T MISS OUR MIDGET GEMS
DWARF bulbs are the jewels of the spring garden, whether they are in the rock garden, or in groups at the edge of beds and borders.
They also look quite superb in pots and containers on a patio, terrace or verandah, as well as in window boxes.
This week Daily Mirror readers can buy a tremendous collection of 84 bulbs for pounds £11.99, including VAT, packing and postage, instead of the normal £15.45.
Creamy
They are: 12 Narcissi ‘Baby Moon’, soft yellow scented flowers; 12 kaufmanniana type tulips, creamy white petals with golden-yellow bases; 24 Ipheion unifolium ‘Wisley Blue’, rich violet-blue; 24 Crocus tommasinianus ‘Ruby Giant’, deep violet, and 12 Scilla siberica alba, pure white.
Orders to: Daily Mirror Dwarf Bulbs Collection, Van Tubergen (UK) Ltd., Bressingham, Diss, Norfolk, IP22 2AB.
Make cheques and postal orders payable to: MGN Dwarf Bulbs Collection.
Name and address on the back, please.
Allow 28 days for delivery.
LITTLE BELTERS: Dwarf bulbs are a bright treat
Field onions
HOW TO KILL OFF MAGGOT PESTS
Q EVERY year my onions are ruined by small grubs eating the roots.
What are they?
A These maggots are the young of the Onion Fly, and infestation tends to be worst on dry soils, particularly during a hot spell.
The first step to reducing this problem is to get your ground dug over and left fallow during the winter.
This will expose over-wintering grubs to frost and also birds seeking food.
If you grow your own onions from seed, dust the seedling with something like Gamma-BHC powder when you plant them.
Q WHY does my two-year-old Arum Lily refuse to flower?
A The Arum Lily (Zantedeschia) is normally grown in a greenhouse or conservatory, with the exception of Z. aethiopica, which is reasonably hardy, particularly the variety ‘Crowborough’, which should be grown in a rich, moist soil in full sun.
In gardens where the soil tends to be dry, they will do best in shade.
Wherever they are make sure that plenty of well-rotted manure is worked into the ground.
They can also be grown as waterside plants.
It could be that your plant is in the wrong spot, or that it is a young plant which has yet to reach the flowering stage.
Q WHY are my self-sown lupins covered with a grey mould, and what should I do about it?
A The lupins are under attack from Powdery Mildew.
This can be controlled by regular spraying with something containing Benomyl.
When you cut the lupins down try not to shake or knock them too much, because this will spread the mildew spores.
Burn the old growth rather than composting it.
Slug it out with bin intruders
Q SHOULD I try to get rid of the large number of slugs and snails which have got into my compost bin?
A Yes.
These damaging pests have found that your compost bin is a lovely place to hide and shelter.
They will probably lay eggs which you will transfer to the garden.
You can either put in a slug trap, which is a jar filled with beer and partly buried in the compost, or slug pellets.
If you use the latter make sure they cannot be got at by children, wild birds or pets.
Q WILL the Loquat trees I have grown from seed survive outside in East Anglia?
A The Loquat (Eriobotrya japonica) is a remarkably tough plant, and will survive pretty low temperatures, although it will suffer frost damage.
I would grow it in a sheltered spot against a south or south-west facing wall or fence.
Business is blooming for the Porters
IN 1802 a giant dahlia (D. coccinea), which grew six foot tall and had yellow, orange, scarlet and maroon flowers, was introduced from South America and caused a sensation.
Since then dahlias have become one of the best loved of all garden flowers.
From bedding dwarfs to huge-flowered cactus varieties, they are the showman's delight.
And when the top exhibitors want prize winning plants, they invariably turn to Robert and Rosemary Porter, who produce for competition growers at their home in Halstead, Essex.
Robert began showing when he was 18, and introduced Rosemary to exhibiting when they met in 1970.
They married and began the business selling their surplus prize plants.
Four years ago they expanded, building a 28ft by 11ft greenhouse.
Two years ago Rosemary was made redundant from a job she had held for 20 years.
‘Then we decided to push the business.
I took it on full time,’ she said.
Now 98 per cent of their business is with the top exhibitors, and this means keeping up with all the new varieties being bred.
‘We never put a variety on the list until we have grown it ourselves for a year.’
Dahlias are not difficult to grow by the Porter rules.
Plant in May and June, after dressing the soil with fertiliser.
Feed fortnightly with a liquid feed — seaweed-based ones are best; an eggcupful to a can of water.
Pinch out the middle of the plant in July.
SPLASH OF COLOUR: Dahlias are a favourite with British gardeners
HOLIDAY
DAVID KERR
COSMOS Holidays are offering a wide range of winter sun destinations.
In Tenerife, seven nights at the Laguna Park II Apartments starts at £159 per person and only £225 at the hotel Oasis Paradiso on half board during December, just when everyone is shivering in Britain.
For details call: 061 480 5799.
MOVE mystically through Moorish Andalucia with Explore Worldwide.
The trip starts in Malaga, through Andalucian villages to Granada, before heading for Cazorla where four days are spent rambling in the Sierra Nature Reserve.
Finally, enjoy several days in Seville and Cordoba.
The tour departs October 11 for 15 days and costs £495.
Accommodation is B&B in hotels and pensions.
Details: 0252 319448.
IF you have a passion for the Piste but shudder at the cost for the whole family, take advantage of a superb offer from Sally  holidays .
The company are offering ‘up to three children free’ on self-drive ski holidays in France, Austria and Italy, when accompanied by two adults.
For example, a family of five can spend seven nights in France for just £158, including studio accommodation and return ferry crossing.
For details call: 0732 780499.
EURO Express, who pioneered day trips to Eastern Europe, is offering a special Daybreak to Prague on Tuesday October 13 for £159 inclusive.
The trip provides seven hours in one of the world's most beautiful cities.
For more information call: 0444 235 678.
Booze, banter and brooding hills
NEIL SOWERBY /DAVID KERR
WE WERE just getting over the shock of seeing Arkle's skeleton when this peacock strutted into the bar.
Not for long.
A terrier played bouncer and the intruder flapped to a nearby rooftop.
Outside it was a soft day — and getting softer by the bucketful.
So we ordered another Guinness and soaked up the atmosphere some more.
Morrissey's Bar in Abbeyleix is like most Irish pubs used to be.
Darkly gleaming wood and glowing hospitality.
It huddles in the dripping centre of Ireland, in unspoilt County Laois, which most tourists hurtle through on their way to the West.
For our family it was the gentlest of introductions to an island full of surprises.
Evocative, yes, but don't think that today's Ireland is set in some quaint emerald aspic.
Shackles
Our impression over a two week jaunt round the Republic was of a country shedding the shackles of its tortured past without sacrificing its most endearing features.
What endeared us most was the CRACK — convivial evenings of booze, banter and traditional music.
The skirls and laments still echoed in our heads as we rolled through the West's brooding, lonely landscapes.
Always you find this exhilarating sense of freedom — away from tourist honeypots like Killarney where the pony and cart cowboys hassle coach parties unmercifully.
Dingle, in the wild West, could have gone the way of Killarney, but this tourist town hasn't sold its soul.
We hit Slea Head by early evening the day's rain relented, but the cap of mist on the mountains mocked the blue sky seawards.
At a tiny cove our little daughters whooped as they plunged fully clothed into the Atlantic swell.
How they loved the wondrous clean beaches.
We were staying in a custom-built B&B, £12.50 a head, a fiver for the kids.
Elsewhere we sampled a variety of accommodation from rather grand country houses to new-style independent hostels.
One, near Cork, allowed us to feed the kids in the backpacker's kitchen, put them to bed in our basic but spotless large room (£20 for all of us), then settle down to a sumptuous gourmet meal in their separate restaurant.
A bargain this, but be prepared to SPEND in Ireland.
Car hire, petrol, food and drink do not come cheap.
And finally the Soft Sell — it will always be worth your while to invest in a stout umbrella!
FACT BOX
WE travelled to Ireland with B and I.One way fares for car PLUS five adults range from £75 to 175.
Write to B and I Line, Freepost, London W12 8BR.
Two useful publications offering contrasting types of accommodation are Irish Budget Hostels (£1 from Irish tourist information offices) and The Hidden Ireland, free from The Secretary, The Hidden Ireland, Kensington Hall, Grove Park, Dublin 6, Ireland.
For additional information on where to stay, write to the Irish Tourist Board, 150-151 New Bond Street, London, W1Y 0AQ., or call them on: 071 493 3201.
BAR NONE: a warm welcome awaits at Morrissey's
EMERALD ISLE: Ireland's brooding landscape invites you to explore
HOME AND AWAY
THE Channel Islands claim the British sunshine record and are a good bet for some late rays and warm days at this time of year.
Jersey is the largest and most southerly of the islands, and being only 14 miles from the coast of France offers a taste of the Continent in local names and food without leaving the UK!
Warmed by the Gulf Stream and with an enviably mild climate, it feels like another country — but with all the comforts of home and duty-free shopping to boot!
Things to do and see include the Festival France which began this week and runs to October 18, a celebration of the island's links with France.
The Jersey Country Music Festival, headlined by Daniel O'Donnell, runs from October 18-21.
Another attraction is The Living Legend, an ‘experience’ tracing the island's history.
Guernsey, with its great night life, is an ideal base for a visit to the neighbouring islands of Sark and Herm where you can take a break from the trappings of modern life.
FACT BOX
BRITISH Channel Island Ferries offer big savings from October.
Two night Guernsey break at £56 each (was £76), and £47 November to February.
Phone: 0202 667799.
ISLAND IN THE SUN: Beautiful Beauport on Jersey
Wight on the button…
FUN for all the family is the biggest lie about any holiday destination or activity.
Often it ends up being about as much fun as trying to have a quiet drink in a bouncy castle.
The first promising thing about the Clarendon Hotel at Chale on the Isle of Wight is that it looks like a charming little English country hotel.
Then you notice there's a pub attached to it called the Wight Mouse Inn which sells six superb real ales, 365 different whiskies and has live music every night.
There's also a sign saying: ‘Children most welcome’.
The owner of the Wight Mouse Inn will tell you jokingly that his sign actually means ‘most children welcome’.
But he can afford to joke because his pub has won the Egon Ronay Family Pub of the Year award.
And it's not hard to see why.
The hotel features special family rooms with fabulous views of Freshwater Bay, high chairs and kids' menus and there's full access to a wonderful garden.
It even supplies baby listening devices.
Perhaps the most impressive thing about the hotel is  its price.
A room with en-suite bathroom, breakfast and dinner for a family of four — two adults and two children under five — will pay £540 per week.
Be sure to book in advance.
For full details, phone:(0983 730431).
FACT BOX
RED Funnel Ferries offer a day trip from Southampton to Cowes at £28 for a car and four adults and a weekend special deal (after 6pm Fridays) of £35.
For a Sailaway Holidays brochure write to Red Funnel Ferries, 12 Bugle Street, Southampton, SO9 4LJ or for more information call 0703 330 333.
For Isle of Wight Tourism call 0983 524 343.
UK HOLIDAY XTRA
Head south for winter
AND CHANNEL YOUR HIDDEN ENERGIES!
ANNE GRAHAM /DAVID KERR
HEAD south and banish those autumn blues with a trip to the seaside.
The temperature may be lower than in the height of summer, but that's compensated for by the peace and quiet you find out of season.
Brave souls can still try a dip in the English Channel and there's plenty of things to do if the weather does its worst.
Sand, sea and shingle are year-round attractions even if that elusive ‘S’ for sunshine is absent!
Heading east from Poole in Dorset right along to Dover in Kent there are sights to see and bargain breaks waiting to be snapped up.
Children will love the Icetrax and Splashdown park in Poole where there is a two-level ice pad with ramps, an ‘active’ volcano, eight water flumes and an open air Lazy River Ride.
Bournemouth is the next port of call: a well-established resort which is both elegant and friendly and where you can see anything from classical concerts to dinosaur reconstructions.
Head for Portsmouth and see Lord Nelson's HMS Victory and HMS Warrior at the Royal Naval Museum — then visit the Sea Life Centre.
Nearby Bognor Regis, boasts a host of good pubs and restaurants as well as sandy beaches.
Brighton — like Portsmouth — has an impressive Sea Life Centre.
Here you will find the longest underwater tunnel display in Europe, teeming with conger eels and sharks.
End with a visit to Dover's White Cliffs Experience, a technological time trip through 2,000 years of history.
FOR more information contact the Southern Tourist Board on 0703 620006 and the South East England Tourist Board on 0892 540766.
YOUR MONEY
A ROARING SUCCESS
JOHN HUSBAND
IN the current economic jungle Anglia TV's wildlife programme Survival is still a king.
After nearly 30 years it is the station's biggest single money-spinner, accounting for the lion's share of its sales to the ITV network.
This, together with a rise in TV advertising, helped boost Anglia's profits by a half to £4.8 million in the six months ended June.
LION'S SHARE: Anglia's Survival is a winner
Cuts on cards
THE cost of borrowing is coming down at last.
First bank off the mark is Lloyds, which slashed the cost of personal loans, overdrafts and credit cards by between 1.4 and 2.8 per cent— the first reduction for a year.
Nationwide building society has also brought its mortgage rate down by 0.75 per cent to 9.95 per cent.
HOPES that there will be more interest rate cuts to come sparked off a fresh shares boom yesterday.
The FTSE index of leading shares jumped 40.7 to 2,621.2.
Cracks in nest eggs
LIFE insurance endowment policies are a great way to build up a family nest egg for the future.
But the way they are sold means many savers end up with egg on their faces if they are forced to cash in policies before these fall due.
This is because salesmen are paid commission up front, which is often as much as the whole of the first year's premiums.
To pay for this, insurers load the front-end charges on policies, so that customers get back only a fraction of what should be due to them if they have to cash in ahead of time.
So it is good news that Sir Bryan Carsberg, new Director General of Fair Trading, is questioning both these practices.
Sir Bryan told the  insurance industry yesterday that commissions should be related to the long-term maintenance of policies over their full lifetime, rather than paid out as a lump sum immediately a policy was sold.
If this happened, sales staff would be encouraged to give more attention to tailoring insurance savings plans to the long-term needs of the customer.
But the Government also needs to restore the tax relief which used to exist on life assurance  premiums .
It's unfair that this has been removed when tax breaks have been given to people who invest short-term in shares, property or new businesses through Personal Equity Plans and Business Expansion Schemes.
Insurance companies are more likely to improve their sales methods if Sir Bryan tackles the Government on this issue.
SHELF LIFE
JAN WALSH
STAYING TUNED
PSSST…want to buy a cheap squarial?
If you're tempted to try satellite TV and you've seen some old BSB squarials on sale, beware.
They'll only give you three months of Sky programmes.
Some shops are offering old squarials at knock-down prices and implying that they're a good buy because they can be converted to receive Sky next year.
But that's all pie in the sky.
The fact is, they'll only give you BSkyB until December.
After that you'll need to rent or buy the proper Sky dish to get their programmes.
THE PRICE THAT'S RIGHT
WHEN Arnold Parker bought a chocolate gateau in his local grocer's shop, he thought he'd got a bargain.
The frozen dessert was marked 99p.
But when he got it to the check-out the girl assistant asked him to pay £1.99.
‘She said I'd have to pay the full amount or put it back in the freezer,’ said Mr Parker, of York.
‘Is that right?’
Many readers ask the same question, and the fact is you DO have to pay the correct price for goods, even if the shop has mistakenly put a lower price on the label.
But you can get your own back.
Displaying the wrong price is a criminal offence and you can report the shop to your local trading standards office.
If you think a store regularly gets its prices wrong it's worth ‘shopping’ them to protect other customers.
OFF YOUR TROLLEY
Steer clear of the wheels of misfortune
SUPERMARKET trolleys are a national joke.
You push them, pull them, even plead with them — still they won't go the way you want.
But their dreadful steering isn't the only reason to hate them.
They also cause nasty accidents.
Children fall out of them or get trapped under them, and adults get sprained wrists, strained backs and bruised shins because of their design.
Tomorrow the Health and Safety Executive will reveal a catalogue of injuries caused by trolleys.
And they'll press shops and trolley manufacturers to come up with better designs and clearer instructions.
The Daily Mirror has been campaigning to make trolleys safer for years after reporting accidents, such as:
EIGHT-week-old Zack Saltman, who fractured his skull in two places after falling out of an overhead baby cradle attached to a trolley in Edinburgh.
AN eight-year-old girl in Bletchley, Bucks, who died in an accident with a DIY store trolley, loaded with chipboard, which overturned and crushed her.
PIPPA Steffell, aged one, who got her foot caught in the gap of a Sainsbury trolley while sitting in the seat.
‘She was hysterical,’ said her mum, Sarah Steffell, from Godalming, Surrey.
RUPERT Browne, three months, who grizzled in the baby cradle of a Tesco trolley.
His mum, Jacqueline, of Cardigan, said: ‘When I bent down I could see that the metal mesh had been cutting in to his scalp.’
PAT Toone from Leicester, who suffered a severed tendon when the lock mechanism on a Tesco trolley cut her finger.
‘It really shook me,’ she said.
More than 100 people a week are taken to hospital after hurting themselves on supermarket trolleys.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents has discovered that around half the victims are children under five.
But up to now many supermarkets have ignored the problems.
They blame customers for mis-using trolleys.
Yet few make it clear HOW we're supposed to use them.
Did you know, for example, that you're ‘mis-using’ your trolley if you wheel it out to the car park with a child in the seat?
RoSPA are trying to get supermarkets to change the design of their trolleys, and to give clear guidance to customers.
David Jenkins, spokesman for RoSPA, said: ‘It's unfair for stores to blame the users for accidents.
Some customers are careless, but in many cases people have no idea that trolleys can cause accidents until they happen.’
Physiotherapists blame the new giant-sized trolleys for causing back problems and other joint and muscle strains, too.
We asked the five top supermarkets what they were doing to make their trolleys safer.
Only Asda, Safeway and Sainsbury's answered our questions.
Most Sainsbury trolleys now have diagrams on the handles.
‘Over the years we have always striven to improve on trolley safety,’ said spokeswoman Wendy Godfrey.
Asda spokesman, Alan Preece said: ‘Our trolleys go through stringent tests for stability.’
Safeway say their trolleys are designed to cater for everyone, from the very young to the elderly or disabled.
‘We have eight different types of trolleys which have been designed with safety considerations paramount,’ said spokesman Tony Coombes.
IF YOU or your family has recently been hurt by a supermarket trolley, we'd like to hear.
Information could help safety experts.
Write to: Trolley Safety, Consumer Dept, Daily Mirror, 33 Holborn, London EC1P 1DQ.
SAFETY TIPS
NOT all of these tips are easy to follow, especially if you've got more than one child in tow.
The real answer is better-designed trolleys.
Don't let your child stand up — preferably use your own harness.
Don't let toddlers lean into the basket from the seat — they're top-heavy and could topple.
Beware at the check-out.
As the basket empties, a heavy child could lean and make the whole trolley overbalance.
Be careful when wheeling a trolley over any uneven ground if your child is in the seat.
Take him out and ask for help.
If we all did that we'd soon get improvements!
Don't balance a baby's car safety seat on the top of a trolley.
Put it inside, firmly wedged.
Don't let children stand on the sides of a trolley.
Steer your trolley carefully.
Beware of bumping into other shoppers' shins.
When unlocking a trolley, make sure it's pushed close to the trolley in front before inserting the coin.
Otherwise, the mechanism could leap out.
DANGER: Don't give your child an easy ride — the trolley could topple over
DANGER: Accidents can happen if you leave your child in the trolley while unloading
DANGER: Jan finds that when her child stands up, the shopping trolley is impossible to control
DEAR MARGE
MARJE PROOPS
The rage of a single mum
I HAVE just read an article — not in the Mirror I'm glad to say — which has left me speechless with rage.
It implied that most of today's lone mothers are single because they choose to be.
They decided, according to this writer, to bring up their babies alone because they want to be independent and manage their lives without a man.
What a load of rubbish!
Speaking as one of them, I can tell this person that I am a single mother, not from choice, but because my baby's father scarpered as soon as I told him I was pregnant.
I was 18 when my daughter, now four, was born.
I love her and have never, ever, wished she hadn't happened, but I have had no youth, no fun, no life worth living.
I scrape and save to support us both.
I have almost no social life, free only when my disabled mother can manage my child for a few hours.
Choice?
It's a laugh.
A man can choose to walk away.
A woman never can.
Sorry to rant on.
I had to get it off my chest.
I DIDN'T read the article that stirred up such anger in you, but if I had, I'd have shared your rage.
No woman in her right mind would choose to be a single parent and the tiny minority who set out to be are, in my view, incredibly selfish, unimaginative and cruel.
I see them as women wanting lone motherhood as a gesture of independence and to augment a feminist argument that men are useful but disposable.
The victims of their aggressive stance are their children.
Women like you, old before your time, burdened by the problems — both practical and emotional — of single-motherhood, could teach these misguided women a lesson.
And ask them how they'd answer their children's inevitable questions, such as‘why don't I have a daddy like the other kids at school?’
And ‘what did my daddy look like?’
And ‘why did he go away and leave me?’
All too many women like you are deserted even before their babies' birth.
Some are forced into single-parenthood by a man who walks out on his wife or partner, often for a younger model and a quiet life away from nursery squalls.
I daresay that as a result of your letter and my few words, I'll have an angry response from men who'll say, ‘what about the women who abandon their children for other men?’
True, there are some of those, but there aren't droves of them.
The large majority of one-parent families consist of a mother trying to cope without a partner.
But I have to make one comment you might not care to hear: A woman does have a choice.
She doesn't need to get pregnant.
You probably took chances rather than precautions.
And although it doesn't let your daughter's father off the hook, it doesn't let you off either.
The difference is that you were left holding the baby.
Which is women's lot.
But not, as the blinkered writer of that article implied, necessarily her own independent choice.
Fed up with the cheap plonkers
AT forty-three, divorced six years ago, I frankly admit I want a man.
What I don't want is a man who takes me out for a meal, buys a bottle of cheap plonk and expects payment in the form of instant sex, either in the back of his car, or if he gets really lucky, in my flat.
I have met plenty of those since my husband left me — for another man, incidentally, not for a young bimbo.
I am still friends with my ex-husband who takes it on himself to be my personal agony aunt.
He says I come on too strong with these men, not sexually because believe me, I don't.
But my ex-husband says I'm inclined to be intimidating and also I give out powerful signals that I'm desperate to get another husband.
But he doesn't have any suggestions to offer me about how to make a man interested in a future beyond a one-night stand.
Do you?
ONE way, I guess, to sustain a man's interest further than a quick bonk in a lay-by is to make it absolutely plain from the start that you are not interested in instant sex out of gratitude for a pizza and a couple of glasses of Italian white.
Or whatever ethnic culinary delights you are offered.
A lot of men are under the impression that a divorcee in her forties is so hungry for sex that they're doing her a huge favour by providing it, at very little inconvenience or cost to themselves.
Perhaps some of your one-night stands have passed the word around that you are readily available.
So the first thing you must do is get a different message across.
Like you need to get to know and like someone before you're ready to make love.
Like you are in favour of mutual respect, as well as mutual regard.
Old fashioned notions, perhaps, but since what you want is old-fashioned marriage, those are the principles on which it should be based.
You stand to risk frightening some men off but since you've no hope of a future with them it doesn't matter if you never see them again.
You've learned there's no hope with one-night standers, so simply say thanks for the meal, but no thanks when they start asking for the afters.
I can't, of course, comment on your ex's accusation that you intimidate men.
He could judge that better than I can.
But don't take that criticism too seriously.
Perhaps you merely intimidated him and perhaps you had reason too.
Tell him from me he falls a bit short of agony aunt requirements.
The pros are expected to come up with a few answers to problems.
I hope he'll give the nod to the ones I've suggested to you.
He's shocked by Sir's secret
I AM the father of a 14-year-old son and have learned that one of the teachers at his school is a transvestite.
My wife uncovered the man's secret through her friend's husband, who apparently knows this teacher well.
It seems he makes no pretence about his disgusting perversion.
My wife and I don't believe this practice can be illegal but we both feel that such a man with influence over vulnerable young boys is the wrong person to teach them.
I don't want my son to grow up to be a sexual pervert because of lessons he's learned at school.
I assume this man is a homosexual.
I would value your advise as to the course I should take.
Would an approach to the headmaster be the best way?
Or should I contact the Social Services department at the council?
Thank you.
THANK you, too — for giving me an opportunity to put you right on a simple matter of fact.
It does not follow that a transvestite, ie, a man who dresses in women's clothes, is either a pervert or a homosexual.
You do the teacher in question a terrible injustice by putting these emotive labels on him without a shred of evidence that he presents a risk to the children he teaches.
Let me give you a brief word picture of the average transvestite.
He cross-dresses in women's clothes because of some deep need, probably rooted in his childhood.
This is often because of early emotional over-dependence on his mother, which is associated in his subconscious mind with items of her clothing.
Many male transvestites have a history of being dressed when toddlers by their doting mothers in pretty dresses.
Happily for some, they marry women who learn to cope with their man's special need.
Such men are usually normal, sexually active lovers.
And while it's true to say that some cross-dressers are gay, not all gays, by any means, are transvestites.
Having explained this, I hope you'll think again before storming in to see your son's headmaster.
You never know, the head may well be wearing knickers and a bra under his tweed jacket and cords.
And don't bother the Social Services department either, unless you have very good reason to believe the boys in this teacher's charge are genuinely at risk.
As for the legality of cross-dressing, relax.
Luckily for all of us, it's perfectly within the law.
Otherwise we'd be deprived of, among others, our own darling from Down Under, Dame Edna Everage.
Perish the awful thought.
 BOUQUET OF THE WEEK
THIS week's bouquet nomination comes from an elderly reader who writes about a special and very kind friend.
‘I must tell you about our guardian angel.
For the last 18 years this wonderful lady has done the housework, the washing and the gardening for the old people living in our village.
Because I am 84 and live alone, she also pops in every morning and evening to ensure I am all right, and she gives me a bath once a week.
Without her care, friendship and encouragement a lot of people would have given up.
She spent her whole life looking after her parents and now she looks after us, too.
Please let her know how much she is appreciated.’
A bouquet is on its way to this super lady from Slinfold, West Sussex, with my very best wishes.
HELP!
HELP!
I MENTIONED in this space recently a friendship agency named Handidate which caters for disabled people.
‘Great idea’, was the response.
And I'm told a lot of people contacted the agency.
But several disabled readers have written to tell me that though they've found their perfect partner, physical handicaps mean sexual fulfilment is often very  difficult .
Some of those who wrote had disabled partners.
An organisation called SPOD (Sexual Problems of Disability) is a charity which can provide direct service to people with disability and/or their partner who are having sexual or relationship problems.
The hours of this voluntary service are limited.
But for disabled people with sex problems, it's worth persisting.
The number to call, on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, is 071-607-8851.
There are also some useful leaflets available for only 50p each.
I recommend particularly leaflets Two, Three and Five.
Write, with an SAE, to SPOD, 286 Camden Road, London N7 0BJ.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
INDIE rockers Suede lived on the breadline for 18 months before finding pop success.
Says singer Brett Anderson, at No. 25 with Metal Mickey: ‘We lived in squalor for a year and a half.
We were ignored and despised by everyone — fans, venues, bands and journalists.
I learned how to survive on just £1 a day.
Thank God those times are over.’
BOYZ FREEZE OUT THE GIRLZ
‘We need to concentrate on our careers’
CHARTBUSTERS Boyz II Men are giving up sex for a year to stay on top of the job.
They have vowed to stay celibate for the sake of their careers.
The Philadelphia foursome are terrified that romance could wreck their plans for stardom.
So they have given girlfriends the cold shoulder.
This week their American No.1 smash End Of The Road has shot to No.11 in the UK charts.
Interfere
Singer Michael McCary, 20, says:
‘It's not that we think it's wrong to have girl-friends, we just choose not to at the moment.
‘We feel we need to concentrate on our careers because we are just starting out.
‘Girls would definitely interfere with that.
They are an incredible distraction.
So they will have to wait.’
Band member Shawn Stockman adds: ‘We miss the opposite sex and we all think it would be nice to have someone around, someone that we could love and who would love us.
‘But living without women is something we decided had to be done — it's not too high a price to pay for fame.’
The band, who dress up in short-trousered suits, are the hottest group in America now.
Their debut album, Cooleyhighharmony, has sold more than four million copies already, making the band millionaires.
MICHAEL McCARY: No distractions
A feeling of terror
SEXY singer Neneh Cherry, left, admits a scream froze in her throat when a guy groped her on a bus in Nigeria.
She says: ‘It happened the first evening I arrived there.
He started playing with my hair and then he just got worse.
‘If it had taken place in London or New York I would have simply bawled at him to get lost.
But out there, it was unnerving — yet fascinating.
I couldn't believe it was happening,’ she admits in an interview with The Face.
Neneh, back in the charts at No 23 with Money Love after an absence of two years, adds: ‘I have never cried so much as on that night.’
SEE SHAMEN, LIVE!
THE Limit has teamed up with chart-toppers The Shamen to launch a truly wicked competition.
We're giving away 120 tickets to see the band live on their UK tour which kicks off next month.
And every winner will also get a stylish Shamen bag to impress their pals.
The rave kings are playing shows in London, Manchester, Sheffield, Birmingham — and two in their Glasgow home town.
To win one of the 10 pairs of tickets we have for each show, simply complete this Shamen hit: Move Any……
. Write your answer, name and address, on a postcard, to: The Limit's The Shamen competition, 1 Thavies Inn, London EC88 1AB, to reach us by October 1.
First correct entries out of the bag win.
BOB MARLEY'S eldest daughter, Cedella, never got to do the one thing she always desperately wanted — join her late father on tour.
Says Cedella, whose father's record Iron Lion Zion, is at No. 5 a decade after his death: ‘Only the boys were allowed to go on tour with Dad because he thought it was too rough for us girls.
I thought that was real unfair.’
Dances of death
PRODIGY has slammed Top Of The Pops.
The rave band, which rocketed to No.8 with Fire, believes the Beeb show is death to dance.
Front man Liam Howlett rants: ‘It's stupid, worthless and is killing dance acts.
‘The best dance music should stay underground.
We have always refused to appear on the programme.’
SEX AND THE BRITISH TEENAGER
LORRAINE BUTLER
LOVE, SEX AND THE WHOLE DAMN THING
Whispered confessions you'd never tell mum and dad
Nearly half have illegal sex
170 under-age girls get pregnant every month
The nightmare of AIDS
SEX.
From the playground to the common room it's the word on every youngster's lips.
They want to know when, where, how, why, and who with.
And never before has this knowledge been so vital to them.
Our teenagers are the first generation of young people to begin their sex lives under the shadow of AIDS.
Yet for so long their thoughts on sex and love have been ignored.
But today The Daily Mirror reveals what the Nineties teenager really thinks about making love.
In an exclusive and wide-ranging survey we have have delved deep into the minds of 13 to 17-year-old girls and boys from all over Britain.
We have put to them the intimate questions teachers and parents are too afraid to ask.
And we have unlocked the sex secrets of an army of teenagers.
In the first part of our sensational three-day series, we talk to teenage girls about about sex, love and their relationships with boys.
Their answers are both forthright and fascinating as they reveal their most private thoughts.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE PLAYGROUND MOVES
HER knees felt weak and butterflies flocked into her stomach as she felt the first hot flush of teenage love.
She'd fancied him for ages and when he asked her out she managed to keep her cool even though she felt faint.
She pretended to be mulling it over.
Not bothered.
Just a casual OK.
Don't let him see you're really keen.
That was a month ago.
Now she is on the verge of the Big Adventure.
Sex.
He wants it badly.
Why not?, he says, after all we're old enough.
She's not so sure at first— but then she thinks about what all her girlfriends tell her.
They all seem to be doing it.
And she's sure she's in love with him.
So yes.
Why not?
That is the perfect world painted by teenage girls who poured out their hearts to the us in our exclusive sex survey.
How they'd like it to be.
But the reality is starkly different.
Family Planning Association figures show that half Britain's teenage girls under 16 are having illegal sex.
Many regret it and many fall pregnant — about 170 under 15s in this country every week, according to the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
This means Britain has the highest rate of under-age pregnancy in the Western world.
These are hard facts.
But what they do not show is what teenage girls feel.
And what they want.
Seven out of ten young girls questioned said boys put too much pressure on them to have sex before they were ready.
And although 75 per cent of them thought 16 was the right time to start having sex, girls admitted they still made the mistake, often with drastic consequences, of saying Yes when they really meant No.
‘Girls are much more sexually aware than boys,’ explains psychologist and teenage sex expert Dr Roger Ingham.
‘But many still find it hard to talk to their boyfriends about sex and birth control.
They often agree to intercourse because they feel they must or they think they've got to a certain age where they have to do it.
‘As a result the majority of young girls I have interviewed say they regret how they lost their virginity and would love to turn the clock back.’
And for girls sex means much more than just intercourse.
Six out of 10 told us they would like to be ‘in love’ when they make love — especially the girls.
And three quarters want to be taught about relationships as part of their sex education too.
The 15 to 17-year-old girls wanted this subject included in the school syllabus.
Says Mandy Haines, 15: ‘I would like to be told what boys expect you to do and how they think you'll behave when it comes to sex.
‘I think we should be given lessons on that and then we could make up our minds about whether we are being used by a boy seeing how far he can go, or whether the boy is really interested in us.
‘It is sometimes quite difficult to say ‘no’ to a boy.
It's embarrassing and they take advantage especially at parties where some girls have had a lot to drink.’
When it comes to sex talk in the classroom boys, both girls and boys reckon they get a raw deal.
Three quarters of the teenagers we questioned were unhappy with sex education at school.
Two thirds reckoned they learned more about the facts of life during sex lessons by chatting to classmates.
And a quarter of those questioned even wanted to see sex education taught to children under 10.
This can be seen as a backlash against independent research which shows that confusion and ignorance is the main factor in about a third of unplanned teenage pregnancies.
Even so only one in 10 girls — as opposed to one in four boys — would talk to a knowledgeable teacher about sex.
In fact they would be just as likely to turn to the agony aunt pages of a magazine.
Surprisingly more than half the girls — even though they were aware of their right to confidentiality — would be to embarrassed to talk to a doctor about sex or contraception.
Just last week a survey by Brook Advisory Centres revealed an estimated 84,000 15 year old girls are sexually active, yet just 18,000 of them go to a family planning clinic.
And they while they reckon condoms, by far the most popular form of contraception for teenagers, are sensible they are victims of their own self-consciousness because they are too afraid to buy them.
Eight out of 10 agreed it was OK for girls to carry condoms but half said they would be too embarrassed to buy them.
When it comes to asking parents' advice, tensions of previous generations have eased considerably.
Three quarters of all the teenagers questioned would open their hearts at home.
But mum's the word.
Two thirds of girls would confide in their mother whereas only one in ten would talk to their dad about sex.
And 75 per cent of all the girls admit they just can't help gossipping about sex to their friends.
But for many, stories about one night-stands are more inclined to raise eyebrows than get them giggling.
Half the girls felt both boys and girls deserved a bad name if they slept around.
And two thirds said they would only have sex in a long-term relationship.
For the teenage girls of the Nineties, it seems, love conquers all.
CASE HISTORY 1
MUM'S THE WORD IN AMBER'S LIFE
HAVING sex for the first time doesn't frighten 15 year old Amber Armitage.
Instead the young woman is looking forward to it.
And that's all thanks to her mum.
For mother-of-two Margaret has taught both her daughters as much about sex as she knows.
Says Amber: ‘My mum is quite unusual.
Many of my school friends know hardly anything about sex and it worries them but mum has made it very easy for me to ask questions.
‘I feel I have enough information to have a sexual relationship when the time is right.
It would have to be with a steady boyfriend.
Some friends who have lost their virginity did so because they didn't know what was going on.
In a way they had no choice — but I have chosen to stay a virgin and that is important to me.’
A pretty brunette Amber says hers is an attitude many, but not all, of her girlfriends share.
She adds: ‘I would like to have a boyfriend but it is not the most important thing right now.
‘And I'd only go out with someone I really liked — I wouldn't do it for the sake of it.
And I think we all reckon sex without a condom is out now.
I think we've got accustomed to the idea because of AIDS and the number of unwanted pregnancies.
‘Sex is like anything else I suppose you can talk about it and ask questions but you don't know what it will be like until you actually do it.
So I just have to wait and see.’
Vital
For Amber's mum divorcee Mrs Armitage, 48, it is a relief her daughter's Amber and Cara, 17, know about contraception, HIV and  AIDS , sexually transmitted diseases, cervical cancer and sexual intercourse.
She says: ‘I am not embarrassed at all talking to the girls.
It is vital they have this information.
The only thing I find difficult to discuss with them is my own sexuality.
‘I think they would both probably only tell me after the  event about having sex for the first time but as long as I have helped prepare them they won't do anything silly.
‘You can't do anything to stop young people having sex so you have to help them.
However I wouldn't be happy about either having a boyfriend to stay overnight in the house quite yet.
‘I am annoyed at the lack of sex education they get at school.
I think Amber has had some during biology but it is not enough and I will be talking to the Parent Teachers Association about it.’
PASSION KILLERS OF THE NINETIES
THE teenagers of today are the first young people to begin their sex lives under the shadow of AIDS.
And while they recognise the threat of this killer disease they are still faced with the  dilemma of physically protecting themselves from it.
Just over half the teenagers we surveyed had received formal sex education on AIDS and the HIV virus which leads to AIDS.
Yet a staggering eight out of 10 disagreed strongly with the idea AIDS isn't really a risk for young people.
And the large majority of even the 13 and 14 year olds knew they too were under threat even though only three in 10 members of that age group had actually covered the subject in class.
But protecting themselves against the deadly virus by practising safer sex is another matter.
Realities
They want to use condoms — nine out of 10 agreed it was sensible to carry condoms ‘just in case’— but half those surveyed said they would be to embarrassed to buy them.
Even among the 15 to 17 year olds four out of 10 admitted they would be to shy to buy condoms, the most popular form of contraception for teenagers, over the counter in a chemist.
This month HIV and AIDS became a statutory part of the national curriculum and now schools have to teach it.
Yet the large majority of our teenagers said they had not been taught the practical realities of avoiding AIDS until they were at least 15.
They wanted to know much more, much earlier.
And surprisingly only one in five teenagers questioned had been taught about homosexuality and lesbianism in school.
THE report A Survey Of Attitudes To Sex Among 13 to 17-year-olds was written for the Daily Mirror by the Research Group of Great Britain Limited.
FAMILY FORTUNE: Amber knows her mum gives her sound advice on sex
CAREFREE: But most girls are aware of the dangers of casual sex and want long lasting relationships
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
THOSE two holy sinners, Jim Bakaar and Jimmy Swaggart, are apparently running a magazine from their prison cells.
It's called Repenthouse.
ANDY'S UNDIES
ALTHOUGH Prince Andrew is seemingly lovelorn, we can reveal that he intends to go on a shopping trip next week for high-class ladies' underwear.
And he has decided to buy the lacy garments from Janet Reger — Fergie's favourite designer.
He made a bee-line for Janet on Thursday night during a party aboard the Thames-based HMS Belfast.
And after their lengthy and intimate chat, he confided in a naval colleague that ‘at the earliest opportunity’ he would visit Janet's shop in Beauchamp Place around the corner from Harrods.
‘Sarah buys all her stuff from there,’ he added.
‘It's really rather elegant.’
Our disclosure will of course interest Fergie, who has been spending most of her time with John Bryan but undoubtedly still wears the red and black £100-apiece underwear which she bought from Janet.
Does it mean Andrew is seriously planning a reconciliation with Fergie?
Or is the underwear for someone else?
Janet was determined yesterday not to help answer these questions.
‘It's true to say I did see Prince Andrew the other night and I might add he was looking more handsome than ever,’ she said.
‘But it would be indiscreet of me to say any more.’
Quite.
CLINTON COMES A CROPPER
THE staid old Washington Post recently carried a drawing of presidential hopeful Bill Clinton's wife, Hilary, sketched from the back.
Ahead of her was a large crowd and as she addressed them she hoisted her skirt up high.
The caption read: ‘Read my lips…no Bush.’
Silicon Valley
SYLVESTER
STALLONE'S girlfriend Jennifer Flavin parades the new look that Sly loves to get his teeth into.
IMAGINE…kissing Brooke Shields.
That's one thing Julian Lennon's Dad never did.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
PROFITS AD UP…
PROFITS of Central TV jumped from £3.4 million to £15 million in the first half of this year.
The station, which makes Spitting Image and Inspector Morse, has increased its advertising sales at the expense of rivals.
Central shares rose 80p to £13.45 on the news, but most others fell.
as hopes of fresh interest rate cuts faded.
The FTSE index of leading shares plunged 20.2 to 2,601.0.
OLD Rollers are going cheap according to Rolls-Royce dealer Reg Vardy, who has sold 18 second-hand ones this year against six new models.
MANSELL'S ROAD TO GLORY
Grand Prix wallchart packed with facts of the track
Today we are giving away another super exclusive Daily Mirror wallchart — Nigel Mansell, portrait of a hero.
This is your chance to chart Mansell's progress in a dramatic season of Formula One world championship racing.
It was a season in which Mansell won an amazing Nine Grands Prix.
He took the first five straight off, and went on to capture the world crown for the first time.
He became only the seventh Briton of all time to wear the champion's laurels and will go down in history alongside Mike Hawthorn, Graham Hill, Jim Clark, John Surtees, Jackie Stewart and James Hunt.
Now you can capture all the glory of Mansell's victory in our stunning souvenir wallchart.
Every day this week you can collect pictures of the first eight Grands Prix that Mansell won.
South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, Spain, San Marino, France, Britain, Germany — Mansell won them all as his mighty Renault-Williams car blazed to triumph after triumph.
Speed
And the second place in Hungary clinched the title for Mansell — with an incredible five races still to run.
Start collecting your pictures today.
Each one shows a map of the Grand Prix circuit where Mansell beat the world, plus the finishing line-up of first, second and third, Mansell's average speed and the winning time.
Add to your wallchart every day and by Saturday your souvenir of Mansell's victory will be complete.
WIN A DREAM HOLIDAY FOR TWO IN SAN  Francisco 
PLUS 100 videos to give away
TEAM up with Richard Gere and Kim Basinger and you could be heading for a super holiday in San Francisco.
Gere and Basinger star in the erotic thriller Final Analysis which Warner Home Video will released into video libraries by October 18.
Most of the action takes place in San Francisco where the two lucky winners of our great contest will be heading for a sensational seven days.
They will fly with with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, on their brand new route from Heathrow to San  Francisco via Amsterdam, and stay for six nights at the Tuscan Inn, the newest hotel on the world-famous Fisherman's Wharf.
Attractions
The hotel is ideally placed to check out all the waterfront attractions of the Wharf.
Or they can board one of the famous San Francisco trams to shop till they drop at Ghiradelli Square.
Our winners will be given a FREE Tropical USA Rent-A-Car so you can drive cross the Golden Gate Bridge on your explorations.
Warner Home Video will also give them £300 spending money.
In Final Analysis Richard Gere plays Isaac Barr, a San Francisco psychiatrist, who thought he was in full control of his life until he met the stunning Heather Evans played by Kim Basinger.
The sister of one his patients, she's also a mobster's wife, so when Barr falls under her spell, he becomes involved in a passionate affair that leads to obsession, betrayal and murder.
For 100 runners-up we have copies of the video, worth around £60 each.
To enter our contest, complete these other video hits linked to Gere and Basinger:
(a)
9 1/2…;
(b)
Pretty…;
(c)
An Officer And A…;
(d)
My Stepmother Is An…
Print your answers on a postcard and send to Final Analysis Video Contest (Daily Mirror), Parkes Print, 86 East Avenue, Hayes, Middx., UB3 2HR by October 9.
The first correct entry drawn wins the holiday.
WOMEN OF SUBSTANCE
Revealed — multi-million fortunes of Britain's most well-heeled ladies
Queen just 10th richest Heiresses worth £3.6 bn
BILL AKASS
THE Queen is only the TENTH richest woman in Britain, a survey reveals.
And the wealthiest woman in the country, shipping heiress CHRISTINE GOULANDRIS, is almost three times richer than the monarch with a fortune of £290 million.
The Queen is worth only £100 million after state assets are deducted from the Crown's £5 billion fortune, according to Business Age magazine.
But that's nothing to 44-year-old Mrs Goulandris, wife of millionaire Heinz chief Tony O'Reilly.
She inherited a half share of her father's shipping business at the age of five, and has British nationality.
Heiresses dominate the magazine's list of the 250 wealthiest women in Britain — there are 97 worth a total of £3.6 billion with the nine richest coming from just three families.
Britain's other fabulously wealthy women of substance include:
Body Shop businesswoman ANITA RODDICK, 32nd richest with £45 million.
Writer BARBARA CARTLAND — who has written more than 520 books with more than 500 million copies sold — 34th richest with a £40 million fortune.
Singer SHEENA EASTON, 33, who thanks to a series of shrewd property deals in California is 36th richest with £39.4 million.
Beatle Paul McCartney's wife, LINDA McCARTNEY, holds 38th slot with £39.2 million, most of it stemming from an inheritance from the Eastman/Kodak fortune.
Actress JULIE ANDREWS is worth a cool £22 million, fellow star JOAN COLLINS £12.7 million, singer PETULA CLARK £12.6 million, and TV star CILLA BLACK £12 million.
Barbara Cartland isn't the only woman to write her own fortune — CATHERINE COOKSON is worth £24 million, SHIRLEY CONRAN £16 million, JACKIE COLLINS is richer than sister Joan with £15 million and ROSEMARY CONLEY has £14.8 million.
Former Premier LADY THATCHER will never be short of a few bob — she's worth an estimated £9.5 million.
Most of her initial wealth comes from her husband Sir Denis.
But she's adding to it by the month with a lucrative round of speaking engagements all over the world at up to £125,000 a time.
A surprise entry is singer and former model SAMANTHA FOX, 26, ranked 179th with a £5.5 million fortune.
Libel
Despite her fabulous wealth, Sam's only property is a humble £60,000 two-bedroom flat in North London.
Prince Andrew's former love KOO STARK, 36, is said to have amassed £4.2 million, largely from a divorce settlement from Green Shield stamp heir Tim Jeffries.
She has also collected huge libel payouts together with fees for her photographic work.
Viscount Linley's latest love SERENA STANHOPE is an eligible bachelor-girl with a personal hoard of £4.8 million — at the age of just 22.
John Lennon's first wife, CYNTHIA LENNON, received a large divorce settlement and lives on the Isle of Man with £3.9 million worth of investments.
Actor Richard Burton's widow, SALLY BURTON, has £8.2 million — but no man to share it with.
Another wealthy widow is BETTY MAXWELL, wife of disgraced Robert Maxwell.
She is believed to have a £4.2 million fortune based solely on French property she owned before her marriage to the tycoon.
More than 250 women in the UK are worth more than £2 million each and about 700 women own cash and assets worth more than £1 million.
At the top of the tree, the nine women richer than the Queen all inherited their wealth.
Second to Mrs Goulandris with £234.5 million is 30-year-old DONABELLA MOORES, only daughter of Peter Moores, former chairman of the Littlewoods pools group.
Her first cousins — PATRICIA MARTIN and LADY GRANTCHESTER — rank sixth and seventh with £195 million and £170 million.
Members of the Guinness family are ranked third, fourth, eighth and ninth.
VISCOUNTESS BOYD has £210 million and LADY BRIGID NESS £205 million.
LADY ELIZABETH NUGENT has £128.8 million and Lady Ness's daughter, PRINCESS VICTORIA VON PREUSSEN, £125 million.
Britain's richest businesswoman LAXMI SHIVDASANI, 69, is also a relative unknown.
Royals
She has amassed a £94 million fortune through her family's food, hotel and banking chain, making her the nation's 13th richest woman.
Six members of the Royal Family rank in the top 250.
They include the QUEEN MOTHER with £26 million, and PRINCESS MARGARET and PRINCESS ANNE with £9 million.
Despite their wealth, each receives a hefty cash handout from the Civil List.
The 90-year-old Dowager DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER is worth £26.5 million, but also gets £90,000 a year from the public purse.
PRINCESS ALEXANDRA, 56, is the 106th richest woman in Britain with £12.7 million.
And what a lot they've got!
£290m Christine is the richest woman
£100m Queen is only 10th richest
£40m Best-seller writer Barbara Cartland
£45m Body Shop chief Anita Roddick
£39.4m Shrewd pop star Sheena
£39.2m Beatle Paul's wife Linda
£15m Wealthy novelist Jackie Collins
£9.5 Lady Thatcher is a lucky lady
£4.2m Andrew's former love, Koo Stark
£5.5m Former model turned singer Sam Fox makes the richest women charts with a £5.5 m fortune — but she still lives in a humble flat
MAJOR BLUNDER
Five months after General Election and Tories are in a mess
‘He's trapped…and facing one of the toughest weeks of his life’
ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
JOHN MAJOR has stopped taking all the newspapers.
And just as well, because yesterday's press was perhaps the worst a prime minister has faced since the Suez crisis.
Papers which fought to win him the election have, like so many of his back-benchers and supporters, turned against him.
Page upon page has been filled with Cabinet splits, the Europe crisis, the economic crisis, the industrial and jobs crisis, the Mellor crisis…and a crisis of leadership.
Major's decision to rely on a press resume written by others, and so avoid personally confronting the welter of hostile headlines, mocking columns and cartoons, is not the only symptom of bunker mentality.
Colleagues have noticed mannerisms which reveal a growing obsession with how he looks — constantly playing with his hair, gazing in mirrors, fussing about his clothes.
The mild paranoia which afflicts all prime ministers in time is setting in earlier than expected.
He is convinced that a Cabinet minister is plotting against him and determined to find out who it is.
But he is doing very little about policy problems themselves.
Pitiful
Cabinet ministers were exasperated that he allowed last Thursday, when he was facing a big test in the Commons, to be dominated by the resignation of a junior member of the Cabinet.
That it was David Mellor, a Major crony, has reinforced fears that this is a prime minister who can't judge what he should do with his time.
That Major still backs Mellor and believes he did nothing untoward arouses suspicions that he doesn't know the difference between right and wrong.
The Prime Minister's speech was pitiful, not just because policies had collapsed but because he'd spent so little time preparing it, so busy was he trying to help his chum.
By contrast, Labour leader John Smith was masterly.
In one fell swoop he settled rumblings of discontent and turned the Labour conference, which starts today, from being an inward-looking examination of defeat into a confident bid to show the world — Brian Gould notwithstanding — an alternative to the ‘devalued Prime Minister of a devalued government’.
Major, meanwhile, faces one of the toughest weeks of his life before his party conference in Brighton next week.
He must meet the Prime Minister of Denmark, that other sceptical EC country convulsed by troubles over Europe.
And he must meet the French President, Francois Mitterrand, who, in alliance with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, is threatening Britain with relegation to Europe's second division of Europe.
These two encounters sum up for Major, cast by history as EC president, the difficulties he faces in advance of a special summit next month.
Attacked
If he signals too much sympathy for the Danes in their problems in ratifying the Maastricht Treaty on European union, he will be under immediate attack from EC partners and pro-Europeans in his party.
But if he is to assure Mitterrand too convincingly of his commitment to Maastricht or the Exchange Rate Mechanism, he will be condemned by a howling mob of backbenchers who will be backed, privately, by at least a quarter of his government.
It's like walking a tightrope in size-15 wellies.
Nor can Major divert attention with good news.
Sure, he'll cut interest rates before the party conference.
But against that, unemployment is soaring, industry running out of patience and he is about to authorise massive cuts in public spending.
For all these there is a political price to pay.
Victim
As Major heads for his winter of discontent, there is no sign he has the ideas or the steel to weather it.
He is being buffeted from all corners — a victim of circumstance trapped at the centre of a party more divided even than in the final days of Lady Thatcher.
According to one minister, he changes his mind by the hour.
It was Major's idea that Foreign Office minister Tristan Garel-Jones, a passionate pro-European and hate figure for the right, should make a high profile defence of the Treaty.
Now he is said to regret it because it has inflamed the Thatcherites.
A leading right winger in the party said yesterday: ‘It's only because Michael Heseltine and Kenneth Clarke are such Euro-fanatics that there is no serious talk about a challenge.
If the sceptics had a real leader inside the Cabinet, he'd be in deep trouble.’
So, for now at least, his position is unthreatened.
But nobody at Westminster in recent days has failed to notice Messrs Clarke and Heseltine looking very pleased with themselves.
As indeed, is John Smith, enjoying the sea air at Blackpool and hoping that the devalued Prime Minister leads the devalued Government all the way to the next general election.
PITIFUL: John Major
PLEASED: Kenneth Clarke
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PAP SNAP
POP'S most  flamboyant dresser — Elton John meets — rock's dowdiest — Bryan Adams.
But Elton probably wouldn't mind exchanging his sparkling shorts to suffer Adams' lumberjack shirts if it meant having a song at number one for 16 weeks like the Canadian rocker did
BITTER BATTLE
BILLY JOEL is battling to save the tiny New York club that gave him his first pop break.
Manhattan-based Billy, at No 39 in the charts with All Shook Up, is trying to raise cash to stop the closure of The Bitter End, which featured legends like Bob Dylan and Stevie Wonder.
‘I played some of my earliest gigs at the club,’ Joel says.
‘It'd be heartbreaking to see it turned into a car park.’
MARK MY WORD
ZANY comic Mark Lamarr has landed the job of presenter on The Word.
Mark, 25, joins Katie Puckrik, Terry Christian and Dani Behr in the team on Channel 4's top youth show, which starts a new run on October 30.
The comedian is also among the personalities on Channel 4's The Big Breakfast show for early birds, launched yesterday.
He was chosen for Word after he showed programme bosses a reel of wacky interviews he had done — including one with me.
MARK LAMARR Four's fun
MESSIAH'S LAST L.A. SUPPER
Gun gangs and drug fiends drive band out of town
RAVE stars Messiah have vowed never to return to ‘violent, drug crazy’ Los Angeles after they suffered a  catalogue of terror in the city.
The London-based band, visiting L.A. to promote their latest chart hit, were left terrified after they were:
SHOT AT during an armed hold-up, THREATENED by a violent drug gang and BEATEN UP at a party in posh Beverly Hills.
The nightmare started when top duo Mark Davies and Ali Ghani — at No. 19 with I Feel Love — attended an all-night party in notorious East L.A.
Keyboard player Davies said: ‘An armed gang suddenly burst in and demanded all the ticket money from the guy on the door.
‘They were firing machine guns into the air.
It was like a war zone.
We hit the deck and froze — we thought we were going to die.’
Then the band walked into a row between two violent street gangs who were arguing over a drug deal.
‘We were terrified.
It was like a scene from Miami Vice,’ says fed-up Mark who finally quit L.A. after a punch-up at a Beverly Hills party.
He adds: ‘Everybody kept offering us drugs and we got angry.
Just because we're a rave band it doesn't automatically mean we take Ecstasy.
‘These people got abusive because we wouldn't take their drugs so I just grabbed this bag of s*** and poured it over the floor.
‘A huge fight ensued and things got pretty ugly
‘We're not a drugs band and we're prepared to fight for our beliefs.’
NIGHTMARE TRIP: Mark Davies and Ali Ghani
SHRINK the world with our latest pen pals' list as we visit India, China, Canada, Japan and Kenya.
For your FREE copy, send a large (33 x 23cm), stamped (49p), self-addressed envelope to Pen Pals List 21, Daily Mirror, PO Box 800, London SE99 8AB.
SWAYZE'S £5,000 JOY RIDE
PATRICK SWAYZE has shelled out £5,000 to bring his favourite car to Britain.
The Hollywood heart-throb walked into a Los Angeles car showroom three weeks ago, snapped up a brand new £20,000 Lincoln Town Car, and asked: ‘Do you deliver?’
Says the star: ‘They didn't bat an eyelid when I told them I wanted it delivered 5,000 miles away in London.
It cost me a lot extra to have it shipped over but it's worth every penny.’
Swayze now plans to drive the car around Europe while promoting his new movie City Of Joy, which is released in Britain next week.
‘I thought I might as well have a bit of a motoring holiday at the same time,’ he explains.
DAILY MIRROR QUIZ OF THE WEEK
HAVE fun with our weekly quiz about the news of the last seven days.
Answers on Page 14.
1.
Revealed…the naked truth about Paul McCartney.
Who snapped intimate photos of him?
2.
The French said ‘Oui’ to the Maastricht Treaty — but it was a close thing.
What percentage voted Yes?
3.
Name the doctor given a suspended prison sentence for the attempted murder of a dying patient.
4.
Princess Diana sent back her Mercedes 500 SL sports car.
How much would you pay for a new one?
5.
Major minor was sent off in a school soccer match.
What is the PM's son called?
6.
A huge chemical blast rocked which town?
7.
Which TV soap gave US vice-president Dan Quayle the bird?
8.
Who spent 17 months on the sidelines, scored within 10 minutes of his comeback then a few days later was sidelined again?
9.
The stars turned out to pay tribute to Fred Scuttle — better known to us as…?
10.
Cop the name of the man (above) who is stepping down from a top job.
11.
Why did Angela Smith's wedding day turn into a ding-dong court battle?
12.
Franzy that!
Soccer star Franz Beckenbauer thinks he was what in a previous life?
13.
Who compared John Major to ski-flop Eddie the Eagle?
14.
First it was Roland — now which other Rat is hoping to make it big on breakfast TV?
15.
Which cricket county was fined £1,000 for tampering with the ball?
16.
Name the pop star who launched his new UK tour 34 years after his first hit.
Now for last week's Mellor-drama.
17.
Who said after Mr Mellor finally quit…
‘We all get our just deserts’?
18.
How much a year, to the nearest thousand, did he earn as Heritage Secretary?
19.
Who said: ‘I don't think I take any part in his downfall whatsoever.’?
20.
Cryptic teaser: Who drew 6-6 and was then sent off by the ‘ref’?
Quiz compiled by DTH.
QUIZ OF THE WEEK ANSWERS
1:
His wife Linda;
2:
51.05 per cent;
3:
Doctor Nigel Cox;
4:
£72,000;
5:
James;
6:
Castleford;
7:
Murphy Brown;
8:
Paul Gascoigne;
9:
Benny Hill;
10:
Police Commander George Churchill-Coleman;
11:
Her mum refused to pay her share of the food bill;
12:
A flower;
13:
Labour leader John Smith;
14:
Ex-Boomtown Rat Bob Geldof;
15:
Surrey;
16:
Cliff Richard;
17:
His father-in-law Edward Hall;
18:
£63,000 a year;
19:
Antonia de Sancha;
20.
The Mona Bauwens libel case jury.
YOUR RATING:
0-5:
Dreadful.
6-10:
Must try harder.
11-15:
Room for improvement.
16-19:
Clever clogs.
20:
Brilliant…you must have cheated!
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
CHART newcomer Tasmin Archer fears she may never get her licence after failing her driving test for the third time.
The singer, at No. 4 with Sleeping Satellite says: ‘I work myself up into such a state during my tests.
I'm not going to take another  until I get my confidence back.’
PAP SNAP
BONO'S suit is so bright even his pet dog has to wear shades.
The U2 star who now takes fashion tips from Dame Edna Everage reckons: ‘If you've got it, flaunt it.
If you haven't — find a better tailor.’
TOP 40
1 1 EBENEEZER GOODE The Shamen
2 2 IT'S MY LIFE Dr Alban 3
3 3 BAKER STREET Undercover
4 13 SLEEPING SATELLITE Tasmin Archer
5 6 IRON LION ZION Bob Marley and the Wailers
6 14 END OF THE ROAD Boyz II Men
7 8 MY DESTINY Lionel Richie
8 5 TOO MUCH LOVE WILL KILL YOU Brian May 9
7 THEME FROM M*A*S*H/EVERYTHING I DO Manic Street Preachers
10 4 RHYTHM IS A DANCER Snap
11 12 FIRE/JERICHO Prodigy 1
2 9 THE BEST THINGS IN LIFE ARE FREE Luther Vandross & Janet Jackson
13 11 HOUSE OF LOVE East 17
14 — DRIVE R.E.M.
15 10 JUST ANOTHER DAY Jon Secada
16 — SENTINEL Mike Oldfield 1
17 — I'M GONNA GET YOU Bizarre Inc feat Angie Brown
18 26 CONNECTED Stereo MCs 1
19 21 I FEEL LOVE Messiah
20 20 I JUST WANT TO DANCE WITH YOU Daniel O'Donnell
21 15 JEREMY Pearl Jam
22 — TETRIS Doctor Spin
23 — MONEY LOVE Neneh Cherry
24 27 IT'S ONLY NATURAL Crowded House
25 17 METAL MICKEY Suede
26 16 HAVE YOU EVER NEEDED SOMEONE SO BAD Def Leppard
27 — GOODBYE Sundays
28 22 THE CRYING GAME Boy George
29 18 WALKING ON BROKEN GLASS Annie Lennox
30 19 DON'T YOU WANT ME Felix
31 30 DO I HAVE TO SAY THE WORDS?
Bryan Adams
32 — SOMETIMES LOVE JUST AIN'T ENOUGH Patty Smyth with Don Henley
33 32 POSSESSED Vegas 34 — KEEP IT COMING C&C Music Factory
35 — GYPSY WOMAN/PEACE (REMIXES) C Waters and S Johnston
36 — FOR ALL TIME Catherine Zeta Jones
37 — THE BANANA SONG G.S.P.
38 — ANARCHY IN THE UK Sex Pistols
39 — START ME UP Salt N' Pepa
40 — ONE LOVE IN MY LIFETIME Innocence
 BOASTFUL OR BASHFUL
Are they REALLY only interested in only one thing?
‘There's a lot of pressure to lose your virginity.
Older boys think there's something wrong with you if you haven't had sex’
LORRAINE BUTLER
SEX AND THE BRITISH TEENAGER — PART TWO BOYS
THEY are crying out for lessons in love.
They don't agree with one-night stands and they want to know what sex is like for girls.
Today we look at what makes boys tick in the second part of our exclusive Daily Mirror teenage sex survey.
Yesterday we lifted the lid on what teenage girls thought about love, sex and relationships.
Now we delve deep into the minds of 13 to 17-year-old boys to find out about their attitudes.
We have been all around Britain to put to them the intimate questions teachers and parents were too afraid to ask.
And their answers are startling as they frankly reveal all for the first time.
THEY aren't shy.
They don't blush.
And not a snigger is heard as a group of teenage boys sit around the table talking about sex.
From condoms to unwanted babies, from love to the danger of AIDS, this new generation of 13 to 16-year-olds shatter the old image of spotty schoolboys who boast about what they did — or more likely didn't do — behind the bike shed.
They confess they know little about sex.
They're not interested in one-night stands — and they even want to know what making love is like for girls.
But they do admit that it's still more often than not a case of all talk and no action when boys discuss sex in the playground.
As the first part of our special teenage sex survey — carried out by the Research Group of Great Britain Limited — showed yesterday, girls are more willing than boys to talk about sex with their friends.
When boys do get around to talking among themselves about what it was like they are more likely  to lie.
‘There's a lot of pressure to lose your virginity by a certain age,’ says Phil Keer, a confident 16-year-old who has a steady girlfriend of the same age.
‘You get made fun of really if other boys think you still haven't had sex.
They think there's something wrong with you.’
The other boys nod their heads in agreement.
They say they get teased and ridiculed if they are still virgins once they get to 16.
Says 15-year-old David Stokes: ‘There are quite a few boys who just have to have a girlfriend, but it's not what we all feel.
‘And there are some boys who are just out to go as far as they can with a girl and get rid of her after a couple of days.
It depends who you mix with.’
Our survey found that four out of 10 boys agree it's difficult not to have sex if all your friends are doing it.
But nine out of 10 said you shouldn't go all the way unless both you and the girl want to.
A fact supported by our forum of boys.
Says Phil Keer: ‘I think me and most of my friends are looking for a long term relationship.
One night stands, sex at a party or something, is not what we're interested in.’
Two thirds of all the teenagers we interviewed agreed that sex education at school missed out too much.
And the boys supported the girls in wanting not just better sex education in school but also lessons on developing relationships.
‘I'd like to know exactly what the emotional implications are of having a sexual relationship — the kind of problems you have or mistakes that get made,’ says David.
A quarter of the boys said they would be prepared  to talk to a teacher about sex as opposed to only one in 10 girls.
And when it comes to discussing the birds and bees with their parents, nearly half the boys we questioned would rather talk to mum.
Our teenagers laughed at the suggestion that maybe dad could help.
Most of the 16-year-olds say their fathers have more or less told them to ‘go out and have a good time’.
And although three quarters of our teenagers  thought it best to wait until 16 before losing their virginity, the younger boys say they feel under pressure to have sex and reckoned they've got even less information to equip them for a sex life.
Only a third of 13 and 14-year-olds said they had received facts on contraception.
And most teenagers in that age group were worried about AIDS.
‘I am frightened about the whole AIDS and HIV thing but I think we have got a lot of information from television on that,’ says Gary Williams aged 14.
All the boys said they were also aware of the danger of getting a girl pregnant.
Nine out of 10 said it made sense to carry condoms ‘just in case’.
But almost half would be too embarrassed to buy condoms even among the 15-17 group.
Says David Stokes: ‘My parents said they would by them for me when the time was right but I would be too embarrassed to ask.
‘I think if I did that would make them look at me in a completely different way.’
The common question the boys all seemed to want answered was what is sex like for a girl?
They were keen, especially the older ones, to know about girls bodies and minds.
‘We we would like to know a bit more about how girls feel about having sex,’ says Andrew.
‘I wonder what's it like for them.
What are their emotions?
We should be taught about that in school.’
And amazingly all the boys nod approvingly as David adds: ‘Girls are more mature about sex.
You can tell that when you hear them talk.’
CASE HISTORY 1
‘I want to know how girls feel’— ANDREW GREENSTEAD, AGED 14
AT 14 Andrew Greenstead has a girlfriend.
Yet in the back of his mind this young man harbours a trunk full of doubts and confusion around sex.
He says he's had not nearly enough sex education at school, he couldn't talk to his parents about it and boys just don't speak to their mates when it comes to something so intimate and private.
Says Andrew: ‘The only place I have got turn is my sister, whose nearly 18.
She very helpful and we get on well.
Talking to her is less embarrassing than talking to anyone else.
‘Boys don't really discuss sex themselves apart from a few who brag about it all the time.
And I couldn't talk to mum and dad.
It just wouldn't feel right.
‘I really want to know more about girls and what they feel about sex and love.
May be if they taught us about it at school boys would find it easier to talk to a girl about sex and things like that.’
He says sex education at school is useless and hasn't prepared him for what to expect.
‘Sex and girls don't really become important until you get to about 14 or 15 then you need some information.
‘But we haven't been taught anything about relationships.
All we got learnt really was about reproduction and how a baby was born.
‘It's not really that useful to me right now.
‘And I'd like some more information on AIDS.
‘I've learnt a lot off the television but I think I still need to know more and it is something I think we all worry about.’
CASE HISTORY 2
‘Mention sex and parents go red’— STEVEN RICHARD, AGED 16
STEVEN Richard was 11 when he first had a girlfriend.
And holding her hand with the occasional stolen kiss was all their physical relationship amounted too.
Now at 16 Steven has a steady girlfriend of 15, who he has been going out with for several months.
They were hanging around town when they met and now they see each other about five times a week.
It's his second fairly serious relationship and his attitude to sex will come as surprise to most unenlightened adults but it is, according to our survey, a typical one.
‘My girlfriend and I have talked about sex seriously,’ says Steven, who is planning to go to college to study mechanics.
I believe you should wait until you are both ready.
I wouldn't push a girl into have sex for the sake of it.
In my mind 16 is about the right age.
‘My girlfriend and I have also talked about contraception I would not be embarrassed to buy condoms.
We have quite a close and serious relationship.
And I think you should have a fairly good friendship before having any kind of sexual relationship.
‘My parents seem fascinated by our relationship, they're very nosy and curious but I would never talk to them about sex.
They're a different generation and if you mention it they go all red and shy.
KIDS START DAY WITH THE FACTS OF LIFE
TEENAGERS today want love and relationships as well as sex but they say there's one thing holding them back — adults.
The young people we surveyed felt completely let down by teachers and parents who aren't giving them the facts of life.
They want to be taught earlier, preferably at 11, and they want to know more than just how babies are made.
One teacher who gives teenagers what they want when it comes to sex talk is headmaster Michael Marland, a leading author and authority on sex education in schools.
HEAD teacher Michael Marland is one teacher with a refreshing and unusual approach to sex education.
He believes youngsters should start the day with some sound advice on the facts of life.
During assembly the youngsters of London's North Westminster community school tackle intimate details of intercourse and foreplay.
‘You can't just teach young people about babies and reproduction,’ says Marland, ‘Sex includes trust, relationships, communication and pleasure.
‘We begin around 12 telling them what a baby is, why it's the sex it is and how it comes about.
Then we talk about sexuality — what it means and how to deal with desire.
Feelings
‘It doesn't embarrass them and they are often gripped with interest as they learn.
‘We show boys how to understand girls’ feelings and we get the teenagers to ask the questions they are too frightened to ask at home or of friends.
Mr Marland says teenagers need practical information on how to use condoms as well has to deal with their emotions concerning sex.
‘They must know the hazards and we want them to start their sex life in the happiest way possible.
Mr Marland says he has the support of parents and governors in the way he teaches sex education.
‘But I am depressed about the usual  attitude in schools.
Nothing seems to have changed and the Government is doing nothing to support us.’
ANDREW: Sex talk with sister
STEVEN: 16 is the right age
A cushy number for Dot!
SCATTY great-granny Dorothy Ward nearly scuppered her chance to scoop £10,000 on Daily Mirror bingo.
She put her card away in a safe place — then couldn't remember where.
She missed two games before finding it behind a cushion, but then took only a few days to call house on number 52 in game 230.
Dorothy, 65, of Hinckley, Lincs, is putting the £10,000 in a safe place — the bank, not behind a cushion — while she ponders how to spend it.
Today's Game — Page 25 
PUBLIC OPINION
Don't Trust ‘em
I HAVE been a patient in a Trust hospital since before it moved out of the NHS in May, and I've witnessed what that means.
A caring hospital was transformed into a human factory.
From the first day, one ward was closed at weekends to save on wages.That means shifting the patients around however sick they are.
Wards are mixed and many of us only see a nurse at meal times.
Last weekend the heating was turned off and the patients had to wrap blankets round them.
No wonder people are fighting the change to trusts.
PRINCESS Diana had the right idea sending back her Mercedes car.
We should stop drinking German wine and beer and stop eating their sausages.
That would get back at them for their currency chicanery which cost us so dear.
WHAT rampant sexism for a reader to say that Fiona Armstrong's legs had been wasted behind the newsreaders’ desk.
Though Ms Armstrong is intelligent and good at her job, perhaps she should join a chorus line instead.
I WAS especially moved by your stories about Jack Ashley.
I've suffered from tinnitus for ten years.
The noises in my head never stop and have nearly driven me to suicide.
Belinda's the one
POP singer Belinda Carlisle deserves more recognition.
She has real talent and a style all her own, while others above her in the charts are just clones of past stars.
George's joy boy
IT WAS great to see the smile back on actor George Baker's face after the death of his dear wife Sally in the summer.
It was put there by new grandson Sam who he met in Australia.
After the ordeal of Sally's grim battle for life George deserves some joy.
CHART GRAND PRIX TRIUMPHS OF A CHAMP
MANSELL'S LAP OF HONOUR
HERE'S another smashing cut out and keep picture to add to your great Nigel Mansell Formula One World Champion wallchart.
Carry on collecting all this week and you'll have a fabulous souvenir of the season in which Mansell has roared to a record NINE victories and taken the world crown for the first time.
He became only the seventh Briton of all time to wear the champion's laurels and will go down in history alongside the other greats.
Every day this week you can collect pictures of the Grand Prix victories that made him king.
South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, Spain, San Marino, France, Germany, Britain — Mansell won them all as his Renault-Williams car blazed to triumph after triumph.
Finally, second place in Hungary clinched the title for him — with five races still to run.
On Sunday he snatched victory in the Portuguese Grand Prix, breaking Ayrton Senna's record of eight wins in one season.
Start collecting your stickers today.
Each one shows a map of a Grand Prix circuit where Mansell beat the world, plus the finishing line-up of first, second and third, Mansell's average speed and the winning time.
Complete your historic chart by adding stickers every day — here is the second — and by Saturday your souvenir of Mansell's victory will be complete.
RECORD-BREAKER: Nigel after Sunday's victory in Portugal
WINNING WAYS: Nigel's third victory came in Brazil.
Cut this out and stick it in the space on your super Daily Mirror wallchart
LIVELY LETTERS
of  writes: WITH the recent Californian earthquakes in mind I was wondering if you knew in what year most earthquakes had occurred.
Which ones caused most deaths and how often do severe earthquakes happen?
Surely science must be close to forecasting such natural catastrophes?
There is no pattern to earthquakes.
They are caused by the giant plates which carry the continents bumping and grinding into each other as they float around the Earth's molten centre.
Old records show a quake in Calcutta killed around 300,000 people in 1737 and in 1976 the Tangshan earthquake in China wiped out 242,000.
Normally, the world sees two or three major quakes above seven on the Richter Scale each year and recently experts detected a pattern showing really big earthquakes in the Tokyo region almost exactly every 70 years.
If they are right, one is due very soon.
BREW
writes from : AS A barmaid, I was told by a customer — a Mr Brewster — that his ancestor founded the annual Brewster Sessions when all pub licences are up for renewal.
Was he joking?
Just taking a bit of licence.
Brewster is merely an old word for ‘brewer’— which is why licensing sessions, held in the first 14 days of February, have that name.
BIRD
writes: ONE summer evening as darkness fell thousands of sparrows arrived and settled on two houses next to me.
Can you explain?
They were not sparrows in such numbers but could be house martins, which settle on west-facing houses to bask in the setting sun.
Or, in early July, they could be young starlings.
UPPITY
writes: THE council shared the problem of your reader who wondered if Clapham should be pronounced Claffam.
They decided Up Holland should be two words because people called it ‘Uffoland’.
I still write Upholland as one word because I have never heard anyone say ‘uffolstery’ when they are talking about furniture.
Folk in Up Hatherley, Gloucestershire, have the same problem uffolding the dignity of the district but it is uffill work.
TODAY'S THOUGHT
If you want people to think well of you, do not speak well of yourself.
— Blaise PASCAL (1623–62).
DID YOU KNOW
ONLY two English clubs have averaged gates of more than 50,000 during a season since 1945 — Manchester United and Everton.
UNDER THE WEATHER
Philippines volcano gets blame for blowing away summer
GILL SWAIN
IT WAS a big bang about seven thousand miles away that blew the socks off the end of Britain's summer, weather experts have revealed.
When  Philippines volcano Mount Pinatubo exploded blowing out 20 million tonnes of hot ash into the air it was the signal for a cold, wet, miserable August for Northern Europe a year later, they say.
That's because the series of eruptions that killed 350 people in June 1992 left a 3,000-mile long cloud of ash and sulphur dioxide circling the earth.
For weeks after the biggest blasts recorded this century the cloud caused spectacular sunsets in Australia.
Even in Britain people noticed dazzling, lingering sunsets last winter which left a distinctive purple afterglow.
But the downside is that Pinatubo — which had been dormant for 600 years — may have been the reason we have all been reaching for our brollies and in some cases sandbagging the front door over the past few weeks.
Because a team of National Aeronautical Space Administration experts in New York has discovered a link between the eruptions and a cooling down of the average global temperature.
Cooling
The ash cloud has been moving around the earth at 75 mph at an altitude of about 15 miles up in the stratosphere.
Because there is little wind that high to split the particles up, it could stay there for years.
So the cloud absorbs sunlight, heating the stratosphere up but stopping warmth from reaching the Earth.
Now the NASA experts have recorded an average cooling of 0.2C already and their computer model predicts that will increase to 0.5C by the end of the year.
And they claim that the knock-on effect is that weather patterns change.
They point to statistics which show that six to 18 months after volcanic eruptions, eastern American states and most of North West Europe have lousy summers.
It's not the first time that a link has been made between erupting volcanoes and the weather.
In the 1780s US scientist and statesman Benjamin Franklin blamed an unseasonal summer on an eruption in Iceland.
After the eruption of Tambora in Indonesia in 1815, which threw between five and ten times as much muck into the atmosphere as Pinatubo, the north east of America endured the famous ‘year without summer’.
There was widespread famine in Eastern Canada and frost in June in New England.
A volcano has even been blamed for speeding up the onset of the last Ice Age.
In newly-published research, two American scientists claim the eruption of Toba in Sumatra 73,500 years ago — the largest in the last million years and five times bigger than Tambora — may have caused a global cooling of 3-5C.
More importantly, it may have cooled Eastern Canada by 10-15C, triggering off the massive movement of Ice across the Earth.
There are still many experts sceptical about just how much influence a volcanic explosion can have on the weather.
Dr Mick Kelly, senior research associate at the University of East Anglia's Climatic Unit, said: ‘We can't be sure it is cause and effect.
‘It could be coincidence.
There are so many other possible causes.’
Delay
But whatever the truth, the NASA team insists that the Pinatubo cloud does have one silver lining.
They say it will delay global warming due to the greenhouse effect for several years.
They should try telling that to some  householders in Edgeware, North London, who found last week they had a swimming pool where the lounge used to be.
THE BIG BANG Thick black clouds hover over a village near the Pinatubo volcano.
Right, how the ash cloud has cooled the earth
WASHOUT: Did a volcano ruin our August?
MICHAEL JACKSON IS KILLING HIMSELF SAYS MADONNA
What the first lady of rock thinks of her rival superstar
‘He's in a world I want no part of’
RICK SKY
MICHAEL JACKSON is ‘killing himself’ by hiding away and refusing to face the real world.
That's the sad verdict of rival superstar Madonna.
And she admits that she would hate to live the kind of life he does — that of a frightened recluse.
‘I think Michael Jackson is a very talented man,’ she tells top rock magazine New Musical Express.
‘But he operates in a world that I don't want any part of.
‘I don't want to cut myself off.
I don't want to alienate myself from humanity.
‘I've spent all my time trying to face facts, being in touch with people.
He spends all his time hiding, cloaking and padding things around himself.
‘I'm an artist who likes to be honest and confront.
He operates in a completely different way.
We're like oil and vinegar, oil and water.
We just don't mix.
‘I think he's killing himself.’
Madonna and Jackson never have mixed — even professionally, though they were once set to work together on a duet.
Those plans hit the rocks amid reports that Jacko was horrified when Madonna told a gay magazine that she wanted him to hang out with a gay dance troupe and become more hip.
‘When the duet didn't happen, I wasn't disappointed,’ she says.
Rock's raunchiest star prides herself on always speaking her mind.
‘I am an outspoken person,’ she says.
‘I'm opinionated and people ask me things and I say them.’
She has lot to say about Diana.
Madonna believes she understands the turmoil and pain the Princess has suffered in her marriage.
And she sympathises with her having to live her life in the full glare of the spotlight.
Di, she declares, should start a new life for herself.
‘I invite her to come and live in my  apartment .’
From the publicity viewpoint, the Princess's plight, Madonna admits in NME, is even worse than her own.
‘I have weeks off and she doesn't.
There are ways for me to hide.
‘She's expected to behave in certain ways because she's royalty and I'm not.
It's hideous.’
The Princess's happiness, she believes, should be more important to the British people than the ‘antiquated charade’ of the Royal Family.
‘Nobody really knows what this girl is going through, not one person — except her.
‘The fact that she has to live in the public eye, I mean, I would slit my wrists already.
I can't understand how this poor girl can take it.’
Madonna attributes her openness about her own life, her honesty about sex and her apparent ability to handle her personal problems to psychiatry.
The singer, who releases a new single Erotica next month, as well as an album and an X-rated book of sexplicit photos of herself, admits: ‘I saw an analyst for years and years.
‘It was a very educational experience.
I learnt a lot about myself.
Analysis is a very slow process and it takes a long time to weed through the past and try to discover what things happened to you that affected you.
‘Why you behave the way you behave and what you can do to change it.
And what you like about yourself and what you don't like about yourself.’
‘You learn unbelievable things about yourself — from the tiniest things like little quirks and mannerisms to something really big, such as why you keep having the same kinds of relationships with people.’
Madonna is certain that her life and career will go down as one of the landmarks of history.
The sexy singer believes she will be remembered not just as a pop queen but as a goddess figure —‘like Boadicea’.
She says: ‘It feels like I've done a lot of work.
But I've still got a lot more to do.’
CHIDING: Madonna believes in speaking out Picture: SIUNG SAT TJIA
HIDING: Off-stage, Madonna says, Jacko is a frightened recluse
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
YOU needed balls to give evidence in Roman times.
Under ancient Roman law only men with two testicles were allowed to give evidence in court.
Eunuchs and slaves were deemed unreliable by judges.
MICK JAGGER is back with wife Jerry Hall.
The couple, whose marriage recently hit a rocky patch, were spotted kissing and cuddling back-stage at country rocker Dwight Yokam's London gig.
Says a pal: ‘They were all over each other like a pair of love-struck teenagers.’
OFF LIMITS
UNDERCOVER star JOHN MATHEWS has gone on a crash diet after ballooning to 15 stone…
U2 have splashed out £1m buying Dublin's Clarence Hotel.
They plan to turn it into a nightclub…
Skid Row singer SEBASTIAN BACH has married girlfriend Maria Aquiar…
TAKE THAT star Jason Orange says girls fancy his twin brother Justin more than him…
Chart newcomer DANIEL O'DONNELL loves motorway service station food…
ANNE ROBINSON
Not just another pretty face
ANNA FORD is quite right about women getting a raw deal when it comes to television presenting.
Although she might have been wise to add that even the life of a Television Presenter 2nd Class is a doddle compared to packing frozen peas, doing a 12-hour nursing shift in an understaffed hospital ward or for that matter being married to David Mellor.
Still the fact remains that few women in television are seen as suitable to handle the major political interviews; to chair important political debates or even be awarded the senior presenter's job on News programmes — whatever the channel.
The problem, alas, remains the same as it always was.
Women are not given the opportunities because very often they are not up to the job.
Right
And the reason they are not up to the job is that those in charge of hiring them are mostly men.
These men are not necessarily anti-women.
But frequently they appear to have taken leave of their senses when it comes to choosing the right sort of women.
I have sat around tables with senior male television executives and listened to them on the one hand bemoan the lack of good women presenters and on the other make suggestions of possible women candidates so inappropriate as to be laughable.
Quite simply the criteria by which women are hired are entirely different.
And so are the ones by which they are judged.
If Peter Sissons were a woman he wouldn't stand the chance of a job.
He isn't pretty enough.
Nor would Trevor MacDonald.
At 55, he is too old.
Mind you if Frank Bough had been a Manchester beauty queen with no previous experience would he have been appointed to front the BBC's Breakfast Time as was Debbie Greenwood?
Waste
Women presenters who wish to be taken seriously, and Ms. Ford deserves to be, shouldn't waste time whingeing on at charity lunches.
What they need to do is lobby strongly for more women bosses.
Another woman, after all, would no more hire a beauty queen to present a current affairs programme than she would hire a motor mechanic to give her a facelift.
HARD DONE BY: BBC news presenter Anna Ford
An overdose of fun
WHEN Lady ‘Bubbles’ Rothermere died unexpectedly a month ago the obituary columns were filled with charming anecdotes about this most famous of rich, fun-loving, party going socialites.
A person apparently so eager to live life to the full she never left home without an adequate supply of vintage champagne to drink between engagements.
A woman whose energy and appetite for merriment were so enormous and whose gift for friendship was so limitless as to make her unique in high London society.
Can this be the same tragic Lady Rothermere at whose inquest it was revealed had a stash of 2,000 pills lying round her French villa, who refused to travel abroad unless accompanied by massive quantities of prescribed drugs and who was so exhilarated by her fast-moving lifestyle she could only survive the small hours by swallowing incautious numbers of sleeping tablets?
PILLS: Bubbles
LOADSA MONEY, LOTS OF SEX
THE trouble with the newly published list of the richest women in Britain is that it only confirms men's worst prejudices.
Those who have not inherited their money, unlike the Queen, Sally Burton and Linda McCartney, seem to have earned it from sex.
Jackie Collins and Barbara Cartland writing about it; Joan Collins exuding it; and Samantha Fox,, who's made £5.5 million for unashamedly encouraging others to do it.
LAST LINE
DID you also puzzle why for that most important debate in the House of Commons last Thursday the women in the Shadow Cabinet chose to dress in a uniform of baby pink so they appeared on the front benches looking like a bunch of misplaced Barbie Dolls 
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
WIN YOUR OWN RECORD DEAL
DO YOU dream about being a pop star with your very own record deal?
Well, now you can make it come true thanks to The Limit.
We've teamed up with BBC2's top-rated music show Dance Energy House Party to find the best new band in Britain — with a record contract as the top prize.
The winners will get a contract with EMI's Parlophone — the label that launched The Beatles —-to produce one single and a video.
The competition is open to any unsigned solo artist, dance or rave act.
A shortlist of entries will be featured on Dance Energy House Party with winners chosen by a panel of viewers and top music biz hotshots.
To enter send a home video of your work to Normski/Lift Off, Room E111 Scenery Construction Block, BBC North Acton, Wales Farm Road, London W3 6XP…
Tubular Hell
AIR SCARES DRIVE MIKE PLANE CRAZY
ROCKER Mike Oldfield flew straight into trouble the day he decided to cure his fear of flying by buying a plane.
First the millionaire star — who has soared into the charts at No 16 with his new single Sentinel — landed shaking with terror after the plane doors flew open at 5,000 feet on one of his first training flights.
Then he watched in horror as a pal crashed his plane on landing, causing £9,000 of damage.
But the final straw came when the would-be Biggles discovered his pride and joy was being used by someone he didn't know to smuggle drugs.
Off came the flying jacket and up for sale went the £200,000 aircraft.
‘I bought the plane to try and cure my lifelong fear of flying — but everything went wrong,’ says Mike whose Tubular Bells II topped the album charts earlier this month.
‘The worst moment was when the door flew open.
I thought I was going to be sucked out.
I've got rid of the damn thing now.’
MIKE OLDFIELD Fear of flying
Rap girl's beauty deal turns ugly
RAP trio Salt N' Pepa are fuming after they were gazumped by a New York property speculator.
The chartbustin' all-girl band planned to invest their pop earnings in a beauty salon.
‘We had everything worked out,’ rapper Spinderella, at No 39 with Start Me Up, reveals.
‘We found the building we wanted but when the owner found out it was us he upped the price at the last moment.
‘The new asking price was way above our heads and we just couldn't afford it any more.’
Adds the star: ‘We wanted to start another business to keep us going in our old age.’
FUMING: Rap stars Salt N' Pepa
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
DEALINGS in Davies and Newman, the struggling Dan-Air airline, were halted yesterday while talks continue on a possible link-up with Virgin tycoon Richard Branson (above).
Most shares were hit by the Cabinet split over whether Britain should opt in or out of European economic union.
The FTSE index plunged 41 points to 2560.
They've got you covered
WHERE do you stand if your insurance company goes broke?
Municipal Mutual, Britain's ninth biggest insurer with 1,500,000 policyholders, is in difficulty and looking for a new partner.
It's our biggest insurer of local authorities and has been hit by huge payouts, including those for schools burned down by young arsonists.
The Association of British Insurers says there's no need for policyholders to worry.
All claims are being met and the company has Government blessing to accept new customers.
But if an insurer did fail, the industry would pay 90 per cent of all claims on both general and life insurance policies.
Where statutory cover is involved, such as for car insurance, any claims would be met in full.
It's also worth knowing that the first £20,000 in a building society or bank is protected up to a set percentage.
With a building society you'd get back 90 per cent of your savings and with a bank 75 per cent.
THIS IS WHY BEEFY'S WALKING
The little girl who spurs Botham on
LITTLE Louise Bennett is the reason cricket ace Ian Botham is trudging across southern England today in agony.
Louise was struck down with leukaemia almost five years ago, at the age of three.
Today she's as fit as a fiddle — thanks to research funded by efforts such as Beefy's.
Louise's grateful mum, Kim Bennett, is rushed off her feet collecting all the money she can to support Botham's 546-mile walk.
‘He's a wonderful man.
I can't thank him enough for what he is doing,’ says Kim, of Romford, Essex.
BECAUSE of the money the walks raise, kids like my daughter have a future.’
Botham, who set out last Friday on the 22-day hike from Land's End to Margate, is already suffering for his efforts — a deep-seated blister is causing untold pain.
But since first setting foot inside a children's leukaemia ward 18 years ago, Botham has managed to raise £3 million for his favourite charity.
‘I will carry on walking until leukaemia is licked,’ he says.
Five hundred parents every year hear the appalling words: ‘Your child has leukaemia.’
Only 20 years ago that meant almost certain death.
Today there is every chance a young victim will recover.
When Kim Bennett was told her daughter had acute myeloid leukaemia, she couldn't believe it.
Up until then, Louise had been a perfectly normal, healthy little girl.
‘I only took her to the doctor because she had a bad nose bleed at playgroup, and I thought she looked a little pale.
I was worried she might be a bit anaemic,’ recalls Kim.
Blood tests revealed Louise's haemoglobin level was down and doctors referred her to the local hospital.
Even so, Kim and her police constable husband didn't think anything was seriously wrong.
‘When they told us she had leukaemia, I thought that was the end.
I wept buckets, night  after night,’ she explains.
Louise was transferred to London's Great Ormond Street hospital.
Her long blonde hair fell out.
‘But she was a great little fighter,’ says Kim, proudly.
‘And six months later she left hospital.’
Today, eight-year-old Louise wants to be a nurse.
‘In May next year she will have been in remission for five years,’ explains her mum.
‘From then on the chances of her relapsing are minimal.
‘Louise has a future thanks to efforts such as Ian Botham's to fund research.’
Douglas Osborne, director of the Leukaemia Research Fund, agrees.
‘Botham helps keep our name up front,’ he says.
‘The more money we have, the nearer we are to finding a cure.’
The last word goes to Kim Bennett.
‘Botham's a hero,’ she says, ‘give him a big kiss from all of us.’
CATCH UP WITH BOTH
TODAY Ian will be walking from Devonport to Kingsbridge — a total of 23.2 miles — and still looks well on course to win his bet with Corals, the bookmakers who are helping sponsor this trip.
Beefy has backed himself to complete the 23-day marathon hike in 130 hours at odds of 16-1.
IN THE PINK: Louise Bennett enjoying Battersea Children's Party
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
WIN £2,000 FOR THE HOLIDAY OF YOUR LIFETIME
HERE'S your last chance to win £2,000 for the holiday of a lifetime.
You can take a cruise down the Nile, fly off to sun-drenched Barbados or choose any holiday you wish.
We are offering this fabulous prize in partnership with the Birmingham Midshires building society, who are also bringing a ray of sunshine to the mortgage market with their special 8.24 per cent Super Discount mortgage.
For a chance to win our super £2,000 holiday send the answers to our three questions along with your name and address on a postcard to: HOLIDAY of a Lifetime, PO Box 81, 35-49, Lichfield Street, Wolverhampton WV1 1EL.
Closes October 3. 1.
WHICH American State is Disneyland in: A, Alaska.
B, California.
C, Florida? 2.
WHAT is the interest rate that Birmingham Midshires is offering on its Super Discount mortgage: A, 9.24 per cent.
B, 8.97 per cent.
C, 8.24 per cent? 3.
HOW much can you win in our Birmingham Midshires contest: A, £500.
B, £1,000.
C, £2,000?
Big sales for any old iron
IRON Maiden star Bruce Dickinson is singing all the way to the bank.
Apart from making a fortune out of hits like Be Quick or Be Dead the heavy metal band is cashing in on merchandising, which is a fancy marketing term for flogging T-shirts, posters, belts, and anything else the fans will buy.
Last year Iron Maiden gear grossed £7 million compared with record sales of £21 million.
The great escape!
EMIGRATION LOOKS JUST THE JOB FOR SKILLED WORKERS
JOHN COPPOCK /JOHN HUSBAND
BRITAIN is sinking into the sea under the burden of Tory economic disaster.
After two years of recession, there are now three million on the dole.
And since John Major won't go, record numbers of Brits are thinking of leaving instead.
About 50,000 hopeful job hunters are queuing to emigrate.
The most popular destinations are still Australia, New Zealand, America and Canada.
But these countries do not accept immigrants readily and you will need to have a skill before they let you in.
That immediately excludes about a quarter of our youngsters on the dole, because they have never been trained.
However, if you have been made redundant from a skilled or semi-skilled job you are eligible.
Your application will be considered more favourably if you take some money with you.
You will be assessed on age, the number of children you have and your health — seriously ill people won't be allowed in.
Be prepared also for an interview with an immigration panel at the country's High Commission or Embassy in London.
It normally takes six months from filling out a form to getting permission to emigrate.
Do your homework before applying to permanently up sticks.
Check the comparative cost of living overseas as well as job prospects and wages.
Remember also that few other countries have the same level of free health care and social welfare that we have in Britain.
If you have definitely made up your mind to explore pastures new here's what you will find: AUSTRALIA is still the favourite and there are now two million expats Down Under.
The Aussies use a points grading system to decide on whether to let you in.
You get points for having qualifications, work experience and a skill.
People under 35s get preference.
Homes are far cheaper — about £30,000 for a three-bedroomed semi compared to £55,000 here.
But cars are about half as much again as in Britain.
Food costs vary.
Meat is cheaper, because the sheep outnumber people, but fruit and veg is dearer.
Heating costs are minimal because of the weather.
NEW ZEALAND also operates a points system.
The cost of living is similar to Australia, but homes are even cheaper.
A three-bed, detached house with swimming pool, garage, big garden and large loft with sea views recently fetched £25,714.
A detached two-  bedroomed town house in the capital Wellington went for £18,500.
But the bad news is that beer is dearer — about £2 a pint.
AMERICA is strict about immigration.
You need a ‘green card’ to live and work there.
These are only given to skilled people who contribute to the US economy.
Living costs are high too.
A three-bedroomed semi costs around £80,000, so about half the population rent instead.
Cars, food, and clothes are cheaper, but services like plumbers cost a packet.
All health care has to be paid for.
CANADA has a shortage of certain skilled people, such as scientists and doctors.
Like America, manual or untrained workers are not wanted.
Remember also that in parts of Canada French is the first language.
Living costs are about the same as Britain.
EUROPE: Under single market rules EC citizens don't need permission to work in any member state.
Germany is the most expensive country in which to live and Spain the cheapest.
SURGEONS OUGHT TO TAKE A HUGE PAY CUT
IAN MILLER /JOHN HUSBAND
THE cost of medical insurance could be slashed by ONE FIFTH if greedy hospital consultants cut their exorbitant fees.
According to insurance giant Norwich Union the average premium for private health cover is around £240 a year, but a fairer price would be £192.
Specialists paid £50,000 a year by the NHS can push this up to as much as £300,000 in private practice.
A British Medical Association spokesman said: ‘We disagree with certain aspects of the report.
Some costs have risen in the past few years.’
So if you want private medical insurance, what's the best way to get value for money?
Plans
Around 35 companies offer PMI from £85 to £1,800 a year for a couple, depending on age, health and extent of cover.
This sort of insurance is best for straightforward problems — NOT as a replacement for the NHS.
Some plans set a limit of £50,000 worth of cover a year, others allow for the minimum NHS waiting list time to pass before cover is triggered.
Common exclusions are pregnancy, cosmetic surgery and treatment of AIDS.
So always check the small print.
Premiums can also be cut by paying the first £150 or £250 of a claim and some insurers offer no-claim discounts, which should suit the super fit.
A GRAND HAREM SCARE ‘EM
WILLIAM KEENAN /JOHN HUSBAND
A RANDY Rajah had this special harem lock made in the middle of the last century to protect his sizzling sex slaves.
As soon as a key was inserted it rang a loud alarm bell and palace guards would rush in with drawn swords.
If it was the Rajah they made their excuses and left, but any unauthorised Romeo would receive the unkindest cut of all.
The old Indian ding-a-ling is being flogged by Sotheby's on Friday, who expect it to fetch between £800 and £1,000.
LIVELY LETTERS
, writes: THE WINKLE Club at the Trout consists of a bunch of chaps who want to raise money for charity.
They want to stage a Conker Championship and wonder whether there is any a set of rules which govern running such a  competition .
They would like to call it the ‘Welsh Open’ if that title has not been used before.
There are no official rules and people tend to make them up as they go along.
All you do is string a conker and, by using it to hit opponents’ conkers, see how many other conkers you can break.
The BBC who organised the biggest conker contest in 1954 claimed the winner had a ‘five thousander plus.’
You should also keep your event low key for there is now a campaign to stop conker contests.
The Guinness Book of Records says it ‘will not publish any category for the largest collection of conkers for fear that trees might suffer wholesale damage.’
TALKER
, writes: OUR COLLEGE lecturer waved a cane at us and said it was ‘a talking stick’ but he didn't seem to know its origin.
Do you?
African tribal leaders carry these carved wands as a symbol of authority and a sign that the bearer must be heard without interruption.
CHECKED
, writes: WHILE LOOKING through a book of Royal photos the other day I noticed that Prince Charles seems to wear kilts of different tartans.
I thought the Royal Stuart would be the only one he could wear.
And while we are at it, how many tartans are there?
Prince Charlie can go a lot better in the tartan game than most for he can, officially, wear no fewer than 11 different tartans.
Apart from the family kilts he can twirl he is also entitled to wear many regimental and association tartans.
Tartans became fashionable in Queen Victoria's day and hundreds were invented then.
Currently, there are 2179 officially recognised tartans and the only one you can't buy is the Balmoral, exclusive to the Royal family since 1852.
SONG
, writes: MY MOTHER, many years ago, used to sing a song about a miner, warned by his daughter not to go to work because she dreamed of a disaster.
Have you any record of it?
Not even for a wind-up gramophone.
Called Don't Go Down the Mine it was written in 1910 by William Geddes and Robert Donnelly.
A real tear-jerker, it included lines like: ‘I saw the pit all afire,…
Daddy, you know it would break my heart, if anything happened to you.
Later, comedians adapted the words to ‘Don't go down the mine, Daddy, there's plenty coal in the cellar’.
TODAY'S THOUGHT
The world may discover that all its common interests are being managed by one concern.
— H. G. WELLS (1866-1946).
DID YOU KNOW?
BEFORE returning to England to attempt to blow up the Houses of Parliament, Guy Fawkes lived in…
Maastricht 
WIN A dream holiday for two in San Francisco
PLUS 100 Final Analysis videos to give away
YOU could be following in the footsteps of Richard Gere and Kim Basinger if you win our super holiday in San Francisco.
Gere and Basinger star in the erotic thriller Final Analysis, which Warner Home Video release on October 14.
It's mainly set in San Francisco, where the two winners of our great contest will be heading for a sensational seven days.
They'll jet with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines on their brand new flight from Heathrow to San Francisco, via Amsterdam, and stay for six nights at the Tuscan Inn, on the world-famous Fisherman's Wharf, where they'll enjoy FREE use of a Tropical USA Rent-A-Car.
Warner Home Video will also give them £300 spending money.
In Final Analysis, Richard Gere plays Isaac Barr, a San Francisco psychiatrist whose affair with a mobster's wife (Kim Basinger) leads to obsession, betrayal and murder.
For 100 runners-up we have copies of the video, worth around £60 each.
To enter our contest, complete these other video hits linked to Gere and Basinger: a) 9 1/2……;(b) Pretty……;(c) An Officer And A………;(d) My Stepmother Is An
……
Print your answers on a postcard and send to: Final Analysis Video Contest (Daily Mirror), Parkes Print, 86 East Avenue, Hayes, Middx., UB3 2HR by October 9.
The first correct entry drawn wins the holiday — and the next 100 the videos.
Mansell reigns in Spain
GET IN GEAR WITH YOUR WINNING MIRROR
Fabulous free wallchart is fastest with the facts
COLLECT OUR LATEST GRAND PRIX STICKER
IT'S Nigel Mansell week in your Formula One Mirror as we celebrate his famous World Championship victory with the third sticker for your fabulous wallchart.
Today we're off to Spain where Nigel picked up his fourth win out of four to get his Grand Prix season off to a fantastic start.
Carry on collecting all this week and you will have a great souvenir of the season in which Mansell won an amazing NINE Grand Prix as he took the world crown for the first time.
He became only the seventh Briton of all time to wear the champion's laurels and will go down in history alongside Mike Hawthorn, Graham Hill, Jim Clark, John Surtees, Jackie Stewart and James Hunt.
Now you can capture all the glory of Mansell's victory in our stunning souvenir wallchart.
Every day this week you can collect stickers of the Grand Prix that Mansell won — South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, Spain, San Marino, France, Britain, Germany.
Incredible
Mansell won them all as his mighty Renault-Williams car blazed to triumph after triumph.
Finally, second place in Hungary clinched the title for Mansell — with an incredible five races still to run.
And Mansell didn't stop there, winning last Sunday's race in Portugal to break the record for most firsts in a season.
Each sticker shows a map of the Grand Prix circuit where Mansell beat the world to win his crown, plus the finishing line-up of first second and third, Mansell's average speed and the winning time.
Complete your historic chart by adding stickers every day — here is the third — and by Saturday your souvenir of Mansell's victory will be complete.
CHAMPAGNE CHAMP: Nigel celebrates his victory in Spain
Public Opinion
A mother's despair
THERE'S still no justice for women who are abandoned by their husbands.
I was left with four small boys to bring up and, from the start, maintenance payments were irregular.
When my ‘ex’ was sacked from his job some months ago they stopped altogether — though he has just spent two weeks in Spain with his girl-friend and new family.
Two years of applying to courts for arrears of maintenance have come to nothing.
You just can't nail these men.
They seem to be able to get away with anything.
—
MY gratitude goes to a mini-cab driver who took me to an animal hospital with my sick budgerigar and then wouldn't accept any fare.
I must have been with the vet for an hour but the driver was still waiting to take me home.
‘Have that one on me,’ he said.
It proves there are still some kind people about.
—
YOUR reader who came up with the old nonsense about teachers' holidays obviously knows nothing about the job.
My daughter taught during the day and studied in spare time for her MA.
Now, as a deputy head, she works every evening and through most of the holidays.
It's no bed of roses teaching in a secondary school.
—
LAY OFF CLIFF
I WAS disgusted by Rick Sky describing Cliff Richard as Ol' Turtle Neck.
It was particularly offensive because Cliff had not spoken for ten days in order to rest his larynx and avoid surgery before a new tour.
He is still the greatest.
—
I LOVED Michael Firth's portrait of model Jerry Hall, which so captured her beauty.
I wouldn't get as excited about a mug-shot of her estranged husband, Mick Jagger.
—
Lone glory for Brits
I LAUGHED when I heard Jacques Delors warn Britain of the dire consequences of failing to sign the Maastricht treaty and of ‘standing alone’ in Europe.
Let's remind him what happened the last time the UK stood alone, in 1940.
We didn't do too badly then and I suggest we may turn out the winner again.
—
Be the boss
WHERE TO FIND THE BACKING TO GO IT ALONE
THE DREAM of going it alone in business has taken a tumble in the present dodgy financial climate.
But being the boss is still possible — thanks to franchising.
This is currently one of the most popular — and safest — ways of setting up on your own.
Research shows that 85 per cent of all franchised small firms succeed.
With a franchise you are still your own boss.
You simply buy the rights to run a known-name business.
Many High Street names such as Wimpy, Kall-Kwik Printing, Prontaprint, Athena and Ryman have expanded as franchises — with the franchisee ‘copying’ their tried and tested idea.
Usually you pay an up-front fee of about £5,000 to £10,000 to the franchise firm, followed by a fixed percentage of annual turnover.
In return you get the benefits of staff training, purchasing, product development, marketing and leasing services.
Ability
Franchisees come from all sorts of backgrounds, with women increasingly taking up the challenge.
Roger Gamlin of Amtrak Express Parcels explains: ‘We look for a sales-oriented person with the ability to gain new customers.
A selling background is not essential — but a willingness to learn is paramount.’
Attractive as it sounds, there are pitfalls.
Even if you're sure you've got what it takes, NatWest Bank advise prospective franchisees to ask themselves these questions: WHAT are your real strengths and weaknesses?
DO you have the desire to succeed and the ability to cope with pressure?
DO you have the relevant skills, interests or experience?
HOW much money could you invest in a business venture?
Support
Banks generally lend two-thirds of the total investment.
With savings of £20,000 you could expect to finance a franchise with a start-up cost and working capital of £60,000.
CAN I count on the support of my friends and family?
They point out: ‘During the first year or so, you will have to work long and unsociable hours and may have to go without a holiday or make other sacrifices.’
Brian Smart, executive director of the British Franchise Association, adds: ‘Franchising is not a guarantee of success, but it does give you the option of joining a business whose worth has already been proved.’
And, of course, of being your own boss.
ON THE ROAD: Trained Amtrak franchise holders ready to be their own bosses
Franchise without tears
Get some expert advice and your new business will boom
AMID all the doom and gloom in the High Streets, there's just one ray of sunshine — franchises.
These off-the-shelf businesses created 6,000 new jobs in the past year.
Yet their success rate can lull many prospective business people into a false sense of security and optimism.
As well as motivation, drive, ability and hard work, you'll need all the help you can get.
Your starting point should be the British Franchise Association (BFA) and there's no better time than now.
From Friday to Sunday this week, the Autumn Franchise Exhibition at Birmingham's NEC will provide a unique opportunity to meet more than 100 new and established franchise companies, under the umbrella of the BFA.
The programme includes seminars exploring opportunities from the viewpoints of both franchisors and franchisees.
The business areas covered will be as diverse as fast-food outlets, retailing, delivery services, cleaning, training and business services.
Franchise companies represented will include many top names and they are all looking for new recruits.
A wealth of advice and guidance will be on hand, courtesy of lawyers, bankers and specialist consultants.
So you can learn everything, from how to choose and finance a franchise to legal rights and the day-today realities of running a business.
There will also be a daily session introducing franchising as a way to expand an existing business or develop a new venture.
Reputable
Visitors can get free professional advice about premises, including tips on finding the right property, rent reviews, planning claims, structural surveys and acquisitions and sales.
Experts will be on hand to deal with specific financial queries and help you with management accounting, cash flow, payroll services and taxation.
The BFA acts as a regulatory body covering the industry.
Full members and associated members have to be accredited so they meet business and ethical standards laid down by the association.
This gives potential franchisees the confidence of knowing they will be dealing with a reputable company.
The BFA also regulates disputes between franchisor and franchisee and sets out their mutual obligations.
Among visitors to the exhibition will be Baroness Denton of Wakefield, parliamentary under-secretary for consumer affairs and small firms.
She is well aware of the role small franchise businesses can play in bringing about economic recovery.
She says: ‘Finding capital and backing can be daunting.
Franchising, however, can give the new business a real head-start by providing both infrastructure and the back-up to get it moving and growing.
‘Looking at how the franchise industry has developed in the United States and the diversity of franchises offered there, we can expect that much greater growth is still to take place in the UK market.’
The BFA suggests that anyone interested in franchising should do some homework before visiting the exhibition.
For general information, you can call the BFA Advice Line on 0891-888657 (calls are charged at 36p per minute cheap rate and 48p at all other times) or get a Franchise Information Pack from the BFA.
This can be obtained, along with advance tickets for the exhibition at the special price of £8 (normally £10), from the franchise team at Blenheim, Blenheim House, 630 Chiswick High Road, London W4 5BG (Tel: 081-742 2828).
RINGING SUCCESS: A franchise can be a real money-spinner — but you have to know what you're doing
What a bunch of Charlies
POLICE COMPLAINT AGAINST DAILY MIRROR IS THROWN OUT
TED OLIVER /RAMSAY SMITH
MOST people would agree that drug dealing inside Buckingham Palace is a pretty serious crime by any standards.
But when the Daily Mirror uncovered startling evidence of a shocking cocaine racket on the Queen's doorstep we almost ended up in the dock ourselves.
In a judgment out today, the Press Complaints Commission says our investigation was ‘entirely proper’ and in the public interest.
But we got brickbats instead of justice when we exposed young mother Lucy Marshall in October last year for dealing in drugs.
From the behaviour of the Crown Prosecution Service and Scotland Yard when we presented them with our damning evidence, you'd think WE were the guilty party.
We had secretly videotaped Marshall, who lived with her parents in the Royal Mews at the Palace, selling high-quality cocaine.
An order had been placed with her for ‘Charlie’— a code word for cocaine — in a call made through the main Palace switchboard.
The deal was completed in a flat near the Palace…and Lucy even took her baby son Matthew along.
Proof
But she had no idea that the ‘customer’ who paid her £400 for five sachets of cocaine was Daily Mirror reporter Jill Turner — and that the transaction was being recorded on video.
When the Mirror's expose was published, Marshall was arrested and we gave police the clearest visual proof of her crime.
Amazingly, she was to get away with it.
Far from acting on our evidence, the police seemed more concerned to discredit it.
Lawyers from the Crown Prosecution Service decided the evidence was insufficient — and Commander Roy Penrose at New Scotland Yard later agreed.
Marshall was freed, and detectives even spoke of arresting our reporters.
When we learned that she was not to be charged, the detective inspector carrying out the investigation told us: ‘It's the first I've heard of it.’
Next day, we reported the decision and carried a Mirror Comment denouncing it.
Now the CPS and Commander Penrose took action.
But it was against the Mirror, not drug dealer Marshall.
The commander wrote to the editor, demanding an apology.
He said: ‘I take the strongest objection to the suggestion that anyone other than the Daily Mirror themselves are to blame for the Crown Prosecution decision that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute Lucy Marshall for drugs offences.’
The Chief Crown Prosecutor, Brian McArdle, sought an apology for our ‘inaccurate and derogatory’ comments.
Our evidence was said to be flawed because: WE could be accused of setting up Marshall for an offence she would not have otherwise committed.
BUT she had admitted on camera and tape that the deal was by no means a ‘one-off’.
THE substances could have been contaminated or tampered with.
BUT Jill Turner and driver John Crawley were both prepared to swear that they had driven directly from the flat to a firm of independent chemical analysts.
The sachets remained unopened and in their possession at all times and the analyst confirmed to police that it was high-grade cocaine.
WE had jeopardised a prosecution by allowing our informant to retain two sachets himself to help maintain his cover.
BUT he said these were destroyed within hours, and he was willing to testify.
The Mirror took independent advice.
A top firm of criminal lawyers told us they did not believe that the chances of a successful prosecution fell below 50 per cent— the CPS's normal test.
Experienced police officers told us that if a jury had seen the video they would certainly have convicted Lucy.
Apologise?
Not likely.
So the CPS and Commander Penrose turned to the Press Complaints Commission.
Mr McArdle wrote: ‘It is sad to report that in this case the behaviour of the Daily Mirror and its staff did not contribute in any way to the detection of crime.
‘…
When the true facts were placed before the editor of the Daily Mirror he refused to acknowledge them and refused to correct the inaccurate, misleading and distorted reporting…in his newspaper.’
Today that complaint is rejected by the Commission.
In its adjudication, it says: ‘The CPS decided not to prosecute the woman as there were problems with the quality and admissibility of the evidence submitted by the Daily Mirror.
‘In a subsequent editorial the newspaper fiercely attacked the CPS decision…and questioned whether the CPS would have made the same decision if the woman had been a black girl caught in exactly the same way on Broadwater Farm.
Task
‘Mr McArdle and Commander Penrose have explained the problems with the evidence…
. These had not, however, been explained to the police officer in charge of the investigation at the time the paper spoke to him.
‘The Commission would have to assess whether the evidence compiled by the Daily Mirror could have been used to obtain a conviction in criminal proceedings.
Such a task is not within the competence of the Commission.
‘Nevertheless, they consider that it was entirely proper and in the public interest for the Daily Mirror to mount its own investigation into drug-related crime.
‘The complaint is rejected.’
One person involved has NOT complained to the Mirror: Lucy Marshall.
EXPOSED: On our front page last October 21
LUCY MARSHALL No charges
He's worth £1.7 billion
MEET THE LITTLE PRINCE WITH THE WORLD'S BIGGEST PIGGY BANK
And he's only NINE
‘CHILDREN OF THE RICH ARE NEARLY ALWAYS UNHAPPY’
LORRAINE BUTLER
HE OWNS six fairytale castles, has 75 servants and travels to school in a bullet-proof Mercedes.
And when he had his ninth birthday party last July, Michael Jackson was one of his guests.
Even Princes William and Harry would look like a couple of little paupers in the presence of Prince Albert von Thurn und Taxis.
For Prince Albert is the world's richest kid.
And when it comes to cash he could even say ya-boo-sucks to Britain's wealthiest woman, revealed this week as shipping heiress Christine Goulandris.
Her £290 million fortune would still leave plenty of room in Prince Albert's massive piggy bank of £1.7 billion.
AS WELL as his half-dozen treasure laden castles in Europe, the billionaire boy also owns a bank and several breweries.
Also at his star-studded birthday party, which cost £500,000, were his two sisters, aged 10 and 11 — but they won't inherit a penny of their parents' fortune.
Second to the son of Germany's dead Prince Johannes and Bavarian Princess Gloria von Thurn und Taxis is Athina Roussel, seven-year-old daughter of the late Christina Onassis.
She has just under £1 billion to spend and when she wants to go to the zoo she can chose between the two Christina and her husband Thierry bought for her.
She dresses her dolls in super expensive Dior label frocks and even has her own  yacht .
Day to day expenses are covered by her annual allowance of £2.5 million.
Best known of the rich kids on the list published in American magazine People Weekly are our own Princes William, 10 and Harry eight.
As the grandsons of the Queen — worth £100 million — they enjoy luxuries like a toy Aston Martin — worth £30,000 — to drive around Highgrove.
But it's not just the children of Royalty who have enormous bank balances.
Hollywood has its own millionaire prince — Macaulay Culkin, the 12-year-old Home Alone star.
LITTLE Mac is worth £10 million after a series of film roles — and is now asking £2.5 million for a sequel to his original box office hit.
Yet in the main the list is peppered with kids born into money.
Princess Caroline of Monaco's grandchildren — six-year-old Charlotte, Andrea, eight, and Peter, five — stand to inherit their grandfather Prince Rainier's fortune if Caroline's brother Albert does not produce an heir.
They already have pots of cash — Charlotte's got an island off the Italian coast worth £4 million for her fifth birthday.
The richest brood of brothers and sisters are those of oil baron the Sultan of Brunei, the world's wealthiest man, worth an estimated £19.2 billion.
The Sultan spent £58,000 on a birthday party for his 11-year-old daughter at Claridges in London and when his eldest, Prince Billah, turned 15 two years ago he celebrated at the world's biggest palace, worth £250,000, in a gold covered carriage.
The other titled tots who make the major money league are the four kids of Jordan's Queen Noor and King Hussein.
They have their own zoo at the Amman palace and speed around the grounds in minijeeps.
But there is always a price to be paid for having such riches at such a young age, says top  psychologist Dr David Lewis.
‘If you look at the children of very rich parents you will see that they are nearly always an unhappy, shoddy lot,’ he says.
THEY can do and have what they like and after a while it doesn't mean anything to them.
‘As they grow older they will have a problem trusting people.
They will be confused as to why people like them, is it the cash or is it for them?
‘It's hard to bring up children when you have no money.
‘But in a bizarre way it's more difficult to bring them up if you have too much.’
NO KIDDING: World's richest kid Prince Albert (above) had star Michael Jackson at his birthday party.
ISLAND GIRL: Monaco royal Charlotte, top left, owns a £4m island off the Italian coast
DIOR ME: Billionaire Onassis girl Athina dresses her dolls in designer clothes
BIG MAC: Movie star Macauley is worth £10m
RICH ROYALS: But Wills and Harry can't match Albert
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PEARL JAM fans caused motorway chaos in Seattle after the band announced a secret homecoming gig.
Hundreds of motorists abandoned their cars to dash across to a local radio station after a DJ offered scores of free tickets to the band's concert.
A spokesman for Pearl Jam, at No 21 with their tale of child abuse Jeremy, says: ‘They haven't played in their home town for ages.’
WATT NOISE
THE Prodigy have been forced to scrap £50,000-worth of gigs because their P.A. system is too loud.
The Essex-based rave stars insist on using an ear-crushing 70,000-watt sound system at concerts but council chiefs in Cambridge, Hull, Coventry and Hereford claim local venues could suffer  structural damage at that volume.
A spokesman for the band, at No 11 with Fire says: ‘We've played dozens of gigs in recent months and we haven't brought the roof down yet.
‘The only reason they're kicking up a stink is because they don't like rave music.’
CLAUDIA'S POISON TERROR
SEXY Top Of The Pops star Claudia Simon was rushed to hospital in agony after eating some dodgy olives.
The pretty presenter was taken by ambulance to London's Charing Cross Hospital at 6 am with terrible stomach pains.
Claudia, who can be seen on the show tonight, says: ‘I woke up in the middle of the night in absolute agony.
I was shaking, shivering and sweating and I had the most awful pain going through my body.
‘I really thought I was going to die.
I was all alone in my flat, so I crawled to my phone and rung a friend to beg for help.
‘She called an ambulance, which rushed me to the hospital immediately.’
Willowy Claudia, had her stomach pumped immediately.
The 21-year-old star — plucked from children's TV last year to host TOTP — says: ‘The doctors told me I had a very bad case of food poisoning.‘
Apparently some rotten olives she had eaten were to blame.
Claudia says: ‘I certainly won't be having any more in a hurry.’
CLAUDIA SIMON Hospital dash
ANNE ROBINSON
Taking the Michael…
MICHAEL DOUGLAS is currently booked in to a £500 a night clinic in Arizona to cure his addiction to sex.
The idea being that if he spends the next couple of weeks explaining to all the other people there why he can't keep his hands off women he won't want to be unfaithful any more and his wife will forgive him.
Or will she?
If I were Mrs Douglas and had put up with years of a philandering, self-important husband I think I might consider I was more deserving than him of the luxury away-from-it-all fortnight's vacation.
AGAINST THE COMMONS INTEREST
DAVID MELLOR has gone to the back benches nursing the belief that since he told John Major all about his expenses-paid holiday it made it okay and if life were fair none of us should have considered him out of order.
Much the same thinking goes on with the directory of Members' Interests.
As long as an MP declares he or she is on the take these payments somehow are deemed acceptable.
So not only can a back bencher shout the odds for the fur trade, the police, the bookies or whoever in exchange for money but worse, the chairman of the Home Affairs Committee can be on the payroll of a private security firm without anyone thinking there might be the tiniest conflict.
I remain astonished that this state of affairs is allowed to exist.
MPs are elected to represent the people, not companies and organisations who pay them.
And if MPs on the take are not parroting the opinions of these companies what can we suppose the money they receive is for?
CANNELLONI COP
THE NEW CRIMEBUSTER WHO AIMS TO MAKE US FORGETTA ALL ABOUT MORSE
PAULINE WALLIN
MAMMA Mia Morse — you're about to be replaced by a roly-poly cop who can scoff a  cannelloni faster than you can sink a pint.
He's pasta-loving Italian policeman Marshal Salvatore Guarnaccia who is being lined up to take over as ITV's top detective.
Like Oxford's Morse, his beat is a beautiful cultural city — Florence, where museums burst with works by old masters like Michelangelo, Botticelli and Leonardo Da Vinci.
But where Morse likes his real ale, 16-stone Guarnaccia just can't stop stuffing himself with real Italian cooking.
Alfred Molina — who ironically played beach-bum Blake in Costa del Crime series El CID — will play the man ITV hopes will be as big a hit as John Thaw's inspector.
Thaw says the new Morse series he has just finished filming will be his last apart from a few specials.
So TV chiefs have turned to best-selling author Magdalen Nabb and the roly poly hero of her best selling Marshal books.
Guarnaccia will make his debut in pilot two-hour special — The Marshal And The Madwoman — made by Cardiff-based Harlech Television.
That is expected to be followed by six more episodes at a cost of £1.6 million each.
Half-Italian and fluent in the language -Alfred is widely regarded as one of Britain's most talented actors and certainly one of the busiest.
As well as El CID, he starred opposite Sally Field in Not Without My Daughter and was showered with praise for his portrayal as tortured comic Tony Hancock.
‘Guarnaccia's a real peach of a part, they don't come along very often,’ says 39-year-old Alfred.
‘One of the attractions was that he doesn't jump out of cars shouting freeze.
‘He is quite a melancholy character.
You get the impression that he's not exactly stupid, he's just marching to a different drum.
‘But although he's working to a different rhythm to everyone else, he always gets results.’
Alfred had plenty of advice to hand on how to play a cop — his 55-year-old wife Jill Gascoine made her name as Inspector Maggie Forbes in hit series The Gentle Touch.
‘She told me to get the small details right from the start — things like hair, clothes, likes and dislikes — because it's the small details that define an individual.’
Although born and brought up in England, Alfred found filming in Italy like going home.
But that pleasure was tinged with sadness because his mother, Joanna, isn't alive to see him in a role he might have been born to play.
‘She'd have loved it.
Before she died I was still only doing plays in garages wearing weird costumes.
‘One of the last times I saw my mother, I was borrowing money off her.
She lent me a couple of hundred quid because I was in financial difficulty.
I was still bumming round trying to get work and she bailed me out.
‘That was before she moved back to Italy, she knew she was ill and went back to die.’
His mum was a big, volatile, typically Italian mamma who came to live in Britain in 1949 where she made her living as a cook for a medical family in North London until marrying Fred's father who was Spanish.
‘She had a great zest for life.I loved her dearly,’ says Alfred.
His mother died at 56.
The combination of being overweight and a smoker killed her.
‘It's a strand that runs through my family.
So I thought I should try to stop smoking and lose some weight.’
Ironically, eating and drinking is an important feature of his role as the Marshal.
He loves to devour huge meals — washed down with Chianti wine — which are rustled up by his wife Teresa, played by Pennies From Heaven star Gemma Craven.
‘He is very fussy about what he eats.
He really enjoys food,’ said Fred.
To his relief the producers didn't want him to pile on the pounds.
They thought he his 6 ft 4 in frame was paunchy enough already.
Jill applauded the decision.
She helped him lose two stones.
‘She diets for fun.
It's her hobby.
Both of us went on a diet which made it easier,’ he said.
They have been married for five years, confounding sceptics who said it wouldn't last because of the age difference.
Jill is touring Britain, so she can't be with him.
‘While I'm here in Florence she's in Hull, Woking and York.
‘I've got the short end of the stick,’ he says with a wink.
COAST STARS: Alfred (right) with John Bird in crime series El Cid
PIZZA THE ACTION: Marshal Guarnaccia, Bruno and Di Nuccio, solving mysteries in Florence
HAPPY COP-PLE: Alfred and Gentle Touch star Jill
THE LIMIT
PAP SNAP
RACE ace Willie Carson keeps Genesis star Mike Rutherford spellbound with tales of his exciting Derby and St Leger wins.
I hear that Rutherford is now plotting his revenge.
He plans to hypnotise Carson with fascinating, and no doubt endless, Genesis stories.
OFF LIMITS
BONO is to join GEORGE HARRISON, ERIC CLAPTON, SINEAD O'CONNOR and TOM PETTY at a show to mark BOB DYLAN's 30-year career in New York on October 16…
THE SISTERS OF MERCY have split up…
NENEH CHERRY has recorded a duet with R.E.M. 's MICHAEL STIPE…
DEXY'S MIDNIGHT RUNNERS are reuniting for an album and tour…
SUEDE'S first show was attended by 20 people.
OVER THE LIMIT
HOLLYWOOD celebs may not be faithful to their partners but, according to Dr Andrew Geeley's new book Faithful Attraction, most Americans don't cheat.
Says Dr Geeley: ‘Ninety per cent of American spouses have been faithful since they married.’
GOOD FOR FERGIE
SINEAD O'CONNOR has admitted she was thrilled when she saw the Daily Mirror's pictures of Fergie's romp with John Bryan in the South of France.
‘I was glad that at last she was having a good time, that she was happy,’ she said in an interview with Vox magazine.
She praised Princess Diana and claimed: ‘If she ran the world, child abuse wouldn't exist any more.’
The Irish star, who as a child was battered by her mother, revealed that she went to a psychiatrist to sort out her problems.
She said: ‘I then realised there were people just like me, and people who had gone through a worse hell than me.’
THE Shamen were booed and jeered by football fans when they performed at half-time at Arsenal's home game against Manchester City on Monday night.
The group, at No. 1 with Ebeneezer Goode, said: ‘Jeering at a football match is just part of the ritual.’
What a carry on!
Watch it, dad…that's my wife you've got your arm around
JESTER JIM GETS FRESH WITH HIS DAUGHTER-IN-LAW
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
SEXY Sara Crowe turned veteran comedy actor Jim Dale weak at the knees as they made a passionate bedroom scene for Carry On Columbus.
Blonde Sara, best known as the ‘Ooh lovelee’ Philadelphia cheese girl in the TV advert, was making her movie debut as a superspy.
She had to seduce Jim by whipping off a false beard disguise and transforming herself into an exotic belly-dancer.
But she had an even bigger surprise in store — behind the scenes of the first Carry On film in 14 years, she was wooing Jim's actor son Toby for real.
‘It was the talk of the set — the rumour monitors were working overtime,’ Jim said yesterday as he talked for the first time about the couple's whirlwind romance.
‘Toby had a small part in the film but he was also working as my stand-in.
That meant he and Sara had hours and hours of hanging around together waiting to be called — and they got to know each other rather well.
‘They let me in on the secret quite early — then people started joking about it.
‘Sara finally gave the game away when she sat in front of her make-up mirror and started singing her own version of that song from Oklahoma!—‘I've got the dad in the morning and the son at night…‘.’
There wasn't a dry eye on the set when Toby, 27, and Sara, 26, announced they were going to get married.
But before they did, Jim, who stars as Christopher Columbus, and Sara, as sultry dancer Fatima, had to finishing filming with a romp in a ship bunk.
‘Several people have asked what it was like to have to film scenes like that with your future daughter-in-law,’ Jim says.
‘But honestly, when you're acting you're acting and you don't even think about it — and we are talking about a Carry On film after all, so the passion rating is pretty tame.
‘I am just so happy for them.
They have proved there is such a thing as love at first sight.’
Jim, who is divorced from Toby's mother, married art-gallery owner Julie Schaffler 11 years ago.
‘I first met Julie when I walked into her gallery but it took me three years to walk out with her as my wife,’ he says.
‘Toby is obviously quicker off the mark than his dad.’
Toby, the youngest of Jim's four children, is also doubly determined.
For Jim revealed that he has married Sara twice.
‘They booked Chelsea Register Office for July.
But the news leaked out and they decided they couldn't wait.
‘So they had a small secret do with just close friends, then went back four weeks later for the proper wedding.
‘It was in the same place with the same registrar but this time everyone was there, including me.’
The entire courtship was only 12 weeks long so Jim is now hoping to find time to get to know Sara better.
Jim, who moved to New York 16 years ago, had never heard of her, although she's a familiar face to British audiences.
‘I've been away so long I felt a bit like the new boy walking into the old school when I arrived at the studio for Carry On Columbus,’ he admits.
‘I had never heard of alternative comedy and I have to confess I didn't know some of my co-stars, like Rik Mayall and Julian Clary.
‘But that didn't last long.
We are all in the business of making people laugh — and in Carry On films there is only one way to do that — good old slapstick humour.’
And Jim had some familiar faces around to make him feel at home.
‘Bernard Cribbins is my old mate, June Whitfield is priceless and Jack Douglas was lovely to have on board,’ he says.
‘But you can't help missing the old favourites too — like Kenneth Williams, Charles Hawtrey and the wonderful Sid James.’
Jim was the star of 10 Carry Ons before he went off to America to become a Broadway star.
Fans perhaps remember him best in Carry On Doctor as the hapless Dr Kilmore, who is found in compromising positions with nurses.
Or as Marshall P. Knutt, the conscientious sanitary engineer who gets mistaken for a hot-shot and ends up the hero of Carry On Cowboy.
‘I've got lots of favourite moments from those days but perhaps the best is the vision of Kenneth Williams singing one of the dirtiest songs I have ever heard to sunbathers on the beach at Rye — which was doubling for the desert in Carry On — Follow That Camel,’ he recalls.
Jim still carries the scars of his Carry Ons — he fell off the camel he was supposed to be riding and his left arm was badly broken during the making of Doctor, when he had to ride a hospital trolley down a flight of stairs, through a plate-glass window and on to a table.
He says: ‘I used to do all my own stunts, then one day I thought, ‘Why am I depriving a stuntman of an honest day's work?’
Now I just leave it to the professionals.’
Carry On Columbus has been made by the original Carry On creators, executive producer Peter Rogers and director Gerald Thomas.
It is one of three films coming out this year to mark the the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America.
But whereas Columbus, The Discovery, with Marlon Brando and Tom Selleck, cost £17.9 million, and 1492 had a massive £25.6 million budget, Carry On Columbus needed a cheap and cheerful £2.25 million.
‘I think you'll find that our plot varies a little from the history books,’ Jim says.
‘But we have been faithful to the Carry On formula and that is what counts.
There's plenty of slap and tickle, nudge, nudge and wink, wink.
‘I've always thought Carry On films were like a pair of old jeans.
As soon as you slip them on, they are nice and comfortable.
And the more familiar the jokes, the funnier they are.
Only a true snob can fail to laugh.
‘I expect there will be some critics who can't find a good word to say — but there always were and no bad review was ever able to dampen the success of the Carry Ons.’
But one thing is quite clear as Jim makes his comeback — those youthful looks have remained intact.
There are a few laughter lines around the eyes but the boyish grin is the same and at 57, he looks 10 years younger.
HE SAYS: ‘Hanging on to your hair helps but I haven't got any of the old films on tape and it is just as well,’.
‘I think they would be too painful for my ego to take.’
Having got Columbus in the can — it opens on general release this Friday — Jim is still game for another Carry On.
‘If you can spend five weeks having the time of your life and get paid at the end of it — why not?’ he asks.
‘Besides, I've got two more sons to marry off yet!’
FAMILY AFFAIR: Sara and father-in-law Jim are clinch-perfect as the lovers
CHELSEA MATCH: Jim, Sara and Toby after the wedding
PHILLY FILLY: Blonde Sara found fame in the cheese advert
COLUMBUS CAPER: Jim, Sara and friends keep their eyes skinned for laughs
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
WINNING DOUBLE
CONFEDERATION Bank has launched two new fixed interest accounts.
You need £1,000 minimum for its One Year Investment Certificate, which pays 10.5 per cent gross.
The One Year Guaranteed High Income Account (9.5 per cent gross) pays monthly income.
Minimum investment £5,000.
DETAILS: 0438 744500.
Sears slim down
ANDREW KEENAN /JOHN HUSBAND
THE high-street slump has left Sears looking pretty down at heel, writes Andrew Keenan.
The group which owns Selfridges and Saxone and is Britain's biggest shoe shop owner saw profits crash from £2.4 to £8.8 million in the last six months.
It's been forced to shut 350 of its 2,000 UK shoe shops and give 1,700 workers the boot, at a cost of £32 million.
To add to Sears' woes another £82 million went on getting rid of its loss-making menswear arm, which included Fosters.
Fortunately chic Miss Selfridges fashion, right, is still a big hit with women and while profits from Selfridges the Oxford Street store, soared by nearly an eighth to £5.5 million.
Boss Liam Strong is also pleased that Adams, Sears' kidswear section, has become tops with the tots.
More than one in ten of youngsters now gets clothes from Adams.
WORTH A PACKET
THE great British biscuit goes from strength to strength.
In 1991 we munched a record £1.4 BILLION worth of them.
Foreigners also love our digestives and custard creams.
Last year we exported 110,000 tonnes of biscuits worth £182 million, a tenth more than 1990.
Blues at Boosey
THEY are playing the blues down at Boosey & Hawkes, the international music publishers and instrument makers, because the recession is catching up with them.
Boss Richard Holland, who calls the tune at Boosey, say that the group traditionally feels the effects of recession late in the cycle.
And this slump is no exception the music market has deteriorated and times are now getting harder.
Nevertheless, Boosey still managed to play a good tune in the six months to June with profits up 10 per cent higher to £1.4 million.
SEXCESS STORY
SHERWOOD, who make sexy lace bras and knickers, is showing a fuller figure.
Half-year profits rose by a quarter to £8.2 million, despite the slump.
The firm, named after Sherwood Forest, has cornered the UK frillies market and has pulled its socks up and become Britain's biggest sock maker.
It makes one in every three pairs sold in Marks & Spencer.
Playing for cash
NATIONAL and Provincial building society's new My Money Game is proving a smash hit with schoolkids like these youngsters from Owlsmoor Primary in Camberley Surrey.
It is part of the Managing Money information pack, which N&P is providing FREE for primary schools to help children learn about cash.
This is the second pack in a three-year activity programme called Learning to Work Together.
It covers a variety of business topics.
The Managing Money pack is now available from N&P branches.
With cash for extra books and other materials so short nowadays these packs are a godsend to schools.
How to crack a claim
BIG shocks may be in store for some unfortunate homeowners when the housing slump ends.
Insurance experts warn that many properties have been hit by subsidence, but fewer cases are spotted because homes are not changing hands and therefore are not being surveyed.
Meanwhile, more insurers are increasing the £500 excess to £1,000, £2,000 plus, which policyholders must pay on any subsidence claim.
Insurance negotiators Salmon Adams suggests the best way to beat these rises is to tell your insurer NOW if you spot a suspicious crack.
Then you will only be liable to pay the present excess, even if the rate has gone up when you claim later.
Only a full survey can tell you for sure whether you have subsidence.
But survey fees start at around £300 plus VAT.
And they can't be claimed back on your insurance if it's a false alarm.
So we have fixed up a deal for readers with chartered surveyors Angmering Gorse and Partners.
They will give Mirror readers an initial FREE survey providing you agree to use their services if further work is necessary.
Their offer only applies to property in the home counties.
DETAILS: Phone Simon Fenwick on 081 340 8181.
Or write to 40, Highgate West Hill, London, N6 6LS.
Surveyors in other parts of Britain should be prepared to offer similar deals.
There's no harm in asking.
PUBLIC OPINION
CHURCH OUT OF TOUCH!
NO WONDER churches get emptier.
The reason is the clergy's sheer lack of interest in attracting worshippers.
My daughter and son-in-law have tried to have their baby son christened in a local church.
They were turned down at the one where they were married and christened because they'd moved five miles outside the parish.
At churches near them they were told they would have to attend services for 26 weeks, then their baby might be baptised.
This is scandalous because no child should ever be turned away from a church.
THE reader who lives in a council house and believes her rent is subsidising home-buyers has it the wrong way round.
Either she pays her rent or she can buy a property and pay £500 a month mortgage.
Then if she can't keep up payments she risks losing her home, as thousands of families have done.
Count your blessings, council-house tenant.
I wonder at the lack of knowledge of human nature shown by some judges.
A husband was jailed for attacking a man he found making love to his estranged wife.
He was told that as he and his wife had been separated 15 months it was to be expected that she would find a new partner.
But I have been divorced 30 years and know I'd feel the same as the man who was jailed if I found my wife in the arms of someone else.
I CAN understand the grumpiness of Prince Charles.
Unless the Queen stands down, he could be 70 before he is crowned king.
— Mrs M. Arthur, Kingsbridge, Devon.
GERMAN football legend Franz Beckenbauer must have headed the ball too many times to say he believes he was a flower in a previous life.
Still I approve of his wish that the next time round he will become a woman so that he can bear children.
MUM'S HEARTACHE
WHAT a moving picture (right) of Kerry Needham when she met the blond boy who was not her son.
She'd flown to Corfu in the hope that an English boy might be her lad Ben, who disappeared 14 months ago.
Instead he was named Panos and had been properly adopted by a Greek couple.
Let's hope Kerry finds Ben soon.
Kinnock treatment for Mellor
FOLLY: Mellor
HOW arrogant of David Mellor to blame the tabloids for bringing him down when it was his own folly.
Doesn't he remember that at the General Election the tabloids and so-called quality newspapers slaughtered Labour leader Neil Kinnock who did not have an affair with an actress or take freebie holidays?
At least Mr Mellor knows what it's like to be hounded now.
IT was disgusting for David Mellor to compare himself to Captain Oates of the ill-fated Antarctic expedition led by Scott.
Captain Oates was a gallant gentleman.
HOUSEWIFE Sarah Fox threw away £10,000 in research trying to invent a floating soap because such a soap called Swan, and shaped like one, was around at least 50 years ago.
— Arnold Gilpin, Morley, W. Yorks.
THE reader who claims he grew a tomato weighing 13lb 4oz is a lightweight.
I have just picked one weighing 14lb 10oz.
Any advance, big tomato growers?
Flaked out by this corn
THE last thing I would want to see and hear over my corn flakes is Anne Diamond, lovely though she is, presenting syrupy, romantic drivel written by Dame Barbara Cartland.
BBC-1 bosses, inflicting this on our screens in the new Good Morning show, should be shown being force-fed with porridge as so-called celebrities read out the honeyed words.
THEATRE REVIEW
SPIRITS ARE HIGH
WITH so many flops in the West End these days it makes a welcome change to report a success story.
You would have thought The Woman In Black wouldn't have stood a ghost of a chance of survival with just two actors, a simple set and some offstage sound effects going for it.
But Susan Hill's spine tingler has become the longest running show ever at London's Fortune Theatre with over 1347 chilling performances.
A new cast of John Nettleton and Patrick Toomey carry on the ghoul work.
With a little help from a walk-on spirit who doesn't even emerge from the shadows to take a bow at the final curtain!
TONY PURNELL 
WIN A WEEK IN EXOTIC INDIA
WIN 1,000 EROTIC KAMA SUTRA VIDEOS
VISIT JAIPUR AND THE TAJ MAHAL
ALL the world loves a lover and everyone will love our latest, free competition.
It is to mark the release of a remarkable new video from Vision Video, Kama Sutra.
Our winner will receive a seven-day holiday in India and a copy of the video.
1,000 runners up will get the video, worth £12.99 in the shops.
The first prize includes return flights London-Delhi, half-board hotel  accommodation and all transfers.
The winning couple will enjoy a breath-taking tour of Rajasthan in northern India, an area rich in beauty and romantic settings.
They will marvel at the Taj Mahal, by moonlight of course.
They will visit Udairpur, the City of Dreams, the most romantic in all India.
They will even travel by painted elephant to the Amber Fort in the hills around Jaipur, with its huge gateways and pillared pavilions.
To enter our competition, just answer this question.
Name the Hindu God of Love.
1.
Shiva 2.
Eros 3 Kama?
Keep your answer carefully.
There will be another question tomorrow and you will need both answers to take part.
You MUST be over 18 to enter.
Full details to-morrow.
THE Kama Sutra, for 2,000 years the Lover's lexicon, is beautifully brought to life in this new video.It is artistic, tasteful yet powerfully erotic.
Developed with expert knowledge of the original Indian text, this video creates a sense of well-being and fulfilment that improves every aspect of your life 
MAGIC: The Taj Mahal and Wind Palace, Jaipur
MARINO MAGIC
CHART THE GRAND PRIX VICTORIES OF CHAMP NIGEL
HERE'S another sticker for your fabulous Daily Mirror souvenir wallchart to celebrate Nigel Mansell sweeping to the world Formula One title.
Today's sticker is from the Grand Prix won by Mansell in San Marino.
Carry on collecting all this week and you will have a great souvenir of the season in which Mansell won an amazing NINE Grands Prix, including the first five straight off, and went on to take the world crown for the first time.
He became only the seventh Briton of all time to wear the champion's laurels and will go down in history alongside Mike Hawthorn, Graham Hill, Jim Clark, John Surtees, Jackie Stewart and James Hunt.
Now you can capture all the glory of Mansell's victory in our stunning souvenir wallchart.
Every day this week you can collect stickers of the Grands Prix that Mansell won.
South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, Spain, San Marino, France, Britain, Germany — Mansell won them all as his mighty Renault-Williams car blazed to triumph after triumph.
Finally, second place in Hungary clinched the title for Mansell with an incredible five races still to run.
Winning And Mansell didn't stop there, winning last Sunday's race in Portugal to break the record for most firsts in a season.
Each sticker shows a map of the Grand Prix circuit where Mansell beat the world to win his crown, plus the finishing line-up of first second and third, Mansell's average speed and the winning time.
Complete your historic chart by adding stickers every day here is the fourth.
And by Saturday your souvenir of Mansell's victory will be complete.
KING NIGEL: Mansell conquered all his rivals in San Marino
DID YOU KNOW?
WORLD heavyweight boxing champion, Ingemar Johannson was disqualified in the 1952 Olympic Games for ‘not trying’.
SWIM WITH SHARKS?
YOU MUST BE JOKING!
REVEALED: The secrets that prove super hero James Bond was really a super wimp
TONY PURNELL
WE'VE all thrilled to his devil-may-care reckless charm, been left gasping at his audacious exploits.
But now the truth is out…
James Bond is a wimp.
A London Weekend Television special marking Bond's 30th anniversary in the cinema, 30 Years of James Bond (ITV, 9.20pm) reveals the truth behind those daring stunts.
It shows the stars can be anything but tough guys when it comes to danger.
And it doesn't spare the blushes of Sean Connery, Roger Moore and the others who have been issued with the secret agent's famous licence to kill.
According to the film makers, Roger Moore was terrified of explosions.
‘He did not like the bangs,’ says special effects boss Derek Medding.
And when Sean Connery discovered he was to be filmed with 8ft sharks for Thunderball his reaction was: ‘You must be joking — not bloody likely.’
Director Terence Young assured him he would be perfectly safe behind toughened flexiglass but they ran out of sheets and there was a 4ft gap.
‘Two sharks got into the perspex tunnel and believe me the startled look we got from Sean was not anything to do with his acting ability,’ said Terence.
Sean recalled: ‘I suddenly found myself on the same side as the shark and got out of the water as fast as I could.
I think I was dry when I touched the side.’
Even in his legendary seduction scenes, Bond scored 0 out of 10 for macho charm.
In Live and Let Die Roger Moore had to undress Madeline Smith without her noticing.
The solution was a watch with a magnetic field strong enough to undo a zip.
Neat.
What fans didn't see was special effects boss Derek Meddings on the floor with his hand up her dress to keep it from ruffling up and his assistant up a ladder holding the tension on a piece of fish wire while the zip was being pulled down.
On another occasion Moore, notoriously edgy about risking his neck, had to film with crocodiles in the Everglades.
Knowing this, film-makers added the devilish touch of putting him in crocodile skin shoes.
‘It was a very nasty feeling being on the island on my own surrounded by crocodiles,’ he says, shuddering at the memory.
Even though a stand-in stepped into his shoes for the scene where he uses the snappers as stepping stones.
Stuntmen and stand-ins are the real heroes.
And some have diced with death to make Bond look good.
Martin Grace had to run along the top of a train doubling for Roger Moore in Octopussy.
‘It was child's play.
It was like second nature to me and I was enjoying it,’ he recalled.
Then the 40mph train made an unrehearsed diversion under a bridge and WHAM — Martin's body slammed into the concrete parapet.
‘I was very lucky I did not get wiped out completely,’ he says.
‘Later they told me my body just went up in the air and I was hanging on by one hand.’
He spent three months in traction in hospital followed by three months on crutches.
Stuntman Richard Graydon was supposed to ‘fall’ during a tussle on top of a cable car with the terrifying steel-toothed Jaws in Moonraker.
‘I was desperately waiting for the magic word ‘Cut’ so I could attach myself to the wires before falling,’he says.
‘But it didn't come.
‘I had no alternative but to go over.
I grabbed the handrail at the edge of the cable car.
‘I was not attached by anything other than sheer terror.’
When it came to fisticuffs Sean Connery was happy to mix it with the best of them —‘He believed stuntmen were there to take the knocks and let them have it in the fight scenes,’ said one.
But Moore freely admits he has no stomach for the stunts.
And he is full of praise for the tough guys who take his place.
‘People become stuntmen because they like the burst of adrenalin.
It's the same reason why bullfighters go into the bullring and Nigel Mansell drives as fast as he does.
‘They like the rush of blood but I can happily do without it.’
George Lazenby was keen to show a macho image when he was picked as James Bond Mark II for On Her Majesty's Secret Service.
‘I was upset when I was told stand ins would be used,’ he said.
‘I thought I would be allowed to do some of the stunts but the insurance company cut me out.’
Timothy Dalton proved the most daring of the four Bonds — insisting he did his own stunts when he made his debut in The Living Daylights, which gets its television premiere on Saturday (ITV, 6.30pm).
In the opening sequence he is seen hanging on to the top of a jeep as it careers down the rock of Gibraltar.
Tim just shrugs and says: ‘You do things not because you are brave but because you are a kind of perverse coward.
If I was on my own I wouldn't have done it but when there are other guys there you can't say no.
‘You are not going to have them say you are some kind of dickhead.’
So at last, James Bond is SHAMED into being brave.
It's not all daring stuff though.
Remember the scene where Jaws — 7ft 4in Richard Keil — had to bite into a cable car wire?
The wire looked real enough.
But it was made of…braided licorice.
‘Fortunately I happen to like licorice,’ said Richard.
007 gets that sinking feeling
IN the famous underwater sequence in The Spy Who Loved Me Bond's car takes up swimming.
Seven full size Lotus car bodies and three  miniatures were used.
The car plunged into the ocean in the Bahamas and was seen emerging off Corsica — with an ordinary sweeping brush covering up the tell tale tracks in the sand left by the cable pulling it from the sea.
HANDS OFF: Bond's trick was not all it seemed
SHAKEN Gripping stuff, but Roger Moore left it the stuntman in Octopussy
STIRRED Hang on…is that really Timothy Dalton?
SMOOTH OPERATOR Sean Connery certainly looked the part of secret agent 007 — but he was no real-life hero
HEAD FOR HEIGHTS: A stuntman took on more than the scary Jaws
BANNED: George Lazenby says insurers wouldn't let him do his own Bond stunts
PAUL FOOT
ANGER AT CASE THAT NEVER WAS
HERE'S another strange story about Astra, the defence company formerly connected to the Minister for Defence Procurement, Jonathan Aitken.
Astra's former chairman, Gerald James, alleged in this column earlier this year that he and most of his fellow directors had been victimised and the firm sold off to protect dark secrets about arms for Iraq and a cosy monopoly relationship between British Aerospace and the Ministry of Defence.
John Anderson, another former Astra director, agrees.
On 24 April 1990, soon after the old board of Astra had been toppled and a week after parts of the Iraqi Supergun were seized by Customs at Teesside, John was arrested at his son's home in Fort William, Scotland, by the Ministry of Defence.
Angry, embarrassed and under close guard, he was flown to London where a Ministry of Defence car rushed him to Ramsgate, in Kent.
On its way the car smashed into another one, and Mr Anderson suffered whiplash injuries to his neck.
The next day he was released on police bail and given a ticket back to Glasgow.
News of his arrest was leaked to the newspapers.
Months later he rang to ask about his case.
He was told he wasn't wanted any longer.
He is outraged at his treatment, and wants an explanation.
‘There was not a shred of any sort of case against me,’ he says.
Mr Anderson's MP, Charles Kennedy, took up his case.
Viscount Cranborne, Parliamentary Under Secretary at the Ministry of Defence explained that Mr Anderson was only wanted ‘as a witness.’
Mr Kennedy says: ‘If that's how they treat a witness, I dread to imagine how they treat a suspect.’
VICTIM OF GOVERNMENT SMEAR?:
John Anderson
Hired hands
BRITISH LAWYERS FLY OUT TO PROSECUTE TORTURE VICTIM
TWO top British lawyers are off to Africa this month to prosecute a trade unionist imprisoned and tortured by a ruthless dictator.
Recently he was adopted by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience.
THE LAWYERS are John Beveridge QC and his instructing solicitor, Andrew Nitch-Smith.
Mr Beveridge is a Recorder for the Western Circuit, former Tory councillor and joint master of the Westmeath foxhounds.
Mr Nitch-Smith comes from the rich and powerful partnership, Denton, Hall, Burgin and Warrens.
THE DICTATOR is Dr Hastings Banda, who has ruled Malawi, population 8 million, for 28 years without any elections or legal opposition.
THE TRADE UNIONIST is Chakufwa Chichana.
He has spent his life campaigning for free trade unionism and free votes.
In the 1970s he was detained without charge or trial for five years and tortured and held for long periods in leg-irons.
In April this year, he was grabbed by Banda's goons, thrown into a cell without a window, where he could barely stand up, and (much later) charged with sedition.
In Malawi opposing the president and advocating multi-party democracy is considered sedition.
The mother of his secretary, Sophia Nkosana, was arrested, stripped naked, beaten and tortured to persuade her daughter to testify against Mr Chichana.
Last month Amnesty International called for all charges against him to be withdrawn and concluded: ‘At every stage the behaviour of the authorities has been in open defiance of the authority of the courts and the rule of law.’
So why have Mr Beveridge and Mr Nitch-Smith agreed to prosecute?
Mr Beveridge told my colleague Bryan Rostron: ‘I think from time to time one is brought in for overseas work in parts of the world where the old English system of justice still applies.
‘I'm surprised to learn Malawi is widely condemned.
I should have thought Malawi was the one country any right-thinking person would be trying to support.’
Hefty
Mr Nitch-Smith said: ‘I think the Malawi authorities have instructed outside lawyers so that it can be emphasised they are committed to a fair and open trial.
‘Hitherto I believe it's been accepted that the judiciary in Malawi are entirely independent and fair-minded.
It would be a sad day, wouldn't it, if lawyers were only prepared to act in ‘politically correct’ cases.’
Mr Beveridge and Mr Nitch-Smith often represent Lonrho, the multinational which owns a hefty slice of Malawi and all of The Observer, a newspaper renowned for its freedom-fighting in Africa.
Mr Nitch-Smith sat on the stage during Lonrho's annual general meeting in March.
He assured Bryan Rostron: ‘Lonrho has absolutely nothing to do with this case.
We have been instructed by the Malawian authorities who are responsible for our fees and nobody else is.’
PS It's not only the lawyers who come from Britain.
The leg-irons were made in Sheffield.
RECORDER: Beveridge
PRISONER: Chichana
THE THINGS THEY SAY
It is shameful to suggest that Fascism is, or was, anti-Semitic.
Signor Gianfranco Fini, leader of the Italian Fascist Party, MSI. — The Guardian, Sept 16.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
MARRIED people rarely look at each other when they talk.
According to Bernard Asbell, author of The Book Of You, wedded couples don't feel the need to look into each other 's eyes when they are speaking because they feel at ease with each other.
POP recluse Morrissey blames his loveless lifestyle on his parents' unhappy marriage.
The star, who has just enjoyed a hit with the old Smiths hit How Soon Is Now?, suffers from bouts of depression.
Says Morrissey: ‘If as a child, you live in an environment where your parents don't get on, it's quite crippling.
Even if you can overcome it, it's very debilitating.’
LOVE SONG
WILD rockers Guns n' Roses took turns making love with a girl fan…while recording one of their songs.
The band invited the sexy beauty into their studio for the saucy romp — and taped her squeals of passion on the track.
The results can be heard on the band's song Rocket Queen.
Lead singer Axl Rose told Penthouse magazine: ‘We taped the song while we made love to the girl in the studio.
‘She started dancing around and we did it because it felt right.’
CHRIS De Burgh stunned owners of a top London recording studio when he told them: ‘I'm not working here again unless you change the carpet’.
The Irish singer-songwriter currently on a sell-out tour of Britain, booked the studio in South West London for two months but walked out after just two days, grumbling about the decor.
Reveals a source: ‘Chris reckoned he deserved the best as he was spending so much time and money in the place.’
HEART-THROB actor Keanu Reeves is a secret Shakespeare fan.
And he can't wait to start work on a movie version of the bard's famous play, Much Ado About Nothing.
Says Keanu, who has starred in The Bill and Ted's Bogus Journey: ‘I have been in Shakespeare twice before.
I love it!‘
 ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
WITH FRIENDS LIKE THESE…
I CANNOT remember looking forward to a Tory conference with such relish.
There are so many old friends to see, Lord Cecil, Lord Norman, Lord Nick, Lady Maggie and my old special chum, Kenny Baker.
We have so much in common, particularly our desire to see Mr Major out of No.10.
Far be it from me to give Mr Major advice, but I would suggest that insults towards any of these people, such as his recent attacks on ‘froth and bubble’ Lord Tebbit, will backfire.
There is such a difference  between him and these old timers.
They know what they stand for.
He doesn't.
They have a well of real belief from which to draw sustenance when times are tough.
He doesn't.
They're good with the English language.
He's not and would be wise to bite his tongue.
I do so hope he ignores my advice.
He usually does.
SEAL OF DISAPPROVAL
 ALASTAIR CAMPBELL
THERE has been much comment in Blackpool about the way John Smith claps his hands, elbows out from his side so that his arms form a bar across his chest, hands thundering into each other with short, sharp smacks.
And look out for his fellow party leader's odd clapping habits next week.
Mr Major keeps his elbows on the table, and claps his fingers together but not the base of his hands, which makes him look rather like a seal.
ALL the Labour pressure groups rush out daily conference bulletins.
In one yesterday, an article by Islington Council leader Margaret Hodge ended by describing her as the leader of the Association of Local Authorities since 1093.
This makes her at least 909 years old.
Well done.
BLAMING THE MESSENGERS
IT CAN'T be very long before a rapist or a murderer stands up in court and pleads in defence: ‘It wasn't me, Your Honour, it was the Press.’
If politicians can do it, why not child molesters, fraudsters or armed robbers?
Seeing a prostitute?
Blame the Press.
Being found out taking backhanders?
It's that darned circulation war.
Economy in crisis?
It's those telephoto lenses talking down the pound.
It's a marvellous catch-all alibi for failure and inadequacy.
Dave Mellor did not have it away with that  repellent tart.
The People did.
It wasn't Dave that took all those freebies, it was the Lancashire Evening Post.
Straight up, as the Minister said to the actress.
And that wasn't the Prime Minister, was it, being nasty about the Germans in the Commons last week but the editor of the Daily Beast?
Then poor wee Norrie Lamont had to go grovelling to the Germans — the same Norrie you heard saying all Krauts should be put down.
Newspaper technology is so sophisticated we can even make  politicians say things they don't know they're saying.
Amazing.
And absolute tosh, too.
When little squirts like John Gummer claim cartoonists, rather than chancellors and foreign secretaries, are damaging Anglo-German relations, you know  the full extent of the Government's bankruptcy.
I am told that Honest John has taken to phoning up editors of the papers that helped him regain power to plead with them not to be so beastly.
Pathetic.
Yet for all this newfound hostility to the most lickspittle Press in the ‘free’ world, what did Dave Mellor do on his first day out of the Cabinet?
Nip down to the Marriage Guidance Council?
Play Subbuteo with the kids?
No, he did four ‘exclusive’ interviews to help launch his rehabilitation campaign.
He'd have been better off getting them to help him compose a Dear Marje letter.
So would Major:
Dear Marje, I run a country but can't seem to do anything right.
Dear John, Make way for someone who can.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
CASH WILL DO NICELY
MANY Britons holidaying abroad are having difficulty cashing their sterling travellers' cheques.
Barclays tells me it is particularly difficult in Spain, Italy and and France.
To avoid trouble:
Take a few hundred pounds in local currency and your credit cards which can also be used to draw cash.
If you're going almost immediately, take travellers' cheques in dollars or the local currency.
If you still have a week before you leave, Eurocheques might be best for the Continent.
You use them just like ordinary cheques here to settle bills or draw cash.
And the Eurocheque guarantee card which comes with them will draw cash from dispensers.
Unlike travellers' cheques, you pay only for what you change.
But you do have to order a Eurocheque card in advance and there's a small fee.
Ask your bank for details.
TROUBLED leisure group Brent Walker, owners of bookies William Hill, could be making a fighting comeback.
A multi-million pound assets sale slashed the interest bill on its £1.4 billion debt.
That helped nearly halve losses to £79 million in the last six months
Quit call as Ratners profits dive
GERALD RATNER'S pay cut from £574,000 to £383,000 a year cut no ice with angry shareholders yesterday after the jewellery tycoon admitted that losses at the chain's near 2,000 shops ballooned from £17,700,000 to £30,600,000 in the six months to August.
His pay was branded ‘utterly obscene’ amid calls for him to quit and drop his name from the company.
Sales plunged by 14 per cent to £364 million, the annual meeting heard.
Price cuts failed to boost sales so profit margins have been slashed.
Ratners, hit by the recession, is still also suffering from Gerald Ratner's ill-advised ‘joke’ description of one of their cheap sherry decanter sets as ‘crap’.
Shares have slumped from nearly £4 apiece at their peak five years to ago to just 9p last night.
WIN A holiday in INDIA
SEE THE TAJ MAHAL BY MOONLIGHT
PLUS 1,000 KAMA SUTRA VIDEOS
OUR latest, free competition is a genuine labour of love.
It marks the release of a remarkable new film from Vision Video — Kama Sutra.
Our winner will receive a seven-day holiday in India and a copy of the video.
1,000 runners up will get the video — worth £12.99 — in the shops.
The first prize includes return flights London-Delhi, half-board hotel  accommodation and all transfers.
The winning couple will enjoy a breath-taking tour of Rajasthan in northern India.
They will take in the Taj Mahal and visit Udaipur, known as the City of Dreams.
They will also travel by painted elephant to the Amber Fort in Jaipur.
The Kama Sutra, for 2,000 years the Lover's lexicon, is beautifully brought to life in the new video.
Developed with expert knowledge of the original Indian text, it creates a sense of well-being and fulfilment that improves every aspect of your day-today living.
Yesterday, we asked you to name the Hindu God of Love.
Was it: 1.
03Shiva; 22.
Eros, or; 3.
Kama?
Today we want you to unscramble the name of an Indian city: JURIPA.
Write both your answers on a postcard.
Add your name and address and send the card to Vision Video Contest, Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TY.
Closing date is October 12.
The winners will be the first correct entries drawn.
Normal MGN rules apply.
There is no cash alternative.
You MUST be over 18 to enter.
ANIMAL MAGIC: Take an elephant ride to the Amber Fort in Jaipur
If it's seaweed it must mean rain
SIMON FERRARI
COME rain or shine, our weather never ceases to fascinate.
And it has fascinated Bill Foggitt for most of his 79 years.
Now Bill, veteran of scores of television and newspaper forecasts, has produced a book in which he opens a treasure-chest of weather fact, fiction and folklore.
Not for him the satellites, computers and massive back-up team the Michael Fishes, Suzanne Charltons and Alex Hills of TV depend upon for their forecasts.
For the predictions that have made him famous, Britain's top amateur weather-watcher would rather rely on a few observations of his own…
Such as the erratic behaviour of Blackie, his cat.
That, Bill says, is a sure sign that windy weather is on the way.
Or the pine cone hanging by his door.
He checks it each morning to see whether it is going to rain.
Seaweed, frogspawn, flies, spiders, squirrels, sheep — phenomena as unlikely as the weather itself — all help give Bill an insight into what lies ahead.
The Foggitt family have been monitoring the weather in Thirsk, North Yorkshire, since 1881.
Bill took over the job 25 years ago.
Among the weird and wacky weather facts he has accumulated over the years: IN the severe winter of 1814 the Thames froze over for nine weeks.
The ice was so thick that an elephant was able to walk down it — and did.
THE world's coldest place is Vostok in Antarctica with an average annual temperature of minus 57.8 deg C. THE driest place on earth is the Desierto de Atacama in Chile.
It did rain there in 1971…for the first time in about 400 years.
So much for Britain's drought!
Weatherwise by Bill Foggitt.
Published by Pavilion Books at £4.99.
RAIN CHECK: Bill relies on his seaweed
VIVE LE CHAMPION
ONLY one day to go to complete your great Daily Mirror souvenir wallchart of Nigel Mansell's champion year.
At last he has won the World Formula One title — and we're offering you this marvellous memento of his triumph.
Today's sticker is from the French Grand Prix he won to get back on course for the title with his sixth superb victory.
Tomorrow look out for the last two — from Germany and Britain's very own Silverstone.
They will complete your wallchart of the season in which Mansell won an amazing NINE Grands Prix, including the first five straight off, and went on to take the world crown for the first time.
He became only the seventh Briton to wear the champion's laurels.
Now you can capture all the glory with our stunning souvenir.
Every day this week we've been printing stickers of the Grands Prix that Mansell won.
South Africa, Mexico, Brazil, Spain, San Marino, France, Britain, Germany — he came first in them all as his mighty Renault-Williams car blazed to triumph after triumph.
Finally, second place in Hungary clinched the title — with an incredible five races still to run.
And Mansell didn't stop there, winning last Sunday's race in Portugal to break the record for most firsts in a season.
Each sticker shows a map of the Grand Prix circuit where he beat the world to win his crown, plus the finishing line-up of first, second and third, Mansell's average speed and the winning time.
GRAND FINALE: Nigel celebrates his superb victory in France
STICK AT IT: Keep on collecting our great Grand Prix stickers to complete your fabulous Nigel Mansell wallchart presented only with your Daily Mirror
PAULINE McLEOD
Limitless love of Emmanuelle
DIRECTOR Roman Polanski turns on the shock treatment in the passionate but quite perverse BITTER MOON (Cert 18; West End).
This compulsive movie revolves around a couple whose affair is triggered by the most intense sexual chemistry.
In order to keep their appetites satisfied, in a relationship seemingly destined for disaster, they go far beyond the boundaries regarded as normal.
In fact Polanski, unconventional at the best of times, takes us to the limit — and beyond.
His wife, Emmanuelle Seigner (above), plays the young dancer Mimi who has a bizarre relationship with middle-aged American writer Oscar (Peter Coyote).
Their obsessive story is told in graphic detail as they sail merrily along on an ocean liner.
This film may be a shocker, but as well as being very sexy it's also pretty funny at times.
If you want to witness the extremes of passion and jealousy, don't miss it.
PASSION: Emmanuelle Seigner in Bitter Moon
No, Calcutta!
SLUMMING SWAYZE IS OUT OF HIS DEPTH
PAULINE McLEOD
IT SETS out to be a film depicting immense human courage amid the horrific squalor of life in Calcutta's slums.
In CITY OF JOY (Cert 12; General), director Roland Joffe tries to bring home the pride and dignity of people existing in the meanest of mean streets.
Yet, regrettably, the lasting impression is of a merely superficial look at grinding poverty.
Patrick Swayze, movie star, Hollywood heart-throb and hardly a character actor of any consequence, plays Max Lowe, an American doctor escaping his past by wandering aimlessly around India.
He's not too taken with Calcutta and is planning to return to the United States when he's mugged and robbed of all his possessions.
Afterwards a rickshaw driver hauls him off to the City of Joy, a vast area of slums where the matronly Joan Bethel (Pauline Collins) runs a school.
She patches Max up and makes it known that she desperately needs his medical expertise.
However he just wants to get away as fast as he can.
But when a leper discloses that his blind wife is about to give birth, Max comes to the rescue.
So, suddenly he becomes a a sort of missionary Dr Kildare…caring, concerned, compassionate.
The trouble with this remarkable change of character is that Swayze simply lacks conviction.
Close your eyes and you just can't help imagining him in Dirty Dancing.
RAIN MAN: Wanderer Swayze revels in a Calcutta downpour
TOP TEN MOVIES
Last week in brackets
1
(-) Patriot Games
2
(1) Unforgiven
3
(2) A League Of Their Own
4
(-) California Man
5
(3) Housesitter
6
(4) Lethal Weapon 3
7
(5) Alien 3
8
(6) Beethoven
9
(-) Just Like A Woman
10
(7) Knight Moves
Compiled by MRIB 
THE NIGHT DE NIRO WANTED A PUNCH-UP AT THE SAVOY
Raging bull who made smoothie Barry Norman lose his cool
‘We squared up to each other like a scene from high noon’
TONY PURNELL
FOR 20 years Barry Norman has been the Mr Cool of movie reviewing.
But his job as presenter of BBC-1's Film ‘92 — despite the image of the smooth- tongued critic who doesn't pull his punches — has brought him some decidedly UN-cool moments off-screen.
Like when a drunken Richard Burton nodded off in the middle of a question; the time Warren Beatty kept him waiting for an hour-and-a-half…and the day Robert Raging Bull De Niro looked as if he was about to punch him on the nose.
The confrontation with De Niro came in the foyer of London's Savoy Hotel.
‘I clearly got up his nose when I asked him about a report which disputed his status as a big box-office draw,’ says Barry.
‘At the end of the interview he accused me of trying to stir up trouble, refused to shake my hand and stormed off.
‘I was irritated because all I got from him was yes-and-no answers.
I went after him to ask him what his problem was — and we squared up to each other like something out of High Noon.
‘In the end we parted quite amicably…but I can safely say you won't see him on my programme again!’
When Barry went to interview Richard Burton, the star's two biggest problems — booze and Liz Taylor — played their part.
‘Burton had been hitting the bottle because he was missing Liz.
‘They had just been reconciled for about the 18th time and when work forced them apart he started on the vodka.
‘He drank from the moment he got up and continued throughout the day, although it didn't show.
Unfortunately, when I got to interview him he fell asleep within five minutes.
Warren Beatty was among a number of superstars who make a habit of keeping people waiting.
‘They do it to show they are important, which is pathetic,’ says Barry.
‘When Warren did eventually turn up he was marvellously witty and entertaining — but unfortunately that was only when the cameras WEREN'T rolling.
‘When they were, it was difficult to get anything out of him — especially about his reputation as a lover.
‘Although he has been bad-mouthed and rubbished by lots of the women he has slept with, he never says anything about them, which I suppose is quite admirable.’
There were red faces when halfway through an interview it was noticed that veteran Hal Roach, who produced the Laurel and Hardy movies, had not buttoned up his trousers properly.
‘I got a women member of the production team to have a discreet word with his wife.
She immediately sprang to her feet and shouted at the top of her voice: ‘HEY HAL.
YOUR GODDAMN FLIES ARE UNDONE!’’
The BBC's film review programme is 21 years old today — and Barry, 59, has been presenting it for the last 20.
In that time he has sat through more than 10,000 films.But he confesses that he wouldn't be seen dead in a cinema.
‘I hate going to the pictures.
The manners are so bad.
People talk all the way through,’ he says.
So he watches most movies alone at private screenings.
‘I get criticised for not going to the cinema to see people's reaction — but I'm not there to review the audience.’
Bashful Barry believes it was his failure with girls as a schoolboy that set him on the path to fame as a film buff.
‘One of the reasons you went to the cinema when I was a teenager was to pick up girls, but I never seemed to have any luck.
‘My mates always seemed to score and spent their time snogging in the back row.
‘I was left sitting on my own with nothing to do but concentrate on the screen.
Looking back, I'm quite glad.’
Barry is the first to admit that most movie stars are a bit of a letdown in the flesh.
But beauties like Sophia Loren and Michelle Pfeiffer bring a sparkle to his baggy eyes.
‘Sophia is still sensational and Michelle is without doubt the most beautiful woman in movies at the moment.’
He was accused of flirting with her when he talked more about her looks than her movie Frankie and Johnny.
But it was not his racing heartbeat the mikes picked up — it was the blonde beauty's rumbling stomach.
‘It was so loud you couldn't ignore it.
I said: ‘I told you you should have had some breakfast’.’
Diana, Barry's wife of 35 years, doesn't mind him meeting all the great screen goddesses.
‘I think she feels I'm safe’, he says with that famous lopsided grin.
Since joining Film ‘72 on a three-week contract Barry Norman has watched an average five movies a week on behalf of the public.
He estimates he has spent a total of 20,000 hours in front of flickering images on a silver screen.
‘That's quite a chunk of my life spent in darkness,’ he says.
‘When I am on holiday I love to get away to the sun to a place where there is no television or telephone.
‘And definitely no cinema.’
YOU WERE LUCKY BARRY: Robert De Niro playing the tough guy in the movie Goodfellas.
Thankfully, Barry's Savoy grilling of the big man didn't end in blows
NORMAN CONQUESTS: Beatty kept him waiting, Pfeiffer he adores…and boozy Burton fell asleep
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
IT'S great that chivalry is not dead, even in East London.
How about a Royal response to the gesture of Hubert de Graft-Hammond in kissing Princess Di's hand.
He should be dubbed Sir Hubert.
As a psychiatric nurse he deserves a medal, anyway.
—.
WIN £10 if we use your Picture of the Week.
TWIT OF THE WEEK
WHAT a mixed-up lover was the tawny owl which broke into a nature park night after night to pay court to a wooden model of a female owl.
He got into her enclosure by wriggling through a ventilation hole — a real Too-wit to Woo.
—.
WIN £10 if we use your Twit of the Week.
Price of Tory failures
IN A week of industrial horror, more than 6,000 jobs have been lost to prove the depth of Britain's economic disaster.
And the Tory reaction to it shows their crude callousness.
Our motor industry has been brought to its knees with redundancies at Rolls-Royce and Ford.
And hundreds more have been given the chop in other areas.
Yet Treasury Minister Michael Portillo is demanding big cuts in dole pay, possibly even by halving the entitlement to six months.
That means we have to pay in misery yet again for the Government's mismanagement.
— L. Davis, Southampton.
WHAT a lot of heartache for minimal savings this new dole cuts plan is.
Perhaps it's time for the electorate to call a halt and put the MPs on unemployment benefit to see how they would manage.
—
IT'S astonishing that our government didn't admit that the German bank spent £17 billion trying to prop up the pound and the Italian lira during the recent crisis.
It seems a childish lie to blame ‘the hun’ for our troubles again.
Now surely our discredited government must go.
—
Walk tall
WHAT a contrast between compassionate Ian Botham and greedy millionaire Peter de Savary was highlighted at the start of Ian's 546 mile Land's End to Margate charity walk.
While on holiday we had to pay de Savary £4.95 each to visit Land's End, which he owns.
It should be public property and would be so if the millionaire had the same heart and principles of Beefy.
—
READY FOR LOVE
I WAS disturbed by two items in the Mirror's study of teenage sex.
They were that girls thought 16 was the right age to lose their virginity and that 75 per cent of them admitted to saying yes to sex when they really wanted to say no.
When a girl turns 16 it doesn't mean she should start having sex.
There is no right age for sex.
Girls shouldn't be ashamed to be virgins.
They should be proud.
I am 26 and have just lost my virginity after a year-long relationship.
I'm glad I waited.
I wanted to be sure that I was doing the right thing and wouldn't regret it.
For a sexual relationship you should be in love and ready.
—
Tramp vamp
IT WAS a meeting of the Lady and the Tramp and it looked like fun.
So let's hope Shirley Bassey turned out to be a Real Big Spender and put the Goldfinger on him to the tune of a few bob.
Pity she couldn't take him into the nightclub, Tramp.
Shame of cigs Mum
IT'S disgraceful that a woman turned her baby daughter into a nicotine addict by smoking 50 cigarettes a day while she was pregnant.
This mother has forced her tot to face up to the ordeal of withdrawal symptoms because she couldn't control her own habit.
She must have been warned of the dangers.
—
Vinny's fear
REPORTS about Vinny Jones being the hardest man in football make me smile.
When he played for Sheffield United he told a local newspaper that he dared not go into city nightspots in case he ran into any Wednesday supporters.
Some hard man.
— E. Welthorpe, Sheffield.
DISAPPEARING DOSH
I SHALL be so sorry to see the end of the florin.
A mini 10p piece will not be the same.
All our coinage, even our notes, diminish in size in proportion to what you can buy with it.
In a few years, I suppose we will have plastic discs like tiddlywinks and the £1 will be the lowest form of coin.
—
FOR a nation which fire-bombed Hamburg and destroyed Dresden to complain when the Germans planned to celebrate the anniversary of the V2 rocket is ridiculous.
—
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
Mickey mouse
SUEDE singing star Brett Anderson is terrified of going to a rave in case he gets beaten up.
Brett, at No.
25 with Metal Mickey says: ‘I'm too scared to attend raves.
The whole scene's very intimidating.
But I don't think I'm missing much.
It's all rubbish, anyway.’
THE LIMIT ALBUM REVIEW
Automatic For The People — R.E.M.
GEORGIA'S finest return after a two-year break with probably their best album yet.
Dark, witty and laced with mandolins, strings and acoustic guitars, the country-flavoured Automatic shows singer Michael Stipe and guitarist Peter Buck at their best.
It includes the new single Drive and Man On The Moon.
GARDENING
CHARLES LYTE
CHRIS BRICKELL toiled to make his book about 8,000 plants a blooming good read.
British gardeners thought it was and the RHS Encyclopedia of Plants and Flowers has now become a best seller.
Chris, director general of RHS, didn't stop there.
He has completed a second marathon as editor-in-chief of a companion volume, the RHS Encyclopedia of Gardening, out this week, which is a guide to designing and a garden and growing flowering plants, fruit, and veg.
PRETTY SOCIAL CLIMBERS
THE clematis tops the climbing plants' league.
But lesser known species give great displays.
The Mirror offers five varieties for £25.95, including VAT, p&p, instead of £40.
Or two for £13.95, including p&p and VAT, instead of £19.15.
They are: Clematis alpina Willy (left), masses of early pink nodding flowers; C. montana rubens Odorata, strongly scented cream-pink flowers; C. integrifolia Durandii, a tall herbaceous plant with deep violet-blue flowers; C. x fargesloides, a froth of green-white flowers, and C. texensis Duchess of Albany, deep pinkbells with a cherry bar.
Write to: Daily Mirror Clematis Offer, Blooms of Bressingham, Bressingham, Diss, Norfolk, IP22 2AB.
Cheques and POs to: MGN Clematis Offer.
Your name and address on the back, please.
Allow 28 days.
GETTING THE HANG OF IT
LINE a wire hanging basket with a layer of moist sphagnum moss about 3 cm thick when compressed.
FILL basket almost to the brim with a mix of one part sharp sand to three parts loam-based potting compost.
Prepare a hole for the plant in the centre.
INSERT the plant (here a Schlumbergera), spreading out the roots.
Infill with compost so that there are no air pockets around the roots.
Wait two to three days after planting before watering finished basket.
BE SAUCY WITH MINT
FRESH mint makes a piquant summer sauce which you can have even in the winter.
So says Richard Bailey of the National Vegetable Society.
His tip is to lift some mint roots now and lay them in boxes of garden soil or the contents of old Gro-bags.
Keep them moist in a warm greenhouse or a corner of the kitchen, for a steady supply of fresh sprigs.
And another Bailey mint tip is: after clearing the dead growth from the mint bed, burn straw on the surface to kill mint rust spores.
MIRROR PLANT
THE Paulownia is a flowering tree of grace and beauty which has enormous heart-shaped leaves and tubular, scented flowers.
P. tomentosa is the commonly grown because it's hardy.
It has violet flowers with yellow stripes inside the tube.
Another reliable  species is P. fargesii, with lilac and violet flowers, which are yellow inside.
Their problem is their flower buds tend to swell in the winter and can be damaged by frost or winds.
They do best in a deep, fertile soil that is well drained, but does not seriously dry out.
The position should be sunny, but not exposed to winds.
Sow seed in a cold frame in March and April, or from heeled cuttings taken in July and struck in a cold frame.
COTTON SOCKS AN APPLE CROP
Let us spray for bugs
DID the cotton wool on my apple tree twigs cause the fruit to rot?
THE cotton wool was created by woolly aphids and the rot by brown rot.
Give the tree a winter wash and after the blossom falls a treatment with a systemic insecticide.
Spray with benomylin mid-August and at the end of the month, to deal with brown rot.
THE leaves on my bonsai tree are falling off and some of the twigs have died.
Is there anything I can do to save it?
IT does sound as though your tree is in a bad way, or has died.
Confirm this by chipping the bark with your thumbnail.
If it is green underneath then it is it is probably alive and worth trying to rescue.
Remember that the majority of bonsai trees are hardy plants which normally grow outside.
So they tend not to thrive in dry centrally heated rooms.
Ideally, they should be kept in the open where they get good light, but are not exposed to severe winds.
They can be brought indoors for display for short periods, particularly those that blossom, such as cherries.
Young plants should be weed free, with the compost kept moist, and fed every two weeks in the growing season with half-strength liquid fertiliser.
During the autumn and winter keep the compost from drying out completely, which means providing some kind of protection over the plant.
WE live in Blackpool and have a Harry Lauder's Walking Stick growing in a tub, but all the leaves are shrivelled round the edges and look a mess.
What is the matter?
IT could be that your Corylus avellana Contorta is being attacked by aphids.
So spray it with a contact insecticide.
But the explanation may be simpler.
The leaves may have been scorched by the salt in the wind, especially those strong winds that often blow in to Blackpool off the sea.
See if you can place your bush some where sheltered from the wind.
TROUBLE WITH RUBBLE
A PIECE of ground by my house is 16ft wide and covered by tarmac with more than12ins of hardcore.
Can I turn it into a bed without removing the tarmac and hardcore?
THE only solution seems to convert the wide strip into a raised bed, contained within brick walls.
Try to remove the tarmac as it is hostile to plant roots.
The rubble would make good drainage.
The raised bed should provide at least 12 inches of soil.
More would be better.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
DAVID KERR
FANCY going to France to stock up for Christmas?
Hoverspeed has introduced a £35 same-day or 24-hour return for a car and up to five passengers on its Folkestone to Boulogne route, Sundays to Thursdays.
Non-landing standby trips are offered at £1 per person on some afternoon Sea-Cat routes.
Ring 0304 240241.
SEE the Emerald Isle for £10 (£20 return) with B&I Line until December 17.
Go from London and Birmingham to Dublin, in conjunction with Slattery's Coaches and Bus Eireann Superbus.
Details: 051 227 3456.
SURFIN' SAFARI
Have a whale of a time in San Diego
DAVID KERR
LYNN DALY
THE giraffe blinked, bent slowly forward and gingerly took the carrot from my outstretched arm.
Behind her, in the distant heat haze, two thirsty rhinos raised a wall of dust as they lumbered past some waterbuck to a watering hole.
It felt like Africa.
It looked like Africa.
In fact, it was deepest California.
San Diego Wild Animal Park is the best kind of ‘zoo’— one where the people are rounded up and the animals wander free.
Herds of antelope and gazelle and families of gorillas and cheetahs roam alongside flocks of flamingos, pelicans and ostriches.
The park is a sanctuary for 41 endangered species.
The city itself, with more than a million people, is America's seventh largest and where California began in 1542.
Play
Unlike L.A., the pace is relaxed.
The streets are clean, there's no smog to dull the sunshine, and the skyscrapers don't overpower.
Everywhere there is water — to play on, to get about on, to work on.
The resort is the U.S. Navy's Pacific base but its harbour is still one of the most beautiful in the world.
Close by are 70 miles of white, sandy beaches — the kind that inspired the Beach Boys.
Don't be put off by Garbage Beach, by the way — it's a surfers' paradise.
They say if it can be done on water, it can be done on Mission Bay, the largest aquatic playground in the world.
There's more water at Sea World where kids can touch, feed and learn about anything fishy.
Large or small, visitors love the big daddy of 'em all — Shamu the killer whale, guaranteed to give the spellbound audience a good soaking.
You can get around on rumbling red trams and harbour ferries.
Or, unlike some big U.S. cities, you can walk.
Mountain ranges, the desert and Palm Springs are just a few hours' drive away.
And Mexico is a mere 20-minute jaunt.
Fifteen minutes up the coast is La Jolle (pronounced La Hoya), with its smart boutiques, beautiful beaches, windswept bluffs, spectacular hillside homes and some great places to eat.
Other musts are the world-famous San Diego Zoo, the old town, and the San Diego missions which echo the city's Spanish heritage.
Take a trip, too, across the spectacular curving bridge to Coronado.
There you'll find more beaches and upmarket restaurants and the 104year-old Hotel Del Coronado frequented by Marilyn Monroe in Some Like It Hot.
San Diego has it all — even that.
If you're California dreaming, there's nowhere better.
FACT BOX
YOU can fly North-west Airlines from Gatwick to San Diego via Minneapolis.
Fly-drives start from £396pp.
Call 0424 224400.
Cosmos packages start from £709 for holidays combining San Diego with Palm Springs or Long Beach.
Call 0272 227799.
British Airways include San Diego in multi-centre packages from £799.
Call 081 897 4000 for more details.
FLIPPIN' GREAT: Shamu the killer whale is a star turn at San Diego
TRACKS OF A CHAMPION
THESE last two great stickers complete your superb Daily Mirror souvenir wallchart of Nigel Mansell's famous world Formula One championship victory.
Today's stickers cover his wins in Germany and that historic day Silverstone saluted its very own British champion.
You now have a complete record of the super season in which Mansell became only the seventh Briton of all time to wear the champion's laurels.
His name will now go down in history alongside Mike Hawthorn, Graham Hill, Jim Clark, John Surtees, Jackie Stewart and James Hunt.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
PROFIT HITS A ROCCO
ROCCO Forte, boss of hotel giant Forte, claims the group has ‘started to turn the corner.’
Since July profits have picked up slightly for the first time in 18 months.
But they have a long way to recover.
They crashed by 43 per cent to £24 million in the six months to July 31.
Because of the recession only six in ten of beds in the group's 839 hotels were occupied compared with seven a year ago.
To add to Rocco's woes, firms have been spending less on functions while he had to splash out £160 million on tarting up his properties, which include the Cafe Royal and the Waldorf.
At a time of sky-high interest this has been pretty painful.
FORTE: Cutting costs
THE Halifax has cut the monthly interest rate on its VISA card from 1.95 per cent to 1.85 per cent.
The rate includes an annual £10 fee.
The cut brings Halifax in line with Barclaycard's 1.85 per cent.
Access charge 1.9 per cent and have an annual fee of £12.
Battle for Trafalgar
HOPES of a Chinese takeaway made shares of Trafalgar House, which owns Cunard and the QE2, jump 29p to 90p yesterday when Hongkong Land snapped up 15 per cent of the company.
Hong Kong Land, owned by big Hong-Kong-based trading group Jardine Matheson, paid £79 million for the stake and wants to buy more.
Trafalgar shares have slumped from a peak of £3.96 three years ago as the recession has bitten into profits.
Hopes of a further interest rate cut boosted most other shares.
The FTSE index climbed 19.3 to 2,572.3.
I'd walk a million miles with Beefy
BRAVERY OF THE SICK SOCCER STAR ON BOTHAM'S MARCH
SAYS MIRACLE MAN CHRIS
CHRISTINE GARBUTT
EVERY step Chris Garland takes along the road demands enormous will-power.
And every mile he covers is a triumph.
Some of Britain's fittest sportsmen — among them Gary Lineker, Will Carling, Graham Gooch and Mike Gatting — are joining Ian Botham on his South Coast charity walk.
Beefy's punishing pace is a tough challenge for even the best as he strides along on his 22-day trek from Land's End to Margate.
But Seventies soccer star Chris didn't just find it hard.
He found it almost impossible.
For Chris, 44, has Parkinson's Disease.
He has to concentrate on every yard.
Yet he has walked 130 miles with Botham and is coming back for more next week.
‘I'm doing it,’ he says excitedly.
‘I can't always keep up with the old bugger, but I'm never far behind.’
Three years ago, the ex-Chelsea, Leicester and Bristol City striker walked with a stoop and kept tripping over.
He pretended to his family and friends that his doddering gait was due to old soccer injuries.
But after one fall too many, he went to the doctor and found out the truth.
He had the progressive nerve disease, which causes tremors and rigid muscles.
‘At first I tried to keep it a secret from my wife and three children,’ says Chris.
‘But in the end they had to know.
‘There are 100,000 people in Britain with Parkinson's Disease.
I've come to walk with Beefy — not just to prove to myself that I can, but to bring this terrible disease out in the open.
To help sufferers think positively.
‘But it's hard, it's bloody hard.’
He and Botham have been friends for 20 years, and Chris says: ‘He is a walking miracle.
What he has done for leukaemia research is brilliant — and what he has done for me is give me my confidence back.
‘That man has the biggest heart I know.’
WHERE TO SEE BOTH TODAY
Ian Botham is walking the 22 miles of Devon coast from Topsham to Sidmouth.
TOMORROW he heads for Bridport in Dorset — a real 26-mile marathon.
On SUNDAY it's on to Weymouth to chalk up another 19 miles.
And on MONDAY he tackles the 23-mile stretch to Lytchett Minster, with Bournemouth beckoning.
Beefy won't be able to put his blistered feet up until he arrives in Margate on October 16.
IN DEMAND: Signing for Dave Sexton's Chelsea
INVINCIBLE: Parkinson's Disease could not stop soccer star Chris Garland from walking 130 miles with Botham
You're on a winner with the DAILY MIRROR
YOUR super Daily Mirror really does make dreams come true!
The winners of our Vernons Live Like a Pools Winner contest in September will all be getting the chance to sample the high life.
Carol Impey, of London, wins a trip for two to Hollywood.
Dorothy Snook, of Bristol, will be on cloud nine after a stay at the Hereford Moat Hotel, which includes flying lessons, a balloon flight and a helicopter lesson.
B. Clark, from Dorchester, will hopefully be backing a winner at the Breeders Cup races in Florida, while Lynne Orchard, of Atherstone, jets off to St Lucia.
And Mrs N. Hart, of Dagenham, and 100 friends will be dancing the night away with the rich and famous at Stringfellows nightclub in London.
Twenty readers plus their partners had ringside seat at the Daily Mirror sponsored fight between Chris Eubank and Tony Thornton after winning our boxing competition in September.
They were:
It was 30 years ago today
1962 LOVE ME DO THEY SAID…
AND WE DID, WE DID 1992
The Beatles taught the world to play
DAVID HANCOCK
THEY were fresh-faced and cute and heralded the Swinging Sixties.
Nothing would ever be the same again.
The nation were to take the Beatles to their hearts.
But it was months before anyone took them seriously.
THEN the Daily Mirror's Donald Zec announced the birth of Beatlemania.
The screaming at one their concerts he wrote ‘pierced the recoiling eardrums like the shriek of ten thousand bo'suns whistles blasting through a wind tunnel.’
The ‘lovable mop tops’ had arrived.
BUT the Fab Four's first record was more of a MISS than a hit.
In 1962 Love Me Do reached only 17 in the charts.
The Liverpool group were up against Elvis Presley, Frank Ifield and evergreen Cliff Richard.
What sort of world was it then?
We look at Britain 30 years ago — the year that the Beatles — and modern Britain — was born.
ON the eve of the Swinging Sixties, Britain was still a homely and quirky sort of place.
Adverts in the Mirror urged you to: Eat More Potatoes — Enjoy them Today!
And the 6d (2 1/2 p) Woman's Mirror had FREE!…
All the best in SUET cookery!
The Beatles were pitched against our own Cliff Richard…yes, Cliff.
He was at No 6 with It'll Be Me and had his own  column in the Mirror, which cost a mere 3d (1 1/4p).
Sexy Cliff had his own fans.
Asked how British and American teenagers compared, he wrote:
‘Truly I don't think there is any difference.
They all look alike.
They dress alike.
But I must say some of the American girls are slightly more polite…
‘A few of them actually ASKED if I would mind having the clothes ripped off my back.
I mean, really.’
Really…everything was a shock.
And everything was so different from today.
Most people got their music from the BBC radio's Light Programme.
TV was black and white — there was no BBC 2 no Channel Four and even ITV was still fairly new.
But some things on the box had a familiar ring.
Such as Coronation Street then billed as ‘a northern serial’.
But the big soap of the time was Emergency Ward 10, which gripped the nation every Tuesday night.
But if you were ‘with it’ you watched the Saturday pop show Thank Your Lucky Stars which was hosted by Brian Matthew.
It made a star out of Birmingham's Janice Nicholls who, when she liked a record, said: ‘Oi'll give it foive’ in a Brummy twang.
It became a nationwide catchphrase.
The other great catchphrase at the time was ‘swingin', dodgy’ made famous by comic Norman Vaughan the host of Sunday night's Palladium Show.
But while mum and dad stayed in to watch the telly, young people were at the pub, drinking light ale at 10p a time.
A packet of cigarettes was just 23p.
The car every Beatles' fan craved Mini Cooper.
It was a passport to success with girls in a time when discos were unknown and most couples did their courting on the back row of the pictures on Saturday night.
And the week the Beatles released their first single, a cinema legend was born…the first James Bond film, Dr. No, with newcomer Sean Connery and a daringly bikini-clad Ursula Andress.
Another movie, Cleopatra, starred Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton, whose on-off affair was the greatest love story of the Sixties.
You could visit ‘the flicks’ for just 10p.
To listen to the Beatles on a Ferguson ‘7 transistor’ portable radio would cost 12 1/2 guineas.
And every teenager's dream — a Dansette autochanger record player — was 17 guineas.
Confused?
Well, a guinea was £1 1s.
Still confused?
Well that's £1.05p in today's money.
And it was all in the days before credit cards, when hire purchase was king.
Girls would save like mad for the latest clothes from Britain's new fashion queen Mary Quant.
Her London shop Bazaar sold ‘shocking’ evening dresses in black and white OILSKIN.
Later she was to launch the mini-dress on the world.
For mums it was the era of the cheap washing machine that would free them from drudgery.
And the man to do that was John Bloomm, whose Rolls Razor company brought automated washing within the reach of ordinary people and made him a tycoon worth millions.
Two years later the company's crash was just as spectacular and Bloom was fined £30,000 on charges in connection with the affair.
But the big news of the day that gave everyone sleepless nights was the Cuba Missile Crisis.
The Soviets flexed their muscles over the right to have a missile bases on America's doorstep.
And for a while, the world looked terrifyingly on the edge of nuclear war.
Plenty for the politicians to talk about.
But they had something else on their minds too, 30 years ago.
The big question all politicians were debating was…the Common Market and whether Britain should be at the heart of Europe or not.
It seems some things never change.
TOP TEN
THE Top Ten the week Love Me Do was released: 1.
Telstar — The Tornadoes. 2.
She's Not You — Elvis Presley. 3.
Sheila — Tommy Roe.
4.
The Loco-Motion — Litte Eva.
5.
IT might as well rain until September — Carole King.
6.
It'll Be Me — Cliff Richard.
7.
I Remember You — Frank Ifield.
8.
You Don't Know Me — Ray Charles.
9.
Don't That Beat All — Adam Faith.
10.
Sealed With a Kiss — Brian Hyland 
WRECK ‘N’ ROLL: The Beatles were to leave Liverpool and conquer the world
ROCKIN' ROLE: The Fab Four made ‘mop top’ haircuts fashionable…and turned on a generation
SHELF LIFE
JAN WALSH
FILLED WITH DANGER
PERILS THAT MAY LURK IN YOUR ‘FRESH-CUT’ SARNIE
WHEN you get a gippy tummy, which meal are you more likely to blame — last night's curry, or yesterday's sandwich lunch?
You'd probably be wrong.
We now munch four million sandwiches a day.
But those innocent-looking sarnies could be riddled with bacteria, such as listeria, Salmonella and Staphylococcus.
And because the filling in a sandwich isn't cooked before it's served, the bugs can easily multiply to give a nasty bout of food poisoning.
In the latest food poisoning epidemic, which made at least 30 people ill in a private West Country hospital two weeks ago, sandwiches are the prime suspects.
The guilty fillings are probably chicken and egg mayonnaise.
Investigations are going on, but a health official said: ‘The sandwiches were prepared by 10am and often remained on display in a warm room until 10 at night.’
New food safety laws say sandwiches must be kept refrigerated in delivery vans and shops, unless sold within four hours of being made.
But health and safety experts say the law is flouted regularly by traders, for example: Environmental health officers in Mid-Bedfordshire found sandwiches being delivered to a petrol station in the back of a car, instead of a refrigerated van.
And hospital volunteers in Devon sold sandwiches which had been chilled, but then displayed through the day with no refrigeration.
The latest government figures show that incidents of Salmonella, the most common type of food poisoning, reached an all-time high last month, even higher than during the Salmonella-in-eggs scandal.
In six hours in a warm environment four bugs in a moist sandwich will multiply to more than a million — the danger level for causing illness.
If kept under refrigeration, experts advise that sandwiches can be safely eaten within two days of being made.
Most big shops stick to this.
But the Daily Mirror found a Hampshire petrol station selling sandwiches with an ‘eat-by’ date four days ahead.
Poor hygiene and handling are also to blame for food poisoning.
New laws apply to all food handlers.
But while workers in food factories are regularly inspected, sandwiches are often made by small firms and even one-man-bands.
Three years ago the Government promised all food workers would be trained.
But it has dragged its heels on implementing a training scheme.
‘There are too many people around who think it's easy to make sandwiches and will set up in a garden shed, almost,’ said Jim Winship, director of the British Sandwich Association.
‘What they don't realise is that they are dealing with a high-risk food product,’ he warned.
In the West Midlands, a survey of chicken, egg and meat sandwiches from supermarkets, petrol stations, bakers and sandwich bars found 27 out of 32 were contaminated.
A survey in Mid-Bedfordshire last month found 19 out of 46 sandwiches from petrol stations contained listeria.
THE SAFEST
CORNED BEEF: As long as it's not infected with botulism (which is pretty rare), corned beef is sterile from the tin and so it's unusual to find high bug counts.
CHEESE AND TOMATO: Hard cheese isn't moist enough to encourage bugs to grow, and tomatoes are rarely contaminated from their greenhouses.
TUNA: Tinned tuna, as long as it goes straight into the sandwich after opening, is virtually bug-free.
Tinned sardines are similar.
THE DEADLIEST
CHICKEN, SALAD AND MAYONNAISE: Poorly cooked chicken can contain Salmonella and listeria.
Badly washed salad carries bugs, which breed in mayonnaise.
EGG MAYONNAISE AND CRESS: Risk of cross-contamination from egg shells to mayonnaise.
Risk of Salmonella in undercooked eggs, bacteria in cress.
PRAWNS IN DRESSING: Prawns can be very risky if they haven't been kept at the right temperature.
In a moist filling the bugs could multiply very fast.
SNACK ATTACK: If your sandwich isn't kept cool it could bite back
CASEBOOK 1
WE ALL know some shops are struggling to survive.
But sometimes they go over the top with tricks to get you to buy.
One well-known DIY store promised ‘20 per cent off’ when some of its prices had actually gone up.
The price used as the original price had been bumped up so that the 20 per cent off claim could be made.
But the final sale price was still pounds more than it had been in normal trading the month before.
Tricks like this aren't just misleading to customers, they're also unfair on rival traders trying to be honest.
If YOU spot a price reduction that you think is really a price increase, let us know.
We'll pass the information on to the trading watchdogs.
CASEBOOK 2
THOUSANDS of us complain about the size of our gas bill, but occasionally you may find your meter is wrong.
If you suspect yours is faulty you can ask your gas region to replace it.
You must then send the old one to the Department of Energy Testing Station.
If you're right, you'll get a refund.
But if you're wrong, you'll have to pay a fee of around £30.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
MEAN STREET BOYZ
ANGEL VOICES AMID DEATH AND DRUGS IN BLOOD ALLEY
BOYZ II MEN are America's hottest new band, with a single End Of The Road, which has been at No.1 there for the last NINE weeks,
But the  group's Fifties-style, sweet harmony singing is in complete contrast to their background- the brutal streets of Philadelphia where many of their friends and family have been victims of violence or bloody murder.
Today the four Boyz whose  single is at no. 4 in our chart, flew into Britain for their first ever performance here, with their front-man Michael McCary insists that it will never turn him into a snob.
He is so true to his roots that he is buying his first home in ‘mean street,’ Philadelphia, the tough district where his father and several friends were killed.
Speaking to me in New Orleans during a break in filming a TV show Michael said: ‘It's my home I don't want to move out.
I refuse to be scared of living there.’
But he has good cause for fear — his dad was gunned to death in the street there only three years ago.
Michael adds: ‘All killings are stupid but this was more senseless than most.
‘Dad had won £7,000 in a lottery and the word got out.
He was ambushed a few hours later and shot dead.
‘But the robbers killed him for nothing.
He had not cashed in his winning ticket.
‘Also, several friends have died violently in drug battles.
Unfortunately that kind of life is getting to be a way of death now.’
‘It made me real hard — nothing shocks me now.
I can understand how my friends got mixed up in all that.
When times are bad it can be a very savage choice people have to make — either break the law or go broke.’
A few months ago one of the band's closest friends Roderick Roundtree was  murdered in a shoot-out in Chicago hotel room.
Michaels and the three other Boyz: Shawn Stockman, Nathan Morris and Wayna Morris insist that he was not the victim of a mob feud.
Says Michael: ‘It was  nothing to do with gang wars.
He was shot trying to stop some guys who came to steal a lot of our money.
‘It was a terrible shock because he was a real father figure and taught us a lot.
There's not a day goes by that we don't think of him.’
The sweet-voiced harmony group, whose first LP Cooleyhighharmony sold 4.5 million copies this year, began life by busking on Philadelphia sidewalks.
But their hard, streetwise experience gave their big break.
Record mogul Michael Bivins was in town to see a show and the Boyz managed to sneak past security guards pinch a back-stage pass and reach the man himself.
Bivins listened to their music in his dressing room and a few months later signed them up.
The rest is history.
‘50'S STYLE: Clockwise from top left, Wanya Morris, Michael McCary, Shawn Stockman and Nate Morris
R.E.M.
SLAM FAME GAME
CHARTBUSTERS R.E.M.
have hit out at their own fans — for idolising the ultra-cool group.
The band, who have shot to No. 11 with Drive, say they are sick of being mobbed wherever they go.
Says singer Michael Stipe: ‘The very weird religion of celebrity scares me.
It's like people are creating fake heroes because they don't have any real ones.
‘The politicians have failed us, religion has failed us, so who do people turn to?
Celebrities.
It's wrong.’
But despite their superstar status, the band refuse to change their lifestyle and have snubbed the showbiz establishment — turning up to collect a recent award in their pyjamas.
guitarist Peter Buck says: ‘We don't have bodyguards.
We never have and never will — and we hate riding in limos.
‘None of us take the music biz too seriously.
We're happiest driving around in beat-up old cars.’
PUNCHY PATTY
SINGER Patty Smyth attacked two policeman after she caught them beating up a friend in New York.
The American star, who was later arrested for harassing an officer, hurled herself at the cops as she rushed to the aide of her pal.
Patty, who with ex-Eagle star Don Henley, is at No. 25 with Sometimes Love Just Ain't Enough says: ‘It was the most frightening experience of my life watching someone you love getting kicked about.
‘I just couldn't stop myself from getting involved in the brawl.
‘I started screaming so loudly that crowds ran to the scene which eventually made the policemen stop.’
Reveals Patty: ‘My friend was badly injured with bruised ribs, black eyes and a fat lip.
It was a totally unprovoked attack and in the end the police were prosecuted for assault.
EAST 17 star Brian Harvey was almost forced to scrap £50,000 worth of TV appearances after finding himself covered in mysterious red blotches.
He feared he had chicken pox and would have to cancel his debut appearance on Top Of The Pops and other shows.
But the blotches turned out to be the result of a take-away chicken meal.
Said Harvey, at No. 22 with House Of Love: ‘The doc told me it was just a food allergy.’
GIBBS' GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
CLASSIC QUOTE
IT'S up to us to produce better movies.
— Lloyd Kaufman, producer of Stuff Stephanie in The Incinerator.
Why Di's in the dosh!
GIFTS BRING A FORTUNE
WHEN Fergie finally divorces Prince Andrew, she's going to need as much Royal cash as she can lay her hands on.
But if the worst comes to the worst for Princess Di, money won't be a problem.
For we can reveal that she is extremely rich in her own right.
When Business Age magazine published their list of the richest women in Britain this week, they left Diana's name off it — because they didn't know she had any dosh of her own.
But she has — lots.
OK, she isn't quite in the Chrissie Goulandris league (£290 million), but we reckon she's probably around the 133rd richest woman in the country — just pipping Old Ma Thatcher with her £9.5 million.
How come she's so loaded?
Her dad, Earl Spencer, gave Di a present of £1 million.
She also got an inheritance from a family trust set up by her American great-grandmother, Frances Work.
Aged 18, she was given £50,000 from the fund to buy her famous Colherne Court flat, where she lived until her engagement to Charles.
It was sold after the wedding for twice the price and the money was invested.
On top of that, other money from the fund was left untouched and has built up substantial interest.
And the princess has accepted gifts of jewellery worth several million pounds.
One set of jewels from the Sultan of Oman is worth more than £1 million, and friends have added to her collections of silverware and porcelain.
In all, we reckon she's worth around £10 million.
Isn't old Squidgy worth every penny?
IONE IN THE EYE FROM DAD
FATHER'S PRIDE: Here's Ione Skye, dishy daughter of Sixties relic Donovan.
We all, of course, would like to go Skye diving.
WIN THE SUPER SUMMERSLAM ‘92 VIDEO
Get to grips with the mightiest prizes
SIGNED BY THE KINGS OF THE RING
NOW you can see the fearsome fighters of the WWF in your own home — if you're brave enough to let in a muscular gang of mighty strong men.
They are in WWF SummerSlam ‘92, a new video, released today by Silvervision (£14.99).
And the 20 winners of this gripping contest will each get one free — and signed by Macho Man Randy Savage, Bret ‘Hit Man’ Hart and Legion of Doom.
PLUS — 250 runners-up each get the video.
WWF SummerSlam ‘92 captures ALL 11 matches from the spectacular Wembley event.
See World Champion Macho Man Randy Savage put his belt on the line in the main event against The Ultimate Warrior.
Catch the great British Bulldog as he takes on brother-in-law Bret ‘Hit Man’ Hart.
Just answer our question on a postcard.
Add your name and address and send it to: WWF video contest, Daily Mirror, Department D31, Po Box 1, Loughborough, LE11 0WS.
WHO fought his brother-in-law at SummerSlam ‘92?
Closing date is October 14.
First correct entries drawn win.
Normal MGN rules apply.
There is no cash alternative.
You may be sent details of Silvervision special offers as a result of your entry.
PLUS GRAB TWO FREE PACKS OF WRESTLING CARDS
WRESTLING fans!
Here's what you've been waiting for.
Part Two of Merlin's fabulous WWF Gold Series Collector cards hits the shops next week — and thanks to this super EXCLUSIVE Daily Mirror offer, you can get your hands on a whole pack of eight cards, worth 30p, absolutely free.
The new series kicks off with brilliant action shots taken at SummerSlam, the record breaking Wembley event.
Ultimate Warrior, Brett ‘Hit Man’ Hart, The Undertaker are all seen in close up action during their SummerSlam flare-ups.
And there are the latest shots of all the top WWF Superstars including, for the first time, the new macho powerhouse, Razor Ramon.
Lots of you are collecting Gold Series Part One.
Now you can get going with Part Two.
There are two separate tokens this week.
They will entitle you to one eight-pack of Gold Series Part Two and, as a special bonus, one eight-pack of Part One worth 30p each PLUS a copy of the brand new official WWF merchandise catalogue from Squared Circle.
This brings together all your favourite WWF merchandise so you can select and shop at your leisure -and find plenty of Christmas gift ideas into the bargain.
The first token appears tomorrow.
Later this week we'll tell you how to use it.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
SCOTTISH TV has hit the jackpot with profits nearly doubled to £2.2 million in six months.
The station which renewed its licence for only £2,000 a year made bumper sales to the ITV network with Taggart and Wheel of Fortune.
THE Halifax reports that because it is so hard to move house, 41 per cent of borrowers made major improvements last year compared with 37 per the year before.
DID YOU KNOW?
AN AMERICAN researcher compiled a list of 2,241 words in English all of which meant being drunk.
 DIANA PUSHED HER FROM BEHIND…
RAINE WENT FLYING ON TO HER KNEES
EXCLUSIVE: The incredible feuding Spencers…by girl friday to the countess
SUE INGRAM/NOREEN TAYLOR
FEW women were closer to Raine, Countess Spencer, throughout her second marriage than her personal assistant and confidante, Sue Ingram.
For many years she helped Raine and her late husband, Earl Spencer, father of the Princess of Wales, run Althorp in Northamptonshire — and became a trusted friend.
But what Sue saw and heard there bore little resemblance to the popularly-held view of the Spencer family.
For years she could only look on and sympathise with Lady Spencer as the ‘spiteful stepmother’ stories about her grew unchecked.
‘She was one of the nicest, kindest of people,’ says Sue, a 34-year-old mother of three.
‘It made me so angry to see her stepchildren cast as innocents while she was made out to be a dragon.’
Until now, the story of one of the most emotionally-charged moments at Althorp, involving the Princess of Wales, has never been told.
Doubtless it will shock, but it may also remind us that even a princess of poise can crack under the strain of family tensions.
I HAD never seen such an expression on the Princess of Wales's face before.
She was flushed with rage, furious.
I watched from below as she followed her stepmother Raine down the passage in Althorp House that connected the old nursery with the grand staircase.
At the end of the passage, just as Raine was about to descend the short flight of stairs to the landing, Diana shot forward.
I could barely believe what I was seeing.
Diana pushed Raine, who went flying and fell forward on to her knees.
She crashed down the four steps, ending up in a heap on the landing.
Her ladyship looked frightened, shocked.
Before she could struggle to her feet, Diana neatly sidestepped her bruised stepmother and marched off without a word or a backward glance.
I wanted to run upstairs and ask Raine if she was all right, but I was too embarrassed.
Like the other servants who had witnessed the incident, I just looked away, pretending nothing had happened.
Later, in her bedroom, her ladyship showed me her bruises and asked: ‘Sue, what has happened to Diana?
Why such an outburst?
I just do not understand that girl.’
The amazing scene took place in September 1989, on the eve of Diana's brother Charles's marriage to Victoria Lockwood.
There was much about the Spencer children that I would never understand, especially their relationship with Raine.
That weekend had been more strained than usual because Frances Shand Kydd — Earl Spencer's former wife, and mother of his four children — was for the first time under the same roof as Raine.
I had been working for the Countess as a personal assistant since she married the Earl in 1976.
And while I adored them both, I was closer to her ladyship.
She was kind and courteous, with an  exhilarating personality — nothing like the hard, wicked stepmother she had been portrayed as.
Quite why her four stepchildren, Sarah, Jane, Diana and Charles, loathed her I could never understand.
I suppose that to them she represented a fast, efficient approach to life that jarred with their more laid-back, aristocratic one.
I watched as they laughed behind her back, mocked her, walked out of rooms when she appeared, and looked the other way when she spoke to them.
Salt was poured into her drinking water, silly letters were sent to her, and any attempt to win their friendship was met with sullen silences or rebuffs.
It seemed to me that their actions were always calculated to hurt.
Christmas cards would be sent to ‘Darling Daddy and Raine’.
And while she always spent a great deal of time and money on their Christmas presents, they only ever sent her a packet of scented drawer liners or a box of soap.
‘Oh look, Sue,’ her ladyship would laugh, ‘more drawer liners.
Give them to the charity bazaar.’
I first met her when she began coming to Althorp and into the Northampton hairdressing salon where I worked.
I was a teenager — and she was a 46-year-old mother of four, the former wife of the Earl of Dartmouth, with a half-page of her achievements listed in Who's Who.
She had been everywhere, met everyone, was terribly glamorous and unlike anyone I had ever met.
Some people might have found her demanding, a bit of a perfectionist, but I didn't.
Like her, I hated sloppiness, laziness and second-best.
Later I began to go to Althorp to do her hair and gradually became involved in her life.
Lady Diana's engagement to Prince Charles really put Althorp on the map, and it became a full-time job for me.
In the end I was answering press inquiries and organising banquets and fund-raising functions.
The job began to take over my life, and my first marriage ended in divorce.
I had three children, a home to run…and tunnel vision as far as the Spencers were concerned.
I adored being with them.
From the time they woke at Althorp, I was by their side.
Raine used to say I was like another daughter.
But sometimes the Earl would ring me at home at night and ask me to drive back to Althorp because the Countess was in floods of tears.
‘Sue,’ he would say, ‘her ladyship is crying, depressed and in the most awful state.
Please help.’
I'd go round and say: ‘Now, what's all this?
You're upsetting his lordship, so stop the tears: they are not going to solve anything.’
Her tears were usually the result of some slight from her stepchildren.
‘Oh, I don't know why I bother, Sue,’ she would say.
‘Nothing is ever going to change their feelings towards me.
‘I've tried everything, so why go on trying to understand their hostile behaviour?
I should just concentrate on my own children.’
Yet Raine had not stolen their father from their mother — his first wife, Frances, had left years ago.
Nor had she tried to take their mother's place in their affections.
All she wanted was to be their friend, but they responded by ridiculing her.
Lady Sarah once asked me: ‘Sue, tell me, what does my step-mother look like with wet hair?’
I just told her that she looked like everyone else, although I'm sure that wasn't what she wanted to hear.
Princess Diana's relationship with her step-mother had deteriorated to an all-time low, culminating in that outburst which led to Raine's fall downstairs.
The Countess had arranged a family tea party in the nursery, and Diana's mother, Frances, was a guest.
Perhaps Diana felt that her mother had been ignored or should have been the one playing hostess.
I can't think of any other explanation for the flare-up.
Other scenes had clouded that weekend.
Diana seemed distressed, rushing around in a distracted way — oblivious, it seemed to me, of the work we had all put in for her brother's wedding.
Lord Charles had asked his father and stepmother if he and Victoria could spend their wedding night at Althorp, and Raine planned a romantic late-night supper for them.
I can't tell you how exhausted we all were, running around practically 24 hours a day for weeks, making sure their day would be as perfect as possible.
A pre-wedding luncheon had been arranged for the family.
While I was on the telephone, busy finalising details, the Princess of Wales stood nearby, leaning against a wall, chatting to one of her detectives.
She was barefoot, dressed casually in a pink skirt and sweater.
As she heard me going on about the luncheon party she pulled a face.
‘Does that mean I have to change?’ she asked, as if it was the dreariest thing ever.
It might have been for her, but I thought she could have shown some gratitude, considering the work her stepmother and I had gone to.
I knew I wasn't being terribly respectful, but I just cupped the telephone, looked her up and down and said: ‘Well, you could put some shoes on.’
Diana wasn't her usual self that weekend.
She seemed worried that Prince Charles would not make the wedding in time.
I had been asked to let her know the minute I saw his car arrive.
Yet she kept running to the entrance herself.
Instead of a sit-down meal at the reception, everybody milled around, eating from trays of finger foods.
In the middle of the speeches, Diana left.
She flew around, looking for Prince William, found him in the kitchen, grabbed his arm and ran off through a side door.
No one knew why.
Lord Charles and his bride seemed happy enough.
In fact, it was one of the few times I had seen him act in a civil way towards his stepmother.
Usually the children were a cold, unforgiving little group, rather remote and distant.
As a family, they had everything — materially, anyway — and their father bent over backwards pleasing them, assuring them he loved them all.
Yet it seemed to me they had much to learn when it came to manners and plain humanity.
I knew the Earl worried about the growing distance between himself and his children.
Because they could not stand to be in the company of his wife, they rarely saw him.
Lady Jane Fellowes, his middle daughter, and wife of Sir Robert, the Queen's Private Secretary, was the only regular caller.
But when she brought the children round, they would all wait outside a side door until he came down and joined them.
Diana rarely came to the house more than twice a year.
When she did, Raine would have the red carpet rolled out in her honour.
She respected her stepdaughter's position as Princess of Wales, always curtsied and paid her compliments on her looks and her outfits.
I never heard her say a bitchy word about Diana.
On one of the rare occasions Prince Charles came too, he made it obvious he liked Raine.
They had a lot in common, and over dinner they talked non-stop about architecture and their interest in British heritage.
The Princess did not join in.
Every Tuesday, Lord and Lady Spencer would drive down to their house in Mayfair.
When they returned on Thursday evening, I always asked the Earl if he had seen his grandchildren, William and Harry.
‘Not this time, Sue.
They are always so busy.
Maybe next time.’
Eventually I stopped asking, because I couldn't bear the sad little shake of his head that meant Not this time either.
‘RAINE'S stepchildren loathed her, Diana included.
They were so cold and unforgiving…
I never knew why they went out of their way to hurt her’
‘THE Althorp job took over my life and wrecked my marriage.
But I really loved being with the Spencers’
‘I ADORED them both…
Raine was kind and courteous to me — not a bit like her ‘wicked-stepmother’ image’
PUBLIC OPINION The column you write
CUTTING THE LIFELINE
IT'S incredible that both the British Government and the European Commission plan cuts in overseas aid.
What timing.
Don't they know that millions of people are starving in Africa?
For years we've been told the Government is pledged to reach the UN aid target of 0.7 per cent.
But they've never made it.
It seems that there's always something more important.
For me nothing could be more important than the scandal of world poverty in the late 20th Century.
-Tony Gariff, Loughborough, Leics.
I'VE never been so moved before as I was when I saw on TV the rescue of a boy who had collapsed on his way to a feeding centre in Somalia.
All his family had died and he had walked for two days without food to find aid.
—
WHILE the leaders of all three main political parties seem intent on dragging us into closer union with Europe, there must be millions like me who fought in World War Two to stop Germany dominating the Continent.
Why can't we have a referendum to stop them doing so again?—
EVERYONE has the right to be tattooed, but Mark Baudain (above) has odd taste to want such grotesque markings on his face, neck and head.
Could you cope with opening the door and suddenly seeing that fright in front of you?—
The lawman's an ass
JUDGES are notorious for being out of touch with the world but Judge John Lee must win the Legal Ass of the Year award for saying it's a woman's function to upset men.
His wife would win the hearts of all women if she bashed the judicial scalp with a frying pan.
—
WHAT WAS HAPPENING IN THE WORLD 30 YEARS AGO
DAVID HANCOCK
WHEN the world held its breath: Crates of jet bombers bound for the Soviet Union are inspected by US officials.
For a week the superpowers had played nuclear poker as President Kennedy warned Soviet leader Krushchev to dismantle Russian missiles based in Cuba.
In the end Krushchev backed down and everyone breathed a sigh of relief.
LIFE OR DEATH: A farmworker looks on astonished as a jet pilot shoots out of his cockpit at 300 feet.
The amazing picture was taken by a Mirror reader seconds before the plane crashed.
The pilot was saved by his ejector seat…and by smashing through a greenhouse full of tomato plants.
DARING: Ursula Andress and Sean Connery in Dr No
STUNNING: Liz Taylor as Cleopatra
MOVER: This Mini Cooper would have cost you £679.36
…and this was what was happening outside Liverpool
IT'S the Paul Gascoigne of his day…none other than TV pundit Jimmy Greaves.
The Spurs ace was the First Division's top scorer.
However, after a lacklustre match against France, he was threatened with being dropped from the England side.
He kept his place when they played Ireland in Belfast.
How many of this team can you remember?
Springett, Armfield (Capt.) Wilson, Moore, Labone, Flowers, Hellawell, Hill, Peacock, Greaves, O'Grady.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
Damme clever
HOLLYWOOD heart-throb Jean Claude Van Damme has a novel method of dealing with troublesome fans…he smiles at them.
The Belgian-born actor has been plagued by have-a-go hard nuts ever since shooting to fame in bone-crunching movies like Double Impact and Universal Soldier.
The star, dubbed Muscles from Brussels and Van Dammage because of his rippling physique, says: ‘Some guys always want to start fights with me.
‘When I see trouble coming I walk over, smile at the guy and say: Hello.
‘It usually works.
But if the guy tries to lay a finger on me, he'll end up staring at the moon!’
SMILER: Van Damme
OVER THE LIMIT
NO-SEX clubs for teenagers are the latest trend in America and Canada.
The nightspots are full of youngsters who have decided to say ‘No’ to bodily pleasures.
Julie Champagne, 18, who belongs to a no-sex club in Ontario says: ‘We think ‘no sex’ is better than ‘safe sex’.
Other kids call us goody goody, but we're proud of that.’
WHEN RAINE MOVED OUT DIANA SEARCHED HER CASE…
THEN BUNDLED CLOTHES INTO BIN LINERS
NOREEN TAYLOR
SUE INGRAM
FEW women were closer to Raine, Countess Spencer, than her personal assistant, Sue Ingram.
For many years she helped Raine and her late husband, Earl Spencer, father of the Princess of Wales, run Althorp in Northamptonshire — and became a trusted friend.
In that time ‘spiteful stepmother’ stories about Lady Spencer grew, while her stepchildren were cast as innocents.
But when Lord Spencer died, a different story emerged.
It was the children, Sue reveals, not least the Princess, who handed out harshness and humiliation…
I KNEW that Earl Spencer had made a special provision in his will.
He had wanted to ensure that his wife would enjoy a smooth transition from that of lady of the great house to one of widowhood.
He asked that she be given six months' grace at Althorp so she could adapt to life without him.
In effect, what took place last March was a cold, compassionless kick out the back door
Yet neither her ladyship nor I was the least surprised.
For she knew where she stood with that family.
There were no illusions.
Now that she is settled in her beautiful Regency house in London, her ladyship will say to me: ‘At least I haven't got the worry of Althorp any more, Sue.
‘All I have now are the memories of a wonderful marriage.
I never want anything to do with that house or the family ever again.
As far as I am concerned, it is a closed book.’
But I know she wished it could have been different.
It's a terrible thing to lose your husband and your home at the same time.
She was virtually banished by her stepchildren from the moment he died.
Her ladyship would hardly recognise her private quarters at Althorp now.
The whole area has been gutted, carpets pulled up, curtains torn down, wall colours changed.
Not that her ladyship minds — she realises the new Earl's tastes are different.
What did break her heart, though, were the accusations that she had ruined the interior of one of England's most distinguished houses.
So many lies and half-truths have distorted what actually took place.
Of course the Earl and Countess sold off paintings and furniture.
They were forced to both to cover death duties and to pay for the wear and tear on a house that costs £450,000 a year to run.
The new Earl once described his childhood memory of the house as being a dark, gloomy place.
Well, he now has his stepmother to thank for the beautiful house that has been restored to look as it did in the 18th century.
Her ladyship always took advice from art historians before she would even change as much the piping on a cushion.
And yet all her hard work has never been appreciated by those she was doing it for, her stepchildren.
A lot of mischievous gossips have talked about vans leaving Althorp packed with pictures and furniture.
Absolutely true.
But the vans were going to restorers, not salerooms.
The Princess of Wales once jumped to the wrong conclusion as well.
She saw an empty space on the walls and demanded to know where the picture was.
When the Countess tried to calm her, explaining the picture had been sent off to be cleaned, Diana refused to believe her.
To satisfy the Princess, the picture had to be brought back.
It was the only proof she would accept.
Lord Charles was another one always suspecting the worst.
Often, when his father and stepmother were in London during the week, he would walk around the house checking that all the pictures and furniture were in place.
They were a very suspicious family.
From the beginning, the lines of communication between Lady Spencer and her stepchildren were twisted by their inability to understand one another.
To them, she appeared an interfering busybody, a pushy incomer meddling with their heritage.
Someone who had too much influence over their father.
She, in turn, wondered why they could not understand that she loved their father and had rescued him from a life of solitude.
She had even saved his life in 1978, when he sank into a coma after suffering a brain haemorrhage.
All she wanted was to turn Althorp into a flourishing commercial business to ensure its survival.
Yet, as far as Diana and her brother and sisters were concerned, Lady Spencer was a gold-digger after their father's status.
To me, those stepchildren seemed so tough and hard and nothing like you imagine them to be.
There was always a hostile atmosphere when they were together at Althorp.
Shortly after his father died the new Earl said how regrettable it was that he had died alone.
I saw his words as a way of getting at the Countess.
On the day Lord Spencer died at London's Humana Wellington Hospital, there were three functions at Althorp, and both Spencers felt her ladyship should be there.
The Earl had been shouting at her that morning, ‘Haven't you gone yet?
Get on with you.
Don't hang around here’.
He began to die after she reached Althorp.
Privately, I think he wanted to spare her ladyship his death.
He knew he was going to die.
A few days earlier, I remember asking him if he would collect the wines from the cellar for that evening's function.
Instead, he lay down on his bed sighing deeply.
‘I'm not well,’ he said.
‘And I'm frightened that if I go down to the cellars I might die.’
The Countess told me that on arrival at the hospital after his death, she spent half an hour alone, sitting by his bed, just talking to him.
She was very calm when she rang me from the hospital asking for her mourning clothes.
‘I feel so disrespectful in bright red,’ she said.
When I arrived at Althorp the housekeeper, Joyce Cole, told me that she had orders banning me from touching anything in the house.
I told her that I wouldn't be leaving without her ladyship's mourning clothes.
After 17 years of service it was a humiliating experience.
On orders from the new Earl, my visits to the house were to be permitted only if I agreed to be supervised.
The following day, when I arrived to collect her ladyship's papers, a similar reception was waiting.
This time it was Simon Thorpe, the new estate manager.
Nothing was to be removed, and I was to go home and keep my head  down .
A few days later, I was made redundant.
On the directions of the new heir to a £50 million fortune, I was to receive the state minimum of one week's redundancy pay for each year's service.
Only 11 years were acknowledged, and plans to throw the wedding reception at Althorp for my second marriage were cancelled.
Two days after her husband's death, Lady Spencer came to Althorp with a roll of red stickers to identify her possessions, the pieces she would be removing to her London home.
Before anything could be removed her ladyship was asked to supply receipts proving she owned each item.
It seemed that in the days following the Earl's death, his children displayed a hardness that even surprised me.
When Pauline, Lady Spencer's maid, came to collect her clothes, Diana and Lord Charles positioned themselves outside one of the side doors.
‘What have you got in there?’
Diana asked the maid who was carrying two Louis Vuitton suitcases with the ‘S’ initial to her car.
‘Those are my father's cases.
They do not belong to you,’ the Princess told Pauline.
Pauline was nervous, but she stood her ground.
She explained that they contained Lady Spencer's clothes, and had been bought much earlier for a trip to Japan.
There were four cases altogether — two others bore the initials ‘R.S.’
Even so, Diana and Lord Charles insisted on examining the contents.
The cases were laid on the ground.
Diana and Charles stooped down to search through the clothes.
After everything had been checked Diana ordered the contents to be transferred to plastic dustbin liners.
The cases would remain with them.
Shortly afterwards, a dress bag was brought down.
Again Diana insisted it was laid on the ground.
She bent down, undid the zipper, and felt carefully inside the layers of clothing before kicking the bag to one side.
Other humiliations followed in the weeks after the death and funeral of his lordship.
There was little contact with her stepchildren.
Lady Spencer had to phone Lord Charles for details of the memorial service, and he asked his solicitor to send her a fax.
I knew she had not been asked to the service at which her husband's ashes were placed in the Spencer vault.
Her ladyship told me: ‘I don't mind.
I've said my goodbyes.’
Perhaps I'm sounding cynical, but the sight of Diana reaching for Lady Spencer's arm during the funeral service made me feel quite sick.
Her ladyship told me that what kept her going throughout the service was a beautiful letter from Prince Charles that she carried in her handbag.
Diana's gesture did not surprise her, merely bemused her.
The graveside note about missing her ‘Darling Daddy’ did not make sense to anyone who knew the family, since Diana rarely saw her father.
MY later visits to Althorp were allowed only if I agreed to be supervised
THE Earl and Countess were forced to sell paintings and furniture…the house costs £450,000 a year to run
PICTURE THAT MADE ME SICK AT Lord Spencer's funeral, Diana reached for Lady Spencer's arm.
The gesture did not surprise her ladyship, merely bemused her
Arise, Sir Sony
THE Japanese tycoon who dreamt up the Sony Walkman has been awarded an honorary knighthood.
Akio Morita, 71, chairman of electronics giant Sony, gets the honour for boosting British industry by setting up TV factories in Wales and for improving Anglo-Japanese relations.
BOSS: Morita
Killer wind roars back in Florida
SMASHED houses, flying roofs, streets of rubble…once again Florida takes a beating from nature.
Three people died when tornadoes howled through the sunshine state's west coast — only six weeks after Hurricane Andrew killed 40 people and flattened thousands of homes south of Miami.
Five tornadoes battered Pinellas Park, an area near St Petersburg, ripping through caravan parks where many elderly people live.
An old lady was found still in bed in the open, her caravan wrecked and scattered.
A couple hiding in a wardrobe escaped unhurt after their mobile home flew 20 yards into a neighbour's house.
Two pensioners lost their second home — the first was wiped out by Hurricane Elena in 1985.
DAILY MIRROR QUIZ OF THE WEEK
EYES down for our weekly quiz about the news of the last seven days.
Answers on Page 19.
1.
Who cast a shadow over the Labour conference by quitting the Shadow Cabinet?
2.
How many women in Britain are now richer than the Queen?
3.
Who took a spin at 100 mph and walked away in a daze?
4.
Which Royal suggested parents who cannot read should go back to school with their children?
5.
Who's got the brain of a mosquito, according to his chairman?
6.
Which film star talked of her tearful visit to famine-hit Somalia?
7.
Ian Botham knows how many miles it is from Land's End to Margate, but do you?
8.
Which TV comic was arrested after allegedly delivering a strong punchline in a bistro?
9.
The Carry-on team is carrying on again after 14 years.
Who plays the lead in Carry On Columbus?
10.
Who (above) was right beside her husband during a testing time?
Christian name please.
11.
Blind MP David Blunkett was involved in a row with a cabbie over his guide dog.
What is the dog's name?
12.
Actor David Threlfall landed a plum role…playing who in a TV mini-series?
13.
How did Mark Baudain get his face in the news?
14.
Oh Brother!
Which pop star had his £160,000 country home repossessed?
15.
Ross Perot has joined the race for the White House.
Who is his running mate for vice-president?
16.
Which airline owned the plane that crashed in Katmandu, killing 167 people?
17.
Supermodel Cindy Crawford breezed into town.
Who is her famous husband?
18.
Former Chancellor Nigel Lawson was in the news as the £ crashed.
He is a director of which bank?
19.
Name the US aircraft carrier which accidentally fired on a Turkish destroyer, killing five crewmen.
20.
Cryptic teaser: Whose Red Army marched on Moscow, then retreated in agony after a shoot-out?
Quiz compiled by DTH.
QUIZ ANSWERS
1:
Bryan Gould;
2:
Nine;
3:
Racing driver Riccardo Patrese;
4:
Princess Anne;
5:
Soccer star Vinny Jones;
6:
Audrey Hepburn;
7:
546;
8:
Joe Longthorn;
9:
Jim Dale;
10:
Elizabeth Smith, wife of the new Labour leader;
11:
Offa;
12:
Prince Charles;
13:
By having his entire face tattooed;
14:
Luke Goss;
15:
James Stockdale;
16:
Pakistan International Airlines;
17:
Richard Gere;
18:
Barclays;
19:
Saratoga; 20.
Manchester United.
YOUR RATING:
0 — 5:
Ugh!
6 — 10:
Poor.
11 — 15:
Getting better.
16 — 19:
Excellent.
20:
Pull the other one!
FREE WRESTLING CARDS
GET A GRIP ON THE LATEST ACTION
THEY are the picture cards wrestling fans will be grappling to get their hands on — and they can be yours absolutely FREE.
TODAY we are printing the first of two special tokens you'll need to cash in with our latest EXCLUSIVE offer.
PART Two of Merlin's fabulous WWF Gold Series Collector Cards hits the shops next week — and thanks to the Daily Mirror, you can pick up a whole pack of eight cards, worth 30p, absolutely free.
THE new set kicks off with brilliant action shots of Ultimate Warrior and Brett ‘Hit Man’ Hart at SummerSlam, the record-breaking Wembley event.
There's also a stunning picture of those crowd-pleasers The Legion of Doom.
LOTS of you are already collecting Gold Series Part One.
Now you can start on Part Two.
We're printing two tokens this week, the first today, the second tomorrow.
THEY will entitle you to one eight-pack of Gold Series Part Two and, as a special bonus, one eight-pack of Part One, worth 30p each PLUS a copy of the brand-new official WWF merchandise catalogue from Squared Circle.
THIS brings together all your favourite WWF merchandise…the latest in T-shirts, footwear, action figures, computer software, posters — and much, much more.
Watch out for tomorrow's token.
Later this week we'll tell you how to collect your cards.
HIT MEN: Collect great pictures of the legendary Legion of Doom and other exciting WWF stars
ANNE ROBINSON
Nigel knockers are out to lunch
SEVERAL Tory grandees have denounced the memoirs of Mr Nigel Lawson.
The Princess of Wales, we are told in today's Daily Mirror, swapped place cards at a dinner to avoid sitting next to him.
I think he deserves better.
Not least because he is the first senior politician for some time to write a book that is stylish, witty, beautifully observed and therefore vastly superior to the plodding tone employed by most ex-Cabinet ministers who confuse being there with being able to write an interesting account of what happened.
ACHTUNG STRANGE
‘LEARN German, says Duke of Kent’ read a startling line on Ceefax last Saturday.
What a pity if he who's never given out about anything is about to start just when we've persuaded the rest of the House of Windsor to shut up.
Getting on a Winner
MICHAEL WINNER and I ceased to be on speaking terms after I described him as a very average director who made very average movies.
He thought I had been economical with the truth.
Which, to be fair, I had.
I should have added that he is an absurd, self-important figure with as much charm and sophistication as your average lavatory brush.
Anyway, having had the heave-ho from Mr Winner means I've some idea how Simone Hyams must be feeling.
She is the 21-year-old actress from Grange Hill who went for an audition with Mr Winner, and, seven months after he had had his way with her on a regular basis, got dumped.
In the old days, incidentally, when a mother discovered her daughter was the innocent young victim of the lust of a rich old man, there were several obvious remedies.
In my neck of the woods a boat to Ireland for a stay with the Dublin cousins was quite often handy.
Alternatively, a year's au-pairing in France, a beauty therapy course or half-a-dozen driving lessons did the trick.
Jilted
Simone Hyams' parents, you will note, chose none of these things.
They picked up a phone and called Max Clifford, thus providing their daughter with an opportunity to get things off her chest.
Mr Clifford, for anyone who has been asleep through the entire summer, is to jilted mistresses what Zimmer frames are to decrepit old ones.
Namely, a support system which allows movement in all sorts of new directions.
In Mr Clifford's case, these include a starring role on the front page of newspapers and a cast-iron guarantee that a reputation as a woman of doubtful values will follow.
Life for Simone, like Ms Antonia de Sancha before her, is now likely to be one great photocall.
Life for Mr Winner will almost certainly continue as before with him mistakenly believing he is a figure of some note.
Unless, of course, his next movie — in which Ms Hyams has a 12-second role, but it is early days and this might soon be substantially reduced — is above average.
In which case some of us may well die of surprise.
ABSURD: Winner
LOOKS TOO GOOD FOR THE PARTY
OH for the days of unwashed female activists with shapeless dungarees, tobacco breath and roll-your-owns.
Blackpool last week, Brighton this week, alas, is full of the  Nineties political woman.
She may be a wife, a delegate or the constituency secretary.
It hardly matters.
Whichever way she'll look much the same.
A monument to Next, Principles and Country Casuals.
A style created by Avis Rentacar and personified by Margaret Beckett, the  new office wife.
An awkward arrangement of glued hair, polyester accessories, Gorgio perfume and the misguided idea that this is chic.
Is it really that long ago since the distinguished figures of Audrey Callaghan, Edna Healey, Mary Wilson and Jill Foot were the sort of women clever politicians were wise enough to marry?
Toning
Whoever heard of any of them being groomed by a fashion editor and strapped into toning pinks for a photo call?
To be fair to the Tories, would Lady Whitelaw, Lady Howe or Lady Ridley have subjected themselves to the magazine make-over?
‘You have to strike a happy medium between looking like royalty and looking like a housewife,’ a helpful Mrs Tony Newton, wife of the Leader of the Commons explained after she and four Cabinet Minsters' wives for being lip-glossed and back-combed into shape by the Mail on Sunday.
Personally, I am very disappointed they chose to be so balanced.
It would have been much more fun, don't you think, if they'd dressed as housewives.
FASHION VICTIM: Labour's Margaret Beckett, over-groomed for stardom
LAST LINE
PAGE 3 girls apparently are feeling the chill and quite unable to earn the sort of mega money available to them a few years ago.
How come, therefore, I asked a sage on the Daily Mirror newsdesk, Samantha Fox is worth £5.5 million?
‘That's because,’ he replied memorably, ‘she's big in Japan.’
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PAP SNAP
TAKE That's heart-throb Robbie Williams come to a sticky end as he celebrates his band's latest hit, A Million Love Songs.
You can have your cake and eat it Robbie…just use a fork in future.It will save you from getting into another fine mess.
Kiss of life saves Sade
POOL DRAMA AS MERMAID VIDEO SHOOT GOES WRONG
SULTRY singer Sade had to be given the kiss of life when a spectacular underwater scene for her new video went dramatically wrong.
She frolicked as a mermaid for the tongue-in-cheek promotional film for her new hit, No Ordinary Love.
But the strain of being underwater for so long proved too much for the fragile beauty.
A guest at the Los Angeles hotel where the £30,000 video was shot revealed: ‘Sade kept on having to hold her breath for the scenes in the pool.
‘It was exhausting work, especially with the fake tail she was wearing.
After a minute swimming around she'd come to the surface panting for breath.
‘Suddenly she started coughing and spluttering.
She was trying to stand up in the pool but couldn't because of the costume.
‘One of the film crew dived in and carried her to safety and she was given the kiss of life.
It could have been a close call.’
The supercool star is proving luckier with the song, which entered the charts this week at No 26.
FRAGILE: Sade nearly drowned
Doc ‘groped girl with stiff neck’
A DOCTOR groped a woman patient's breast while examining her for a stiff neck, a court heard yesterday.
And in the next seven months Joel Danjuma groped three others — one twice — despite being warned by bosses at Wigan Royal Infirmary not to examine women unchaperoned, Liverpool Crown Court was told.
The ‘Jekyll and Hyde doctor was gratifying his strange desires’, claimed the prosecution.
Danjuma, 36, of Wigan, denies five indecent assault charges.
The case continues.
Lots of bargain baubles
JOHN HUSBAND
THERE are some real gems of bargains to be had in the old jewellery market claim Bonhams, the London auctioneers.
For example, a good engagement ring bought at auction will cost you half what a high-street shop would charge.
A beautiful diamond necklace which recently fetched £11,000 at Bonhams would be twice the price in an ordinary jewellers.
But not all Bonhams' baubles are so expensive — the entire collection our model is wearing went for £450 the other day.
Don't expect to make a speculative fortune with old jewellery, but it is fun to collect and should hold its price, whereas you'll be lucky to get half your money back on anything bought in a shop.
Bonhams have a jewellery sale each month phone 071 352 8017 for details.
SHARES in Eurotunnel plunged 63p to £3.57 on news that the Channel Tunnel won't open before Christmas next year at the earliest.
They're now 7p above what they were sold at when they went on the market five years ago.
In 1989, they were £10.36
MAD MONDAY
BILLIONS of pounds were wiped off shares yesterday as the pound slumped again.
And no wonder.
For nobody can understand what the Government is doing to clear up the economic mess it has created.
WE desperately need to CUT interest rates to boost investment and house-building — yet the Government is talking about RAISING them to stop the £ falling.
WE should be REBUILDING our run-down transport services, roads, hospitals and schools — yet Ministers plan to SLASH spending.
WE must REDUCE taxes to encourage customers to spend — but the Government is threatening to INCREASE them.
Bring on the men in white coats!
State of terror
Florida killing spoils Disney World dream for a million holiday Brits
‘MUGGERS HERE CARRY GUNS…
AND USE THEM’
MARK DOWDNEY
THE million Britons who head for the sunshine state of Florida each year are being offered a far more dangerous illusion than any of the rides Disney World has to offer.
They are always being told by American tourist chiefs how safe they are in Orlando, the nearest city to Disney.
How only downtown Miami is dangerous.
And they swallow it.
But if that illusion was not totally shattered by the mugger's bullet that killed British tourist Keith Thompson in Orlando at the weekend, then the city's own police department finished the job yesterday.
‘If these guys ask you for anything, just give it to them.
Don't say a word because they can kill you in a heartbeat.’
That was the simple, chilling piece of advice police spokesman Jim Soloman offered to British holidaymakers facing robbers in Orlando.
And his words echoed terrifyingly true when a second attack took place only 24 hours after Essex postman Mr Thompson was shot dead.
This time it was two brothers from Ohio returning from a visit to Disney World.
Like Mr Thompson they were held up at gunpoint by two men near their hotel.
Horrors
They were bundled into their room.
Cash was demanded.
The elder brother was shot in the stomach as he knelt pleading for mercy.
Luckily he survived.
Now Orlando's city chiefs are terrified that the lid is coming off what really happens in the city.
Until now they have claimed it is a world away from the horrors just five hours' down the road in Miami — so chillingly portrayed in the TV series Miami Vice.
This impression has helped upstate Orlando reap a rich bonanza of 13 million visitors a year, one million of them British.
But the reality is that the city — larger than Manchester — has its own fair share of muggers, murderers, and drug addicts.
Police say there have been at least 50 armed robberies of tourists in the Orlando area so far this year.
Few of these crimes got much publicity.
One in four local people works in tourism — which earns the area nearly £3 billion a year.
And they do not need it spelt out how important it is to promote Orlando's image as a safe and healthy resort.
So the city's worried public relations arm went into overdrive yesterday in the wake of Mr Thompson's death.
Orange County chairman Linda Chapin said the Orlando was ‘appalled and saddened’.
She assured visitors everything was being done to catch the killers.
But she admitted: ‘Such a senseless tragedy reminds us that, unfortunately, even the safest of places is not crime-proof.’
Dangerous
Orlando's crime rate is not excessive when compared to cities like New York, Washington and New Orleans where British tourist Julie Stott from Manchester was shot dead last April while strolling through the ‘safe’ streets of the French Quarter.
But what makes Orlando dangerous is that holidaymakers are led to believe it is safe.
‘British tourists do not realise that most muggers here carry guns and do not hesitate to use them,’ says Barry Jolly, chairman of the British Chamber of Commerce in Orlando.
He was backed by the Foreign Office which is advising visitors to America to follow police advice and not resist muggers.
‘People should carry a few dollars which they can hand over.
The rest should be in travellers’ cheques which can be replaced,’says a spokesman.
Meanwhile, despite US murders hitting a record 23,700 last year, Disney World continues to do its best to distance itself from the disaster unfolding down the road.
No crimes are ever reported in the Magic Kingdom — and it's even rumoured that fatal heart attack victims are smuggled out so their deaths can be recorded off the park.
‘Of course that's an exaggeration, but it illustrates the point,’ said a local police source yesterday.
Soft words that help protect the fantasy that is Disney World.
Crazy
But a far cry from the hard ones used to describe life a few miles away in Orlando where police spokesman Jim Soloman was at pains to spell out the dangers — and with no exaggeration.
‘We do urge visitors not to resist these animals,’ he said.
‘Most of them are so crazy for drugs they would kill their own mothers to get cash to buy them.
‘In fact, some of them have.’
MAGIC KINGDOM: The fairytale side of Orlando
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
IN ANCIENT Greece men were supposed to get married by the age of 30.
If they didn't, they were banned from watching the popular nude athletic events.
PAP SNAP
GEORGE Harrison wowed fans at the Royal Albert Hall by turning up unannounced to play with close friend Gary Moore, the blues guitarist.
Harrison took the stage just hours after snubbing — along with Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr — a party to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the release of the Beatles' first hit Love Me Do.
And Harrison even labelled the Fab Four ‘a waste of time’.
In an interview in Rock CD magazine he said: ‘I am a musician.
I wasn't supposed to be a novelty that people come to look at, like we became in the Beatles.
‘The Beatles were a brilliant thing that happened, but if you look at it from another point of view, what a waste of time.’
THE three remaining members of Queen are set to tour next year.
Guitarist Brian May has revealed that Roger Taylor, John Deacon and himself are hoping to play dates again.
May, at No. 17 with Too Much Love Will Kill You, told Radio One listeners that they would perform as a threesome under a different name.
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
BIG BONUS FOR SMALL SAVERS…
KIDS with a few bob in their piggy banks can help Mum and Dad collect extra interest on the family's savings.
The TSB's new Family Bonus plan allows up to eight in a family to pool their nest eggs and so qualify for higher rates of interest.
All your accounts remain separate, but the amount of interest you earn is based on the family's total.
For example, children earning 7.25 per cent in TSB's Firstsave account would get 8.5 per cent if their cash helped pushed up the family's total savings to more than £5,000.
RAINE Industries, the house builders is having to rely more on part-exchange deals to clinch sales.
But that cuts up to 2.5 per cent off profits, the firm revealed yesterday.
Raine's profits plunged by 34 per cent from £20.47 million to £13.48 million in the past year.