

Jam foils dead cert
TWENTY factory workers could only listen on the radio to their red-hot tip romping home at 9-2 after a run of bad luck on the way to the race.
First the coach broke down.
So three of the punters, from Fawdon, Newcastle, hitched a lift to the Ripon race to put on £400 in bets — but they got stuck in a jam and arrived too late.
THEY'RE ALL AT IT
Sir Colin: ‘We don't know what to do about ball tampering’
Spot checks are likely
COLIN PRICE
SIR Colin Cowdrey admitted last night: ‘They're all tampering with the ball.’
The chairman of the International Cricket Council, talking in Sri Lanka, said the ball doctoring issue exposed in the Mirror by Allan Lamb is cricket's biggest headache.
He claimed all countries have been guilty of tampering with the ball and conceded: ‘We don't know what we are going to do, and the countries don't know the answer.
‘The problem is that when a new trick appears, everyone is trying to see what advantages they can get from it.
Everyone knows that all countries try it.’
Sir Colin flies back to England later this week to try to sort out the storm over the Pakistanis.
But he may well have kicked up another by exposing the eight other Test-playing nations.
Certainly, England were reported to Lord's by umpire John Holder for a marked ball during last summer's final Test against West Indies.
Holder, despite rave reports from Pakistan after standing as a neutral umpire in the series against India, hasn't umpired another England Test since.
The Test and County Cricket Board almost managed to hush up that incident — but BBC TV commentator Jack Bannister exposed it in a book months later.
And New Zealand admit Chris Pringle became so angry at Pakistan's tricks that he produced life-time best Test figures of 11 for 152 after scuffing the ball.
Kiwi manager Ian Taylor took the unprecedented step of telling the world what had happened because he wanted the ICC to investigate Pakistan.
But the ICC did what they did with Lamb's evidence last week and with West Indies skipper Desmond Haynes's complaint about them in Karachi in 1991 — exactly nothing.
Now that Lamb has blown the whole affair into the open, Sir Colin must see the cheats are exposed and the door slammed forever on the ball doctors, whichever country they belong to.
One suggestion is that the umpires should inspect the ball at the fall of every wicket, or at unscheduled stops, instead of the end of each over when bowlers have the chance to cover their traces.
That change might be in place by the time Pakistan visit West Indies this winter.
THIS is the kind of ball doctoring of which Sir Colin Cowdrey says all Test-playing countries are guilty.
MIRROR SPORT headlines last week
JOLLY GREEN GIANT
HUGH JAMIESON
VICENTE Fernandez won the English Open at The Belfry after sinking one of the longest putts ever to win a golf title.
The jubilant 46-year-old Argentinian celebrated landing the £91,660 first prize with a head-over-heels roll then dedicated his moment of glory to soccer boss pal Ossie Ardiles.
After pipping Swedish pair Per-Ulrik Johansson and Fredrik Lindgren, by one shot, thanks to birdies at the last two holes, he said: ‘I was so far away I just about saw the ball disappear.
It was great that Ossie was there — he's my hero.’
West Bromwich boss Ardiles, an enthusiastic 15-handicap golfer, said: ‘I've known Vicente for a long time.
‘Like him, I couldn't see the putt drop in but the gallery's roar said it all.’
ARDILES: Close pal
BERN UP
MIDDLESBROUGH boss Lennie Lawrence has appealed to Jack Charlton: ‘Don't forget Bernie!’
Boro's Bernie Slaven started the season with two goals against Manchester City and starred in the win over Leeds under Charlton's watchful eye.
But the 31-year-old striker can't get his place back in the Republic of Ireland squad.
Said Lawrence: ‘I'm disappointed.
I reckon he deserves a call-up and I want that mentioned.
‘You've got to respect what Jack does — but Bernie has started the season as well as anybody here.’
Lawrence was also disappointed by Scotland's decision to overlook midfielder Willie Falconer but new signing Derek Whyte is in the party to face Switzerland.
All three get the chance to put their case against Ipswich tonight.
Winger John Hendrie misses the match with a calf injury.
SLAVEN: Left out
HOME TIME
WIMBLEDON are set to roll out the red carpet and bring back their original Crazy Gang member Alan Cork.
Manager Joe Kinnear, robbed of injured ace striker John Fashanu, sees Sheffield United's cult hero Corky as the vital replacement to ease the club's injury problems.
Cork, Wimbledon's record busting striker, left reluctantly after 12 glorious years — and immediately won the hearts of the Yorkshire club's fans.
The 32-year-old helped Sheffield stay in big time soccer but Dave Bassett wouldn't stand in his way if a move back South came up.
CORK: Return
Hull axe bad boy
LEIGH Jenkinson has been fined £100, dropped from tonight's game against Swansea and transfer listed by Hull City boss Terry Dolan for gesturing to a fan.
Jenkinson blew his top after missing a penalty at Plymouth on Friday night.
BLOW FOR GARY
Mercer out for two months
MARTIN RICHARDS
LEEDS were last night reeling from the shock that new-signing Gary Mercer had broken his jaw in Sunday's opening defeat by St Helens.
The Kiwi Rugby League forward, playing his first game for the club since a summer move from Warrington, will be sidelined for eight to 10 weeks.
Mercer, who picked up the injury in the first 20 minutes, was substituted by Andy Goodway but bravely returned in the second half wearing a protective head guard.
‘It's a sickening blow to us,’ said Leeds chief executive Alf Davies.
‘Gary showed great courage in coming back in the second half even though the injury was very painful.’
Mercer, who will have the jaw wired to-morrow, said: ‘It's the first serious injury I've had and I've never felt as flat as this.
I knew I had done something when I went down in the tackle.’
Despite Mercer's injury, Leeds say they've still not finalised a two-year deal for Aussie Test back rower Bob Lindner.
And manager Doug Laughton gave an intriguing twist to Leeds search for a top overseas three-quarter by saying: ‘I'm negotiating with one of the biggest names in Australian Rugby League — and it's not Mal Meninga.’
‘If he signs it will be like all the fireworks going off on Bonfire Night.’
Lindner announced on Aussie network TV on Saturday that he'd signed for Leeds, but Davies said they still hadn't received final confirmation from the player.
Lindner is sure to be in Australia's World Cup squad which leaves early next month to prepare for the final against Great Britain at Wembley on October 23.
HE'LL BE THE BEST
Souness backs the James boy
RICHARD TANNER
GRAEME SOUNESS last night defended his £1.3 million goalkeeper David James by declaring: ‘He can be the best.’
James, 22, has marred some brilliant early-season displays for Liverpool with some alarming lapses.
The former Watford star was at fault for Leeds' late equaliser on Saturday and one of Ipswich's goals last Tuesday.
He also admits he should have prevented goals in earlier games against Sheffield United and Arsenal.
But Souness is backing the player who has taken over from Bruce Grobbelaar, Anfield's first-choice keeper for the last 11 seasons.
He said: ‘I'm pleased with him.
He's a young man with as much potential as any keeper I've ever seen.
That's why we bought him.
‘David had a very good game at Leeds, apart from not applying the golden rule of playing until the ref blows his whistle.
‘He fully accepts the responsibility for their late goal.
But at the same time he deserves a pat on the back because of some of the saves he had to make.
‘Hopefully, he'll learn something from Saturday and from the other games we've played so far.
And one day soon he might fulfil all that potential.’
James hopes for a double celebration today — an England call-up and his first clean sheet for Liverpool in tonight's clash with Southampton at Anfield.
Poor
The Merseysiders have made their poorest start for 11 years with only five points from five games.
But skipper Mark Wright believes they should look on the bright side of the draws at Ipswich and Leeds — despite throwing away a win in each game.
Wright said: ‘After the disappointment of the Arsenal defeat, we've bounced back with two creditable performances and haven't been beaten at places where it's hard to get results.
‘We were in winning positions in both games so we can't be playing that badly.
‘But it was disappointing to throw away four points with silly late errors.
We must apply ourselves right to the end of games.’
Injuries continue to disrupt Liverpool.
Paul Stewart has joined Steve Nicol on the injured list after damaging a hamstring at Leeds.
But Michael Thomas could be back after missing the last two games with a twisted ankle.
SUPER SAVER DAVID JAMES may have made a few mistakes but he is learning all the time, says Liverpool boss Graeme Souness (inset).
James is hoping to celebrate a double today — an England call-up and his first clean sheet for his new club.
REID RECALL
KEN LAWRENCE
PETER REID starts his first match in six months at Wimbledon tonight bidding to force Manchester City back on the championship trail.
The 36-year-old player-manager will play himself at the expense of either Steve McMahon or Rick Holden, both of whom cost £900,000.
Reid said: ‘As far as I am concerned it is no big deal that I am coming back — I simply feel the time is right for me.
‘I can still win the ball, pass it, and have a lot to give on the pitch.
‘I thought we played some good stuff against Oldham but when you concede three goals you obviously have problems — if you score three at home you should run out winners.’
McMahon faces his first crisis since moving to Maine Road from Anfield last season.
But Reid, who is also considering giving brilliant youngster Gary Flitcroft his full debut, stressed: ‘There is no problem with Steve even though he was substituted on Saturday — to be fair to him he has been fighting a toe injury.’
REID: He's in action again for Manchester City tonight
WE'RE IN IT FOR KICKS!
Crocked Hirst clears Bould
MATT HUGHES
DAVID HIRST last night cleared Arsenal's Steve Bould of blame for the challenge that has destroyed his England recall hopes.
Sheffield Wednesday striker Hirst was chopped down early in Saturday's 2-1 defeat at Highbury.
And many observers thought the booked Bould was lucky to stay on the field for his tackle from behind.
But Hirst, carrying the legacy of a cracked left ankle, harbours no bitterness despite being forced out of the running for England's first fixture of the season.
‘I have no hard feelings towards Steve,’ insisted Hirst, who looked certain to make today's squad for the September 9 friendly in Spain after his five-goal start.
‘I watched the tackle on TV and he came through me.
But strikers are there to get kicked just as defenders are there to kick them.
‘It's my job to get past him and his job is to stop me.
Besides, I don't think anyone sets out with the intention of hurting people.
‘Steve has no reason to feel responsible and I don't think he will.
It's just part of the game.’
Casualties
Meanwhile, England keeper Chris Woods has joined Wednesday's alarming casualty list after being taken ill with food poisoning.
Manager Trevor Francis could now be without half a dozen senior players for Coventry's visit tomorrow.
He is already missing Hirst, Chris Waddle, John Sheridan and Phil King, who faces several months on the sidelines after surgery today to repair damaged knee ligaments.
And Francis has yet to decide whether he can recall Carlton Palmer, who was axed at the weekend because illness has  affected his form.
Said Francis: ‘Carlton's virus seems to be lingering so he'll see the doctor before we reassess his situation.’
DAVID Hirst bears no grudge over his injured ankle
BOULD: Tackle
JINX BUSTERS!
Mac out for Royle revenge
WALTER STOREY
GARY McALLISTER tonight aims to blast away Leeds United's Boundary Park jinx and prove his wonder goal against Liverpool was no fluke.
Leeds haven't won at Joe Royle's Oldham in their last seven attempts but McAllister warned: ‘That's a record we're bursting to put right.
My scoring output since I left Leicester hasn't been good — but after that goal against Liverpool maybe I can start improving.’
McAllister's stunning volley captivated millions of Match of the Day viewers and brought into sharp focus the mystery of his goal drought.
He said: ‘It's been a fabulous two years for me at Leeds and the lack of goals has been my only disappointment.
‘It is something I've been working hard to improve.
Double figures should be a realistic target, especially now I am the penalty-taker at Elland Road.’
Fierce
McAllister, 27, has one of the fiercest shots in the Premier League, yet he managed only six goals in all competitions during his first season at Elland Road.
And last season he scored just five.
Now he is confident of shaking off a hamstring strain and extending his ever-present League record to 86 matches since his £1 million move from Leicester.
‘Oldham have a great record against us over the years,’ he adds.
‘The goals are flying in for them, too.
But they are also leaking goals, so we can nail our Boundary Park jinx once and for all.’
Meanwhile Eric Cantona returns to the scene of his English soccer baptism, with McAllister excited by the Frenchman's surge of form.
Cantona hardly had a kick when he made his debut at Oldham as a second-half  substitute in a 2-0 defeat last February.
‘Eric has come a long way since then,’ said McAllister.
‘He's worked so hard at his game and he's much more involved than when he first came over from France.’
McALLISTER: Target
MARTIN PIPE'S six-timer attempt at Newton Abbot yesterday was foiled — twice.
The West Country trainer and champion jockey Peter Scudamore got  off to a flying start winning the first three races with odds-on shots Mohana, Slavi and Skipping Tim.
But then Myverygoodfriend finished second and after Galway Star had become their fourth odds-on scorer, Passed Pawn failed in the last race.
CHEERS LLOYD
CHARLES FAWCUS
JOCKEY Jeff Lloyd gets kicked out of the saddle this week-end — but it's all in the rules of the game.
The South African-based rider landed his seventh British win on Rocality at Epsom, but his 30-day permit expires on Saturday.
‘I'm shattered.
I had hoped to carry on here for another two weeks, but the Jockey Club have told me to stop,’ said the Epping-born rider.
Lloyd is caught up in a worldwide agreement which limits a foreign-based jockey to a 30-day stay.
It's different for Michael Roberts and Steve Cauthen who ride on British licences.
‘It would be different for Jeff as well if he had a job here, but he's just on holiday.
If I went to South Africa with a British licence the situation would be the same for me,’ said Derby-winning jockey John Reid.
Amateur Steve Swiers brought David Elsworth in from the cold on Statajack, also at Epsom.
Statajack was David's first win for nearly a month and the big time could come with Seattle Rhyme who reappears against Derby third Silver Wizard and Jeune at Kempton on Saturday.
‘Cash Asmussen has turned down six rides in France for him, so he must fancy his chances,’ smiled the trainer.
MICHAEL Tebbutt picked up a four-day ban for excessive use of the whip when beaten a short head on Briggsmaid by Vain Prince at Newcastle.
‘I had a very fair hearing and accept the stewards' decision.
I hit the horse 13 times in a very tight finish,’ said Tebbutt.
FOR GOD'S SAKE PICK THESE MEN
ALF RAMSEY GIVES IT TO YOU STRAIGHT
Taylor must go for Wright and Beardo
TONY STENSON
GRAHAM TAYLOR now has a second chance to get it Wright for England!
No one has to tell the England manager he got it terribly wrong with his selection for the European championship matches in Sweden.
He was given more than enough encouragement to pick players like Arsenal's 30-goal Ian Wright — but he ignored all the cries.
I plead with him to get it right this time for his own sake.
Because if his squad selection today for next week's friendly in Spain fails, then by God he will feel the full wrath of his critics — and no one need tell me how that feels.
I can assure Graham he will be the loneliest man in football, reviled by people who haven't the first clue about the game, but who will go right along with the bloodsuckers willing him to fail.
When he names the most-important squad of his England career — the one that could make or break him — I do hope he includes the names of Wright and Everton's Peter Beardsley.
Taylor must bury any recriminations about Beardsley turning his back on England.
Surprise
You pick your best players and there is little doubt on current form that Beardsley is one of England's finest forwards.
Beardsley would be my surprise choice for England's game in Santander next Wednesday, but I also think there should be a place for Wright.
I would ignore the claims of Nottingham Forest's Nigel Clough and Southampton's Matthew Le Tissier, but I'll explain why later.
Beardsley?
I can hear a chuckle in some quarters but I feel he never let England down.
He was dropped too early — but instead of sulking he has returned with his old fire.
Beardsley and David Platt would provide a very mobile midfield that also has an eye for goals.
Wright, a player I've admired since he made a name for himself at Crystal Palace, was strangely ignored for the European championship finals.
I say strangely because finishing as the League's top striker surely warrants a travelling place even if only for experience.
Everyone knew Gary Lineker was saying farewell to international football and a new dawn was beckoning.
Wright could have sat, watched, learned and even been given a short burst to discover again what the international arena is all about.
Taylor now has a problem.
Does he go for new tactics or again show faith in the squad he took to Sweden?
I see Blackburn's £3.6million man Alan Shearer again being part of Graham's thoughts, which at the moment seem to be pointing towards the long ball game.
Shearer, an instant hit at Blackburn, has yet to convince me.
He's good.
Brilliant?
I am not yet sure.
From what I've seen and heard, Graham seems to be looking to a big man with the ball aimed for the sky.
There's nothing wrong in that belief provided you do it properly.
There's no half measures to playing this way.
It's all or nothing and being strong enough to take the flak if things go wrong.
Mobile
I was my own man and played the way I believed because we lacked talent in certain areas.
Jack Charlton, one of my team of 1966, turns his back to criticism as manager of the Republic of Ireland.
He does it his way and that's how a manager, be it at club or international level, should act.
Sadly for Graham we haven't got too many players of true international quality to spearhead his attack this way.
There aren't too many big, strong, mobile strikers with the skill to hold the ball and allow the midfield to feed off him.
Calls for Le Tissier come from some quarters because of his good partnership with Shearer while at Southampton.
I don't agree.
Le Tissier is a very good club player but he has yet to prove himself.
I feel he needs to be in a winning side, one brimming with confidence before he sparkles.
At the moment we haven't got an England side to fit his needs.
Clough is someone I've long admired, a tremendous club player who no doubt makes his dad Brian very proud.
I'm trying not to be unkind but I doubt whether he has the requirements for international football and I wouldn't be surprised if he's missing from next week's squad.
To ensure it won't be a pain in Spain I expect Graham to rely on his tested experienced players and sprinkle them with a blend of youth.
I'd like to think Beardsley and Wright will get the nod and Graham doesn't get it wrong again.
HE'S THE TOPS
STRIKER Peter Beardsley has this season rediscovered his best form with Everton after being dropped too early by England.
DAVID PLATT would be a hit with Beardsley
IAN WRIGHT should have gone to Sweden with England this summer and now deserves a recall for the friendly in Spain.
SHEARER: Taylor choice
LE TISSIER: Doesn't fit in
STRIFE OF SAD BRIAN
HARRY HARRIS
BRIAN CLOUGH is facing the biggest crisis of his managerial career.
A 3-1 defeat at new table-toppers Norwich last night left Clough with the indignity of his worst-ever start in 18 years at Nottingham Forest.
Worse still, Forest are third from bottom, having conceded more goals in their opening five matches than any team.
Lee Power, Dave Phillips and Ian Crook humbled Forest, inflicting their fourth consecutive defeat.
When Phillips scored the third goal for Norwich a minute before time it was the twelfth that Clough's side have conceded.
Nigel Clough did more than anyone to avert a crisis for his old man.
Watched by England manager Graham Taylor, Clough struck a superb goal after 31 minutes.
That equalised Norwich's strike within 100 seconds of the start — a 25-yard free-kick from Ian Crook.
Forest's only victory this season was in their first match — at home to Liverpool.
Then Teddy Sheringham blasted a terrific goal — but since then he has been sold to Spurs.
But it is in defence where Clough faces his biggest problem — now that he no longer has Des Walker.
CLOUGH: Problems
TERRIER
Gibson's set to go
TONY STENSON
WIMBLEDON striker Terry Gibson could start a £4 million transfer merry-go-round between Manchester City, Chelsea and Coventry.
Little Gibson, 29, and so forgotten that he trains alone, was once part of Terry Phelan's £2.3 million move to Manchester City.
But the deal collapsed when City looked at their bank account.
Now they're talking again and Gibson will meet manager Peter Reid before tonight's match at Selhurst Park.
But Coventry's Bobby Gould sees Gibson as the ideal replacement for Kevin Gallacher, who seems destined for a £2 million move to Chelsea.
So it seems Wimbledon, who have cashed in on £12 million of talent since winning the FA Cup in l988, could be in for more money.
But one player ready to head back to Wimbledon is Alan Cork, 32, one of their original Crazy Gang.
Manager Joe Kinnear, robbed of the injured John Fashanu, sees Cork as a short-term solution — and Sheffield United's Dave Bassett would not stand in the way of his great pal.
Kinnear tried to talk to Graham Taylor yesterday to push the claims of Robbie Earle and Warren Barton.
He said: ‘Robbie is the best midfield player I've seen since Martin Peters — he ghosts into corners and scores — while Warren is ambitious and ready to climb mountains.’
GIBSON: Trains alone
ROYLE GUARD
Leeds out for revenge
OLDHAM boss Joe Royle has warned his players to be ready for a revenge raid when Leeds United cross the Pennines tonight.
The Latics were one of only four sides to beat the League champions last season and Royle said: ‘They will be going all out to put that right.’
Leeds are the Premier League's top scorers with 11 and Oldham are just one behind.
But with both sides having some shaky defensive displays so far, the Oldham boss predicted: ‘It certainly won't be 0-0.’
Oldham will be unchanged from the side which drew 3-3 against Manchester City as skipper Mike Milligan, who needed three stitches in a mouth wound, has passed himself fit.
And he will be one of the players given the job of keeping out the twin threat of Frenchman Eric Cantona and Lee Chapman.
Both have scored four goals.
ROYLE: Warning
Handy
LIVERPOOL and Arsenal were among the disappointed clubs yesterday when Andy Awford signed a new contract at Portsmouth.
Tyson failed to blunt Razor
IAN GIBB
NOBODY, but nobody, can stand up and say they gave Mike Tyson a fight twice…and survived.
That's apart from the Razor — Donovan Ruddock.
Stopped controversially in their first battle, Razor demanded a second go at Tyson.
Even if Iron Mike was not quite the same fearsome character as the man who cleaned up all the titles to be the undisputed champion — he was still the most feared man in boxing.
But the Razor wanted to prove a point and demanded a return.
He got it with the cruel bonus of a broken jaw but took Tyson the distance.
‘That's Ruddock finished,’ said the smarties.
‘He'll never be the same after two fights with Tyson.’
Prospect
Yet Ruddock, the man with a similar Jamaican-Canadian upbringing to our own Lennox Lewis, proceeded to batter former world champion Greg Page and then knock out big-punching top ten prospect Phil Jackson.
Then Ruddock told me: ‘Do you really think that after facing Tyson twice, knocking out former world champions Mike Dokes, Page and Bonecrusher Smith I'm really gonna be frightened of Lennox Lewis?’
He was at ringside to watch Lennox batter Mike Dixon in a warm-up win and played the gentleman by saying: ‘I don't need to tell Lennox what I'm going to do.’
They fought as rookie amateurs, Ruddock taking the decision, but even Razor admitted: ‘That won't have anything to do with our next fight.
‘I can't wait to get it on.’
RUDDOCK: Still Razor sharp
EYE TV
ITV are set to sign a deal with UEFA president Lennart Johansson today for live coverage of the closing stages of this season's European Cup.
BREAKER
ALLISON Fisher scored a women's record break of 133 last night — but she still lost 5-4 to Irish champion Joe Swail at the £224,000 Dubai Duty Free Classic.
TRAGIC TONY
Peterborough 0, Tranmere 0
TRANMERE defender Tony Thomas was carried off with a broken leg after only two minutes of this Anglo-Italian Cup-tie last night.
He collided with former Everton youngster Marcus Ebdon.
But despite being forced to reshuffle their defence so early, Tranmere held out manfully with goalkeeper-skipper Eric Nixon making a string of fine saves.
KICK START
DERBY County striker Tommy Johnson is out to break his duck tonight against his former team Notts County.
The 21-year-old, who moved from Meadow Lane for £1.3million in March, hasn't scored this season but sees this Anglo-Italian Cup-tie as his big chance.
He said: ‘The fact that I have not scored yet spices the match up for me.
It would be a great way to start the season off with a goal against my old club.’
Viv's last fling
COLIN PRICE
VIV Richards is staying with Glamorgan — and has promised the Welshmen one last great season.
The former West Indies skipper is currently out of the side because he is short of confidence and form.
But chairman Tony Lewis denied last night he had been given the boot.
‘Viv will be back here next season,’ he said.
‘We have had a chat about what has gone wrong this summer and the upshot is Viv will get himself into real shape by playing more in the West Indies this winter.’
Richards said: ‘Things haven't gone well for me this season because of injuries but I want to stay on here to finish the job.
‘When I came I said I wanted to help Glamorgan to become winners and that is still my aim.’
Former England batsman Bill Athey is leaving Gloucestershire after turning down a new two-year contract.
Lager lovers
WALES' rugby squad is to get a yearly £15,000 boost from brewers Heineken as part of a three-year £3.1million deal to sponsor the Welsh League.
WRIGHT ON
CHRIS ARMSTRONG, signed from Millwall for £1.5 million yesterday, will make a sensational debut for Crystal Palace against Manchester United at Old Trafford tonight.
Palace boss Steve Coppell says of the striker: ‘He can give us the pace Ian Wright used to offer.’
COPPELL: Swoop
CRASH!
RONNIE O'Sullivan was beaten for the first time in 25 snooker matches last night — Dave Finbow thrashed him 5-0 in the Dubai Classic.
Phelan injury shock
MARK Hughes and Mike Phelan are both ruled out of Manchester United's team to face Crystal Palace at Old Trafford tonight.
Phelan will be out for three weeks with damaged ankle ligaments and Hughes also has an ankle injury.
But Hughes is hoping to brush off the knock in time to face League champions Leeds on Sunday.
Ukrainian Andrei Kanchelskis returns with Brian McClair forming the strike force with Dion Dublin.
Welsh international Clayton Blackmore will take over Phelan's right back spot as United search for their first home win after two successive away victories.
United manager Alex Ferguson said: ‘It's important for us to get a win in front of our fans.’
‘We were tighter in defence on Saturday and Mark Hughes and Dion Dublin caused problems.
Ryan Giggs was also something special.’
Indirect line for Graham
HARRY HARRIS
ARE England going to play direct football?
Graham Taylor isn't saying.
The England manager, upset by the way his comments were interpreted after the European championship, has gone on record as saying that he is mis-understood, that he cannot shake off the association with the long ball game from his formative years at Watford.
Taylor was given the perfect platform to set the record straight at yesterday's press conference.
When asked to clarify his intended future playing policy, he said: ‘Have a look and see what the team does in Spain, see how it plays and then we'll talk about it.’
If Taylor believes in the direct style, he should flaunt it.
Instead, once again, he has left himself open to more criticism.
FIRST LADY
CHARLES FAWCUS
ANGELIC Antoinette Armes became the first girl to win a race round the Derby track when striking on Incola at Epsom yesterday, but favourite backers did their money before the start.
Atlantic Way headed the betting at 2-1 after her win at Brighton last week, but unseated Francis Norton twice in the paddock.
Then the filly collided with the rails and lay prostrate on the ground before being re-united with her rider.
Owner-trainer John Hill and three racecourse vets checked the filly over and decided she was fit to run, but Atlantic Way could finish only third.
Hill later told the stewards that he wouldn't use an apprentice rider again although Norton won on Atlantic Way last week.
Incola didn't look a likely winner either when 25 lengths behind pace-setter Great Max rounding Tattenham Corner.
‘I didn't think we had any chance of catching him but I just kept shoving and shouting and he got there in the end,’ said Antoinette.
The Isle of Wight born rider's attempt to break into the male dominated racing game has been dogged by injury.
‘I've still got a steel plate and screws in my leg after breaking both ankles last year and I had two falls in four days in July.
But I'll keep on trying,’ she said.
Another Epsom first came when Japanese Champion Yokio Okabe scored on Shrewd Partner.
Hull of a draw!
HULL face local rivals Hull KR at the Boulevard in the first round of the John Smiths Yorkshire Cup on Sunday week.
Last night's draw: Hull v Hull KR, Bradford Northern v Bramley, Wakefield Trinity v Doncaster, Sheffield Eagles v Halifax, Featherstone Rovers v Dewsbury, Huddersfield v Batley, Leeds v Hunslet, Nottingham City v Keighley.
TAYLOR SHOCK
HARRY HARRIS
GRAHAM Taylor will not be offered a new contract by the FA — unless he leads England to a successful World Cup.
I can reveal there will be no move to extend Taylor's current four-year deal before England depart for the United States in 1994.
And if England fail to qualify — the opening tie is against Norway at Wembley in October — then Taylor can hardly expect to continue.
Taylor faces his FA bosses tomorrow fully aware that his minimum requirement is to ensure that England reach the finals in two years’ time.
Taylor will then need convincing shows in the USA before the FA would give him another four years, equalling the eight-year reign of Bobby Robson.
But I believe that
Yesterday Taylor named his squad to face Spain next Wednesday.
He started a new phase of is management with the same old faces and a stunning whitewash of England's performances in Sweden.
He argued that he has to persist with his Euro flops as he tries to qualify for the World Cup.
So in come just two new boys, goalscoring wingers David White of Manchester City and Rod Wallace of Leeds.
But 14 of the players who shared in the failure in Sweden are retained.
Poor Des
DES Maea, 22, Oldham's new Rugby League signing, is in danger of losing his sight after a serious road accident.
He was hit by a truck as he crossed a road in Auckland.
MY JOB-BOB
Leeds chase Aussie ace
MARTIN RICHARDS
LEEDS are all set to clinch their final overseas import — Aussie Test forward Bob Lindner.
Manager Doug Laughton also showed an interest in Manly's ex-Wigan centre Kevin Iro.
But Lindner said yesterday: ‘I talked to Doug Laughton this afternoon and he told me a two-year contract was in the mail and everything was fine.’
Lindner won't be available until after the World Cup final on October 23 because he'll be a key man in the Aussie pack facing Great Britain.
He plays for Western Suburbs against Newcastle in Sunday's Winfield Cup play-offs.
‘If we get eliminated on Sunday I could have come over straight away.
‘But I've told Leeds I would prefer delaying it until after the World Cup final, especially with the Aussies playing three warm-up games in England.’
New Zealand Test star Iro has not been given a new contract by Manly and was offered back to Wigan last week.
But the champions had already filled their overseas quota with Andrew Farrar.
Iro has been in poor form for the Sea Eagles and was told several weeks ago that he would have to take a pay cut to stay with the club.
Leeds will have to off-load Kiwi utility back Morvin Edwards to make way for Lindner or Iro.
Chief executive Alf Davies said: ‘We are exploring one or two options but I would hope an announcement will be made in the next 48 hours.’
IRO: Pay cut
DRUGS SHOCK
MARTIN RICHARDS
GREAT Britain full back Graham Steadman has been fined £1,000 for failing a drugs test after the last match of this summer's Lions tour.
The Castleford star took medicine for a throat and chest infection before the second Test in Auckland.
Afterwards he was tested positive in a random check.
Steadman, who had been doubtful to play, admitted he was ‘naive’ to take the medicine  without clearing it with the tour doctor.
But he stressed that he told officials about it at the post-match drugs test.
The RL board of directors accepted Steadman's explanation but said he was ‘irresponsible’ in not checking the contents of the medicine which he bought from a chemist's shop.
Castleford officials are angry about the way the case has been handled.
Martin Offiah has been fined £250 for snubbing the medal ceremony after the Charity Shield.
Wigan team-mate Kelvin Skerrett, who did the same, received a severe reprimand.
STEADMAN: Failed test
CECIL FILLY FACES ARAZI
CHRIS JUDGE
ALL AT SEA will be supplemented for Sunday's Emirates Prix du Moulin de Longchamp in France as she bids to shake off her bridesmaid's tag.
But the Oaks runner-up was far from impressive in her workout on the Limekilns at Newmarket yesterday morning.
She was ridden by Pat Eddery over seven furlongs, but it was Willie Ryan's mount Musicale, who came out on top.
Trainer Henry Cecil, however, was satisfied enough to let All At Sea take on the likes of Arazi and Ireland's Brief Truce.
All At Sea reverts to a mile for the first time this season, having finished runner-up on her last three starts, the best of which was her length defeat by Rodrigo de Triano in the Juddmonte International over a mile and a quarter.
Cecil, who had been considering the Queen Elizabeth II Stakes at Ascot, believes the prevailing soft ground will negate the speed of the specialist milers.
French classic winner Culture Vulture was left in the race, but the Paul Cole stable said she will not be ready to run.
Ireland's challenge will be led by Brief Truce, who runs for the first time since accounting for both Rodrigo de Triano and Arazi in the St James's Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot.
Cecil's Derby fifth Twist And Turn should get back to winning ways at York today in the Reference Point Strensall Stakes where Badawai looks the main threat.
Dayflower, who goes for next week's May Hill Stakes at Doncaster, was impressive on the gallops yesterday and the step up to a mile is expected to suit her admirably.
The stable, who may lose head lad Paddy Rudkin for a training job with Sheikh Mohammed in the Gulf at the end of the season, will also be looking for a new assistant trainer with Simon Bray leaving to gain more experience in America.
Daru booked his place for the Cesarewitch at Newmarket on October 17 when completing a hat-trick at York yesterday.
Before the big end of season handicap at Newmarket, Daru has a date at Doncaster on Saturday week for the Mallard Handicap.
AMRULLAH, racing's best known non-winner, is back in training for another attempt to break his incredible losing sequence which has now reached 74.
A decision over retirement has been postponed for the 12-year-old gelding, who resumed road-work last week at trainer John Bridger's Hampshire yard, with a reappearance set for next month.
Bridger said yesterday: ‘I have had several phone calls during the summer wondering if Amrullah was going to continue racing and he still seems to love the idea of carrying on.’
SUAVE Dancer was taken out of the betting for the Arc de Triomphe yesterday.
Corals offer 2 St Jovite, 4 Pistolet Bleu (from 9-2), 8 Dr Devious, 10 Magic Night, 12 Jolypha, Seattle Rhyme
PALACEGATE EPISODE ended her racing for the season on a winning note yesterday.
But she had to battle for a York neck victory from Satank and trainer Jack Berry said: ‘She ran well, but looked to be going over the top.
I do not think Palacegate Episode ran like a 2-5 shot so we will wrap it up for her this season.’
I'M THE GREAT BRITON
Bruno's blaster
IAN GIBB
FRANK BRUNO last night lashed back at Lennox Lewis: ‘The British public will never believe you are one of us until you live here!’
Lewis lit the touchpaper to their smouldering feud in yesterday's Daily Mirror.
He rubbished Bruno's up-and-coming battle with South African Pierre Coetzer at Wembley on October 17, sneering: ‘Bruno's next fight doesn't rank in the same league as mine.
‘Put it this way…the fans can go to see a good fight between me and Razor Ruddock at Earls Court on October 31 — or they can go to see Bruno win on a cut against Coetzer.’
Bruno has always stayed clear of any verbal cut and thrust with Lewis — until now.
And with big fight tickets to sell, Frank isn't going to stand about silently while Lennox knocks his fight.
Bruno smashed back: ‘How does Lennox expect the British public to have respect for him when he's not even resident in this country?
‘He has just come back from Canada and he will go back to Canada.’
That is presumably via Pennsylvania's Pocono Hills, where Lewis has his training camp for the Ruddock showdown.
Lewis, with his trans-Atlantic accent and life-style, is an easy target — despite having a house in Bexleyheath and a declared intent to hang onto his British, Commonwealth and European titles.
Warmth
Bruno was razor sharp himself as he added: ‘He is earning money over here and buying houses in Canada.
‘If he committed himself to Britain by actually living here he might find a bit more warmth forthcoming from the British public.
‘He wouldn't have to put up with people chanting my name at his fights.’
That was a cutting reference to Lewis's triple title flattening of Londoner Derek Williams, when before the third round knockout punters were growing tired of Lennox's labours and chanted ‘Bruno, Bruno.’
Bruno is no mug and knows that at the very least he is publicising his own fight, and building the grudge content for an eventual show-down with Lewis that could be a £5million production.
BRITISH through and through…that's big Frank Bruno, whose huge popularity with the sporting public was crowned by the award of an MBE.
LENNOX LEWIS is an outsider, insists Bruno
FIGHTING TALK: Yesterday's Mirror Sport
Mel's on the mend
JOHN EDWARDS
FAST-RAIDING full-back Mel Sterland is poised to end his six-month injury nightmare.
Leeds' former England defender was forced to sit out the final ten matches of last season's title charge with an ankle injury that needed surgery.
But last night he signalled he is ready to launch a comeback with the reserves within the next week.
And he could even be challenging for a place in the return leg of Leeds' European Cup first round tie against Stuttgart at Elland Road at the end of the month.
Sterland announced his return to fitness by saying: ‘I am picking up my training steadily and looking to turn out for the reserves in the middle of next week.
‘If I come through that without any reaction I'd like to think I'll be in the frame for the return leg with Stuttgart.’
RICHARD TANNER
JAMIE REDKNAPP last night looked on the bright side of Liverpool's worst start to a season since 1954.
The 19-year-old insisted: ‘We just need a couple of good wins to get us going.’
Anfield has quickly taken to the midfielder and manager Graeme Souness's decision to replace him with Michael Thomas during Tuesday's match with Southampton was greeted by a chorus of boos.
Redknapp added: ‘The fans didn't realise I had been nursing a groin strain.
But it was nice to know the crowd appreciated my performance.’
REDKNAPP: Popular
WILKO'S TAYLOR-MADE
BERNIE LOVETT
STRIKER Paul Wilkinson is beating out a message that England boss Graham Taylor may find increasingly difficult to ignore.
The Middlesbrough man has hit five goals in as many Premier Division games.
It prompted boss Lennie Lawrence to step up his ‘Wilko for England’ call, saying: ‘He's at the peak of his form and a threat to any defence.’
Wilkinson, 27, picked up six Under-21 caps six years ago.
But he dropped out of the limelight after moving to Watford from Nottingham Forest.
Lawrence has pulled out of a £400,000 move for Charlton striker Robert Lee.
WILKINSON: Hit
TEARS FOR CAROLINE
CHARLES FAWCUS
QUEEN OF SHANNON had tears and not champagne flowing by winning at Salisbury yesterday — but she could not have picked a better moment.
For  it's the funeral today of stablegirl Caroline Peat, the horse's regular rider, who was killed in a motor accident last week.
‘Caroline looked after Queen Of Shannon as well as riding her at home.
She loved this filly and would have been so proud.
This win is for her.
I just wish she had been here to see it,’ said trainer Dave Morris.
‘Her car was involved in a head on crash with a lorry and the funeral is in Derbyshire,’ he added.
Queen Of Shannon's jockey Michael Tebbutt showed plenty of enterprise when he and John Reid were the only riders to stick to the far rail for most of the race — and they finished first and second.
Veteran trainer Bill Wightman still keeps an ace or two up his sleeve and struck in some style when Catherineofaragon won by ten lengths under John Williams.
Williams followed up on Sheringa for Toby Balding who plans to run Gold Cup hero Cool Ground over the Grand National fences at the revived Aintree fixture in November.
Dancing Spirit, who was just behind Catherineofaragon at Newbury, looks a likely televised winner at Kempton today.
Willie Carson stands on the brink of his 21st century after reaching 98 on Thawakib, but that's 69 adrift of Michael Roberts who struck twice at York.
Takenhall proved the annual star turn, winning the Quintin Gilbey Trophy for the third year running.
ANGRY COLUMN
PETER SHAW
LAMB IS THE HERO
SO Allan Lamb's reward for having the courage to speak out and tell the truth about the Pakistani ball-tampering was to be banned for two games and heavily fined — with the possibility of further punishment from the TCCB.
I am angry and disgusted at the feeble-minded lot at Northants and the petty-minded lot at Lord's.
Most of the county players too knew what was going on but kept silent.
Lamb's capacity to speak up is the true definition of a man.
How small, how shamefaced the ICC must feel now.
—
The ICC feel small?
The ICC feel shamefaced?
For a sensible chap, you have a fragile grip on reality.
Bad form
I AM very annoyed about the Pakistani cricket scandal.
It is absolutely pathetic the way Allan Lamb is accusing Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram of cheating.
It makes him look like a racist prat.
I'm almost ashamed to be English.
What Lamb is saying might be true but I doubt it.
Thanks to him and the rest who are behind these outrageous accusations, the Pakistanis' reputations will probably be in tatters. —
That's two of us, luv.
I'm almost ashamed you're English as well.
Seams OK
WE should encourage all bowlers to raise the seam of the ball.
This will help them combat the tactics of the batsmen who these days look more like knights of old with their protective clothing.
—
As you seem to know about knights, how come you haven't heard about chivalry?
Al's pal
IF I was a rich man, I would pay Allan Lamb's wages.
—
Don't worry.
It's the thought that counts.
Not cricket
WITH all the talk about tampering with cricket balls, I wonder if it might be possible to make the ball from plastic or nylon or some other modern material that couldn't be defaced.
After all, football left leather behind long ago, but I expect cricketers will be up in arms about this suggestion.
—
So what if they are?
If you want to have curious thoughts, you have ‘em.
Stu's pots
WHO does Stuart Pearce think he is?
If it is true he is on £4,000-a-week and is asking for more, Brian Clough is right — as usual— to say ‘no’.
I would have gone further though.
I'd show him the door, tell him if he can get more than that somewhere else he's very welcome and use the £2million transfer fee on a player who doesn't put money first.
—
What a treasure!
Not you, mate, this unique player you know who doesn't put money first.
Whine list
HERE we go again.
At the start of another football season the professional whingers are in full swing — Ferguson, Kendall and Souness to name but three.
As we have a school of excellence for soccer, why not a school for whingers where they could go in an effort to be cured?
I am sure Lennie Lawrence, Steve Gritt and Allan Curbishley would be delighted to take up a teaching post.
—
Waste of time.
Once a whinger, always a whinger.
Wet wimps
WHY is it cricketers never play in the rain?
Footballers and all other competitive sports people stay out but cricketers scurry back inside just when it is getting interesting.
Is it to stop the rain spoiling their designer hairstyles or is it because they may get damp and catch the sniffles?
I think it is stupid and should be stopped.
The weather should not win.
—
What you need, sunshine, is more homework if you've time to worry about silly things like that.
TV hell
YOU don't have to watch a free-kick for a pantomime as suggested in last week's column.
Just turn on telly's Central Sport Special.
It's the worst sports programme I have ever seen and the first I have ever turned off.
My wife was clapping her hands all night.
—
All night!
What a braggart.
TOP THAT
THE Football Writers’ footballer of the year award started 44 years ago.
Mr C. Jones, of Kingswood, Bristol, wins our first £25 prize by asking you to name the players in that time who have won the award with two different clubs.
The second £25 goes to Miss P. Burnett of Norbury, London.
She sent the first correct solution selected and knew that the teams this century who appeared in FA Cup finals and were relegated in the same season were Brighton (1983), Leicester (1969), Manchester City (1926) and Chelsea (1915)
EAGLED
CRYSTAL Palace are aiming to clinch the £850,000 signing of West Ham right-back Tim Breacker in the next week.
The cash-strapped Hammers will sell the £600,000 signing from Luton in October 1990, as long as the price is right.
They may then chase their top target, Charlton's £750,000-rated winger Robert Lee.
FORTY LOVE
PARTY TIME FOR CONNORS
NIGEL CLAKE
JIMMY CONNORS' 40th birthday bash was a two-hour knees-up in his beloved New York in front of a guest list of 20,000.
He won his first round match in the United States Open, putting Flushing Meadow into a party mood as he whipped Brazilian Jaime Oncins 6-1, 6-2, 6-3.
Old Jimbo can still roll back the years and reach into his glorious past, and how he loved it as the crowd roared at every winning shot and then sang Happy Birthday as a giant cake was rolled on to court for him afterwards.
A star-spangled gallery watched his dramatic win.
Actor Richard Harris punched the air when Jimbo made a winner, Romanian gymnast Nadia Comaneci shouted her support and actress Kim Basinger yelled ‘Go Jimmy Go’.
It was fun-time in the Big Apple and Connors admitted: ‘I had a great time.
That was my kind of deal in front of my kind of people.
‘I've had my greatest moments here on my birthday for the last 20 years and I don't intend to stop now.
‘I'd have stayed out there four hours if I'd had to.
I'd have done anything to win.
It was party time for me.
‘Jaime must have stood back and thought, ‘God, what's going on’.’
Connors left the Brazilian shaking his head in disbelief as he hit winners at will and showed the kind of form that rocketed him to the semi-finals last year.
Fans hung out banners for their hero, saying ‘We love you Jimbo’ and ‘Age rules’, and the game's greatest entertainer made it a night to remember.
He told the crowd: ‘It seems like I've been playing here forever — and you've been watching me forever.
‘I never thought I'd be playing until I was 40.
You have given me something I'd never be able to buy.’
Connors faces old foe Ivan Lendl in the second round today.
HAPPY RETURN BIRTHDAY boy Jimmy Connors conducts the crowd in a chorus of ‘Happy Birthday’ after demolishing Jaime Oncins in the first round of the US Open.
KO FOR KOP KID!
England ace Jones ruled out for six weeks
Souness suffers a new blow
RICHARD TANNER
TROUBLED Liverpool were last night rocked by the news that Rob Jones needs an operation to clear up a persistent shin problem.
It will sideline the talented right-back for up to six weeks.
And a further blow for the struggling Merseysiders is that key midfielder Michael Thomas won't play for a month after aggravating an ankle injury.
Jones, 20, will have to pull out of Graham Taylor's England squad for next Wednesday's friendly in Spain.
He missed the European Championship finals in June after suffering pains in both legs, a complaint commonly known as ‘shin splints’.
Surgery
Jones, a £600,000 bargain buy from Crewe last October, hoped that rest over the summer would clear up the problem.
But the pains have continued to trouble him and now surgeons feel an operation is the only answer.
Jones is likely to undergo surgery over the weekend or early next week — and he could miss up to 10 games while he recovers.
Thomas will also miss most of those matches after having his right ankle put in plaster to repair ligament damage.
It's a desperate double setback for boss Graeme Souness as he tries to halt Liverpool's worst start for 38 years.
And Souness' attempt to sell Dean Saunders has hit the rocks with Aston Villa still refusing to pay Liverpool's £2.3million asking price.
The Saunders deal is now off unless Villa chairman Doug Ellis increases his offer.
Souness had verbally agreed a £2.3m deal with Villa boss Ron Atkinson on Tuesday.
But Ellis intervened and insists he won't pay more than £2.1m for the striker.
Liverpool, who splashed £2.9m for Saunders 13 months ago, are equally determined not to lower their asking price.
So Saunders will be back in training with Liverpool today with Souness having to decide if the Welsh ace will be in the right frame of mind to face Chelsea tomorrow.
Big Ron could now turn his sights on his original target, former Kop star John Aldridge.
To complete a bad day, Souness has had an FA warning following remarks he made about referee Stephen Lodge after the goalless draw with Southampton at Anfield last February.
CHOKER: Thomas (left) and Jones are both injured
OWLS SWOOP FOR WEGERLE
JOHN EDWARDS
TREVOR Francis wants out-of-favour Blackburn striker Roy Wegerle to solve Sheffield Wednesday's sudden lack of firepower.
The Wednesday player-boss contacted Rovers last night in a bid to fill the void left by England marksman David Hirst's month-long injury absence.
Francis made his move after seeing his side squander a hatful of chances in their first match since Hirst cracked an ankle bone against Arsenal.
Wednesday lost 2-1 at home to Coventry and convinced Francis that he needed a stop-gap replacement for his crocked goal ace.
He wasted no time targeting Wegerle as the man to make the most from former England winger Chris Waddle's brilliant prompting.
Francis splashed out £1million to take Wegerle from Luton to QPR when he was player-boss at Loftus Road nearly three years ago.
And he's remained an admirer, even though the 28-year-old's £1million move to Blackburn six months ago has backfired badly.
The South African-born striker made little impact and is still out in the cold.
Now Dalglish could be ready to sell.
Francis initially wants Wegerle on a month's loan but if he is successful it could lead to his third £1million move.
Wednesday striker Nigel Jemson could be on his way back to former club Nottingham Forest.
Forest boss Brian Clough has agreed on a swap deal involving Northern Ireland winger Kingsley Black going to Hillsborough plus £200,000 cash coming Forest's way.
Wednesday offered Jemson to Forest last week but Clough was not interested.
But following the sale of Teddy Sheringham to Spurs for £2.1million Forest are now short of firepower.
WEGERLE: Admired
COTON STORM
MANCHESTER
City goalkeeper Tony Coton can expect to be carpeted by the FA following spitting allegations during Tuesday's win at Wimbledon.
Police have received complaints from Dons fans about the England B keeper.
A spokesman for South Norwood police said they would be sending a report to the FA.
COTON: Accused
Leeds land Iro
MARTIN RICHARDS
LEEDS yesterday snapped up giant New Zealand centre Kevin Iro on a two-year contract — leaving Australian Test forward Bob Lindner a very unhappy man back in Sydney.
Lindner thought he was on his way to Headingley on a similar deal and was expecting a contract to be faxed to him yesterday.
But Leeds boss Doug Laughton, knowing that Lindner would not be available until early November because of the World Cup final, switched his attentions to Iro.
Leeds hope the Kiwi international will make his debut in the home clash with Hull KR a fortnight on Sunday.
New Widnes skipper Paul Hulme leads the side into tonight's First Division clash at Hull KR hailed as ‘another Ellery Hanley.’
Phil Larder, the former Great Britain assistant coach now in charge at Widnes, says: ‘Paul has the same leadership qualities as Ellery.’
IRO: Shock deal
DOUG'S DILEMMA
KIWI centre Kevin Iro, who is joining Leeds from Manly, didn't do the business in Sydney this year, but the former Wigan ace can probably do a good job against English defences.
But after watching St Helens destroy Doug Laughton's men last Sunday, I reckon Leeds need a new front row as well!
THIS EXCUSE CUTS NO ICE!
ALEX MURPHY
MARTIN Offiah has been let off lightly over his Charity Shield loser's medal snub.
A fine of £250 is hardly going to hurt one of the highest paid players in the sport.
The punishment doesn't fit the crime, that's for sure.
We've made too many allowances for another top player who thinks he's bigger than the game.
I can't buy Offiah's excuse that he needed immediate ice-pack treatment on a leg.
A few extra minutes while he went up for his loser's medal wouldn't have made much difference.
It can't have pleased the sponsors and the whole affair overshadowed an excellent win by St Helens — who are going to push Wigan all the way this season.
Offiah said earlier this week that he's a lousy loser but nobody likes to lose — he's not unique.
But it takes bottle to bury your feelings and accept defeat, no matter what the competition.
The Charity Shield might not be the most important trophy but it's still a prestige event and it is used to promote the game.
Offiah is fortunate to be blessed with great natural ability and he is certainly the most marketable asset in Rugby League.
And with such a high profile, he should set a better example.
Sportsmanship might be an old-fashioned concept to many in the modern game but it has to be protected.
I'm sure I remember Offiah doing a lap of honour with an ice-pack on his leg after Wigan won the Premiership last season.
That was in stark contrast to the previous year in the same competition when he went straight to the dressing-room after Widnes lost to Hull.
The Wigan club were embarrassed by Offiah and team-mate Kelvin Skerrett's behaviour at Gateshead.
They've a tradition to uphold and the likes of Billy Boston, Eric Ashton and Brian McTigue wouldn't have acted like that.
The tragedy is that Offiah did some very good promotional work in Gateshead a couple of days before the game — and then blew all the goodwill.
He made a wonderful gesture by donating his jersey from this summer's third Test against Australia to the Daily Mirror's special auction in aid of stricken boxer Michael Watson.
He refused to swap it with opposite number Willie Carne after the game because he had promised it to the Mirror.
That shows he can become one of the game's best ambassadors.
MARTIN Offiah has the highest profile in the game and must take the rough with the smooth.
SKERRETT: Culprit
STRIP SHOW'S A SHOCKER
COLIN PRICE
ENGLAND rugby fans are getting all shirty over another kit change as Will Carling's men chase a third Grand Slam this winter.
For Carling's all-conquering side have worn three different outfits in the last 18 months.
First it was the all-white gear with a single red rose on the breast.
Then that was changed in a big-money deal with Cotton Traders for a pyjama outfit for the World Cup.
And now the one the players have chosen themselves on a split vote is sure to anger the traditionalists.
It is predominantly white, but the away strip is even more garish, a mix of red, white and blue.
ENGLAND stars Jason Leonard (left) and Dewi Morris show off the new kit with David Pears (middle) in the away strip.
SIR Colin Cowdrey has rushed back early from Asia to take personal control of the Pakistan ball-tampering saga.
But a cable fault knocked out the phone and fax at his home for two days delaying the arrival of the umpires' report.
They won't send over the 2,000 word revelation on what really went on in the referee's room at Lord's, when the Texaco Trophy ball was changed, until BT fix the fault.
BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU
CHRIS LANDER
THIS is the letter from TCCB chief Alan Smith that has gone out to every county secretary and effectively gagged England players from supporting Allan Lamb over his ball-doctoring claims.
Several Test players have told Mirror Sport they want to publicly get behind their gutsy team-mate, but fear Big Brother is watching closely and ready to get tough if anyone steps out of line.
To a man the England team are backing our campaign to flush out the truth.
One top player said: ‘It's just great the way the Mirror has stuck at prising out exactly what went on in the umpires’ room when the ball was changed during the lunch interval.
‘It's absolute humbug for cricket's administrators not to come clean and tell the cricketing world everything that took place inside Lord's famous pavilion that Sunday.’
Lamb himself commented: ‘I've had England players on the phone telling me what's in the Mirror before I've had time to go out and buy the paper.
‘Then they are back on again discussing the latest twists in the whole affair.’
Another Test star said: ‘We've told Lambie he has the support and admiration of all the England squad as well as the backing of every umpire in the country.
‘It would be a travesty of sporting justice if he is barred from the winter tour of India and Sri Lanka because he spoke out and told the truth.
‘How many times do you punish a man for speaking the truth?
That could be on cricket administration's conscience for years to come.’
SMITH: Letter
ESSEX MEN COME FIRST
They're out in front again
GRAHAM Gooch labelled Essex's latest county championship ‘the best of them all’ after his side clinched the title by beating Hampshire at Chelmsford yesterday.
The England captain said: ‘We've done it despite a lot of injuries and we've been without Mark Waugh for the last six matches because he's with the Australian team in Sri Lanka.
‘Every trophy is nice but perhaps this is our best of all because of the difficulties we've had this summer.’
Essex guru Keith Fletcher ended a 31-year association with Essex yesterday.
WHAT A CORKER
THE Essex boys celebrate with champagne on the balcony after clinching the championship at Chelmsford yesterday
Mac's smash
ALLY McCoist took his Glasgow Rangers goal tally past the 250-mark with a second half hat-trick as the Scottish champions surged to the top with a 4-1 win at Motherwell.
The striker, who last season claimed the European Golden Boot award for his 36 league goals, has now claimed 12 in ten games this term.
Mac's crunch
JOHN McENROE goes into today's US Open showdown with world No.1 Jim Courier insisting: ‘This will separate the men from the boys.
It will be an unbelievably tough match.’
But Courier is playing down the fourth-round confrontation at Flushing Meadow, insisting: ‘I see it as my next match — and every match is a new challenge.
‘I'm just going out there to perform well and see what happens.
No reason to expend any extra energy worrying about it.’
Ferrari U-turn
FERRARI the fast fading Grand Prix giants, are revving up for a revival…with British know-how.
John Barnard, the world's greatest designer, has been recruited by new team mastermind Harvey Postlethwaite.
The cars will be built by a team of 40, only a few of them Italian, and they could be joined by British engine designer Brian Hart for the Italian job to be done in Surrey.
DES IN GOAL CRAZY START
DES Walker's Italian League career got off to a hair-raising start as Sampdoria drew 3-3 with Lazio.
Channel 4 chiefs will have been delighted with the feast they served British viewers.
The game had everything — two spectacular own goals, brilliant strikes and marvellous individual skills.
Walker did an outstanding job to shut out German dangerman Karl Heinz Reidle.
But questions will be asked about a defensive unit that could give away three goals.
At least he played — England colleague David Platt was left out of the Juventus opener, a 0-0 draw at Cagliari.
Platt said: ‘As the season unfolds, I'm sure I'll get my chances to play and contribute to what looks like being a very successful season.’
SACRIFICIAL LAMBS!
Day 15 of the sensational Lambgate cricket scandal
DEXTER'S REVENGE
CHRIS LANDER
ALLAN LAMB'S sensational ‘Daily Mirror’ revelations about Pakistan ball doctoring will today cost him his place as an England cricketer.
Lamb and David Gower will be two famous omissions when chief selector Ted Dexter announces the 16-strong England tour party for India and Sri Lanka.
It means Lamb's worst fears will be confirmed as he discovers how his disclosure of the Pakistan ball tampering scandal has totally embarrassed cricket's governing body, the Test and County Cricket Board.
Erupted
Dexter dropped a heavy enough hint a fortnight ago by failing to back Lamb when the row erupted.
After Lamb had blown the whistle on the Pakistanis Dexter seemed to want to wash his hands of anything Lamb was doing — suggesting that the Northants captain's forthright comments would not just end with a fine and a suspension from his County bosses.
If Lamb's sacking does not come as a major shock then Gower's latest axing is mind-blowingly baffling following his much trumpeted recall for the third Cornhill Test match at Old Trafford.
Skipper Graham Gooch and Gower, one of England's true post-war cricketing idols, had buried the hatchet in the wake of one of the game's most public and personalised slanging matches.
The elegant Gower had rediscovered his appetite to be both combative and successful in the Test arena and had celebrated his return after nearly 20 months' absence by eclipsing Geoff Boycott's long standing English Test runs aggregate.
Gower's form in the last part of the series, when he had an average of 50, should have guaranteed his ticket to India.
Yet the selectors are set to perform a mystery U-turn by leaving out their greatest modern day left-hander and most experienced Test cricketer.
It is hard to believe that the hiccups over his newly published autobiography can be the real reason behind the decision.
True, Gower upset the Indian Cricket Board of Control with sensitive claims about ball scuffing in the last series here two years ago.
By the strict and draconian censorship standards of the TCCB it was extraordinary that these allegations were not heavily blue-pencilled.
Gower and the TCCB were assured the tour of the subcontinent was in no danger and that he would still receive a cordial welcome in a country where he is admired and respected having beaten Sunil Gavaskar's team there eight years ago.
With Lamb and Gower about to be dumped and the mightiest of all rounders Ian Botham unavailable today's Lord's team declaration will mark the sad end of an era for English international cricket.
It will be the first time in 15 years that an England tour party has not included one of the celebrated trio, who between them have appeared in 298 Test matches.
But if the departure of Botham, Gower and Lamb is a depressing thought, then the international comeback of Mike Gatting and John Emburey must be welcomed.
Now an amnesty has been granted reducing their five-year ban to a three-year suspension, they both deserve to play again.
But I cannot see any other members of Gatting's controversial South African tour being brought back.
Neil Foster of Essex would have made it a year ago after his spectacular haul of 106 wickets and remembering his superb bowling when he produced the performance of his life as the Test bowling hero of Madras under Gower's leadership.
But now his injuries have caught up with him, despite a brave battle to recover from recent knee surgery.
With no Lamb and no Gower I can see the chance for England's batting enigma Graeme Hick to go on the senior tour, even if he has not been offered a winter retainer contract.
Quite amazingly I hear that the selectors are undecided about taking the best wicket keeper Jack Russell — and could give Yorkshire's Richard Blakey a first major tour on the grounds that there will be eight one-day international games.
This is the tour party I expect to be named this morning: Gooch (captain), Stewart (vice-captain), Smith, Atherton, Fairbrother, Gatting, Hick, Reeve, Russell, Emburey, Tufnell, Lewis, DeFreitas, Malcolm, Cork, Jarvis.
MIKE'S SHAME
COLIN PRICE
BRITISH Lions prop Mike Griffiths last night insisted: ‘I'm no villain!’
Griffiths was sent off in disgrace for kicking an opponent in the head during Cardiff's 15-6 Heineken League win at Aberavon.
The 30-year-old forward could now be banned for three months under the ‘doubling-up’ system for getting sent off twice in two years.
Griffiths went down in Welsh history as the first person to be sent off for kicking one of his own players.
That happened against Pontypridd when video evidence clearly showed his foot came into contact with Stuart Roy.
This time he made contact with Aberavon flanker David Edwards in an incident which sparked a mass brawl and will almost certainly rule him out of Wales' international with world champions Australia in November.
But Griffiths said: ‘I like to play my rugby hard but I'm not a villain.
‘It looked a lot worse than it was.
He went down on a loose ball and my boot landed on him.
People say I kicked him in the head but there is no way I would do that.’
Cardiff's new Australian coaching organiser Alex Evans hopes to produce video evidence to help reduce Griffiths' sentence.
STAMP FURY
COLIN PRICE
Leicester 11, England 18
ENGLAND manager Geoff Cooke, horrified by violence that marred what should have been a gentle centenary celebration, read the riot act to the players after England's new kids on the block found themselves on the rack at Leicester.
His fury was directed mainly at Orrell prop Martin Hynes for starting the madness by stamping on Dean Richards, who had elected to play for Leicester.
Hynes was lucky not to see his England prospects totally wrecked by a sending-off.
But referee Ed Morrison's leniency led to bad blood spilling over in a six-man brawl as Richards looked for revenge.
Now Cooke has to decide whether England B international Hynes is ready for the step-up.
‘We must get back to the high standards of self-discipline that we have set ourselves in the past,’ said Cooke.
Inspirational Richards helped Leicester storm back from 18-3 down to 18-11 — and they could have snatched victory in the dying stages.
England's hero was two-try Nigel Heslop.
Record-breaking ful
Hold tight!
NORTHANTS might just struggle to hold on to the NatWest trophy they won on Sunday.
The draw for next season's competition pits the holders against Lancashire in round one and — if they survive that hurdle — they travel to Essex in the second round.
DRAW: First round (June 22): Bucks v Leics, Cheshire v Notts, Devon v Derbys, Glam v Oxon, Gloucs v Herts, Kent v Middx, Norfolk v Warwicks, Northants v Lancs, Scotland v Worcs, Shrops v Somerset, Staffs v Hants, Suffolk v Essex, Surrey v Dorset, Sussex v Wales, Wilts v Durham, Yorks v Ireland.
ARAZI SHOCK
CHARLES FAWCUS
FALLEN star Arazi missed his chance to shine again at Longchamp yesterday, but Henry Cecil got back among the big winners just in time for the St Leger.
Arazi was scheduled to try to put his flops in the Kentucky Derby and St James's Palace Stakes behind him in a re-match with the Royal Ascot winner Brief Truce.
But trainer Francois Boutin withdrew last year's demon two-year-old after one of the colt's hind legs swelled up.
And Boutin still believes that his horse will hit the heights again.
Problem
‘The problem is not serious and he should be ready to run here at Longchamp in two weeks,’ he said.
‘Arazi has been working like his old self and I hope he can go back to America for the Breeders Cup and win like he did last year.’
Brief Truce was unable to benefit from Arazi's  absence — he was beaten a neck by All At Sea, who became Henry Cecil's first Group One winner of the year.
‘If the going stays soft she'll go for the Queen Elizabeth at Ascot, otherwise we'll wait for the Champion at Newmarket,’ said Cecil, who tries to win his fifth St Leger on Saturday with Allegan.
But yesterday's race proved another boost for the Doncaster chances of favourite User Friendly, who beat All At Sea in the Oaks.
Ruby Tiger beat All At Sea at Goodwood and she was in action across the Atlantic on Saturday night, running second in the Beverly D Stakes at Arlington Park, Chicago.
She couldn't hold the challenge of Kostroma in the straight, but second place brought her earnings worldwide to half a million pounds.
Outgunned
Trainer Paul Cole had also been second in Ireland's big race on Saturday when well-backed Bright Generation was outgunned by Clive Brittain's flying filly Sayyedati at The Curragh.
Geoff Lewis was the man on top at Kempton when Silver Wizard ended his run of misfortune in fine style.
‘Perhaps people will start to give him the credit he deserves.
He's the best I've trained and the best I'm likely to train,’ declared Geoff.
REAPER ROBIN
HARRY LLOYD
BIG-PUNCHING Robin Reid faces five rivals at Crayford tonight but he won't be landing a glove on them!
The Barcelona bronze medallist's dog track debut is part of the Kent circuit's sixth birthday celebrations.
Light-middleweight Robin, self-styled The Grim Reaper, is off scratch in the Human Race over the sanded 206metre course.
Taking on the Runcorn betting shop cashier is Charlton's Steve Gritt who gets a 20-metre start.
Handy
The First Division leader's joint manager cannot be ignored from his very handy mark and bookies will almost certainly make him favourite.
Water Drip appears a tempting bet for the serious punters in the Birthday Stakes Hurdle although the 540-metre trip will tax his stamina.
The Walthamstow jumper was outstayed over the course and distance a month ago but has less to do on this occasion.
Back to form Sandy Cottage takes on the classy Lovely Charlott in the 6th Year Marathon.
Lovely Charlotte, who has been off-colour, may not be able to hold Sandy Cottage (9.38) over this stamina-sapping distance.
Trap one should be the box to follow in Catford's John Humphreys Gold Collar heats.
Four red box bankers are Murlens Gift, Mauir
Joyful, Skilful Dancer and Slatefield Magic.
Murlens Gift (8.32), 8-1 in the sponsor's ante-post list, has a fine chance to regain winning form after an August 21 beating at Sheffield.
Locally-trained Mauir Joyful (8.48) was impressive over the shorter course a week ago and is unlikely to be troubled in getting the extra distance.
Skilful Dancer (9.04) failed by just a head over the course and distance last time and an improved trap position should do the trick.
Gutsy Slatefield Magic (9.55) scorched out of the boxes four days ago and another fast exit will enable her to complete a quick double.
Wembley punters will seize on Handsome Henry (9.30) in the Pick Systems Trophy.
Powerful Barry Silkman's powerful all-rounder should soon be handily placed and once clear will be difficult to beat.
BAGS, the bookmaker company which awards contracts to afternoon tracks on the betting shop service, celebrates its 25th birthday at Hackney tomorrow.
Dysert Cheeta (4.37) could give the bookies the birthday blues from an ideal Trap 1 posit- ion.
Love-Lee
Sunderland 0, Charlton 2
ALAN Curbishley can't understand why Robert Lee is still at Charlton…but he's delighted he is!
Lee, valued at £650,000-plus, carved up Sunderland at Roker Park to show just why he's rated in the big-money bracket.
Said his co-boss Curbishley: ‘I was a bit disappointed when Lennie Lawrence at Middlesbrough didn't come up with the price we'd fixed but I'm happy the lad is still here.
‘He's a good player.
I can't believe nobody has come in for him.
‘But we've sold too cheaply in the past and it won't happen again.’
Things went Charlton's way against a Sunderland side that had John Kay sent off after 15 minutes and then conceded two bizarre second-half own goals.
Kay went for a head-butt on Colin Walsh, who refused to discuss the incident after the match.
But Curbishley wasn't so reticent, saying: ‘It was obvious.
The guy turned round and nutted him.’
Sub Craig sinks the champs
MARTIN RICHARDS
Wigan 13, Hull 14
TEENAGE substitute Craig O'Donnell had a day to remember with the try that humbled the champions and brought Hull only their third post-war win at Central Park.
The alarm bells were already ringing for Wigan in a  scrappy , error-strewn game, when the 18-year-old O'Donnell, in his only his second senior outing, stepped up for his moment of glory.
Scrum-half Rob Nolan chipped ahead, beat Steve Hampson to the ball, and sent the supporting O'Donnell scampering over for a 69th minute try.
Paul Eastwood added his third goal of the afternoon before a Hampson try, beautifully laid on by Shaun Edwards four minutes from time, gave Wigan hopes of a last-ditch escape route.
But Joe Lydon's touchline kick sailed well wide.
The shock result ended Wigan's run of 17 successive championship wins stretching back to last November, but will dramatically lift spirits at the Boulevard.
Wigan started the match without top points scorer Frano Botica and five Great Britain tourists.
Their problems intensified when wing ace Martin Offiah didn't appear for the second half after picking up a leg injury.
And Test prop Kelvin Skerrett had to be replaced six minutes after the break.
Eastwood missed two kickable penalties before he got off the mark with a 20th minute kick after Wigan were caught offside.
But three minutes later Wigan were ahead.
Andy Dannatt lost the ball in the tackle and from the scrum Edwards sent 18-year-old winger Jason Robinson sidestepping through from 30 yards out for a sparkling try.
Lydon added the goal and try machine Offiah had the crowd buzzing with his first drop goal in Rugby League — a coolly taken effort from 25 yards.
A Lydon penalty gave Wigan a 9-2 interval lead and despite the errors, John Monie's men didn't look in imminent danger.
But with Wigan using up all their substitutes when Skerrett came off, Hull stepped up the tempo in the second half.
Eastwood spilled a chance near the corner before Steve McNamara capped a tremendous spell of Hull pressure when he slipped Gary Nolan over on the last tackle after 54 minutes.
Eastwood added the goal and stop gap scrum- half Rob Nolan unlocked the door.
Hull yesterday upped their offer to £140,000 for Featherstone's tour scrum half Deryck Fox.
Tea's party
St Helens 24, Wakefield 12
NEARLY 10,000 fans turned out to see St Helens' new Kiwi signing Jarrod McCracken live up to his pre-match billing as the ‘new Mal Meninga’.
But it was fellow New Zealander Tea Ropati who led Saints to victory.
Stand-in kicker Ropati landed six goals from nine attempts and created a try for Alan Hunte.
Trinity held an early 6-4 lead, but were hit with two tries in the final six minutes of the first half as Saints finally clicked into gear.
First Bernard Dwyer and Shane Cooper combined to send Kevin Ward crashing over and then Dwyer kicked ahead for Sonny Nickle to win the race and touch down, Ropati landed both conversions to add to a couple of earlier penalties.
Saints again struggled to get going in the second half and had to wait until three minutes from time for their final try through Hunte after numerous handling mistakes.
Ropati again tagged on the extra points after a penalty success four minutes earlier.
Wakefield managed tries through Nigel Bell and David Jones and Peter Benson landed two goals.
ROPATI: Goals 
DEAN: DON'T BLAME ME!
‘I didn't mean to hurt Elliott’
DEAN SAUNDERS last night pleaded his innocence for the challenge that may have put Paul Elliott out for the season.
The Chelsea defender suffered serious ligament damage in his right knee after a sickening first half clash with Liverpool's Aston Villa-bound striker.
TV replays showed that Saunders went in with his foot raised and came down on Elliott's leg as they both steamed into a full-blooded 50-50 clash.
Saunders admitted: ‘It wasn't the best tackle in the world.
But there's no way I intentionally tried to hurt him, even though it might look that way.
‘The ball was bouncing about and I just went in for it.
It's just one of those things.
I'm disappointed more than anybody that he went off.
‘None of the Chelsea lads said anything to me.
I'm just concerned about his injury and I hope he's back as soon as possible.’
The Chelsea camp, though clearly distressed by Elliott's plight, refused to point the finger at Saunders — who was awarded the free-kick by referee John Key.
Boss Ian Porterfield said: ‘As I saw it, Dean Saunders came down on his leg but whether Paul twisted it as well we don't know.
‘These things happen.
It's a man's game.
We've no complaints but I was surprised the referee gave the free-kick to Liverpool.’
Unlucky Elliott, 28, knows all about knee injuries.
He had two operations to repair torn ligaments in his left knee and was sidelined for 18 months during his spell with Italian club Pisa.
Porterfield added: ‘It's a big blow — far worse than losing the match.
‘There has not been a better centre half in the country for the last 18 months.’
To cap a miserable day for the Londoners, keeper Dave Beasant gifted Liverpool their last-minute winner.
Beasant let a Mark Walters cross slip through his hands, leaving Jamie Redknapp a simple tap-in.
Beasant said: ‘I thought I had it covered but it just crept through my finger-tips.’
Chelsea looked worthy of at least a point after Mick Harford's 72nd minute goal had cancelled out a first half Saunders header.
HOT CHAMP
WORLD champion Stephen Hendry was in a hurry in Blackpool yesterday as he took only 58 minutes to reach the fourth round of the £140,000 Regal Welsh Open.
Hendry beat former English amateur champion Steve Judd 5-0 and in the process fired in breaks of 94, 78, 120, 68 and 97.
Former world champion Steve Davis also raced to a 5-0 victory in his match against the Australian John Campbell.
ACID TEST
FOOTBALLERS could face a three-month suspension — for taking ordinary cough mixture!
That is just one of the medicines on the FA's new list of banned substances.
But many of the Premier Division players claim they know nothing about the current drug-testing programme.
THE WONDER OF WHITE
JOHN EDWARDS
ENGLAND boss Graham Taylor can still call on Gary Lineker's deadly goalscoring instinct — by picking David White.
The Manchester City marksman is being tipped to win his first cap after surging clear of the pack as the country's top scorer.
A two-goal flourish in the 3-0 win at  Sheffield Wednesday lifted his Premier League tally to seven and thrust him into the frame for an England debut in Spain on Wednesday.
Peter Reid, City's player-boss, is backing White to fill the retired Lineker's role.
Reid said: ‘David has exactly the same single-minded attitude as Lineker, and that's why he will score goals at any level.’
4 OFF
FOUR Hereford players were sent off yesterday in their 1-1 draw at Northampton — the first time in British history four players from one side have been given the red card.
Sheffield referee Brian Coddington, who dismissed three Newcastle players at Derby last season, dished out marching orders to Andy Theodosiou, player-coach Greg Downs, David Titterton and Richard Jones.
Theodosiou was the first to go for stamping in the 72nd minute and Greg Downs followed after protesting at a penalty decision.
In the final five minutes Titterton and Jones also went after been booked in the first half.
Downs and Titterton were interviewed by local police after the game concerning an alleged incident of inciting the crowd.
Downs said: ‘If I said what I really thought about the ref, they would lock me up and throw away the key.’
Hereford's Steve Devine said: ‘There wasn't one malicious foul.’
TUC AT BLACKPOOL
TERRY PATTINSON
‘Change or die’ unions warned
TRADE union bosses warned the TUC to ‘change or die’ yesterday as they unanimously backed a survival drive to recruit more members.
Civil and Public Services Association chief Barry Reamsbottom told the unions' Blackpool conference: ‘We're stuck in a time-warp and must come in from the cold.’
And engineers and electricians leader Bill Jordan said the TUC was an ‘overburdened packhorse.’
Recruitment will be aimed at women workers, the self-employed and part-timers.
Miners' leader Arthur Scargill's call to defy Tory union laws was rejected.
PEARCE BACKS CLOUGH
NIGEL CLARKE
FOREST'S Stuart Pearce, who leads England against Spain tomorrow night, yesterday claimed: ‘Brian Clough is no quitter.’
With Nottingham Forest bottom of the Premier League, manager Clough is reeling from the club's worst start in his 17 years as boss at the City Ground.
There are rumours that he has finally ‘shot it’, that the old managerial magic has gone.
But Pearce, says: ‘I just can't see him packing it in for a younger man to come in.
He won't step down when things get tough.
‘He's more likely to walk out when he's at the top, not when he's at the bottom.’
‘He's still the same Cloughie — obviously something has got to be done.’
Pearce backs Clough
PEARCE: Determined to be the top gun when he leads England against Spain tomorrow night.
From NIGEL CLARKE 
PEARCE: Determined to be the top gun when he leads England against Spain tomorrow night.
NOT SO HOT ROD
John Edwards
ROD WALLACE last night pleaded for the chance to make up for his England heartache, writes John Edwards.
The Leeds striker's world fell apart when a hamstring injury cost him his first-ever place in a senior England squad in Spain tomorrow.
He said: ‘The fear is always there that you won't get back in.’
WALLACE: Hurt
Deane's plea
NIGEL CLARKE
BRIAN Deane, Sheffield United's star striker, last night asked not to be thought of as just a target man.
Deane is most people's choice to play centre forward for England against Spain here to-morrow in a system manager Graham Taylor is almost certain to change.
He has been quoted as saying he wants to play long-ball football and that 6ft 2in Deane would come in as his target man.
But Deane, who has scored four times this season, says: ‘There's more to me than being just that.
‘I feel I'll score goals anywhere in any system and not just as a forward player getting on the end of anything knocked long.
‘People would be wrong to think of me as just a centre forward who is good in the air.
‘I've got pace and I like to take defenders on either wide down the flanks or through the middle.
‘It's unfair to have a reputation just because of my size and my build.
‘It's always said I'm the perfect man for long- ball football, but I can play anywhere you want me to.
‘Maybe if I played with another side I'd get more recognition for what I can do.
‘But I've made it with United and now I want the chance to show what I can do at the highest level of all.’
THEN and NOW
FORGET the sangria and San Miguels, England got a slimline tonic when they arrived in Spain yesterday…in the shape of Paul Gascoigne.
Soon after Graham Taylor's boys touched down in Santander for to-morrow night's friendly against Spain, Gazza joined his old team-mates after a 10-hour trip from his new home in Italy.
The Lazio star, pictured left carrying a lot of extra poundage on his way to Rome two months ago, has shed more than a stone in weight since his £5.5million summer move from Tottenham — but he must wait a few more weeks before he returns to serious competition.
His England pals were last night trying to get him working before he leaves Spain…as a waiter in Eldorado!
Pictures: ALBERT COOPER
INCE WAR
HARRY HARRIS
GRAHAM Taylor had to promise Paul Ince his England debut to persuade him to get off his sick-bed and fly to Spain.
The Manchester United midfielder, originally called up for tomorrow's friendly in Santander when Trevor Steven withdrew, was suffering from a virus despite his match-winning performance in Sunday's 2-0 home win over Leeds.
Old Trafford boss Alex Ferguson withdrew Ince from the England squad after the game and was about to order his 24-year-old star to have three days’ rest when there was the sudden turn-around.
A telephone call from Taylor's assistant Lawrie McMenemy soon had Ince travelling south, along with United team-mate Gary Pallister, a late replacement for Arsenal's Tony Adams.
Ferguson explained: ‘Lawrie told me that under a new regulation Ince must join the squad anyway.
‘Then he asked me to tell Ince he would definitely be playing in Spain.
I put it to Paul and he decided he was prepared to give it a go.’
Taylor said: ‘Lawrie spoke to Alex and as we had lost David Batty we were quite short in mid-field.
‘It was right and proper to let Paul know he would be playing.’
The England boss then gave a breakdown of the dramatic telephone calls made during Sunday.
He said: ‘At 11.30am we were notified that Tony Adams was out.
‘Lawrie immediately contacted Manchester United to make sure Pallister was okay and was told to check again at 6.30pm after the match.
‘When Lawrie made the check call he was informed Pallister was coming but that Ince was out on his feet.
‘Ince had had an exceptionally good game and Ferguson was told that Ince would be playing in the England side.
He said phone back in five minutes.
‘When that call was made we were told both players would be coming down and we didn't have to apply any new rules.
‘We simply applied rule one, which is what most players are interested in — whether or not they are playing.’
INCE: England debut
PUT OUT
A HUNGARIAN shot putter last night became the first Paralympic Games competitor to fail a drugs test.
Danes Nagy, silver medallist in the event for partially-sighted competitors in Barcelona, was found to have taken metanodianone, an anabolic steroid.
Froggy rejects Ireland
TONY STENSON
ASTON Villa's Steve Froggatt opted for England last night — and infuriated Ireland boss Jack Charlton.
Charlton has been watching the teenage winger recently but England boss Graham Taylor has handed Froggatt an Under-21 debut in Spain tonight.
Charlton said: ‘Every time Graham Taylor finds a player with Irish parents, he is after him whether he wants him or not.’
Froggatt, who has an Irish mother, said: ‘I decided to play for England after speaking to my father.
But it hasn't pleased my mum!’
FROGGATT: Chased
Duke's treble
IAN GIBB
DUKE McKenzie came through his comeback at York Hall, Bethnal Green, last night to earn the chance of becoming Britain's first-ever world champion at three difference weights.
McKenzie fights WBO super-bantam weight champion Jesse Benavides of Texas at Lewisham Theatre on October 15.
McKenzie, the former IBF flyweight champion and ex-WBO bantamweight king, earned something of a hollow victory last night when Birmingham's Peter Buckley was forced to retire with an injured shoulder at the end of the third round.
McKENZIE: Winner
Trouble brewing
NEIL SILVER
CRYSTAL Palace chairman Ron Noades led an angry walkout of Premier League clubs as yesterday's sponsorship meeting collapsed.
Noades stormed out after eight clubs blocked the proposed £13million Bass sponsorship deal and six other club  representatives followed him.
FA chief Graham Kelly, who was in Spain for England's friendly, will fly home today to deal with the crisis.
SPACK'S BACK
Nigel rescues his old club
Vinny stays
FRANK WIECHULA
NIGEL SPACKMAN is likely to rejoin Chelsea from Glasgow Rangers today in a £500,000 deal — but Vinny Jones's £700,000 move to Wimbledon has fallen through.
Chelsea moved swiftly after Saturday's cruciate knee ligament injury to Paul Elliott, which has robbed them of their defensive kingpin for a year.
Rangers and Chelsea agreed a deal last night and Spackman, 31, will travel to London today to complete personal details.
But Jones decided to turn down his old Wimbledon club, where he made his name as one of the Crazy Gang.
Both Chelsea and Wimbledon agreed the deal, but after a weekend of soul-searching Jones decided to stay and fight for his place.
The deal would have taken Jones's transfers to almost £3 million, spanning four moves with the two London clubs, Leeds and Sheffield United.
Jones joined Chelsea for £575,000 from Sheffield United just over a year ago and a move to the Dons could be resurrected in the future.
Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear said: ‘Everything's on ice at the moment.
It might be a day or it might be a year.’
Wimbledon are hoping to sign Crystal Palace striker Stan Collymore for around £250,000 and could bring some cash back in by selling forwards Terry Gibson and Paul McGee to Coventry.
SPACKMAN: Talks today
SAD STAR
TONY James, two-try hero of Nottingham Rugby League Club's first win in 18 months on Sunday, has been detained in hospital at Barrow with internal injuries suffered in the first half.
James played the second period unaware of the seriousness of his problem.
Mel back
SHEFFIELD United goalkeeper Mel Rees, on the mend after a stomach operation, has joined Terry Yorath's Welsh squad although he will be out of action for the rest of the season.
RICH PICKINGS
Row looms over West Indies batting ace
Tykes in turmoil
JOHN EDWARDS
RICHIE Richardson will find himself at the centre of another bitter Yorkshire bust-up tonight.
The troubled Tykes meet at Headingley to decide on Sachin Tendulkar's successor as next season's overseas signing.
They desperately need a top-class fast bowler and ordered their cricket committee to come up with a suitable candidate.
West Indies pair Kenny Benjamin and Anderson Cummins and South Africa's Craig Matthews are believed to have come under scrutiny.
But I understand the cricket committee voted 4-1 to nominate West Indies batsman Richardson for a one-year contract to fill the vacancy until Craig McDermott becomes available in 1994.
And that will cause uproar tonight when the general committee gather to ratify the decision.
Yorkshire TV insist on a household name in return for their £30,000a-year sponsorship money.
But one Yorkshire committee member fumed: ‘If you need an engineer you don't go out and get a baker.
‘Our urgent need is for a bowler, and that's why we've failed to knock over the final three wickets in an innings on five occasions this season.
‘It doesn't matter how good he is.
It simply doesn't answer our need and is flying in the face of common sense.’
RICHARDSON: Cricket committee choice
CARLING'S TICKLED PINK
Will spreads the gospel
MATT HUGHES
NOW children that is hardly the way to treat England rugby skipper Will Carling!
His leadership is respected by all the rugby nations of the world, but a happy bunch of youngsters from Witham School brought him down to earth as they piled in yesterday at Twickenham.
But Will took it lying down — all in a good cause of course.
He committed himself to helping the future of rugby when he was elected president of a relaunched Young England Club.
The England skipper has taken over a club founded by one of his predecessors, Nigel Melville.
Carling said: ‘Developing the game is vital.
This club wants youngsters to choose what we regard as a special game.’
The organisers of Young England RC are printing 500,000 application forms to be issued to schools and rugby clubs.
TWICKERS IN A TWIST WILL Carling is flat out, but the young mixed pack is very much on the ball.
Picture: ARNOLD SLATER
DION DOWN BUT NOT OUT
INJURED Manchester United striker Dion Dublin watches and waits as his team-mates launch a devastating assault on the Premier League's early front runners.
The big man has been in a clinic since breaking a leg against Crystal Palace last week and the only way he can join in the Reds rise is by cheering them on in front of his telly.
‘I saw the lads beat Leeds on TV and wanted to be out there doing the business,’ said Dublin.
‘It's frustrating but I'll just have to be patient.’
And he cheered up on hearing he could be back before the six months doctors first predicted.
Picture: DENNIS HUSSEY
McClair says he's McClear!
KEN LAWRENCE
BRIAN McClair last night eased Alex Ferguson's worries that the Old Trafford virus had reached epidemic proportions.
McClair arrived in Switzerland with the Scottish squad for tomorrow's World Cup qualifying match insisting ‘I feel fine,’ despite fears by his Manchester United manager that he may have ended up in bed at home.
Ferguson thought the Scottish striker might be forced to withdraw from the trip to Berne because he feared he had been afflicted by the same illness which has hit more than a dozen of the Old Trafford squad.
McClair stressed: ‘Funnily enough, I've never felt better after a game this season.
‘In fact, it was about the only game in which I've not picked up a knock since the start of the season.
‘I did feel a bit ropey earlier in the week and a bug has been going around the club for sometime.
‘But it looks as if I've been lucky and escaped the worst of it.
McClair stressed: ‘I'm sure I will be ready to face the Swiss if selected.
I'm feeling good.’
RACEGOERS will have a chance to back a winner at Britain's next Sunday race meeting and stay within the law.
Officials at Cheltenham, which stages the trial fixture on November 15, have agreed to hold sweepstakes on the races.
By buying a £1 ticket, racegoers will be given a number which will correspond to a horse running in a race and, if it wins, they are guaranteed a return of 4-1 whether the horse is odds-on or an outsider.
‘After the Doncaster experiment we felt that this was the one element that was missing,’ explained chief executive Edward Gillespie.
The programme, to be televised by BBC, comprises eight races including the £35,000 Coral-Elite Hurdle, already earmarked as an early season target for Granville Again, Fidway and Flown.
There will also be two novelty events, though not the Desert Orchid versus Linford Christie contest that Gillespie had briefly considered.
User Friendly was supplemented for Saturday's Coalite St Leger at Doncaster and was among the small band of eight declared yesterday.
Clive Brittain's unbeaten filly is now as low as 6-4 favourite and Bonny Scot 11-4 with Corals.
JOHN BOTTOMLEY became the first trainer to miss the new official deadline for declaring jockeys yesterday.
On the second day of the Jockey Club's OJOCs system, the Malton handler's Swynford Flyer was the only horse to have been declared without a rider at any of today's three meetings.
Bottomley had in fact booked Lindsay Charnock to ride his horse at Leicester, but had not informed Weatherbys by the 3.30pm deadline.
TAKE GATT
‘I'm so sad for David’
CHRIS LANDER
MIKE Gatting last night said David Gower ‘will be sorely missed’ on the England tour to India and Sri Lanka.
As Gower's shattering rejection overshadowed Gatting's uneasy wait for his recall, the former England captain said: ‘David not being chosen is a very touchy subject.
‘I'm very sad he won't be there.
He's a very good friend.
‘We had a very successful relationship and partnership on the field during the last tour of India eight years ago.’
Unwise
Gatting, back after serving three years of a five-year ban for his part in the rebel tour of South Africa, has unselfishly not forgotten how Gower fought for him to be his understudy in the sub-continent.
Gatting added: ‘I'd be unwise to say anymore about David Gower at the moment.’
As for his own comeback to the official international cricket scene, Gatting admitted: ‘I'd taken nothing for granted.
My name had been bandied about in recent weeks, ever since the ban was reduced by two years.
‘Even today I wasn't presuming that I had been chosen.’
He confessed that he had ‘missed playing Test cricket over the past couple of years’ but had never lost the belief that he would one day play for his country again.
He had always banked on being good enough to play another Test match, even if he had been made to serve the full five-year ban.
GATTING GUN: Former captain Mike Gatting backs his old mate David Gower
GOWER ON ENGLAND
I'd have hoped the England team would have been selected on quality and experience but it seems those qualities are not important any more
Sacked David won't give up
COLIN PRICE
A BITTER David Gower blasted England's selectors last night after he was virtually the last to hear he had been tossed back into the cricketing wilderness.
The country's greatest scorer has been abandoned by the selectors for the winter tour to India and Sri Lanka and last night he said:
‘I would have hoped teams were selected on quality and experience but it seems those qualities are not important any more.
‘It's a very sad trend if that is the case.’
But what hurt Gower more than being rejected for flop Graeme Hick was the way he was told.
As England's most capped cricketer, he expected an early telephone call once the team was finalised on Friday.
But captain Graham Gooch waited almost 60 hours before phoning with the bad news at 9.30 yesterday morning.
‘Graham came up with the news later than expected,’ Gower said icily.
‘I thought the longer it went on, the better it was looking for me.’
Finished
And now Gower is wondering whether the war of words in his and Gooch's summer biographies has finished him off.
Gooch blasted Gower's attitude in his book ‘Captaincy’ and described the laid-back left-hander as his biggest failure in management.
Gower responded in his book ‘Gower’ by describing the England captain as driven by money and blasted former team manager Micky Stewart's soccer-style approach.
As Gower tried to bury the misery of rejection in the preparations for his wedding to Thorrun Nash in Winchester Cathedral in a fortnight, he admitted: ‘My words have come back to haunt me.’
After forcing Gooch to eat his words by winning an England recall this summer and passing Geoff Boycott's Test runs record, Gower had hoped for a late honeymoon in India.
Instead he will meet Hampshire officials today to talk about a new two-year contract.
And Gower is bitterly disappointed not to have made the tour squad after virtually apologising to the Indian Cricket Board for alleging their bowlers scuffed the ball in the final Test at the Oval two summers ago.
Those remarks, like his attack on Stewart and Gooch, were not due to be made public until next week.
But his publishers rushed out copies last week and prompted a furore in India.
Gower, who averaged 50 in the three Tests he played this summer and 44 throughout his Test career said: ‘To say I am disappointed is an understatement.
‘I really thought I had done enough after being recalled against Pakistan.’
Gower was even more stung to learn one of the reasons for his omission was that England play eight one-day internationals on tour.
‘Graham talked about the number of one-day games and about not having too many players of over 35,’ he said.
‘I had time in the wilderness when my form was not good and that taught me a few lessons.
I believed I put them to good use against Pakistan.
‘But I shall keep at it.
I've come to terms with the blow and I've a marriage to arrange.
Nothing will spoil that.’
GOWER: Tour rejection hurt him
THAT'S RICH!
RICHIE SIGNING SPARKS STORM
COLIN PRICE
YORKSHIRE last night signed West Indies skipper Richie Richardson — and sent three of their greatest old stars into a rage.
Brian Close, Ray Illingworth and Fred Trueman wanted a tearaway fast bowler but were overruled when paymasters Yorkshire TV insisted on the world's number two batsman.
The 30-year old Antiguan was recommended by Geoff Boycott, and Headingley legend Trueman blasted: ‘It's the same old bloody story.
What Boycott wants, Boycott gets.
Cricket committee chairman Close didn't even get a vote and threatened to quit as the county plunged towards a new civil war.
Former England captain Illingworth snapped: ‘The real reason for signing Richardson is because Yorkshire TV are paying his wages.
They might as well all resign and hand the club over to the TV bosses.’
Another committee man said: ‘We want an engineer and we've hired a baker.
It's crazy.’
Skipper Martyn Moxon and manager Steve Oldham both wanted a bowler to fill the £30,000 a year contract.
But Sir Lawrence Byford, the club president, insisted: ‘We have searched the world at great cost to myself and there just isn't one available.’
Novice Test fast bowler Kenny Benjamin, rated the best prospect in the West Indies, was just one of the names offered to Yorkshire TV.
But they insisted on a player ‘of international repute’.
Benjamin had powerful backing in the Yorkshire cricket committee.
Close, former England fast bowler Bob Platt and ex-Test spinner Bob Appleyard all wanted him.
But Boycott's supporters, who included his fellow former England batsman Phil Sharpe, carried the vote for 63-cap Richardson.
Close said: ‘This is quite ridiculous.
The decision has been made on financial conditions and not to meet the needs of the team.
Richardson said: ‘I have always wanted to play county cricket and this is a great challenge.’
Not so rosy RICHIE RICHARDSON had plenty to chew on yesterday after the West Indian's capture by the White Rose county started a row among the big names of Yorkshire cricket
NO: Illingworth
NO: Close
NO: Trueman
YES: Boycott
SWALES BLASTS TOP DOGS
ALEC JOHNSON
MANCHESTER City chairman Peter Swales yesterday hit out at the eight Premier League clubs who torpedoed the £13 million Bass sponsorship deal.
The astute soccer  administrator clearly believes there is a serious split which could lead to a ‘league within a league.’
Says Swales: ‘They fought pretty dirty.
What concerns me is that a group of clubs had clandestine meetings.
There was a prearranged cartel.
‘It is a dangerous precedent which could lead to a league within a league.’
Graham Kelly, FA chief executive, yesterday morning abandoned England's team headquarters in Santander to fly to London in a bid to sort out the crisis.
SWALES: Split
GREAT SCOTT
Wilko K0's Kenny
JOHN EDWARDS
JUBILANT Howard Wilkinson was last night celebrating a transfer triumph over Kenny Dalglish.
The moneybags Blackburn boss had demanded £1.2million for Scott Sellars when the out-of-contract midfielder joined Leeds in July.
The champions refused to meet it after selling the 26-year-old to Blackburn for just £25,000 six years ago.
Wilkinson came back with an offer of £660,000 — and was cock-a-hoop yesterday when a tribunal in Walsall ordered Leeds to pay £694,000.
The panel listened to both sides for nearly three-and-a-half hours before ruling that Sellars was worth £925,000.
And with Leeds due 25 per cent of any fee under a clause in the original July, 1986 deal between the clubs, it trimmed their outlay to just over half Blackburn's asking price.
Wilkinson headed north with Sellars, managing director Bill Fotherby and secretary Nigel Pleasants and said: ‘I'm over the moon with the outcome and delighted with the fairness of the English judicial system.’
Sellars’ only problem now is trying to force his way into Wilkinson's star-studded side.
Wilko has yet to find even a place on the bench for either of his two big-money summer buys.
Record signing
Former England under-21 midfielder Sellars, who signed a four-year contract two months ago, and £2 million record signing David Rocastle have both been left kicking their heels.
But the pair will be battling it out with Gordon Strachan and Steve Hodge for the vacancy created by Rod Wallace's three-week injury absence when Aston Villa visit Elland Road on Sunday.
IT was hardly a Sellars market as Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson scored brilliantly over Liverpool's Kenny Dalglish to beat down the price for midfielder Scott Sellars
WINNER: Wilkinson
DISMAYED: Dalglish
Paul on the mend
NEWCASTLE boss Kevin Keegan yesterday dismissed any fears about the future of Paul Bracewell.
The midfielder's career was almost ended by an ankle injury while he was with Everton.
Now the same ankle has been put in plaster for 10 days because of tendon trouble, but Keegan insisted: ‘It's not too serious and he will be all right.’
Meanwhile, Keegan revealed yesterday that a £1million price-tag won't end his interest in Ghent striker Eric Viscaal.
‘He's definitely worth another look,’ said Keegan, whose No 2 Terry McDermott watched the Dutchman in action at the weekend.
But Keegan is ready to pull the plug on a £500,000 deal for Mechelen's Swedish striker Kennet Andersson.
‘It's getting very messy and very  political ,’ said Keegan, who has set a deadline for the Belgian club.
He wants to know by tomorrow if they will allow Andersson to spend a month on loan at Newcastle.
BRACEWELL: Injury
BATTLE FOR BYRNE
SUNDERLAND boss Malcolm Crosby has warned West Ham it will take an ‘incredible offer’ to tempt him to part with striker John Byrne.
The Hammers are considering a move for the 31-year-old, but Crosby said: ‘I wouldn't consider selling him at the moment.’
Crosby reassured Byrne yesterday after the Republic of Ireland marksman was forced to pull out of the international squad with a calf injury that will sideline him for a fortnight.
Peter Davenport, John Colquhoun and David Rush are all in competition for Byrne's place at Oxford on Saturday.
But Crosby won't see them in reserve team action tonight because he's set to be away on scouting business.
Byrne was one of the heroes of Sunderland's FA Cup campaign last season, hitting seven goals as the Roker men marched to Wembley.
BYRNE: Wanted
SKY-HIGH LINDNER
MARTIN RICHARDS
RUGBY LEAGUE championship leaders Halifax have quashed persistent rumours that they have targeted Aussie Test forward Bob Lindner to help their title push.
They admit to having tentative  discussions with Lindner's agent several weeks ago but quickly lost interest in view of the player's sky-high demands.
Lindner, who was set to join Leeds until they swooped for Kiwi centre Kevin Iro last week, has claimed he has received an offer from another English First Division club.
Halifax secretary David Fleming said: ‘Lindner is a terrific player but he was talking telephone numbers.
‘As well as a £50,000 signing-on fee he wanted two cars and a nanny for his kids, plus his contract money.
‘We are still in the market for an overseas second rower and utility back to strengthen our squad.
‘But we think we have spent our money wisely on new signings up to now and won't be rushed into anything.’
MARK ASKS FOR HELP
MARK Ramprakash believes he needs help to get back to the top after being overlooked for England's two winter tours.
The Middlesex batsman, left out of the senior trip to India and the ‘A’ team tour of Australia, has paid the penalty for two bust-ups with his county and a lack of form in Tests.
He said: ‘I've found it very hard to relax because of the pressures.
‘I was so wrapped up in my own performances that I needed someone with experience to help.
‘I play hard and to win and that produces frustrations — and dealing with those frustrations is what I need help with.’
RAMPRAKASH: Out
Good hiding
HERBIE HIDE, Norwich's unbeaten heavyweight prospect, laboured to stop former European champion Jean Chanet after 30 seconds of the seventh round at the Norwich Sports Village last night.
The Frenchman's left eye was swollen almost shut from the end of the first round onwards.
But Hide could not floor the tough 30-year-old.
BOOKIE BASHER
CHARLES FAWCUS
YORKSHIRE bookies took a caning yesterday on the eve of Doncaster's St Leger meeting — and they're threatening not to pay.
A betting inquiry has been ordered over Lingfield shocker Jo N Jack, who popped up at 33-1, and BOLA is recommending its members not to settle until investigations are complete.
There was little on course money for the horse, but betting shops in Yorkshire were hit by a string of late bets, mostly of £30 or £40.
Jo N Jack has previously raced in Ireland for trainer/rider Joanna Morgan and is owned by her mother.
But yesterday the horse ran from the little known stable of Roger Ingram.
The gelding had failed to win over a variety of distances from five furlongs to two miles, but galloped clear in yesterday's mile and a quarter all-weather race under veteran jockey Chris Dwyer.
‘I was asked to take two horses from Ireland and this was one of them.
We brought him to Lingfield last week and he went so well on the sand, we thought he had a chance today,’ said the trainer.
A GAMBLE on Omidjoy, backed from 66-1 to 14-1 for the opener at Leicester yesterday, failed by the narrowest of margins when odds-on Fair Maid Of Kent got up again to lead on the line.
Minutes after appearing before a television crew to defend a jockey's right to have the whip in his armoury, Steve Cauthen was forced to use it aboard the short-head winner.
WHY I'VE HAD TO THROW AWAY THAT PHOTO
GAZZA  sheds more tears for England
I cry each time I see the video…
‘I thought the memories might help me.
They made it worse’
‘Being with England has made me realise what I have missed’
NIGEL CLARKE
PAUL GASCOIGNE revealed yesterday why he still sheds tears for his beloved England.
The man who wept during England's World Cup semi-final with Germany two years ago, now cannot bear to watch himself in the white shirt of his country.
And he admits he cries when he sees film of the glory days in Italy when Gazza was ready to become the best footballer in the world.
That was before his shattering injury that has taken 16 months off his career.
‘I just can't watch myself,’ he said in Santander yesterday where he has joined up with the England team to watch tonight's match against Spain.
‘I have had to throw the videos away.
In those dark days when I was recovering from my knee injury I'd play a video of an England match and upset myself all over again.
‘I have watched David Platt's last-minute winner in the World Cup match against Belgium, and a big lump came in my throat.
‘I thought a few reminiscences might help me.
It didn't.
Just made it worse.
I just wanted to go out and smash a door down.
Jokes ‘I will  watch the game against Spain because I am not playing.
It will be great just to be with the lads again.
‘I have missed it all so much.
English voices, the general banter, jokes, comradeship and team spirit.
‘Yes, I have been lonely.
I can't wait for the next get-together, and the thought of pulling on that old white shirt again excites me.
‘When I've played a few games for Lazio, when I'm ready and the boss says I am fit to return, I will bring the whole family to Wembley to watch me again.
‘I don't think I have much else to prove…other than that I want to be the best player in the world.
‘My knee is fine.
There is no doubt in my mind that I can be the player I was before I got injured.
‘I don't think about my knee.
All I know is that I want to give everything I have for England again.’
Gazza, now with Lazio of Rome after his £5.5 million transfer from Tottenham, expects his first match to be against Spurs on September 23.
By then he should have fully recovered from the injured right thigh muscle that has delayed his eagerly awaited debut in Italian football.
All being well, that should be at home to Genoa the following week.
He went on: ‘I am fit.
I can run around a pitch 25 times, no problem.
I don't know what a beer looks like.
‘I don't think about what the first tackle is going to be like, unless of course it comes from Stuart Pearce!
Or the first twist or turn.
‘It will mean so much just to play again.
‘I watched the European championship finals on television but I got down again, disappointed because I wasn't there.
‘But I kept in touch with Graham Taylor and the boys.
‘I involved myself by phoning the hotel to find out from the boss what was going on.
‘I knew I would never be fit to play, but I wanted to be part of it still.
‘I won't put myself forward for England until I have successfully played for Lazio.
That would be wrong.’
Taylor has already pencilled in Gazza to play his first match for England in the World Cup qualifier against Norway next month.
Gazza added: ‘Going back to Wembley is very much on my mind.’
Talent
It was there that he was hurt so badly, rupturing knee ligaments in Spurs' FA Cup final win over Nottingham Forest in May last year.
He said: ‘I will think about the thousands who will be watching and how I want to prove people wrong.’
There have been many doubts that Gazza couldn't make a come-back at club level or even contemplate straddling the international scene again with the outrageous talent that made him a folk hero.
He said: ‘I came to Italy for something different.
To try something new.
‘Of course I still miss the Football League, the chance to get stuck in.
You can't do that in Italy without getting booked.
‘But I just love football.
I like training and enjoy working out twice a day.’
But Gazza admits he missed Lazio's 3-3 draw with Sampdoria on Sunday that kicked off the Italian season.
‘Where were you?’ he was asked.
‘Did you go shopping?’
‘No,’ he grinned.
‘I was at home, looking to make babies.’
Gazza is slowly but surely learning the Italian language, making it work for him.
He said: ‘There was a dog barking outside my house.
It kept on and on.
‘I shouted at it in English but it kept on.
‘So I went through my phrase-book to search for something like ‘Shut up’.
‘I yelled out ‘Silencio, bastardo’.
There was immediate silence.’
The old grin is back on his face.
That old confident strut and swagger has returned.
He said: ‘I am nearly there, so nearly fit, so close.
‘It's been a long time and I am not going to rush it.
Pleased ‘Being with the English lads again has made me realise just what I have been without.
‘They were all so pleased to see me.
Nobody went on about my injury — just asked me how I was getting along in Italy.’
Gazza cannot wait to be one of them again.
And you cannot help keeping your fingers crossed for him.
THE ANGUISH OF DEFEAT ENGLAND'S World Cup exit was a sad occasion for Gazza but he's desperately keen to pull on that old white shirt again.
GAZZA limbers up with the help of Alan Shearer
Pictures: ALBERT COOPER
BUSTED
MIKE LANGLEY
THE Boot Room on Sky stars Andy Gray holding forth like a latter-day Bill Shankly in the tabernacle of Anfield.
That windowless cell was where Shanks and his managerial descendants thrashed out every topic.
I give Sky's version high marks for content but none for realistic decor.
The walls of the actual Boot Room, as I've seen it, have no room for blackboards or instructional pitches because every inch is covered with pin-ups picked for protuberant busts.
Come on, Sky.
Show it as it is!
GRAY: Star host
THAT'S OUR BOY
True Brit grit
MIKE LANGLEY
FRANK Bruno jibed this week that Lennox Lewis (Canada via West Ham) isn't one of ours.
I've suggested the same myself but, compared to Bob Fitzsimmons, big Lennox is as British as a bacon sandwich.
It's 100 years on Sunday since Gentleman Jim Corbett won the first world heavyweight title under Queensberry rules.
Fitzsimmons, from the Floral Dance town of Helston in Cornwall, took it off him five years later.
The charming Mrs  Fitzsimmons was at the ringside screaming: ‘'It 'im in the slats, Bob!’
Body-puncher
Her husband dutifully obliged in Round 14 with the blow he'd practically invented — a left deep into the abdomen.
The solar plexus punch.
Fitzsimmons, a vicious body-puncher, also invented the left hook and was the first to say: ‘The bigger they are, the harder they fall.’
He coined it when matched with ‘The Human Freight Train’, 21stone Ed Dunkhorst.
Fitz derailed him in Round One.
Fitzsimmons is the only native-born Englishman to win the heavy-weight title, but he'd emigrated to New Zealand as a toddler and fought almost entirely in America.
Argument
Lewis stuck around in London for five or six years longer than that — and he's come home again, which is more than Fitz did.
He'll want the facts right if ever qualifying for some later inclusion in ‘Champions of the Ring,’ the life stories of the heavyweight kings that's out this month.
Author Gerard Suster, not one to duck an argument, calls Ezzard Charles the most under-rated champ.
He says the style of Apollo Creed in ‘Rocky’ was based on Charles, known for his snaky swiftness as the  Cincinnati Cobra.
Floyd Patterson's hands, he says, were even faster than Muhammad Ali's.
But Patterson was knocked down more times than any heavy-weight champ — with Joe Louis in second place.
Mike Tyson is ranked: ‘Somewhere in the Top Ten but Joe Louis would have done him.
He might not have connected solidly with Jack Johnson — and his style was made for Muhammad Ali.’
So, excluding Tyson, who are Suster's best nine?
Ali, ‘the greatest champion’, Jack Johnson, Jack Dempsey, Gene Tunney, Joe Louis, Rocky Marciano, Sonny Liston, George Foreman and Larry Holmes.
But, as he admits, ‘Putting them in a proper order is a matter that will never be settled to everyone's satisfaction.’
* ‘Champions of the Ring’ by Gerard Suster.
Robson Books £17.95.
ALI: ‘Greatest’
TYSON: Top Ten
The decline and fall of a legend
MALEEVA KID GUNS DOWN THE GODMOTHER
Sad Martina loses heart
NIGEL CLARKE
THE head went a long time ago, then it was the legs — but on Thursday night it was Martina Navratilova's heart that had gone from her game.
The Godmother of tennis, who turns 36 next month, lost 6-4, 0-6, 6-3 to 17-year-old Bulgarian Magdalena Maleeva in the second round of the US Open at Flushing Meadow.
Afterwards she admitted: ‘That ranks right up there with the worst losses of my career.
‘Time is running out.
This could possibly be my last Grand Slam event.
‘I just don't know how much I have left in this head, these legs and my heart.’
Martina, the greatest woman player of all time, has now been beaten by three Maleeva sisters.
As well as Magdalena, there's Katerina 23, and Manuela, 25.
Navratilova said: ‘Thank God Maggie's the last one.
I beat her mother, Yulia, but obviously not well enough.
She went on to have three daughters.’
Defeat left Martina tearful, pale and drained and when asked about her future she said:
‘Next year?
It's pretty hard to think about that when you've just gone out of a Grand Slam event as early as that.
‘I don't even know where I will be tomorrow.
It's a lot easier to say you'll be back when you are 17 than when you are 35.
But I still have no plans to retire.
Target
‘I was so nervous out there.
Why?
Do I have to spell it out for you?’
It was Martina's earliest exit from the US Open since 1976, the year after Magdalena Maleeva was born.
She is now a sitting target for any kid new on the block and friends close to her say the defeat has hit her very hard.
In 1991 at Wimbledon, it was another pigtailed predator, 15year-old American Jennifer Capriati, who dashed her hopes.
Yet Martina believes she is playing her best tennis for six years.
She thought she was peaking at just the right time for her battle of the sexes match with Jimmy Connors scheduled for Las Vegas on September 24 with a 500,000 dollar first prize.
Yesterday's loss hit her hard and one friend said: ‘It's not one that a good night's sleep will make her forget.
‘Martina has to give serious thought to whether it is time to review her tennis career.
‘When her heart goes out of the game that's it.
Maybe it has just happened.’
MALEEVA: Shock win
UPSET A DEJECTED Martina Navratilova walks off court at Flushing Meadow following her shock defeat by Magdalena Maleeva.
Afterwards Martina, 36 next month, admitted that it could possibly be her last Grand Slam event.
GOOD BOY
Hit man's now Saint Jarrod!
MARTIN RICHARDS
BLOND bombshell Jarrod McCracken has vowed to throw of his ‘bad boy’ tag and help blast St Helens to the championship this season.
The strapping Kiwi international centre — 6ft 3in and 16 stone — has been no stranger to Aussie disciplinary chiefs while playing with his Sydney club Canterbury-Bankstown.
He was banned for seven weeks after a spear tackle and handed an eight-week suspension for biting.
And on top of that McCracken was sent off for fighting in a Test match against Australia.
But St Helens have no doubts about his magnificent rugby ability with Canterbury team-mate Terry Lamb describing McCracken last week as the best centre in the world.
And Saints hope the Bulldogs will let them keep their prize guy until late February so that he'll be available for the second and third rounds of the Challenge Cup.
The 21-year-old McCracken, who makes his debut in tomorrow's home game with Wakefield, said: ‘I've come to England with a bit of a reputation but I want to put all that behind me and get on with playing rugby and improving my game.
Dream
‘I've learned my lesson and changed my ways.
That spear tackle cost me my place with the New Zealand team against Great Britain this summer.
‘Playing in a Wembley final has always been a dream of mine and I think Saints can get there this season.
‘I'm quite excited about playing alongside Gary Connolly in the centre.
I watched him on the Lions tour and he's a very good player.
I think we can form a very good partnership.’
Saints coach Mike McClennan enthused: ‘With McCracken and Connolly in the centres we'll have something for the ladies and something for the opposition.!
‘McCracken is a real mean machine and quite lethal.
Saints fans have been honoured to have seen the likes of Tom Van Vollenhoven and Mal Meninga.
I think they'll feel the same way about Jarrod.
‘He has such awesome power when he hits the line and I think the English game will suit him.
We shall certainly be giving him the ball at every opportunity.
‘After his enforced lay-offs in Sydney he's raring to go.’
KIWI CRACKER: Jarrod McCracken boosts St Helens bid Picture: KEVIN FITZPATRICK
IT'S NOT OVER YET
Italian soccer won't be beyond our Ken
Big comeback for TV legend
IAN GIBB
THEY thought it was all over at the BBC 21 years ago when they switched off the most famous  football commentating voice of all, Kenneth Wolstenholme.
But to paraphrase the great man, it's not now!
He's back tomorrow on Channel Four to anchor their weekly live coverage of the Italian league, the best club football in the world, and he said: ‘This will be much more like the Premier League than what we like to call ours in England.’
It's beyond our Ken, TV's voice of soccer and it's top commentator through the 50s and 60s, that anyone could prefer the domestic Premier League highlights cobbled together for an hour on BBC's Saturday night Match of the Day.
‘There are far more personalities and characters in the Italian game,’ he said.
‘And, of course, our best players like Paul Gascoigne, Des Walker and David Platt are all there.’
The RAF hero who flew 100 missions over Germany, winning the DFC and bar, believes ratings for the new show will be sky high.
He said: ‘I think Italian football could well appeal to the ladies.
It is so exciting and skilful with many characters.
‘We will see top players from the rest of world, Brazilians, Argentinians, Dutch and Germans to enhance the flavour.
I'm really looking forward to it.’
Tomorrow's opener is between Paul Gascoigne's club Lazio and Sampdoria, who have signed England defender Des Walker.
And from next week-end, viewers will be able to get a double dose of Wolstenholme.
‘That's when we start our preview programme to the big Italian games on the Sunday.
That will go out mid-morning on a Saturday, just right for the fans who are getting ready to go to a domestic match,’ he said.
Ken Wolstenholme was never really lost to football after he left the Beeb and he commentated for a time on ITV's Tyne Tees station and recently worked for Tottenham's Clubcall line.
Whatever happens in this new Italian season, nobody can ever take away from Kenneth Wolstenholme the most famous football commentary line of them all, delivered in 1966 at the moment England won the World Cup: ‘They think it's all over…it is now.’
But not for Ken.
THEN: Ken Wolstenholme interviewing Joe Fagan and Don Revie (right)
NOW: Ken with England great Bobby Moore
BARD LUCK!
DAVID BARDSLEY will be re-united with Graham Taylor in Spain next week — nine years after the then Watford boss signed him from Blackpool.
QPR full-back Bardsley, 28 next Friday, comes into Taylor's England squad as replacement for Liverpool crock Rob Jones.
Taylor confirmed: ‘Like everyone at QPR he's started the season well and I was impressed with him against Arsenal.’
BUST-UP!
Blank cheques row at ‘broke’ Barnet
Flashman accused
HARRY HARRIS
STAN FLASHMAN'S Third Division Barnet are bust — and are in danger of trading despite being ‘insolvent’.
That is the extraordinary claim made before the new season started in the resignation letter of managing director Tom Hill sent to Flashman dated June 30, 1992.
The Mirror's Special Investigation into the affairs of Barnet have uncovered Hill's shock resignation letter.
It informs Flashman of the dire consequences of the club's financial predicament, recommending that the  controversial chairman sells out to a consortium as quickly as possible.
Hill concludes that if Flashman refuses to sell: ‘The alternatives involving possible legal action against directors and officials of the club and the club itself do not bear thinking about.’
Hill has informed the Mirror that he has been asked to sign cheques on Flashman's request without any knowledge of who would be the benefactors, or for how much.
Hill wrote in his letter to Flashman: ‘It would appear that the club is presently trading insolvently.
‘This may or may not be the case and I am in no position to establish this, since as you are aware you and Helen have exercised total control both financially and in all other respects without reference to myself or any other director.’
Helen is the company secretary.
She is also Flashman's wife.
Hill goes on: ‘I also have to state that I am staggered at the amount of money that appears to be owing and am at a loss to understand how such a situation has been reached.
‘In any event the system whereby I signed a book full of blank cheques in advance of you writing and issuing them was somewhat of a farce.’
Flashman threatened legal action yesterday when the Mirror investigation broke the story of a mystery cheque stub.
The Football League spokesman said: ‘It is our policy not to make any public comment until our investigations have been concluded.’
But Flashman insisted allegations in the Daily Mirror: ‘are totally untrue and are denied’ and added that: ‘Court proceedings are in the course of being instituted.’
FLASHMAN: Warned of Barnet's dire situation
FLASHBACK: Yesterday's Mirror reveals the Barnet scandal
Tony's big break
MATT HUGHES
RUGBY Union rookies Tony Underwood and Martin Hynes received a boost to their England hopes yesterday when they were called up for the today's game against Leicester.
The two are among five uncapped England players to face the Tigers as part of the club's centenary celebrations.
Hynes is set to replace the injured Jason Leonard at loose-head prop.
But while Underwood looks sure to take over from his retired brother, Rory, team manager Geoff Cooke warned:
‘We have Chris Oti and Nigel Heslop available and Tony must prove himself.’
Rory plays for the Tigers.
But Cooke has not ruled out a return for the wing legend, who scored a record 35 tries for England.
Added Cooke: ‘We'll have to see how Rory's RAF career develops — he's still playing club rugby.’
But Tony's sparkling form at England B level is sure to give him the left wing spot and set him up for the Test against Canada on October 17.
And with Leonard ruled out of that Wembley clash, Hynes could claim his place today.
UNDERWOOD: Call-up
HUNGRY
PETER NDLOVU, Coventry's 19-year-old Zimbabwean international striker, is banking on scoring up to 15 goals this season to send his value rocketing.
He scored his first goal of the season on Wednesday — and Ndlovu, who is rated by Coventry manager Bobby Gould as ‘the most exciting young striker I have ever worked with’, believes that's the first of many.
Ndlovu is already a national hero in Zimbabwe after becoming their youngest ever international at the age of 15.
Durie's Sheri party
SPURS star Gordon Durie hopes to carry on today where he left off with new striking partner Teddy Sheringham.
They both scored against Sheffield United in midweek in Tottenham's first win of the season.
But Durie picked up a knee injury and faces a late fitness test before today's game against Everton.
Coach Doug Livermore is keen to keep the £4 million partnership going.
He said: ‘They've struck it off and look a great combination.’
Spurs have called reserve team striker John Hendry into the squad, plus Nicky Barmby, who was called up to the England Under-21 squad this week.
Paul Allen takes over as captain in the absence of suspended defender Neil Ruddock who is likely to be replaced by David Tuttle.
Gary Mabbutt, last season's skipper, plays his first full game after three summer operations in a friendly against West Ham this morning.
Spurs are trying to get their Coca Cola League Cup tie with Brentford brought forward two days so they can send a strong team to play a friendly in Rome on September 23 against Paul Gascoigne's Lazio.
DURIE: Fitness test
Kevin loses Swede
NEWCASTLE boss Kevin Keegan is caught in a £500,000 tug-of-war over Swedish import Kennet Andersson.
The Mechelen striker, who is owned by his club president and leased out to the Belgian team, was on his way home last night after less than a week on Tyneside.
And although a three-man Newcastle delegation will watch Andersson against Ghent tonight, boss Keegan fears club politics are hampering his assessment of the player.
He said: ‘The lad is torn politically because while their president is happy to let us have him on trial, the trainer wants him back for matches.
‘It's an unfair situation.
We are expecting him back on Monday — but if he's only staying for three days it's a pointless exercise.
We want him for a month on loan to give him a proper chance.’
Keegan takes a 17-man squad to Bristol Rovers as his high-fliers bid to justify new promotion odds of 3-1 after winning their last six League games.
Fit-again central defender Brian Kilcline, key midfielder Paul Bracewell and new full-back John Beresford are all in the running to play.
KEEGAN: Unfair
ROKER ALERT OVER CROOK
Crosby has new target
£1m swap on cards
MATT HUGHES
SUNDERLAND boss Malcolm Crosby yesterday opened the door to a swap deal that would bring Norwich schemer Ian Crook to Roker Park in exchange for Gordon Armstrong.
High-flying Norwich had a £1 million approach for Armstrong turned down last year.
But the Canaries are likely to have more success if they throw 29-year-old Crook into the equation.
Crosby said: ‘I have not spoken to Norwich but I would be interested in Crook.
‘He's a good player and he fits the bill.’
Check
The Roker manager had planned to watch the former Spurs midfielder in action last week, but ran a check instead on Sheffield Wednesday's Danny Wilson.
But Crosby's move for Wilson has been put on ice while Southampton dither over whether to come back in for Armstrong after having a £750,000 bid rejected.
It's a complicated situation that leaves Armstrong in limbo — and almost certainly back on the bench for today's visit by table-toppers Charlton.
Crosby said: ‘I can't fault Gordon's attitude.
I've kept him informed and he has just to get on with his job.
‘I've got to be patient with players in the side but I can't afford to be patient for too long.’
Sunderland are unbeaten in four games but have scored only one League goal at a time when rivals Newcastle have been hogging the limelight.
Crosby said: ‘If I worry about what's happening up the road, I'll lose track of what we are doing here.
‘We are not doing that badly.’
SWOOP: IAN CROOK fits the bill at Roker Park
STAND BY YOUR LAMB
NOW LET'S HEAR IT FOR HIM AT LORD'S TODAY
MIKE LANGLEY
A MIGHTY blow for honesty can be struck today at Lord's — nothing is required beyond the crowd rising as one for Allan Lamb.
I'm not proposing a massed demo.
The headquarters of cricket isn't the place for howling mobs with banners.
I'm not calling, either, for sporadic barracking or bricks through the Long Room windows.
The great day of a NatWest Trophy final is certainly not the time for that.
But a serious point can be made with dignity by thousands of spectators simply standing to applaud Lamb when, as the toss dictates, he either leads Northants down the pavilion steps or walks out to face the Leicestershire attack.
Those fans today should not waste their opportunity to show the ICC, the TCCB, the MCC — and all other initials conveying infirmity — exactly what the public think of official evasiveness.
Pakistan doctored the ball in the Texaco Trophy at Lord's, but the authorities admit nothing.
Every particle of evidence remains under lock and key.
The umpires' statement, the match referee's ruling, even the allegedly mistreated ball itself — although I wouldn't be surprised to hear it's disappeared in a burglary!
We'd know nothing of that damaged ball but for outspoken Allan Lamb.
He defied suspension under a gagging contract imposed by the counties on their cricketers — but which, I feel, the players should have refused to sign.
They'd been duped into believing the gag (nothing may be published without sanction from Lord's) protected them.
But wouldn't cricket have been better served by frankness from the outset and an early investigation of suspicions concerning Pakistan?
My postbag is the proof that a season's secrecy — until Lamb forced some overdue action — has exposed professional cricket to the public as a game prepared to condone or cover-up cheating.
A game that shrugs its shoulders while figuratively dropping Exhibits A to Z down the nearest grid.
A game where the Test and County Cricket Board yearns for powers that would allow Allan Lamb to be hung in chains as a warning to all whistleblowers.
The TCCB meet two weeks' after today's final to decide on what further punishment can be meted out to Lamb on top of a two-match ban and threat of expulsion from the England dressing-room.
I say they shouldn't get away with that.
I say you fans at Lord's can shame the TCCB into a re-think.
So let's it hear it this morning for Allan Lamb.
Stand up and be counted for fair play and truth!
Eu are not to blame says Watson
IAN GIBB
MICHAEL Watson has recovered enough from brain surgery to tell conqueror Chris Eubank: ‘It was my own fault.’
Watson, who hovered near death and needed two brain operations after his  twelfth -round collapse in a WBO super-middleweight title fight at Tottenham a year ago this month, is even talking about a comeback!
Of course, it won't happen.
Islington's brave battler can still barely talk above a  whisper .
But he is making a remarkable recovery.
In an interview published by Boxing News he said: ‘I've told Eubank to bring the Belt he owes me.
‘He says I'm the champ and I told him to tell everyone.
I'd fight him again.
‘Next time I would keep my hands up — it was my own fault.
I've seen the fight many times on video.’
Watson, for whom The Mirror helped raise £150,000 in a special appeal night in July, is being cared for in an East London neurological rehabilitation unit, added: ‘I am here until next March — it's driving me crazy because I want to make a comeback.
There's nobody out there to beat me.’
WATSON: Interview
YOUNG FERGIE IS SENT OFF
KEN LAWRENCE
Switzerland 2, Scotland 0
MANCHESTER UNITED star Darren Ferguson was sent off in disgrace as Scotland were beaten in this European Under-21 championship qualifier at Sursee last night.
Ferguson, son of United boss Alex, went for two bookable offences in a stormy game that saw three dismissals.
The young midfielder was booked for a foul on Jean Karlen in the 28th minute.
And when he clashed with Mario Cantaluppi in the 65th minute he was sent packing.
The Swiss player also got his marching orders and team-mate Raphael Comisetti went two minutes later for a lunge at Darren Salton.
The young Scots crashed to a surprise defeat through goals from Sven Christ and sub Marcel Meier.
Ferguson became the first player to be sent off in the six-year reign of Scotland manager Andy Roxburgh.
But Under-21 boss Craig Brown said: ‘I felt Darren was unfortunate, but he made it easy for the official by a slight push.
‘I'm not exonerating him but a lot of refs would have maybe done it differently.’
I'M SORRY
Come back Nigel
Young Cloughie backs the boss
HARRY HARRIS
GRAHAM TAYLOR yesterday turned for salvation to Nigel Clough, the Nottingham Forest star who declared England had no chance of winning the next World Cup.
Only three weeks ago Clough launched a scathing attack on the way he was treated at the European championship finals in Sweden this summer and voiced his disapproval at manager Taylor's long-ball style.
But Taylor was in a forgiving mood here in Santander when Clough was named in a new-look attack for tonight's friendly against Spain.
Clough had written in a newspaper column: ‘If England are switching to kick-and-rush football, you can count me out.
So-called direct tactics wouldn't be good enough to beat the best teams at international level.
‘I've only ever known one way to play the game, and that is to pass the ball on the floor.
Impact ‘The long-ball game is no good to me and it won't enable England to succeed in the 1994 World Cup in America.’
Clough was embarrassed by the newspaper article and clearly sorry over the impact of his remarks.
But last night he insisted he had no grudge against Taylor, even though in his column he openly discussed his innermost anguish at being one of only three England players not to kick a ball during finals.
Clough wrote: ‘I felt angry, frustrated, disappointed, useless and unused for a whole week.
‘It was the most frustrating time of my life sitting on the bench and watching our hopes blow up in smoke.
‘Graham Taylor was trying to get us through to the semi-finals in the best way he knows — rightly or wrongly.
‘I don't believe for one minute I'd have been the saviour, but I'd have loved the chance to make a contribution in my country's hour of need.
I I Turn to Page 26
U From Back Page might even have got us a goal.’
Now red-faced Clough wins his eighth cap, saying sorry and backing Taylor.
‘I am happy to do any job for Graham Taylor, and it's nice to have the likes of Peter Beardsley praising my ability and fighting my corner,’ he said.
Taylor added: ‘Nigel will be asked to play as he does for his club, his normal game.
‘Okay, he didn't play in Sweden but who's to say he wouldn't have done had we got to the final?
‘When I took over in 1990, Nigel only had one cap and I wasn't absolutely convinced that he would be an integral part of the team.
‘Now I am looking for Nigel to produce his club form.
I am not saying anything about the short or long-ball game, only what is right at the proper time.
‘We are looking to get the ball to Alan
Shearer, David White and Andy Sinton.’
Clough is excited at the prospect of linking up with free-scoring forwards like Shearer and White.
He had a close look at Shearer in Saturday's match at Blackburn, and added: ‘He's the sort of player that makes you want to get the ball to him as many times as possible.
‘Now I just want to fit in and become a member of a successful side.’
GAME FOR A LAUGH!
Clough and Gazza during training in Spain Picture: ALBERT COOPER
THREE weeks ago Clough blasted England's tactics
WHITE: Goal ace
STEVE CAUTHEN was happy to hear that a Jockey Club working party is being set up to look into use of the whip.
‘It's something that should have been done a long time ago.
It's as difficult for the stewards as it is for us,’ he said.
LOCHSONG IN RECORD BID
CHARLES FAWCUS
LOCHSONG clicked again at Doncaster yesterday and now she's attempting the impossible.
No horse in history has landed the Stewards Cup, Portland Handicap and Ayr Gold Cup treble, but Lochsong is off to Scotland next week with the first two in the bag.
Ian Balding's filly is 7-1 favourite for Ayr with sponsors Ladbrokes, but jockey Willie Carson knows she has a job on.
‘She's tough and game and the ground at Ayr should suit her better than this,’ said Willie after Lochsong had just held on to take the Portland.
‘But she gets a 7lb penalty next week and will the soft ground be enough to wipe that out,’ queried Willie who has reached his 21st century on Tuesday.
Carson has to be at Newbury on Cup Day and Balding may well use apprentice Francis Arrowsmith.
Venture Capitalist almost caught Lochsong yesterday and her trainer Richard Hannon is only too happy to take Lochsong on again in Scotland.
‘We didn't get the run of this race,’ said Richard who went on to win the next with Notley.
Difference
‘Blinkers did the job for him.
He's been a bit disappointing and they made the difference.’
The Kerry Group Irish Champion Stakes lost one of its biggest draws yesterday when Rodrigo de Triano was not entered for the Group One race at Leopardstown on Sunday.
Find us a star
COLIN PRICE
BRIAN CLOSE was last night challenged to find Yorkshire a proven world class fast bowler.
As cricket chairman Close raged on about the decision to sign West Indies batsman Richie Richardson instead of a genuine quickie he was told: ‘You find one and we'll sign him.
They are just not about.’
 Beleaguered chief executive Chris Hassall said: ‘The two we talked to — Ken Benjamin and Anthony Cummins — have only just come onto the scene and they are very inexperienced in real international cricket.
‘It was felt they didn't really measure up.
Everyone here accepts we need a bowler, the problem is there is no-one of sufficient stature.
‘We didn't want to be another Surrey, where Rudi Bryson has been a disaster.’
But Close, who is considering whether to resign in protest, insisted: ‘There are two tours this winter by the West Indies.
What if Benjamin and Cummins make names for themselves and become world class by next summer.
‘They might be available — but someone else will sign them.
‘We know Richardson is a fine batsman but the real need is for a fast bowler.’
Man in the middle RICHIE Richardson is one of the world's great batsmen, but Brian Close believes Yorkshire's need is for a top strike bowler and not the West Indies captain
Foxy move
MARTIN RICHARDS
BRADFORD Northern finally snared Deryck Fox at the fourth attempt yesterday — helped by three local businessmen and 200 fans digging into their own pockets.
The 27-year-old Great Britain rugby league star joined Northern from Featherstone Rovers for £140,000, a record for a scrum half.
And after watching Fox initial a three-year contract, Northern chairman Chris Caisley commented: ‘It's been the most difficult job I've had since being here, both financially and having to deal with Featherstone.’
Fox turned down a move to Hull at the weekend but Northern had to match the Humbersiders' £140,000 offer before clinching the deal.
They had originally offered £100,000 for Fox, who asked relegated Rovers for a move just before he left on the Lions tour Down Under in May.
‘This has been a success story for Bradford supporters,’ added Caisley.
‘Two hundred fans have contributed in one shape or another with people coming with a fiver in the hope it would help.
Featherstone will now use a slice of the Fox cash to recruit an Aussie scrum half.
Great Britain tour skipper Garry Schofield will head back to Australia next summer to play for Manly on a £50,000 short-term contract.
He will team up with Widnes star John Devereux who agreed a short-term deal with Manly coach Graham Lowe last week.
Schofield and Devereux are expected to fill the centre roles left by Michael O'Connor who has retired, and Kevin Iro, who joins Leeds next week.
DERYCK FOX celebrates his switch to Bradford
BRIAN CLOSE ON THE BIG YORKSHIRE BUST-UP
‘I've been stitched up by the Richardson gang’
JOHN EDWARDS
BRIAN CLOSE
I WAS ready to turn my back on Yorkshire and end an association stretching back 40-odd years over the decision to sign Richie Richardson.
As I made my way home and tried to comprehend the logic of taking another batsman on board, I kept arriving at the same conclusion — that I'd be better off out of it.
I could see no just cause for carrying on after arguing vehemently against the idea, then seeing it carried.
As cricket chairman, I was left to carry the can for a move that made no sense and was none of my doing.
And I wasn't prepared to go along with that.
There was only one thing for it, and that was to sever a connection that — save for a seven-year stint with Somerset in the 70s — goes back to 1949.
The president, Sir Lawrence Byford, talked me out of it yesterday by imploring me to stay and fight my corner rather than walk away.
Heavy
I saw sense and decided I wouldn't take my bat home after all.
But I did it with a heavy heart, I can tell you.
I'm still absolutely disgusted at what has happened, but the emotion is one of sadness and bitter regret rather than anger.
Seeing that ruling railroaded through made it the saddest day of my life.
I was ready to chuck it all in after a decision that flew in the face of reason.
For starters, we only decided to break down the barriers and go for overseas imports last year because we needed an out-and-out fast bowler to make any impact on the championship.
Batsman Sachin Tendulkar was engaged this summer simply because Craig McDermott pulled out with an injury at the last minute.
The lad has done a lot for the club out in the middle and in the dressing room, but hasn't answered our prime need — someone to knock over the opposition.
Now we've signed up Richardson, who may be the world's number two batsman but will do no more than Tendulkar to sharpen our cutting edge.
And I'm haunted by the fear that we're going to pay a hefty price for ignoring the claims of Kenny Benjamin and Anderson Cummins.
The detractors say they are relative newcomers who would have constituted a gamble.
Host
But try selling that argument to the counties who took on Mike Procter, Malcolm Marshall, Courtney Walsh, Waqar Younis, Allan Donald and a host of others who arrived as untried prospects.
Sir Richard Hadlee is another who was nowhere near his knighthood as Test cricket's leading wicket-taker when Notts first tossed him the new ball.
They have all blossomed into world-class talents, and their counties have prospered with them.
We could have done the same with Benjamin.
I want to make it clear that the cricket committee did not put forward Richardson's name unanimously, as some have suggested.
Bob Platt and I pressed for a bowler as fiercely as we could, but to no avail.
The club went for another batsman instead, and that's why I was intent on resigning.
But I won't.
REJECTED: Kenny Benjamin was Close's choice
GEM: Hampshire's Malcolm Marshall
GEM: Courtney Walsh
GEM: Waqar Younis
GEM: Richard Hadlee
Disaster for Davis
FORMER world snooker champion Steve Davis was dumped from the Dubai Duty Free Classic in Blackpool yesterday by Wayne Jones.
After losing 5-2, Davis said: ‘I've no complaints but this was best forgotten.
It's an occupational hazard.’
Welshman
Jones, 33, took a 3-0 lead and never looked in any danger after that.
Another loser was world number five Neal Foulds, who crashed 5-3 to Accrington's 143rd-ranked Shokat Ali.
Salisbury shows 'em
LEG spinner Ian Salisbury, left out of the England tour squad for India, sent Lancashire crashing to one of the worst championship defeats in their history in the last Old Trafford match of the season against Sussex.
They were humiliated with a day and a half to spare by an innings and 182 runs — just 18 runs less than their record loss against Yorkshire in 1938.
Salisbury followed a career-best six for 29 in the first innings with five for 54 in the second for match figures of 11 for 83.
Webb gets chop
MATT HUGHES
THE man who masterminded Derby County's escape from bankruptcy was yesterday shown the red card by the club.
Stuart Webb, who has been secretary, chairman and managing director during 21 years at Derby was unanimously voted out as associate director after constant conflict with the board.
His position as a member of the Football League Management Committee could also be under threat.
Webb was one of the key figures in the restructuring of the Football League following the breakaway of the Premier League.
Webb's finest hour came in 1984 when, with Derby just days away from going out of business with debts of £1.5 million, he promoted himself from managing director to chairman.
He then persuaded the late Robert Maxwell to join the board.
Webb is currently out of the country on business and neither Rams' chairman, Brian Fearn or owner and vice-chairman Lionel Pickering, would comment on the matter.
Daley's knee op
ASTON VILLA winger Tony Daley yesterday had an exploratory operation to assess knee ligament damage and is out for a month.
But manager Ron Atkinson is hoping to complete the £2.25million signing of Liverpool striker Dean Saunders in time for Sunday's televised game at Leeds — just 24 hours before Cyrille Regis goes into hospital for an Achilles tendon injury.
Atkinson is also giving a trial to Canadian striker Alex Bunbury.
Mardon nightmare
PAUL Mardon, Birmingham City's £1 million rated central defender, has suffered a setback in his bid to clinch a dream move to Liverpool.
Mardon, who began a week's trial at Anfield on Monday, suffered an ankle ligament injury during training which will sideline him for two weeks.
He said: ‘It's the second time I've suffered this sort of problem.
There was nothing said about the transfer.
All I can do is try and get back in the side.’
Last season Mardon's hopes of joining Liverpool were also hit by injury.
RECORD BREAKERS
Colin hits lucky 13th
DAVID MOORE
N Ireland 3, Albania 0
RECORD-BREAKER Colin Clarke set Northern Ireland off on a World Cup romp in Belfast last night.
Portsmouth striker Clarke fired his way into the history books with his 13th goal for the Irish to finally beat the all-time best of 12, which he previously shared with Gerry Armstrong, Joe Bambrick and Billy Gillespie.
And Clarke admitted: ‘It's a weight off my mind.
I've been waiting for four or five games, so it's a bit of a relief.’
Kevin Wilson and Jim Magilton also hit the target in the first half, after the Albanians had started this Group Three qualifier with a bang.
Following the disappointment of April's 2-2 home draw with unfancied Lithuania, when the Irish surrendered a 2-0 lead, this victory will put some colour back into the cheeks of Billy Bingham's boys.
The boss must now drive his troops on towards tough games against Spain and reigning European champions Denmark at Windsor Park during the next two months.
Bingham's new-look outfit, with Mal Donaghy pushed into a holding midfield role, and Kingsley Black dropped after a run of 22 caps, finished well in control against the Albanians.
But their nerves were twitching early on as Albania cut loose with fast, lively football.
Irish keeper Tommy Wright did well to shove over a fierce shot fired in by Altin Reaklli after just 30 seconds.
Then Wright grabbed Ilir Kepa's header, watched Eduard Abazi's drive clear the bar and later blocked another blast by Kepa.
But the game changed character dramatically in the 14th minute, when Clarke's breakthrough dampened Albania's spirit.
Attack partner Iain Dowie battled through two tackles on the edge of the penalty box, before the ball broke kindly for Clarke to sweep his shot wide of visiting keeper Foto Strakosha.
Goal number two arrived in the 29th minute.
Kevin Wilson was given space by Clarke's precise header to beat Strakosha with a low cross shot.
And he set up the third, after 44 minutes, with a 20-yard effort that Strakosha could only shove out.
Magilton then seized his chance, collecting the rebound to score from close range.
CLARKE'S CRACKER: Northern Ireland's Colin Clarke blasts the first goal of the game — and his record 13th for the team.
ROYALS SEE RED
HUGH JAMIESON
WBA 3, Reading 0
READING had four players booked and defender Phil Parkinson sent off against Second Division leaders West Bromwich.
Scott Taylor, Jeff Hopkins, Parkinson and Kevin Dillon all had their names taken before Parkinson got his marching orders for a foul on Bob Taylor.
Unbeaten Albion scored through Simon Garner, Taylor and Craig Shakespeare.
United bonus
MANCHESTER United's Ryan Giggs, Dennis Irwin, Clayton Blackmore and Darren Ferguson have all lost their ‘foreign’ tag.
They will now be classed by UEFA as ‘assimilated’— and United can choose two of them in their squad to face Russian side Moscow Torpedo in the UEFA Cup first round clash later this month.
GOUGH OFF
KEN LAWRENCE
SWITZERLAND 3 SCOTLAND 1
SKIPPER Richard Gough was sent off as Scotland's World Cup hopes were hammered by a late Swiss surge at the Wankdorf Stadium last night.
It was a disastrous night for Andy Roxburgh's men, despite the fact that they went in at half-time all square at 1-1.
Gough got his marching orders from Dutch referee Mario Van Der Ende when he caught the ball during a devastating Swiss assault.
The day had started in farce when keeper Andy Goram somehow lost his passport on Scotland's team coach.
Only hurried negotiations between the Scots and the British Embassy produced the necessary clearance papers in time for the keeper to play.
And within two minutes of this Group One clash, Goram must have been wishing his accreditation hadn't come through.
Swiss midfielder Alain Sutter was allowed to run hard at the Scottish rearguard, forcing Gough to concede a corner.
Sutter took the kick himself and Adrian Knup rose unchallenged to head down and past the stranded Goram.
But Ally McCoist put the Scots back in the game when he hit his 13th international goal in the 13th minute.
Gordon Durie stole down the right and seeing the defences lack of organisation, he blasted in a low pass which McCoist drove home first time.
But then Knup grabbed back the lead in the 72nd minute and ten minutes later, Georges Bregy thundered home a 30-yard free-kick.
And as Switzerland began to run riot, Gough was sent off in the 84th minute for handling the ball as Knup threatened to break through again.
Knup rocker SWISS forward Adrian Knup rises unmarked over the Scottish defence to head the opening goal.
ADIOS TAYLOR!
The DAILY MIRROR SPEAKS ITS MIND
…and this is the picture the whole nation wants to see WAVING GOODBYE
AND THAT GOES FOR BIG LAWRIE
NEIL SILVER
Steve Clarke, Chelsea's Scottish international defender, had a hernia operation yesterday and will be out of action for five weeks.
WHY HE'S GOT TO GO
NO flair NO goals
‘Taylor is public enemy No1’
HARRY HARRIS
SPAIN 1 ENGLAND 0
GRAHAM TAYLOR has now used 54 players in his two-year reign — and the England manager is still no nearer to formulating a team.
There is no belief, no conviction, no flair, no inventiveness and, with no goals in Santander, no hope.
The case for Taylor to vacate his position has been strengthened by the pain here in Spain of a shabby England performance after the torment and failure in the European championship finals.
To avoid any more personal suffering I say he should contemplate going now to give his successor the chance to build a proper team to qualify for the World Cup finals.
Taylor has turned into public enemy number one.
Two years ago he was clearly the right man for the job — now few would support that motion.
Taylor suffered only his third defeat in 25 games, but each reverse has been harder to take.
First it was defeat against the Germans at Wembley to end a 12game unbeaten run.
Next it was against the Swedes when it really counted in the European championship.
There were debuts for Paul Ince, David White and David Bardsley last night and there are sure to be even more changes for the opening World Cup qualifying tie against Norway at Wembley on October 14.
Setback
The Football Association are sure to be unswayed by this set-back, as they were by the failure to score in the opening European championship games against Denmark and France and then by the defeat by Sweden.
But by the time Taylor approaches the return tie with Norway on June 2, England's participation in the World Cup finals in 1994 is sure to be virtually decided one way or the other.
That gives Taylor just seven World Cup ties to rescue his own precarious position or accept that the only solution is an honourable resignation.
Taylor boldly announced that he would begin his second phase as England manager with an adventurous, attacking, entertaining team.
That has rebounded.
Alan Shearer wore the number ten shirt with high hopes of scoring the goals in the first international since the retirement of Gary Lineker.
But Shearer suffered the same lack of service in Taylor's new-look team as Lineker had in Sweden.
Nigel Clough was instructed to link in attack with Shearer.
But that was abandoned midway through the second half.
White switched from the flank to partner Shearer in attack, but it wasn't long before Taylor tried a third attacking combination.
Brian Deane took the place of White while Paul Merson came on for Andy Sinton.
Whichever formation Taylor deployed the result was the same — absolutely nothing!
Clough's only moment of inspiration came after just two minutes when he superbly threaded through a pass to utilise the blistering acceleration of White.
White burst clear, but his shot cannoned off the legs of the experienced Barcelona keeper Zubizaretta.
Once again Taylor was afflicted by the right back curse.
QPR's right back Bardsley came on for Arsenal's Lee Dixon at the start of the second half, but lasted only 19 minutes before limping off.
Carlton Palmer, who cannot get into the Sheffield Wednesday side, came on, with Ince switching to right back.
Palmer almost rescued England.
His cross, just one minute after coming on as substitute, caught Zubizaretta floundering on the ground — but White's shot was blocked.
Taylor had earlier witnessed the worst piece of defensive football that Des Walker has produced in 48 appearances.
Walker played a sloppy square-pass, selling his centre-back partner Mark Wright short and costing England a 12th-minute goal.
Liverpool captain Wright lunged into a tackle but the ball bounced off the legs of Spain's masterful midfield star Martin Vasquez.
The player that Terry Venables would have loved to lure to Spurs unleashed a shot that struck the heels of Fonseca and fell kindly for Fonseca to shoot past Chris Woods.
Orders TAYLOR lays the law down to Nigel Clough, but it didn't work.
USELESS!
CHARLES FAWCUS
DONCASTER'S ST LEGER will turn into a farce tomorrow if the weather forecast is wrong.
Clerk of Course John Sanderson is banking on rain to save the race's face and ensure that favourite User Friendly lines up.
‘The forecast is for rain and I'm not going to water the track,’ said John to the dismay of User Friendly's trainer Clive Brittain and jockey George Duffield.
‘Her owner Bill Gredley was persuaded to pay £25,000 to enter her because the going was to be good.
It hasn't been good all week and that's not fair,’ said George.
And Brittain declared: ‘She won't run if the ground stays as it is.
She hated the fast ground at York and she's too good to abuse.
They should put some water on at least.’
Two track records fell yesterday and the official going was changed to good to firm.
But early punters were betting on the idea of good going and well-backed Sovereign Rock just could not handle the faster conditions.
Sanderson stuck to his guns: ‘I am trying to do what's best for the meeting.
If I water and then it rains it will go soft just like that with false patches.’
Hold-up
KINGSLEY
Black's £ 1.2m move to Sheffield Wednesday from Nottingham Forest is off until after the weekend.
The deal, which also takes Nigel Jemson back to Forest, was agreed but neither club wants to complete the move before the two teams clash tomorrow.
BLACK: Wait
RED EYES!
HUGH JAMIESON
LIVERPOOL are on the trail of Steve Lilwall, table-topping West Brom's rookie left back, writes Hugh Jamieson.
Manager Graeme Souness has already watched the 22-year-old, and Liverpool were again represented at West Brom's match against Reading on Wednesday night.
Lilwall said: ‘Obviously I am delighted and flattered, but at the moment I am just concentrating on playing for West Brom.
If anything does happen then I am sure our manager, Ossie Ardiles, will tell me.’
Brummie boy Lilwall was signed from GM Vauxhall club Kidderminster in the summer for £30,000 with another £30,000 due when he completes 30 senior games.
SOUNESS: Interested
Swede nothing
KENNET Andersson's dream of playing for Newcastle United lay in ruins last night.
The Swedish international striker's proposed £500,000 move from Belgian club Mechelen fell through after Newcastle boss Kevin Keegan failed to agree the fee.
Meanwhile, United's John Beresford returns against his former club Portsmouth tomorrow after missing four games through injury.
LET ME GO!
PACKIE BONNER is angry that Glasgow Celtic boss Liam Brady would not let him go on loan to Premier Division club Middlesbrough.
The transfer-listed Republic of Ireland goalkeeper is desperate for first team football, especially as the Republic face tough away World Cup assignments against Denmark and Spain.
Bonner said: ‘Nothing has changed at Celtic.
I want to leave the club.
I need first team football and I'm disappointed that the loan period to Middlesbrough did not materialise.’
Brady turned down the loan deal — Boro keeper Steve Pears was injured — because he says he needs Bonner as cover for Gordon Marshall in next week's UEFA Cup tie with Cologne.
BONNER: Disappointed
No go Tony
TONY AGANA last night walked away from a chance to rejoin Sheffield United on loan — and end his Notts County nightmare.
Blades boss Dave Bassett, whose team haven't scored for three games, wanted to reunite Agana with England striker Brian Deane.
But County's record £750,000 signing decided to stay at Meadow Lane, where he has scored only once since moving last November.
The 28-year-old striker was recently fined and transfer-listed by County boss Neil Warnock after showing his displeasure at being substituted.
But Bassett said: ‘Tony explained that he doesn't want to go anywhere on loan.’
AGANA: Deal off
That's the Way
Paul putts the past behind him
ONY STENSON
PAUL WAY, former golden boy of British golf, is lucky to be alive, kicking and just three shots adrift of Ian Palmer in the £600,000 GA European Open at Sunningdale.
Way suffered a bizarre, life-threatening accident just nine days ago.
Fortunately he managed to duck out of the way of a lump of glass as it speared towards his neck.
He said: ‘I'm lucky not to be paralysed and to have escaped with just a busted nose.’
Way, his face still cut and bruised, put his nightmare behind him yesterday at Sunningdale to resurrect his once glittering career.
But the man the players were all looking over their shoulders at was British Open champion Nick Faldo.
He rattled up three birdies on the final holes, to move into Palmer's shadow with a four under-par 67.
Even so, the day belonged to Way, who, after two Ryder Cup appearances, got lost on his way to the top.
Way, watching Faldo's charge, told about his horror story which began on the eve of the Swiss Open.
He tried to use the top of a door frame to stretch his aching back.
He said: ‘But the whole thing collapsed on me.
‘I landed on a lump of wood, felt another crash on to my face and was just getting up when a huge piece of glass fell where my neck had been.
I'm lucky to be alive.’
Way was forced to quit the Swiss Open and missed out on a chance to claw his way back into the Ryder Cup reckoning.
He said: ‘I'm desperate to regain a Cup place, and that made the whole episode even worse.’
Way lifted his battered body from the treatment table to finish just three shots behind South African pace-setter Palmer, who stroked a glorious seven-under par 63.
Palmer was one shot ahead of Robert Karlsson, one of the new wave of scintillating Swedes, England's Mark James and Kiwi Frank Nobilo.
Faldo's back nine of 31 was the best of the day.
He finished with a fabulous flourish — three birdies in a row.
Then he admitted: ‘It's nice to be back at work.’
NICK: Hat-trick
BOSS MAN
Vinny puts his shirt on it
Jones heads for top
NEIL SILVER
VINNY JONES went back to Wimbledon yesterday and declared: ‘I've taken the first step on the managerial ladder.’
Jones admitted he was still baffled by his sudden £700,000 exit from Chelsea, but is now looking forward to learning all about management from Dons boss Joe Kinnear.
After signing a four-year contract Jones, 27, said: ‘I see this as my apprenticeship towards management and supremo Sam Hammam told me to come back and look forward to that.
‘That's in the future but it will be another chapter in the book and I am sure Joe is going to point a few things out to me and help me along the way.
‘When I finish playing football I'll probably be coaching and be one of those still playing in Wimbledon's reserves at 40.
That's the sort of club it is, you've got to muck in and do everything.’
Kinnear, who said he expected to make one more signing this week-end, looked forward to Jones the manager with a wry smile.
He said: ‘All I know is that we've signed him on a playing contract for four years and we're delighted to have him back.
‘Whenever Vinny is around there is always excitement.
He has come back a wiser player and he will add drive to the team.’
Jones, who makes his debut at Ipswich tomorrow, revealed the agonising details of a transfer he never wanted to happen.
‘I don't know what the reasons are because there has been nothing said to me,’ he said.
‘A decision was made, they had to raise money and that was it.
‘It came out of the blue.
I first heard about it after the game at Liverpool last Saturday and I stormed in and said I don't want to get away.
‘I tried to stay but they said they were paying my contract up and I had no option.
They made it impossible for me to stay.
‘I was gutted because I had a superb time at Chelsea.
‘But that disappointment has gone and now I've got to look forward to my time at Wimbledon.
I can already feel the old excitement coming back.
It's not the Crazy Gang any more but maybe we'll find a new name.’
Jones, who started his professional career at Wimbledon before moving on to Leeds, Sheffield United and then Chelsea, said he had returned a better player.
‘I have played alongside internationals wherever I have been, so of course I am a better player,’ he said.
‘But I am not coming back crash, bang wallop.
I will see how the club has changed and then ease my way in.’
VINNY Jones nailed his colours to the wall yesterday as he swapped his Chelsea shirt for a Wimbledon one.
Pictures: ARNOLD SLATER
LINK-UP: John Fashanu and Vinny Jones are back together again at Wimbledon.
No lolly Loughlin
ST HELENS are taking legal advice after the Rugby League turned down their compensation plea for injured Test centre Paul Loughlin.
Loughlin, out until Christmas, broke his arm playing for Great Britain against New South Wales Country, and Saints have been told that insurance does not cover players on international duty.
Nabbed by telly
WIDNES scrum half Bobby Goulding was last night banned for two matches for attempting to butt Castleford's Mick Ford in a League game on August 30.
The incident was highlighted on Sky TV and spotted by the club's committee when they watched a video of the clash between John Devereux and Keith England in the same match which resulted in both men being sent off and banned for two games.
ONE IN THE EYE FOR SKY
ALEX MURPHY /MARTIN RICHARDS
BOBBY GOULDING is no saint — but I'm glad the disciplinary committee only gave him two matches last night after his trial by TV.
Don't get me wrong, I don't condone what he did in the Widnes-Castleford game.
And the committee could have come down on him like a ton of bricks.
But they obviously felt they couldn't make too much of an example of him because a lot of people, mainly on Sky TV, had already judged the issue.
It's grossly unfair for television to single out one player from one game and conduct a kangaroo court there and then.
Sky TV's broadcast put the whole incident in the public eye, even though Goulding was formally cited after the  Disciplinary Committee watched a tape of the game last Thursday when dealing with two men sent off in that match.
Unfair
The referee didn't see the Goulding incident and he wasn't reported.
Widnes bitterly complained about the unfairness of the situation saying — quite rightly — that if incidents like that are to be pulled out you would need 26 cameras — for every player.
There were 16 other games going on that day and there could have been a score of bad incidents missed by the referee.
But the cameras were only at one game and Goulding was the sacrificial ‘bad boy’.
After he was pulled out of the tour following a four-match ban and then seeing Wakefield's Michael Jackson make the trip after picking up a similar suspension, Goulding probably feels there's a vendetta against him.
If you do it for one you do it for everybody.
And to prevent the game being faced with another can of worms, the system of picking out illegal or violent play must be done through proper channels — not after a TV judge and jury have sat.
Club
It would mean videos of very game being studied by a panel of experts, not connected to any club, before a player is cited.
The four or five men on the panel would have square eyeballs ploughing through all the tapes but that's the only real way forward if we are going to be fair in all this.
Clubs don't like citing other clubs’ players for the ill-feeling it can cause.
And TV cameras homing in on incidents referees have missed can only make the officials feel a little incompetent.
BOBBY Goulding didn't deserve to be judged by TV says Alex Murphy.
OZ RULES
ALEX MURPHY /MARTIN RICHARDS
HUDDERSFIELD have an electronic scoreboard at Leeds Road — and it could blow a fuse when the Aussies play us next month!
Australia are calling it a warm-up game for before the World Cup but I just hope they feel a little heat from my boys.
And I reckon it would be a good idea to include two or three Great Britain Under-21 players to add a competitive edge.
But it's still a great bonus for the people of Huddersfield, Sheffield and Workington to be able to see great players like Mal Meninga, Laurie Daley, Bradley Clyde and Andrew Ettinghausen.
Champs roar on
ESSEX put the seal on another glorious season with one of the most famous victories in their history against Derbyshire at Derby yesterday.
Set a massive 440 after being dismissed for a paltry 96 in their first innings, the champions showed their pedigree by reaching the target with four wickets to spare.
England captain Graham Gooch was again the hero with a magnificent unbeaten 123, the 98th ton of his career.
Wicketkeeper Mike Garnham scored a fighting 66 in a sixth-wicket stand of 129 with Gooch.
Colin's dream chance
KEN LAWRENCE
COLIN Hendry's international dream could come true next month.
Blackburn Rovers' Scottish defender, who has only one B cap to his name, has already been pencilled in as replacement for Richard Gough who was sent off in Switzerland this week.
Andy Roxburgh will check on Hendry before the World Cup qualifier with Portugal and is poised to bring him in for a match Scotland must now win.
Gough, the first Scotland captain to be sent off, faces a one-match ban after his automatic dismissal for handling during the disastrous defeat in Berne.
Scotland international coach Roxburgh admitted: ‘The loss of Richard presents us with a real problem.
‘We are a bit thin on the ground for central defenders and we're going to have to look around a bit.
‘Not only have we lost a centre-half, we have also lost the leadership of Gough — his absence is a big blow.’
Only two weeks ago, Hendry sent a plea to Roxburgh asking for his chance at the highest level.
And the Blackburn star insisted: ‘Now I am playing under Kenny Dalglish I feel my chances of finally achieving my ambition of playing for Scotland must be enhanced.
‘All I want is the opportunity, then it's up to me.
If I'm not good enough I'll be the first to admit it.’
Hendry is also noted for making dangerous raids on opposition boxes — just like Gough.
Cheats warned
COLIN PRICE
NEW England rugby president Danie Serfontein has told cheating clubs making illegal payments: ‘Cut it out or else.’
His warning follows another close-season merry-go-round of players changing clubs amid rumours of big-money payments.
Serfontein said: ‘Illegal payments are widespread.
We have heard cases of players being offered £5,000 to change clubs.
 Unfortunately we have never been able to get the evidence.’
SCANDAL
Talking at the launch of the Rothmans Rugby Union Yearbook, Serfontein added: ‘We will take sanctions against clubs if we can pin them down.’
Officials could increase next season's four-month qualification period for players changing clubs to one season in a bid to stamp out the scandal.
HARRY HARRIS
GRAHAM TAYLOR yesterday vowed not to quit as England manager — but admitted he feels as hounded on the back pages as the Royal Family are on the front.
Despite calls for his head, Taylor yesterday pledged to stay on until his contract expires after the World Cup in 1994.
However, I believe that if England falter seriously in their next seven games — all World Cup ties — and look like failing to qualify, then Taylor will consider the honourable move of resigning.
But for the moment Taylor isn't running scared of the barrage of hostile headlines.
He has certainly not been tempted to consider his position ahead of next month's first qualifier against Norway.
And he has no intention of resigning now.
Taylor said: ‘It is pointless asking that, because I am not going to do it.
I don't think it would serve any purpose.’
‘It's not a question of whether I feel I'm the best man for the job.
I was appointed and I've got the job.’
FLASHBACK: Yesterday's Mirror Sport
GRIM REAPER'S REVENGE
MATT HUGHES
THE ‘Grim Reaper’ of ice hockey explained the role he has at Wembley Arena today: ‘I go out and do a job on anyone who is giving our top scorers a hard time.’
Stu Grimson, 6ft 5 1/2ins and 220lbs, provides the steel for Chicago Blackhawks when they clash with Montreal Canadiens in a ‘war on ice’ for a £20,000 prize and the Molson Challenge Cup.
England football team agent Jon Smith has organised this latest attempt to popularise the sport in the UK.
But angry British Ice Hockey chief David Pickles said: ‘We don't need the National Hockey League here.’
GRIMSON: Hit-man
KRABBE KO
THE German Athletics Federation has recommended a four-year ban on double world sprint champion Katrin Krabbe for failing a drugs test.
They recommended that a similar ban be imposed on two of Krabbe's team-mates — world 400 metres silver medallist Grit Breuer, and Manuela Derr, a member of East Germany's gold-medal winning 4x400 metres relay team at the 1990 European Championships.
BULL'S RED RAG
DAVID MOORE
STEVE BULL faces a roasting from angry Leicester fans when he spearheads the Wolves attack at Filbert Street tomorrow.
City fans are still livid over the clash with Bull that led to skipper Steve Walsh's sending off in the 3-0 defeat at Molineux three weeks ago.
The bad feeling goes back further than that — because the England striker was himself red-carded after a bust-up involving Walsh at Leicester two seasons ago.
With Walsh under suspension, the unenviable job of marking Bull has been handed to Simon Grayson.
And the 22-year-old is under strict orders from manager Brian Little to lay off the physical stuff.
Says the Leicester boss: ‘Bully loves it when there's plenty of rough and tumble.
He absolutely thrives on body contact because he's so powerful.
‘The answer is to stand off and let him play in front of you, rather than wrestling his way round the back.’
And Little added: ‘We've lost only twice this season — against Wolves and at Southend last week-end.
‘In both cases we had a player sent off and conceded a penalty.
If that doesn't signal a message about how we should approach Sunday's match, I don't know what will.’
Paul Mardon's hopes of clinching a dream £1 million move from Birmingham City to Liverpool have been dealt a major blow after he was told that he needs surgery on an ankle ligament injury.
KEV'S GOLD RUN
NIGEL CLARKE
KEVIN Campbell, Arsenal's goal-greedy hit man, plans to overshadow team mate Ian Wright and Blackburn's Alan Shearer in the race to provide England with the next generation of strike stars.
Campbell, Wright and Shearer will show off their talents at Highbury today, as Arsenal bid to gun down Rovers’ unbeaten record.
It was Campbell who replaced the injured Wright in the England squad in Spain this week.
And he says: ‘I got in only because Ian was hurt, but I have to put sentiment aside and think of Kevin Campbell.’
Shearer is in to stay, but while Taylor deliberates just who should be his partner up front Campbell plans to gate crash the party.
Adds Campbell: ‘There are some good strikers around, and I don't know if the England manager has ever had such a choice.’
Whelan comes clean
YOUNG Ipswich defender Phil Whelan pleaded last night: ‘Don't call me dirty.’
The 20-year-old, who has picked up three Premier League bookings already this season, also sprang to the defence of the game's most notorious tough guy Vinny Jones.
The pair clash at Portman Road today as Jones returns to Wimbledon following his £700,000 move from Chelsea.
Whelan said: ‘I've never played against Vinny before and I am looking forward to it.
‘We won at Wimbledon last month and Vinny might be just what they need to gee them up.’
The 6ft 4in newcomer is concerned at his own disciplinary record, which took another jolt when he received a yellow card on his Under-21 debut.
He admitted: ‘Lawrie McMenemy took me off at half- time in Spain after I'd been booked.
He did it for my own good.
‘I am going to have to watch my step.
But I am more clumsy than dirty.’
FLECK FLAK
Rob aims to gun down old pals
Blues are better bet
FRANK WIECHULA
ROBERT FLECK aims to gun down table-topping old boys Norwich today insisting: ‘Chelsea are a better bet for trophies.’
The Scottish international striker left Carrow Road last month in a £2.1 million-deal after a string of goals and a blaze of publicity.
Ironically, City now head the Premier League whilst Fleck has scored just once in six games for mid-table Blues.
But the 27-year-old firmly believes he's done the right thing.
‘I think Chelsea offers me the greater chance of winning something than if I'd stayed at Carrow Road.
‘Chelsea are a big club and have got big support.
‘I was used to that at Glasgow Rangers.
I stepped down in going to Norwich even though the supporters were good.
‘The time was right before the season started for us to part company and I've never regretted it and neither have Norwich.
‘Hopefully we can go out and beat them, it'd be great to burst their bubble.’
Fleck was kept out of the first meeting between the two sides at Carrow Road — when Chelsea went down 2-1.
He's now ready and waiting for the Bridge return, saying: ‘We are playing against the Premier League leaders so obviously we've got something to prove to everyone as well.
‘I'm not surprised to see them where they are.
They are a good bunch of lads and there's a lot of confidence from that 4-2 opening day win at Arsenal and they've just kept it going.’
Chelsea, without nine first-teamers, introduce left-back Anthony Barness, a £350,000 buy from Charlton, and versatile Nigel Spackman, who has returned to Stamford Bridge in a £485,000 move from Glasgow Rangers.
Vinny Jones has been sold to Wimbledon and David Lee is set to come in for Paul Elliott, who will be out for the season with injury.
Skipper Andy Townsend, another Norwich old boy said: ‘If we can get them all back fit again, get a few wins and the confidence going, there's no reason why we can't get up there.’
Norwich's Mark Robins — Fleck's £800,000 replacement — is looking to pep up his form.
He's scored four in just five starts, and said: ‘It's been a good start but I still don't think I've been at my best.’
TOWNSEND: Rally cry
GLORY HUNTER: Fleck has medal hopes at Chelsea
FAST FORWARDS
CRYSTAL Palace unveil their new strike force today when Paul Williams and Chris Armstrong team up against Oldham at Selhurst Park.
They are hoping their pace can produce the goals to give Palace their first victory of the season.
The new signings also face the pressure of winning over the fans who idolised Ian Wright, now at Arsenal, and Mark Bright who moved to Sheffield Wednesday last week.
England B forward Williams, 27, said: ‘I don't know too much about Chris but I know he is very fast.‘
TONY'S BACK
MARTIN RICHARDS
TONY MYLER is back in a Widnes jersey tomorrow — a month after he was on the verge of quitting the game.
Injuries have savaged the career of one of the brightest talents in Rugby League — but ex-Great Britain stand-off Myler is determined to make a fresh start.
He signed a new 12-month contract yesterday and coach Phil Larder puts him straight into the side for the Greenalls Lancashire Cup first round home tie with Carlisle.
‘It's a great bonus for us.
Tony is a bit special and in the Garry Schofield-Ellery Hanley class,’ said Larder.
‘He will strengthen our squad and give us a lot more options this season.
‘Tony was thinking of packing it in over a month ago but I told him to go away and talk it over with his family first.
‘He decided to carry on and returned to training four weeks ago.
With Bobby Goulding suspended, the chance to give Tony a quick return was too good to miss.’
Myler said: ‘I've been fed up of injuries and played only eight matches last season after a neck operation.
‘But I couldn't bring myself to throw the boots away and am not 31 until later this month.
I reckon I still have another two or three seasons left if I keep clear of injury.’
Coach Larder is delighted with the form of Welsh winger Adrian Hadley in his first two games.
‘He's lost a stone in weight and is looking very strong,’ said Larder.
‘Adrian feels he didn't get the success he deserved at Salford and is relishing playing with a side with so many good individual players.’
MYLER: Fresh start
Back to his roots
GREAT Britain star Graeme Hallas is back in action this weekend — but not with Hull or Hull KR in Sunday's Humberside derby.
Rovers' contract rebel, who is the subject of a reported £70,000 bid from Hull, has temporarily turned his back on the professional game to return to his amateur roots.
He misses the Yorkshire Cup clash, opting instead to play for Dudley Hill reserves in the Yorkshire League.
Hallas, who is transfer-listed at £180,000, wants to play amateur rugby in a bid to keep fit until a fee is agreed.
Tony Myler returns for Widnes tomorrow — a month after he nearly quit the game.
He signed a new 12-month contract yesterday and comes straight into the side to face Carlisle.
HALLAS: Keeping fit
PLANGE'S PLUNGE!
Sheffield Eagles 34 Halifax 14
DEVASTATING David Plange dumped big-spending Halifax out of the Yorkshire Cup with a three-try supershow.
Sheffield looked like being overwhelmed as tries by new boys Gary Divorty and John Bentley powered Halifax 10-0 ahead in 11 minutes.
But Plange hit back with two tries in three minutes — and when Mark Aston's conversion and penalty were followed by a 46th-minute debut try from Gary Jack, it was all over.
Bentley scored his second after a dazzling run to narrow the gap to 20-14.
But Plange completed his hat-trick and sub Ian Hughes scored the try of the night after a 40-yard dash.
PLANGE: Hat-trick
HOKO HEAD CASE
IAN GIBB
CIRCUS contortionist Fabrice Benichou reckons he can tie world featherweight champion Paul Hodkinson in knots tonight and grab the WBC title.
The rugged little Frenchman growled: ‘Hodkinson will have to do a Houdini to escape from me.’
Benichou likes to use his head if the fists won't do the job for him, and the atmosphere is definitely hostile down here in the South of France — but Scouser Hoko is totally unmoved.
Shaking
The Merseysider told me: ‘I've been used to fighting away from home all my life — it doesn't bother me.’
And Hodkinson added: ‘After beating a fighter as good as Mexico's Marcos Villasana to win the title, I'm not exactly shaking in my shoes about facing Benichou.’
But the Frenchman is known to use his head.
And Geordie John Davison, who was unlucky to lose to Benichou, warns: ‘He brings his head up and catches you before you know it.
He split my eye doing that in our first fight.’
READY: Hodkinson
FALDO FLIPS
TONY STENSON
SUPERSTAR Nick Faldo proved himself less than awesome yesterday.
And it cost him a share of the halfway lead in the £600,000 GA European Open at Sunningdale.
The Open champion had blitzed the famous old course with six birdies when he reached the 17th tee.
At that stage he was an amazing 154 under par for his rounds in Europe this season.
But then followed a pushed drive into heather, a hack out and an iron shot into a bunker before he carded a double-bogey six.
Faldo, who called his game ‘awesome’ on his way to winning the Irish Open, snapped: ‘Forget that — now I'll have to find another word.’
But he added: ‘I played really well and that drive (with a three-wood) was my only bad shot of the day.
I paid a price.’
Despite the disaster, he carded a 66 for a two-round total of 133.
But it did let in 6ft 5in Swede Robert Karlsson — the tallest player on the European tour.
His 67 gave him a nine-under total, two better than Faldo.
England's Mark James also crept past Faldo on 132.
Ryder Cup captain Bernard Gallacher, on a rare playing excursion, showed he can still fight with the best.
He is on four-under 136.
But for Seve Ballesteros there was an early trip home to see his week-old son.
Troubled by a cold and a painful left shoulder, he managed only a 73 and for the third time in four starts missed the cut.
GREEN GODDESS: Caddie Fanny Sunesson helps Nick Faldo line up a birdie putt at Sunningdale
MITCH IS BACK
MITCHELL THOMAS makes his first appearance of the season for West Ham at Peterborough today, replacing suspended skipper Julian Dicks.
Transfer-listed Thomas comes in at left back as Dicks starts a three-match match ban following his red card for elbowing Franz Carr at Newcastle last month.
Thomas was signed from Spurs last year for £500,000, but has not been able to establish himself at Upton Park.
He was put up for sale before the start of this season.
Striker Mike Small returns to a 15-man squad after suspension.
Former Hammers player Bobby Barnes lines up against his old club.
ERIK CRISIS
ERIK Thorstvedt will seek crisis talks with Spurs if he is left out of the side at Coventry on Monday.
The Norwegian international goalkeeper is worried that playing second fiddle to Ian Walker at Tottenham will harm his World Cup prospects of playing against England in October.
‘The time will come quite shortly when something has to be done,’ said Thorstvedt.
‘The Norwegian national coach is a very fair and honest man.
But he has told me that if I'm not regularly in the Spurs first team then it will be very difficult for him to pick me.’
BASSETT SORRY!
JOHN EDWARDS
DAVE BASSETT last night apologised to striker Ian Bryson, saying: ‘I've probably cost you a Scotland cap.’
The Sheffield United boss tipped his versatile front-runner for international honours last season when he formed a productive partnership with England's Brian Deane.
But the 29-year-old is still waiting to make the breakthrough.
Bassett said: ‘It's my fault for messing him about, switching him from one flank to the other then playing him through the middle.
‘I should have stuck with playing him down the middle.
‘That's where he likes playing best and is where he's managed to weigh in with some vital goals.’
Liverpool visit Bramall Lane today with Bassett admitting that the Blades' morale has slumped.
Bassett, who yesterday put midfielder Mike Lake on the transfer list, said: ‘We have allowed our confidence to be affected by a few bad results.
‘We have dug ourselves into a hole.
But now it's up to us to lift ourselves out of it.’
FRIENDLY BANKER!
CHARLES FAWCUS
USER FRIENDLY should make today another classic payday for local hero George Duffield so long as she gets the green light to tackle the Coalite St Leger at Doncaster.
Yorkshire-born George waited 25 years for his first classic win on User Friendly at Epsom in June.
But the follow up came in Ireland a month later and number three beckons this afternoon.
But everything depends on the state of the Doncaster track, finally watered last night.
‘We want to run but we will not risk her unless the going is right,’ said trainer Clive Brittain.
And Allegan will drop out as well is it hasn't rained, to leave a disappointing six-runner field.
But there is still every chance of User Friendly running and Duffield has no doubt that his filly is the best horse in the race.
‘You saw what she did at Epsom and in Ireland.
She didn't win so well at York, but I'd have to admit I wasn't at my best there.
‘I'd been involved in that plane near miss on the way to York which would have frightened anyone and it was hard to concentrate properly.
Everything went wrong, but she got me out of trouble.
‘It was a good effort in any case because Niodini, who finished fourth, has already won a big race at Doncaster this week.’
The watering won't please everyone with Bonnie Scot and Rain Rider best on a fast surface.
But the one to trouble User Friendly could be Lester Piggott's mount Mack The Knife.
There is plenty of top tele-action tomorrow with BBC covering the re-match between St Jovite and Dr Devious in Leopardstown's Champion Stakes and Channel Four showing highlights of the Arc trials at Longchamp.
Trev's Bright spark
JOHN EDWARDS
MARK BRIGHT last night promised Sheffield Wednesday fans a double act to match his prolific partnership with Ian Wright.
The 30-year-old striker became big-spending Trevor Francis’ latest recruit when he completed a swap deal that took Paul Williams and a £375,000 cash adjustment to Crystal Palace.
And he will make his debut at Brian Clough's Nottingham Forest today with instructions to fill the gap left by David Hirst's injury.
But it's as Hirst's sidekick rather than replacement that Bright can see his Wednesday career taking off.
Wright and Bright caused havoc among defences before Palace sold Wright to Arsenal.
And a re-run of those days could be just a couple of weeks away.
Hirst is on the mend after cracking his ankle at Highbury a fortnight ago, and Bright said: ‘I like his style of play and feel we can work well together.
Linking
‘He is a strong runner who is very quick and very direct, and the fact that he and Chris Waddle are both Wednesday players was a big factor in my decision to move here.
‘I'm really looking forward to linking up with David because I believe we can go on to become every bit as good as the partnership I had with Ian.’
Francis was delighted at landing Bright — even if it was at the third time of asking.
‘I tried to sign him at QPR three years ago, then again during the summer,’ said Wednesday's player-boss.
‘But Steve Coppell told me I couldn't have him until he found a replacement.
‘Finally, we got the go-ahead, but only as long as we included Paul Williams.’
Francis backs Taylor
NEIL SILVER
GERRY Francis last night leapt to the defence of Graham Taylor and insisted: ‘We've got to get together to help England.’
Former England skipper Francis, now manager of QPR, believes that the structure of English football does no favours to managers at both club and international level.
‘It is very important that players do go and play for their country, but we haven't got it right here,’ said Francis.
‘We've got to sort out the balance between club and country because it's very important to both sets of managers.
‘It is great for players and their clubs when they are picked for their country.
I played for and captained my country so I know how important it is and I would never stop anybody going.
‘But we've got to look at ways of helping Graham Taylor.
The whole structure of the season, plus the situation with World Cup and European Championship games, has got to be looked at because at the moment we just seem to penalise successful teams.
‘If teams are doing well in the League, Cups and Europe then they are forced to play so many games.
If those teams have also got players in the international set up they suffer.’
Francis is disappointed that the chance to change football for the good with the introduction of the Premier League has been wasted.
He said: ‘There was a lot of talk about the Premier League going to be right for England, but I don't think anything changed.
It hasn't done anyone any favours.’
Defender David Bardsley is ruled out of today's match at Southampton by an ankle injury picked up playing for England in Spain, while Andy Sinton is also very doubtful with a sore foot.
Victory at the Dell today would keep Rangers among the early season front runners.
Rush to honour a boss on the brink
BRIAN CLOUGH is to be given the Freedom of Nottingham — after rumours in the city that his reign at Forest could be coming to an end.
Council leaders want to bestow the highest honour  they can in recognition of Clough's achievements with Nottingham Forest.
But Forest are currently bottom of the Premier League and the leader of the Labour controlled council, Cllr Betty Higgins, said: ‘We had heard a rumour that Brian may not be in charge of Forest for much longer.
It was just something that someone said.
‘I don't know whether it's true or not but we wanted to do it while he is still in charge.’
Clough has already been approached privately and has confirmed he will accept the honour.
The last people to be given the distinction were Olympic and world champion ice skaters Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean in 1983.
WE'LL PLAY FOR NOTHING!
World Cup stars put country before cash
England's glory boys
HARRY HARRIS
GRAHAM Taylor's players are willing to play for nothing in England's World Cup ties — starting with Norway at Wembley on October 14.
The country's elite have already been sounded out by Taylor to scrap appearance money, as well as the win and draw  bonuses that have existed since Don Revie's era.
Honour
The players will discuss the plan again prior to the Norway match, which will be make-or-break for the credibility of Taylor.
The players are sure to vote in favour of the motion to play for the honour and not the cash.
At present England players are paid £300 by the FA for being selected, £500 for a draw and £700 for a win.
After the latest set-back in Spain, and the public mauling for the England manager, this is the one major plus-factor for Taylor.
The public would applaud the axing of cash rewards for players to wear the England shirt.
The new plan was explained to the players when they gathered in Luton before flying out to Spain.
New England captain Stuart Pearce told me: ‘This is something we shall give serious thought to.
‘In any case, I believe the players play for the honour and glory rather than the money.’
A major part of the financial restructuring will be a new players' pool.
For 21 years, the players have used an agent to privately negotiate commercial deals which have been split between the squad and the management team.
Now the commercial deals will come under the umbrella of the FA.
It worked for the last World Cup, when the FA paid a £30,000-a-man bonus for reaching the semi-finals.
ENGLAND CRISIS: Thursday's Mirror Sport
Nice touch, Nigel
NOW here's something for England manager Graham Taylor to consider.
He wants a world beater in his side so how about Nigel Mansell as a driving force in his next squad.
Taylor, of course, would need to do a deal  with his Williams-Renault team and a little matter of around £8million would perhaps secure his services — he would guarantee to put Taylor's men in pole position!
Mansell warmed-up for tomorrow's Italian Grand Prix by playing soccer.
He drove in a goal and then laid one on for German driver Michael Schumacher.
CARRY ON CHAMP — Page 25 
False start
CARL Lewis, who bleated because he wasn't allowed to run in the Olympics against Linford Christie, has ducked out of the World Cup in Cuba where they would have met for a 100 metres showdown later this month.
Kent's run spree
KENT went run crazy yesterday as they piled up a 603 for eight — their highest total since 1934 — against Warwickshire at Edgbaston.
Carl Hooper joined Trevor Ward and Mark Benson as a century-maker to stretch his side's formidable overnight 487 for three to massive proportions.
He reached 102 off 167 balls before been caught behind off Tim Munton.
Graham Cowdrey kept the runs flowing with a hard hit 88.
Then Alan Igglesden took five for 34 as Warwickshire slid to 121 for five — still 482 behind.
Victory will ensure that Kent collect the £23,000 prize as runners-up to Essex in the Britannic Assurance Championship.
Hoko asks high price
IAN GIBB
PAUL Hodkinson and Colin McMillan are demanding £500,000 between them for a world featherweight title showdown.
That emerged after Hoko saw off gutsy Frenchman Fabrice Benichou through a gashed upper lip in the 10th round of his WBC title defence in Toulouse.
WBO champ McMillan was at the fight and his promoter Frank Warren made Hoko an offer of £200,000 for a unification battle.
But Hodkinson said: ‘Not enough.
I think the fight is worth more, at least another £50,000 on top of that.
It's a big fight.
‘I think I should earn more as the WBC title is recognised as a better class than the WBO but I might come to a 50-50 split.’
McMillan said: ‘There's no way I'll take the smaller share.
I'd settle for an equal share.’
Whether the two little fighting men are pricing themselves out of the market remains to be seen but both were threatening a stand-off.
Hodkinson's promoter, Barney Eastwood, revealed: ‘French TV loved Paul so much they are willing to have him back before Christmas and fight an opponent of his own choosing.’
And that's if the Eastwood camp can persuade WBC mandatory number one challenger, Kevin Kelly, to stand back rather than be forced to go to New York to take him on.
HOKO: Demand
Hawks swoop
CHICAGO Blackhawks have won the Molson Challenge and a large share of the £25,000 prize, beating Montreal Canadiens 2-1 after a scoreless period of extra time and two penalty shoot-outs.
CUT IT OUT!
BLACKBURN keeper Bobby Mimms makes sure Arsenal hit man Ian Wright gets the message after one of several skirmishes between the two in the Battle of Highbury Picture: ARNOLD SLATER 
OFF TO THE DOGS
HARRY LLOYD
MIGHTY Scurlogue Champ strides onto the smallest stage of his career at Mildenhall on Saturday.
But the most charismatic greyhound since Mick The Miller will merely walk the circuit prior to the Daily Mirror race in his honour.
Now ten years old and sprouting grey whiskers, the Red Rum of the dog tracks gets top billing at Mildenhall's gala meeting.
Excited
‘He'll get excited, thinking he's going to race,’ said Wayne Peckham, who was still at school when he nicknamed the bargain-buy ‘Duke’.
Wayne's grandparents, Ken and Pat Peckham, paid just £1,700 for Champ whose marathon exploits quickly made him the people's champion.
The Champ, who retired six years, was an institution and his extraordinary finishing burst took him to 20 track records.
Promoters who fought for his services paid appearance money for the wonder dog who could boost attendances by 500 per cent.
And his public relations value to greyhound racing was estimated at a million pounds.
Among the early entries for the Scurlogue Champ race is leading marathon performer Poor Sue.
Even if she sets a track record she would already have been upstaged by the people's champion.
Catford's John Humphreys Gold Collar semi-finals could provide a Westmead double for sisters Surprise and Spirit.
Both were strong-finishing second round winners and head the sponsor's betting for Saturday's final.
Side Wink, earmarked for Wembley's Wendy Fair St Leger, can underline her classic claims in the Tony Morris Variety Club Stakes at the Empire Stadium.
Desperately unlucky at Crayford last month, the lightweight bitch has since won over the Leger course.
Clongeel Rebel, an even-money flop last time out at Crayford, gets a quick chance to atone in the Kent track's charity meeting.
Pennys Sweetness and Clashganiff Hero hold bright chances at Hackney tomorrow and in the evening Oyster Duke, Our Muriel and Deepwell Minx could be worth supporting at Walthamstow.
PAT PECKHAM pointing the way for Champ's celebrity appearance at Mildenhall.
DEVIOUS DELIGHT
HARLES FAWCUS
DR DEVIOUS dished out the medicine at Leopardstown yesterday, but the Epsom Derby winner will be needing treatment when he runs into User Friendly in the Arc.
That's the confident view of Clive Brittain, carrying all before him after User Friendly's demolition job in the St Leger.
The Doctor took his revenge on St Jovite in a dramatic finish to the Kerry Group Champion Stakes, but Clive has no doubt that he can beat both of them.
Nostril
‘My horse Alflora was third today and he wouldn't be in the same street as User Friendly.
She would have won this all right,’ he declared.
Dr Devious had finished twelve lengths behind St Jovite in the Irish Derby and they were separated by less than a nostril yesterday.
St Jovite had rounded the final turn in front, but John Reid was on his tail on Dr Devious and forced his horse in front right on the line as Christy Roche was forced to ease off because his mount was hanging.
Roche took St Jovite into No. 1 spot, but the photo went against him and Dr Devious's trainer Peter Chapple-Hyam expects more improvement from his horse.
‘This will put him spot on for the Arc.
I wanted to leave a bit for next time,’ he declared.
St Jovite's trainer Jim Bolger wasn't disappointed; ‘It was a super race and you must expect it hard against horses as good as this.’
St Jovite will certainly be happier going right-handed at Longchamp, but no one was happier than Brittain.
He picked up another big prize in Ireland yesterday with Mr Martini and he was still bubbling over User Friendly's St Leger triumph.
‘I can't compare her with any of the top horses I've trained because I just don't know how good she is.
‘She lost less weight on Saturday than she had at York and we have got to think of a crack at the Arc.
Handy Andy
COLIN PRICE
NIGERIAN prince Andrew Harriman warmed up for next week's Pilkington Cup rugby final repeat against Bath with a regal hat-trick of tries for Harlequins in a 64-6 win at Plymouth.
Bath's replacement for the injured Stuart Barnes, Craig Raymond, set up a try and scored a drop goal in their 18–15 win over Italians Treviso.
Leicester's British Lion No 8 Dean Richards again helped out in the second-row for their 40-24 win over Milan.
Gloucester beat Sale 17-11 while Bristol thumped Rugby 35-13.
Platt out by a nose
DAVID Platt was forced to miss Juventus's league game with Atalanta yesterday after sustaining a broken nose during England's defeat in Spain on Wednesday.
Platt, who has yet to make his Italian League debut for Juventus, said: ‘My nose has been X-rayed and confirmed as broken, although I thought I was fit enough to play today.
I hope to play in our UEFA Cup game on Wednesday.’
Platt was left out of Juventus's opening match last Sunday and has been told he may only play in Juventus' home game.
TEL'S WAR
TONY STENSON
SPURS supremo Terry Venables has declared war on the eight Premier League rebels who blocked the £13million sponsorship deal with brewers Bass.
He has called a summit on Thursday for the 14 clubs who opposed Arsenal, Liverpool, Manchester United, Everton, Leeds, Aston Villa, Nottingham Forest and Queens Park Rangers.
Venables said: ‘It is a meeting to discuss the whole situation.
‘It is not a secret meeting.
Premier League chief Rick Parry has been invited but it is only for the 14 clubs.
‘I am very  positive about saving the sponsorship deal.’
VENABLES: Positive
LEIGH-WAY
LEIGH boss Jim Crellin quit last night after only three matches in charge.
He and assistant Ray Clark re-signed after Leigh's first win of the season, a 50-9 Lancashire Cup success over Third Division Chorley.
Crellin, who took over at promoted Leigh from sacked Kevin Ashcroft this summer, said: ‘I have resigned because of boardroom interference.’
Leigh lost both First Division matches against Warrington and Bradford before beating Chorley.
Davies is on target
Widnes 52 Carlisle 8
JONATHAN Davies scored 20 points as Widnes went on a scoring spree that took them into the second round of the Lancashire Cup.
Davies scored a spectacular final try and landed eight goals, including some brilliant long-range shots.
Widnes had it won by half-time with a 28-0 lead but Carlisle battled on bravely and scored two well-taken tries in the second half.
And they were unlucky to have hooker Malcolm Thomason carried off with concussion midway through the half.
Skipper Paul Hulme and centre Stuart Spruce led the Widnes try-scoring romp with two each.
DAVIES: On target
FORD RUNS RIOT
Salford 60, W'haven 8
WING wizard Phil Ford treated himself to five touchdowns as Whitehaven were swamped under a tidal wave of tries in this Lancashire Cup tie.
Sizzling Salford, who have never lost to their Third Division opponents at the Willows, crossed 12 times.
Two tries came from new Aussie recruit Craig Coleman.
The 28-year-old scrum-half only landed in England last Thursday.
But the South Sydney star shrugged off jet-lag to play a major role.
Kevin Tamati's men led 24-2 at the break with Coleman going over in the 32nd and 34th minutes.
Whitehaven hit back with a John Routledge try and Steve MacGuire conversion.
But then Salford turned on the heat, with seven tries in the last half hour.
FORD: Five tries
LIFT
MARTIN RICHARDS
PETER Coyne is 80 minutes away from a Sydney Grand Final appearance — leaving Castleford to play a frustrating waiting game.
Coyne's second half drop goal for St George clinched a 3-2 win over Newcastle.
The Dragons now play Illawarra next weekend to see who will meet the Brisbane Broncos.
Castleford desperately need Coyne to lift their fortunes after three opening defeats.
TERROR TINY
Oldham ace hits Wires
MARTIN RICHARDS
Oldham 33, Warrington 20
GIANT prop ‘Tiny’ Solomona softened up Warrington for the kill and three-try centre Iva Ropati fired the bullets as Second  Division Oldham produced the only upset of the Greenall's Lancashire Cup first round.
The Wires had no answer to the power and fire of the 6ft 2in, 17-stone Solomona who formed an outstanding front row pairing with No.8 Mark Sheals.
Solomona blasted over for an important try just before the break after smart interpassing with Sheals.
And the big Aucklander really came into his own in the second half after the 50th-minute dismissal of Warrington prop Neil Harmon for a high tackle on Oldham hooker Richard Pachnuik.
Harmon's loss, when Oldham were leading 18–10, spelled the end of any real hopes Warrington had of pulling the game out of the fire.
They gamely fought back to 27-20 with a Rob Myler try 10 minutes from time.
But Solomona caused more havoc with another explosive burst and the ball was fanned right for full-back Sean Tyrer to stroll over for a sixth Oldham try.
Spirit
Two-try Warrington scrum-half Kevin Ellis didn't deserve to draw losing pay in his first match of the season.
But the Wires, plagued by too many errors, never applied enough  consistent pressure to break Oldham's spirit, despite the class of Ellis, Kelly Shelford and Greg Mackey.
And full-back Robert Turner had a miserable day with his kicking, landing only two goals from seven shots.
OLDHAM prop ‘Tiny’ Solomona powers through the Wires defence.
ELLIS: Double
Warrington couldn't get themselves back into the match after having Neil Harmon (bottom right) sent off for a high tackle in the second half.
SPEED TRAP
Rangers are on the up
Fan-war Dave is peacemaker
NEIL SILVER
Southampton 1, QPR 2
DAVID SPEEDIE was yesterday cleared of all blame for his pitch battle with an unruly Southampton fan.
The fiery Scot was first to react when two supporters ran on to The Dell to stage an injury-time protest.
And when one made it to the centre circle and started his own sit-in, to Speedie that was like a red rag to a bull.
With Southampton trailing 2-1 and desperate for an equaliser, he grabbed the fan around the head and tried to drag him from the pitch.
But the protester shrugged him off and Speedie — already on an assault charge following a skirmish with a supporter last season — was close to wading in again.
QPR's Clive Wilson pleaded in vain with the fan to leave and finally four stewards carried the man away.
Speedie explained later: ‘When the fan ran on I thought he might be going for the referee, so I tried to intervene.
‘He sat down and we wanted to get on with the game and try for another goal, so I wanted him off.
‘But I already have an assault charge hanging over me, so in the end I had to leave it to the stewards.
‘I didn't mean the man any harm — he was just an idiot.
But we were losing and as someone had to get him off his backside I thought it might as well be me.’
Two fans were charged with public order offences, but a police spokesman confirmed that no action had been taken against Speedie.
And Southampton secretary Brian Truscott said: ‘As far as we are concerned all David was doing was encouraging a fan to leave the pitch.’
Added manager Ian Branfoot: ‘David was annoyed because it was one of our own fans wasting our time.
I have no objection to what he tried to do.’
The sit-down came on a day when Saints fans picked up on the ‘Branfoot out’ chants they began last season.
But Branfoot insisted: ‘We have to keep producing and selling the Alan Shearers and Rod Wallaces to survive.
‘It's always going to be like that here and anyone who thinks differently is living in cloud cuckoo land.’
Matthew Le Tissier gave Saints a 12th-minute lead, only for Rangers to reply with two second-half goals in as many minutes.
After being tripped by Terry Hurlock, Andy Sinton got up to curl a brilliant 25-yard free kick round the wall.
Then Sinton started the move which ended with Les Ferdinand crossing low for Justin Canning to volley the winner.
FLASH ‘N GRAB ANGRY David Speedie lays  into the protesting fan after his last-minute sit-down strike at The Dell
Pool king
JON SMITH, head of First Artist Corporation, has been offered a five year contract by the FA to help organise the new England players’ pool.
Smith's organisation has run their commercial activities for the past six years.
Now the FA plan to take the players pool under their umbrella, retaining Smith because of his success working with the players since the 1986 World Cup finals.
Bruce is top target
NIGEL CLARKE
CHELSEA will this morning open negotiations to buy a new goalkeeper — and Bruce Grobbelaar heads the short list to replace disgraced ex-England star Dave Beasant.
Manager Ian Porterfield indicated Beasant's Stamford Bridge career is all but over after his dreadful errors gifted victory to Norwich on Saturday.
‘We shall be definitely making every effort to improve that department as soon as possible,’ said Porterfield, who tried to sign Grobbelaar last year.
‘Our fans are the best, they deserve the best, and I have got to make a change.’
GROBBELAAR: Wanted
Bruce is top target 
GROBBELAAR: Wanted
I QUIT
Mansell out in tears
TED MACAULEY
WORLD champion Nigel Mansell sensationally decided to quit Grand Prix racing yesterday.
And, to complete his heartbreak, his car broke down when he was looking for his ninth win of the season at the Italian Grand Prix.
Mansell stunned the Grand Prix race world when he revealed that he was packing up only four hours before he was due to start in his 178th Grand Prix.
He was close to tears when he started to read a statement in which he opened his heart as never before.
And even as he began, a top executive from Renault-Williams tried to persuade him not to go through with it.
But Mansell shook his head, ignored the request and read: ‘Due to circumstances beyond my control I have decided to retire from Formula One at the end of the season.
‘I have made this decision with some regret — but not without a great deal of thought.’
Mansell, 39, and a winner of 29 GPs went on: ‘Any relationship between a driver and an F1 team is vital for success and partly dependent on money because it defines how seriously the team and its backers take the driver.
‘But those who know me well understand the importance of the human side and the mutual trust, goodwill, integrity and fair play that are the basis of all human relationships.
‘All these issues have suffered in recent weeks.’
He added: ‘Looking back, I feel that relationships between me and the team started to break down at the Hungarian Grand Prix.’
And he revealed: ‘A deal was agreed with Frank Williams before that race in front of a witness and I have to say that at the time I felt very, good about racing again with Williams in 1993.
Having won the championship I was looking forward to defending it with what I believe to be a very competitive car.
‘However, three days after Hungary I was telephoned by a Williams director.
‘He said he had been instructed to tell me that because Ayrton Senna would drive for nothing, I, the new world champion, had to accept a massive reduction in remuneration from the figure agreed in Hungary.
Badly treated ‘It was considerably less than I am getting this year.
If I did not, then Senna was ready to sign that night.
I rejected the offer and said that, if these were the terms, Williams had better go ahead and sign Senna.
‘Since then relations with the team have not been good.
And I refer to the directors rather than the scores of people behind the scenes at Williams.
‘I have listened to many different opinions, some well-meaning and some not, and we've heard public statements made by Senna.
‘To say that I have been badly treated is a gross understatement.
‘Of course, a team-owner, any team-owner, is free to choose whomever he likes to work for him.
It was a lack of information, and sudden changes, that I found disappointing.’
‘It all comes down to ‘fair play’ or the lack of it.
Money, a trigger for the problems after Hungary is now no longer an issue for me.
‘As for myself I know that I am not yet ready to retire completely.
‘I still love motor racing and I still want to win.
So I may look at the Indy Car World Series in America and see what opportunities are available if any.’
Later
Frank Williams wouldn't reveal whether he had made last-ditch efforts to persuade Mansell to drive on.
And he would only say ‘I'll be having something to say later on in the week.’
Senna admitted yesterday after his third win that he has been having talks with Williams.
But he is likely to be kept out of the team by Prost who is believed to have a deal which bars the Brazilian from coming in as his partner.
And that could open the way for Martin Brundle, fired by Benetton, but second yesterday in the best finish of his career.
POLE-AXED THE strain breaks through as an emotional Nigel Mansell quits.
WILLIAMS: Promise
MANSELL: Hit by massive pay cut
Hit-and-run kills granny
A HIT-and-run driver who killed an 84-year-old granny was being hunted by police last night.
Mother-of-five Margaret Morrison died early yesterday after she was mown down by a speeding Ford Escort in Premier Road, Sunderland.
Two men were later seen running from the abandoned car.
TV jobs axe
AT least 100 jobs are to be axed at recently merged Yorkshire and Tyne Tees TV.
Bosses say the losses will be in admin and programme-making.
WE FEAR LEE
LEE Chapman, Leeds United's giant striker, has Stuttgart quaking in their boots at the prospect of tomorrow's European Cup clash.
Stuttgart coach Christov Daum watched Leeds at Elland Road last Sunday then declared: ‘Chapman is my headache.
‘He's so good in the air.
I haven't a defender to deal with him.’
Chapman hopes Leeds do better than the Arsenal team he played for in his last European appearance 10 years ago.
The Gunners lost to Moscow Spartak 3-2 and 5-2 in the UEFA Cup, with Chapman scoring in both legs.
Daum expects another upset.
He said: ‘Leeds are not playing with the same confidence as when they won the title.
‘We have to stop them scoring.
I would even be happy with a 0-0 draw.’
CHAPMAN: Danger
Hardy chases dream
NORTH-East fight rivals Billy Hardy and John Davison are lining up a bonanza £100,000 pay night…against each other!
Hardy, former British bantamweight champion, fights Aussie Ricky Rayner for the vacant Commonwealth featherweight title on October 7 at Sunderland's Crowtree Leisure centre.
If he wins that he's set to meet Newcastle's newly-crowned British champion Davison in the Spring with both titles at stake.
‘We'd look to fill either St James's Park or Roker Park,’ said Hardy's joint manager Mickey Duff.
HARDY: Title shot
STEVE GETS LIFT
KEVIN Keegan has told young Steve Watson that he's still wanted.
Watson, 18, won an Under-21 cap with England in Spain last week — then found himself playing for Newcastle juniors.
The lad who made a big impact as a 16-year-old has been ignored this season.
But Keegan said yesterday: ‘Steve's got a great future at Newcastle.
He hasn't been forgotten.
‘He is very much in contention for a first-team place, although he may not think so after playing for the juniors.
‘He did ever so well in that match, which showed he has a terrific attitude.
Nothing bothers him.’
Mick Quinn collected three crates of champagne from chairman Sir John Hall after scoring twice against former club Portsmouth.
Hall threw in the third crate for a Quinn goal that was disallowed.
KEEGAN: Praise
MIKE'S BACK
COLIN PRICE
WORLD Cup hero Mike Teague is roaring back as England search for a record-breaking third Grand Slam, writes Colin Price.
The big Gloucester builder was so badly battered in the World Cup campaign that he had to take six months off work — and he and self-employed forward Paul Rendall lost so much money that they successfully appealed for a hardship payment.
But Teague has been named in a 31-man squad for England's opening friendly against Canada at Wembley on October 17.
And he said: ‘I've had a good rest now and it remains to be seen whether I have still got it.
But I know I am certainly not finished.’
WIDE BOYS
NEIL SILVER
MATTHEW Le Tissier believes the England team is big enough for both him and Andy Sinton.
Both men scored when QPR beat Southampton at the Dell on Saturday, raising the question of who deserves to be England's wide boy-wonder.
Rangers ace Sinton is the man in possession at the moment, but Saints star Le Tissier believes there is room in the team for them both.
‘I don't see Andy and myself as rivals for an England place,’ said Le Tissier.
‘He plays more on the left hand side which is not my favourite position, I prefer to play on the right.
‘It would be very nice if he was on one wing and I was on the other.’
Both men scored a quality goal apiece on Saturday.
Sinton is one of the new generation of England players introduced by Graham Taylor against Poland last November.
Le Tissier, who is Southampton's top scorer this season with three goals, has yet to win his first full cap.
Jacki jolts boss
COLIN PRICE
BRISTOL City's Polish striker Jacki Dziekanowski was involved in a wine-bar scuffle at the weekend.
He received hospital treatment for a cut eye and a split lip but told police that he did not want to press charges.
His former manager Jimmy Lumsden admitted that only Dziekanowski's reputation for the high life enabled City to snap up the ball-playing genius from Celtic for a bargain £250,000.
Now manager Denis Smith has to decide whether to risk Dziekanowski against West Ham tonight as City chase a first home win.
Hoko's hitch
PROMOTER Frank Warren yesterday warned rivals Colin McMillan and Paul Hodkinson that greed could prevent them meeting in a world title clash.
WBC holder Hodkinson wants a £250,000 purse but Warren, who is McMillan's promoter, said: ‘I don't want to see the big contests slip away because the fighters are too greedy.
‘They mustn't forget there's a recession going on and we've just got to be realistic about money.’
But Warren is prepared to meet Hodkinson halfway by paying him a further £25,000 — provided he beats McMillan but he will have to offer the WBO champion the same.
Hodkinson, 27 today, insisted on £250,000 after Saturday's 10th round title victory over Fabrice Benichou in Toulouse.
Strike it rich
LEEDS are poised to cash in on last season's championship win by signing a multi-million pound sponsorship deal with a German company.
Managing director Bill Fotherby will use this week's European Cup trip to Stuttgart to put the finishing touches to negotiations which could smash all records.
He said: ‘When you're champions and in Europe, the sky's the limit.
‘That's why we did not get tied up to a long deal before.
The situation was changing so fast and we hoped we might find ourselves in this situation.’
Leeds have sold the television rights for their first two European Cup rounds to UEFA and ITV for £800,000.
If they qualify for the Champions League (last eight) they get another guaranteed £800,000, plus around £180,000 a point.
Manager Howard Wilkinson admitted: ‘You daren't think about what it means — if you do that you end up thinking about what you might lose.
I just know it's a very important game for Leeds.’
Rams-page
BRIAN Clough's woes continued last night when Nottingham Forest were crushed 2-0 by Derby in a testimonial for former goalkeeper Steve Sutton.
Nazi riot alert
LEEDS fear that neo-Nazis will infiltrate tomorrow's European Cup tie here in Stuttgart and cause trouble.
A large contingent of police from Yorkshire will mingle with the 1,200 Leeds supporters to try to ensure their trouble-free re-entry into Europe.
They are well aware that a hooligan element scarred Leeds' last European match in Paris in 1974 — also against German opposition.
Les Walker, the FA's adviser on crowd control, travelled to Stuttgart yesterday.
He told me: ‘The Germans are concerned because of Leeds’ past reputation.
‘And they have a major sport-related problem in their own country — and a fascist problem.
‘But they are well prepared to deal with fascist situations.’
Walker's worry is that neo-Nazis will travel from all parts of Germany and treat the clash between the champions of England and of Germany almost like a mini international He is confident that Leeds have taken all reasonable precautions but added: ‘The great bulk of Leeds supporters are well behaved and will subject themselves to checks.
‘But there are sure to be around 150 who will come without any supervision.’
BAD BOY
Bristol City 0, Southend 1
A BRISTOL City ball-boy was handed over to police during a bad-tempered second half at Ashton Gate.
Referee Vic Callow stopped play and asked police to intervene after the boy made several comments.
The home fans were angry because they thought Andy Ansah was offside when big striker Ian Benjamin hit the 75th-minute winner.
BENJAMIN: Winner
Super Stefan
SWEDEN'S Stefan Edberg successfully defended his U.S. Open title by defeating American Pete Sampras 3-6, 6-4, 7-6, 6-2 in New York last night.
The victory capped a tough week for second seed Edberg, who reached the final by winning three successive five-set matches.
Edberg's victory lifted him over American Jim Courier to the top of the world rankings.
‘I just didn't have enough today,’ admitted rival Sampras.
£4 TO BEAT UNITED
Russian fear for Fergie
KEN LAWRENCE
ALEX FERGUSON and his men tonight face a bunch of £4-a-week footballers determined to battle from the Russian breadline to the big-time.
For the players of Torpedo Moscow will not only be fighting for the honour of becoming the first side to beat Manchester United in a European tie at Old Trafford.
For United's own Red flier, Andrei Kanchelskis, warns that the men from Moscow will be on a mission most public — to sell themselves to the big-money clubs of Western Europe.
Kanchelskis made that giant leap 18 months ago when he arrived from Donetsk.
Now he drives a glamorous black BMW, owns a palatial house with a swimming pool and earns the kind of salary that would make the average Muscovite's eyes pop.
Kanchelskis, forced out of tonight's UEFA first-round clash because of the restriction on foreigners, said: ‘The players from Torpedo will have one big plan in mind.
‘They will know the game is being televised all over Europe and they will give everything because of that.
Contract ‘They will be hoping that their performance might bring them a big contract with a foreign club — that would represent a way out for them.
‘So they will be tough to beat.
They will be dangerous.’
One of the Russians — left-wing danger man Yury Tishkov — may already be halfway there.
Sheffield Wednesday boss Trevor Francis is hoping for the same kind of bargain with Tishkov as Ferguson discovered when he paid just £650,000 for Kanchelskis.
Tishkov, 21, has scored seven goals in nine UEFA Cup matches and Ferguson stressed: ‘He is their danger man — he is the one we must worry about most.’
Torpedo Moscow are on £80 a man to win — a huge amount of money by their standards, even if it is buttons compared to the wealth of United's £4,000-a-week stars.
Fergie's worries are compounded by suspension, injuries and the foreigners rule which will force him to bring in one 17-year-old youth player — and have three others on the bench.
He had hoped one of his Englishmen, Mike Phelan, would recover from an ankle injury, but the midfielder is almost certainly out.
That means that one of a quartet of 17-year-olds — Nicky Butt, David Beckham, Gary Neville or Chris Casper will make a dramatic debut.
Neil Webb and Danny Wallace will also figure, while the foreign players will be Brian McClair, Mark Hughes and Peter Schmeichel, with assimilated players Ryan Giggs and Denis Irwin joining them.
Ferguson admitted: ‘If Phelan does not make it I will be in a bit of trouble because I need as many experienced men out there as I can muster.’
EURO THREAT: Ferguson and Kanchelskis
Cup runs over
RUGBY League bosses had to overcome the first major fixture hurdle of the season last night.
The second round draw for the Greenall's Lancashire Cup threw up St Helens against Widnes.
But the September 23 date clashed with the championship programme.
The same applied to Wigan's tie against Swinton, because the champions meet Widnes on September 25 in a League match being televised by Sky.
Draw: Swinton v Wigan (Tues Sept 29, 7.30pm at Gigg Lane, Bury), Leigh v Oldham (Wed Sept 23), Salford v Workington Town (Sept 23, 7.30pm), St Helens v Widnes (Wed Sept 30, 7.30pm).
THE CAR THAT'S CAUSED ALL THE TROUBLE
BUILT FOR A CHAMP
THIS is the Grand Prix dream machine — the £1million missile of a car that every top racer wants to drive.
Quite simply, the new Williams FW15 is the greatest Grand Prix car of all time…and it is what all the fuss is about in Formula One.
Three-times world champion Ayrton Senna would give up £12million a year just to get behind the wheel for nothing.
Frenchman Alain Prost has come out of retirement in a bid to steer it to a fourth world title next season.
They know it is a champion's car, a masterpiece of mechanics, electronics and space-age technology.
Each Renault engine costs more than £100,000 and they rocket the 800 brake horse-power car to a top speed of more than 200mph.
It is so aerodynamically perfect and the down forces are so strong it could travel upside down across your ceiling at 150mph without falling off.
Track
Test driver Damon Hill gave the FW15 its first-ever shakedown at Silverstone yesterday.
The car was driven straight from a studio photo session to the world's fastest track.
Even retiring world champion Nigel Mansell will test the car he will never use in Grand Prix action.
Mansell may be at odds with Team Renault-Williams, but he will be keen to give them all the feedback he can when he takes the dream car for a spin at Silverstone tomorrow.
The car, which could have raced as early as May, will be fully prepared for action with Prost behind the wheel next season.
Under new regulations it will run on thinner tyres than the 18inch wide version used this season.
But they will still cost around £350 each and Goodyear will supply the team with more than 2,000 for the season.
MONDAY'S Back Page
ROARING TO GO…but yesterday the new Williams FW15 dream car was sitting pretty at its unveiling in London.
Retiring world champ Nigel Mansell will give it a spin around the Silver-stone circuit tomorrow and next season the super car makes its long-awaited Grand Prix debut.
POLICE CALLED IN BETS COUP
CHARLES FAWCUS
JO N JACK'S Lingfield win was cleared by the Jockey Club yesterday, but winning punters won't get paid yet.
Racing's bosses looked into the circumstances of the horse's 33-1 triumph and found that no rules had been broken.
But they have passed some relevant information to the police, and BOLA are still investigating.
‘We have nothing to add at the moment,’ said a spokesperson for the betting shops association who advised bookies to withhold winnings after Jo N Jack's success eight days ago.
The horse was racing for the first time for Epsom trainer Roger Ingram having previously run in Ireland for Joanna Morgan.
But memories of the Flockton Grey affair of 1982 were revived when it was revealed that the horse was bred by Ken Richardson.
He was given a suspended sentence and declared a disqualified person by the Jockey Club after it was discovered that a winning horse called Flockton Grey was a ringer.
But Mr Richardson has always protested his innocence.
Most of the winning bets on Jo N Jack were struck in Yorkshire and the horse is due to run again at Beverley to-morrow.
Michael Roberts's second double in as many days at Sandown yesterday leaves him needing three wins a week to reach the magic 200-winner mark.
‘If he doesn't get there he'll probably sack me,’ smiled agent Graham Rock.
If he doesn't get there he might also regret his defeat on Branston Abby who was caught close home by Our Rita.
Steve out
STEVE Archibald, ex-Scottish international, has parted company with Fulham after playing 155 minutes for the Second Division club.
He joined them on a non-contract basis.
Derby land Short
KEN LAWRENCE
CRAIG Short last night turned his back on Kenny Dalglish and a £2.5m move to Blackburn Rovers — and opted to join Derby County.
The Notts County star had been expected to travel north to last night's clash at Ewood Park, where money-bags Rovers lost 3-2 against Everton and missed their chance to bounce back to the top of the Premier Division.
Instead he will join First Division big spenders Derby, who have made a disastrous start to their multi-million pound promotion campaign.
Jim woe
LONDON referee Tony Ward sent off Jim Magilton and booked seven other players as Oxford beat Cambridge 3-0 in a stormy First Division battle at the Manor Ground.
Northern Ireland international Magilton, who had given Oxford the lead from the penalty spot, went after 58 minutes for retaliation after being fouled by Paul Raynor.
Rocky road to debut
HARRY HARRIS
DAVID Rocastle will discover tonight whether he is a £2 million misfit or a potential European Cup match-winner, writes Harry Harris.
Manager Howard Wilkinson's record purchase from Arsenal has yet to kick a ball in anger since his surprise switch from Highbury to Elland Road.
Now Wilkinson admits he is tempted to call up Rocky to hit the German champions Stuttgart with a surprise selection.
The nearest Rocastle has come to the Leeds team was sitting on the bench during last Sunday's 1-1 draw with Aston Villa.
Wilkinson admitted: ‘I am keeping all my options open and I have been thinking about whether I should play Rocastle.
‘I know a lot of people are beginning to wonder why I paid £2 million for him.
‘But I can only pick my best eleven at the time.’
IRON MAN ANDY
IAN GIBB
ANDY HOLLIGAN produced an Aintree iron of a left-hook to knock out Manchester's Tony Ekubia in 31 seconds of the seventh round at the Everton Sports Centre last night.
Liverpool's Holligan retained his British and Commonwealth light-welterweight titles after barely outpointing the brave Manchester man in the same ring to win the title 15 months ago.
Just when it looked as though Holligan would struggle, while being watched by his world featherweight champion pal Paul Hodkinson, he pulled out the big one.
A left-hook hurt Ekubia in the sixth round, and then another put him down for a count of nine.
But Holligan wasted no time in the seventh and an even better left-hook stretched Ekubia on his back to earn the Liverpool lad a Lonsdale Belt.
New boost for hero Nigel
TED MACAULEY
LABATT'S, the brewery giants who pour millions into Williams, joined the clamour for Nigel Mansell's recall yesterday.
Managing director John Eckmire said: ‘It's our wish that Frank and Nigel should re-open discussions and that the prospect of Nigel's premature retirement will vanish.’
Mirror Sport's phone lines were jammed with angry fans venting their rage at their hero's enforced retirement.
One irate caller promised: ‘If I was down to my last spoonful of petrol, with a hundred miles still to go, I'd drive past an Elf station.’
French petrol suppliers Elf partner Renault as principal sponsors of the £25 million-a-year team.
Another caller raged: ‘I've cancelled my Renault.
They can stick it.
If this is the way they want to treat Nigel, they can suffer the consequences.
And I'll bet I'm not the only one.’
Labatt's don't want to get caught up in what could be a damaging commercial kickback.
Eckmire, anxious to be seen to be supportive of the departing champion, added: ‘Our sponsorship position has always assumed that Nigel would be driving for Williams next year and we echo the British public's sentiments.’
WHY MANSELL HAD TO GO — Pages 26, 27 
SUPPORT: Mansell
KING OF THE TIPSTERS
NEWSBOY rounded off a brilliant nap hand yesterday when Jdaayel romped home at 4-1 for his fifth winning nap on the trot.
The King of the Tipsters has been in unstoppable form since he struck with another 4-1 shot, Pursuit Of Love, at Doncaster last week.
It's been winners all the way with Green Lane 9-2, Mellotlie 13-2 and Seaside Minstrel 100-30.
To put the icing on the cake, Newsboy — that's Charles Fawcus (left)— weighed in with a 29-1 double yesterday through Jdaayel and Our Rita (5-1).
He also gave 13-2 shot Highland Fantasy and King's Signet (3-1).
FAWCUS: In top form
LICKED
Ex postman sends Spurs crashing
COVENTRY 1 TOTTENHAM 0
DAVID MOORE
EX-POSTMAN John Williams, Coventry's £250,000 bargain buy from Swansea, made Spurs look second class last night.
The lanky 24-year-old grabbed Coventry's winner after 61 minutes.
And that followed his special delivery at White Hart Lane last month, when he netted twice in a 2-0 Coventry win.
Williams' goal lifted the Sky Blues to second place in the Premier League — and punters can get 1,000-1 on a Norwich-Coventry one-two at the end of the season.
Doug Livermore, Tottenham's team boss, was left moaning: ‘We will be glad to see the back of Williams, that's for sure.
‘The lad was in non-League football little more than 12 months ago.
He has shot up and seized his chance with both hands.
Good luck to him.’
But Livermore insisted: ‘We had no luck at all, particularly when Neil Ruddock had what looked like a perfectly good header disallowed after half-an-hour.
‘We worked hard, defended well and surely deserved some reward for our efforts.
‘There were periods when we gained control.
But a couple of errors crept in and we allowed Coventry to take the lead.’
The Williams breakthrough came when Lee Hurst's pass sent Peter Ndlovu racing at Tottenham's defence.
He fired a drive which looped crazily off Pat van den Hauwe's heel.
Williams leaped for a header which dropped over Ian Walker and just under the bar — with the keeper finding he had taken one step too many off his line.
Williams said: ‘For a moment I thought the header was going over.
But then I saw the keeper struggling.
It could have gone anywhere.’
Ruddock's goal was ruled out by referee Martin Bodenham, because Teddy Sheringham was pushing Andy Pearce.
Ruddock himself, back from a one-match ban after being sent off against Crystal Palace, was blameless as he met a Vinny Samways cross to beat Steve Ogrizovic.
But Ruddock enjoyed his own share of good fortune later, escaping punishment for what looked  suspiciously like an elbow in the face that flattened Ndlovu.
Centre
The skipper was often at the centre of the action, saving Spurs early in the second-half when Brian Borrows hesitated just six yards out with the goal at his mercy.
With Manchester United due at White Hart Lane on Saturday, Tottenham's problems are made worse by a lengthening injury list which could soon reach crisis proportions.
Livermore confirmed: ‘Four people were hurt — Gray has a bad shin, Gordon Durie twisted an ankle, Sheringham hurt a knee and Samways sustained damaged ankle ligaments.
‘Samways is most doubtful for the week-end.
We will need to patch the rest of them up.’
YOU AGAIN!
JOHN Williams (centre) somehow gets in his header before the leaping Spurs defence — and that meant his third goal against the Londoners this season.
Mart's chance
TED MACAULEY
BRAVE Martin Brundle has emerged as favourite to replace Nigel Mansell in the Williams-Renault team.
The Grand Prix world was rife with rumour last night that team boss Frank Williams will put him in the seat every top driver wants.
Britain's former world sports car champion Brundle said last night: ‘I've heard the stories, but so far as I'm concerned they're just that — stories and rumour.
‘I'm a free agent and like any other driver I'd love to be in the Williams.’
Mansell last night admitted he was considering driving in the infamous Indy sports car series in the USA — despite fears about safety.
DEATH WISH — Page 30, 31 
BRUNDLE: Favourite
COTTEE POTTY!
Wrad injury spoils Kendall's night
Blackburn 2, Everton 3
KEN LAWRENCE
HOWARD KENDALL'S discovery last night that Mark Ward could be out for the rest of the season with a broken leg spoilt a brilliant Tony Cottee-inspired performance at Ewood Park.
Ward went down in agony following a challenge from Rovers' midfielder Mark Atkins, which produced a caution.
The joy of Everton's win turned to depression when Kendall and his men returned to the dressing room still elated by their stunning victory.
Goodison boss Kendall admitted: ‘Everybody is desperately disappointed for Mark.
‘He is a bubbly character and while he may not be a favourite of the Everton fans he is certainly a favourite among his team mates.
‘We don't know how long he will be out, but we will certainly miss him.’
Meanwhile, Kenny Dalglish was forced to re-live his bitterest memory as Cottee returned to haunt him.
The Blackburn manager will never forget the night 18 months ago when Cottee scored two for Everton in the FA Cup fifth-round replay with Liverpool.
The game ended as a 4-4 draw — and Dalglish then stunned soccer by announcing his  retirement as Anfield boss.
Cottee got two again last night — returning after five months on the sidelines to stop Dalglish's £10million side striding to the top of the Premier League.
And Dalglish must have gone into shock again as the side who have so far swept all before them suddenly surrendered their 100 per cent home record.
Yet the mega-buck manager of Ewood could have had little complaint — Rovers lost to a side who played revivalist football of a kind manager Howard Kendall has waited 22 months to see.
Cottee, fit again after two knee operations, was the man who once more put the knife into Dalglish — though the catalysts of Everton's thrilling victory were Robert Warzycha and the effervescent Peter Beardsley.
Substitute Warzycha was forced on to the field after only ten minutes after Ward was stretchered off.
And moments later more trouble hit Everton as Alan Shearer collected his seventh goal in eight games from the penalty spot.
But Warzycha's arrival turned fate against Dalglish — he was involved in all three Everton goals.
Beardsley, meanwhile, produced a performance of such craft, guile and wisdom that it could yet make him the saviour of England manager Graham Taylor — if only he would pick him.
Cottee finished off the first of a series of classic Everton moves to grab the equaliser before John Ebbrell put them ahead at the break.
Shearer, continuing his astonishing run since his £3.3m move from Southampton, put Rovers back on terms.
But Everton were not to be denied, and they produced another brilliant move as Beardsley and Warzycha combined to allow Cottee a simple tap-in.
Shocked Dalglish admitted: ‘Everton are the best footballing side we have faced all season.’
TONY'S TIME TONY Cottee (right) grabs the first of his two goals against Kenny Dalglish's Blackburn last night.
Picture: ALBERT COOPER
COTTEE POTTY
IT WAS joy and despair for former West Ham stars Tony Cottee and Mark Ward as Everton scored a shock 3-2 win at Blackburn last night.
Cottee, in his first match of the season after knee surgery, scored twice.
His second was a brilliantly-worked winner nine minutes from time.
But Ward was stretchered off with a broken leg after a challenge by Mark Atkins, who was booked for the tackle.
But Everton manager Howard Kendall refused to be drawn by suggestions that the tackle was malicious.
MATCH REPORT — Page 25 
COTTEE: Double joy
MY HELL
‘They said I should have been killed in a crash’
COLIN PRICE
HARRY REDKNAPP poured his broken heart out yesterday after being accused of inciting a mini-riot at Bristol City.
‘A fan behind the dug-out snarled at me and said I should have been killed along with my mate Brian Tiler and three others in a car smash,’ he said.
‘I ask you, what kind of person says a vile thing like that over a football match?’
West Ham's first-team coach angrily refutes the charge that he made V-signs at the lout during the 5-1 victory.
But he admits that his self-control snapped sufficiently for him to signal the score, 3-1 to West Ham.
Avon and Somerset Police have summonsed Redknapp to appear in court to answer charges of alleged abusive conduct.
Redknapp is determined to fight the charge but he is even more upset that his action was seen as the spark for crowd violence.
‘Honest to God, I put three fingers up on one hand and one finger on the other, smiled at him and then sat down,’ said Redknapp.
‘There was no V-sign at all.
‘A steward standing some 40 yards away rushed over and said he saw me making an obscene gesture.
I was flabbergasted and so was my manager Billy Bonds.
‘I can't believe I am being blamed for a fight that went on in the stand behind us, and I hope video evidence will clearly back me up.’
Redknapp spent the best part of six months recovering from serious head and leg injuries after the horror crash near Rome involving a mini-bus in which he and ex-Aston Villa star Tiler were travelling.
They were on their way to cheer England in the World Cup finals when the bus was in collision with a car.
Tiler, Redknapp's managing director at Bournemouth, and three men travelling in the car were killed.
Redknapp returned to West Ham during the summer.
MIRROR SPORT yesterday
Martin's fired up
MARTIN RICHARDS
THE Rugby League have mounted their biggest ever advertising campaign in London to promote the Stones Bitter World Cup final showdown between the Lions and the Kangaroos.
The centre-piece is the world's costliest player, £440,000 Wigan and Great Britain winger Martin Offiah.
Officials are confident that — with Offiah's help to lure the southern punters — there will be a 78,000 Wembley full house next month — a new world record for a Rugby League international.
Said Rugby League public affairs executive David Howes: ‘Offiah was chosen because he is the greatest  personality in the game.
He has a London background and great showbiz appeal.
‘Like goalscorers in soccer, the great try scorers are the heroes and the personalities.
‘He has an amazing try record since he came into the game into 1987 and is being compared with legends like Billy Boston and Brian Bevan.
‘And because of his unusual name there can be only one Martin Offiah.’
Advance ticket sales for the final have already broken the 50,000 barrier and are approaching a British Test record of 54,000, also set at Wembley in 1990.
Great Britain have never won the World Cup but after this summer's titanic struggle for the Ashes and blessed with home advantage, Mal Reilly's men will never have a better chance to take the trophy.
World champions Australia arrive on October 3 and play three warm-up games in Sheffield, Huddersfield and Workington.
HANNON IN GOLD VENTURE
CHARLES FAWCUS
RICHARD HANNON is eyeing the gold in a bid to clinch his first ever trainer's title.
Hannon is already £20,000 ahead of Michael Stoute and a win with Venture Capitalist in Saturday's £75,000 Ladbrokes Ayr Gold Cup would make him even harder to catch.
‘There aren't many harder races in the year, but they are making Lochsong favourite and I don't see why we should not beat her,’ said the Wiltshire trainer.
‘Venture Capitalist was just a neck behind Lochsong at Doncaster last week and he should have won.
‘He was nearly put out of the race when he ran into the back of Clifton Charlie who had broken a leg and yet he would have caught Lochsong in another couple of strides.
‘The horse seems to have improved since we put blinkers on him and he'll wear them at Ayr.
‘We are giving Stoutie a bit of a target already.
It would be nice if we could stretch it.’
Jo N Jack, who landed a coup for Yorkshire punters when winning at 33-1 at Lingfield last week, is back in action at Beverley (4.00) today.
Bleating bookies are still refusing to pay out on the bets while Bola make their inquiries.
TAKEN FOR A RIDE
Sponsors fear public backlash over Mansell
Message for Nigel: ‘Don't quit’
TED MACAULEY
BOARDROOMS right across Britain were buzzing yesterday with anxious debate about the shoddy Nigel Mansell affair.
Sales of cars, lager, cigarettes, petrol and office equipment are all threatened and could be hit in an astonishing public backlash.
And major sponsors of the Renault-Williams team, caught in the crossfire of the bitter battle between the world champion and his team boss Frank Williams, are in a panic.
They want a finish to the feud…and a different ending.
The message last night was: ‘Come back, Nigel.
Don't quit!’
Their underlying feeling is that Frank Williams has blundered badly and they are saying: ‘What a mess he has made of it all!’
Army
Williams has emerged as the unrelenting villain as he patrols what has turned into Fortress Didcot, the race-team HQ, refusing to enlighten the enraged Mansell army on the reasons for their split.
He has become a target for abuse — and powerful sponsors who back the team with around £20-£25million a year want a say in what has become the greatest sports outcry of all time.
I conducted a round-up of the principals yesterday and without exception the big six want a say…and they want Mansell to reverse his decision to quit.
The money men who keep Formula One afloat want to stave off commercial backlashes that could cost them millions of pounds and hard-earned goodwill.
John Eckmire, managing director of Labatt's, the lager brewers who pump £2million into the team, said: ‘All the sponsors need to get together to get the two men talking again.
‘If I had a magic wand I would wave it and get Nigel back.
But I'm not advocating a sponsors’ rebellion.
‘We are not basing our views on emotion, but on pure business.
But I don't think we realised just what a hero Mansell is to the public.
‘We put a lot of money in and we want to maximise on our investment — and Nigel, perfect for us, is a major part of our future.
‘I see no reason why he and Frank Williams can't get back together again.
‘We want him back.’
And that was the message from Camel, the cigarette company who put £3million a year behind Williams.
Their spokesman, Richard Grundy, said: ‘It's all been handled very badly by Frank Williams.
He's managed to turn a triumph into a public relations disaster.
Caught
‘We've waited for years to have a Formula One world champion like Mansell — and now it looks as though we won't be able to use him.
‘Unfortunately, we've been caught up in the crossfire and we've had people on to us saying they'll never smoke Camel cigarettes again.
‘But we'd just like them to know we are as terribly unhappy as they are.’
Renault, who supply the £100,000 engines — changed every 400 miles — said: ‘We've already had a few people on to us saying they're not going to buy our cars.
‘We're very sorry and we'd do anything we could to get Nigel back and the situation restored.’
Major sponsors Elf, the French petrol suppliers with 800 filling stations in Britain, told me: ‘It's up to Frank Williams to sort it out.
‘We love Nigel.
We think he's a hero and he's shown he's a brilliant driver.
‘Things might have been handled a bit better — but it's between him and the team.’
Canon, the Japanese office equipment and electrical suppliers, who put in £5million a year, want Mansell and Williams to get together again.
And a spokesman said: ‘We've expressed our concern already to Mr Williams.
‘Nigel has a fanatical following of loyal fans and we hope they don't try to hit our business.
‘No sponsor is happy about the possibility of his business being hit when he has done all he can.
We are proud to have been supporters of him and the team.
‘So we just hope Nigel's supporters will be sensible.’
Champion sparkplugs spokesman Robin Longden said from the company headquarters on Merseyside:
‘We are having continuing dialogue with both Nigel and Frank Williams because everything in our advertising campaign for next year was geared around the two of them.
‘I'm optimistic there'll be a meeting of minds and it can all be resolved.’
Wave
‘There's been a massive wave of patriotism behind Nigel that is quite unbelievable — and we just hope that there isn't any backlash from the public that will damage either the sport or sponsors.’
At Goodyear, who supply 2,000 tyres a season at £350 a time, a spokesman told me: ‘Nigel is a character, a personality and a tremendous driver who does the sport a lot of good.
‘It's a tragedy that it looks as if he's quitting just when he's developed from being a superstar into an awesome megastar.
‘What worries us is that our sales could be affected because fingers of suspicion are being pointed at us.’
Putting his foot down
NIGEL MANSELL insists his decision to quit is final, despite the outcry from the world champion's fans and the concern of the Renault-Williams sponsors
MONDAY: Shocker
Poles apart MANSELL and team boss Frank Williams failed to hammer out a deal
MONDAY: Mirror Sport's verdict
TUESDAY: Mansell's American offer
My sacking hurt me, my family and my friends like hell
PHIL THOMPSON ON THE CRISIS AT LIVERPOOL
NEIL SILVER
PHIL Thompson last night described the torment of his sacking by Liverpool.
In a frank debate on the Anfield crisis on Sky TV Thompson, former Liverpool skipper and coach, told how his shock sacking had shattered his family.
‘It hurt me, it hurt my family and friends like hell,’ said Thompson.
‘And I've not been given a good reason for it.’
Thompson was backed by former hard-man Liverpool colleague Tommy Smith, who said Thompson should have been given a medal for what he did at Anfield, not the sack.
Here is the amazing transcript of the debate, on The Footballers' Football Show, which also included Liverpool community liaison officer Brian Hall and former skipper Mark Lawrenson, and which was hosted by presenter Richard Keys.
Debate
We pick up the debate at the point where Hall suggests Liverpool boss Graeme Souness was under too much pressure to make rational decisions.
BRIAN HALL: ‘At that particular moment in time we have a manager that has got himself into the semi-final of the FA Cup, he's got the opportunity of reaching Wembley, he's had a difficult time in the League, it's been a traumatic season okay, then he's told he needs triple by-pass surgery at the age of 39.
‘There aren't many people in the world that are actually going to make solid, rational decisions.
I don't think so under those sort of circumstances.’
TOMMY SMITH: ‘So you're saying his decision to have this operation and to actually sell it to the Sun came all within five seconds?’
HALL: ‘No, what I'm saying Tommy is that Graeme has subsequently apologised, he's made apologies.
I think we ought to make some understanding of the sort of pressures that the man was under at the time when all this happened, and it happened very quickly.’
PHIL THOMPSON: ‘So that mean's I get my job back does it?’
RICHARD KEYS: ‘We should explain that too.
Phil, you were on the coaching staff and left in the summer.
‘I understand you've got a legal problem which means we can't go too deeply into that, but from the outside is it hurting you a little bit?’
THOMPSON: ‘It hurts like hell.
Reasons for my dismissal were nothing like I think I deserved.
I think it lies a little bit deeper.’
SMITH: ‘I think the lad deserved a medal, because they won the Cup with half a reserve side out last year — and he was taking care of the reserves.’
THOMPSON: ‘All I've just said is that it was not a good enough explanation of what I got and I don't think anybody has been told, not only to the media out there, myself who is the most important one.
‘But it hurt me, my family and my friends like hell.
And I've not had a good enough reason why — that's all I'm hurting Brian, I don't think that is taking anything too far.’
KEYS: ‘Mark, somewhat distanced from it now, what's you're impression of what's happening at Anfield.’
MARK LAWRENSON: ‘I think the thing you have to say Richard, they've only played eight games.
This has happened before and no matter what people say I think in my second year we were about 16th or 17th.’
KEYS: ‘But it is not just a question of what is going on on the park, it's what's happening elsewhere that we're beginning to hear and read about and that's never been the case at Liverpool previously, ever.
LAWRENSON: ‘No but I honestly believe that there are certain members of the Press that are delighted to have a go at Liverpool because of the success that they've had.
‘They are a victim of their own success.
It has been absolutely phenomenal, it really has, and now all of a sudden eight games into the season and we hear supposedly all of the stories.
‘How many games are there left? 34?
You know, I don't think he (Souness) has been able to pick from all his players every week certainly probably for 18 months since he's been there.
‘So I think it is a bit early to pre-empt things.’
Souness was then accused of trying to run Liverpool on the same lines as an Italian club.
SMITH: ‘Souness seems to be changing an awful lot.
If he wants to do it his way and he succeeds then great, but so far it hasn't been that successful.
‘I know that Liverpool won the FA Cup — thanks to Phil and his reserves, because most of the reserves were playing in most of the games last year with all the injuries.
‘There's a big question mark about how Liverpool train.
They go on pasta diets now.
If food's got anything to do with it then I must have been eating the wrong way for the last 40 years.
‘An awful lot of things are changing which is foreign to Anfield because it used to be a very friendly club.’
THOMPSON: ‘The thing with Bill Shankly was that we were always a family and everyone knew each other from the cleaning lady to the girls in the ticket office.
It was something special.’
PHIL Thompson is still bitter at the way he was treated at Anfield.
SMITH: ‘Thompson deserved medal’
LAWRENSON: ‘Too early to judge’
SOUNESS: Upset some Anfield fans
Happy Gooch
ENGLAND skipper Graham Gooch last night backed the decision to leave David Gower out of the winter tour to India and instead pick South African rebel Mike Gatting.
Gooch said: ‘I agree with our policy to select two batsmen over 35.
‘Given that I was one of them it came down to a choice between Gower and Gatting.
It was a marginal decision and I'm certainly not unhappy with it.’
He added that wicket keeper Jack Russell was left out because of his poor Test batting.
VIV GRABS GOAL GLORY
Anderson lifts Owls
Sheffield Wed 8, Spora 1
JOHN EDWARDS
VIV ANDERSON called on all his European know-how to help Sheffield Wednesday recover from the shock of their lives last night.
Humble Spora arrived at Hillsborough with a reputation as one of the tiniest of this season's European minnows.
They attract crowds of 450 for their home matches in the Luxembourg league and brought 26 fans with them for this UEFA Cup first round tie.
But that didn't stop them reducing Hillsborough to a stunned silence by answering Chris Waddle's eighth-minute opener with an equaliser two minutes later.
Ricco Cardoni robbed Peter Shirtliff and set up Joao Cruz for a simple finish that had Spora's fans — all 26 of them — dancing with delight.
That followed Waddle's first goal for Wednesday, a low left-foot drive from 20 yards.
And it left Wednesday rattled until veteran campaigner Anderson took charge midway through the first-half.
The 36-year-old defender — who won European Cup medals with Nottingham Forest in 1979 and 1980 — restored Wednesday's lead with a header from Waddle's 22nd-minute cross.
And he struck again in the 29th minute, chesting down a Trevor Francis cross and firing past the keeper from 12 yards.
Wednesday completed a burst of three goals in nine minutes to go 4-1 up.
Carlton Palmer sent make-shift striker Paul Warhurst clear in the 31st minute for an explosive finish that finally removed any Wednesday anxiety.
Curling
The vastly-experienced trio of Francis, Anderson and Waddle — with 105 years and four European Cup finals between them — were beginning to revel in the huge open spaces left by their part-time opponents.
And Francis almost made it five on the stroke of half-time, cutting in from the right and curling a left-foot shot just wide.
Wednesday kept up the relentless pressure after the break and Chris Bart-Williams made it five in the 61st minute.
Nigel Worthington and Warhurst  added to the drubbing with two more goals.
And Bart-Williams rounded off the thrashing in the 81st minute.
FRANCIS: Exp[erienced
WADDLE: Scored
IT'S RUSH HOUR!
Champ-Ian slams four to storm past Hunt's record
Super Reds in a Euro romp
Liverpool 6, A Limassol 1
RICHARD TANNER
JUBILANT Ian Rush was crowned Liverpool's European goal king at Anfield last night.
The Welsh ace bagged four goals in this Cup-Winners' Cup romp to eclipse Sixties' idol Roger Hunt.
Rush now has 19 in European competition compared to Hunt's 17.
And last night's haul puts him just one behind Hunt's all-time Liverpool scoring record of 285.
Rush, without a Premier League goal this season, took all his pent-up frustration out on the unfortunate Cypriots.
And after scoring four for the first time in a European game, he said: ‘I'm proud and privileged to break such a great player's record.
Hunt was my dad's hero.
He was a big Liverpool fan in the Sixties and we called him Sir Roger.
‘Hunt is a legend here but if I go on and beat his all-time record I think it'll take some bettering.
‘It's been hard going for us all in the League, but hopefully this result will help bring back the confidence.’
Rush's club landmark came just a week after he had reached a scoring milestone for his country.
Drive
His World Cup hat-trick for Wales against the Faroe Islands took his international tally to 23 and brought him level with Ivor Allchurch and Trevor Ford.
While Rush ended the night as the hero it was Paul Stewart who got Liverpool going.
Danish star Torben Piechnik, who will complete a £500,000 move to Anfield today from FC Copenhagen, had hardly settled into his seat before Stewart made the vital early breakthrough in the fourth minute.
Pushed up front by Souness to partner Rush, the former Spurs star showed he had lost none of his old striking instincts by evading two challenges and firing a rising drive high into the net after robbing Apollon's Scottish exile Dave Kenny.
Liverpool enjoyed almost total domination but faced with a team who pulled all 11 players back behind the ball they had to wait until the 38th minute before adding their second.
This time Stewart ran in unmarked at the far post to score with a downward header from Jan Molby's free kick.
The Rush show began a minute later when Mike Marsh wriggled his way into space in the penalty area before Rush rifled in a 10-yard chance.
Apollon didn't help their cause when they had Marios Charalambous sent off for a second bookable offence a minute before the break.
Rush completed a quick-fire hat-trick within 10 minutes of the second half starting — and he owed it to Mark Walters.
In the 50th minute he produced an instinctive finish from six yards after Walters had driven in a fierce low cross.
And five  minutes later he stooped low to head his third after overworked keeper Mikalis Christophi had only managed to push out a curling effort by Walters.
The sixth came in the 74th minute with Rush pouncing to punish Christophi again after he had failed to hold another Jamie Redknapp shot.
Surprise
Apollon grabbed a surprise consolation goal seven minutes from time when Marsh upended Pampos Pittas and Yugoslav international Malenko Spoliaric converted the spot kick.
That denied David James the distinction of his first clean-sheet for Liverpool, but it will hardly raise Apollon's hopes of a fight-back in Limassol in a fortnight's time.
Only 12,769 watched the game — Liverpool's second lowest in their 23 seasons of European soccer.
STRIKE IT RICH IAN RUSH slots home his fourth goal against Limassol last night to make him Anfield's European goal king.
EURO HELL FOR JOHN
Leeds in shock
Stuttgart 3 Leeds 0
HARRY HARRIS
LEEDS' bid for European Cup glory struck disaster last night.
Keeper John Lukic was beaten three times in the second half and they now face a giant task in the second leg of this first round tie.
And Eric Cantona's night ended in misery.
The Frenchman's exceptional talents might have been rewarded with two goals in the first half here in the Neckarstadion.
But after the interval the striker pulled up with a hamstring strain, signalled to the bench to come off — and then gave the ball away and set up Stuttgart's vital opening goal.
The whole tie turned from Leeds' grasp in that fateful moment the Frenchman will want to forget.
His first injury in English football could not have come at a worst time.
As he tried to leave the field the ball suddenly dropped at his feet and he attempted a long-range crossfield pass aimed at Gordon Strachan.
The Germans cut it out and ruthlessly exploited the possession as dangerous winger Ludwig Kogl crossed along the ground.
Centre back Chris Whyte slipped and top goalscorer Fritz Walter expertly chipped over the advancing Lukic for the 63rd-minute opening strike.
That was a cruel blow for Howard Wilkinson's team, who had made a committed, controlled and commanding start.
Instead they fell apart when the German champions went ahead, and Walter collected his second within five minutes.
A long-range effort from Eyjolfur Sverrisson was parried by Lukic and Walter demonstrated his predatory instincts ruthlessly inside the box.
Then, with Leeds still hopeful of prising an away goal to take back to Elland Road, they were caught out on the break with Andreas Buch beating Lukic with an angled shot into a corner eight minutes from time.
It could have been so vastly different for Leeds and Cantona.
But instead of the Leeds fans celebrating with their new sing-song ‘Ooh Ah, Cantona’ it was ‘Oh no, Cantona’.
Firing blanks LEE CHAPMAN and his Leeds team-mates couldn't break down the Stuttgart defence as they began their European campaign in Germany last night
BACK ON TOP
CHARLES FAWCUS
CHAMPION apprentice Darryll Holland is a winner again — and that's good news for boss Barry Hills as well as his jockey.
With the Hills team poleaxed by a virus, this season had proved a real struggle for Darryll until his win on 25-1 chance Knifebox a week ago.
He set off for Ayr yesterday with five more under his belt and promptly won the first three races, two in photos.
‘It's amazing what happens when your luck changes.
I had to be patient and wait for the tide to turn,’ he said.
Typical of his new found fortune was his win on Bandoline.
Two weeks ago he forgot to weigh in when second at Haydock on the horse and was fined £315.
By coincidence his Ladbrokes Ayr Gold Cup ride tomorrow is Cantoris.
Darryll was suspended for his ride on the horse last month — at Haydock!
Hills is just as relieved that the nightmare is over.
‘I wouldn't like to go through another summer like this one.
‘Some of the three-year-olds have never recovered, but the two-year-olds are looking good,’ said Barry who runs promising Bawaeth at Newbury today.
Job horse Jo N Jack failed to land any touches at Beverley yesterday, finishing way out of the money behind No Comebacks.
It's unlikely that losing punters will get their money back!
CASH IN
Eubank aims for earning power
IAN GIBB
THE way forward for WBO super-middleweight champion Chris Eubank should now be clear enough — as long as he beats highly-rated American Tony Thornton in tomorrow's Daily Mirror-sponsored fight in Glasgow.
With old foe Nigel Benn favoured to take the WBC version of the title from Italy's Mauro Galvano on October 3, the two champions could afford to forget their squabbles fighting for a mountain of cash.
Forget it.
I believe Eubank is already planning another defence before Christmas and Benn's name doesn't come near the list.
If anything, the two men are further apart than ever — even if a clash between them is one of three domestic battles that fight fans want to see — the others being Lennox Lewis against Frank Bruno and Paul Hodkinson against Colin McMillan.
When I asked Eubank if Benn had crossed his mind recently, it drew a cold response.
He said: ‘No.
Here is a man who antagonised me and bothered me for 16 months and when I said ‘yes’ to fighting him again, he said ‘no’.
‘What am I to do?
He's not being true to the man he is.’
Eubank is certainly showing no great interest in trying to unify the title, possibly starting against WBA holder Michael Nunn.
He said of the American stylist: ‘I'm not interested in him.
He doesn't mean anything to me.
‘If my intention was to become famous worldwide, it would mean something to me to unify the titles.
‘But my intention is to make money and I'm doing that rather well with the WBO.’
The Brighton fighter strolled into a Glasgow press conference this week resplendent in light suit, bow tie and carrying a briefcase — a new slant on the old line about taking care of business.
And he knows there will be plenty of business to occupy him against Thornton.
Eubank admitted: ‘From what I can make out, this will be a good fight — unfortunately for me, because I like to get the job over and done with and go home with the minimum of fuss.’
BENN: No deal
IT'S MINE: Eubank takes Benn's title, November 1990.
POUNDING: Chris Eubank's goal is big money.
ANDERS AGONY
Top Gunner's fight for glory
LIMPAR GETS SWEDE BASHED
FRANK WIECHULA
ANDERS LIMPAR was warned last night that his international career is in jeopardy if he keeps missing out on matches with Arsenal.
Swedish chief Tommy Svensson declared: ‘If Anders doesn't play for his club for some time then it's going to be very difficult for me to pick him.
‘We need the player to be playing matches and be in form.
I just hope it all clears up.’
It's the latest twist in the lengthy club versus country row which has simmered for the last two seasons.
In the past, the exciting forward has opted to play for Sweden and lost out on his club place afterwards.
Now, in an ironic reverse, being kept in the cold at Highbury could cost him his international place.
Limpar hasn't figured for the Gunners since scoring the opening goal in the 2-0 win at Anfield on August 23.
He's played twice for his country in that spell, against Norway and Finland, but not for Arsenal.
Now he's in line to miss his sixth successive club game at Sheffield United tomorrow.
Arsenal boss George Graham is annoyed that it took so long for him to be told about Limpar's current ankle injury.
The Swede had played in his country's World Cup qualifier against Finland, but the injury wasn't reported until Limpar rejoined Arsenal last Friday.
Graham said the Swedish FA should have had the courtesy to inform him.
But Svensson said: ‘When Anders left Finland on Thursday he had no problems with his ankle.
‘I did not know he was injured.
When he was back in London, he felt something.
It's surprised me.’
WOUNDED HERO: Anders Limpar's ankle injury has left Arsenal boss George Graham fuming — and now his Sweden career is on the line too.
Good golly Ollie!
SPANISH golf ace Jose-Maria Olazabal grumbled yesterday after taking the lead in the Lancome Trophy in Paris with a first-round five-under-par 65.
Olazabal, 26, shot five birdies and a superb eagle but said: ‘My game is just not there.
It is only 50 per cent at present.
‘It has happened to me before but this is the longest period.
‘I am practising hard to try to find the answer and I am playing in several events in the next few weeks and hope it comes right.’
Nick Faldo, chasing his fourth successive European tour win, laughed and said: ‘I'm happy enough with my par 70.
‘But Ollie is very young.
When he is 10 years older he will be happy with 65 every time.’
Olazabal is just one shot ahead of Ian Woosnam, Barry Lane, Spaniard Jose-Manuel Carriles, and Argentinians Vicente Fernandez and Eduardo Romero.
Dave sings Blues
FRANK WIECHULA
DEFIANT Dave Beasant last night spoke for the first time since his week-end goalkeeping torment and insisted: ‘I still want to play for Chelsea.’
Beasant has been to hell and back since he was publicly blamed by manager Ian Porterfield for Saturday's 3-2 home defeat by Norwich, and was told he was finished at the club.
Chelsea have been actively looking for a replacement.
But brave Dave has broken his silence and is ready to play in Sunday's live televised match at Manchester City.
He said: ‘I'm still employed by Chelsea and no matter what the manager has said, I'll be wanting to play on Sunday.
‘I've been in the game a long time and you don't last forever.
But you don't play over 500 games with three big clubs, have a couple of big moves and become a bad player overnight.
‘I've still got belief in myself and I still have confidence in my own ability.’
Beasant, who still has 18 months of his contract to run, has a chance of playing on Sunday.
Chelsea's other senior keeper, Kevin Hitchcock, is struggling to recover from injury, and the club have until midday today to sort out a new signing.
BEASANT: Determined
Fozzie staying
WEST Ham defender Colin Foster yesterday turned down a £425,000 move to crisis club Nottingham Forest.
Brian Clough, whose side are bottom of the Premier League after six successive defeats, wanted Fozzie back — three years after selling him to West Ham for £750,000.
NO JOKING, IT'S STEVE
STEVE Martin, Featherstone's new Aussie coach, is a shrewd man.
He could be in the right place at the right time when top jobs come up for grabs next summer.
Wigan's John Monie, Darryl Van de Velde at Castleford and St Helens' Mike McClennan are in the final year of their contracts.
Martin will in the running.
Come in, David
MARTIN RICHARDS
HALIFAX are ready to resurrect the career of Wigan's out-of-favour Great Britain winger David Myers.
The championship leaders have contacted Wigan chairman Jack Robinson about the £120,000tagged Myers, who has lost his senior place since the arrival of Martin Offiah.
Myers upset coach John Monie by demanding a move when Wigan came back from the Sydney Sevens last February.
He had promised Monie he would wait until the end of the season before discussing his future.
‘He and John haven't been able to strike up an amicable relationship since and David doesn't seem to figure in the coach's plans,’ said chairman Robinson.
‘If Halifax come back with a decent offer we'll consider it.
David is listed at £120,000 but you have to be flexible.’
Halifax are pulling out all the stops to try to strengthen their squad and want a sponsor to help fund a deal for Aussie Test forward Bob Lindner.
Salford face strong competition from an un-named Yorkshire club in their bid to sign Leeds former All Black star John Gallagher.
The stumbling block to any deal is a cash settlement for the remainder of Gallagher's contract, worth a reported £400,000 when he signed for Leeds in the summer of 1990.
Leigh are set to advertise for a player-coach to succeed Jim Crellin, who quit last Sunday.
CARRY ON GARRY
ALEX MURPHY/MARTIN RICHARDS
GARRY SCHOFIELD must keep the Great Britain captaincy for next month's World Cup final against Australia.
And there has to be a big question mark as to whether Ellery Hanley is effective enough to be offered even a playing role in the Wembley showdown.
It will be a real kick in the teeth for Schofield if he has to make way for Hanley again as Britain's captain — no matter what the set-up is at Leeds.
And there'll be uproar in Wigan if the classy Phil Clarke has to give up his No.13 jersey for Hanley.
I watched Hanley on TV against St Helens and Halifax and he looks to have lost the pace and mobility to close down players going away from him.
Saints' Allan Hunte went past him with ease and Hanley was caught out several times in midfield in the Halifax match.
Aussie scrum half Allan Langer is playing out of his skin at the moment and if ‘Alfie’ controls the open spaces at Wembley, it will be curtains.
For that reason I'll be happier to see Clarke in midfield — and a lot of Aussies would agree.
Don't get me wrong.
This is not another knocking piece on Hanley, who has been a great player for club and country.
I'm just being realistic.
There's a school of thought that Hanley should be given a spot on the bench and brought on in a game-breaking role.
That's worth considering.
But the right selection is vital for this game.
It's a great opportunity to win the
World Cup for the first time since 1972.
Schofield was an inspirational leader in this summer's Ashes tour when he took over from the injured Hanley and he played the game of his life in the second Test win in Melbourne.
He is a first-rate professional who's popular with his fellow players and the media.
There was an amusing moment when Schofield talked enthusiastically to the press after the Melbourne win and a British journalist pleaded: ‘Slow down Garry, I can't get all this down!’
By contrast, Hanley is not comfortable with the press and a good media profile is vital with the World Cup final being heavily promoted in London.
CLARKE: Should play
HANLEY: Lost form
MAN FOR THE JOB GARRY Schofield played the game of his life when he led Britain to victory in the second Ashes Test in Melbourne.
BIGG BUY
BOLTON are set to break their transfer record by splashing £500,000 on Stoke striker Wayne Biggins.
Manager Bruce Rioch wants to link Biggins, 28 goals last season, with the equally prolific ex-Celtic player Andy Walker.
KENNY GOES DANISH
KEN LAWRENCE
KENNY Dalglish is poised to bring in a Danish defender to make up for the disappointment of losing £2.5 million Craig Short.
The big-spending Blackburn manager watched Glasgow Rangers play Lyngby on Wednesday and his eyes were firmly fixed on right back Henrik Risom.
Dalglish had Risom training at Ewood Park last year but did not pursue matters.
However, Lyngby are ready to part with the Danish international as soon as their interest in the European Cup is over — and following Rangers 2-0 win that is likely to be in 10 days time.
Dalglish, who has already spent more than £10 million, will have to pay £500,000 if Risom arrives at Ewood Park.
DALGLISH: New target
Bjorn again Dane
MATT HUGHES
DANISH international Bjorn Kristensen yesterday staked his claim for a First Division recall at Newcastle United.
Kristensen, a star of United's Anglo-Italian 2-2 draw at Grimsby on Wednesday, insisted: ‘I reminded a few people that I'm still around.’
Manager Kevin Keegan was delighted by Kristensen's form as the 28-year-old tasted 90 minutes of first-team action for the first time in more than a year.
Keegan said: ‘Bjorn was terrific and adapted to the pace of the game very well.’
Kristensen, who missed most of last season through injury, won't break into the side for tomorrow's match against Bristol City at St James's Park.
But he added: ‘I'm a happy man.
The last few months have been frustrating, so it was nice to be in action again.
‘There wasn't a big crowd at Grimsby, but the atmosphere was 400 per cent better than in the reserves.’
KRISTENSEN
LAMBGATE UMPIRE SACKED
OSLEAR'S LEFT IN THE COLD
CHRIS LANDER
DON OSLEAR has been sacked in the middle of cricket's great ball-tampering scandal.
The blunt-talking Yorkshireman has been voted out as chairman of the Umpires' Association by his fellow pros.
And this could be a major blow for Oslear and colleagues Ken Palmer and John Hampshire, the men at the centre of the ball-changing drama.
The fact that Oslear has been stripped of his position as the umpires' boss at their annual meeting, means that Palmer, Hampshire and the England team now fear Allan Lamb's sensational Daily Mirror revelations may never be backed by cricket's dithering chiefs at the Test and County Cricket Board.
Oslear, a one-time Grimsby stevedore, had privately put pressure on the International Cricket Council to confirm Lamb's claim that the Pakistanis tampered with the ball during the one-day match at Lord's nearly a month ago.
Dossier
Oslear produced a 2,000-word dossier recording all that happened from the moment that Lamb and England manager Micky Stewart lodged complaints about the state of the ball at lunchtime.
Oslear was determined to see the truth told about the ball-tampering.
But for his pains he was was given a private roasting by a TCCB official.
This official was furious when it appeared that Oslear had spoken to media men about his determination to back Palmer and Hampshire, as well as Lamb, the only England cricketer who has had the courage to take on the cricket establishment.
Now Oslear is wondering if the truth will ever come out — especially as ICC supremo Sir Colin Cowdrey has failed to comment on match referee Deryck Murray's report and on the umpires' official findings.
The Umpires' Association had planned to table a motion giving an official vote of support for Lamb.
But this was shelved when Oslear was deposed as chairman.
An umpire told me: ‘What's happened to Don was no reflection on his unswerving attempt to get the truth told over everything that went on at Lord's.
‘But, sadly, this may take the pressure off the ICC and the TCCB and many of their officials who seem embarrassed — as though they would have preferred Lamb not to have rocked the boat.’
But last night other umpires stressed that Oslear had not been sacked as chairman because of his battle to support Lamb.
One senior umpire said: ‘Don not being voted back as chairman had absolutely nothing to do with the uproar about the ball-changing.
‘The umpires are simply determined to have an independent chairman who can fight for us on contractual and legal matters.
‘We are the only full-time professional umpiring body in the world.
We believe we are undervalued and there is a feeling that we get kicked around.’
The umpires are calling for their new chairman to be Roy Kerslake, a Taunton lawyer and a former Somerset cricketer.
CHOICE LAMB ALLAN LAMB sparked a storm with his revelations
OSLEAR was voted out by his fellow umpires
LAST Friday's Back Page
RUSHIE RECORD
RICHARD TANNER
IAN RUSH moved within one goal of Roger Hunt's all-time scoring record of 285 goals for Liverpool with a four-goal spree in the 6-1 Cup-Winners' Cup thrashing of Apollon Limassol.
Rush took his European tally to 19, smashing Anfield legend Hunt's 17-goal Euro record for the club.
Paul Stewart scored Liverpool's first two goals against the hapless Cypriots, who had Marios Charalambrous sent off.
Paul Warhurst, Sheffield Wednesday's make-shift striker, was rushed to hospital with a serious head injury sustained while scoring in the 8-1 win over Spora.
MATCH REPORTS — P 46, 47 
RUSH: Four-timer
MANSELL SIGNS FOR INDY
Newman's sting for Williams
TED MACAULEY
NIGEL MANSELL has sensationally signed to race in America next year in the killer-car Indy series.
I can exclusively reveal that Britain's Grand Prix hero last night secretly agreed to a multi-million-pound link-up with film star Paul Newman's red-hot team.
World champion Mansell, at loggerheads with Grand Prix team boss Frank Williams, finally snapped and turned his back on Formula One.
He will be paid around £3million — the same wage he was offered in a cut-price deal by Renault-Williams.
An informed insider told me last night: ‘It is absolutely certain that Nigel has done the deal.
I understand he finalised it all today.’
Mansell, 39, is still young by Indy standards, where drivers compete and win well into their fifties.
He has been pursued all year by race fan Newman and his Chicago business partner Carl Haas.
Indycar racing holds no fears for the brave Brummie, even though it is a notorious killer with spectacular crashes in cars belting around oval tracks at 240mph.
Even as the clamour grows for Mansell to reverse his decision to quit, the public hero has decided to give it a go in America.
One of the attractions about Indycar racing is that Mansell will not have to cross the world in wearying pursuit of Grand Prix glory.
He'll be able to return to his Florida oceanside home in just a couple of hours.
But it must have taken some sweet talking from Newman to persuade Mansell's wife Rosanne to agree.
Earlier in the year Mansell told me that Indycar racing fascinated him — and he would relish its new challenge.
That is just what he'll get — with every wild car racer desperate to humiliate the Limey champ.
Formula One supremo Bernie Ecclestone told me: ‘Yes, it is true.
Nigel has told me that he's going to go Indycar racing.’
Ecclestone, president of the Formula One Constructors Association, had pleaded with him not to do it and added: ‘I'm frightened for him.
‘A crash finished Nelson Piquet — and I wouldn't want the same to happen to Nigel.
He's an old friend.’
WARNING: Tuesday's Mirror
MANSELL: Racing in America next year
BLOW ME!
This ref can play
Steve spot on 
HARRY HARRIS
STEVE BAINES, an ex-pro footballer with more than 600 matches behind him, is hoping to lead a revolution.
He is quietly working his way to the top as a referee — and he is just 18 months away from landing his first League fixture.
He believes he can be the man to change the face of referring for the better.
Baines turned out for seven League clubs, chiefly Huddersfield, Bradford City, Walsall, Scunthorpe and Chesterfield.
Then he was inspired by two famous hard men, Ron Harris and Tommy Smith, who insisted that football needed ex-players as referees.
Agree
The players' union agree.
They are itching to hold up the red card to an establishment that doesn't believe that ex-pros have the right pedigree to control top matches.
The PFA describe Baines as a guinea pig.
If he is successful, the FA will no longer be able to ignore the clamour for ex-pros.
Baines told me: ‘Reg Matthewson played a couple of matches for Bolton before becoming a referee.
But I want to be the first man to achieve Football League status after a full playing career.
‘In my first season I was referee-of-the-year in Chesterfield.
I'm now in my fifth season.
‘I'm running the line in the Conference and the Pontins leagues.
Depending on how this season goes, I could be running the line in the League next season and taking control of a League game the following year.’
Baines' playing career was terminated by arthritis in the neck.
Now he has become a pain in the neck to the establishment.
He says: ‘They do keep moving the goalposts.
I have had some problems.
‘They don't really want somebody with my background, even though they say they do.
‘It does help for a referee to have played the game.
I can tell what's going to happen before it happens.
I've done it myself.’
Two unhappy managers, George Graham and Terry Venables, have told players' union leader Gordon Taylor they are angry at  refereeing standards.
A summit — a gathering of referees, managers and the PFA — will take place ‘in the next few weeks’.
Graham and Venables have been sniping at refereeing but have been unable to declare publicly their full outrage for fear of FA disrepute charges.
Graham says: ‘We were assured that we would have the top 20 referees in the country taking charge of our games.
But I'd like to see that list.’
The PFA's Taylor supports the move to publish a list of referees, as assessed by managers, and for only the top 20 to officiate in the Premier League.
STEVE BAINES proudly holds up a medal he won as a player — and one he has collected as a referee.
MAN IN CHARGE: Baines
By HARRY HARRIS 
STEVE BAINES proudly holds up a medal he won as a player — and one he has collected as a referee.
MAN IN CHARGE: Baines
‘BEAST’ CAGED
Kiwi recruit out as Leeds battle
MARTIN RICHARDS
FRUSTRATED Leeds have been wounded by two more injury blows as they bid to kick-start their season with a win over Hull KR tomorrow.
New Kiwi centre signing Kevin ‘The Beast’ Iro, who flew in on Thursday, has been caged because of a damaged ankle which will keep him out of action for a fortnight.
And a hamstring injury has put skipper Ellery Hanley out of the starting line-up against Rovers.
Leeds, who have lost their two opening championship games, are already without second rower Gary Mercer and Iro's former Wigan team-mate Andy Gregory.
‘The best Ellery can hope for is a place on the bench,’ said manager Doug Laughton.
Aggravated
The 24-year-old Iro picked up the injury playing against Great Britain in the second Test in Auckland in July and aggravated it in his last match for Manly three weeks ago.
Ex-Wigan favourite Iro was looking on the bright side yesterday.
‘Leeds were always at the back of my mind as the side I would like to join if I came back to England,’ said the 6ft 2in, 16 stone Iro.
‘It's a new-look team but has the players to be very successful.
‘This is a great opportunity for me.
One of the main factors in my coming here was the chance to play outside such great players as Garry Schofield and Andy Gregory.
‘I always got a great service from Andy at Wigan.
‘The English game is a lot more open than the Sydney competition which is a little stereotyped with defence being the main part of the game.’
After his record-breaking exploits with Wigan, Iro didn't strike gold in his two years at Manly.
‘My form was up and down at Manly but so was the form of the team.
We won 10 and lost 10 this season.’
Iro, who holds the Wembley try scoring record with six tries in a total of four Challenge Cup final appearances with Wigan, is aiming to go back again in a Leeds jersey.
‘Wigan are a high profile side and so are Leeds and I certainly wouldn't mind a trip back to Wembley,’ he added.
Laughton commented: ‘Kevin is a class act who's proved his worth in the English game.
He's a big man who can score tries and make the ball available to his winger.’
Laughton had to spend time at Iro's press conference fending off questions about Leeds' next targets.
He denied he'd talked to props Ian Lucas of Wigan and Castleford's Dave Sampson.
‘There are no forward signings under review.
We can't stop clubs linking us with their players.
‘We've been linked with Dean Sampson but I have not spoken to the player.
‘And there has been no approach to Wigan over Lucas — yet!’
Laughton added that speculation about John Gallagher leaving Headingley sounded as though the player's agent was doing all the talking.
Wigan chairman Jack Robinson last night said that tour prop Lucas was one player he definitely didn't want to lose.
The unsettled Lucas, who wants regular first team football, is on the bench for tomorrow's trip to Wakefield.
But Robinson said: ‘Ian is a bit down after the tour and I think once he gets a couple of senior games under his belt things will work out.’
OH BLOW!
Leeds' new signing Kiwi Kevin Iro will be only be a spectator at tomorrow's game due to an ankle injury.
HIGH WIRE SWINGERS
Hull 14 pts Warrington 29
SUPER Warrington wrecked Hull's bid to go to the top of the Stones Bitter Championship.
Greg Mackey — the Australian stand-off who turned down Hull's contract offer last month to re-join Warrington — and Welsh scrum half Kevin Ellis were at the heart of the Wire's classy, high speed football.
Intense pressure was rewarded after 13 minutes when prop Neil Harmon produced the perfect pass for Rob Myler to score, Chris Rudd adding the goal.
Then Mackey re-gathered his own kick to put in Rick Thackray.
Two Paul Eastwood penalties against one to Rudd gave Hull a glimmer of hope.
But it was snuffed out just before half-time when hooker Duane Mann seized on a Rob Nolan error to score.
Mackey turned the screw in the second half with a drop goal, and then brilliant handling ended with Ellis kicking to the corner for Neil Kenyon to go over.
Dean Busby hit back with a Hull try.
But almost immediately Wire's prop Phil Sumner raced through to score.
Rudd added the goal and then a penalty.
Hull had the final say with a spectacular breakaway by Andrew Mighty and Eastwood's third goal.
CLAYBANKER
CHARLES FAWCUS
CLAYBANK could prove a blinking good bet at Ayr today if Barry Hills's big race plan pays off.
Barry fits a visor on his colt for the first time in the Ladbrokes Ayr Gold Cup in a bid to cover all the angles.
‘My son Michael rode him at Newcastle where they were second to Venture Capitalist and felt that a visor would help the horse to concentrate more,’ said the trainer.
‘You've got to do everything to give yourself a bit of an advantage in a race like this, so we'll put the visor on.
We've got the beating of Venture Capitalist on that run and he's got the beating of Lochsong so in theory we should have a big chance.
‘The horse is certainly in good heart and because we are drawn close to Lochsong we are on the side of the track with a strong pace guaranteed.
All we need now is the luck.’
Richard Hannon is confident of a bold show from Venture Capitalist.
‘He was nearly knocked down at Doncaster and finished just a neck behind Lochsong.
We are 9lb better off at Ayr so we've got to fancy our chances.’
EU ON CLOUD 9
Chris aiming to stamp on another challenger in Glasgow tonight
Champ lays a trap for tough guy Tony
IAN GIBB
CHRIS EUBANK is determined to be the British Bulldog who tears a chunk out of New Jersey punching postman Tony Thornton in Glasgow's Scottish Exhibition centre tonight.
It's WBO super-middleweight champion Eubank's ninth world title fight in just 22 months — and there's to be no let-up in his quest to earn the money that can give him retirement in the next year.
Assuming he stamps Thornton with a return-to-sender label tonight, the Chris Eubank caravan moves on to Manchester on November 28.
Sheffield and Cardiff are also on the list of future venues as the controversial, unbeaten Brighton fighter carries on his own tour of Britain.
Promoter Barry Hearn told me: ‘He must have created some kind of record already with this his ninth world title fight in under two years.
‘And there's no stopping him.
His appetite for fights and, of course, making money is such that he wants to make his pile as quickly as possible and get out.’
Damaged
I understand names like Paraguay's Juan Carlos Giminez, who had to pull out of a previous challenge with a damaged hand, Americans Darrin Van Horn and Lindell Holmes plus Italian Vicenzo Nardiello have already been short-listed for November.
They are all walk-forward, exciting types of fighters, and Hearn added: ‘We'll never ever go for non-fighters like Ron Essett again.
They are poison.
Chris loses interest against them.’
That's why WBA champion Michael Nunn and our own former world title challenger
Herol Graham haven't a prayer of ever facing Eubank.
Thornton should certainly be in the rugged bracket.
‘His style is that he keeps coming forward,’ observes Eubank.
‘His strength could turn out to be his weakness.’
And that's where Eubank hopes the American will play right into his fists in the Daily-Mirror sponsored fight.
Chris has looked decidedly uncomfortable against runners and awkward opponents.
But with Thornton, what you see is what you get.
And he may be marching into a trap with a right hand that needed surgery on it three fights ago to enable him to continue in boxing.
There is an ugly lump on his right fist and Thornton doesn't sound too confident when asked whether it would stand up to a hard fight.
Although he enjoys a top four rating in all the major organisations, including the IBF, WBA and WBC, his winning record is studded with nonentities.
He did halt Dave Tiberi in four rounds, the same man who was robbed when challenging IBF middleweight champion James Toney.
But Tiberi is not really in Thorton's 12st class.
Eubank has no special game plan tonight and says: ‘I'll play it by ear and in accordance to Thornton's fighting spirit.
You may say he has an intimidating record.
But that's nothing new to me — I've fought plenty of people who were intimidating.
That's part of the business.’
Eubank has been at his best when right up against it and facing defeat, especially in the battle with Nigel Benn that first gave him the world middleweight title and then when he climbed off the floor in the second, tragic contest with Michael Watson.
Unbeaten
He is also fiercely protective of that unbeaten record despite constantly saying that he's only in boxing for the money.
‘Every day I think about losing’ he says.
‘That's what keeps me winning.’
Thornton, shaven skulled to hide his baldness, knows this is his one chance, at 33, to crack the big money and supplement his modest postman's wages.
He says: ‘I didn't come here to put a notch on Chris's belt.
I'm looking for a lot of fireworks to fly.’
Eubank will spare a thought for Michael Watson.
It's a year to within two days since he put the brave Londoner into a coma, from which he is only now slowly recovering.
Eubank said: ‘Michael is never far from my thoughts — but he'll understand better than anyone that on the day I must close out everything except the fight.
I'll tell him after how it went.’
It should be a happy account and I take Eubank to halt the smaller-framed Thornton by the eighth round.
If the fight goes the distance, there might hardly be the thickness of a stamp between them unless Chris ups his recent workrate.
But he should have the power to hurt the battle weary, 36-fight Thornton — and then move on to Manchester.
HAVE BELT, WILL TRAVEL CHRIS Eubank's world championship roadshow stops in Glasgow tonight for his ninth title fight in just 22 months.
Next stop could be Manchester.
TARTAN TERROR TONY THORNTON'S wife Carole took an instant liking to his new tartan kilt yesterday.
Higgins' dream on cue
FALLEN hero Alex ‘Hurricane’ Higgins took another step on the comeback trail last night when he beat Canadian Kirk Stephens 10-5 to keep alive his dream of a return to the Crucible.
The 43-year-old Irishman is having to battle through the qualifying rounds in Blackpool to try and clinch a place in next April's finals of the £1 million Embassy world championship in Sheffield.
The two times world champion, now rated No. 72, trailed Stevens 5-4 overnight but, without having to produce his best form, he won the next six frames in succession to win their third qualifying round tie.
Higgins, whose highest break of the session was 44, said: ‘The snooker was nothing to write home about but I'm pleased to get a step nearer Sheffield.’
He added: ‘I felt sorry for Kirk.
He's not the player he used to be but I suppose you could say the same about me.’
In the next round Higgins meets Brian Morgan, of Essex, over 19 frames.
Ronnie O'Sullivan, a 16year-old from Essex, finished with breaks of 72, 74, and 83 to beat Paul Davies, a Hampshire-based Welshman, 10-5.
HIGGINS: Battling
Not so crazy, gang
JOHN EDWARDS
DAVE Bassett last night laughed off Sheffield United's bad-boy image.
‘We're angels compared to my old Crazy Gang,’ he insisted.
United and today's opponents Arsenal have both been under the disciplinary spotlight, having picked up a stack of yellow cards between them.
But Bassett reflected on his early management days in charge of Vinny Jones and Co at Wimbledon.
And he said: ‘That mob could have gone in against a team containing Mike Tyson and Joe Frazier and looked after themselves.
‘Maybe my connection with them has rebounded on Sheffield United.
‘We seem to be automatically tagged a physical side.
‘I've seen tackles going in from other sides that would without question produce a booking for a United player.’
Bassett gives £150,000 summer signing Alan Kelly his debut in place of suspended goalkeeper Simon Tracey.
BASSETT: Angels
TRACEY: Banned
MIXING IT WITH THE BEST
King Kenny's brave brigade
ALEC JOHNSON
BLACKBURN boss Kenny Dalglish takes his expensive collection of stars to rough and tumble Wimbledon today, insisting: ‘I can't wrap them up in cotton wool.’
His £3.3 million striker Alan Shearer is still battle-scarred from his recent trips to Spain and Highbury.
But Dalglish said: ‘Alan is a brave player and he can handle it.
‘That goes for the rest of the team.
You expect there will be strong physical challenges because, after all, it is a contact game.
‘But you don't complain.
You just get on with it.
The players are strong and fit and can look after themselves.
‘It is up to the referees to decide whether or not the tackles are fair or not.
As long as they are doing their jobs I see no problems.’
Blackburn suffered their first defeat of the season in midweek when lost 3-2 at home to Everton.
Dalglish said: ‘I was disappointed that we lost but not with our performance for I thought we played well.
‘All credit to Everton for that was probably the best they have played this season.
‘That defeat will not have affected the spirit of the team and they will be going out against Wimbledon as determined as ever.
‘Wimbledon are always a difficult side to beat, especially on their own ground.
‘It is up to us to play to our strengths and try to control the game.’
Dalglish picks from a squad of 16.
SHEARER: Strong
DALGLISH: Defiant
PETER PERFECT
Sch…he's on title trail
KEN LAWRENCE
PETER SCHMEICHEL arrives in London for the first time this season convinced Manchester United can become the first Premier League champions.
The Great Dane, recently voted the world's best goalkeeper, will be looking for his seventh shut-out in a row as Manchester United take on Tottenham today.
And last night he insisted: ‘We know the feeling of losing the title by half a horse's head — but it won't happen this time.
We are playing better than last season.
‘We are more mature as a team and we are more clever.
‘The problem last season was that we were too successful.
We were involved in so much.
‘And while we felt we were the best team in England, we were killed by our own success.
‘We play too many games in this country.
Last season at United it was one game every three days — and it was too much.’
Difficult
With his amazing current shut-out record, Schmeichel has confirmed boss Alex Ferguson's opinion that he is the best in the game.
Fergie enthused: ‘Peter has IMPROVED from last season.
‘We had a difficult start to this season and our defence was making mistakes.
‘But now we are showing real discipline and concentration — and Peter's had a big say in that.’
Schmeichel added: ‘We are quite happy that unlike last year we are not out in front.
This time it would suit us fine to stay behind the pace — and jump to the front as late as possible.’
That is looking an increasingly difficult task as United soar towards the summit.
And with Paul Ince, Darren Ferguson and Ryan Giggs all available again, Fergie is also boosted by the fact that Danny Wallace has finally rid himself of his hang-ups.
He'll be on the bench today and the boss says: ‘Danny has finally learned he has nothing to prove here — whereas I think he tried too hard before.
‘Now he is standing right at the door and knocking to get in.
‘I'd have sold him for £600,000 in the summer but there were no takers.
Thank goodness for that, because it would have been the sale of the century.’
SCHMEICHEL: ‘We're playing better than last season’
FERGUSON: Tribute
A WING AND PRAYER
Spurs sweat on dazzling Darren
Duel of the whizz-kids
NEIL SILVER
BRITAIN'S two wondrous whizz-kid wingers may come face to face today when Darren Anderton's Tottenham Hotspur meet Ryan Giggs' Manchester United at White Hart Lane.
The prospect conjures up magic memories of the vintage clashes featuring Jimmy Greaves and George Best, but £2 million Anderton is still battling to shake off a stomach strain.
Tottenham fans are still waiting to see the England Under-21 international produce the scintillating form that he displayed at his former club Portsmouth.
Desperate
But Spurs coach Doug Livermore said: ‘It is just a matter of time before Darren explodes — then watch him go.’
Anderton suffered his troublesome injury at Coventry on Monday night, but played on.
Assistant coach Ray Clemence said: ‘Darren was feeling the injury at half-time but didn't want to let the rest of the boys down by coming off.
That's the kind of lad he is and he's desperate to do well.’
Anderton faces a late fitness test, along with Gordon Durie, Teddy Sheringham and Andy Gray.
Vinny Samways is definitely out after damaging ankle ligaments at Coventry.
Spurs have drafted in Justin Edinburgh, Terry Fenwick, David Tuttle and John Hendrie to a 17-man squad.
GIGGS: Great talent
ANDERTON: Faces late fitness test
Mark's tipped for top
NIGEL CLARKE
GEORGE Graham showed last night that he is ready to let loose another of his hungry young pack.
He named Mark Flatts in his squad at Sheffield United only a week after giving 18-year-old Ian Selley his debut.
Graham has pencilled in Flatts, 19, as a stand-by for the injured Anders Limpar and says: ‘I would have no fears about playing him.
He is a talented player, happy on either wing.’
Two broken legs have held back Flatts.
But Graham has never been afraid to experiment.
Two successive defeats have brought about fresh criticism and Graham adds: ‘We know what people are saying.
But to be honest, we thrive on it.’
Both Arsenal and United have picked up a stack of yellow cards.
But Blades manager Dave Bassett reflected on his early days in charge of Vinny Jones and Co. at Wimbledon and said: ‘That mob could have gone in against a team containing Mike Tyson and Joe Frazier and looked after themselves.
GRAHAM: Confident
BASSETT: Tough guys
TONY STAYS LOYAL
RICHARD TANNER
STRIKER Tony Cottee last night knocked rumours that he is keen to return to London.
‘I want to earn a new contract with Everton,’ he insisted.
The £2 million former West Ham man has endured an up-and-down four years on Merseyside.
After months of injury frustration, he took a definite up-swing on Tuesday by launching his season with the two-goal blast that wrecked Blackburn's unbeaten run.
And he faces Crystal Palace today determined to show he can still play a key part in Howard Kendall's blueprint for the future.
‘It's up to me to convince Everton to give me a new contract,’ he said.
‘I just want to play regular football and I don't think there's a better place to do that than at Goodison.’
Everton are without broken leg victim Mark Ward and Polish winger Robert Warzycha, who misses the next two games because of international duty.
Striker Paul Rideout faces a late fitness test on a shoulder injury.
COTTEE: Staying
The iron maiden
LIZ MCCOLGAN is out to prove herself the iron woman of athletics in tomorrow's IAAF/Diet Coke World half marathon championship on Tyneside.
McColgan fronts Britain's challenge seven weeks after flopping in the Barcelona Olympics.
POOR TREVOR LEFT OWLING
But the pain isn't over yet
JOHN EDWARDS
TREVOR Francis is ready to drag his weary frame through another 90 minutes of torture at Norwich today.
The 38-year-old Sheffield Wednesday player-manager made his first full appearance for 17 months in the 8-1 UEFA Cup rout of Spora Luxembourg in midweek.
But it was murder for Francis, who said: ‘I thought a European tie would be easier than the Premier League — but I miscalculated.
‘As it turned out, we launched attack after attack for the entire 90 minutes and there was simply no respite.
I still enjoyed playing again but even now I'm feeling very tired.’
New signing Mark Bright returns to the attack after being ineligible for the Spora tie.
But with makeshift striker Paul Warhurst facing a long lay-off after his horror injury, Francis must again decide between himself, Nigel Jemson and Gordon Watson for the other place.
‘I'll see how I feel before deciding but it's a bit of a predicament,’ he said.
‘I've got to weigh it up carefully and make sure I can justify my selection.’
Wednesday's injury crisis will ease next week when England striker David Hirst starts his comeback from a cracked ankle.
He will resume training on Monday and could be in line for a place in Wednesday's Coca Cola Cup tie against Hartlepool.
Warhurst was allowed home from hospital yesterday after the clash with Spora's keeper that knocked him out and almost cost him his life.
FRANCIS: Still weary
WARHURST: Recovery
Give us a lift, Craig
CRAIG SHORT makes his £2.5 million debut for Derby County tomorrow — joining a bunch of players feeling sorry for themselves.
That's the verdict of manager Arthur Cox, who is desperate that his men show their true colours at West Ham and score their first win of the season.
Big-spending Derby were pipped by Middlesbrough for automatic promotion last time — then they lost to Blackburn in the play-offs.
‘Maybe we've still got to get that out of our systems,’ said Cox.
‘If that's the case, it's time to knuckle down because ability that doesn't come covered in sweat is not enough.’
Defender Short, signed from Notts County, chose Derby not Blackburn.
He will play in this TV clash with Simon Coleman in danger of losing his place.
Keeper Steve Sutton is suspended and Martin Taylor deputises.
West Ham skipper Julian Dicks is also banned and they will keep the side that won 5-1 at Bristol City in midweek.
Meanwhile Cox, who has spent £9.5 million in ten months, is deciding whether to lay out another £100,000 on Dutch midfielder Richard Goulooze.
WALSH BUZZING
TOUGH Leicester defender Steve Walsh is planning to clean up his act after serving a three-match ban already this season.
Walsh — whose ‘bad boy’ reputation began five years ago when he received a record nine-match ban after an incident that left Shrewsbury's David Geddis with a broken jaw — returns today for the visit of Brentford.
‘I'm more determined than ever to stay out of trouble,’ he said.
Beardo danger
MATT HUGHES
INJURY-HIT Crystal Palace go in search of their first Premier League win today at Everton with boss Steve Coppell fearing the Peter Beardsley factor.
Coppell said: ‘Blackburn number two Ray Harford told me Beardsley was magnificent in Everton's 3-2 win over them this week.
‘He is one of those players you want in your side because you know he will be superb week-in, week-out.
If he gets back into the England team it will be deservedly so.’
Palace, yet to keep a clean sheet this season, are without Geoff Thomas with a trapped nerve in his neck as well as long-term injury victims Richard Shaw, Andy Thorn and Simon Rodger.
England goalkeeper Nigel Martyn has also been laid low by a virus this week.
Everton are without broken-leg victim Mark Ward and Polish winger Robert Warzycha, who misses the next two games because of international duty.
Striker Paul Rideout faces a late fitness and Mo Johnston, Peter Beagrie and Stuart Barlow are on stand-by.
DIXON SET
KERRY DIXON returns for Southampton against Leeds at The Dell today in search of his 200th League goal.
Former Chelsea striker Dixon is back after missing two matches with an ankle injury.
‘I have been in the 190s for more than a year, so I will be glad to get there,’ said Dixon.
David Speedie and Terry Hurlock, the Saints players at the centre of a brawl in an exclusive Channel Islands hotel, have been fined by manager Ian Branfoot.
GOOD AS GOLD
SUNDERLAND boss Malcolm Crosby last night backed Don Goodman to end his goal famine.
He said: ‘Goodman will come good.
He has worked his socks off and he'll get his reward.’
The tricky and talented Goodman is a target for Derby.
But Crosby said: ‘He's staying here.’
Sunderland travel to Cambridge, with Crosby saying: ‘I want the players to go out and not be afraid to take a few risks.’
But John Byrne, Anton Rogan and John Colquhoun are injured.
Going batty
It's just not cricket
MARTIN RICHARDS
KIWI Test ace Kevin Iro and West Indies Test ace Richie Richardson swapped a few jokes — and bat and ball — when they arrived at Headingley yesterday.
Iro, who will play for Leeds and Richardson, Yorkshire's overseas import, officially signed on the dotted line.
The 16-stone 6ft 2in New Zealander, who holds the Wembley try-scoring record with six tries in a total of four Challenge Cup final appearances with Wigan, is aiming to go back again in a Leeds jersey.
‘Wigan are a high pro-file side and so are Leeds and I certainly wouldn't mind a trip back to Wembley,’ he said.
But he will have to wait to get into the action — an ankle injury has sidelined him for two weeks.
Butch Cassidy and the Indy Kid
Film legend Paul Newman talks exclusively to the DAILY MIRROR
‘I hustled to get Mansell’
He's a great champ
TED MACAULEY
A SWEET-TALKING phone call from film superstar Paul Newman wiped out any worries Nigel Mansell had about switching to killer-car Indy racing in America after quitting Formula One.
The Hollywood actor, a racing fanatic, booked a call to Brummie Mansell at his Isle of Man home when he heard about the world champion's bitter split with the Renault-Williams team.
And that was that — Mansell was hooked.
They agreed a contract that will bring Mansell £3million a year, a pittance compared with the £12 million he was offered to rejoin Ferrari and the £8 million a year he was on at Renault-Williams.
But with prize-money soaring to £500,000 a race, he is poised to become American motor sport's biggest earner.
New adventure
And last night Newman, star of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and joint-owner with Chicago businessman Carl Haas of America's top Indy team, told me: ‘I am really excited about Nigel joining us.
‘I know what a great driver he is.
I have followed his career closely.
He is a superb champion.
And he will do well in our team.’
Newman, who still races even though he's turned 60, believes Mansell can carry on now for at least another six or seven years.
And he revealed: ‘We met by accident just recently and I got to talking to him about Indy.
‘Then we had a chat on the phone last week and I told Nigel it would be a new adventure for him if he joined our team and that we are all looking forward to his racing in America.
‘I am very  enthusiastic .
He will be a great boost to the Newman-Haas team and to Indy car racing in the States.’
An announcement timed to be released simultaneously in Britain and America confirmed my world exclusive in Mirror Sport yesterday that Mansell had done the deal.
Mansell will commute to races from his ritzy £4million oceanside mansion in Clearwater, Florida and will now sell his £3million cliff-top home in the Isle of Man.
Wonderful
He telephoned his wife Rosanne in America, where she is with their three kids, and told her of his decision and then from his Port Erin home said: ‘Indy car racing is a wonderful new challenge for me.
‘I have seen quite a few races on television and the competition is really good.’
Lion-hearted Nigel doesn't worry about the high-speed horrors of blasting around a concrete oval, six inches from a wall at up to 240 mph with 30 other drivers all battling for the same space — and no runoffs if you crash.
He says: ‘Indianapolis and the other ovals will be a new experience.
I am ready to give it a go.
It doesn't scare me.’
Mansell is 39 — but top drivers carry on into their 50's in the 16-race Indy series that, oddly, kicks off in Surfer's Paradise, Australia.
‘Paul missed that race last year,’ said Carl Haas, ‘but sure as hell he'll be there for Nigel's debut early next year.’
Fabulous
Mansell's first taste of Indy action will be in California in December when he tests the monster motor that will hurtle him to the threshold of survival in the most hair-raising episode of his race career.
He is the first reigning Formula One world champion to make the switch and Haas, a wealthy ex-racer, admitted: ‘We know he had a fabulous offer from Ferrari.
But he honestly only wanted to defend his title with Williams.
‘Okay, we are paying him plenty — not nearly as much as he gets in F1 — but real good.
‘But he's worth every penny.’
Haas, talking to me from the team HQ in Illinois, was anxious to underline that neither he or Newman had unfairly, unethically, rocked the Williams boat.
Said Haas: ‘Whatever anybody says we had no deal with Nigel before he fell out with Frank Williams.
‘But as soon as he he had real problems and got unhappy with Williams, he became seriously interested in Indy racing.
‘He told us he couldn't see anywhere else to go and he'd like to join the team.
‘I'd talked to him a year ago — and we just kept in touch.
Then Paul rang him and that was it.
We'd got our guy.’
BYE-BYE BRITAIN WORLD champion Nigel Mansell waves goodbye to the Formula One racing circuit after this season — and the battling Brummie will also sell his £3million Isle of Man cliff-top mansion to live in the Florida sunshine as he joins superstar Paul Newman's team
PARDNERS!
NIGEL MANSELL is no Robert Redford lookalike — but then the film star hasn't won many Grand Prix races!
FLASHBACK Mirror Sport yesterday exclusively revealed Nigel Mansell's Indy racing plans
BIG WHEEL PAUL Newman is a star of the track as well as the screen, and has a date with Mansell for the first Indy race in Australia
WRONG!
TED MACAULEY
THREE-TIMES world champion Nelson Piquet, who survived an Indy horror crash three months ago, last night blasted Nigel Mansell for quitting Formula One.
‘He's an idiot,’ said Piquet, once a team-mate of Mansell's — but never a friend.
‘But having said that,’ he added ‘I think he will do well.
He's such a bloody good driver.’
Piquet's 200 mph crash nearly took off his legs and left him with a limp for life.
But, even at 40, he still burns with ambition to dump Indy racing and make a Grand Prix come-back.
He added: ‘Indy circuits, particularly the ovals, are really dangerous.
And Nigel will have to watch out.
‘But he should have stayed with Williams.
It's a shame we won't see him racing on equal terms against Senna or Prost.’
PIQUET: Horror
THE GANG'S STILL CRAZY
AND THAT'S ONLY THE RESERVES
TWO SENT OFF SEVEN BOOKED DOORS SMASHED WALLS GOUGED
FRANK WIECHULA
WIMBLEDON reserves, the club's second-string Crazy Gang, were booted out by Southampton after allegedly causing hundreds of pounds of damage to changing rooms.
The Dirty Dons are accused of smashing two doors and of gouging walls before getting their marching orders from reserve ground Marchwood after a stormy clash on Wednesday.
Wimbledon won 4-2, had Steve Anthrobus and Gerald Dobbs sent off and seven players booked.
Southampton, who had the worst  disciplinary record in the League last season, had three players booked.
 Saints secretary Brian Truscott said: ‘After the game they were screaming, chanting and shouting.
It stopped only when we told them to leave.
‘We will be billing Wimbledon for damage caused, although we don't know at this stage how much it will all cost.
‘It is not just the cost.
It is the principle of having respect for other people's property.
‘It is a great shame that we should provide such a superb facility and then see it treated like that.’
Wimbledon assistant manager Terry Burton countered: ‘Whenever we win, we have a sing-song.
We do enjoy our football and we enjoy winning.
‘We were happy, we were delighted and we were singing.
They came in and asked us to stop.
‘It's probably sour grapes after they've been beaten 4-2 by nine men.
They can't be enjoying their football down there at the moment if that's the only thing they've got to moan about.
‘Our reserve team manager Brian Sparrow is amazed at the accusations about damage to property.
‘He asked the senior players if they'd seen anything as they came away from the dressing-room and they said they hadn't.
‘Apparently someone said there was plaster off the wall.
But before players go out they tend to kick the wall to make sure their boots are on properly.
‘Most clubs have scuffs around the base of their walls where players have kicked them.
Or they've kicked the base of a door to make sure their boot is on comfortably.
‘It could possible have been something like that.
And anything that has been done — if it's been done — has certainly been done accidentally and not intentionally.
‘Brian thought that the sendings-off were a bit unfortunate.
He felt that there were not really any nasty tackles.
‘He felt the referee did not have a particularly good game and I think he's going to speak to the League about that.’
Reg Davis, Wimbledon's commercial manager, added: ‘If damage was caused, then it is only right that we should be sent a bill for the repairs.
‘As for the matters on the pitch, I think it's a bit of a coincidence we were playing Southampton when this happened.
Their disciplinary record speaks for itself.’
HANDY
MILKMAN Andy Till, 29, took the British light-middleweight title at Watford last night by a wafer-thin margin.
The London fighter outpointed Wally Swift over 12 rounds with a 118-117 verdict from referee Mickey Vann.
Birmingham's Swift boxed for half the fight one-handed after damaging his right fist.
Send for Simon
COLIN PRICE
ENGLAND'S forgotten hero Simon Hodgkinson is in line for a squad recall after David Pears broke his jaw at Bath.
Pears prefers to play fly-half but both England and Harlequins see him as an attacking full-back.
He was named ahead of Hodgy as record-breaking Jon Webb's cover for the opening international against Canada at Wembley on October 17.
But his nightmare start to the season ended in a broken jaw as double winners Bath started their Courage League defence with a 22-6 win.
Three weeks ago Pears was rushed to hospital for x-rays to a head injury after being injured during a sevens tournament.
Now he faces at least two months on the sidelines.
One of the first on the scene to treat him at Bath was full back Jon Webb, an orthopaedic surgeon.
Webb, who has agreed to play on for both Bath and England until a Registrar's appointment becomes available, kicked five penalties and converted a superb Jeremy Guscott try to sink Quins.
Former Quins centre Ron Eriksson had plenty to celebrate with the only try in London Scottish's 8-3 win over a rebuilt Gloucester side.
Tony Underwood raced in for a 70 metre try in Leicester's 30-14 win at London Irish.
Bristol's new fly-half Andy May missed five penalties as his side went down 16-6 to Northampton.
Alan Buzza kicked 14 points as Wasps came back from West Hartlepool with a 19-6 victory.
Ben Crawley got the only try as Saracens beat relegation favourites Rugby 14-6.
HODGKINSON: chance
OVER THE MOON
Welsh facing back trouble
COLIN PRICE
WALES chiefs Alan Davies and Robert Norster face a rare new headache tonight as they sit down to pick the first squad of an exciting new season.
They've got almost too much back talent from which to choose a side to play Italy at Cardiff on October 7.
Another Heineken weekend of records and dazzling rugby has convinced fans that Wales are on the brink of a new golden era of back play.
And no-one would be surprised if that first national side of the season includes another Englishman, Rupert Moon, to partner his record-breaking Llanelli team-mate Colin Stephens.
Fastest
A third Scarlet, Neil Boobyer, is tipped for the centre while Nigel Walker, rated the fastest man in world rugby, could be a shock choice on the left wing after just a handful of Cardiff games.
Stephens, capped three times last season, is now oozing confidence in Llanelli's all-action side and scored an incredible 39 points in shattering Newport's unbeaten record.
That haul included three of the 11 tries that hoisted Llanelli's total to 26 in just three games as they won 79-10.
Wales skipper Ieuan Evans also got three before limping off with a groin injury.
And national coach Davies was so impressed that he wants a full video shown to all clubs as the perfect illustration of playing under the new laws.
That runaway win ensures a full house at Stradey Park on Saturday to see defending champions Swansea in a repeat of last season's Schweppes Cup final.
Swansea were only half a dozen points short of matching Llanelli's record haul in a spectacular 73-24 thrashing of South Wales Police.
Star of the Swansea show against the overrun police was CID officer Simon Davies with a hat-trick of tries.
The Police were so worried about Davies in the sixth round of the Schweppes Cup last season that they knocked him out by giving him a Saturday shift.
Davies got his revenge in spectacular fashion as Swansea tore the police apart in an 11-try bonanza.
Police team manager David Rees said: ‘We should have switched him to a Saturday afternoon shift.
I think he will be back on traffic duty after doing that to us.’
Mark Titley, switched from wing to fly-half, landed nine conversions in a rare kicking display as well as getting a try.
Nigel Walker, clocked at 10.35 secs for the 100 metres, ignored fellow Olympic hurdler Colin Jackson's advice to set up Cardiff's 39-14 win over Newbridge.
Jackson said: ‘I told Nigel he was too thin to play rugby and that they would break him in half.’
Stretcher
Fly-half Adrian Davies topped 50 League points in three matches with a try, two penalties and four conversions.
Meanwhile former Wales hooker Kevin Phillips looks certain to quit the game after being stretchered off in Neath's 24-20 win at Bridgend.
He admitted: ‘This might be the end.
My life is more important than rugby.’
Neath, rocked by centre Colin Laity's decision to leave in midweek, were relieved when giant No 8 Paul Jones got the all-clear after being kicked in the head.
Jones played on, helping back row partner Adrian Varney grab two tries, before going to hospital for x-rays on his jaw.
MARK Egan of Newbridge gets to grips with Cardiff's Mike Rayer on Saturday.
MOON: Ready
That's final by George
FORMER Hull boss Brian Smith showed why he's one of the game's top coaches by steering St George into their first Sydney Grand Final since 1985.
Smith and assistant Rod Reddy, the ex-Barrow coach, watched their side beat Illawarra 4-0.
The Dragons now go through to meet red-hot favourites the Brisbane Broncos in next Sunday's final.
LUCA CUMANI and Frankie Dettori did an Italian job yesterday with Masad who beat Modhish and In A Tiff in the Grand Premio D'Italia at San Siro.
OFF TO THE DOGS
HARRY LLOYD
TRACK promoters and bookmakers are locked in a bitter £3.5million dogfight over punters' cash.
Bookmakers say they should handle the betting tax rebate as the money comes from their betting shops.
Greyhound racing claims the Chancellor earmarked the windfall for the tracks in his March Budget.
It's the poor old punter who pays the betting tax in stoppages from winning bets — but he won't get a penny.
It's not the first time punters, who bet £1.6billion a year just on the dogs, have found themselves cornered in the doghouse.
Betting shops deduct ten per cent from punters' winnings — a whopping two per cent over the odds which puts a £10million perk in bookies' pockets.
If the money was ploughed back into dog racing — horse racing enjoys a £40million levy — tracks could improve amenities and strengthen security which would encourage more people to go to the dogs.
Prolific winner Murlens Abbey just gets the nod in a red-hot Fosters Select Stakes at Wembley.
The Abbey, from Trap 1, should gain first run on Sheffield record-breaker Pineapple Lemon.
Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Grand National winner Kildare Slippy and the powerful My Texette are among the stars in a brilliant supporting card.
Kingswell Limo, Duagh Colours and Skelligs March are three to follow in the Wey Plastics Puppy Derby semis at Wimbledon on Tuesday.
The Limo, a sub-28sec performer, has the style to go all the way in Saturday's final.
Toulon and Lets All Boogie at Walthamstow and Harbour Breeze at Hackney are other Tuesday fancies.
CRAYFORD's Some Rabbit was tagged The Fugitive when he went on the run from his Essex kennels.
His 12-day taste of freedom slimmed down the heavyweight performer who has notched six wins from 16 starts.
Some Rabbit, from a handy six-metre start, should quickly escape his rivals in tonight's 540 handicap to bolt up.
Wimbledon's auction on Wednesday carries the incentive of a £20,000 bonus if the sale dog wins the Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Derby.
ARAZI FLOPS
CHARLES FAWCUS
ARAZI'S reputation nose-dived again yesterday when the one-time wonder horse could finish only third at Longchamp.
But trainer Francois Boutin came out of his corner in fighting mood.
Last year's champion had been expected to stroll home against second-division opposition in the Prix du Prince D'Orange before another Breeders Cup bid.
But he finished six lengths behind the winner Arcangues, who could manage only eighth place in the Coral Eclipse at Sandown, losing second place on the post.
Defeat was no disaster however to Boutin who still expects his fallen hero to rise again.
‘I still believe that I can find the great horse of last year,’ he declared.
‘Arazi came to today's race after enduring all sorts of problems — the trip to America for the Kentucky Derby, a hard race at Ascot when he wasn't right and an injury which stopped him running two weeks ago.
Power
‘I think he ran as well as he could in the circumstances and he'll go again at Longchamp in two weeks.’
Steve Cauthen blamed lack of staying power and Arazi will revert to a mile on Arc day.
But it wasn't all gloom for Cauthen over the week-end and a brilliant ride landed the Irish St Leger on Mashaallah.
Steve refused to be drawn when Willie Carson set a suicidal pace on Jahafil, but was still far enough ahead of the others to have a winning lead off the final bend.
‘I worked for Vincent O'Brien for a year and it's great to come back here and win my first classic,’ said trainer John Gosden.
‘If Mashaallah gets the mud he wants he could well run in the Arc.’
Carson was unlucky all round, as his regular ride Lochsong killed off the Ayr Gold Cup opposition under apprentice Francis Arrowsmith.
Winning trainer Ian Balding was in New York seeing Spinning finish a brave third in the Man O' War Stakes.
BAD BOYS
IT'S A FACT
SEVEN sendings-off made it the season's worst day for discipline and took the total to 50, compared with 64 at the same stage last season.
I'M DOING IT FOR YOU MICHAEL
FANZINE special on the force that's driving Eubank
Respect for fallen hero
IAN GIBB
CHRIS EUBANK couldn't help himself — the words of tribute to Michael Watson came tumbling out in a torrent, a year to the Saturday since he put the brave Londoner into a coma.
Forgotten, momentarily, were the lumps and bumps and soreness of his face after the punishment he took from game but limited American challenger Tony Thornton in Glasgow on Saturday night.
Today is the actual anniversary of the tragic night in Tottenham when Eubank crushed Watson — and it is only recently that the Islington fighter has started to make a real recovery.
Just the mention of his name started Eubank off.
‘What a blinding man, and I'm so very pleased that Michael is seeming to make an amazing recovery.
‘I've spoken to him a few times and he's the  epitome of a true warrior.
He still wants to fight, believes he still has it in him to fight.
‘He's still sharp, has a sense of humour, he's witty.
He's bitter about what happened — he didn't want to lose.
He hated that.
‘But I got punched to pieces that night and the only reason I won the fight was that I could still keep going in the 12th round.
Brilliant
‘Since that day it hasn't looked too good for Michael, certainly not five or six months ago.
Now he's brilliant.
He said to me: ‘Bring the championship belt and a camera.’
‘I'd willingly give him the belt but he wouldn't take it.
The difference between us is that I don't like this boxing business — and he still loves it, even now.
‘He keeps telling me that I must fight every contender and mustn't dodge anyone.
He says as a champion I must perform well and give the public value for money.
Then he says: ‘Are you ready for the re-match.
Are you up to it?’
‘He's still a warrior in his mind and you can't break his spirit.
He will keep on trying to finish on his feet.’
Yet questions have to be asked quite seriously about whether Eubank himself can maintain his work-rate with a tenth world title fight lined up in just 24 months.
He faces yet another challenge for his WBO super-  middleweight crown in Manchester on November 28.
But I think it's all to do with Watson, the man he now respects so much.
Eubank would fight every week if he could to make his fortune secure as soon as possible.
Yet on Saturday night he may have run away from a million dollar showdown with Iran Barkley, a man Nigel Benn once conquered, now the IBF champion at 12 stone.
Barkley's handler, Stan Hoffman, was in Glasgow to run the rule over Eubank — and he wasn't impressed.
He said: ‘I could not sell a Eubank-Barkley fight in the States after that performance.
‘All that running away in the last couple of rounds, it was crazy — an American TV audience wouldn't like it.’
Eubank's promoter Barry Hearn may have different ideas, and is thinking of trying to put Barkley on against Eubank in Britain.
That's even though the British Boxing Board have already ruled out Barkley from fighting here because of eye retina damage.
If that fell down Hearn might think of staging such a fight in France.
But that wouldn't happen until some time next year when Eubank could also be facing Nigel Benn — especially if Benn lifts the WBC title in Italy next month.
Eubank looked as though he was going to finish off Thornton in the ninth round — and should have done so in the tenth.
But he admitted: ‘I couldn't stay with his pace and I had to get away and look after myself.’
Thornton was not impressed by that tactic.
He said: ‘What was the speed limit in the ring during those last couple of rounds?
He ran his ass off!
It must be wondered whether Eubank is jaded through having so many fights at a high level in such a short time.
But it won't get any easier as Hearn promises: ‘We're only going to fight sluggers and tough guys.
That may sound mercenary because Chris knows the rest of his career is limited, but it will be fun for people watching!
Eubank insists: ‘I HAVE to fight.
I NEED to fight.
I WANT to fight — on November 28.
Yet even Eubank, deep down, does question his continuation in a sport that he has never really liked.
He said: ‘It's nice to have a record of 33 wins in 33 fights, but in a way it is becoming tedious and I'm tired of winning all the time.
‘You can have too much of a good thing — but the alternative is quite unacceptable…defeat.’
If he keeps pushing himself so hard, that unacceptable facet of boxing might have to be faced sooner or later.
Thornton wasn't quite good enough to take his title, but Eubank might soon be so tired that someone, somewhere, will catch up with him.
WHAT A BELTER!
STILL champ — but deep down Chris Eubank knows how close it was against punching postman Tony Thornton
CHRIS makes his point to the fans
EU better watch out — Thornton throws a left
FLASHBACK one year — and joy that was soon to turn to despair for Eubank, with Michael Watson moments away from collapse Pictures: CHRIS GRIEVE
PLATT'S GREAT
BERNIE LOVETT
DAVID PLATT celebrated his Italian league debut for Juventus yesterday with the goal that earned them a 2-2 draw at Genoa.
The England midfielder has played just two domestic cup ties plus a UEFA Cup tie in midweek since his £6.5 million move from Bari this summer.
Platt has had to wait in the wings because he is one of four foreign players fighting for the permitted three places.
But he powered to the rescue nine minutes from time after a neat combination with Roberto Baggio.
AC Milan stayed clear at the top of the table after beating Atalanta 2-0 in a match marred by crowd trouble.
Police with truncheons waded in at the San Siro stadium as fighting broke out, although there were no immediate reports of severe injuries.
Marco Van Basten grabbed his fourth goal of the season, 12 minutes after Daniele Massaro had broken the deadlock.
Napoli failed to find their midweek scoring touch and went down 2-1 at home to an impressive Inter Milan in Channel 4's latest afternoon offering.
Uruguayan striker Daniel Fonseca, scorer of all Napoli's five goals in their UEFA Cup midweek win against Valencia, hit the target again.
But by then German ace Mathias Sammer and new signing Salvatore Schillaci had already put Inter 2-0 up.
However, Schillaci, Italy's sensation of the 1990 World Cup missed a penalty two minutes from time, after being foul by goalkeeper Giovanni Galli.
On another high-scoring day, Dane Brian Laudrup scored two goals as Fiorentina destroyed rock-bottom Ancona 7-1.
Des Walker put his Spanish problems behind him as Sampdoria moved into third spot thanks to a 2-1 win at Udinese, while Lazio, minus Paul Gascoigne, registered their third consecutive draw.
PLATT: Debut strike
FLIER
MARK Roe scored the biggest victory of his career when he shot a five- under-par final round of 65 to win the Lancome Trophy yesterday.
The 29-year-old Yorkshireman finished two shots ahead of Argentinian Vicente Fernandez at Saint Nom La Breteche, near Paris — despite hitting two spectators during the last nine holes.
Ryder Cup star Steven Richardson finished in joint third while world number one Nick Faldo, seeking a fourth successive European tour victory, had to be content with joint 17th place.
Roe, already third, fourth and fifth in European tour events this year, said: ‘I birdied the first three holes to give myself a flying start and never really looked back.’
ROE: Career best
Mugs
PAT Clinton hit back at the critics who jeered him after he retained his WBO flyweight title in Glasgow on Saturday.
The 28-year-old champion was booed after taking a points decision over Hitchin's Danny Porter at the Scottish Exhibition Centre but he said: ‘They are the mugs, not me.’
‘All three judges gave me the decision and having watched the video, I reckon I lost only two rounds — the fourth and the tenth.’
Clinton needed five stitches in an eye cut he suffered in the first round, when he also badly displaced the knuckles on his left hand.
The Scot said: ‘I was one punch away from knocking him out in the fifth and if I hadn't been injured, I would have finished him.’
CLINTON: Injured
BURNT OUT
Graham's tired lines
Sheffield Utd 1, Arsenal 1
JOHN EDWARDS
GEORGE GRAHAM claimed last night: ‘Some of my players are burnt out with the season only a month old!’
The Arsenal boss should have been feeling pleased after his side salvaged a late point.
But he looked a picture of misery instead as he reflected on a the heavy demands on his men.
Arsenal saved face with an Ian Wright leveller five minutes from time after having a jaded, end-of-season look — eight months ahead of schedule!
And that didn't surprise Graham one bit as he bluntly admitted: ‘I've got tired players on my hands, and we've only been playing five weeks.
‘Football is going down a path where the product is being sacrificed for the sake of finance, and I'm not happy about that.
Whingeing
‘I know I'll be accused of just being another whingeing manager.
But it's a fact that the vast majority of chairmen don't even talk to their managers about the workload that's being placed on players.
‘If they did, they would realise it's getting out of hand.
‘They would realise that foreign players think we're crazy to be playing more matches rather than fewer when our game is faster and more competitive than the rest.
‘It's sad for Graham Taylor as well as club managers like myself.
‘He had to pick an England team from what was left after the week-end games a fortnight ago, while I found myself with just two players at Highbury for almost the entire week.
‘There's no way we can bury our heads in the sand and pretend the problem doesn't exist.
You only need to look at John Jensen to know it does.
‘He won the European championship with Denmark in June, and hasn't stopped playing since.
He's already had a handful of World Cup qualifying ties in two or three different countries and is off to another one next week.
‘Is it any wonder the game as a spectacle is suffering?’
Graham hauled off Anders Limpar and Paul Merson 20 minutes from time and reverted to Arsenal's old five-man back line in a desperate late bid to peg back Dane Whitehouse's 49th-minute strike.
And he didn't know whether to grin or grimace when it produced a point-saver from Wright after a link-up between Steve Bould and Lee Dixon.
‘I abandoned my better judgement by sacrificing the flair of Merson and Limpar, and that saddened me,’ added Graham.
‘I'd love to win games 6-0 playing entertaining skilful football, but equally I'd like to stay in a job.’
DANE AND OUT: Despairing Arsenal defender Lee Dixon is left on the deck as Dane Whitehouse (centre) fires Sheffield United ahead
GRAHAM: Complaints
Morris answer
QPR 3, Middlesbrough 3
TONY STENSON
CHRIS MORRIS admitted he nearly caused a touchline riot at the end of a high-octane thriller.
The Irish defender was furious when he was judged to have given away a late penalty for tripping Andy Sinton.
And when the whistle went seconds after Sinton tucked in his spot-kick, Morris went looking for trouble.
He admitted: ‘It was my fault.
Maybe I said things I should not have done — it was over-reaction to the fact we lost two points we probably deserved, and to the manner they were lost.’
Sinton, also joining the candid club, said: ‘I didn't think it was a penalty, either.’
But that didn't save Morris from a rucking by Boro manager Lennie Lawrence.
‘Chris was well out of order,’ he said.
Boro took the lead three times through Alan Kernaghan, Tommy Wright and Willie Falconer but each time were hauled back through Les Ferdinand, Gary Penrice and Sinton's first-ever penalty for Rangers.
MORRIS: Sorry
Brain waves
Norwich 1, Sheff W 0
NEIL SILVER
THE secret of Norwich's rise to the top can be revealed at last— it's brain power!
The clever Canaries may not be brimming with university honours but assistant manager John Deehan revealed: ‘We have got a set of very intelligent players — and it would be naive of myself and the manager not to take their advice.’
Norwich's victory opened up a four- point lead at the top of the table with their fifth win on the trot.
The decisive goal in the dying seconds of the first half was a beauty.
Mark Robins bamboozled two defenders to whip in a cross which make-shift striker Rob Newman headed past England keeper Chris Woods.
DEEHAN: Listens
PROBED
BARNET and Liverpool are among several clubs under investigation over the appearance of black-market tickets for last season's FA Cup final.
Liverpool are carrying out their own internal inquiry at the request of the FA.
‘GIGGS BETTER THAN GAZZA’
Georgie boy reckons Ryan could be Best!
Spurs 1, Manchester Utd 1
HARRY HARRIS
RYAN GIGGS has the magical talent to become an even bigger star in British football than Paul Gascoigne was.
And that prediction comes from a man who should know — George Best, who witnessed the brilliant individual goal by Giggs which put United in the driving seat at White Hart Lane.
Giggs is constantly compared to Best himself, but the former United hero said: ‘One day they might even say I was another Ryan Giggs!
‘Every time a winger comes along with skill he's labelled the latest George Best, but that's not fair on them — or on me.
‘Ryan has the potential to be a great player.
He seems a level-headed lad with a great temperament for the game.
‘He has everything…youth, skill and speed.
He's a real talent — and he could be a bigger star than Gazza.’
Giggs' goal was highlighted on Match of the Day, demonstrating uncanny reactions in taking advantage of Dean Austin's stumble, slipping the ball through Jason Cundy's legs and rounding keeper Ian Walker to shoot into a vacant net from an awkward angle.
But Spurs found the character to come back and equalise through Gordon Durie on 56 minutes, and United manager Alex Ferguson applauded the new competitive edge to a side that ended his team's run of five straight wins.
Ferguson said: ‘After losing Lineker, Gascoigne and Paul Stewart, it has been an enormous upheaval for them — but they are starting to build again.
‘Nobody will find it easy here judging by what I've seen today.’
Spurs coach Doug Livermore was also full of praise for his side, particularly one of their own young hopes, Andy Turner.
Future
Livermore said: ‘For 70 minutes he showed tremendous  enthusiasm .
He tired late on, but he has a great future.
‘Remember, he's just 17, he was playing before a full house, it was Manchester United — but he took it all in his stride.’
But while United strive for the championship, Spurs, for the moment, are aiming for nothing more glamorous than some mid-table security.
Owner Alan Sugar made the point: ‘Now under the leadership of Terry Venables, we feel that the team has tremendous potential…there is a need for a settling in period.’
WHITE HART PAIN: The Spurs defence is spreadeagled, and keeper Ian Walker grounded, as Ryan Giggs bursts through for his wonder goal
GAV STAYING PUT
N'castle 5, Bristol C 0
GAVIN PEACOCK is studying Italian at night school but won't be following Gazza in the player drain.
Kevin Keegan is ready to wheel and deal to keep Newcastle top of the First Division but Peacock is not for sale.
‘He's going to be a key figure at this club for the next three or four years,’ said the Newcastle boss.
The 24-year-old star could have left in the summer but insisted: ‘I know I made the right decision to stay.’
Peacock grabbed two penalties and Liam O'Brien, Franz Carr and Kevin Brock also scored to maintain the Magpies' 100 per cent League record.
PEACOCK: Key man
Cool it or else
Soton 1, Leeds1
COLIN PRICE
TERRY Hurlock and David Speedie have been warned to end the war — or else.
They came to blows in Jersey last weekend and Speedie was fined £50 in court.
Both were fined by Southampton and boss Ian Branfoot had to think seriously about playing them together.
He put them in central midfield — and he would have been rewarded with a vital home win but for Gary Speed's late equaliser.
But Branfoot warned: ‘I'll be keeping them under tight control from now on.
‘There was a team meeting on Thursday when we cleared the air.
They had already shaken hands and been out for a meal together.
‘They have a future as long as they can channel their aggression in the right area.
If they can't, they become liabilities.’
Perry Groves hit his first goal for the club, gloriously fashioned by Matt Le Tissier.
HURLOCK: Warning
SHOWDOWN
It's want-away day for reject Jemson
Norwich 1, Sheff Wed 0
NEIL SILVER
NIGEL JEMSON will walk into Trevor Francis's office this morning and demand to have his future sorted out.
Angry Jemson suffered the embarrassment of coming on as substitute and then being substituted himself at Carrow Road.
Now he is gunning for Wednesday boss Francis for showdown talks about his on-off move back to Nottingham Forest.
‘I was surprised to be taken off,’ said fans' favourite Jemson.
‘I'll be going in to see the manager first thing Monday to sort out my future.
‘One minute I was going to Forest, the next it was all off.
I don't know what the stumbling block is.’
Jemson lasted less than half-an-hour on Saturday.
He came on after 51 minutes to replace the injured Francis, then was hauled off 11 minutes from the end in favour of Nigel Pearson.
‘The substitution was purely tactical because I wanted to get some height up front,’ said Francis.
‘I don't know what Nigel thought, you'll have to ask him that.’
Jemson added: ‘I'm very disappointed.
Nothing much has gone right for me since January when I was injured in a car crash.
I was a first team regular until then, but it has really set me back.’
Just a fortnight ago, 23-year-old Jemson was on the verge of re-joining Forest in a £1million-plus swap deal which would have taken Kingsley Black to Hillsborough.
But the deal collapsed mysteriously and is yet to be resurrected.
Jemson's problems shouldn't detract from woeful Wednesday's own troubles and their disappointing performance.
The scoreline flattered the Owls, who never had a shot on target and were fortunate to concede only one goal, a stunning 44th minute header by makeshift striker Rob Newman from Mark Robins' clever cross.
JEMSON: In to see boss today
LIVERPOOL and Barnet are among several clubs under investigation over the appearance of black market tickets for last season's FA Cup final.
Liverpool, who beat Sunderland at Wembley last May, are carrying out their own internal inquiry at the request of the FA.
Central boss in swoop for Villa
HARRY HARRIS
CENTRAL TV want to buy a football club — and Aston Villa are top of their shopping list.
Gary Newbon, head of sport for Central, will tonight reveal his masterplan — to purchase a Premier League club and provide his company with an influential foothold for future TV negotiations.
On the BBC's Standing Room Only programme at 6.50 tonight, Newbon discusses the chances of an English club going the way of French team Paris St Germain, who were bought by Chanel Plus last year.
Rules
Newbon disclosed that he told his former managing director a couple of years ago: ‘I could get Oxford United very cheaply,’— but his boss wasn't interested.
But Newbon goes on to explain: ‘He's now gone and I'm talking to the present managing director.
‘If we are interested in a Midlands club, it would have to be a big one with a big following like Aston Villa.
‘That would give us a stronger inside track when it comes to deciding TV rights with the clubs.
Standing Room Only researchers can find no rules or regulations to block Newbon's revolutionary plan.
And the example set by Chanel Plus in France can only improve his chances of success in England.
In the 12 months since Chanel Plus bought Paris St Germain, the club has been transformed from a financial cripple to a top-of-the-table French First Division outfit where crowds have doubled.
Central TV have not yet made any approach to Villa owner Doug Ellis — but if Ellis won't play ball, then Newbon may try his luck with other Midlands giants like Coventry or Nottingham Forest.
Misfit Webb seeks move
HARRY HARRIS
OLD Trafford misfit Neil Webb is on the verge of demanding a transfer from Manchester United.
The England midfielder has been continually snubbed by manager Alex Ferguson this season.
A close friend of Webb told me: ‘It doesn't look as though Neil has a future with United.
He wants to talk to the boss about it.
He is very close to asking for a transfer.’
Webb, 29, has played for United just once this season — in the UEFA Cup tie against Moscow Torpedo — and that was only because of the foreigners' rule that restricted Ferguson's choice.
When the team for Saturday's game at Tottenham was announced, Webb's name was missing again.
Now unless Webb figures in the squad for Wednesday's Coca-Cola Cup home tie against Brighton, he is set for show-down talks.
But Fergie might be reluctant to release one of his English midfield players while United are still in the UEFA Cup.
I understand that Fergie was offering Webb in part-exchange during the close season and he is still interested in a swap deal involving Chelsea's Andy Townsend.
But Stamford Bridge chairman Ken Bates is insisting on £3million cash for his 29-year-old star.
Tottenham and Nottingham Forest would also be interested in Webb if the fee was less than £1million.
Spurs are in need of a creative midfielder since selling Paul Gascoigne and Paul Stewart, while Brian Clough might consider luring Webb back to Forest with his team at the bottom of the Premier League.
WEBB: Snubbed
Torby's a disaster
DANISH star Torben Piechnik hit back yesterday after a nightmare debut which must add fresh fears about Liverpool's future.
The 29-year-old cost £500,000 from Copenhagen, but he was turned inside out by an Aston Villa side that cruelly exposed his lack of pace.
He looked a pale shadow of the commanding centre half who helped Denmark win the European championship, but said: ‘I won't crack under the pressure.
‘I'm not the sort — I'm big and strong, and I can take everything they throw at me on my broad shoulders.
‘It's a situation I believe I can handle, given a bit of time.’
PIECHNIK: Nightmare
ACCUSED
Man City 0, Chelsea 1
KEN LAWRENCE
ANDY TOWNSEND last night refused to back down after going wild over an X-rated tackle that left Dennis Wise in a heap.
The Chelsea skipper insisted: ‘That is the kind of tackle that can end a player's career — and it is one Fitzroy Simpson cannot be proud of.
‘I wasn't trying to start a riot or anything like that when I reacted as I did.
‘But if one of our lads had done something similar, I would have expected the Manchester City players to respond in the same way.
‘I told Fitzroy: ‘You are a bloody good player and you don't need to be doing that.
One day it could be you in the same position’.
‘I did put my arm around his shoulders at the end and he told me he did not mean anything malicious.
I believe him.
‘But I don't regret what I did or how I reacted.
I am the Chelsea captain and it is my duty to try to protect my players.’
Protest
Townsend had to be forcibly restrained by team-mates after the tackle ignited this live TV clash.
His reaction was so wild that he would have found himself in even deeper trouble if he had connected with Simpson.
Simpson, booked for the challenge that sparked this flare-up, was the victim of a nasty challenge by Gareth Hall a minute later — and Hall also went into referee Keith Hackett's book.
But Simpson, a £350,000 buy from Swindon, defended himself, saying: ‘I saw the ball and went for it.
‘My game is about tackling in midfield and how the opposition react is up to them.
‘The referee did not stop the game until the Chelsea players started to protest and the linesman did not raise his flag.
So why was I booked?’
Townsend countered: ‘Remember we lost our centre-half Paul Elliott through a bad tackle last week.
Players have to remember that their livelihoods are at stake.
‘I would not have wanted to see either player carted off to hospital because of a tackle like that which was dangerously high.
‘Perhaps Dennis also lunged a little bit and Fitzroy was maybe trying to protect him self.
But there can be no excuse for what happened.’
Simpson left Wise writhing and Townsend reacted instantaneously.
As he tried to grab Simpson, team-mates Mal Donaghy and Nigel Spackman dived in to pull him back.
Then more Chelsea players joined in the manhunt for Simpson.
City player-manager Peter Reid also piled in — and Townsend was still being restrained after Simpson had been cautioned.
Reid said: ‘My man went into the tackle and was going for the ball.
I know the Chelsea players reacted but it is a passionate game and the tackles do go in.’
Wise was also centre stage in the incident which led to Chelsea's 40th-minute winner.
Hackett judged that City skipper Keith Curle's tackle on Wise was head-high.
He gave Chelsea an indirect free-kick in the box which Wise touched to David Lee.
His shot was charged down but Mick Harford shot in the rebound.
The goal came as City tried to struggle through with 10 men while Rick Holden was having four stitches in a mouth wound after colliding with team-mate Terry Phelan.
Holden was missing for 18 minutes and Reid admitted: ‘We took a calculated gamble by not replacing Rick — and it did not come off.’
City created several chances but Kevin Hitchcock's return for the disgraced Dave Beasant boosted Chelsea.
Hitchcock made fine saves from Simpson, Mike Sheron and David White.
Then he responded brilliantly late on to parry a point-blank shot from the ill-starred Simpson.
CHELSEA scorer Mick Harford (centre) leads the angry protest against City's Fitzroy Simpson.
Picture: ALBERT COOPER
TOWNSEND: Wild reaction
WISE lies flat out after being felled by Simpson's tackle.
35 YEAR HITCH
West Ham 1, Derby 1
NEIL SILVER
WEST HAM'S lowest League crowd for 35 years were left wishing they hadn't bothered after this dismal affair.
Just 11,493 spectators turned up at Upton Park as ITV kicked off its live Football League coverage to rival Channel 4's Italian action and Sky's Premier League offering.
It was the Hammers' lowest gate since 9,500 watched them play Bristol City in 1957.
Manager Billy Bonds said: ‘I thought we would have got a few back after our last few results, but this seems to be par for the course lately.’
Striker Trevor Morley, who signed a one-year contract on Friday, celebrated by grabbing West Ham's equaliser, his fourth goal in three games.
They had fallen behind to a crazy goal after 33 minutes.
Paul Simpson broke free on the left, raced into the box and fired in a low-angled shot which keeper Ludo Miklosko fumbled.
Mitchell Thomas tried to hook the ball clear, but it struck Miklosko on the shoulder and flew into the net.
But Morley pounced just a minute after the break to give the Hammers the goal their pressure deserved.
Mark Robson's corner from the right was helped on by Thomas, Alvin Martin and then Kevin Keen before Morley slotted home from eight yards.
BONDS: Disappointed
HELLO
Lee snubs old boss to join Keegan
Magpies steal Charlton ace
COLIN DIBALL
ROBERT LEE joined Newcastle United last night after turning his back on a move to Premier League Middlesbrough.
The £700,000 transfer from Charlton went through only 48 hours after Lee rejected the chance to link up again with his former boss Lennie Lawrence.
Lawrence's bid broke down largely because of Londoner Lee's reluctance to move to the North.
Now, in an amazing snub to Lawrence, the 26-year-old has joined a club which is even further away from the capital and is set to make his debut in the Coca-Cola Cup tomorrow night — against Middlesbrough!
‘I can understand if Lennie Lawrence is feeling a bit bemused tonight, but he wanted an answer straightaway,’ said Lee.
‘He put me on the spot and eventually pulled out of the deal as much as I did.
Lennie wasn't prepared to wait.
‘Maybe I'm wrong, but I hope there are no hard feelings.
I like to think he would wish me good luck in the future.’
Keegan insisted: ‘There's no animosity between us and Middlesbrough.
He had the chance to sign for them and didn't go.
‘I don't feel that we've poached him.
We didn't arrive on the scene until that deal had fallen down.
‘We are nearer than Middlesbrough to London in many ways.
We are on the main rail line and there are more flights from Newcastle.’
Lee revealed that Keegan's presence was a major factor in his decision to join Newcastle.
‘Kevin was my idol when I was a youngster,’ he said.
‘His interest was flattering and I felt Newcastle were right for me.
‘The lure of Kevin Keegan and Newcastle United was too much — and it had to be something big for me to leave London.’
Keegan was allowed to spend £700,000 on Lee because of the huge gates United are attracting this season.
‘The supporters have bought him,’ said Keegan.
‘They have enabled us to add a very valuable player to our squad because they are putting their money on the table.’
Meanwhile, Lawrence refused to get involved in a row following Lee's decision.
Lawrence declared last week: ‘If Lee doesn't sign for me he won't leave London,’ after the striker had indicated he did not fancy quitting the capital.
That's why Keegan's swoop came as such a shock.
Lawrence had insisted: ‘Whether he goes or stays is of no concern to me now.
‘When I put the phone down on him on Friday that was it.
‘Good luck to him.
There's no point in moaning and groaning.
I'm not in any rush to make a signing.
We aren't doing badly, are we?’
Boro players were stunned by Lee's about-turn — especially his former Charlton team-mate Andy Peake.
Said Peake: ‘I'm surprised.
If he was going anywhere I thought he would have come here for Premier League football.
‘I thought I was his best friend.
Now he's going to get some stick for this!’
GOTCHA!
NEWCASTLE'S Kevin Keegan and Sir John Hall celebrate their new signing Robert Lee (front)
LAWRENCE: Snubbed
GOODBYE
NEWCASTLE striker Mick Quinn wants out of St James's Park — after being dropped for Saturday's match against Bristol City.
Quinn, who scored three goals in two games against Portsmouth and Grimsby, has met boss Kevin Keegan but seems determined to get away.
A source close to the player last night made it clear that he was deeply hurt at being dropped from the match.
He said: ‘Mick is confused.
He doesn't know what he has to do to win a regular first team place.’
QUINN: Upset
Cool Nigel
JOHN EDWARDS
NIGEL JEMSON last night shrugged aside the most embarrassing moment of his career and ruled out any showdown with Trevor Francis.
The Sheffield Wednesday striker was livid at finding himself back on the bench just 28 minutes after being sent on as a second-half substitute at Norwich on Saturday.
But he kept his anger under control and vowed to knuckle down and fight for a first-team future.
The £800,000 signing from Nottingham Forest then paid tribute to the man who has helped transform his fiery character and enable him to take such a setback calmly in his stride — player-boss Francis.
He said: ‘I believe my attitude and fitness have both improved since I signed for Wednesday, and I've got the boss and coach Ritchie Barker to thank for that.
‘They have helped and encouraged me to be more professional, and I'm grateful for that.
‘I was disappointed at what happened, but I'm not the only one who has been through something like that.
‘Trevor himself was taken off after going on as sub last season.
‘I didn't like what happened at Norwich.
But Trevor told me it was tactical, so I've got to bite my tongue and accept his explanation.’
Jemson added: ‘I know it's going to be difficult breaking into the Wednesday team, with David Hirst and Mark Bright both ahead of me.
But I will give it my best shot.’
JEMSON: Tribute
MIDDLESBROUGH have been refused permission by Millwall to play on-loan goalkeeper Brian Horne against Newcastle in the Coca-Cola Cup local derby tomorrow.
Neil's war cry
NOTTS County boss Neil Warnock, preparing for tonight's Coca Cola Cup first leg against Wolves, has challenged his players: ‘Let's see you come out fighting — the same as me!’
Warnock, under fire after a 6-0 blasting by Millwall, said: ‘Millwall was a body blow but I've told my players that I've always been a fighter.
I'll come out battling — but will they?’
Kenny nicks Nicky
MATT HUGHES
KENNY Dalglish hopes to clinch the surprise £750,000 signing of Plymouth skipper Nicky Marker today.
The big-spending Blackburn Rovers boss was locked in talks with Argyle manager Peter Shilton throughout yesterday in an attempt to finalise a player-plus-cash package.
Marker, 27, can play in defence or midfield and has a hard-man reputation.
Dalglish switched his sights to Marker after failing in a £2.5million bid for Craig Short.
The deal also involves two young Blackburn squad players going to Plymouth in exchange.
Shilton wants winger Craig Skinner, who has been on loan at the club, and centre-half Keith Hill, who is valued at £250,000.
MARKER: Target
Danny's his boy
WALTER STOREY
WORRIED Sunderland boss Malcolm Crosby is ready to thrash out a £250,000 deal for Sheffield Wednesday midfielder Danny Wilson.
Crosby is determined to buy this week to halt the Roker slide down the First Division table.
Bookies pay out on coup
CHARLES FAWCUS
JO N JACK'S supporters will get their money today after BOLA finally advised its members to pay up.
The Betting Shop association had been looking into the  circumstances surrounding the horse's win at Lingfield two weeks ago.
That success at 33-1 was cleared by the Jockey Club and the police last week, but BOLA surprisingly continued to hold out.
There was almost no money on course for the horse and the only serious cash, about £1,000 in a series of small bets, was placed in the Bradford area.
One winning punter, Chris Welham, said: ‘The bookies only squealed because we beat them.’
Too true and how many attempted coups have gone wrong and the cash has been lost without any question of an inquiry.
BOLA keeps insisting that it is looking after the interest of all punters by examining the details of this affair and issuing the ‘No pay’ edict.
But this was just a shrewd touch that came off.
The betting shops got caught and didn't like it.
BOLA council member Peter Smith, one of the bookmakers hit, said: ‘If this happened again then I would bring it to BOLA's attention.’
A 33-1 chance is unlikely to crop up in this week's top event, the Queen Elizabeth 11 Stakes at Ascot on Saturday, which sees the re-match between Selkirk and Marling.
Rodrigo De Triano also figures in the entries and will take his chance if the ground stays as he likes it.
‘THE WORST LIVERPOOL SIDE FOR 33 YEARS’
EVEN THE BOOKIES ARE READY FOR AN ANFIELD SHAKE-UP
It could take him five seasons to get it right
EMLYN HUGHES/NIGEL CLARKE
A SINISTER campaign to boot Graeme Souness out of Liverpool went public last night when the betting boys opened a book on his successor.
Kevin Keegan, the current darling of Tyneside, is already being quoted 5-1 to be in charge at Anfield when Liverpool start the Premier League next season.
Although William Hills make Souness the 6-4 on favourite to remain manager next year, it's still a shattering blow to his credibility.
Along with Keegan, all the other Kop favourites are being lined up to depose the Scottish hard-man.
There's John Toshack, who has won his managerial spurs with Spain's top clubs, at 6-1 and former boss Kenny Dalglish — now a hit at Blackburn — quoted 8-1.
Difficult
Even Alan Hansen, who has retired to the TV studios, is a 10-1 shot.
Then comes Oldham chief Joe Royle, once a hero with arch-rivals Everton, at 12-1 and current Goodison boss Howard Kendall at 14-1.
Manchester City player-manager Peter Reid is 20-1 along with former Liverpool star Sammy Lee and Howard Wilkinson, boss of champions Leeds.
The bookies chalked up their prices as Liverpool have staggered to their worst start for 28 years.
And ex-skipper Emlyn Hughes, who captained the Reds to an incredible 13 trophies, says: ‘It is the worst side for 33 years.
‘No wonder Souness is having such a difficult time.
What is happening at Anfield now would make Bill Shankly, the man who was my idol, turn in his grave.
‘I hear all the arguments about injuries, loss of form and man management.
The truth is that Liverpool are nowhere near getting out of their rut of despair.
‘A campaign has already begun suggesting that Souness is for the chop — but I blame the players.
‘I know he has made mistakes, but for the first time since Shanks took over in 1959, a Liverpool manager has got a job to do.
‘Souness has inherited the biggest mess at Anfield that I can remember and in trying to get himself out of it he has at times become even more bogged down.
‘But with injuries that have cut the heart from the side, Souness has had to buy — and he's not always been successful.
‘While the critics are erecting the hangman's gallows for him, it is his players who have let Liverpool down.
‘I see no captain on the bridge, no leader, no will to win or passion to play for the club.
‘Souness can sweat his own blood and tears for Liverpool — but sees few others ready to show that kind of commitment.
‘When Dalglish went what did Souness inherit?
A team and a club on the slide.
Players bought who had nothing to do with the Liverpool way of life.
‘Suddenly Souness had to start from the bottom and try to build not just from an injury-decimated side, but from one whose senior players were in the most part over 30 and past it.
‘He has tried to draft in fresh faces, and found it difficult for them to fit in.
‘I don't fancy Mark Wright as a skipper — or even a centre half.
‘He has gone backwards.
But who else is there?
No wonder Souness has been into the transfer market for a new centre back.
‘And what about Mark Walters?
He shows nothing that suggests to me he should wear a Liverpool shirt.
I see no heart and soul for the job.
‘I know critics will say that Souness picks the team, and they reflect his selection.
But he hasn't much of a choice.
‘He has had to play kids because the cupboard is bare.
And the stars he does have are not going to get any better.
‘Souness doesn't have any money to spend like Dalglish did.
He has had to gamble on selling before he can buy, that's why he got rid of first Ray Houghton and then Dean Saunders.
‘He took over a team in turmoil — and it might take him five years to get it right.
‘Will the club be that patient?
While the bookies adjust their odds, the pressure builds for him.’
DOWN GRAEME SOUNESS (far left) and his staff have that sinking feeling.
DREAM TEAM: Bill Shankly's prize guys of 1966…but how things have changed at Anfield
SOUNESS 4-6 KEEGAN 5-1 TOSHACK 6-1 DALGLISH 8-1 HANSEN 10-1 ROYLE 12-1 KENDALL 14-1 REID 20-1 WILKINSON 20-1
Blame Taylor claims Irish
WALTER STOREY
FORMER Irish international Eamon Dunphy has launched a blistering attack on Graham Taylor — and gone to war against a host of other top football personalities.
Speaking about legendary Manchester United manager Sir Matt Busby, Dunphy choked back tears as he said: ‘Busby was the last football man with vision.
‘Compare his dream to people like Vinny Jones, Ken Bates and Graham Taylor.
What the **** has Taylor ever done?’
Dunphy, capped 22 times by the Republic of Ireland, added: ‘We need to winkle out people like Bates, and we don't need an England manager like Taylor.’
Dunphy blamed Taylor for the failings of the English national side.
‘The European championship showed that decline is unique to the English game.
‘There's no place for individuals any more.
‘English football has been dead for a decade now,’ he added.
Turning his scorn on to Republic of Ireland boss Jack Charlton, Dunphy snorted: ‘They play like Wimbledon, yet he's regarded as a hero!
It's the age of the blind and the deaf.’
The former Millwall star, now a writer and broadcaster, stunned the packed audience at a football evening at Waterstone's Bookshop in London's Charing Cross Road as he laid into more of the game's major figures.
Dunphy also blasted pundits Trevor Brooking and Bob Wilson for ‘glibness and stupidity’.
Even Crystal Palace boss Steve Coppell was not spared.
‘Coppell's regarded as intelligent because he's been to university,’ the Irishman said.
‘But he talks a lot of tripe about football, and his team's a disgrace.’
TAYLOR: Blasted
SILENCE OF THE LAMB!
Special on the man who told the truth
No faith, let's hope for charity!
MIKE LANGLEY
I'VE no faith in the disciplinary tribunal of the Test and County Cricket Board.
They look mostly the same breed of numbskulls who've been mishandling the Allan Lamb case for a month.
Ditherers and mums-the-worders who'd make even the fossilised Football Association Council look like a Brains Trust.
I said from the outset that, in the eyes of the TCCB, the MCC and the International Cricket Council, the gouging of a cricket ball is a lesser crime than rocking the boat.
Nothing has happened since to contradict that judgment.
Indeed, hardly a day has passed without some fresh damned-foolery to strengthen it.
Lamb alerted the umpires at Lord's to Pakistan bowling with a ball showing signs of unnatural wear.
‘It's been tampered with,’ he said.
The ball was duly examined, confiscated and changed — without one official, convincing word of straight-from-the-shoulder explanation.
Frantic
Lord's silence over Lamb has been broken only by the swish, frantic swish of sweeping every inconvenient fact under the Long Room carpet, now piled so high that Chris Bonnington might not scale it!
I won't go again through the details of the Fax that failed, the chairman who was uncontactable by phone, the urgent letters posted second-class — and ‘the statement that never was’ delivered by the secretary as he disappeared on holiday.
Yes, we'll skip all that.
Today provides a more immediate issue- the final opportunity for cricket to show it's not administered entirely by blithering idiots.
Eddie Slinger of Lancashire and his tribunal are almighty.
They can double or treble the two-match suspension and £1,800 fine that Northants imposed immediately on skipper Lamb for exposing the ball-fiddle by speaking out without his county's permission.
But chairman Slinger also has the power to ask his eight-man jury: ‘How can we punish a chap for telling the truth, even if he has breached his contract?
‘Won't folk be saying it's us, not Allan Lamb, who are bringing the game into disrepute by acting out a lie and covering up for Pakistan's bowlers?
So perhaps we ought to treat the lad reet leniently.
Any suggestions?’
Yes, Mr Chairman.
No fines, no further suspensions.
Send Lamb a reprimand, instead.
Second-class post.
Langley's verdict on August 29
MIRROR SPORT, August 27
MIRROR SPORT, August 28
MIRROR SPORT, August 29
WALTER'S SO LUCKY
CHARLES FAWCUS
WALTER SWINBURN struck back at Kempton yesterday and now he can't wait for Marling's return at Ascot on Saturday.
Swinburn was knocked down in a late night incident in Newmarket a month ago — and rates himself lucky to be riding again at all.
.
‘I hit my head on the kerb when I fell and when I went to hospital two days later they told me I had severe bruising of the brain,’ said Walter after his Kempton win on Mithl Al Hawa.
‘When I came out again my weight had gone down to 8 stone and it's definitely an experience I wouldn't like to go through again, but it gives you a new outlook on life.
‘I got 500 get well cards and I'm really grateful to the people who sent them.
It feels as if I'm starting the season again and obviously I'm not 100yet, but I will be for Marling on Saturday.
‘I rode her in a bit of work on Saturday morning and she felt great.
It's going to be tough on Saturday but she won't mind the rain which might frighten one or two away.’
Walter gave crack sprinter Sheikh Albadou a spin yesterday morning and he flies to New York to ride the horse in a pre-Breeders Cup race on Saturday week.
Then he makes a lightning trip back on Concorde for Petit Loup in the Arc a few hours later.
Selkirk is 6-4 favourite to beat Marling on Saturday and his trainer Ian Balding was smiling in the rain at Kempton yesterday.
‘It was like this when he won the Queen Elizabeth last year so I won't mind if it keeps pouring down for him or Lochsong,’ he said.
His Ayr Gold Cup heroine is right on song for a farewell appearance for the year in the Diadem Stakes on Saturday.
‘She came back from Scotland in fine form and it's certainly looking as though she'll run again,’ he added.
Laburnum, just beaten at the last Kempton meeting after being off the course since April, was the big weekend gamble yesterday.
Ladbrokes cut his price from 12-1 to half those odds for Ascot's Krug Trophy.
ALL GUNS BLAZING
GEORGE GRAHAM takes his misfiring Gunners into Coca-Cola Cup battle tonight at Highbury against old club Millwall admitting his team are not yet good enough.
He said: ‘With the talent we've got we should be doing better — we are still not playing well enough.’
GRAHAM: Frank
We're here to win
NEIL SILVER
THE FORMER colleagues of Paul Gascoigne at Spurs would like nothing better than to spoil his comeback tonight.
Gazza makes his Lazio debut against his old club and his Tottenham pals aren't going to give him an easy ride.
Captain Gary Mabbutt, who hopes to make his first appearance of the season after injury, said: ‘The game may be only a friendly but there is a lot of prestige involved.
‘The match is being beamed back to White Hart Lane and you always want to look good in front of the cameras.’
And that means there is no question of special treatment for Gazza.
‘We will definitely put Paul to the test,’ Mabbutt said.
‘He came over and trained with us last week and he was looking fit.
‘Gazza has always been brilliant on the football field and it will be great to see him back after the long haul he's had.’
Spurs’ defender Neil Ruddock never played with Gazza but has lined up against him and he said: ‘I've only played against him once and I couldn't get near him.
‘Obviously we won't be deliberately kicking Gazza up in the air.
‘All the lads at Spurs talk about Gazza and what a great player he is.
I know he's had a long time out with injury but he must be all right now or he wouldn't be playing.’
MABBUTT: Prestige
RUDDOCK: Big game
Crosby's Bogie-man
MALCOLM CROSBY, the Sunderland manager, is bidding to tie up a loan deal for Millwall's Ian Bogie — a player once dubbed the new Gazza.
But Crosby faces a snag, with Lions boss Mick McCarthy wanting his striker, John Byrne, in exchange.
Bogie was given the chance to replace Paul Gascoigne at Newcastle, when Gazza went to Spurs, but failed to establish himself.
BELL HAS APPEAL
Mean Dean's set to boss the champs
MARTIN RICHARDS
SKIPPER Dean Bell will be front-runner to take over as Wigan coach when John Monie goes back to Australia next May.
That was the strong inside bet from Central Park yesterday as the champions angrily denied they had made a move for Sydney St George coach Brian Smith to succeed Monie.
Former Hull coach Smith, who has agreed a new 12-month contract with St George, claims he has had two offers to return to England for the 1993-4 season.
‘There's not a grain of truth in the Smith stories and it's unsettling for the club,’ said Wigan chairman Jack Robinson.
Leeds new centre signing Kevin Iro won't make his debut for at least six weeks after a specialist said that the Kiwi international's injury was worse than first feared.
Iro originally hoped he would be sidelined for only two weeks.
He picked up the injury playing against Great Britain in July and aggravated it in his last match for Manly.
BELL: Coach bid
IRO: Out 6 weeks
Rory's return
RORY Underwood, England's most-capped player and record try-scorer, has dramatically reversed his decision to retire from international rugby.
Underwood, who has scored 35 tries in 55 England appearances, will be available for the ‘foreseeable future’ and will tour New Zealand with the British Lions next summer.
Bill's game plan
NEIL SILVER
BILL Nicholson, the man who led Tottenham to the League and FA Cup ‘double’ in 1961, last night slammed the modern game for failing to provide value.
And the former Spurs boss, whose push-and-run team of the 1960's included such soccer legends as Danny Blanchflower and Dave Mackay, called for revolutionary changes.
‘I can't understand how people can pay excessive amounts to watch football the way it is played today,’ he said.
‘I watched Tottenham play Brentford on Monday night and I was very disappointed with what I saw.
‘In my day, it was all about players finding space.
‘I want to see something happening in the game, something that helps the players and the spectators to enjoy it — but how can it happen when players are congested in seven-and-a-half yards either side of the halfway line?’
Nicholson called for the introduction of a major change in the offside law.
He believes two white lines should be drawn across the width of the pitch, one in each half 15 yards from the centre spot.
‘Inside those 30 yards we should say you can't be offside,’ he explained.
NICHOLSON: Ideas
JOHN'S TOP OF THE OPS
C Palace 3, Lincoln 1
TONY STENSON
MIRACLE man John Salako last night showed Paul Gascoigne the way to bounce back from serious injury.
Palace's former England forward struck a glorious goal to serve Graham Taylor notice that he's worth another try.
Salako, once part of Taylor's new dawn, severed two tendons and had to fly to America for £100,000 of treatment.
But while Gazza is still to test his recovery, Salako returned at the start of this season and last night played a majestic role in Palace's first leg Coca-Cola Cup win.
He was behind most of the attacks that usually floundered at the hands, feet or body of Lincoln's inspired keeper Ian Bowling — who played for most of the game with a suspected smashed ankle.
Palace manager Steve Coppell said: ‘Everything we get from John now is a bonus because we did fear the worst.
The money we spent on the operation was worth it.’
Gareth Southgate fired in Palace's opener from 25 yards in the 19th minute then Salako scored on the hour.
The lively Eddie McGoldrick grabbed Palace's third before Graham Bressington gave Lincoln scant second leg hope just before the end.
SALAKO: Inspired
Up for t'Cup
PAUL Gascoigne felt he was going to pot without his favourite cuppa — so he asked a friend to bring some English tea-bags out to Rome.
And he's hoping to brew up a shock for his old mates tonight.
SHAMED
No-hopers shake Kop in 8-goal drama
Souness on rack
Liverpool 4, Chesterf'ld 4
RICHARD TANNER
LIVERPOOL manager Graeme Souness last night refused to discuss the goals that Mark Wright and David James gave away to a team of Third Division nobodies.
Shamed Souness said: ‘I'd rather not talk about the goals we gave away and concentrate instead on the  pluses .’
England centre-half Wright and costly keeper James will doubtless be on the receiving of their manager's tongue today — after being humiliated by two unknown strikers the wrong side of thirty.
Pressure
Last night ex-Halifax striker Steve Norris was doing much of the talking after hitting Liverpool with two goals.
‘We'll finish them off in a fortnight,’ he said, as he celebrated 31st birthday.
Chesterfield came within a whisker of shocking Liverpool in this amazing Coca Cola Cup-tie.
His strike partner Dave Lancaster also snatched two goals as Chesterfield led 3-0 and then 4-2 in a match that will only pile the pressure on Souness.
But Liverpool, facing their biggest Cup humiliation since their 1959 defeat by non-League Worcester, escaped with late goals from Mark Walters and skipper Wright.
Wright's face-saving equaliser came five minutes from time — after he had endured a nightmare display.
Souness, while hugely relieved that his team got out of jail, was furious with the goals they leaked — with Wright and James the prime culprits.
He said: ‘We played some really good football and showed some tremendous character considering we had so many young players out there.
Minute
‘We hit the post in the last minute.
Had that gone in, I think it would have been justice because of the way our players responded.
‘Chesterfield worked hard but we made things easy for them with the goals we gave away.’
But Norris, who launched his career at non-league VS Rugby and Telford, said: ‘That's a birthday I will never forget.
‘If someone had said we would get a draw here, we would have been well happy.
‘But the lads were disappointed in the end  because we threw it away.
‘But scoring four goals at Anfield is brilliant.
Now we are all looking forward to the second leg.
If we play as well as that I don't see why we can't finish them off.
‘You dream about scoring at Anfield — but to do it both ends and to silence the Kop is a fantastic feeling.’
Two-goal Lancaster said: ‘We thought there might be eight goals tonight — but we didn't think we would get four of them!.’
Manager Chris McMenemy, son of England number two Lawrie, said: ‘This is the proudest night of my football life.
It's all we could have hoped for.
‘In fact, the lads are upset because at 3-0 up they should have been home and dry.
But I don't think they could believe what was happening — and nor could I.
‘I don't care what troubles Liverpool may have.
They are still a great club and they had several internationals out there.’
Souness will now conduct a major inquest into Liverpool's defensive shambles.
It was the first time they had conceded four goals at home since the Manchester United of Charlton, Law and Best rammed four past them in 1969.
And Souness will desperately hope that some of his eight injured stars will be back to face bogey side Wimbledon at Anfield on Saturday.
Liverpool are already in the grip of their worst League start to a season since 1953 — and this amazing result will have done little to restore confidence.
Already the bookies are taking bets on whether Souness will still be in the Anfield hot seat neat season.
Another blow was the crowd of 12,533 — the lowest at Anfield since 1945.
STEVE NORRIS races in to beat David James for Chesterfield's first goal — and an astonishing night at Anfield is under way.
Norris ended with two goals, as did fellow striker Dave Lancaster.
HEROES: Chesterfield's two-goal strikers Steve Norris and Dave Lancaster salute the crowd at Anfield
WORRIED: Graeme Souness last night
FELLED
Wright eyeful
NIGEL CLARKE
ARSENAL striker Ian Wright was hit in the face by a coin thrown from the crowd during the 1-1 Coca-Cola Cup draw against Millwall at Highbury.
Arsenal manager George Graham said: ‘Ian was hit just above the eye.
I believe the referee is going to put it in his report, but luckily Ian was unmarked and not badly hurt.’
Six players were booked, four of them from Arsenal taking the team's tally of yellow cards for the season to 21.
MATCH REPORT — Page 30, 31.
FACING TROUBLE: Arsenal's Ian Wright is treated at Highbury after being hit in the face by a coin thrown from the crowd
PROUD
CHESTERFIELD boss Chris McMenemy got a special pat on the back for his team's Coca-Cola Cup draw at Liverpool — from proud dad Lawrie.
The England number two was on his way to see Gazza play in Rome when he phoned his son.
‘He sounded pleased as punch for me,’ beamed Chris, ‘and he said the whole family were absolutely delighted.
It was great to hear from him.’
McMENEMY: Delighted
PHEW-NITED
Brighton 1 Man Utd 1
TONY STENSON
MATT EDWARDS used the Coca-Cola Cup to finally come in from the wilderness last night.
Edwards, one of soccer's wandering gypsies, returned home to keep this second round, first leg tie on knife-edge with a brilliant 73rd minute goal.
The 21-year-old Edwards, London born, and once on Brighton's books, was tossed out by Spurs this summer after being farmed without impact to Reading and Peterborough.
He eventually rejoined Brighton on a free transfer — and last night, at last, he enjoyed a taste of the good life.
Edwards revealed he knew his days at Spurs were numbered when then-manager Peter Shreeves forgot his name!
He said: ‘We were in training and everyone was having goal attempts.
Peter got round to me and said ‘sorry son, I've forgotten who you are.’
I knew it was time to move.
‘I saw Terry Venables and he agreed.
Now it's nice to show them I am really around.’
His goal was a gem for the Seagulls — but it left United manager Alex Ferguson fuming: ‘There was a slackness right through our side — only Danny Wallace played as though he meant it.’
Brighton, relegated from Division Two last season, constantly had United in trouble.
Even Wallace's goal late in the first half did not deflect their determination.
The last time these clubs met was at Wembley in the 1983 FA Cup final, a game that needed two bites for United before they finally ran out winners.
Steve Foster, his famous headband constantly leaping ahead of Mark Hughes and Brian McClair, is sole survivor of those far-off days.
Brighton, now £4m in debt and losing £1,000 a day, will reap almost £100,000 from the two games — and few will deny them their rich pickings.
United's star keeper keeper Peter Schmeichel was on international duty with Denmark.
But his deputy, Gary Walsh, was their hero, constantly in the action.
It took Wallace to finally offer United hope.
Ince, taking a return from his own shot, put the little winger clear to rifle in his first goal of the season on 36 minutes.
But the equaliser was always on offer and arrived in the 73rd minute.
Ian Chapman, booked earlier for fouling Andrei Kanchelskis, provided the cross that Edwards rose to head home.
WALLACE: On target
ALERT RED: Brian McClair slips past a challenge by Brighton's Steve Foster during last night's hectic battle at the Goldstone
Grant grabs title
IAN GIBB
HEROL Graham's reign as British middleweight champion ended last night as Bradford's Frank Grant blasted him to a ninth-round defeat at Elland Road, Leeds.
The master craftsman was left helpless as referee Paul Thomas called it off after two minutes 20 seconds of the ninth.
Up to then Graham, 33, had been mainly in control and had at times outclassed the 27-year-old Grant.
But he was taking far too many punches which at one time he would have slipped with ease.
Grant blazed forward in the ninth with a big right and left and Graham was down.
He got to one knee but had to stay down until the count reached nine.
Another right on the jaw had Herol collapsing back in a corner.
He managed to get away to the other side of the ring but Grant, who calls himself The Terminator, slashed away with both hands, forcing the stoppage.
IAN GIBB
Henry Wharton added the British super-middleweight title to his Commonwealth crown by the narrowest of margins.
British champion
Fidel Castro Smith fought hard and bravely to hang on to his title, losing only by 118 to 117 1/2 points
Sheals shame
Leigh 14, Oldham 26
OLDHAM prop Mark Sheals, signed from Leigh this summer, was sent off on his first trip back to Hilton Park.
He was dismissed by Widnes referee David Campbell in the 36th minute for a high tackle on his ex-team-mate Andy Ruane.
But the Second Division battlers clinched a Lancashire Cup semi-final spot with the help of two touchdowns from winger Scott Ranson who took his tally to 13 in 14 matches since his arrival from Swinton last season.
RODRIGO'S RAINED OFF
CHRIS JUDGE
THE weather has put a real dampener on Saturday's Festival of British Racing at Ascot with some of its biggest stars ready to pull out.
The downpour that caused flooding in many areas of the country yesterday hit the Berkshire track and two inches of rain reduced the going to soft from good.
With such conditions Rodrigo de Triano is almost certain to miss the meeting's highlight, the Queen Elizabeth II Stakes, while Second Set and Brief Truce could also be absentees.
Top two-year-old Sayyedati is also considered doubtful for the Fillies' Mile.
But clerk of the course Nicholas Beaumont is still optimistic about an improvement.
‘I haven't conceded that we have lost Rodrigo de Triano yet.
I spoke to Peter Chapple-Hyam this morning and he told me he hadn't decided what to do.
Reluctant
‘The course dries very quickly and the ground is sure to be better on the old course.
We will have to wait and see.’
Chapple-Hyam has warned for some days that he is reluctant to risk Rodrigo de Triano, winner of the English and Irish 2,000 Guineas, on soft ground.
Second Set, whose disappointing fourth in the race last year was blamed on soft ground, could also be pulled out.
Hills pushed out his price from 8-1 to 14-1 yesterday and there were still no takers.
Irish challenger Brief Truce could also miss the race, though he proved he could handle the soft when chasing home All At Sea, who will love the ground, in the Prix du Moulin.
Hills cut Selkirk to 11-8 favourite from 13-8 and then offer 7-2 All At Sea (from 6-1) and Marling (from 3-1).
Marling has yet to encounter such conditions and trainer Geoff Wragg warned: ‘I will have to play it by ear but as long as it is only soft we should be all right.
However, if it gets bottomless then I would think everyone will be pulling out in hordes.’
Conditions
At Ascot today Two Left Feet should enjoy the conditions after an impressive victory on similar ground at Ripon.
His run at Haydock last time is best ignored as George Duffield got himself jammed in on the rails until too late.
ANGRY COLUMN
PETER SHAW
POOR old Neil Webb — forgotten but never forgiven.
He hasn't a chance of getting his wish and leaving Manchester United!
After the way Mark Robins has exposed Alex Ferguson's lack of judgment by shooting Norwich to the top of the Premier League, the Old Trafford boss will never dare risk a repeat with Webb.
And don't, in your snide comment, make the mistake of thinking I'm a Manchester City fan.
I've been a true Red for 30 years and more.
—
Would I do that?
Anyway who needs City fans with Reds like you?
Red raw
GRAEME Souness has ruined Liverpool.
The club that once prided itself on having so few injuries they could field the same team week in week out now has so many invalids they are lucky to have the same side two games running.
Worse still, injuries are offered as excuses for poor performances.
They never were under Shankly, Paisley, Fagan or Dalglish.
My bet is that Liverpool won't win anything this year and Souness will get the sack.
And the sooner the better!—
Ten out of ten, pal.
That's for your spite.
You get one out of ten for logic.
Empty box
I COULDN'T tell whether I was watching a world title fight or Come Dancing last weekend.
It is no wonder Chris Eubank can go 33 fights without defeat when he spends most of the bout running away.
His display against Tony Thornton was a travesty.
The American at least deserved a draw.
Eubank never stops telling us he hates boxing.
I have news for him: I hate watching him box.
—
So why bother?
Mind you, one look at Come Dancing and you'll soon be back to Eubank.
Ref-raff
BLACKBURN'S Kenny Dalglish and Joe Kinnear of Wimbledon are the latest Premier League managers to have a serious go at referees.
Before them was Howard Wilkinson and Alex Ferguson.
I am a referee in a junior league and can tell that ungrateful lot that even in such a comparative stress-free environment, it is not an easy job.
When managers have to make decisions, they have time on their side — and yet are not always right.
How would they fare if the decisions had to be made in split seconds?
Very badly is my verdict.
—
That's my verdict, too, pal.
Just as badly, in fact, as all the refs I have seen so far.
SURPRISE OFFER'S big-race warm up almost turned to disaster at Brighton yesterday today.
Richard Hannon's 1-8 favourite appeared ill at ease on the switchback track and scrambled home by the shortest of short heads from Troon.
Surprise Offer was running without blinkers and Hannon said: ‘He'll definitely wear them for his next race, the Cornwallis Stakes at Ascot.’
DON'T TELL THE TRUTH
Test chief's stark message to cricket
Bosses butcher Lamb!
CHRIS LANDER
ENGLISH cricket yesterday finally became the sport in which it is a crime to tell the truth.
The outrageous fine of £5,000 plus £1,000 costs imposed on England batsman Allan Lamb will act as the ultimate deterrent to every English professional cricketer who may want to speak out about some scandal, corruption or evil practice in their sport.
England cricketers have already been cowed into submission in recent days over discussing publicly the ‘Lambgate Affair’ which has rocked cricket.
Privately, they have backed Lamb and admired him for disclosing the Pakistanis' ball-scuffing skulduggery.
Now they will be scared rigid of stepping up and saying anything which could land them on the same mat upon which Lamb was so unfairly punished at Lord's yesterday.
A number of England players were horrified on hearing of the draconian sentence passed on Lamb — who has 28 days in which to lodge an appeal — as a top-up sanction following a fine and suspension from his county, Northants.
Disgusted
Their overall verdict on the high and mighty bunch of Test and County Cricket Board disciplinary committee men was ‘What a load of balls!’
They are disgusted with a decision which must kill off the all-important chance of exposing a form of cheating that has spread with alarming haste as bowlers find ways of getting the old ball to swing violently late.
Cricketers the world over, and England's highly-respected umpires in particular, were stunned after the TCCB more than doubled Lamb's original fine, which was already a maximum for a county committee to impose.
One player told me: ‘At the end of the day, you would have thought
Lambie had committed some form of cricketing treason instead of merely having the guts to reveal the Pakistanis’ ball-tampering trickery in an unauthorised Daily Mirror newspaper article.’
Another well-known cricketer said: ‘I wish I could let this appear under my name, but Lord knows what the Board would do with me!
It's a total farce that Lambie can be hit so hard a second time.
‘Cricket must now be the only sport in which you can be punished for the same offence twice and, who knows, maybe three times if he appeals!
‘You just have to wonder if those members of the disciplinary committee really care about where the game is going at international level.
‘Do they truly want to stamp out ball-gouging?
They must know it's been going on at domestic and international level for a long time.
‘We are aware that a number of incidents have been reported but sweet FA seems to have been done about it.’
There is one umpire itching to tell all about the drama of that momentous lunch interval during the Texaco Trophy one-day match at Lord's which sparked the biggest row in modern cricket.
John Hampshire and Ken Palmer, umpires on the day, are mystified as to why their official match report has not been made known.
And match referee Deryck Murray remains baffled as to why his report has been tucked away in some International Cricket Council file.
Board spokesman Ken Lawrence said: ‘Allan Lamb was in breach of his contract with Northampton, and also the England agreement which forbids comments about international matches for a minimum of two years without permission.’
Lamb's solicitor Alan Herd, who represented him at the 50-minute hearing, said: ‘Allan is very unhappy with the decision and is urgently considering an appeal to the Cricket Council.
‘I also want to point out we have been refused access to the match referee's and umpires’ reports as to the reasons for the change of ball on August 23.’
The great game of cricket is now in danger of becoming the sport in which everyone is frightened of telling the truth.
If they do, they know the price — ask Allan Lamb.
ALLAN PAYS HEAVY PRICE A stony-faced Allan Lamb leaves the hearing at Lord's yesterday.
He is considering an appeal against his £5,000 fine with £1,000 costs.
ALLAN PAYS HEAVY PRICE A stony-faced Allan Lamb leaves the hearing at Lord's yesterday.
He is considering an appeal against his £5,000 fine with £1,000 costs.
MIRROR SPORT, August 26
MIRROR SPORT, August 28
MIRROR SPORT, August 29
You're all gagged!
THE England squad for the controversial Texaco one-day internationals against Pakistan: Gooch, Stewart, Smith, Hick, Botham, Lewis, Fairbrother, DeFreitas, Reeve, Illingworth, Small, and Cork
Nothing like the Danes
EUROPEAN champions Denmark were held to a  goalless draw by Lithuania in a World Cup Group Three qualifier in Vilnius.
Midfielder Kim Christorfe missed a penalty for the Danes.
ITV deal on cards
FRANK WIECHULA
ITV could stage their own Snatch of the Day for FA Cup ties and England internationals.
A proposed £72 million deal between BSkyB and the FA is under threat and ITV could be the winners.
FA chief executive Graham Kelly did not want BSkyB to screen Paul Gascoigne's Lazio comeback last night for fear of poor gates at home.
But BSkyB took the FA to court.
Trevor East, executive producer for ITV Sport, said: ‘We are watching the situation.’
KELLY: Request
Well played
FRANK WIECHULA
ALLAN LAMB, hammered by the TCCB, is a hero with the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.
They rang us to reveal all the good work Lamb does for them — one of many messages of support for him.
Fund-raising director Patricia Feltham said: ‘In the middle of everything that's going on, Allan spent two hours on Monday helping with a promotional video.
He is most incredibly supportive.
‘Last year he organised a fund-raising match for us and it raised £51,000 net.
‘He turns up at absolutely everything we ask.
One morning he batted on to an unbeaten hundred.
‘He had a shower, changed, leaped on to a train and came straight to London for a 3pm charity gathering.
‘He's got a two-year-old son called Richard and they were told he had cystic fibrosis.
They had the most horrendous ten days waiting for the tests, only to find Richard hadn't got it.
‘Most people would have simply said ‘Thank God for that’ and done nothing more.
But not Allan.’
TV swoop
ITV are poised to cover the FA Cup and England internationals as a proposed £72 million deal between BSkyB and the FA is under threat.
Lindsey to the rescue
COLIN PRICE
ALLAN Lamb's day got off to the worst possible start as flooding in London forced a quick change of travel plans.
He had intended to go to Lord's by train — instead his wife Lindsey drove them from Northampton.
The ‘jury’ took 50 minutes to consider the evidence.
Chairman Eddie Slinger said: ‘The committee took the view that there had been a deliberate and flagrant breach of Board regulations which Mr Lamb admitted were designed not only for the benefit of the Board but all registered cricketers.
‘He is an experienced player who acknowledged that he was fully aware that under his contractual responsibilities he was forbidden to make unauthorised public statements.
‘The committee took into account his exemplary record, his contribution to the game, both with his county and nationally, and also the fine and suspension imposed by Northamptonshire.’
LINDSEY: Duty driver
NORWAY ALERT
Norway 2, Holland 1
NIGEL CLARKE
ENGLAND will desperately need Paul Gascoigne's skills for the World Cup qualifier against Norway at Wembley next month.
Little Norway stunned Holland here with a shock win and they now have four points from two games after already beating San Marino 10-0.
It was their greatest result since they beat England 2-1 here nine years ago.
And it left boss Graham Taylor saying: ‘This was no fluke and they worked hard for each other.
But I am not going to go overboard — I expect us to beat them.’
Kjetil Rekdal's penalty gave Norway the lead but Dennis Bergkamp stroked in an equaliser 30 seconds later.
Goeran Soerloth smashed the winner 11 minutes from time after a Ronald Koeman blunder.
Allan Lamb and the DAILY MIRROR WE'LL PAY HIS £5,000 CRICKET FINE
A SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
At least he'll get justice from us
MIKE LANGLEY
THE Daily Mirror will pay the £5,000 fine imposed on Allan Lamb.
Our offer was made promptly and proudly yesterday to honour Lamb's bravery in ripping aside a cover-up which is shielding cricket cheats.
But our cheque won't be handed over meekly to the Test and County Cricket Board.
Never that!
We'd rather fling the money in their faces as a mark of defiance by our readers.
The Mirror cannot kow-tow before a disciplinary tribunal whose feudal justice was dispensed from the appropriate setting of a committee room tucked between a Real Tennis court and the Lord's museum.
Real Tennis is a high-class game even older than the Long Room's most ancient inmate.
Henry VIII played it.
If only bluff King Hal had been around yesterday, I think the tribunal might have co-opted him to pronounce the sentence they'd love to carry out on Lamb: ‘Off with his head!’.
They were icily formal with Lamb yesterday.
Not a glimmer of warmth or admiration indicated that the man before them was actually one of the only two England batsmen to hit six centuries against West Indies.
The other is Sir Colin Cowdrey who, as president of the International Cricket Council, has been playing the deadest of bats lately.
He has been stonewalling throughout the whole month since Lamb told the world, through the Daily Mirror, how the Pakistanis scuff and scrape and scoop at an old ball until it swings as though it was factory fresh.
I can't see that Cowdrey knew what was going on among the fielders while Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram bowled.
But if he didn't find out, he's out of touch and shouldn't be in his high office.
Everybody else in cricket claims to have been aware and says so readily.
But they always do so anonymously because every playing contract contains a self-signed gag.
Lamb alone tore that stopper from his mouth so the fans could learn, authoritatively and from the middle, exactly how Pakistan had perfected their series-winning delivery.
The law break!
Now he's been fined a record £7,800 for telling the truth — £5,000 and £1,000 costs yesterday, in addition to an earlier £1,800 by Northants.
Nit-picking legalists — and how that tribunal looked loaded with them — will say the two fines for one offence are not because Lamb exposed Pakistan.
They will say Lamb is being roasted for breach of contract.
Maybe there are some people gullible enough to believe that.
But you won't find Daily Mirror readers among their ranks.
We know, don't we, that Lamb hasn't been fined so heavily for breaching a harsh contract.
He has been fined for exposing a wrong that England and Pakistan seemed happier keeping under the carpet.
And I'll think better of cricket only if the Daily Mirror's cheque for £5,000 goes to charity.
SIR COLIN: Stonewalling
Rambo ready
Charles Fawcus
RAMBO'S HALL rolled back the years yesterday and now he's spot on for another Cambridgeshire bid.
Trainer Jeremy Glover landed his biggest win when Rambo's Hall took the 1989 cavalry charge at Newmarket and his confidence is sky high again.
‘Everything we've planned with this horse has come off.
We set out to win that Cambridgeshire and we set out to win the two races at Haydock which came before today,’ he smiled.
‘But the horse has certainly had a few adventures in the meantime.
We sold him for £100,000 to race in America and bought him back for £25,000 when he did nothing over there.
‘Then he got injured in a field and had to be off for a year, but everything seems to be going well now.
Newmarket is the next stop and he's not rated much higher than when he won the race before.’
Corals were so impressed they cut Rambo's Hall to 7-1 joint favourite with the horse Glover rates his biggest threat — last year's winner Mellottie.
Rambo's Hall provided Jeremy with, his first Ascot win but he's hopeful of doubling that with Doulab's Image tomorrow —‘He'll love the softer ground.’
Ascot's Cesarewitch trial didn't provide many clues for Newmarket, but it did cause top jockeys Pat Eddery and Michael Roberts some anxious moments.
They were pulled into the stewards room after the race as officials took a long look at an incident early in the straight.A ban would have ruled the pair out of the Cambridgeshire and the Arc, but no action was taken.
Roberts won the race on Bold Resolution, who is not entered for Newmarket, but last year's shock Ces winner Go South didn't run badly in fourth.
Luca Comani mopped up the Blue Seal Stakes for the sixth time in seven years with promising newcomer Queen's View.
GLOUCESTER trainer Nigel Twiston-Davies took six horses up to Perth, and five of them have won — including four out of four yesterday.
Emily's Star, Sweet Duke, Grange Blake, and Petosku combined to reward Twiston-Davies’ new Scottish fan club with a handsome 454-1 accumulator.
Celtic Prince had won the day before, and only Twist 'N' Scu (eighth in a bumper) failed to do the business 
SURREY CHEATS FINED £1,000
Cricket's rocked by another ball-tampering scandal
3-year saga of shame
COLIN PRICE
WAQAR YOUNIS'S county Surrey have been fined £1,000 for repeated ball-tampering over a three-year period.
The Test and County Cricket Board acted only hours after fining Allan Lamb five times as much for exposing Pakistan as ball-gouging cheats.
Spokesman Ken Lawrence said: ‘We are determined to stamp out what little ball-tampering there is in the domestic game.’
A four-man panel imposed the heaviest fine in their power — but it will only be paid if Surrey's bowlers are involved in another incident within two years.
The flash-point that finally forced Lord's to act came last month while Waqar was away on tour with Pakistan.
But the world's most devastating fast bowler played in two other matches when umpires reported Surrey to Lord's under Law 42.5 which exclusively governs unfair play.
Struggle
He destroyed Yorkshire's second innings at Guildford with six for 40 last year but struggled to break through against Gloucestershire in a drawn match at Cheltenham in 1990.
Last night Surrey skipper Alec Stewart, the England vice-captain, who appeared before the tribunal, said: ‘I have absolutely no comment to make, on the instructions of Surrey.’
Lord's secretly warned Surrey in writing at the end of the 1991 season.
But they ran into trouble again during a 72-run defeat by Leicestershire at The Oval last month.
Umpires Barry Dudleston and John Holder — the man who reported England for tampering with the ball on the same ground against West Indies last year — changed the ball because it had been suspiciously scuffed.
Stewart, Surrey coach Geoff Arnold and secretary David Seward were all summoned to Lord's for a disciplinary hearing.
Donald Carr, chairman of the panel, said: ‘Surrey were given a warning last year for repeated offences and that is why the matter was reported to the disciplinary committee.’
Lawrence added: ‘It must be stressed that we do not see ball-tampering in our domestic game as a serious problem, but we are determined to stamp it out.
Message
‘There is nothing that cannot be coped with by the co-operation of captains and the vigilance of the umpires.
‘I am quite sure that the message has gone home to the counties and their bowlers.
‘And after all the controversy involving Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis this summer, Lancashire and Surrey will be well aware that people are going to be looking at their performances.
‘But I can assure them our umpires will be quite even-handed about checking all bowlers.’
Surrey's problems started during the 1990 drawn game at Cheltenham when umpires Chris Balderstone and Barrie Leadbeater changed the ball because it had been tampered with.
During the Guildford Festival week in 1991 umpires Don Oslear and Bob White considered the ball had once again been tampered with.
But they didn't change it because the only one of similar age available to them had been used in the previous match when Waqar took seven for 87 against Gloucestershire.
And the umpires considered that to be in ‘too poor a condition’ to use.
One leading umpire told me: ‘At last it seems the Board are ready to back up the umpires in this matter.’
Deal
Waqar recently signed a three-year deal to stay at Surrey, estimated to be worth around £50,000 a year with bonuses.
His Pakistan team-mate, paceman Wasim Akram, re-signed for Lancashire in a five-year deal worth around £250,000.
Both have vigorously denied tampering with the ball.
STEWART: Skipper
OSLEAR: Umpire
LENNOX RAISES ALARM
Lewis ready to cash in
IAN GIBB
LENNOX LEWIS has got a £250,000 sponsorship deal to boost his hopes of destroying Razor Ruddock.
Anti-car-theft company Nightstick believe they will help steer Lewis through his world heavyweight final eliminator at London's Earls Court on October 31 — and help make the £4m battle a sell-out.
Lewis's manager Frank Maloney claims that 5,000 tickets have already gone with 7,000 still to be shifted.
And the fighter revealed he's shelling out £20,000 for sparring partners Mike Weaver and Tony Tubbs, both former world champions.
Lennox also hit back at critics, who claim he should have avoided the dangerous Ruddock and hidden himself away for a world title shot, snapping: ‘I know the British fight fans will respect me for going in against the best instead of facing an easy touch.
‘That's what Riddick Bowe did by beating Pierre Coetzer and now Frank Bruno is getting all brave by daring to face Coetzer.’
Meanwhile, Herol Graham is contemplating quitting after his shock British middleweight title defeat by Bradford's Frank Grant.
The Sheffield Bomber said: ‘I'll have to have a long, serious think about my future — but I'll make the decision, on my own.
And it will be final.’
BBC commentator Harry Carpenter was under fire last night after he said Fidel Castro Smith had in fact beaten victor Henry Wharton in their Commonwealth super-middleweight showdown — a decision that also had Bruno up in arms.
But  promoter Mickey Duff said: ‘If we're talking retirement it should be 5 to 4 ON Carpenter going before Graham!’
LEWIS: Cash boost
BOT BACK
MARTIN RICHARDS
WIGAN'S top points scorer Frano Botica returns after injury for tonight's big TV clash with Widnes.
And Test winger Martin Offiah will also be back after a two-match absence if he comes through a fitness test on his damaged hamstring this morning.
Botica is at stand-off with Shaun Edwards continuing at scrum-half.
Widnes have big injury problems with Jonathan Davies, John Devereux, Tony Myler and Richard Eyres all rated very doubtful.
But Bobby Goulding is back at scrum-half after a two-match suspension.
Wigan will meet Oldham in the semi-finals of the Greenalls Lancashire Cup if they beat Swinton in the second round next Tuesday.
In the second semi-final Salford travel to the winners of next Wednesday's tie between holders St Helens and Widnes.
Wallace in from the cold
Fergie's U-turn
KEN LAWRENCE
DANNY WALLACE has ended his Old Trafford nightmare and is poised to prove it against Queen's Park Rangers tomorrow.
Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson revealed last night he is so impressed by Wallace's comeback that he is considering making room for him in his team's title push.
Wallace scored a wonder goal in the Coca Cola Cup clash at Brighton this week — his first strike for the club since December 15, 1990.
Wallace, signed for £1.2million from Southampton, last played a League game in May 1991 and until the last fortnight it seemed his future lay away from Manchester.
But he returned to the side in last week's UEFA Cup match with Torpedo Moscow and his performance against Brighton finally convinced Fergie that the little winger still has a part to play.
Wallace was only being used at Brighton because Fergie wanted to give his regular stars a rest.
But the days of Wallace being only a bit part player are coming to an end.
Ferguson revealed: ‘I have been so impressed by Danny's form that I am now giving serious consideration about playing him in the League team.
I haven't made up my mind just yet, indeed, I don't quite know what to do.
‘But Danny has shown through his attitude and his skill that he deserves to be in the side and he is under serious consideration for inclusion against QPR.
‘I was ready to take £600,000 for Danny during the summer but no one came in for him.
‘Thank goodness for that, he would have been the sale of the century.’
Wallace's attempts to establish himself at United have been hindered by the player's desperation to become a Stretford End hero as Fergie explained: ‘He tried too hard to make himself popular.
‘He should have realised he had nothing to prove and now, thankfully, he does.
‘He has finally come to terms with being a United player.’
WALLACE could return to United's League starting line-up for the first time in 16 months.
Ticked off
BERNIE LOVETT
THE guilty clubs in the FA Cup ticket probe were named yesterday by trading standards officers.
The officers estimate touts made at least £138,000 profit from fans at Wembley for the Liverpool-Sunderland final, with an average mark-up of £115 per ticket.
One Scottish-based supporter paid £750 for two £45 tickets, originally allocated to Brighton.
Liverpool chief trading standards officer Peter Mawdsley said: ‘A fundamental change is still needed in the allocation system to give the finalists substantially more tickets.’
The clubs named are: Southampton, Newcastle, Luton, Tottenham, Bristol Rovers, Barnet, Brighton, Liverpool and Sunderland.
But Liverpool were congratulated for their efforts to minimise touting from their 26,000 allocation.
Fox in a hole
NEATH have promised to back Welsh star Kevin Fox after the 23-year-old forward was yesterday revealed to have failed a drugs test.
Flanker Fox tested positive for the banned stimulant ephedrine following Neath's opening league game against Pontypridd on September 5.
The Wales Under- 19 cap seems certain to receive a minimum three-month ban when he goes before the Welsh Rugby Union next month.
But Neath are backing the player's insistence that he merely took a cold remedy.
BLANKED
HUGH JAMIESON
STRUGGLING Nottingham Forest yesterday lost out in the chase for Napoli sweeper Laurent Blanc.
Blanc, 27, the French star wanted by Forest boss Brian Clough, has decided to join Nimes in his home country.
And while Clough misses out again, it is understood that Blanc has a contract that will take him to French drama club Marseille in the summer.
Clough has been left kicking his heels in his search to replace England defender Des Walker, who left on a £1.5 million cut-price deal to Italian giants Sampdoria in the summer.
And as Forest, with just one point from seven League games, prepare for tomorrow's trip to Chelsea, they have extended striker Gary Bannister's loan to a third month.
Derby last night signed former Ajax midfielder Richard Goulooze for £100,000 from Dutch Second Division side Heerenveen.
Spink stays
ASTON VILLA are set to offer a new contract to goalkeeper Nigel Spink — six months after he thought his career at the club might be over.
Spink, who has been first choice since regaining the No 1 spot from Les Sealey in March, said: ‘There was a time when my future seemed in jeopardy but things have turned my way again.’
THE VOICE OF DAILY MIRROR SPORT
MIKE LANGLEY
From bad to nurse
FOREST directors wouldn't be human if they didn't relish Brian Clough stewing in his own juice.
He once called them ‘a shower’.
He seized several chances to disparage board members.
He's also said: ‘I've never been in love with directors.
A certain percentage are nobodies who want to become somebodies on my back.’
Now bottom of the table, Brian is in their power, even though chairman Fred Reacher swears: ‘He's always had our full backing and there is no danger of that changing.’
So I liken Forest policy to this rhyme: ‘Always keep tight hold of nurse for fear of getting someone worse.’
CLOUGH: Backing
BLOW THEM ALL TO BITS
CAN'T we have a bit of a rest from ‘bit?’
It's become the most overworked and useless word in commentary.
Bit of a player, bit of a knock, bit of confusion, bit of dissent, bit of a chance, bit of indecision.
Bits to the bitter end!
I remember the days when bit meant a bird, but not the sort you'd find in the same cage as the sick parrot.
DURIE KO
NEIL SILVER
TOTTENHAM striker Gordon Durie will be out of action for two weeks after being rushed to hospital last night for an operation on his left knee.
It also means that the Scottish international's disciplinary hearing due to take place at the Football Association this afternoon has been called off.
Durie was scheduled to fight an FA charge of misconduct after referee Dermot Gallagher alleged he feigned being head-butted in a confrontation with Andy Pearce in a game against Coventry on August 18.
He was booked by Gallagher for ungentlemanly conduct after falling to the ground as he squared up to Pearce.
Durie was rushed into hospital for the operation within hours of the Tottenham party — minus Durie — returning from Wednesday night's friendly against Lazio in Rome.
Bruce earns recall
CLOWN prince goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar returns to the Liverpool side against Wimbledon tomorrow as manager Graeme Souness tries to stop the rot at Anfield.
Grobbelaar's recall means David James will be axed as he falls victim to Liverpool's worst start to a season for 39 years.
But Souness last night stressed that James is not being made a scapegoat for Liverpool's disastrous start, nor for the eight goals they have conceded in the last two games.
Souness said: ‘Bruce will play because I feel the time is right.
‘I feel there is a need for experience in all positions and I'm not blaming James for anything other than the first goal against Chesterfield.
‘I've explained it to him and it's not fair on him being exposed to some of our defending in recent weeks.’
Andy move
DURHAM have signed West Indian paceman Anderson Cummins as their overseas player for next season.
Cummins, 26, who has played in 16 one-day internationals but has yet to make his Test debut, has been offered a one-year contract.
He will replace Dean Jones, who is set to tour England with the Australians next season.
Cummins was the West Indies' leading wicket-taker in the World Cup and he has been selected for their squad to tour Australia this winter.
IRON MAN
MATT HUGHES
IAN IRONSIDE'S reward for his defiant display for Middlesbrough against Newcastle is a first team call-up tomorrow against Aston Villa.
Boro boss Lennie Lawrence said: ‘The lad has arrived as a Premier League goalkeeper.’
Ironside, 28, grabbed his chance because of an injury to Steve Pears and Millwall wouldn't release on-loan Brian Horne to play in Wednesday night's goalless cup-tie.
Ironside, who produced a string of spectacular saves, said: ‘That's the best performance I've put up in front of the television cameras and such a big crowd.’
John Byrne returns from a two-week lay-off for Sunderland — who have scored only three League goals this season — at home to Bristol Rovers.
And Byrne had a message of hope for boss Malcolm Crosby: ‘I'm not worried.‘
KING JACK
MARTIN RICHARDS
AUSSIE veteran Gary Jack is the still the king of full-backs, says Sheffield Eagles boss Gary Hetherington.
The 31-year-old former Balmain star rolled back the years on Wednesday night with a scintillating display against Bradford Northern to help lift the Eagles into the Yorkshire Cup semi-finals for the first time.
‘If there's a better full- back in the world at the moment I want see him said Hetherington.’
Jack's magnificent start with the Eagles could win him a dramatic recall for Australia in next month's World Cup final against Great Britain.
d Draw for the Yorkshire Cup semi-finals: Sheffield Eagles v Hull; Featherstone v Wakefield (October 7).
Puffed
ENGLAND boss Graham Taylor has admitted for the first time that his team flopped in the European Championship finals because they weren't fit enough.
Taylor said: ‘We have to face up to the fact that we're falling behind other countries who do things regarding fitness as a matter of course.’
Can can
ERIC Cantona last night threw Leeds a European Cup lifeline by declaring that he could be fit for the second leg against Stuttgart at Elland Road next week.
The French goal ace had feared being out of the game for two months after hobbling out of the 3-0 first leg defeat with a damaged hamstring.
Al's in
SHEFFIELD
United keeper Simon Tracey was last night ruled out for a fortnight as understudy Alan Kelly mounted a takeover bid.
Kelly was due to step down after covering for the suspended Tracey against Arsenal last week.
But Tracey is likely to miss three more games with a shoulder injury.
YOU MUST BE MAD!
Come on Graham, this is no time to ditch our best hope
Give Paul a go
NIGEL CLARKE
GRAHAM TAYLOR needs Paul Gascoigne now more than at any time in his two-year reign as international manager.
And he must be mad to want to shunt him into the sidings before throwing him an England shirt again.
Not to risk Gazza until the World Cup-tie against San Marino in February, shows Taylor does not yet understand just what the £5.5million star can do for English football.
I know Gazza is not yet fully fit.
But England need his creativity, his inspiration, and, most of all, his sheer blinding brilliance.
Of course it would be a gamble to throw him back in so early, but it is a gamble that has worked before.
Tottenham played Gazza in the FA Cup semi-final against Arsenal, in 1991, one incredible month after a double hernia operation.
He scored the first goal that put Spurs in the final, inspired them to victory, then went off after 60 minutes…job done.
Confidence
Gazza could do the same for his country if Taylor was prepared to take the risk.
But he isn't — and how England need the kind of driving confidence that sent Spurs into battle against the doomed Gunners.
Gascoigne went up to each player in the dressing-room before the kick-off, roughly shook him, and demanded he die for the club and the cause.
Taylor says he does not want to get involved in emotional situations — but football is about emotion, and it disappoints me that Taylor does not want to show his.
Gazza should now be encouraged, not discouraged, and then disillusioned to find out that he is to be overlooked until next February.
Give Gazza belief, and he'll hand over his heart and soul.
England's most endearing footballer badly wants to belong again, and I still believe a half-fit Gascoigne would offer Taylor more in mid-field than has been dished up lately.
Does the England manager need to be reminded how sterile England were against Spain?
How we were outplayed by Brazil, Hungary and Czechoslovakia?
And what happened in all three games of the European Championship?
Isn't it worth giving Gazza a game to find out just what he can do — just what he is capable of producing?
I believe it would be far in excess of anything England have laid before the public.
The Norwegians won't be easy at Wembley.
They are strongest where England are weakest — in midfield.
They will come with six World Cup points already in the bag.
Before they sensationally beat Holland on Wednesday night, they had already stuck ten goals past the no-hopers of San Marino.
And in two weeks’ time, just before their Wembley date, they play San Marino again, so they will be World Cup Group Two leaders with three victories before England have even begun their campaign.
Another defeat, or even a draw for Taylor, will leave him with so much work to do to close the gap.
Taylor has been guilty before of overlooking the impact Gazza can have on a game.
He left him out of the match against the Republic of Ireland in Dublin two years ago.
It was a decision that left one Irish player saying: ‘Can we have him for just 20 minutes?
That would be long enough.’
Taylor needs Gascoigne, England need him too.
I believe Taylor is misreading the situation yet again by delaying his comeback.
He is a great player, a mood player, and more use to his country for 20 minutes than most are for 90.
Lazio are happy with his fitness — so go on Graham…
I dare you.
Pick him, and play him.
Give him the first half, and see what he would do.
You love England, you above all want us to be successful.
Not every decision can be pre-planned to the last detail — we know you are good at that.
But now perhaps it's time, just for once, to let your heart rule your head.
Gazza won't let you down.
SPANISH HOLIDAY GRAHAM TAYLOR took Gazza to Spain two weeks ago ‘just for the trip’— but now the Lazio star is fit he still won't figure in the England starting line-up.
Ellery's hope
ELLERY Hanley hopes to make his Leeds comeback in Sunday's clash with Bradford Northern after missing two games with hamstring trouble.
GAZZA IS OUT
Graham Taylor's amazing verdict
No way he can face Norway
NIGEL CLARKE
GRAHAM TAYLOR yesterday admitted he won't give Paul Gascoigne his international return against Norway next month.
Instead the England manager will keep his jewel in the crown under wraps for another five months.
So England must do without Gazza in the vital World Cup qualifying match at Wembley on October 14, and also against Turkey on November 18.
But Gascoigne last night pleaded for the chance to come to the rescue of his country against Norway.
Gazza will make his debut in Italian soccer for his new team Lazio within the next eight days, and is raring to go for club and country.
Taylor, after the abysmal European championship, again flopped in Spain and cannot afford to foul up against Norway, who beat Holland 2-1 on the night Gazza made his comeback against Spurs.
Boost
Gazza said yesterday: ‘Hopefully I will be ready for England.
I want to be in perfect condition for the match against Norway and I think I will.
‘I was pleased that Lawrie McMenemy watched me and said good things about me, that's another boost.
‘I shall have to wait and see what the situation is with Lazio before I know about England.
‘If I am invited I shall be delighted to go with them and then I will see if I play or not.
‘I'm happy with my fitness.
There's been no reaction to my match and I was pleased with my performance.
‘I've not played for a long time and to get a goal in the first ten minutes was incredible.
Even though it was billed as a friendly, Tottenham didn't treat it that way.’
But England boss Taylor said: ‘I want to bring him back when the time is right.
If we are sensible it ought to be against San Marino in February.’
Gazza will be in the squad to face Norway, but Taylor goes on: ‘I would like him to be involved, just as he was in Spain.’
Then the Geordie star travelled to Santander and trained with the team but watched England's defeat from a touchline seat.
Taylor believes he must protect Gascoigne just at a time when he seems to have shaken off the horrific knee injury that has kept him out of football for 17 months.
And he says: ‘I think it is my job and my duty to protect that talent.
Bring any player back and he does not perform and people have short memories.
They will have a go at him.
‘If I felt there was a part that he could play and he felt he could play it — and if it was reasonable to ask him — I would bear that in mind.
‘But I believe it would be unfair on him after being out for so long to go straight back in and do a job.
‘People say play a half-fit Gazza, or give him a game for just a quarter of a match.
But that is an emotional statement, and I must make sure I don't get carried away by emotional things like that.
‘How can we just throw in a lad who has not played for so long?
We qualified for the European championship without him, so we don't have to take risks.’
Gascoigne marked his first match for Lazio against Spurs by scoring after ten minutes against his old team-mates.
He badly wants to play, and believes that once he has a League match with Lazio under his belt he will be ready to give his heart to England.
Club boss Dino Zoff said he would decide whether Gazza plays on Sunday an hour or two before the game.
Taylor said: ‘I shall not be going to Italy to see him again.
Lawrie McMenemy was in Rome and I shall be talking to him about it.’
McMENEMY: Impressed
I'M THE BOSS GRAHAM Taylor is prepared to make his tough decision
Splash out on the sea
CHARLES FAWCUS
ALL AT SEA has the name and the conditions to cause a big splash at Ascot today.
All the rain she needs has fallen on the Queen's racetrack in the past week to make jockey Pat Eddery set for a much better day than last year.
Then the Champion got banned for his ride on Midnight Air who was thrown out of first place after the Fillies Mile.
‘That was a bad day, but I'm hopeful of a lot better luck on All At Sea.
She is a different filly when the going is in her favour and everything was just right when she beat Brief Truce in France.’
All At Sea has run well against the best when things were against her as well— second to User Friendly in the Oaks, second to Ruby Tiger at Goodwood and second to Rodrigo De Triano at York.
Last year's winner Selkirk has to be a big threat again following his fine Goodwood win.
‘It never stopped raining all that day so he won't mind the ground,’ said Ian Balding.
But Geoff Wragg, trainer of Marling who beat Selkirk in the Sussex Stakes, is much more concerned.
‘I'll walk the course before racing, but we don't want much more rain,’ he said.
Marling was an unlucky second to Hatoof in the I, 000 Guineas and Hatoof ran third behind All At Sea at Longchamp last time.
Another soft ground specialist, Green Lane, looks set for his fourth win in a row in the Krug Trophy.
His trainer Roger Charlton trains a smart youngster in Inchinor who kept up his unbeaten record at Ascot yesterday.
HOPEFUL…
Pat Eddery
UNBEATEN French juvenile Zieten is poised to join the line-up for the Middle Park Stakes at Newmarket on Thursday.
Andre Fabre's colt was supplemented yesterday for the Group One contest over six furlongs.
Owner Sheikh Mohammed won the race with the Fabre-trained Lycius two years ago and last year Lion Cavern finished runner-up to Rodrigo de Triano.
PUT UP OR SHUT UP!
Eastwood in barney over title showdown
Hoko ready for business
IAN GIBB
THE featherweight domestic dream fight is on after a ‘put-up or shut-up’ challenge from Barney Eastwood to Frank Warren.
Eastwood, manager of Kirkby's WBC world champion Paul Hodkinson, is ready to talk business with Warren, promoter of WBO champ Colin McMillan of Barking.
Eastwood moved yesterday on Warren's latest £425,000 offer, with each fighter getting £200,000 and a £25,000 bonus for the winner.
Faxed
Belfast fight boss Eastwood revealed: ‘It's all systems go — I have faxed Frank Warren to say that Paul Hodkinson is prepared to fight Colin McMillan in November.
‘I have asked Warren to lodge £50,000, non-returnable, with the British Boxing Board of Control by close of business next Tuesday if he is serious about promoting the fight.
‘If and when that is done we can sit down and talk about getting the fight on.
‘This would undoubtedly be a great domestic fight.’
It all gives added importance to McMillan's WBO title defence tonight at London's Olympia against Colombian Ruben Dario Palacio, and Hoko is travelling down from Liverpool to watch.
There will be some red tape to cut through as Hodkinson is due to defend the WBC title against mandatory number one challenger Kevin Kelley of the USA.
But Eastwood said: ‘I am sure we can come to an arrangement whereby Kelley steps aside for a while.
‘Also, the WBC don't have McMillan in their current top ten, so something would have to be done there.
‘The WBC are not interested in a unification fight with the WBO but I don't see any problems as it can be a simple defence of Paul's WBC title.’
Eastwood was concerned that no one should think Hodkinson was dodging McMillan.
‘For people to say we were scared is nonsense,’ he said.
Impressive
Warren responded yesterday by saying: ‘As soon as I have received official notice from Eastwood we will do what is necessary to get the fight on.
It sounds like good news.’
First of all, McMillan must deal with tough-nut Palacio, and do an impressive job to launch the Hoko clash.
It shouldn't be beyond Britain's most brilliant stylist, who hand-picked Palacio from the WBO's top ten.
The 30-year-old Palacio used to fight for coins in the streets of Medellin and was good enough to fight for the WBA super-bantamweight crown two years ago, when he claimed he was robbed.
Fellow countryman Luis Mendoza got away with a draw — but in the return Palacio was halted in the third round.
Since then it's been almost all downhill with another four defeats in his next five fights, three inside the distance.
Palacio has won the last two, but I doubt whether he has much ambition left to extend McMillan past the eighth round.
Colin resents the notion that he doesn't carry a big punch and this could be a chance for him to try to prove otherwise as Palacio admits to having been knocked out four times in his 58-fight career.
Sheffield's Fidel Castro Smith has been given a reward for going so close to beating Henry Wharton in their exciting super-middleweight fight at Leeds United's Elland Road this week.
Loser
Smith and virtually the whole TV audience thought he should have retained his British title and taken Wharton's crown, but was adjudged the loser by half a point.
Wharton's manager Mickey Duff declined the chance to fight Italian Vicenzo Nardiello for the vacant European title, so Smith has jumped in to take his chance.
COLIN McMILLAN (left) squares up to tonight's opponent Ruben Palacio, whom Mac must deal with before he worries about Paul Hodkinson
HODKINSON: Crunch
EASTWOOD: Move
Catch us if you can says Mike
HUGH JAMIESON
NORWICH manager Mike Walker doesn't believe his team can win the Premier League — but last night he vowed the Canaries would fight beak and claw to stay top.
Norwich go to second-placed Coventry today in a surprise top of the table clash and Walker said: ‘We are in front and it's up to us stay there.
‘As I've said before, it's not really realistic to expect us to win the league but the others have to try to catch us first.
‘If we can stay at or near the top until Christmas, then our chances get even better and we can certainly expect to finish in the top six at least.
‘It gives me a lot of pleasure to be top but the fact that everybody is surprised is disappointing.’
Meanwhile Coventry boss Bobby Gould has used a touch of ‘pure genius’ to prepare his players for the match.
With the Sky Blues aiming to overtake Norwich, Gould took his team out for pint or two of Guinness!
He joked: ‘It was for medicinal purposes, you understand.
‘We had just played two games in three days, so I had the players in for a hot bath and a massage before taking them for a couple of pints of Guinness.
‘The locals were gobsmacked when us lot trooped in!’
Like Walker, Gould is adamant that his team's form isn't just a flash in the pan.
‘I know what a lot of people are thinking.
They sneer and think it won't last,’ he said.
‘Well, we've already had TV exposure and it's created a lot of confidence here.
‘We've also earned respect from fellow professionals — just like
Norwich — and it's good to see it happening.’
WALKER: Fighter
Scarlet fever!
LLANELLI will become the first Welsh club to earn match receipts of £100,000 when the Heineken League leaders take on champions Swansea today.
The Scarlets are expecting a capacity 14,500 crowd to bring in around £70,000.
Television income and match sponsorship will add at least a further £30,000 to the day's takings.
Coventry draw on a touch of genius
HUGH JAMIESON
COVENTRY manager Bobby Gould used a touch of ‘pure genius’ to prepare his players for today's top-of-the-table clash with Norwich.
With the Sky Blues set to overtake the Canaries if they win at Highfield Road, Gould took his team down to the local for pint of two of Guinness!
He joked: ‘It was for medicinal purposes, you understand.
We had just played two games in three days, so I had the players in for a hot bath and a massage before taking them for a couple of pints of Guinness.
‘I don't know what the landlord thought, but the locals were gobsmacked when us lot trooped in!’
Gould is obviously delighted by his team's form and convinced it's no flash in the pan.
‘I know what a lot of people are thinking.
They sneer and think it won't last,’ he said.
‘Well, we've already had TV exposure and it's created a lot of confidence here.
‘We've also earned respect from fellow professionals — just like Norwich — and it's good to see it happening.’
Stan's threat
BARNET chairman Stan Flashman has vowed he will ban any fans caught criticising him on the terraces.
In an astonishing outburst on the Barnet Clubcall line, Flashman said: ‘I was surprised at the stupidity of people having a go at me.
I can tell them they will never, ever return to Barnet while I am chairman if they are captured.’
Ray puts Rangers on Red alert
FRANK WIECHULA
RAY WILKINS knows old club Manchester United will be all out for revenge today after Queens Park Rangers effectively cost them the title last year.
Rangers' stunning 4-1 upset win at Old Trafford on New Year's Day was a demoralising set-back, and Alex Ferguson's championship hopes eventually bit the dust.
Now Rangers face the backlash in a top-five clash at Old Trafford today, with evergreen skipper Wilkins, 36, saying: ‘I thought they'd have bounced back after that defeat.
‘But United didn't, and looking back it was just the start of their slide.
‘I've been in that sort of situation before, sitting in a dressing- room after losing to a team you've been expected to beat.
‘It's not a nice feeling and I know what United's war cry will be: ‘Let's give them what they gave to us’.’
After an awkward start United have shown title form to move into fourth spot, headed by surprise sides Norwich, Coventry and Blackburn.
But Wilkins believes their success has been merited: ‘The League table is not upside down.
The teams up there at the top are there on merit.
‘Now it's up to the so-called bigger clubs to make their move,’ he said.
Injury-hit Rangers could have debutant England right-back David Bardsley back after a three-match absence with an ankle injury.
He faces a late fitness test, as does left-back Clive Wilson (leg), midfielder Simon Barker (groin) and striker Gary Penrice (knee).
But key central defender Alan McDonald is out after being released from hospital with bruised kidneys.
WILKINS: Big test
LAKE LUCK
KEN LAWRENCE
PAUL LAKE'S girl-friend has flown to America to be with the Manchester City star thanks to a Maine Road whip-round.
The City players collected almost £1,000 to enable Lisa Johnson to join Lake in Los Angeles where he is recovering from a transplant operation on his knee.
Lake flew to the States last week for an operation he hopes will save his career and underwent the same surgery as John Salako of QPR and Ian Durrant of Rangers.
And Lake's recovery will be boosted by the arrival of Lisa, who has booked into an hotel close to the Los Angeles clinic where Lake is recovering.
City manager Peter Reid said: ‘The idea came from the players and I think it's a magnificent gesture.
‘Even the youngsters insisted on putting what they could afford into the kitty.’
DON'T WORRY YOU'RE NOT GOING TO DIE
United ace reveals his ordeal over brain illness fear
That's what Lee was told by the doctor
KEN LAWRENCE
LEE SHARPE last night relived the anguish of discovering he had a disease which he feared could not only end his career — but kill him.
The Manchester United star was diagnosed as having meningitis and is only now starting to battle back to full fitness after having the fright of his young life.
Sharpe was suffering from viral meningitis, less dangerous than the full-blown illness.
And his recovery will prove to all sufferers that the disease can be cured.
But, speaking about his shattering experience for the first time, the England winger admits he feared the worst.
Sharpe, now hoping to put his nightmare behind him, told how he froze when doctors gave him their devastating diagnosis.
‘Every time you hear about meningitis you think about the brain and that you have a big problem,’ said Sharpe.
‘When I heard the verdict from the doctors it was a case of panic.
I thought ‘People die from that!’’
Specialists are still not sure how Sharpe contracted the disease, but the United star believes there is a connection between his illness and a summer holiday in Greece.
He said: ‘I went to the island of Kos with some mates and at the same time as I was being ill some of my mates were having headaches and feeling ill.
‘I just seemed to get the worst of it.’
Sharpe's problems began after only two days of pre-season training last July.
He takes up the story:
‘I got home and had the sensation of pins and needles up my left side which affected my face, tongue, leg and arm.
‘I felt partly paralysed.
 Everything felt numb.
‘The sensation lasted 15-20 minutes and came through my body like a wave.
‘I thought it was food poisoning because I had prepared fish which I had not cooked properly and when the doctor arrived he thought the same way.
‘Next morning I felt just as bad.
I could not keep food or fluids down and when the symptoms did not go after a couple of days they took me to the hospital and put me on a drip.’
Sharpe was released a few days later, but there were to be many more visits to the hospital as worries grew about his condition.
‘On the Saturday I got the pins and needles back and was rushed to casualty.
There I was, back on a drip, and wondering what was happening to me.
‘Then they gave me a lumbar puncture and discovered the problem.
‘The news was scary but the doctor was really good.
He advised me that normal meningitis, the kind that affects young kids, is much worse.
‘And he consoled me, saying: ‘Don't worry son, you're not going to die.’’
Future
Not surprisingly, however, Sharpe, who less than two years previously seemed to have a golden future with United and England, was scared stiff.
And his problems were only just beginning.
‘I was taken to hospital three times.
I had four attacks altogether, the most recent only a few weeks ago after I had watched Everton beat us 3-0 at Old Trafford.
‘The attacks were very worrying.
I thought ‘My God, is this every going to go away?’
‘It was explained to me that I had a mild form which was affecting the part of the brain that triggers migraine, which is why I was having sickness attacks and blinding headaches behind the eyes.’
Sharpe has now begun training again, going through the routine normally reserved for players following their summer break.
And he admitted: ‘I know it is going to be a hard slog for me to get back, but after what I have been through I'm not bothered how hard it is going to be.
‘It is a tremendous relief for me to be kicking a ball around the old place again.
‘Before contracting the illness I had already gone through a nightmare year with injuries.
‘One minute I was on top of the world and everything was going right.
The next the rug was pulled from under my feet.’
LEE SHARPE feared the worst when hospital tests showed the young United star had meningitis.
FLASHBACK: Sharpe the young player of the year
Heat on Martin
LOCAL boy Martin Gray hopes to make good for Sunderland today.
The 21-year-old Teessider faces Bristol Rovers with a ‘Don't freeze before your Roker fans’ warning from the management.
Gary Bennett and Richard Ord are dropped in a reshuffle designed to get goals.
WE'VE GOT TO GIVE THEM ‘ELL!
LEEDS SKIPPER SAYS THEY'VE BEEN TOO SOFT ON THE OPPOSITION
‘We'll have to be mean’
JOHN EDWARDS
LEEDS are ready to put a snarl back on the face of football to give their title defence the kick-start it needs.
The faltering champions hadn't won in six matches before their Coca Cola Cup caning of lowly Scunthorpe on Tuesday.
But skipper Gary McAllister knows all that must change if Leeds are to add the new Premier League title to the old Barclays crown.
And they'll get back on a winning streak by putting the ‘Ell back in Elland Road — just like it was in the glory days of super manager Don Revie and hard-man skipper Billy Bremner.
McAllister spelled out what's needed to start plugging the 11-point gap between themselves and leaders Norwich.
Disliked
He said: ‘We've got to get back to the days when Elland Road was an intimidating place for teams to visit.
‘There was a time when everyone hated Leeds.
We were disliked because of things that had happened in the past and we didn't need any motivation when we kept hearing that sort of talk.
‘Suddenly, it's all changed.
People seem to like Leeds a bit more and while that's nice, it's maybe one reason why we've relaxed and taken our foot off the pedal.
‘We've got to start being a bit meaner on the pitch and we've got to do it now.
‘Arsenal fell so far behind at the start of last season that they couldn't catch us, even though they went 17 matches unbeaten towards the end.
‘We can't afford to let that happen, so we must produce results now.’
Leeds have managed only one clean sheet all season and are desperate to shore up a defence that was the cornerstone of last year's success.
McAllister believes it's a collective responsibility.
He said:
‘We've made a poor start and we have worked out why.
‘It's simply that while we've been playing well in possession, we haven't been doing the job when the opposition have had the ball.
‘A lot of people have told us we've been playing better than last season but we haven't produced winning football.
‘We haven't worked hard enough off the ball.
We're not pressing teams and making it difficult for them, which has previously been the basis of our success.
‘We're desperate to put that right because we don't want to go down as one-season wonders.
‘We don't like the idea of anyone suggesting we won the title by default because Manchester United threw it away.’
Eric Cantona is in the squad less than a fortnight after suffering a hamstring injury that was expected to keep him out of action for two months.
The French striker faces a late fitness test, along with defenders Chris Fairclough and Tony Dorigo.
REVIE: Glory
BREMNER: Hard
HARD CORE: Skipper Gary McAllister believes it's time for Leeds to get tough
HEROL FIGHTS ON
DEPOSED British middleweight champion Herol Graham is to fight on — at super middleweight.
He announced his decision yesterday, saying: ‘I haven't lost my edge or my appetite for boxing.’
Graham, 33, was stopped in nine rounds on Wednesday by Bradford's unrated Frank Grant.
‘I ran out of fuel through making the weight,’ he explained.
‘I'll start roadwork again next week.’
GRAHAM
PAUL'S WAR CRY
Fit for action
JOHN EDWARDS
PAUL WARHURST is set for a dramatic return to first-team football tomorrow — less than a fortnight after it almost killed him.
The Sheffield Wednesday defender last night confirmed that he's ready to bounce back in the live TV match with Spurs exactly 12 days after a horror collision.
Romp
Warhurst crashed into Spora keeper Fernand Felten's outstretched fists a split-second after heading one of Wednesday's eight goals in their UEFA Cup romp against the Luxembourg part-timers.
Physio Alan Smith raced on and battled to revive him after the former record buy had blocked his air passage by swallowing his tongue.
But Warhurst savoured the prospect of an astonishing return to action tomorrow — his 23rd birthday.
He said: ‘The way I'm feeling at the moment, I'm confident I'll be all right.
‘I had a bit of a headache on Wednesday, but I did some running yesterday and training today and I'm in great shape again.’
But player-boss Trevor Francis wants Warhurst to be certain of his fitness before naming him to face Spurs.
WARHURST: Swift recovery from KO
FRANCIS: Cautious
IPSWICH boss Mick McGiven is ready to give his side a roasting before today's Premier League game against Sheffield United at Portman Road.
They have been working on their passing and set-piece play after two poor displays in the Premier League and the Coca Cola Cup.
McGiven said: ‘It's as if subconsciously we switched off after the Wimbledon game and were caught off guard.
It's now up to the players to buck their ideas up and bounce back.’
KEANE STAYS
ROY KEANE, Nottingham Forest's reluctant centre half, is under orders to keep the No 5 shirt by manager Brian Clough.
Clough, who has not replaced England star Des Walker following his £1.5 million move to Italian club Sampdoria in the summer, has drafted in 21-year-old midfield man Keane instead.
And although Steve Chettle is fit again, Republic of Ireland star Keane stays at centre half for today's trip to Chelsea with Clough insisting: ‘I had no option but to play him there.
‘It was either Keane or our Nigel.
But I thought it would do Roy a power of good to give him a few games at the back as part of his education.’
PLAY ME
JULIAN DICKS is heading for a bust-up with manager Billy Bonds if he's left out again at Portsmouth tomorrow.
The Hammers skipper and cult defender missed the midweek Coca-Cola Cup goalless draw with Crewe after completing a three-match ban but insists: ‘I won't be happy if I'm left out.’
Meanwhile, West Ham's first team squad were shown a video of random doping test procedures yesterday.
And they have been given a plastic card to carry itemising the major banned drugs.
I'LL BE TOUGH ON CLOUGHIE
Blues boss threat
TONY STENSON
CHELSEA won't be making the life of Brian any easier for Cloughie at Stamford Bridge today.
Clough, manager of bottom club Nottingham Forest, is under pressure.
But Chelsea boss Ian Porterfield, confident after two successive wins, is not feeling sorry for him.
‘Just because they have had a slow start, it does not mean they are in trouble,’ said Porterfield.
‘Forest have always been a side who finish better than they start and they will grow stronger again as the season progresses.
‘I am in no doubt that we face the stiffest of opposition.
‘We've had two good wins away from home and now we want to put on a show for our fans.’
There will be no place in the Chelsea side for yesterday's signing from Morton, David Hopkins.
Future
The 21-year-old winger is seen by Porterfield as a player for the future: ‘He is big, strong, quick and good with both feet.
‘But we have a number of players already challenging for places ahead of him and he will be given time to acclimatise.’
Right-back Gareth Hall, who missed Chelsea's midweek Coca-Cola Cup win at Walsall, returns to a 16-man squad with goalkeeper Alec Chamberlain also back in line for selection.
Chamberlain will start on the bench as Kevin Hitchcock continues to keep Dave Besant in the cold.
Chelsea are giving a secret trial to Polish World Cup star Roman Szewczyk.
The 27-year-old centre-half has been at Stamford Bridge for the past two days with the hope of making a £500,000 move.
Szewczyk scored his country's goal against England last season.
And the Katowice defender will also be up against Graham Taylor's men in the World Cup qualifying group.
Chelsea will decide whether to sign Szewczyk in the next 48 hours as they look for a replacement for injured Paul Elliott.
PORTERFIELD: Defiant
CLOUGH: Pressure
Wally for Oldham
SECOND Division leaders Oldham have signed Huddersfield's Aussie full-back Wally Gibson on a month's loan.
Gibson, 25, will make his debut in tomorrow's home game against Swinton.
He is out of contract and in dispute with Huddersfield, who have recently cut his transfer fee from £125,000 to £55,000.
Gunn sale
LEEDS hooker Richard Gunn has signed for Featherstone Rovers and goes straight into the side against Carlisle to-morrow.
Rovers will also have two other newcomers making their debut — Australian scrum-half Brett Daunt and New Zealand prop forward Wayne Taekata from the Sydney club Western Suburbs.
Taekata has been highly recommended by Rovers’ new Aussie coach Steve Martin, and his arrival means Rovers have released another Kiwi forward Clarri Iti.
SAVE OUR SOUNESS
Clown Prince aims for Anfield smiles as Wimbledon's Crazy Gang lies in wait
And Grob's just the man for the job
RICHARD TANNER
FRANK WIECHULA
ANFIELD'S clown prince Bruce Grobbelaar makes a triumphant return to the Kop today in a bid to keep under-siege boss Graeme Souness in a job and put a smile back on Liverpool faces.
Souness has axed £1.3million David James and recalled Grobbelaar to shore up a leaky defence that has conceded 20 goals in 11 League and Cup games this season.
Souness believes Grobbelaar's experience is just what his crisis-hit side need as they bid to climb out of the club's worst start since 1953.
And Brucie, 35 next month, will relish the chance to return against the team that has caused Liverpool so much grief in recent years.
But Wimbledon midfielder Vinny Jones promised last night that the Dons were ready to increase the misery level at Anfield.
Jones said: ‘There's no reason why we can't add to their downfall.
‘We are going to Liverpool at just the right time and there's no reason for them to expect any favours from us.’
Slump
Liverpool's slump was brought into sharp focus by their 4-4 Coca-Cola Cup home draw in midweek against lowly Chesterfield.
Jones said: ‘Wimbledon have been knocked out of Cups by lower teams.
Nobody cried for us, so why should we for Liverpool?’
Fellow midfielder Lawrie Sanchez, whose goal beat Liverpool in the 1988 FA Cup final, added: ‘Every time we play them, they want to beat us to try to make up for the 1988 defeat.
‘But since that match we have progressed, while Liverpool have taken a step back.’
And boss Joe Kinnear said: ‘I've got no sympathy for Liverpool in their current position.
As a professional I can't afford to have any.
‘We are second from bottom and we need to get a result.
I know a win for us will increase the pressure on them but that's football.
‘From a personal point of view, I'd like their bad run to continue for another week.
‘Graeme Souness is the man to turn it around but he's not been able to pick a settled team because of injuries.’
The Londoners have won twice and drawn twice on their six League visits to Anfield, as well as having that Cup final to savour.
And the Dons will be lining up to test Grobbelaar in the keeper's first senior game since the Charity Shield against Leeds, when his error gave Eric Cantona his hat-trick.
Career
Grobbelaar, Anfield's No 1 keeper for 11 years, lost his place a week later when he resumed his international career with Zimbabwe rather than play in the opening League game at Nottingham Forest.
James, a £1.3million signing from Watford, looked set for a long run but his mistakes have persuaded Souness to take him out of the spotlight.
The manager's hand has been strengthened by the return of striker Steve McManaman, who has recovered from a back injury, and Dane Torben Piechnik, who was on World Cup duty in midweek.
Souness said: ‘Wimbledon are quite an aggressive side.
We know what to expect.
‘But I just want the same character and fight we showed when we were 3-0 down to Chesterfield.
‘At no time did we throw the towel in.
We had some young boys out there who could have gone into their shell, but they didn't and that pleased me.’
BRUCIE IS BACK!
IT looked like the end for Bruce Grobbelaar when he lost his place to £1.3million summer signing David James.
But now the Clown Prince is poised for a sensational return.
RED FACED HOW former Anfield hero Emlyn Hughes rated the Liverpool line-up in Tuesday's Mirror Sport.
That night, they drew 4-4 with Chesterfield.
SORE POINT: Injuries have ruined Souness's plans
FRIGHT FOR NIGEL
Gutsy Mansell
TED MACAULEY
WORLD champion Nigel Mansell emerged from a horrifying 150mph spin in Estoril yesterday to gasp: ‘That was one of the most frightening moments of my life!’
Mansell is looking to clinch a record-breaking ninth Grand Prix win in a season — and he underlined his determination yesterday by blasting clear of his chasers in the first qualifying session for tomorrow's Portuguese race.
But super-cool Mansell had needed all his skill when the Williams car's hydraulic system totally failed, suddenly jamming on the brakes and locking it in gear at 150mph.
He swerved off the track and into the gravel trap backwards, praying he wouldn't clout the wall.
And he confessed: ‘It was a big, big moment.
It was very frightening.’
He also revealed that he and his team boss Frank Williams have cooled their differences.
He said: ‘We're all professionals.
I've got a job to do.
I've got three races left — three races to win.
And I want them all.
‘Whatever differences I have with the management have been buried.
There are some regrets — but not on my side.
‘I'm not even sure that my team-mate, Riccardo Patrese, will help me out on Sunday.
I think it will be a free-for-all.
‘And I'm sure it will be a bloody good race.’
MANSELL: Spin
AGONY OP FOR CHAMP
TED MACAULEY
NIGEL Mansell will end a year of intense secret agony by having an operation on his driving foot.
Although in non-stop pain, he has put off the operation until the Formula One championship season is over.
The drama of Mansell's foot injury has been one of racing's best-kept secrets.
He has finished most Formula One battles limping heavily, wincing with excruciating pain — but bravely trying to hide the seriousness of it from his rivals.
But I learned about the problem that has dogged him from race one, and he confirmed to me: ‘At the end of the season I'll be having an operation.’
He will probably have it in America where he has signed with film legend Paul Newman's Indycar team.
Critics of the brave Brummie falsely believed that he was overdramatising his gruelling effort in a race with a theatrical limp afterwards.
NEWMAN: Boss
IT'S PASTA JOKE
Mama Mia-such a Roman hollerday
GAZZA knows that when in Rome, do as the Romans — so he got into the spirit with some impressive hand waving and high passion during a training match.
First he threw down his training bib, then he tried to make a point to coaches Dino Zoff and Giancarlo Oddi.
And when that didn't work, he had an animated discussion with team manager Maurizio Mancini before stamping off.
But it was all as innocent as Gazza himself.
He explained: ‘I did it because we were beaten 3-1 in the practice match.’
EXCLUSIVE pictures by ARNOLD SLATER 
TAKE THAT: Gazza dumps his training bib as Dino Zoff and Giancarlo Oddi move in
C'mon BOSS: Zoff and Oddi look bemused as an animated Gazza tries to make his point
COOL IT: Team manager Maurizio Mancini mediates between Gascoigne and Zoff
I'M OFF: Mancini and Zoff are left looking resigned as Gazza turns his back on them
HATS ZOFF TO GAZZA
Big Mac goes batzio over Paul's debut for Lazio
England keep the door open
HARRY HARRIS
ENGLAND No 2 Lawrie McMenemy said last night that it would be a giant step forward for Gazza to make his Lazio debut tomorrow.
Graham Taylor's sidekick said: ‘He has already achieved the first step by playing in the friendly against Spurs and it will be a very big step to get into a competitive game where there will be no quarter given or asked.
‘If Dino Zoff decides to pick him then he must be confident that Gazza can handle it.
If Gazza is back in the Lazio team then he has potentially two more fixtures before England's game against Norway and that provides us with an opportunity to take a look at him in competitive football, something he has not played in for nearly two years.’
McMenemy watched Gazza against his old Spurs team-mates.
He gave Taylor a positive report in the small hours of Wednesday night when the England manager returned from Oslo — where he watched Norway beat Holland 2-1 — and McMenemy returned from Rome.
Ordeal
McMenemy said: ‘The main concern is that there was no reaction to the injury after he played on Wednesday night.
And it is also good news to hear that his chances are now better than 50 per cent of playing this weekend.’
I believe that Taylor is still leaving the door open for Gazza to play some part against Norway in the opening World Cup tie at Wembley on October 14 — providing he comes through the ordeal of an Italian League baptism.
McMenemy added: ‘As I understand it Graham said that in an ideal world the longer the lay-off the more games you would hope a player would have before his next England appearance.
‘But we don't always live in the perfect world.
‘Games come earlier than we want them to, other times not quickly enough!’
Taylor may recall that Gazza returned from a double-hernia operation to win a high-tension match for Spurs at Wembley inside the first 15 minutes.
Crescendo
Gazza beat David Seaman with a 35-yard free kick and set up a goal in a blistering comeback against Arsenal in the FA Cup semi-final.
Now, after nearly 17 months out since his self-inflicted injury in the FA Cup final against Nottingham Forest, he surpassed expectations by scoring after just ten minutes against Spurs in the Olympic Stadium.
Since then the clamour for his Italian League debut has reached a crescendo here in Rome.
And McMenemy will be fascinated to discover how Gazza survives against the hatchet men of Italian football.
McMENEMY: Offering Gazza an England lifeline
COWDREY: MY FEAR
COLIN PRICE
THE most powerful man in world cricket admitted for the first time last night that he is frightened of being sued over the Lambgate Scandal.
ICC chairman Sir Colin Cowdrey (left) is clearly furious that every time he has been ready to make a statement about the Texaco Trophy events of August 23, Pakistan's lawyers have threatened writs.
‘I know what I want to say but I am not a millionaire and cannot afford to see my family dragged into that kind of thing,’ he said.
Weeks of legal bickering by Pakistan lawyers have left the International Cricket Council fuming about their inability to take firm action over the damaging saga.
The ICC have now asked the MCC law-makers to see if the rules relating to unfair play can be tightened up.
But Sir Colin said: ‘Law 42.5 is already perfectly clear.
It covers the use of illegal substance, lifting the seam and scuffing the leather.
If people are going to break laws then we have to prove it.’
He added: ‘All this could be solved by the captains.
They are responsible for what goes on but quite clearly some have been turning a blind eye.’
The MCC should have their review finalised for the ICC meeting in January.
But Sir Colin indicated that it could be another two years before the truth is made public.
That's when the contractual restrictions are lifted from those involved on that traumatic day when the ball was mysteriously changed at lunch.
So far only Allan Lamb has had the courage to speak out — and he's been hammered with fines totalling £7,000, costs of £1,000 and a two-match ban.
Cricket chief's fears 
COWDREY: Worried
GAZZA IN A FURY
The heat is on for £5.5m star
He has a real fling
HARRY HARRIS
PAUL GASCOIGNE, poised for his Italian League debut for Lazio tomorrow, was furious last night over allegations of a training ground bust-up with his team boss Dino Zoff.
Gascoigne threw down his bib after a practice match which his team lost 3-1 and appeared to have angry words with Zoff and assistant coach Giancarlo Oddi before team manager Maurizio Manzini was called in to mediate.
But Gazza told reporters afterwards he was just disappointed his team had lost.
He then scorched out of the gate, almost crashing his already scratched BMW.
Gazza was blazing mad that his training ground ‘discussion’ had been mis-interpreted as a bust-up.
Gazza reacted angrily as he explained: ‘I've just been told that English journalists are saying that I threw my bib down because Zoff said I was out of the side.
If you write that I'll never speak to you again.
‘I did it because we were beaten 3-1 in the practice match.’
Already Gazza has restricted his interviews to twice a week after being hounded by the Italian Press.
Zoff, one of the biggest names in Italian football, clarified the whole situation when he said: ‘We were just discussing a technical point.
It was a general point, we were not arguing.
‘In fact, I didn't understand any of it!’ he joked.
Manzini, who acts as interpreter for the England star on the training ground, brushed aside the discussion between Zoff and Gazza as a typical tactical discussion.
He said: ‘I was called over so Zoff could put some questions to Paul, they were about training and that's all I can say about it.’
Zoff said yesterday he will make a decision today on whether Gascoigne makes his debut against Genoa.
‘I'm optimistic that Gazza will play,’ said Zoff.
‘I'm very happy with him.
‘He now has a more than 50 per cent chance of playing.’
But Zoff knows the knives could be out if Gazza is rushed back into action too quickly.
‘If Gascoigne was playing and we lost, all the questioning would start again,’ he said.
‘There's always negative pressure if we lose.’
HIS BEST BIB AND CHUCKER GAZZA tosses his training bib to the ground yesterday as he confronts Lazio team boss Dino Zoff
Sad sale
MANCHESTER United legend Bill Foulkes is being forced to sell his trophies to raise cash.
Foulkes won practically every honour in the game as a defender in the Busby Babes team.
But 60-year-old Bill has hit hard times and said: ‘I don't want to sell my memorabilia but at the same time I refuse to sign on the dole — I'm too proud for that.’
ALEC'S POSER
MATT HUGHES
ENGLAND vice-captain Alec Stewart will be grilled about ball-tampering at his shamed county Surrey.
The club were fined £1,000 by the Test and County Cricket Board for repeated ball-doctoring, and last night they pledged to publish the outcome of their investigations into the affair.
And Graham Gooch's first lieutenant Stewart, the Surrey skipper, will be a key witness at a committee of inquiry.
The county's chairman Derek Newton said: ‘Although it is an internal matter, it is going to be very open and far-reaching.
We won't be trying to hide anything.
‘I've been left with egg on my face.
I feel shocked and embarrassed.
I'm pretty sick about it.
We don't expect this sort of thing to happen to us.’
Newton only learnt of the charge on Monday, two days before the county appeared in front of the TCCB.
He says he had no idea that Surrey had received two warnings in 1990 and 1991 until the summons arrived from the TCCB citing a third instance, against Leicestershire last month, and referring to the two previous offences.
Stewart was in charge on two of the occasions when they were reported by the umpires.
Waqar Younis, Surrey's Pakistani paceman, also played in the games but is not expected to have to give evidence at the inquiry.
KENNY BLAST
ALEC JOHNSON
BLACKBURN boss Kenny Dalglish warned the rest of his expensive stars last night they can't always expect £3.3million striker Alan Shearer to save them with one of his ‘specials’.
Cannonball Shearer cracked home a gem to give Blackburn a face-saving 1-1 draw in Wednesday's Coca Cola Cup-tie at Huddersfield.
That takes Shearer's tally to 10 goals in 10 games and he is also the Premier League's leading scorer.
But on the eve of today's home League clash with free-scoring Oldham Athletic, Dalglish said: ‘Yes, that was another great goal from Alan and I was delighted for him.
‘But we can't depend upon Alan getting goals like that every week.
‘The lads are looking forward to this game against Oldham to put things right.
‘Oldham like to attack but then naturally there is a chance they can be caught out at the back so it is up to us to exploit that.’
But Oldham boss Joe Royle is looking to strikers Graeme Sharp and £700,000 ex-Aston Villa man Ian Olney to give Rovers problems.
Olney has snapped up just three goals but Royle reckons the partnership is going to prove extremely fruitful.
‘Ian is under no pressure from us although his play deserves more goals than that,’ says Royle.
Preki's big day
EVERTON'S new Yugoslav star Predrag Radosavljevic makes his Premier League bow at Leeds today insisting: ‘I can cope with the physical demands.’
Boss Howard Kendall took a £100,000 gamble last month when he signed the midfielder — nicknamed Preki — from American club St Louis Storm.
And Preki, 29, impressed on his debut in the Coca Cola Cup defeat at Rotherham on Wednesday.
He said: ‘The English game is fast and strong but football is football wherever you are.’
CLOUD 9
Mansell's record win
TED MACAULEY
NEWLY crowned world champion Nigel Mansell showed he really is the big boss of Formula One racing by grabbing a slice of history here yesterday.
The 39-year-old Briton drove his Renault-Williams car to victory in the  Portuguese Grand Prix to clinch his ninth victory — a record number of wins in one season.
Not even the legendary Fangio, Stirling Moss or Jackie Stewart had managed to match that.
It only added to the team Renault-Williams' total embarrassment at carelessly letting him go at the peak of his box office appeal and pulling power.
Team owner Frank Williams must have watched his pit lane monitor with a mixture of delight and dismay as the star he is losing to Indy Car racing ripped up the record books.
But he was sickened by Ayrton Senna's attack on Alain Prost, the French driver he has just signed to drive for him next season.
Prost has a clause in his contract that excludes Senna from joining the Williams team.
Senna, the man Williams wanted to sign, will now have completely wrecked his chances by saying: ‘It's terrible behaviour.
‘If Prost wants to be called champion for a fourth time he should come back in a sporting way.
‘But the way he is behaving he is like a coward.
‘Prost should be prepared to race anybody in any conditions — everything has been laid on for him.’
Mansell stayed aloof from the bickering.
He was magnificent in doing his job and never surrendering, or even looking like surrendering the lead he built up from the green light.
He had pride at stake, deposed champion Senna to humble — and a point to underline to the team that has negligently abandoned him to a new career in America.
By the finish of yesterday's race he was 35 seconds ahead of second placed Gerhard Berger — and had covered the equivalent distance of London to Manchester in a little more than one hour and a half.
He said: ‘I am dead chuffed to have got that ninth win.
‘I just now want to win the last two races in Japan and Australia and then it's a new career for me.’
Senna was third — just ahead of Briton Martin Brundle who was driving half blinded by oil spray over his visor.
MANSELL WALL CHART — Page 23
BUBBLING OVER: World champion Nigel Mansell celebrates his record ninth win after a brilliant drive in the Portguese Grand Prix yesterday.
Cooke's England scare
MATT HUGHES
DEAN RICHARDS and Martin Bayfield both gave England team manager Geoff Cooke a scare before joining up with the Grand Slam squad.
The two forwards, bidding for places in the England side against Canada at Wembley on October 17, were on the receiving end in their Courage League matches.
Lock forward Bayfield had to leave the pitch while playing for Northampton after suffering an asthma attack.
And Richards needed treatment to his back after being stamped on by Paul Ashmead before the Gloucester flanker was sent off at Leicester.
But Leicester coach Ian Smith insisted: ‘Dean was soon okay.
People who try to hurt him usually find they come off a lot worse than he does.’
Richards recovered to help Leicester to a 22-21 victory.
And despite Bayfield's withdrawal, Northampton also maintained a 100 per cent record with a 21-17 win over Saracens.
Champions Bath also made it two wins out of two after thrashing London Irish 42-16 thanks to two first half tries from prop Victor Ubogu.
And Wasps remain the fourth undefeated club in the First Division after a 15-13 win at Harlequins.
England and Quins stalwart Peter Winterbottom came through unscathed in his first match following a recent hernia operation.
ROB JOY
Jones on cloud nine
ROBERT JONES has done more than enough to eclipse the new Moon that is rising in Welsh rugby.
That was the view of Swansea team manager and former international Roger Blyth after Jones had just edged his personal battle against Llanelli's Rupert Moon at a packed Stradey Park.
Current Wales scrum-half Jones helped inspire Heineken League champions Swansea to a 14-7 victory in front of Wales coach Alan Davies, who tomorrow names his team to face Italy on October 7.
Moon has had plenty of backers urging Davies to pick the Scarlets' Englishman ahead of British Lion Jones, but Blyth insists: ‘Robert is still the best scrum-half in Britain by miles.
‘We shouldn't be asking whether he deserves his place.
We should be building the Wales team around him, like the Australians built theirs around Nick Farr-Jones.
‘But we seem to have this thing in Wales about always knocking our best players and looking around to try to put forward rivals who aren't as good.’
Moon, who is bidding to join his Llanelli team-mate Tony Copsey as Wales' second English export, believed honours were even in the show-down of the two number nines.
Strengths
‘I think it was probably a score-draw between Robert and myself.
He did the things that he is good at very well and I was pleased with my own strengths,’ he said.
Davies may have seen a close tussle between his two scrum halfs, but elsewhere in this gripping battle there was no question the Scarlets were the ones left blushing.
Current Wales centre Scott Gibbs demolished the claims of his rival Neil Boobyer with three crunching tackles that saw the Llanelli youngster retreat into his shell.
And among the forwards, Swansea's back row of skipper Stuart Davies, Alan Reynolds and Ian Davies ruled the roost, with Reynolds in particular showing he deserves immediate elevation into the international arena.
In a tense, but action-packed encounter that thrilled a British club record crowd of 14,000, Swansea's match-winner proved to be a wing rejected by Wales three seasons ago.
Mark Titley's try, on the stroke of half-time, was the killer blow.
And though Llanelli managed a try themselves from Lyn Jones, they never looked like continuing their record scoring spree.
Record
Swansea next put their unbeaten record to the test against rivals Neath — also yet to lose a game after a 32-10 win at home to Newport.
Jason Ball scored 20 points including two tries.
But Ball's former Neath team-mate Paul Jackson had an unhappier time in his only his third League game for Aberavon.
Second-row Jackson was sent off for the first time in his career along with South Wales Police hooker Colin Hillman after the two were caught wrestling off the ball.
But following the successful appeal of Cardiff's Mike Griffiths, Jackson also plans to use video evidence to appeal.
‘I'm going to use a video of the incident to prove I should never have been sent off,’ said Jackson.
Even without Jackson, Aberavon chalked up a comfortable 24-0 success to leave the Police rooted to the foot of the table having conceded a massive 180 points in just four games.
Newbridge substitute Stuart Griffiths was also sent off for stamping against Pontypridd, just six minutes after coming on.
Ponty went on to win 22-3.
Cardiff remain the only other unbeaten club in the First Division.
They won 21-11 at Maesteg.
SWANSEA scrum-half Robert Jones is out-matched by Llanelli's giant Phil Davies, but still gets in his tackle during the Heineken League battle that packed Stradey Park on Saturday
JACK ‘N THRILL!
Hull KR 6, Sheffield 19
UNHAPPY Rovers, watched by their smallest crowd for 20 years, were swept aside by the rampant Eagles.
Despite greasy conditions which made handling difficult, Aussie full-back Gary Jack again proved an inspiration — sparking the first try after 20 minutes.
He raced 50 yards up the right before the ball was swept left for David Plange to dive over.
Mark Aston added the touchline kick to his earlier penalty — and then turned the screw with a drop goal.
Just before half-time prop Craig O'Brien rounded off some brilliant Hull KR handling to give the 2,844 crowd something to shout about, Mike Fletcher adding the goal.
But Eagles sub Hugh Waddell set up a try for winger Mark Gamson after 58 minutes, and loose forward Tony Farrell went in from 20 yards to confirm their superiority.
WE COULD DO WITH A REST FROM LIVERPOOL
MIKE LANGLEY
LET Doctor Langley explain to you what's gone wrong at Liverpool Football Club.
It's an outbreak of schizophrenia, amnesia and quadrophenia.
Among the fans, not the players!
In a poll, 70 per cent of fans told Football Monthly magazine that Graeme Souness must go.
Another 70 per cent— mathematically impossible, so probably the same lot — assured a rival survey that manager Souness must stay.
People suffering from schizoid confusion on such a grand scale are not normally allowed out, let alone allowed to see distressing football matches against Chesterfield and Wimbledon.
But there's worse to come.
Nearly a third of red Merseysiders — 29 per cent according to the samplers — have lost their memories and believe Kenny Dalglish is responsible for Liverpool being fourth from bottom.
I heard one say on Danny Baker's Saturday night show: ‘Dalglish is to blame for landing Souness in the mire.’
The fan sounded so convincing that, even though it was only 18 months ago, I reached for my record books to confirm the facts.
DALGLISH'S Liverpool had not long recorded their biggest League win this century (7-1 at Derby) and followed it with five goals against Leeds.
On the day that Dalglish left Anfield, the team were three points clear at the top and in the fifth round of the FA Cup.
Some lurch, some mire!
What about quadrophenia, which is hearing four sounds at once?
In this case, the names of John Toshack, Alan Hansen, Kevin Keegan and Phil Thompson.
I won't trouble you with the percentages of votes cast for them as new managers in the various ballots.
It might only drive both of us up the poll!
Once again, the supporters were undeterred by facts.
Wasn't Toshack, happy in San Sebastian, the first to turn down Liverpool?
Didn't Hansen, sensible man, indicate from the start that he has no interest in management?
Keegan knows he's better off at Newcastle.
If he ever goes anywhere, I'd bet on England.
That leaves Phil Thompson, sacked from the coaching staff by Souness and now talking industrial tribunals.
Thompson won 42 caps for England and captained Liverpool through some of their finest seasons.
But he seems downbeat by nature and I'm not sure he has the resilience to rally a losing club.
ALSO, Liverpool won't want to write off the best part of £1 million spent on recruiting Souness: £500,000 a year salary and £400,000 compensation to Rangers.
Neither would Souness want to go as a failure.
So I think he'd better roll his sleeves even higher and start repairing the damage, plenty of it caused by his own hastiness.
Ray Houghton, Liverpool's star last season, was unloaded because he wanted more money or a move.
Souness said: ‘Once a player shows the slightest glimmer of wanting to go, it's the end of them.’
Yeah?
What about John Barnes then?
Every time he says Italy, Liverpool give him a rise.
WHERE was the judgment in paying Derby a record £5.1 million for Dean Saunders and Mark Wright only to discover that Saunders doesn't fit with Ian Rush and Wright isn't quite what he used to be?
Saunders and Houghton are together now at Villa, along with Steve Staunton, who left the year before because nobody foresaw how Liverpool might need his ability to cover three positions.
I've watched Liverpool from before the days of Bill Shankly but cannot recall a plague of injuries.
Then Souness comes and they drop like flies for two seasons running!
Rush (three knee ops), Ronnie Whelan (knee), Rob Jones (shins), Wright (hamstring) and Barnes (heel and calf) were under treatment last time.
NINE out is today's bulletin but don't let that fool you into thinking the whole nine would be in if they were available.
Steve Nicol, Michael Thomas and Jones are obvious misses, along with Barnes.
But Barnes played only a quarter of last season, so Souness should have adjusted to his absence.
‘I haven't come within three players of putting out my best team,’ he was quoted as saying yesterday.
A majority of managers could say the same, so we can put away the handkerchiefs.
Let's look at the cause of the injuries.
Are they partly due to new, over-strenuous training?
It's a notion dismissed by Souness.
‘Nothing's changed,’ he said yesterday.
‘People look for reasons that aren't there.’
But the day before, he was quoted as saying, ‘The standard of fitness wasn't great.
Something had to be done’.
How's that for a contradiction?
Injuries are the only crisis, according to Souness.
But I think he's also part of the problem.
HIRE-EM, fire-em — his winning policy at Ibrox — won't work in a League where he's not the biggest fish with the deepest purse.
Thirteen championships, four European Cups, four FA Cups, four League Cups and two UEFA Cups inside 30 years are more than enough for one club, I say.
We could do with a rest from Liverpool.
Maybe it's Souness's destiny to take them back to where Shankly found them.
In the Second Division.
Arsenal excepted, that's where I've seen all of the Premier League play at some time — Manchester United, Spurs, Aston Villa, Leeds United and Everton among them.
In the long run, a little relegation did them no harm.
That's the consolation I offer to Souness.
But if Football Monthly's readers' poll is correct, he won't be there to enjoy it!
‘When you walk through a storm hold your head up high’ AS the song says, Graeme Souness won't have to walk alone when he's backed by the experience of Roy Evans and Ronnie Moran.
But they were up in arms on Saturday as Liverpool crashed to Wimbledon.
Picture: HARRY McGUIRE
IT'S A FACT
UNITED FRONT
ONLY five games attracted crowds bigger than 20,000, the highest being at Old Trafford where 33,287 saw the goalless draw with QPR.
434,798…was the total attendance at 42 English League matches.
The same week-end last year (41 matches) amounted to…388,013
LOWEST
CONTROVERSIAL Cambridge United have the lowest League average with just five goals from nine matches.
HIGHEST
SOARAWAY Newcastle United have the highest League goal average with 20 from eight matches.
CLIVE'S USER BOOST
CHARLES FAWCUS
CLIVE BRITTAIN turned User Friendly into a sprinter on Saturday morning to put her spot on for the Arc.
And the triple classic winner flew across Newmarket Heath so fast that Clive is brimming with confidence that she can stay unbeaten next Sunday.
‘User Friendly did absolutely nothing for a week after the St Leger and got so full of herself that we nearly had to tie her down,’ smiled Clive.
‘George Duffield let her breeze along for six furlongs on Saturday morning and she just flew.
He was delighted with her and so was I.
‘Now all she needs is a bit of work over a mile and a quarter on Tuesday and she'll be ready for Longchamp.
She's the one they have to beat.
‘I don't take any notice of this  pessimistic talk about statistics being against Leger winners in the Arc.
I have done things before that no one else has achieved like winning the Japan Cup with Jupiter Island and the Breeders Cup with Pebbles.’
Dr Devious has his final pre-Arc gallop this morning: ‘I wish I was in as good shape as the horse — I've got permanent toothache at the moment,’ said trainer Peter Chapple-Hyam.
Peter rates Dr Devious well recovered from his Leopardstown battle with St Jovite while Jim Bolger is confident that the Irish Derby winner is back on song as well.
Farloe double dashed
HARRY LLOYD
QUALIFYING failure Manx Treasure (5-2) dramatically ended Farloe Melody's Derby double dreams in Dublin on Saturday.
Quaint Irish rules allow for a second bite of the £50,000 cherry, but there were no squawks from Melody's English owners.
The Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Derby hero loomed up menacingly behind Manx Treasure at the third bend.
But Melody (6-4 fav), feeling the strain of a gruelling season, failed by three and a half lengths to pull back the Isle of Man-owned winner.
The fast closing Radical Prince (7-1), who also failed his qualifier outstayed Melody for second place.
With £80,000 already in the bank, Melody retires with a £500,000 stud career ahead of him.
Banker
Forecast double dabblers have a ready made banker bet in Capolla Jack and Water Drip at Crayford tonight.
Both are course and distance hurdle winners — Capolla Jack in record time.
Sam McCluskie's Foot Tripper should follow up last Monday's impressive Wembley win with a repeat course and distance performance.
It may pay to be early at Catford where Dromina Duke looks the part in the second race.
Punters who burned their fingers on Picton at Romford should give the unlucky Kim Marlow runner another chance.
Match race contenders Winsor Abbey and Lets All Boogie eye each other up at Walthamstow tomorrow but in different heats of the Laurent Perrier Champagne Grand Prix.
Connections say the £20,000 confrontation is still on and TV coverage could be on the cards.
Ladbrokes are to bet ante-post on Sunderland's first Sunday meeting on October 11.
There are no afternoon BAGS meetings today.
ON THE SPOT
Leeds 2, Everton 0
JOHN EDWARDS
HOWARD KENDALL pointed an accusing finger at defender Gary Ablett over the two-goal burst that sent Everton home empty-handed.
Everton were surviving a Leeds siege thanks to Neville Southall's brilliance when Ablett erred for the first time.
The former Liverpool centre-back lunged in on Gary McAllister and sent the Leeds skipper sprawling for a penalty in the 61st-minute.
And when he lost possession on the edge of his own area three minutes later, McAllister again capitalised with a near-post cross that one-time Everton target Lee Chapman headed home.
Ablett argued furiously with referee Ken Redfern that he'd made a clean challenge on the inspirational McAllister.
But Kendall was in no mood to sympathise, saying: ‘As far as I'm concerned, the penalty was down to poor defending.
‘Never mind the rights or wrongs of the decision, we should never have given the referee the opportunity to give a penalty in a situation like that.
‘McAllister was heading away from the danger area, and the last thing you do is dive in and risk conceding a spot-kick.
‘What you should do is simply stand on your feet and make sure you don't commit yourself.
‘We made two basic errors and paid with a goal each time, and I'm not happy about that.’
A stony-faced Ablett refused to comment as he left the ground.
But he wasn't the only one in the dock after a punchless show that, in Kendall's words, ‘lacked penetration.’
KENDALL: Errors
PEARL & DEAN!
A man for all seasons
Blackburn 2, Oldham 0
ALEC JOHNSON
KENNY DALGLISH has come to see a side of Alan Shearer that he never knew existed when he shelled out £3.3 million on the England striker.
The Blackburn manager is just knocked out by the worldly-wise maturity of the genial Geordie, still aged only 22.
‘You would be proud to have him as your son,’ said Dalglish who has never been easily impressed.
He added: ‘Alan is a man.
He is an adult in his thoughts and his manners and is a very mature 22-year-old footballer.’
Shearer is set to match Gary Lineker not only for his goals, but his impeccable behaviour and laid-back attitude.
He had spent the week driving back and forth between Blackburn and Southampton where his wife gave birth last Monday to their first child.
But Shearer took it all in his electric stride.
‘I've lost count of the hundreds of miles I've covered and it has been pretty hectic.
But this was the perfect end to the week,’ he said.
Again, it was no ordinary goal that Shearer scored, but an absolute gem.
He pounced in the 30th minute, rifling home a super shot from 20 yards in the twinkling of an eye.
Dalglish, himself a master marksman, said: ‘The way Alan struck that one was just terrific, a real striker's goal.’
It was his tenth Premier League goal in ten games, prompting reporters to ask Dalglish if Shearer is as good as Ian Rush.
‘I don't know because I have only played with Rush,’ said Dalglish.
‘But we don't have to make comparisons between him and anybody.’
Shearer not only scored, but also ran the Oldham defence ragged, leaving Latics' defender Ian Marshall gasping: ‘He is the best striker around.
‘I reckon he will hold on to that England No. 9 shirt for years to come.’
Marshall and fellow defender Richard Jobson were both booked in the space of a minute for pulling down Shearer as he twice homed in on goal shortly after half time.
Stuart Ripley headed Blackburn's second from Mark Atkins' pin-point cross after 61 minutes in a glittering all-round show from Dalglish's expensive cast of stars.
Oldham's attack had a fruitless afternoon against a Rovers' rearguard in which Kevin Moran was outstanding.
Oldham's one hope came with a dubious second half penalty award when Colin Hendry was ruled to have pushed Ian Olney.
But Marshall's spot kick was well saved by keeper Bobby Mimms.
Now next in Shearer's sights are Premier League leaders Norwich who visit Ewood Park for an all-ticket clash on Saturday.
Rovers will go top of the table if they can score the goals to burst the Canaries' bubble.
And canny Kenny says he knows a man who can.
Shear joy of the Rovers HOT-SHOT Alan Shearer wheels away to accept the plaudits after spoiling Oldham keeper Jon Hallworth's day with a superb 20-yard strike
HITCH IN TIME
NEIL SILVER
CHELSEA manager Ian Porterfield is still searching for a top class goalkeeper despite the heroics of stand-in Kevin Hitchcock.
Hitchcock has yet to concede a goal since stepping in for Dave Beasant.
The 30-year-old reserve ‘keeper, who is on a week-to-week contract, has starred in two away wins plus Saturday's goalless draw with Forest.
But, when asked whether he was still looking for a new goalkeeper despite Hitchcock's form, Porterfield said: ‘We are always looking to improve our squad of players and we will keep searching.’
Porterfield has been linked recently with Liverpool's Bruce Grobbelaar and Southampton's Tim Flowers.
Glenn's sour grapes
Charlton 2, Swindon 0
IAN GIBB
GLENN Hoddle rubbished Charlton by saying: ‘We were attractive but football lost today.’
The Swindon player-boss rounded on the First Division Londoners.
He added: ‘They are dogged and soak up pressure — but they don't play the way I like to see the game played.’
But Charlton joint manager Alan Curbishley said: ‘They slaughtered us for half an hour — but only half an hour.
‘Don't forget that apart from our goals by Scott Minto and Kim Grant, we also hit a post and Colin Walsh missed a great chance.’
Artful Allen slays Knight
Pompey 0, W.Ham 1
TONY STENSON
POMPEY keeper Alan Knight turned in a spectacular display that stopped West Ham running riot.
His one-man show yesterday failed to prevent the Hammers moving to fourth in the First Division but it saved Pompey from embarrassment.
Knight made just one mistake and that allowed Clive Allen to score with his usual efficiency.
Manager Billy Bonds said: ‘This was the best we have played away in the two and half years I have been in charge.
‘It was a tremendous performance and Knight kept them in the game.
More goals would have been the icing on the cake.’
West Ham's Trevor Morley could have had a hatful during a one-sided second half but Knight's brilliance and some missed chances stopped Pompey from being  overwhelmed .
But the keeper was to blame when he missed a simple cross and Allen scored with ease.
Later, Colin Clarke found the net but was ruled to have handled — and that was the only time Pompey threatened.
The brilliant Martin Allen and Peter Butler ran the midfield and fed Morley at regular intervals but Knight used every part of his body to stem the tide.
Hammers Julian Dicks and Martin Allen were booked, as were Pompey pair Warren Aspinall and Clarke.
Pompey boss Jim Smith said afterwards: ‘West Ham are the best side we have played all season, even better than Newcastle.
‘They didn't just outplay us a bit— it was a lot.
They ran us off the rails.’
ALLEN: On target
MORLEY: Missed
STU-POT!
focus on two cases of capital punishment
Kid Graham in a blue mood
Chelsea 0, Forest 0
NIGEL CLARKE
GRAHAM STUART, Chelsea's England Under 21 midfield star, will seek show-down talks with manager Ian Porterfield this week.
Stuart, unhappy at being left out of this bore draw, said: ‘To say I am not happy is an understatement.
‘I am going to have to see the boss about it.
At this stage of my career this is no good to me.’
Watched by England number two Lawrie McMenemy, Stuart did get on as a 64th minute substitute, but added: ‘It seems everyone else gets straight back into the side after injury except me.
‘I started off the season feeling great and scoring goals, but now I'm right back on the floor again.’
Award
Stuart grabbed two in his first five matches before getting hurt, including one that is a contender for BBC TV's ‘Goal of the Month’ award.
But Porterfield said: ‘Stuart is a very talented player but Eddie Newton, who has replaced him, has done ever so well with three goals in seven matches.
‘There is competition for places at the club now, and that's just how it should be.’
Stuart is too good to be kept on the sidelines at a time when England have looked to include him in the B squad as the next stage of his international career.
But while Stuart frets about first team football, Robert Fleck, also fed up, stays in the side.
Fleck, Chelsea's record buy at £2.5 million, has scored only once in 10 games — his worst-ever run.
But Porterfield said: ‘There is no question of us leaving him out.
‘He'll start doing what he was bought for — scoring goals.’
But even Fleck wonders when.
‘It's my dream to get a goal at the Bridge, to knock one in for the home fans,’ he said.
‘Right now that's my main target.
I'm desperate to score.
‘It does worry me the longer it goes on without one.
It's always in the back of my mind.
‘Chelsea bought me to score, but I don't know when or where the next one is coming from.’
The little Scot plays with his heart and soul, and perhaps is trying too hard.
The only time Chelsea really rattled a troubled Forest side was when David Lee hit a 30-yarder against a post.
But Forest didn't do much threatening either, largely because their brilliant young midfielder, Roy Keane, is being played at centre-back.
The sooner boss Brian Clough buys a centre-half the better, for Keane is wasted as a central defender.
Keane's Republic of Ireland team-mate, Chelsea skipper Andy Townsend, said:
‘Roy is no longer a threat when he's in the back-four.
He is one of the best midfield players in the country, and he's so quick to get into the box.
‘I had a word with him after the match, and asked him how he was getting on.
Tighter
‘He said he was just asked to do a job — and it's working.’
Unbeaten in their last three games, Forest are tighter at the back, but Townsend added:
‘Roy will want to get back into midfield as soon as possible.
It's no secret that Cloughie is searching for a centre-half.’
Without Keane to run the game, Forest have lost their cutting edge.
They still play attractive football, but there is no end product.
They came for a draw and got it.
THAT'S ROUGH, CLOUGHIE: Sunshine can't brighten a dull draw for Forest boss Brian Clough (centre) and coaches Archie Gemmill and Liam O'Kane Picture: KENT GAVIN
Forrest plea
Ipswich 0, Sheffield United 0
SENT-OFF Ipswich keeper Craig Forrest pleaded his innocence after bringing down United striker Adrian Littlejohn outside the penalty area after just two minutes.
Canadian international Forrest, 24, faces a three-match ban after referee Ron Groves confirmed the red card was for serious foul play.
‘I am very, very upset.
There is no way I would ever want to injure an opponent,’ Forrest insisted.
Eddie Youds made way for sub keeper Clive Baker who held out for Ipswich's eighth draw.
Kevin fury
Coventry 1, Norwich 1
NEIL SILVER
KEVIN Gallacher accused Norwich's Chris Sutton of upending him with a professional foul and blasted: ‘I've seen people sent off for less.’
Centre half Sutton escaped with just a booking for the 52nd minute incident.
But Gallacher said: ‘I felt my jersey being pulled and a push in the back.
I could not understand why it was suggested I was a cheat.’
Sutton pleaded his innocence and said: ‘I think he was looking for the dive.
I made a fair attempt for the ball.’
Ian Crook gave Norwich a 13th minute lead, but Peter Ndlovu equalised with a stunning solo goal eight minutes before the break.
GALLACHER: Accused
PEARL & DEAN
Ace Saunders is the spark
Middlesbrough 2, Aston Villa 3
MATT HUGHES
THE dramatic arrival of Dean Saunders has given Dalian Atkinson a new lease of life at Aston Villa.
Atkinson's Ayresome Park performance showed he is relishing the chance to play alongside the £2.3 million new boy.
Yet Atkinson revealed he was on the verge of quitting during a never-ending battle against injury last season.
‘I got to the point where I didn't want to play again,’ he said.
‘I had one injury after another and it was doing my head in.
‘Now I'm alongside Dean and we're creating so many chances.
The law of averages says we'll score a few.’
Hunger
Saunders was on target twice and Atkinson claimed the other as Villa replaced Middlesbrough in the Premier League's top six.
‘We'll work well together, but I don't expect too many favours because Dean has such a great hunger for goals,’ smiled Atkinson.
Manager Ron Atkinson agreed: ‘Goals are Dean's lifeblood.
‘I think back to people like Allan Clarke, who were annoyed if they came off the pitch without scoring a goal.
‘Dean's like that, but he also a bit different to the majority of strikers because he's also a grafter.’
That's not an adjective the Villa manager would apply to his namesake in the team.
‘It must have been a great game to watch — Dalian seemed to think so,’ said the Villa boss.
Ron wasn't entirely joking.
Atkinson the manager spent most of the second half demanding more effort from Atkinson the striker.
‘Dean has told him he would do all his running and Dalian decided here was the guy he had waited for throughout his career,’ said the Villa manager.
The striker was still too hot for Boro's overworked defenders to handle, although Big Ron insisted: ‘He's not a fraction of the player he will be.’
Villa still refuse to shout the odds over their undoubted title potential.
Bold
‘I'll be bold enough to say we won't be relegated,’ said Atkinson.
But Boro boss Lennie Lawrence insisted: ‘They're championship contenders, but didn't have to be at their best to beat us.
‘The danger was there for all to see, but we failed to heed the warning,’ he groaned.
‘Their front two cut us to pieces.
‘Villa totally outclassed us in the first half and we were extremely lucky only to be a goal down.
When we got back into it with an equaliser, our defensive naivity flared again.’
Saunders is the spark
DEAN'S DOUBLE VILLA goal ace Dean Saunders splits the Boro defence to rifle home his second of the afternoon as Ron Atkinson's side hit the title trail.
By MATT HUGHES Msboro 2 A.Villa 3 
DEAN'S DOUBLE VILLA goal ace Dean Saunders splits the Boro defence to rifle home his second of the afternoon as Ron Atkinson's side hit the title trail.
Dowie power
Palace 1, Saints 2
TONY STENSON
IAIN DOWIE wasn't even listed by the bookies as a potential scorer of the first goal.
But when the injured Kerry Dixon inquired, he was offered 10-1.
He laid out a fiver — and went home counting the cash after Dowie scored twice.
Dowie is a target for the Saints boo-boys but his willing heart makes him a dressing room favourite.
He says: ‘The fans have been frustrated because we haven't scored but all we can do is to try and put it right.
Dowie power
KASEY PROVEN FOR MICK
Brentford 1, Millwall 1
MILLWALL'S American import Kasey Keller bounced back from his clanger at Highbury to pull off two brilliant saves to keep the Lions alive.
The American international boobed by letting a Kevin Campbell shot through his legs on Tuesday, but won praise on Saturday.
‘He is a great shot-stopper as well as a great athlete.
He was saying sorry on Tuesday but you couldn't fault him here,’ said Lions boss Mick McCarthy.
‘I was upset after the Arsenal game,’ admitted Keller.
‘It was good to come back and give a good performance here.’
Steve's silence
Watford 0, Leicester 3
STEVE Perryman admits a new striker is his priority but he will not say if fans can expect good news this week.
His team were booed off at Vicarage Road after their eighth game without a win.
‘I don't want to wind people up and create an expectancy,’ said boss Perryman after Watford's second successive three-goal defeat in the League.
Steve's silence
FIRED UP
Niall gunning for Arsenal
NEIL SILVER
NIALL QUINN is hoping to kick-start his season into action against his old club at Highbury tonight.
The Manchester City striker has scored just once so far this season — so he has a major incentive to score against Arsenal in this televised tussle.
The 6ft 4in hitman said: ‘I don't think my season has really started yet but I hope to rectify that now.
‘I needed last Wednesday's Coca-Cola Cup game against Bristol Rovers to get me back into the swing of things after a three-match suspension.
‘Hopefully I will reap the benefit of that at Arsenal, where we will all have to be in top form to get anything.’
Goal-shy City will be delighted if Quinn can get back on target.
They have failed to score in their last three matches, all at home, losing two in the League and being held to a 0-0 draw in the Cup.
Selfish
Quinn has promised to be selfish in his quest for goals.
But that is fine by his strike partner David White.
‘David and I have had a chat about the goal drought which has suddenly hit the team,’ explained Quinn.
‘We feel we have been considering each other too much.
We have been trying to lay on chances for each other.
‘We have decided that the answer from now on is to be greedy so-and-sos.
If either of us get a chance for goal, we will go for it.’
But Arsenal, desperate to put together a winning sequence themselves after a dismal start, will be in a tough mood.
Tony Adams, the Arsenal skipper, says: ‘Niall and I are great friends and have been since he came over here 10 years ago.
But when we go out on the pitch, I hope he has a stinker.
‘We have lost four games recently that we never deserved to lose so it's been a hard time for us.
‘But we will come through.
There's too much quality at the club for us to stay down for long.
‘We just need to put a couple of wins together and then the ball will be rolling again.’
QUINN: Only one goal
SHEER EL AS NICK BLOWS UP
NICK FALDO dropped six shots in ten disastrous holes yesterday — and gifted the Belgian Open title to Spain's Miguel Angel Jimenez.
Nightmare Nick, three ahead at the eighth, took 42 on the back nine and left Jimenez to pocket £100,000 with a 274 aggregate.
Patty Sheehan shot a final-round 67 at Woburn to become the first woman to win the US and British Opens in the same year.
FALDO: S-painful
KOPPED
But chairman backs Souness
Liverpool 2, Wimbledon 3
RICHARD TANNER
LIVERPOOL chairman David Moores last night broke his silence over the Anfield crisis to insist: ‘We're backing Graeme Souness.’
Moores admitted he was ‘worried’ about the Mersey maestros’worst start to a season since 1953, but he said the club's eight-man board is ‘fully behind’Souness.
The 39-year-old Scot's worries increased after more alarming defensive lapses led to Saturday's defeat.
Millionaire Moores, a member of the Littlewoods pools family, is well aware of the discontent on the terraces.
But the man whose first year as chairman has co-incided with the most traumatic period in Liverpool's history, spoke out to ease the pressure on Souness.
He said: ‘The board fully supports the manager — and I'm certain Graeme is just as concerned as anyone else.
Hopeful
‘But how can you judge a team when seven of the top players are out?
Really the time to judge is when we have a full-strength squad.
‘Obviously, as a Liverpool fan, you have to be worried but I'm perfectly hopeful that we'll get through this and come back as the force that we always have been.’
And Wimbledon boss Joe Kinnear, after watching his side deepen Liverpool's crisis, also backed his old Spurs pal Souness.
Kinnear said: ‘It was a marvellous display by our lads — but the fans up here seem to be getting hysterical.
‘It's rubbish.
Souness remains one of the most respected managers in football.
‘Given time and with his new Danish defensive partner Torben Piechnik were on different wavelengths.
Both hardened internationals, they couldn't cope with John Fashanu and Robbie Earle as they plundered the first and third goals for Dons.
Punch
And red-faced Brucie, brought back to steady the ship, blundered for the second goal, racing to the edge of his area to punch straight to Earle who sent a superbly-judged lob back over him from 25 yards.
Liverpool came back from 2-0 down to be level at the break thanks to Jan Molby's penalty and McManaman's tap-in.
But Earle's 75th minute winner exposed the frailty for all to see.
WOBBLER: Bruce Grobbelaar's return made little difference to Liverpool's leaking defence.
Derby stars pay price
Derby 2, Southend 0
DERBY'S expensive newcomers are weighed down by their price tags revealed record £2.3million signing Craig Short.
He even sold himself short saying: ‘I should have scored three.
If we had lost or drawn the fans would have blamed me.’
But he says the arrival of £650,000 Martin Kuhl from Portsmouth could be just the tonic County's under-pressure stars need.
‘They are very quiet on the pitch and that shows the tension they are under,’ Short declared.
‘They have lost confidence, but Martin is just the player who can get them going and I think you will see their true character soon.
‘He did a great job just sitting in there and keeping everything tight — and he never stopped shouting and goading the youngsters.’
Kuhl admitted: ‘Derby have some very exciting players.
But you could feel the tension in them.
‘The fans want goals, the lads want goals — and you could physically feel their relief when they came.
Maybe we have now turned the corner.’
SHORT: Under pressure
LAST BARB
DAVID MOORE
TESSA SANDERSON kissed the javelin goodbye yesterday — after throwing one final jibe at arch rival Fatima Whitbread.
Sanderson, now 36, scattered her World Cup opponents in the opening round, launching a throw of 61.86 metres.
Then she said: ‘The record books will show I was Britain's best.
I've got to be rated at number one, ahead of Fatima.’
Robbie's a gem
ROBBIE Earle deepened Liverpool's misery with a brilliant display that can only enhance his England chances.
But the powerhouse midfielder with the goal touch modestly handed Vinny Jones much of the credit as the Dons showed again their liking for Anfield.
Earle said: ‘Vinny comes into his own against teams like Arsenal and Liverpool.
He's one of life's great motivators.
‘He had me running all over.
He's a natural competitor, he even beats you up if you beat him at cards.’
‘He's a big influence on us and we're going to miss him when he starts his suspension.’
Earle caught the eye setting up John Fashanu's opener then he punished a poor punch by Bruce Grobbelaar with a superbly-judged 25-yard lob.
After Liverpool pulled level the non-stop Earle pounced on a Fashanu knock-down to score the winner.
No wonder the Dons are Liverpool's bogey side.
Their Anfield record now reads played seven, won three, drawn two and lost two.
ROCKET FOR APOLLON
CYPRIOT club Apollon, Liverpool's hosts in this week's second leg Cup Winners Cup-tie, were involved in a riot on Saturday that led to a referee's strike and postponement of yesterday's Cyprus League games.
A disputed penalty in the last minute of the game with Omonia gave Apollon a 4-4 draw after being 4-2 behind with three minutes to go.
Omonia supporters chased the ref off the pitch, then tore down the steel dressing-room doors.
Mac's tough lesson
IAN GIBB
THERE was a wicked gleam in the eye of Paul Hodkinson as he watched Colin McMillan getting ripped apart in his WBO world featherweight title.
Kirkby's Hoko, himself the WBC world champion at nine stone, had just watched unfancied, virtually washed-up Colombian Ruben Palacio teach brilliant Barking boxer McMillan some harsh truths about life in the spit-and-sawdust cockpit of the big fight league.
McMillan was stopped in the eighth round because his left arm had been viciously dislocated from its shoulder socket — but at the time our Colin was hanging on for grim life.
The protests flew thick and fast that McMillan should have been allowed to keep his crown because he was, mystifyingly, three rounds ahead on two judges' scorecards and, more realistically, one in front on another.
But Hodkinson had seen more than enough.
If their domestic showdown does ever take place, he reckons: ‘I have to say it would be easy money for me.’
The World Boxing Organisation yesterday installed McMillan as the mandatory challenger to Palacio because of the ‘unusual circumstances’ surrounding the defeat, which keeps the Hoko show-down still a possibility.
McMillan was kept in hospital overnight as a precaution and was in a great deal of pain with his dislocated shoulder, plus the cuts and bruises he had to suffer.
Sorry, Colin, but you learned the hard way about the harsh truths of the boxing world.
McMILLAN: Pounded
Regal Neal
SNOOKER star Neal Foulds was back in the winners' enclosure at Motherwell last night after a four-year wait.
The 29-year-old greyhound racing lover pocketed the £40,000 first prize by beating unseeded Gary Wilkinson 10-8 in the Regal Masters final.
‘It's a great feeling to get another title under my belt,’ said Foulds whose last success came in the 1988 Dubai Duty Free Masters.
MOVE OVER LIVERPOOL!
picture special on the record-breaking Magpies
We can be top of Kops — Kev
Peterborough 0, Newcastle 1
HUGH JAMIESON
KEVIN KEEGAN watched Newcastle maintain an eight-match 100 per cent First Division record and warned: ‘We could be bigger than Liverpool.’
Keegan should know, having spent six sizzling years at Anfield under Bill Shankly scooping a treasure trove of honours.
But now the Magpies are on the march again, nine years after Keegan guided them back into the top flight before sensationally swapping fog on the Tyne for the sunshine of Spain.
Eight months after King Kevin was tempted out of retirement to save Newcastle from relegation, the Geordie hordes are in full cry.
Frightening
More than 5,000 have been locked out of St James's Park for each of the last two games and Keegan gasped: ‘The fans are amazing.
‘If we continue to progress and produce the goods, then we can become bigger and more exciting than Liverpool.
‘We're playing some superb football but what is awesome is that we are getting better.
‘There's no pressure on us.
In fact, it's been diverted to the opposition as they try to stop us because with our kind of support we're frightening teams.’
Dream
Now Keegan has set his side's next target — cracking the League record of 13 straight victories at the start of season created by Reading in 1985.
‘People keep saying the run must end, but why should it?’ he said.
‘You dream about situations like this, and the way things are going you feel it can go on forever.
‘But whatever happens we're providing a platform for the season that is exciting.
The fans know it and it's a joy to be involved.’
Keegan's proposed Merseyside take-over was backed by Republic of Ireland midfielder Kevin Sheedy, whose 60th-minute goal sent Newcastle's 8,000 travelling army celebrating all the way back up the A1.
Sheedy, 33 next month, arrived on Tyneside on a free transfer from Everton within days of Keegan's return.
And the man whose glory days at Goodison included League championship, FA Cup and European Cup-Winners' Cup medals insisted: ‘This situation is even bigger than my experience at Everton.
The fans are more fanatical and although we had some great times at Goodison, this could be something else.
‘I like to think my experience is a vital factor in midfield because obviously the side is still developing with the introduction of new players.
‘I might be 33 soon but that doesn't worry me.
I'm in very good physical shape and that's the way it's got to be because there's so much at stake with Newcastle and the Republic's World Cup qualifying campaign.
‘But the side looks well balanced — and the way we are playing I honestly believe it will take something special to stop us.
There is no way complacency will ever be allowed to creep in.’
Sheedy's trusty left foot did the trick, taking Robert Lee's pass in his stride to coax Ian Bennett off his line and chip the ball coolly over the Posh keeper's head.
Until then 21-year-old Bennett, shown the door at Newcastle on a free transfer two seasons ago, had produced a brilliant one-man show of defiance.
For although David Kelly and Lee both hit the woodwork, Bennett brought off a string of super saves.
Promising
Lee, signed for £700,000 from Charlton and making a highly promising League debut, joined Kelly, Mick Quinn and Lee Clark on the brilliant Bennett's list of point-blank ‘victims’.
Yet despite one way traffic at times, Newcastle will have to tighten up at the heart of a defence that looked vulnerable.
Twice Tony Adcock was superbly stopped by keeper Tommy Wright.
Then the Posh striker laid on a glorious chance six minutes from the end, only for substitute Pat Gavin to mis-time his header completely with the goal at his mercy.
ON THE BAWL: David Kelly shouts down Steve Walsh
KEEGAN'S GLEE GUNS: Micky Quinn points the way to the Premier League for Newcastle — and the boss also has plenty to celebrate as the Geordies make it eight wins out of eight.
Pictures: ANGUS THOMSON
GOLD STAR: Kevin Sheedy salutes his victory strike
HOLD STAR: Quinn gets to grips with the Posh defence
BOLD STAR: Keegan acknowledges the travelling fans
ON THE BAWL: David kelly shouts down Steve Walsh
OH, NO!
GAZZA'S RETURN ENDS IN PAIN WITH THE CRY OF…
Moment of agony
HARRY HARRIS
PAUL GASCOIGNE lasted only 45 minutes of his league debut for Lazio here yesterday — but he insisted that he has survived his first crunching tackle in Italian football.
The £5.5 million star endured a heart-stopping few minutes against Genoa, crashing to the ground after a tackle and clutching the same knee in which he ruptured ligaments 16 months ago.
He did not appear for the second-half of the match, which ended in a 1-1 draw, raising fears the knee had been badly damaged and that his career would again be threatened.
But Gazza said: ‘It's nothing really.
I took a knock on the knee but it's not serious.
‘The main thing I remember is just how deadly quiet the whole stadium went when I was tackled.
‘As I was going off at half-time, the lad who tackled me came up and said ‘I'm sorry, but it was only a little tap’.’
Lazio's doctor Claudio Bartolini explained that it will be 24 hours before he can make a true assessment of the damage.
Gazza had to call a halt before a 46,000 crowd here in the Olympic Stadium when a challenge from Mario Bortolazzi stretched the right knee that has undergone two major operations.
Bartolini revealed how Gazza was ‘scared’ by the impact of the crunching challenge.
He said: ‘There is no distortion of the knee.
He was caught on the sciatic nerve and suffered only a dead-leg and an abrasion.
‘This has been a good test for his knee and we don't think it is a big problem.
But we will need 24 hours to assess it.
‘It's the kind of kick that would be a problem on a normal knee for only one week.
‘I don't know if he will fit to play for Lazio next week.
It is too early to make that decision.’
Bartolini also admitted: ‘We were a little bit worried when it happened and, of course, he was a little bit scared.
But there is nothing to worry about now.
‘Now he must get accustomed to these kind of kicks.
‘He didn't ask to leave the field.
But I said it was better for him if he didn't go back.’
Lazio may well have been planning to allow Gazza only an hour's play in any event as he tried to gain match fitness.
Dino Zoff, the Lazio manager, decided to pick Gazza only on Saturday — and to tell him shortly before the kick-off.
‘Maybe he would have played a few minutes more,’ said Zoff.
‘But it's not a big accident.
He didn't give me the impression of being badly injured.
‘I will see Paul's condition before making a decision on whether to play him against Parma next week.’
Drama
Zoff detailed the drama behind the scenes as Gazza was kept on tenterhooks for the past four days, wondering whether he would make his Italian debut.
Zoff said: ‘I wanted to make an evaluation of his condition after his appearance against Tottenham on Wednesday.
I wanted to wait to see if there was any reaction after that match.
‘On Saturday I saw he was in good condition and decided to play him.
‘When I told him he was playing he was moved.
He showed a strong character.
‘I thought he did quite well in the first-half of his first official match.
But of course I had to remove him from the field.’
Before he was injured Gazza showed flashes of his genius.
He played a controlled, holding game in mid-field, allowing the German Thomas Doll to take a more attacking role.
It was a rough match with five bookings but Lazio will not be complaining — they took a million pounds in receipts.
Pic: ARNOLD SLATER
Wright not for sale
RICHARD TANNER
SKIPPER Mark Wright was the centre of transfer speculation last night as Liverpool flew here for their European Cup Winners' Cup second leg tie against Apollon Limassol.
Wright, a £2.2m buy from Derby last season, stayed behind for treatment to a dead leg he suffered in the defeat by Wimbledon.
But the England centre-half denied his absence from tonight's match had anything to do with a weekend newspaper report that Liverpool were ready to sell him.
A Liverpool spokesman said yesterday: ‘I don't know where these stories come from.
Mark Wright is going nowhere.’
Liverpool, who hold a 6-1 lead from the first leg, expect the support of around 4,500 fans for a match that has put the Cypriot police on alert because Juventus, the other Heysel disaster club, are also in action on the island.
WRIGHT: Injury
Diego's dazzler
DIEGO Maradona made all three goals in his comeback match for Seville in a friendly against Bayern Munich in Spain last night.
The Argentine superstar, until recently the undisputed greatest footballer in the world, had his every move cheered by the 40,000 crowd.
He prowled the midfield often at half-pace — he is still a stone overweight — pulling the Bayern defence this way and that.
It was a memorable return for the man who seemed to have ended his career a convicted cocaine user in Naples.
ROBBO JOY!
Bryan is back for United
KEN LAWRENCE
MANCHESTER United skipper Bryan Robson will be standing by this afternoon to make a sensational comeback against Torpedo Moscow.
Robson, 35, has not seen first-team action for five months due to hamstring and sciatica problems, but last Saturday he played 80 minutes of an A team game.
Boss Alex Ferguson may now gamble on his veteran as United prepare for the second leg of this UEFA Cup tie with the scores at 0-0.
Torpedo have never lost a European tie on their dilapidated old ground and Ferguson knows Robson's experience could be vital.
He said: ‘If Robbo does play, then we can expect that he will ‘go’ before the end of the match.
‘I might get only an hour, or perhaps only half a game from him.
‘But the thing about Robbo is that he is a determined  beggar and I know that if I ask him, he will say OK if he's ready.
Ferguson is prepared to risk Robson because another of United's Englishmen, Lee Martin, is unlikely to face the Russians because of a stomach bug.
Ferguson will delay his decision until after a light training session this morning.
‘Before I go to speak to Robbo about it, I want one last look,’ said the manager.
‘If I do ask him, and he says he's ready, that will only confirm my thoughts.’
Robson last played against Liverpool in April when United's championship hopes finally crashed.
Anchor
If he plays today, the former England skipper is likely to play in front of the back four as anchor man, while his colleagues search for the away goal that would put the dour Muscovites under pressure.
‘The great thing about Robbo is that he brings that bit extra out of people,’ said Ferguson.
The manager will play Ryan Giggs from the start after leaving him out of the first leg due to a mix-up over UEFA rules governing foreign and assimilated players.
The other non-English players today will be Brian McClair, keeper Peter Schmeichel, Mark Hughes and Denis Irwin.
Ferguson said: ‘It will be a very tight game and I do not expect the Russians to be too adventurous.
‘The pitch is huge and the longer the match goes on, the better that should be for us.
We will not be worried about extra time or penalties with big Peter in goal.’
RED GUARD IT'S hats off to Alex Ferguson as he gets out and about in Moscow's Red Square
A-WARD!
MARTIN RICHARDS
POWER-HOUSE prop Kevin Ward yesterday appealed to Great Britain coach Mal Reilly: ‘Let me have one last crack at Australia.’
The 35-year-old St Helens pack star has declared himself available for next month's World Cup Final against the Aussies.
‘If selected it would be my swansong on the international scene and a great way to bow out,’ said Ward.
Reilly, who names his 19-man squad on October 13, was yesterday assessing the Aussie party.
‘They'll miss Andrew Ettingshausen and Laurie Daley, but it's still a very strong squad and they've so much talent to choose from,’ he said.
Aussie squad: Meninga,(capt), Cartwright, Clyde, Brasher, Carne, Fittler, Gillespie, Godden, Hancock, Harragon, Johns, Langer, Lazarus, Lindner, Mackay, Renouf, Sargent, Sironen, Stuart, Kevin Walters, Kerrod Walters and Steve Walters.
WARD: Plea
WE CAN DO IT — WILKO
The lads are all bubbling
JOHN EDWARDS
HOWARD WILKINSON savoured the prospect yesterday of a history-making European night for Leeds and revealed why he believes they can conquer the odds.
The champions have to overturn a daunting 3-0 deficit at Elland Road tomorrow night if they are to get past Stuttgart and make it into the European Cup second round.
No British team have ever come back from three goals down in the history of European competition.
But Wilkinson is convinced his in-form side can do it.
And with good reason — it has been done to him already!
The Leeds boss still shudders at the memory of his old Sheffield Wednesday side going 4-3 down to Chelsea in a League Cup tie seven years ago after cruising at 3-0 up.
Mission
A Mel Sterland penalty in the last minute of extra time eventually forced a 4-4 draw.
Wilkinson said: ‘If proof were ever needed that anything is possible in this game, then that's got to be it.
‘One minute we were apparently coasting home at 3-0 up, the next we were 4-3 down and wondering what had hit us.
‘I know some people will think it's Mission Impossible, and I can understand that.
But we don't think it's impossible — far from it.
‘I've noticed the players have perked up a lot since the first leg in Stuttgart.
‘They are looking fresher and bouncier, and I just sense there has been a lot more energy about them the past 10 days.
‘All the players have to lose is their self-respect, and I don't think that will happen.
‘I think the attitude will be that Stuttgart will only get through over our dead bodies.
‘What we will be aiming for on the night is to make sure we score first — and it needn't be in the opening minutes.
‘If we went ahead 15 minutes from time and were performing, I would still fancy us to go through.’
Moment
Fit-again Eric Cantona is desperate to atone for the moment, just seconds after he damaged a hamstring, when his misplaced pass handed Stuttgart one of their goals.
‘That was a crucial error which could even have made his injury worse,’ said Wilkinson.
‘I was resigned to him missing the return leg, but he has recovered remarkably quickly.
Impact
‘He will be nursing a secret desire to try to make amends, even though everyone has reassured him that these things happen.
‘I'm just glad to have him back.
He has made a big impact this season and gives us a much better chance of succeeding against Stuttgart.’
WILKINSON: Optimistic
CANTONA THE AVENGER FRENCH ace Eric Cantona will be anxious to make amends for his first-leg blunder as Leeds seek to overturn a 3-0 deficit against Stuttgart.
Gary just makes it
FOREST boss Brian Clough has handed striker Gary Bannister a contract until the end of the season — but only just.
Bannister, 32, pleaded with Clough for a trial at the start of the season after being kicked out by West Bromwich, but he missed several chances in Saturday's 0-0 draw at Chelsea.
And with Forest still at the bottom of the Premier League, Clough insisted: ‘If I'd waited to offer him the contract after Saturday he may have blown it.
He missed a hat-trick of chances.’
Clough added: ‘He's earned himself a contract not because of how well he has done for us, but because I think he can carry on after 32.’
Bannister, who has hit five goals in eight games, said: ‘If I get 20 this season then I could earn myself an extension of the contract.’
BANNISTER: Lucky
MARTYN'S CHANCE
HUGH JAMIESON
WELSH keeper Martyn Thomas makes a comeback for Birmingham in tonight's Anglo-Italian Cup tie against Cambridge at St Andrews.
With Birmingham needing just a point to qualify for a place in Europe, 32-year-old Thomas replaces Andy Gosney, who is out for a month because of damaged shoulder ligaments.
Boss Terry Cooper is furious at the Steve Bull tackle that injured Gosney in Blues' 4-0 loss to Wolves on Sunday.
Cooper said: ‘Would you be happy if someone jumped at you with two feet?’
But Gosney admitted: ‘It was a 50-50 ball and one of those things that happens.
‘I didn't expect him to pull out because the ball was there to go for.’
On tonight's match, Cooper said: ‘There's a lot at stake and it gives us the opportunity to put things right.’
I NEED YOU
Taylor waits for Gazza
NORWAY RECALL STILL ON
HARRY HARRIS
GRAHAM TAYLOR yesterday announced that he's ready to fly out to Rome to watch Paul Gascoigne before naming his team for the opening World Cup tie against Norway at Wembley.
Gazza shrugged off the trauma of his painful exit from his Italian Serie A debut for Lazio against Genoa to train 24 hours later.
The midfield star trained alone — sprinting, jogging, twisting and turning to answer claims that the tackle which put him out of the game would mean another lengthy lay-off, almost 17 months after he wrecked his right knee in the FA Cup final.
Delighted England manager Taylor said: ‘That's great news to hear he is training.
‘I'll fly out to watch Gazza play against Parma next Sunday if he's selected for the match.’
And, the indications are that Gazza has a chance, despite being slammed by the Italian press for his first half display on Sunday.
More important to Gazza will be Taylor's assessment and the England chief added: ‘I've watched the video of the Genoa match and before Gazza went off there were some very encouraging signs.
‘I'm naming the squad for the game against Norway on Thursday and, as I've already indicated, he will be included just as he was in Spain early this month.
Condition ‘The lad needs to be involved but it's still too early for me to say whether he will play in that game.’
As well as Sunday's League match, there is an Italian Cup tie the following Wednesday for Gazza to prove he's in a good enough condition to make some contribution against Norway.
But Taylor stressed: ‘I just have to wait and see how many games he plays over the next few weeks.’
Lazio manager Dino Zoff may have been tempted to rest Gazza against Parma, but his German ace striker Karl-Heinz Reidle is now a worse casualty with badly-damaged ankle ligaments.
That leaves Zoff with foreign stars Thomas Doll and Aaron Winter, who was left out to make way for Gazza.
Scared
Lazio doctor Claudio Bartolini, who was scared when Gazza was first injured, said yesterday: ‘When I saw the accident again on TV I was very worried, but this morning I looked at it and now we are both very happy.
‘There's no reason why he shouldn't play on Sunday.’
General manager Maurizio Manzini was delighted Gazza was able to train and said: ‘Paul has been training and there's no problem.
GAZZA checks the right knee after the knock that caused much alarm -but now he could play on Sunday
TAYLOR: Encouraged
Gazza's former Spurs team-mate Gary Lineker turned his talents to cricket yesterday and made 103 for Cross Arrows at Lord's, but his side went down to the Stock Exchange by five wickets
HAPPY RETURNS
CHRIS WADDLE is set for an England recall after settling his differences with boss Graham Taylor.
The Sheffield Wednesday winger has been in the international wilderness since last October's match with Turkey, but the pair had talks after Wednesday's win over Spurs on Sunday.
The 31-year old may well be named on Thursday when Taylor reveals his squad for next month's World Cup qualifier against Norway.
Said Waddle: ‘There have been misunderstandings but they have been sorted out.
Now we understand each other perfectly.’
And Peter Beardsley also has a ‘Remember Me’ message for Taylor.
The Everton star believes he can throw off a hamstring strain in time for the Norway match and said: ‘Hopefully I'll be playing at the weekend.
The leg is getting better every day.’
Liam's target
KEVIN Keegan set the seal yesterday on Liam O'Brien's sizzling start to the season at Newcastle.
The Newcastle boss said: ‘He has been a revelation, but maybe that's because this is the best team he has played in.’
The Republic of Ireland international has bounced back after his future looked in doubt following the arrival of Paul Bracewell.
‘I wondered why the manager bought him,’ O'Brien admitted yesterday.
‘We play in the same position and I thought I'd proved myself last season.
‘But I decided to take my chance when it came and make it hard for Paul to get back.’
Now O'Brien hopes for an international recall for the World Cup qualifier in Denmark.
O'BRIEN: Revelation
OWNERS STAGE PROTEST
TWO of racing's most colourful owners Ken Higson and Barney Curley staged protests against the prize money at Fontwell yesterday.
Higson, the owner of first-race 9-4 favourite Across The Card, went to the start and told his jockey Gary Moore not to take part.
The betting market was thrown into confusion, and the stewards announced an inquiry.
Then an hour later Curley took the same action with 2-1 favourite Torwada.
The stewards fined Higson and Gary Moore, Curley and John Twomey, the rider of Torwada, £1,200 each.
After his meeting with the stewards, Curley said: ‘It's a disgrace.
My jockey wouldn't earn that in a year from riding.’
Higson said: ‘Today is one of the saddest days of my life.
But I felt I had to do something to keep some sanity in racing.
Certain tracks and off-course bookmakers must realise that they are rubbing our noses in the dirt.
‘I have the support in writing of a large number of owners and trainers in the action I have taken.
My main complaint is that third place in today's hurdle race — £86 — does not even pay the jockey's riding fee.
CARLISLE boss Aidan McCaffery was sacked yesterday after 18 months in charge.
Carlisle have taken one point from the last 15 and are 18th in the Third Division.
Toe the line!
FRANK WIECHULA
VINNY Jones revealed it was a ‘toe-job’ which led to Paul Gascoigne's grimace in the famous photo of their close encounter.
Gazza's pain came after he got to grips with the Jones boy when he was playing for Newcastle against Wimbledon.
Jones revealed: ‘A lot of people say to me ‘that put you on the map’.
‘In non-League you could definitely get away with it, but now all of a sudden you're in the limelight.
‘That incident was where we had a free-kick on our half-way line and he was just marking me tight, and there was a bit of bantering going on between us.
Giggling
‘If the truth is known he was giggling until I went to stand back and then I trod on his toe.
It shows up on one of the pictures — and I think that's the only bit of pain he got from that.’
Jones, who talks about famous past hard-men such as Billy Bremner, Graeme Souness, Tommy Smith, Jack Charlton and Dave Mackay, then gave his interpretation of the contentious soccer term.
‘I mean, what is hard?
Is hard not flinching in a tackle?
I think that's what it means.
‘If the ball is there to be won and you've got to go in to win that ball for your team, then maybe you are going to be in a 40-60 situation — and you've still got to go in.
‘And I think that's what these lads in this video are all about,’ Vinny added.
Hard Core
MAURICE Core's battering-ram right hand won him the vacant British light-heavyweight title at Manchester's New Century Hall last night.
Core came from behind after suffering a second round knockdown to stop Ireland's Noel Magee after 2 minutes 34 seconds of the ninth.
Core's victory provided his manager Phil Martin with his second British champion inside a week after Frank Grant's shock capture of the middleweight crown from Herol Graham in Leeds.
With the steam running out of Magee, Core thumped in his big rights and referee Paul Thomas had no alternative but to step in.
A split-second after the stoppage, the 26-year-old Magee crashed to the canvas taking an  embarrassed Thomas with him and needed a couple of minutes to recover before being hauled to his feet.
While Core was jubilant with his victory, it was in no way a fistic feast in a division once graced by Chris Finnegan and John Conteh.
There were far too many clinches and referee Thomas had to bring both men together at the start of the seventh to tell them to cut out the holding.
VINNY'S VIDEO NASTY
OUCH!
They'll poke you in the eye
OUCH!
You'll catch a right hander
Secrets of the hit men
TONY STENSON
VINNY Jones last night sensationally revealed the secrets that make him soccer's hardest man.
In a video nasty, full of mayhem, broken bones and bloodied noses, Wimbledon's midfield mugger explains just why he is such a feared assassin.
Jones, who was sent off for the sixth time in a five-year career against Blackburn on his Wimbledon return two weeks ago, hosts a  controversial video that makes heroes of men of great skill who play to hurt and unveils a code that includes:
GIVING an opponent a lump behind the ear with an elbow at corners.
A POKE in the eye when referees or fans are not looking, or when the ball's at the other end of the field the centre-half lays out the centre-forward with a right-hander.
STUDDING the Achilles of your opponent when the ball passes everybody — that's always a nice one.
TACKLING your opponent very hard and then lifting him up with your hands under his armpits and pulling his hairs until he is screaming blue murder — and you say to the referee ‘Well, I'm only trying to help him!’
THE oldest one in the book is waiting for a corner and treading on everyone's toes on a freezing January day.
OR there's Gazza (Paul Gascoigne) when you grab him by the testicles and say ‘Can you speak in a bit lower voice?’
Jones, soccer's anti-hero, admits he is not one of the most loved men around but adds: ‘These sort things happen and it's no good saying they don't.’
But Jones, despite his outrageous statements, is passionate about the game.
He said: ‘I didn't play soccer until I was 21.
I was on the terraces until five years ago.
‘I know what I wanted.
What my pals wanted and I put that on to the pitch.
‘You dish it out, you take it back.
A clump does no harm.’
And he warned his opponents: ‘If you are going over the top on me you've got to put me out of the game.
‘Whether it's five minutes, ten minutes or next season, I'll be back.’
And Jones, in a frank interview on the video, describes why he clumped Liverpool star Steve McMahon in the opening minutes of the 1988 FA Cup against Liverpool at Wembley.
And how McMahon tried to get his revenge when Vinny played at Anfield.
RUSH WAR CRY!
Ian aims to spark Reds revival
Let's get it right
RICHARD TANNER
IAN RUSH makes a welcome return to action for crisis club Liverpool here tonight insisting: ‘We must win for our own good.’
Despite being 6-1 up from the home leg, boss Graeme Souness is demanding his players treat this European Cup Winners' Cup clash with Apollon Limassol as anything but a dead game.
Their credibility and confidence has been stripped bare after three successive Premier League defeats and an embarrassing 4-4 Coca-Cola Cup draw with Chesterfield.
The significance of tonight's game in the Tsirion Athletic Centre Stadium is not lost on Rush, who hit four of the first-leg goals to eclipse Roger Hunt's European club record.
A Rush hat-trick tonight would take him past Hunt's all-time Liverpool scoring record of 286.
But Rush, who has watched Liverpool concede 11 goals in the three games he's missed with a groin strain, insists: ‘I'm not interested in breaking records at the moment.
The only important thing is that we play as a team and that we win.
‘It's a good game to get us going again, although I don't think the ground or conditions will be in our favour.
‘It would just be nice if we could get a goal lead for a change.
That would make a big difference.’
Apart from Rush, Liverpool will be boosted by the return of Paul Stewart, who scored the other two goals in the first-leg win.
But they will be without skipper Mark Wright, who picked up a ‘dead leg’ against Wimbledon on Saturday.
TARGET RUSH is poised to pass Roger Hunt's all-time Liverpool scoring record.
SOUNESS: Demands commitment
ANGRY owners are planning to disrupt racing at Fontwell today by withdrawing several horses just before the start of races in protest of poor prize money.
Imran quits
PAKISTAN Test star Imran Khan yesterday announced his retirement from cricket.
Khan, who skippered Pakistan to triumph in the World Cup final against England earlier this year, said: ‘I retire with the knowledge that I have no ambition left in the game.’
Close call for Cuban missiles!
DAVID MOORE
COLIN Jackson and Linford Christie sparkled as battling Britain finished second in the World Cup here in Havana last night.
Jackson was a class apart from his opponents when winning the 110 metres hurdles, while team captain Christie — who claims he is exhausted — still managed second place in the 200 metres.
Their superb displays ensured runners-up spot for the Brits behind Africa, with Europe third.
Jackson jetted out of his blocks to leave the rest of his field for dead, crossing the line in 13.07 seconds.
That shattered the competition record of 13.32, set by America's Greg Foster in 1981.
Jackson, who failed in the Olympics, said: ‘I had to win, or the rest of the boys would have given me stick, particularly Linford.’
BROWNE IS ON A HIDING
CHARLES FAWCUS
EX-JOCKEY Dermot Browne could be kicked out of the racing game today — without defending himself.
Dermot has been summoned to appear before the Jockey Club this morning to face three charges relating to his brief career as a trainer and he's not expected to turn up.
.
‘If he doesn't come, the  Disciplinary Committe then has to decide whether to go ahead with the inquiry in his  absence ,’ said the Jockey Club's Sue Williams.
‘Everything depends on whether he appears in the morning.’
The former Champion amateur rider was associated with top horses Browne's Gazette and The Mighty Mac, but everything turned sour when he set up as a trainer in 1990.
Eventually his licence was taken away because he  didn't have enough horses.
At one point he was quizzed by Jockey Club investigators and police detectives looking into the doping of Norwich, Bravefoot and Flying Diva, but no action was taken against him.
Today Dermot is accused of ‘giving information to a bookmaker in return for money’ and he faces two other lesser charges relating to horses he trained.
Browne has maintained his innocence all along, but he could be banned from all Britain's racetracks and a friend said: ‘They are just out to get him.’
Newmarket sees more cheerful action this afternoon with the clash of brilliant two-year-olds Lyric Fantasy and Sayyedati.
Michael Roberts could ride either but sticks to Lyric Fantasy who became the first two-year-old filly to win the Nunthorpe at Yor 
I salute the dogs of war
The VINNY JONES story that has rocked the soccer world
The men you'd want to have on your side
FRANK WIECHULA
TOUGH guy Vinny Jones last night saluted British soccer's legendary hard-men — comparing them to heroes in war-time.
Jones opens his heart in the controversial new video, Soccer's Hard Men, exclusively revealed in yesterday's Mirror Sport, which has shocked the football world.
The Wimbledon midfielder pays tribute to big names like Graeme Souness, Nobby Stiles, Dave Mackay, Jack Charlton, Ron Harris, Norman Hunter, Steve McMahon, Bryan Robson, Tommy Smith and Peter Storey.
Jones said: ‘If you look at a war, there was always the lad who carried the flag, or the emblem of a country.
‘If that man got shot then I think you'd bank on any of these lads in the video — you wouldn't even need to turn round to see who was running with the flag.
‘With a lot of the hard men in football it's all down to their characters.
They are not just aggressive on the field, they are probably aggressive in every walk of life.
Pushed
‘These lads say to themselves ‘I'm not going to be pushed about, I'm going to have my piece.’
And when they go out on a football field they can do something about it.
‘I think a lot of supporters look for that because they all want to be leaders themselves — they want to be the boss, they don't want to be the tea-boy.’
These are the men Jones highlights, and his comments:
GRAEME SOUNESS (Spurs, Middlesbrough, Liverpool, Sampdoria, Rangers and Scotland — 1970-91): ‘I've got a lot of admiration for him because he was a very passionate player and he looked after other players as well.
‘If one of his mates got a whack and got hurt he'd go and sort it out for them.
I'm not saying that's right, but he took it upon himself to say ‘You're not taking liberties with any of our lads.’
‘He'd turn a 40-60 ball round the other way.
Even now as a manager he's still very passionate about it and I look up to people like that.’
BILLY BREMNER:(Leeds, Hull, Doncaster and Scotland — 1959-81): ‘He was a hero at Elland Road a long time before I came into football.
But having been a player there myself you can still feel the buzz of the bloke 15 years on.
‘I felt he never just led Leeds United FC.
I think he led the people at work and at home as well.
He inspired them and they looked up to him.’
NOBBY STILES (Manchester Utd, Middlesbrough, Preston and England — 1960-74): ‘He could have been a cartoon character.
He was football's equivalent of Popeye — he probably had a can of spinach before the game.
‘He was a weedy-looking little man with glasses and no teeth.
But when he walked on the field you'd think it was Goliath coming on there.’
DAVE MACKAY (Spurs, Derby, Swindon and Scotland — 1958-71): ‘There's that famous picture of Mackay and Bremner, each showing total commitment and aggression.
‘It looked as though if you'd left them in a ring on their own, one of them would have had to drop down dead to end the fight.
‘For me Dave Mackay was more of a thoroughbred of the early times — but I think he could have played successfully in today's football.
‘The only thing is he would get frustrated with the referees, because they just don't give you an inch.
‘I don't think they understand it — it's not life and death, it's more than that.’
NORMAN HUNTER:(Leeds, Bristol City, Barnsley and England — 1961-82): ‘He had two other hard men with him he was able to rely on.
‘I think it was a big contest at Leeds, with Johnny Giles, Hunter and Bremner to be the toughest.’
JACK CHARLTON (Leeds and England 1952–72): ‘I think he summed it up for me a couple of years ago when they questioned him being an Englishman in charge of the Irish team.
‘He turned round and said it was not about your race, or religion, it's about people — life is about people.
‘When he was playing he strutted about like the rooster in the chicken run.
You knew he was there, wherever you were on the pitch and you didn't want him coming in behind you trying to get the ball.’
TOMMY SMITH:(Liverpool, Swansea and England — 1962-1979): ‘The minute he got off the coach and walked into the changing-room people would go for cover.
‘He was one of these big ugly men, the big ferocious-looking bloke that if someone said to you he breathed fire, you'd believe them.
‘I've seen him at Liverpool in the players’ lounge.
Even now he still looks a beast of a man.’
RON HARRIS:(Chelsea and Brentford- 1961–1983): ‘People called him Chopper Harris, and Chopper was my first nickname when I went to Wimbledon — before the crowd came up with Psycho for me.
‘But it doesn't matter what they call you — with players like Harris the attraction was arrogance, terror, you name it — and the people paid to see it, week in week out.’
Also featured in the video are STEVE McMAHON:(Everton, Villa, Liverpool, Manchester City and England — 1979onwards); BRYAN ROBSON:(West Bromwich, Manchester Utd and England — 1974-onwards) and PETER STOREY:(Arsenal, Fulham and England — 1965-1977).
Jones finished off by saying: ‘The good thing about English football is that they don't roll about the pitch if they are not hurt.
‘I hope the Continental antics don't creep into our football because people like myself will be finished.’
FLASHPOINT THE famous day Spurs hard man Dave Mackay got to grips with Leeds legend Billy Bremner at White Hart Lane — two Scottish firebrands coming face to face in the heat of battle
McMAHON: Still playing
STOREY: Red hot Gunner
SMITH: Anfield iron man
STILES: Like a little Goliath
HUNTER: Hunted in a pack
ROBSON: Still a United hero
HARRIS: Original ‘Chopper’
CHARLTON: Like a rooster
SOUNESS: Trouble-shooter
On the ball
RICHIE Woodhall, who defends his Commonwealth middleweight title against John Ashton in Telford tomorrow, plans a spring challenge for the European title at the Hawthorns.
Woodhall, whose great grandfather George scored the winning goal for West Bromwich in the 1888 FA Cup final, has been adopted by the club.
MICK'S A FALL GUY!
MILLWALL player-manager Mick McCarthy blundered his side out of the Anglo-Italian Cup last night.
Millwall drew 1-1 at Portsmouth, and the result meant Pompey secured a place against Italy's Serie B clubs in November.
McCarthy's mistake came in the 76th minute when he allowed a long ball to go over his head, and Guy Whittingham nipped in for the equaliser.
It spoilt a solid performance from McCarthy, and lost Millwall's lead.
Portsmouth had, in fact, looked second best and the Lions' Dutch triallist Romano Sion was causing them problems.
It was Sion who created Alex Rae's goal after 19 minutes.
Brentford are also through thanks to on-loan keeper Gerry Peyton.
And late goals by Simon Ratcliffe and Gary Blissett were enough to beat Oxford 2-0.
But Peyton's heroics are unlikely to lead him to European glory.
He is due to return to Everton in a fortnight.
Luton were knocked out after drawing 1-1 with Bristol City.
Wayne Allison's
55th-minute goal earned City their place in the next round, although Steve Claridge headed Luton level seven minutes later.
DERBY beat Barnsley 2-1 with goals from Mark Pembridge and Richard Goulooze.
Ged Taggart scored for Barnsley
Taylor told: Wright is your man!
NIGEL CLARKE
ARSENAL manager George Graham last night urged Graham Taylor to pick Ian Wright for England.
Graham said: ‘I can't pick the England team, but Ian would always be in my side.’
Graham gave this reminder to Graham after seeing his £2.5 million striker score in the 1-0 win over Manchester City at Highbury.
It was Wright's sixth goal in 10 games.
Wright's last appearance for his country was as a sub against Hungary in Budapest in May, and Graham promised: ‘If England pick him for the game against Norway next month he'll join the squad’.
The last time Wright was called up he pulled out of the party even though he played for Arsenal.
Graham added: ‘Ian would like to be included.
But it's up to Graham Taylor now.’
Taylor saw the dark destroyer at his  devastating best as he grabbed the 18th minute winner.
Graham was supported by Manchester City boss Peter Reid who said: ‘Wright's a quality player, the sort of striker to keep you on your toes.’
WRIGHT: In form
Take a break
KEVIN KEEGAN last night ordered Newcastle's teenage midfield star Lee Clark to take a break.
Clark was eager to play in tonight's Anglo-Italian tie against Leicester at St James's Park but boss Keegan said: ‘Lee has run a million miles for us this season.
He's only 19 and needs a rest for his own good.’
Clark, in action at least twice a week this season, admitted: ‘I'm disappointed because I don't feel tired — nobody does when things are going so well.’
He is one of seven regulars missing tonight.
Bjorn Kristensen, Alan Neilson, keeper Pavel Srnicek, Alan Thompson and club captain Brian Kilcline will all start.
Coming soon
THE tremendous response to news of the video ‘Soccer's Hard Men’ means the release date has been brought forward a week to October 12.
The tape, from Video Vision, will be priced at £10.99, and will be available at most good video stores from that date.
KO FOR MAC BID
IAN GIBB
COLIN McMillan's ambitious bid to be re-instated as WBO featherweight champion has been rejected.
The WBO upheld Saturday's controversial decision at Olympia, when McMillan lost his title to Colombia's Ruben Palacio after sustaining a dislocated left shoulder in the eighth round.
McMillan is still the mandatory challenger but WBO official Ed Levine said: ‘There is no reason to reverse the verdict since this was not a foul.
Colin lost the fight.’
KO FOR MAC BID
IAN GIBB
COLIN McMillan's ambitious bid to be re-instated as WBO featherweight champion has been rejected.
The WBO upheld Saturday's controversial decision at Olympia, when McMillan lost his title to Colombia's Ruben Palacio after sustaining a dislocated left shoulder in the eighth round.
McMillan is still the mandatory challenger but WBO official Ed Levine said: ‘There is no reason to reverse the verdict since this was not a foul.
Colin lost the fight.’
Preston sack Les
LES Chapman got a belated birthday present yesterday — the sack.
The Preston North End boss celebrated his 44th birthday on Sunday but his fate had been sealed 24 hours earlier with the 2-0 home defeat against Hartlepool.
The Second Division club ended Chapman's two-year Deepdale reign and installed Sam Allardyce as caretaker until a new man is appointed.
Chapman, who hit the goal which earned Preston promotion six years ago, was the club's 18th manager since the war.
Chief Executive Paul Agnew said: ‘It's very sad because Les is so popular with everyone.
But it was given very full and serious consideration.’
Chapman said: ‘Obviously I'm sad but that's life and there is no animosity.
As a manager you always know that one day it will happen.
‘Preston have been a great club and I'm sure they will be great again.
Success will come.’
10 TRY-IFFIC SHAUN IS A CUP CRACKER
Wigan ace shatters Swinton
SWINTON 0 WIGAN 78
ALAN WEST
TEN-TRY Shaun Edwards swept to the top of the Rugby League touchdown chart as Wigan piled on the agony for crisis club Swinton.
Edwards' brilliant support play earned him four tries before the break and six in the second half to take his season's tally to 15 — six ahead of Halifax centre Greg Austin.
The Great Britain scrum-half became only the fourth player in history to score ten tries in a match — equalling team-mate Martin Offiah's club record set against Leeds in the Premiership semi-final last May.
Wigan's victory was also a record defeat for Swinton — beating the 76-3 thrashing by Huddersfield in 1946.
And Edwards' ten-try haul is only one less than the Rugby League record set by George West for Hull KR against Brookland in 1905.
The only blot for scintillating Wigan was that Offiah handed Great Britain coach Mal Reilly a World Cup scare after limping off with damaged knee tendons.
Offiah, back in action against Widnes last Friday after missing two matches with hamstring trouble, was carried off early in the second half after pulling up in agony.
Edwards was handed his tenth try on a plate by Dean Bell with Wigan clinching a semi- final home tie against Oldham next Tuesday.
The Lancashire Cup is the only trophy to elude coach John Monie in his three-year reign though they hardly needed to break sweat against helpless Swinton with Frano Botica booting 11 goals from 15 attempts.
Second Division strugglers Swinton, battling for survival with crippling cash problems, had only the consolation of a 3,501 gate at their new Bury home.
Edwards said: ‘The most I had ever scored before for Wigan was four tries — I never dreamt I'd score ten.
Ability
‘My job is to back up the man with the ball and I always try to do that to the best of my ability.
I learned a lot from Ellery Hanley when he was at Wigan.
‘When I reached eight tries I realised I was in with a chance of records and the lads helped me as best they could.’
KING EDWARDS SHAUN Edward was too hot for Swinton last night — scoring a record-equalling ten tries.
FERGIE'S OWN GOAL
MATT HUGHES
MANCHESTER UNITED manager Alex Ferguson will be ‘haunted for years’ by the sale of striker Mark Robins to Norwich.
That is the grim prediction of former United boss Tommy Docherty who believes Ferguson has scored a spectacular own goal by allowing Robins to leave Old Trafford.
Robins has so far scored seven goals after Ferguson sold him to Norwich for a cut-price £800,000 on the eve of the season.
Docherty, who reckons that is a real blunder, made his feelings known when he spoke at a soccer club dinner in Norfolk.
‘I couldn't believe it when I heard Fergie was going to sell Robins,’ he said.
‘And I was even more astounded when I heard what Norwich were going to pay for him.
‘United gave him away and Mike Walker must have thought it was his lucky day.
‘Fergie has made a big mistake and I'm sure the decision will haunt him for years to come.’
ROBINS: Bargain
DUEL!
AUSTRALIA'S Rugby League kings, the Brisbane Broncos, threw down a dramatic challenge to record-breaking Wigan last night, demanding: ‘Play us to decide the best team in the world.’
The Broncos are happy to take on John Monie's Best of British away from home — they want the showdown at Wigan's Central Park the weekend after the World Cup final between Australia and Great Britain on October 24.
Brisbane would already have eight players in England as part of the Aussie World Cup squad — and the rest could soon follow.
MONIE: Wigan boss
HULL HUNT
HULL are the latest club to show an interest in Leeds forgotten man John Gallagher.
The Humbersiders already have a top kicker in Paul Eastwood but think they can use the pace of Gallagher in their three-quarter line.
Leeds yesterday signed Hunslet scrum-half James Lowes.
WE CAN LIFT CUP
MATT HUGHES
ROLAND NILSSON, Sheffield Wednesday's Swedish full-back, last night backed them to land the UEFA Cup — in the club's first European excursion since 1963.
Nilsson discounts the fact that Wednesday, certain to complete their first-round demolition of Spora Luxembourg tomorrow, have not done battle on Continental soil for 29 years.
The 28-year-old defender knows the route to glory, having won the UEFA Cup with IFK Gothenburg in 1987.
‘We have the experience to win the trophy first time out,’ he said, even though Wednesday will face much sterner tests than the 8-1 first-leg rout of Spora.
‘In Trevor, Chris Waddle, Viv Anderson, Chris Woods and myself we have players who've appeared in Europe for other clubs.
‘And many of those who haven't done that are internationals, anyway — like David Hirst, Carlton Palmer, John Sheridan, Nigel Worthington and Danny Wilson.’
Nilsson added: ‘With a little luck I'm sure we can go all the way.
Our style is suited to European competition.
‘We like to play the ball around like the Continentals, but we still work as hard as any team in England.’
NILSSON: Confident
Gord help us says Strachan
JOHN EDWARDS
GORDON STRACHAN last night appealed for strong refereeing to give Leeds a fighting chance of creating European Cup history.
The champions face the awesome job of wiping out a three-goal deficit against their German counterparts Stuttgart at Elland Road tonight.
Strachan believes they can do it — provided dangerman Lee Chapman gets proper protection against Stuttgart's strong-arm tactics.
The veteran of European campaigns with Aberdeen and Manchester United revealed his concern at the rough stuff dished out to prolific marksman Chapman in the first leg a fortnight ago.
Chapman became a target man in more ways than one as the Germans singled him out for a buffeting that went unpunished by Swedish referee Rune Larsson.
Alarmed
Stuttgart coach Christophe Daum had named Chapman as his side's biggest worry after the pre-season Makita tournament at Elland Road, saying: ‘He is so dangerous when the ball is played into him in the air, and I don't think we are able to cope with that.’
Strachan was alarmed at the way the German defence manhandled the 33-year-old front-runner and got away with it.
And he pleaded for a firmer approach from tonight's referee, Denmark's Kim Milton Nielsen.
‘Don't get me wrong — we're not asking for any favours from the referee,’ said the inspirational Leeds midfielder.
‘It's up to us to overturn the deficit without any outside help.
‘But after what went on in the first leg, I hope we get a referee who will be strong enough to stamp out any foul play.
‘We knew they were worried about Chappy's aerial ability, and it showed in the way they dealt with him.
‘There were arms everywhere, pulling him back and tugging at his shirt, and they got away with it just about every time.’
Strachan feels Leeds are running into form at just the right time for the most daunting task of manager Howard Wilkinson's four-year reign.
An impressive 2-0 win over Everton left the watching Germans in no doubt that Leeds are in the mood to become the first British team to win a European tie from 3-0 down.
And Strachan enthused: ‘We're getting back to something like our old form, and that's encouraging.
‘It's a dream to stick four goals past the German champions and win the tie, but it can be a reality as well.
We've simply got to stick to our pattern.’
CHAPMAN: Dangerman
HEY REF!
LEEDS United's Gordon Strachan hopes the referee takes a firmer approach against Stuttgart's tactics in tonight's second leg at Elland Road.
RED AND BURIED
PENALTY HORROR AS UNITED ARE TORPEDOED
Torpedo Moscow 0, Man Utd 0 (Agg 0-0, Moscow won 4-3 on pens)
KEN LAWRENCE
ALEX FERGUSON'S shell-shocked troops last night trudged home from Russia after failing in a dramatic penalty shoot-out.
Manchester United looked like they had forced themselves into the second round of the UEFA Cup when they went two goals ahead after four spot kicks when Paul Ince and Denis Irwin buried their chances.
But the Russians of Torpedo Moscow hit back when Igor Chuganov beat Peter Schmeichel, who two years ago had led his former club Brondby to penalty glory in the same stadium.
Steve Bruce and Brian McClair both missed their chances and while come-back skipper Bryan Robson took the scores to 3-3 after five kicks each, Gary Pallister became the man forced to hold his head in anguish.
Before he stepped up for the most nerve-shattering moment of his career Guennady Grishin had kept his nerve to fire the Russians into a 4-3 advantage.
Engulfed
England defender Pallister was then handed the responsibility of keeping United in continental competition but, just as they had failed in a penalty shoot-out against Videoton in the Cup Winners' Cup in 1985, so they were again to be engulfed in misery.
Pallister tried to keep his shot low and hard but Torpedo captain Alex Podshivalov pounced on the ball to send his team mates wild with joy and leave Ferguson's battling side shaking their heads in grief.
Earlier, with just seconds remaining of normal time, Mark Hughes had been sent off for a second bookable offence and his team mates then produced a magnificent display of courageous football to keep themselves in this tie.
And it seemed Fergie's ten man heroes had squeezed out a momentous victory until the soccer fates suddenly stabbed them in the back in the pouring rain of Moscow.
They had already been unlucky with just five minutes remaining in normal time, when Neil Webb's shot cannoned back off the foot of the post.
Earlier Robson's dramatic arrival — five months after his last competitive encounter — had an immediate effect on United's performance.
Suddenly Webb looked more relaxed and Ince could drive forward with more confidence.
Just after replacing the injured Danny Wallace in the 37th minute, Robson met a cross from 18-year-old Ryan Giggs but his fierce shot from 14 yards was brilliantly turned away by Podshivalov.
Bruce was the first United man to be cautioned and later McClair and Hughes followed him, but Torpedo's histrionic reaction to the visitors' tackling rarely impressed referee Jan Dangaard.
That was lucky for the Manchester side as the Danish official turned down no less than four strident claims for penalties.
Mike Phelan looked like he may have discovered a passage into the second round with a fierce drive which spun off a defender with the goalkeeper stranded.
Then Hughes, for so long dogged by the determined attentions of marker Guennady Fillimonov, suddenly shook himself into space before blasting from the edge of the box but Podshivalov reacted superbly.
Schmeichel excelled himself as Torpedo's blond danger man Talalayev suddenly found himself 14 yards from goal but his cannon shot was miraculously pushed away by the goalkeeper.
Danger
Seconds later Talalayev found himself in another inviting position but this time sent the ball skywards and out of danger.
Then with only seconds remaining of normal time Hughes was given his marching orders for a foul on his tormentor Fillimonov.
The Welshman kicked the ball away and referee Dangaard dismissed him for a second bookable offence.
But while United were now reduced to ten men during that last desperate half hour of extra time they survived magnificently to force themselves into the dramatic penalty spot finale in the rain.
DOWN'N OUT POOR Mark Hughes slips up as he tries a shot in Moscow — and soon he had fallen from grace completely.
Pic: ALBERT COOPER
Eagles' new plumage
CRYSTAL Palace have signed a deal with new soccer-kit makers.
Chairman Ron Noades will not name the company, who take over from Bukta, but the strip will be revealed during the televised home clash with Arsenal on November 2.
Eagles' new plumage
CRYSTAL Palace have signed a deal with new soccer-kit makers.
Chairman Ron Noades will not name the company, who take over from Bukta, but the strip will be revealed during the televised home clash with Arsenal on November 2.
Blues eye Russian
CHELSEA boss Ian Porterfield has targeted CSKA Moscow's international, Dimitri Kharin, in his search for a goalkeeper.
Porterfield, still seeking a replacement for out-of-favour Dave Beasant, said: ‘We would like to take a close look at him training with us.’
DUN GOOD
ANDY KIWOMYA, brother of Ipswich striker Chris, ended an agonising six-year battle when he signed for Dundee yesterday.
Kiwomya, 25, was not expected to play again after fracturing his spine in a training accident.
STEW-BLOT
A. LIMASSOL 1 LIVERPOOL 2
Agg: A.Limassol 2, Liverpool 8
RICHARD TANNER
FIERY Paul Stewart saw red here last night as Liverpool ran into a Cup-Winners Cup storm.
Stewart was sent off 18 minutes from the end of a niggly clash for foolishly slapping Apollon keeper Michalis Christophi across the head as he picked himself up from an innocent penalty-area collision.
Stewart could argue that it was little more than a playful cuff and Christophi certainly made a real meal of it by falling dramatically to the ground clutching his face.
A linesman called over referee Loris Stasoggia — and the Italian official had little choice but to dismiss Stewart.
As he walked disconsolately away the hotheaded Cypriot crowd threw several missiles on to the running track — but fortunately none reached the Liverpool bench.
Stewart's dismissal — Liverpool's first in Europe since Kenny Dalglish was given his marching orders against Benfica eight years ago — took the gloss off the Merseyside club's first away win in any competition since January 18.
Goals from Rush and rookie Don Hutchison gave them victory after Yugoslav international Milenko Spoliaric had given the Cypriots a shock lead.
But Stewart will now miss both legs of the second round — and possibly a third game — with his dismissal likely to be judged as violent conduct.
Liverpool may have been five goals up from the first leg, but this was never going to be an easy game in 70-degree heat and on a typically bumpy Mediterranean pitch.
Liverpool, missing seven players through injury and ineligibility, survived some anxious moments in the first half.
But Liverpool appeared to have weathered the storm and were heading for their first clean sheet since their Cup final win in May when Spoliaric crashed home a left-foot drive on the hour.
But Ian Rush, Liverpool's most experienced European campaigner, quickly spared their blushes two minutes later, turning well inside the box to drill home a low shot from Hutchison's pass.
Hutchison, the kid Dalglish signed from Hartlepool nearly two years ago, marked his European debut with the winner in the 69th minute when he sent a neat chip over the keeper after being fed by Steve McManaman.
Souness had no complaints about Stewart's dismissal, saying: ‘He was foolish.
He was wrong to get involved as he did.
‘Paul raised his hand and if you do that you deserve to go.’
SHAME OF VINNY
He's a mosquito brain…talking with diarrhoea in his mouth
HARRY HARRIS
VINNY JONES was last night subjected to an astonishing attack by Wimbledon owner and father-figure Sam Hammam over his involvement in a shock video nasty.
Jones was also slammed by the FA and the PFA over the controversial film glorifying the dirty tricks in the game.
But the most vicious attack came from Hammam.
The Dons supremo, who once said he wanted Jones to be his manager, labelled him a ‘stupid, mosquito brain, who talks with diarrhoea in his mouth.’
Hammam is disgusted after viewing the shock 78-minute film which players' union leader Gordon Taylor wants banned.
It will surely lead to at least a one-match FA suspension for the player.
Hammam said: ‘Vinny is like an adopted son to me and I'm very disappointed.
He has let himself down badly.
‘What he has said is so stupid.
He must be a mosquito brain to say that.
‘It's like Madonna showing her bum and her boobs to get people to buy her product.
‘He hasn't done anyone any favours and I'll be talking to him about it.
On that video he is talking with diarrhoea in his mouth.’
In the video ‘Soccer's Hard Men’ Jones talks about players' illegal use of the elbow, the gouging of eyes, punching, pulling hairs under the armpits and deliberately studding opponents legs when the ball has gone.
The FA are appalled by Jones' contribution and are likely to charge him with misconduct.
Taylor called for a ban on the video and said: ‘Something like this that glorifies cheating brings the game into open disrepute.’
Also upset were managers Terry Venables of Tottenham and Brian Clough of Nottingham Forest, who say they will be taking legal action.
In the video Jones is, in the main, observing rather than advocating the ruthless antics of the hard men.
But there is one inflammatory comment that has guaranteed him an FA rap.
He says: ‘If you're going to go over the top on me you've got to put me out of the game because I'll be coming back for you.’
How MIRROR SPORT broke the story yesterday
FERGIE FLOPS OUT IN DRAMA
KEN LAWRENCE
ALEX FERGUSON last night insisted his men had been mugged in Moscow following Manchester United's disastrous UEFA Cup exit.
The Old Trafford side lost out in a dramatic penalty shoot-out with Torpedo Moscow when Steve Bruce, Brian McClair and Gary Pallister all failed from the spot.
But bitter Ferguson refused to blame individuals for United's continental calamity and said: ‘We let them in the back door and they stole the game.’
England defender Pallister was charged with keeping United alive, against a dour Moscow side, once the shoot-out went to sudden death.
found the nerve-racking task too much.
Ferguson admitted: ‘Even when Paul Ince and Denis Irwin had scored to put us 2-0 ahead, I still wasn't counting my chickens.
‘In fact, when the match moved into the shoot-out I didn't really fancy our chances.’
The fact that striker Mark Hughes was dismissed in the 88th minute for a second bookable offence was almost forgotten as Ferguson reviewed the disaster.
He said: ‘The pressure on people, forced to take penalties in this situation, is terrible — no one can envy anybody that task.
‘In the end, however, Torpedo stole the game from us despite my players running themselves into the ground.
‘The fact that we failed to reach the second round is a blow in many ways and I am so disappointed for everybody.’
Fergie offered no real argument on the dismissal of Hughes, saying: ‘The referee was a bit fussy but when you take the ball away as Mark did, when already booked, then it's automatic that you go.’
HUGHES: Red card
FERGIE'S FLOPS
United out in drama
KEN LAWRENCE
ALEX FERGUSON last night insisted his men had been mugged in Moscow following Manchester United's disastrous UEFA Cup exit.
The Old Trafford side lost out in a dramatic penalty shoot-out with Torpedo Moscow when Steve Bruce, Brian McClair and Gary Pallister all failed from the spot.
But bitter Ferguson refused to blame individuals for United's continental calamity and said: ‘We let them in the back door and they stole the game.’
England defender Pallister was charged with keeping United alive, against a dour Moscow side, once the shoot-out went to sudden death.
Guennady Grishin had forced the Russians into a 4-3 lead despite early heroics of keeper Peter Schmeichel.
But Pallister found the nerve-racking task too much in the pouring rain of the Russian capital.
Ferguson admitted: ‘Even when Paul Ince and Denis Irwin had scored to put us 2-0 ahead, I still wasn't counting my chickens.
‘In fact, when the match moved into the shoot-out I didn't really fancy our chances.’
The fact that striker Mark Hughes was dismissed in the 88th minute for a second bookable offence was almost forgotten as Ferguson reviewed the disaster.
He said: ‘The pressure on people, forced to take penalties in this situation, is terrible — no one can envy anybody that task.
‘In the end, however, Torpedo stole the game from us despite the fact that my players ran themselves into the ground.
‘The fact that we failed to reach the second round is a blow in many ways and I am so disappointed for everybody.’
Fergie offered no real argument on the dismissal of Hughes, saying: ‘The referee was a bit fussy but when you take the ball away as Mark did, when already booked, then it's automatic that you go.’
A RED DEVIL MARK Hughes is sent off by Danish referee Jan Dangaard for a second bookable offence long before Manchester United's mission to Moscow ends in bitter defeat.
Picture: ALBERT COOPER
TYSON
The night his world caved in
‘I'VE BEEN BORED WITH BOXING FOR YEARS.
I MAY NEVER FIGHT AGAIN’
PRISONER: 922335
NIGEL CLARKE
MIKE TYSON, the most dangerous fighting man on earth, has admitted he may never box again.
Incarcerated in his prison hell while he serves a six-year sentence for rape, the one time world heavyweight champ admits he's bored with the fight game.
Tyson, the man who rose from the ghettos of New York to the pinnacle of boxing success, had his world destroyed when he was judged guilty of violating a beauty queen whom he was convicted of luring to his room and raping.
But, cooped up in his 12 by 10 feet prison cell in the Indiana Youth Centre, Tyson spoke about his sentence and his incarceration that eats at him like a malignant disease.
Reputations
For such a violent man Tyson is surprisingly sensitive.
He lisps, his handshake is effeminate, a loose-wristed attempt at a greeting that camouflages the evil within him.
As a jailbird he knows he is no different to the cons he has to live with night and day — reputations mean nothing here.
He can turn his head away from the screams, the pleas, the heart-rending shouts that split the night air — suffering human beings screeching their injustice at the outside world.
It is a world he has lived with before.
As a child as young as 12, he was instituted into corrective centres, made to pay the price of his adolescent  indiscretions .
So jail is not new to him, in those days it was an accepted way of life.
But as the most famous boxer in the modern history of the game, Tyson found himself back in an environment he hoped he had turned his back on for ever.
Now he says: ‘When the chips drop, when I get out, I may not even want to box again.
‘I've been bored with boxing  for almost four years.
I live day by day, you know what I mean?
‘On my first night in prison again it wasn't realistic.
Those cells are horrible.
You never forget them as long as you live.’
Tyson's past had come back eerily to haunt him — this time not in street violence but in the way Desiree Washington, a competitor in the Miss America Pageant accused him of the crimes that were to see the world heavyweight champion's status reduced to that of a common criminal.
Tyson recalls vividly his night of destiny.
‘I called her, and she said she was tired or something.
I told her not to worry about it.
‘I said ‘just comb your hair and put water on your face.’
‘She came in the car…we kissed and we were making out.
‘We were fooling around…then we drove right around the corner to my hotel room.
‘I closed the door and we sat on the bed.
‘She just sat on my bed and she was talking.
We started kissing, and she started pulling off her clothes.
‘She was getting hot, she was getting aggressive.
We had sex — and after it was over I invited her to stay.
‘I was tired and I had to leave at approximately five — in about two hours.
She also had to get up around five — we both had schedules.
‘She didn't want to go — but she wanted me to walk her downstairs.
I didn't want to walk her.
I said sorry, I'm tired.
‘Maybe I should have just walked her downstairs or something.
‘The next week I heard about this.’
When it's all over Tyson wants to melt back into the crowd.
He adds: ‘I don't like living like a big star — where everyone has the potential to hurt you or want something from you.
‘I don't like that sort of life because I'm just a normal person — extremely normal…
HOW the other half lives — once Mike Tyson was a big star with all the luxury trappings of fame and fortune…now this is home, a 12 by 10 prison cell in Indiana
PRIME TIME — Mike Tyson in his heyday, mean, moody, and ready to demolish another world title opponent.
Boks new race row
ALAN WEST
SOUTH AFRICA'S under-fire coach John Williams refused to give in to pressure as the row over the Springboks’ rugby tour of France deepened last night.
Williams maintained he has no intention of bowing to pressure from the French government by including a black player in their all-white touring party.
French sports minister Frederique Bredin is boycotting the Springboks' opening match in Bordeaux on Saturday because of the make-up of the squad.
Williams blasted: ‘No new player is going to join us.
The minister is going to miss a good match.’
Team manager Abie Malan also defended the South African decision to bring only white players.
He said: ‘The selection committee is multi-racial and we came with the 30 best players we could pick.
‘There will not be a black player in the team just for the sake of it — our team is picked solely on merit.’
BLISTERED!
Brave Beefy's in agony on walk of hell
But there's still time for fun
CHRISTINE GARBUTT
IAN BOTHAM shouted in pain yesterday as walked down the hills to Dartmouth.
On the sixth day of his latest charity walk, the mighty Botham's legs were killing him.
‘This has been the most savage start of any of the walks I've done,’ panted Beefy, as he walked backwards downhill to relieve the strain in his calves.
‘It's beautiful scenery, but the hills of Cornwall and Devon are torture.’
As the Big Man marched into Dartmouth at his amazingly fast pace of 4.3 miles an hour, the hundreds lining the roadside would have no idea of the agony he was in — nor would Botham dream of telling them.
To him pain is just another challenge.
The crowds waved and cheered him on, the boats bobbing up and down in the estuary.
And money poured into the coffers.
Through sponsorship and money collected by the roadside, more than £40,000 has already been raised for leukaemia research.
Out of Dartmouth and up the Alp-like hills again towards Paignton, king-of-the-road Beefy started running.
‘Come on,’ he ordered his troops.
‘Pain is fun.’
Gruelling
Then, calling for his ‘Orangeand’, known to the faithful as orange and tequila, Botham raced ahead.
Chris Lander, the Daily Mirror's cricket writer and the only man to have marched every step of the way with Beefy on his walks, is amazed at how Ian carries on the torturous pace.
‘It's gruelling,’ says Lander, 51.
‘But Ian keeps us all going by his sheer determination.
Yet I've never heard him cry out in pain before.’
Botham has been in pain since the fourth day of this 546-mile hike from Land's End to Margate, with a deep-seated blister on his achilles tendon.
‘It's the first time I've ever been able to persuade Beefy to stop for treatment,’ says Dave ‘Rooster’Roberts, the new England cricket team physio who is looking after the walkers.
‘I patched him up in record time by the roadside.
It was a bit like a pit stop in a Grand Prix race.’
Roberts also revealed that Ian's knees are swollen, and a large blister is developing under his big toe.
‘I wouldn't be in his shoes,’ he says.
‘Not with 16 days to go.
That man is a hero.’
Beefy is a hero to the thousands that turn out to see him through rain and shine as he marches down the south coast.
An elderly lady couldn't stop crying as the Big Man paced through her small Devonshire village.
‘I had to see him.
I had to see him and wave him on,’ she sobbed, opening the contents of her purse into the collector's tin.
‘I nursed my husband for five years with leukaemia.
He died last week.
Please God the money raised will help find a cure.’
A mobile home, known as the Tardis, goes in front of the walkers to offer food and drink at strategic places.
Ian rarely eats, preferring chocolate milk shakes, water, and his favourite tipple when pain dictates.
Ian's mother-in-law, Mrs Jan Waller, is in charge of catering for the four walkers and 17 back-up crew.
Proud
A five-year-old boy called in, asking Mrs. Waller for a drink.
He'd managed to walk a mile behind Botham and was very proud of himself.
But his mother was crying.
‘Why are you crying?’ asked the kid.
The mother wiped her eyes and, when the lad was out of earshot, she revealed her son was a victim of the disease.
‘It's two years now and you would never guess,’ she admitted.
‘Without funds being raised he wouldn't have stood a chance.
Now we are hoping he will fully recover.’
That is all Botham wants to hear.
He's vowed to carry on walking ‘until we've licked the disease.’
Yet the toll on his 36-year-old body is beginning to show.
His wife Kathy, who organised the walk, admits that Ian goes to hell and back on the walks.
‘But he won't admit it,’ she says.
‘And when I see him hobbling in at night, I am very proud of him.’
Kids gather at the end of each day, hoping Ian will sign their autograph books and cricket bats.
Yet that is one hurdle their hero can't manage.
His fingers are too swollen to hold a pen.
After a long, hot soak, and wearing flip-flops to get the air to his tired feet, Beefy is back in action at the hotel, urging on his troops to make merry.
‘We need fun,’ he says.
‘To keep us going.’
Part of the fun yesterday was when Lander doused the walking hero with a bucket of sea water.
Botham's pals were in stitches, but Lander was warned: ‘You'll go in the sea or an appropriate river before we get to Margate.’
Yesterday Botham marched along the Paignton seafront clocking the incredible time of six hours and 12 minutes over the 26.4 miles.
He has backed himself at 16-1 to complete the marathon haul to Margate in 130 hours, and he is on course to win.
Today he will set off from Paignton to Topsham, a 27.7-mile walk that will mean pounding the roads non-stop for more than eight hours.
It could be Botham's biggest challenge so far — the hills are crippling.
Bird in the hand TEST umpire Dickie Bird joins Ian Botham in Devon on his charity walk.
It's a great laugh for Dickie but Beefy's in agony.
FEET FIRST IT'S medication time for Ian Botham, under the skilful hands of Dave Roberts, the new physio to the England cricket team.
Ian's knees are swollen and a large blister is developing under his big toe.
But he'll be striding on.
DELAY FOR MICK
JIM O'BRIEN
ENGLAND flanker Micky Skinner has pulled out of his come-back for Blackheath on Saturday to allow his injured knee more time to heal.
Skinner, who moved back to Blackheath from Harlequins at the end of last season, underwent surgery in the summer and had hoped to play against Bath at the weekend.
But Blackheath administrator Alun Davies said: ‘The knee is coming on fine but it needs at least another couple of weeks rehabilitation.
‘We don't want to rush Mick because it's a long season and we need him for the long haul.
A setback now would be stupid.’
SKINNER: Delay
Warwick track bid
DEREK Warwick is poised to make a return to Grand Prix racing with the Milton Keynes-based Footwork Mugen-Honda team next season.
Warwick, 38, and a veteran of 131 Grands Prix, won the world sportscar championship with Peugeot this year and has been itching for a chance to get back in the big time of Formula One.
Yesterday he was testing with the team in Estoril where he said: ‘There is nothing I would like better than to be back in Grand Prix racing.’
Oh, Ossie
OSSIE Ardiles, West Bromwich Albion's manager, could face an FA rap following the defeat at Stoke.
Ardiles was critical of the performance of referee Edward Parker, who booked eight players.
He then made it clear to the FA that he was unhappy with Parker's handling of the game.
AZZA KEEPS JOB
ALAN WEST
MOHAMMED Azharuddin will lead India on their cricket tour of Zimbabwe  and South Africa beginning next month.
The former Derbyshire batsman has been retained as skipper despite winning only one of 12 Tests.
‘No other name was considered,’ said chief selector G.R. Vishwanath.
‘We see in Azharuddin leadership qualities.’
The rest of India's squad will be named today.
AZHARUDDIN
Vegas hosts finals draw
MATT HUGHES
CAESARS Palace in Las Vegas is set to host the draw for the 1994 World Cup finals.
FIFA has yet to announce the venue for December 19, 1993.
But bosses at the famous casino, which has staged some of boxing's greatest world title fights, are confident they've scooped the big prize.
‘Next to the matches itself, the draw is the single biggest event in the World Cup,’ said Steve Sampson, vice president of World Cup USA 1994.
‘For an hour and a half that Sunday, the eyes of the world will be on Las Vegas.’
Sampson added that the gambling city's ability to put on major events and Caesars' commitment to the World Cup made it a logical choice over Orlando and Phoenix, the two other cities that had hoped to win.
The draw, which will divide the 24 qualifiers into groups and determine the nine venues, is expected to draw a worldwide TV audience of more than one billion and be attended by 10,000 dignitaries, soccer officials and media personnel.
Stemp stumped
RICHARD Stemp, the Worcestershire bowler, will appear before a Test and County Cricket Board disciplinary committee next Tuesday following a routine drug test.
Worcestershire secretary Mike Vockins said: ‘Richard fully expects to satisfy the hearing.’
Stemp, a 24-year-old spinner, took 28 first-class wickets for Worcester this summer.
Top clubs chasing Africans
HARRY HARRIS
ENGLISH football is bracing itself for an invasion of South African soccer talent.
Aston Villa, Everton, Sheffield Wednesday, Sheffield United, West Ham and Millwall have made the first moves to look at one of the largest untapped areas of players in world football.
Since FIFA accepted South Africa back on to the international stage their top players have become available for transfer at cheap prices.
Three of the best young black players in South Africa have been earmarked for extensive trials in England by Paul Gascoigne's advisor Mel Stein.
Sizwe Motaung, Philemon Masinga and Sean Donnelly are all tipped for the Premier League.
Midfielder Donnelly is interesting Villa boss Ron Atkinson while Masinga has caught the attention of Everton and Sheffield Wednesday.
International Motaung has already been to Hillsborough and Bramall Lane and will have trials with West Ham and Millwall.
Stein said: ‘We've already seen the latest coming from Africa in the shape of Pele from Ghana at Olympic Marseille and Ndlovu from Zimbabwe at Coventry.
‘Transfer fees and salaries are far more modest and reasonable then the UK and Europe and the potential is endless.
There are many fine players there.’
STEIN: Talent
Wigan get in a fix
MARTIN RICHARDS
WIGAN are wanted for a ‘double whammy’ Down Under next February — but it could cause a fixture pile-up at a crucial stage of the season.
Aussie RL chiefs have done a U-turn after originally backing a plan for the Brisbane Broncos to take on John Monie's Wigan for the World Club crown at Central Park on October 31, a week after the World Cup final.
But the Aussies have now decided that the Central Park clash might divert players' minds from the build-up to the final, with eight of the Broncos' side in the Kangaroos squad.
Now Wigan are being asked to defend their world crown in Brisbane next February.
And it's being pencilled in for the weekend after Wigan are due to defend their world sevens title in Sydney on February 5-7.
But that's the scheduled weekend for the second round of the Challenge Cup.
MONIE: Defence
BLUES BOTHER
HUGH JAMIESON
TERRY COOPER yesterday accused Cambridge of a time-wasting campaign as Birmingham qualified for the international stage of the Anglo-Italian Cup.
Birmingham, needing a point from their final group match, scrambled a 3-3 draw, but not before Blues boss Cooper had grabbed the ball on the touchline from striker Devon White as Cambridge's tactics angered the former England star.
CELTIC JOY
Celtic 3, Cologne 0
CELTIC scored twice in two minutes in the first-half to wipe out Cologne's 2-0 lead from the first-leg of this UEFA Cup-tie.
Paul McStay grabbed the first goal with a first-time shot after keeper Bodo Illgner had punched at Tommy Boyd's shot.
Then midfielder John Collins hit an unstoppable 20-yarder into a top corner.
Celtic pressed forward — and Collins made it a memorable night for them when he shot the third goal eleven minutes from time.
MAMA MIA
Hoult's lesson pasta joke
Newcastle 4, Leicester 0
COLIN DIBALL
RUSSELL HOULT conceded the first goals of his professional career and was lucky not to be sent off as Leicester crashed out of the Anglo Italian Cup.
The 19-year-old keeper had kept a clean sheet in his four previous games but got a rude awakening against a Newcastle side that can do no wrong.
Hoult got a harsh taste of reality as Kevin Keegan's side took their unbeaten run to 13 games and clinched a place in the later stages.
Hoult escaped with a caution after bringing down old boy David Kelly on a diagonal run inside the area.
Referee, Michael Peck, gave the youngster the benefit of the doubt but Hoult was still punished when Mick Quinn rapped in the penalty to give Newcastle an uncatchable two goal half-time lead.
Leicester only needed a draw to make progress in the Cup.
But their chances effectively evaporated after only nine minutes.
Kevin Brock, like Quinn a target for Portsmouth boss Jim Smith, slid the ball in from 14 yards to impress watching scouts.
And things got no better for City in the second half when first Kevin Sheedy hammered in a 57th minute free-kick and then Quinn doubled his tally for the night seven minutes from time with a delightful chip.
To rub it in Keegan rested seven of his side and finished the game with only two first team regulars.
Leicester's Geordie boss Brian Little, in contrast, paraded his strongest side but they rarely threatened Newcastle.
Their best effort came after 66 minutes when a
Gary Mills volley was saved by Czech Pavel Srnicek at the second attempt.
For the rest the visitors were simply played out of it — and they could have few complaints.
LITTLE: Exit
GET HAWAY: David Kelly takes on his former club
City spy Rico
MANCHESTER City boss Peter Reid was at Celtic Park last night spying on Cologne ace Rico Steinmann.
Midfielder Steinmann, capped 23 times by East Germany before re-unification has already told Cologne he wants a move and would cost around £800,000.
City have gone four games without a goal and Reid wants to halt the slide.
ANDY'S AGONY
ANDY Gregory's hopes of a comeback with Leeds in tomorrow night's Stones Bitter championship clash with Warrington have been scrapped.
The Great Britain scrum-half, who had a minor knee operation recently, has not yet been given the go-ahead by the specialist.
Leeds could give a debut to new signing Jamie Lowes.
WHIP-ROUND
BRADFORD City signed Barnsley defender Colin Hoyle yesterday after the directors dipped into their pockets to meet a £30,000 fee.
Chairman David Simpson, who appealed to supporters to help the club raise the money, said: ‘We had some reaction.
But we had to move quickly otherwise Colin would have gone back to Barnsley because his loan spell was over.’
Right over the top
CHELSEA legend Ron Harris last night branded Vinny Jones a coward and told him: ‘The hard men of yesteryear would have eaten you for breakfast!’
Chopper, now a successful racing greyhound breeder, said: ‘It just sums up what a bloody idiot he is to have made a video nasty like that.
‘Every club years ago had a tough-tackling defender in their side but they didn't resort to the tactics he is talking about.
‘I might have kicked a few people in my time, and some would say I got away with it for twenty years.
But I never grabbed anyone by the goolies.
‘Players who whack someone when the play is up the other end of the field are cowards.
‘I would like to have seen how brave he is with players like Ron Yates and Norman Hunter about.
‘To my mind he's slow and lacks one big asset that every professional footballer needs — ability.’
HARRIS: Scorn
YOU'RE A PLONKER VINNY!
TOMMY SMITH PUTS THE BOOT INTO PSYCHO
‘Video was an insult’
‘Ban him for two years’
RICHARD TANNER/TOMMY SMITH
ANGRY Tommy Smith last night branded Vinny Jones' controversial new video ‘a sick publicity stunt.’
Liverpool's legendary Iron Man believes the FA should come down on Jones like a ton of bricks for his shameful outbursts that glorify cheating and thuggery.
Jones was yesterday charged with bringing the game into disrepute for boasting about his sickening and cynical philosophy towards the game on the tape titled ‘Soccer's Hard Men.’
Smith, one of the tough nuts that Jones salutes, reckons Wimbledon's ‘Psycho’ has gone well over the top on his vulgar video nasty.
He stormed: ‘The FA should suspend him for a couple of years and if they can't ban the video then they should fine him every penny he makes out of it.
‘I'm insulted that he's even talking about me on the tape — and I'm sure the other players he's mentioned feel the same.
‘I was asked to do a promotional picture with him for the video launch, but I refused.
I didn't want anything to do with him or the tape.
Image ‘I wouldn't mind if it was someone I respected as a player and a hard-man.
But in my book he simply can't play.
‘As for his hard-man image, all I'll say is that he wouldn't have lasted five minutes in my day.
‘The fact he's making a living in the game now is a sad reflection on the lack of true quality in football at the moment.
‘Vinny should count himself very, very lucky to have made a lot of money out of football without having any ability.
‘It amazes me he should now want to kill the goose that has laid him the golden egg.
‘He's moved from Wimbledon to Leeds, Sheffield United, Chelsea and back to the Dons for around £3million.
And yet 15 or 20 years ago he would still be playing non-League stuff and carrying a hod around for a living.
‘The only reason so many clubs have signed him must be because he's a good motivator.
‘But he's kicked football in the teeth with this tape.
It's just a cynical publicity campaign to promote himself and sell more copies of the video.
‘It insults the great players he mentions from a by-gone age, and doesn't do Vinny, his club or football in general any credit at all.
No wonder his chairman, Sam Hammam, has hit the roof and called him a mosquito brain.
‘It isn't jealousy on my part because at least I could kick a ball straight.
‘You don't play 600odd games for Liverpool and help them win European trophies, League championships and FA Cups if you can't play a bit.
‘Vinny's not fit to lace the boots of the players he talks about on the tape.
They may have been hard but they could all play a bit as well.
‘He couldn't have lived with people like Billy Bremner, Johnny Giles, Norman Hunter, Dave Mackay, Ron Harris and Nobby Stiles.
He doesn't know anything about hard men.
‘He's not crafty enough, he hasn't got the brains and most of all he hasn't got the ability.
Once a hod carrier, always a hod carrier.
‘He doesn't offer anything to the game.
He hasn't got skill, he doesn't make runs off the ball and he doesn't even tackle properly.
‘There's an art to tackling and it's nothing to do with the elbows in faces, eye-poking, testicle-grabbing and raking opponents down their Achilles tendons that he talks about.
‘In my day we went out to break an opponent's concentration — not his leg.
‘There were plenty of verbals intended to frighten the life out of someone, but it disturbs me that Jones is talking proudly about hurting players.
‘He should have been banned for life for the disgraceful tackle that effectively ended the career of Gary Stevens at Spurs.
‘He tackled a player who was getting up after a challenge from someone else — on the touchline.
‘How he ever got away with that I don't know.
‘I was no angel, but I was sent off just twice in over 20 years in the game and on both occasions it was for having a go at referees.
‘Nobody went out with the intention of hurting anyone.
But Vinny talks as if everything is pre- meditated.
Psyched
‘Vinny has always claimed the Wimbledon players psyched out the Liverpool team in the tunnel before the 1988 FA Cup final.
‘That's ludicrous.
I'll tell you this — if they had tried that on with the Liverpool team of the mid-1960s that included Ron Yeats, Ian St John, Gerry Byrne and myself the match would never have taken place.
‘We wouldn't have taken that.
We'd have sorted them all out in the tunnel!’
I've got you taped TOMMY SMITH scoffs at the tough-guy claims of Vinny Jones (left), the Wimbledon ace who is in trouble with the FA over his video outburst.
FLASHBACK: Tuesday's Mirror
DURAN EASES IN
ROBERTO Duran fed a steady diet of left jabs to Tony Biglen to win his first fight in 18 months at Buffalo, New York.
The former holder of four world titles scored two knockdowns but there were boos in the late rounds when it became apparent that Duran, 41, wouldn't win by a knockout.
The three judges each scored it 100–86 for Panamanian Duran who was stopped in the sixth round by Pat Lawler in his last fight in March, 1991.
Duran looked fitter than in some previous fights.
His official weight was 11st 12lb — 1lb under the limit for the super-middleweight division in which he will campaign in the future.
DURAN: Fitter
FILTHY FIFTIES
MIKE LANGLEY
HARD men ain't what they used to be!
The equipment is lighter.
A whack in the face from a plastic ball is a lover's kiss compared with a teeth-loosening belt from an old-style football.
Also sending-offs used to be rare.
So it was Carry on Chopping in hard toe-caps.
In the fifties at Old Trafford I watched an England forward stick his fingers into a keeper's eyes.
Nothing's new!
Derby manager Harry Storer swanked in those days: ‘I have a team of bastards — and I'm the biggest bastard of them all.’
The high jump record of the Sixties was broken every time Cliff Huxford went into merciless action for Southampton.
When Eddie Clamp played for Wolves and England, stretcher-bearers were on appearance money.
Tommy Banks and Roy Hartle reigned through eight years of terror at Bolton under the slogan: ‘We gives 'em gravel-rash!’
They once warned the great Tom Finney: ‘Any hankypanky, Tommy, and tha’ goes on the track.’
Does no 1992 hard-man compare?
Yes, Terry Hurlock of Southampton.
He's the King, I'd say.
Odd he's not on that video!
Home, Robbo!
MIKE LANGLEY
SHOULDN'T Bobby Robson come home?
Abroad doesn't suit him.
Years ago at Vancouver he was replaced without warning by a pot-bellied Puskas.
Knives were drawn during his two years with PSV in Holland.
Now Robson's jeered off at Sporting Lisbon for losing a UEFA Cup tie.
He's on £300,000 in Portugal, but for how long?
Get yourself an air ticket, Bob!
Peter's war cry
PONY-TAILED snooker star Peter Ebdon last night declared war on world number one Stephen Hendry.
Ebdon, 22, faces the Scottish maestro in the fifth round of the £224,000 Dubai Duty Free Classic tomorrow declaring: ‘I can beat him — this is the first battle of a war.
I hope Hendry's brought his golf clubs because he'll need them next week.’
EBDON: Confident
Birdies singing for Sam
SAM TORRANCE led the British charge with a seven-under-par 65 in the first round of the German Masters in Stuttgart yesterday.
Torrance is two shots behind Swedish leader Robert Karlsson with Germany's Bernhard Langer and Italy's Constantino Rocca.
Torrance, 39, believes he is still good enough to make next year's European Ryder Cup team and said: ‘People might think I'm too old but Ray Floyd is over 50 and still winning.
‘I first made the Cup team in 1981 and I desperately want to be in next year's.’
Despite having the worst of yesterday's weather, Torrance was so sharp with his putter that he had seven birdies and no bogeys.
Karlsson had seven birdies and an eagle in his superb 63.
LEIGH'S AUSSIE GLEE
ROCK-BOTTOM Leigh have signed Australian forward John Elias from Sydney side Balmain.
The 22-year-old pack ace will arrive tomorrow and could make his debut in Sunday's First Division home clash with Wigan.
Leigh chief executive John Stringer said: ‘We have been trying to sign John for weeks.
He is an aggressive player with plenty of pace.’
Widnes have transfer-listed Darren Wright, their 24-year-old former Great Britain centre, at his own request.
The asking price is £130,000.
High dive
MATT HUGHES
DAVE BASSETT is ready to toss rookie goalkeeper Danny Wainwright into a shock Premier League assignment.
‘He'll have to sink or swim,’ says the Sheffield United boss.
Wainwright is fifth choice at Bramall Lane and only made his debut for the reserves on Wednesday.
But Bassett's number one, Simon Tracey, is out with shoulder damage.
Phil Kite is struggling against a hand injury and Mel Rees faces a long recovery from cancer surgery last summer.
‘I've never known anything like it,’ said Bassett, relieved that Alan Kelly has recovered from a thigh problem in time to face Southampton tomorrow.
‘It looks like I'll have to put Danny on the bench and that will be a great opportunity for him.
‘I can't even talk about his future in the game because it's too early to say.
‘But if he gets into the Southampton match he'll just have to cope.’
HUGH JAMIESON
SKIPPER Stewart Robson is set for a comeback as Coventry aim for the top in tomorrow's clash against Crystal Palace at Highfield Road.
Midfield man Robson, who has missed four games because of a mysterious eye infection, warned: ‘It's so important we keep our run going.
‘People are now beginning to see the strength in depth we have, in view of our injuries, and they're impressed.’
Coventry, among the favourites for relegation at the start of the new Premier League, are three points adrift of leaders Norwich.
But manager Bobby Gould insisted: ‘Stewart is such an inspiration to the rest of the side and we're glad to have him back.’
Robson, snapped up on a free transfer from West Ham last season, added: ‘I've had to be very careful because the trouble was caused by a virus infection.
‘It's taken this long to get over it and, as many good athletes have discovered to their cost, the temptation has always been to carry on training.
It left me fatigued and in the mood to fall asleep every time I sat down.’
Meanwhile, Aston Villa manager Ron Atkinson, is following the lead of England supremo Graham Taylor for tomorrow's trip to Wimbledon.
With Villa bidding to close the gap on Norwich, Atkinson has decided to complete preparations at England's Bisham Abbey training camp.
Republic of Ireland left-back Steve Staunton is struggling with a knee injury and Bryan Small is standing by to make his first appearance of the season.
ROBSON: Welcome return for Sky Blues
GET SET
ALLAN WELLS, the former Olympic sprint champion, is to help Second Division Reading with their speed and fitness.
Player-manager Mark McGhee said: ‘The results Allan has achieved with other sportsmen and women are very impressive and if he can get an extra yard of pace out of our players, then it will be very worthwhile.’
Reading are at home to Fulham tonight.
GOOD SPORTS: Fernand Felton and Paul Warhurst
SHOOT-OUT COSTS £3M
MATT HUGHES
THE UEFA Cup shoot-out defeat in Moscow could have cost Manchester United up to £3 million.
ITV had agreed an exclusive deal for all United's European games, promising the club a seven-figure reward if they reached the final.
Executive Trevor East said: ‘When you add fees for overseas television rights, plus their gates and advertising sponsorship, you would have to think they could have more than doubled the figure we offered.
‘United have certainly lost a lot of money and next to United, there is no one more sorry about it than us.’
RON'S SECRET
MATT HUGHES
LIVERPOOL midfield star Ronnie Whelan has had a thigh operation and is out of the Republic of Ireland squad for the World Cup qualifying tie against European champions Denmark in Copenhagen on October 14.
Liverpool kept the operation a closely-guarded secret but the 30-year-old Whelan, who had sore muscle tissue removed from his right thigh, was released from a Merseyside hospital yesterday.
Only hours earlier, Whelan had been named in Jack Charlton's 22-man Irish squad.
He hopes to make a come-back in two to three weeks.
Charlton is unlikely to make any alterations to his squad until the weekend before the game, but Newcastle United skipper Liam O'Brien and veteran Blackburn defender Kevin Moran must now come into the reckoning.
Mark Wright, bitterly disappointed at being axed by England, has resigned himself to missing tomorrow's Anfield battle with Sheffield Wednesday.
Slump
He is struggling to overcome a thigh injury and has seen his form slump as Liverpool suffer their worst start for 39 years.
They are treading unfamiliar ground in the relegation zone and have failed to keep a clean sheet this season.
Steve Nicol is also on the casualty list, which is likely to mean that Jan Molby will again pull on the armband.
He was both a stand-in skipper and an emergency defender during Liverpool's successful European trip to Cyprus this week.
Molby said: ‘I prefer to play in midfield but with the injuries we have got we have to find other ways.
‘Wherever you are asked to play you do your best.
We're all in this together and we've got to get on with it together.
‘It was an honour to be captain in Cyprus and although I'd like to say it was not important, it is nice.
‘Even if it's only for one or two games it's something I'll always be able to look back on with pride.’
WHELAN: Operation costs him cap
MOLBY: Proud
SHARK BAIT!
Knives are out for top bosses
ALEX MURPHY/MARTIN RICHARDS
LEEDS boss Doug Laughton and Liverpool manager Graeme Souness are swimming in the same shark-infested sea at the moment.
They are in charge of world-famous clubs, but the job has turned into a nightmare for the pair of them.
We're just five weeks into the season and the knives are out for Laughton after just one win in four championship games plus a second round exit from the Yorkshire Cup.
Laughton is in the hottest of hot-seats in Rugby League but at least he has been spared the indignity of the bookies taking bets on his possible successor, as has happened to Souness.
But a humiliating defeat at Bradford last Sunday had the Leeds fans spitting fury in radio phone-ins.
And if Leeds lose against Warrington at Headingley tonight it will plunge the club into a full-blown crisis.
The sharks will really smell blood.
Warrington have the best half-back pairing in the game at the moment in Greg Mackey and Kevin Ellis and are quite capable of twisting the knife.
Leeds can't make any more excuses about injuries, no matter how cruel they have been.
It's a squad game and there is still enough ability at the club to do the business and win 90 per cent of their games.
Many Leeds fans say the captaincy issue over Ellery Hanley and Garry Schofield is the main problem.
Well if that's the case it must be sorted out once and for all if the club is to go forward.
Laughton is in a hole and the players as professional sportsmen have a  responsibility to pull him out of it.
Commitment
They are playing for one of the biggest clubs in the game and that should be a source of pride, but that seemed to be painfully absent at Bradford last week.
The players owe a debt to the club and those long-suffering fans who have made them among the best paid in the game.
Laughton and his board have put faith in the players and they must repay that faith or look for another club.
It's all about guts and commitment now.
I feel sorry for Doug — he cannot know where to turn.
He's made mistakes, but like Souness he's in the painful process of re-building a side with a lot of new faces in the line-up.
The game desperately needs a strong Leeds but if they don't stop the rot soon they can say goodbye to a top eight place, let alone the top four.
Laughton has had no luck with injuries but every coach has to put up with that.
Meanwhile the Leeds rumour factory is working overtime with stories that Schofield wants to leave and that players don't get on with their manager.
The only way to stop these damaging rumours is for the players to back the manager on the field and start winning games again.
FINS ain't what they used to be for Doug Laughton and Graeme Souness
Doug's Wires worry
EMBATTLED Leeds boss Doug Laughton admitted yesterday: ‘We must beat Warrington at all costs.’
The shock waves from last week's 36-6 crash at Bradford are still being felt at Headingley.
And tonight's televised home game against the Wires is a vital one for the club and its fans.
‘We're desperate for a win and the players have been left in no doubt what I expect of them,’ said Laughton.
‘We have had bad luck with injuries but with the number of quality players at the club we should be a match for most teams.
‘Some players were just not doing their stuff at Bradford and there has been some strong talking this week.’
No way, Beardo
SPURS' Norway goalkeeper Erik Thorstvedt isn't shocked that Peter Beardsley and Chris Waddle have been left out of England's squad.
‘They haven't been involved for quite a while so you couldn't really expect them to be picked,’ said Thorstvedt, who is likely to be Norway's last line of defence on October 14.
SHEER MAGIC
UGLY DUCKLING CAN FOIL BRITS
CHARLES FAWCUS
CINDERELLA FILLY Magic Night can become the belle of the ball at Longchamp to-morrow by dancing home in Europe's top race, the Ciga Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe.
Magic Night is the ugly duckling of French racing who was transformed into a golden swan when she ran second to Suave Dancer in this race last year.
None of the big trainers wanted to know Magic Night as a youngster, so she passed into the care of little-known Philippe Demarcastel and made his name.
Beautiful
‘Everyone says she isn't pretty, but she looks beautiful to me,’ he smiles.
‘She got out of trouble to win her pre-Arc race, the Prix Foy, but it would not have worried me if she was beaten then.
The Arc is what we want and the Fox proved that she's in top form.’
Another young lady could pose the biggest threat to Magic Night tomorrow in the shape of User Friendly, who has put jockey George Duffield on the classic map after 20 years of trying.
‘Whatever happens in the Arc she is just a star and she is the one they've all got to beat,’ declares George.
‘St Jovite is the one I fear, but I don't think he's as dangerous on soft ground and we can do him.’
St Jovite has landed an unfavourable outside draw, but he reserves his best form for right-handed tracks like Longchamp and he's likely to be sharper than when beaten by Dr Devious at Leopardstown.
Steve Cauthen is confident of a good run from Irish St Leger winner Mashaallah, but Magic Night has been in this battle before and this time she can win.
Keen Hunter defends his Abbaye crown and the rain has come in time for John Gosden's flier.
‘He's back in good form,’ said the trainer.
Garry set to glitter
HUGH JAMIESON
ASTON Villa manager Ron Atkinson yesterday backed £650,000 mid-field man Garry Parker to push his claims for an England World Cup call-up.
Parker, signed from Nottingham Forest nearly 12 months ago, has been placed on stand-by for England's qualifying clash against Norway at Wembley.
And, as top six Villa today take on Wimbledon at Selhurst Park, Atkinson said: ‘I am very pleased for Parker but he has now got to make the next step.
‘The great thing about him is that he always wants the ball and always wants to use it.
‘He's proved that he is capable of scoring goals and although he can improve on the defensive side of his game his passing skills are a tremendous asset.’
As Villa wait for a fitness check on £1.1 million Republic of Ireland defender Steve Staunton, Atkinson warned: ‘No one relishes playing Wimbledon.
‘But we have got to play our football and earn a result.’
PARKER: On stand-by
NEW YATES BLOW
HUGH JAMIESON
DEAN YATES, Notts County's £2million-rated centre-half, could be out for the rest of the season.
Yates is still struggling to recover from a serious knee operation that cost him his place as County were relegated and missed out on a lucrative ticket to the Premier League.
Yates, 25 later this month, has been tracked by a number of top clubs, including both Liverpool and Spurs, but manager Neil Warnock yesterday admitted: ‘His injury is not responding as well or as quickly as we had thought.
‘Now there is a possibility he could miss the entire season and I feel very sorry for him because he's put in so much hard work.’
Thrums up for Koloto
EAGER Halifax have snapped up New Zealand Test forward Emosi Koloto on a month's loan.
The ambitious Thrum Hall club moved quickly for Widnes's giant Tongan after their main target, second rower Trevor Gilmiester, opted to stay with Brisbane Broncos.
Koloto goes straight in tomorrow at Hull, who have Aussies Ivan Henjak and James Grant making their debuts.
It's a great chance for the 27-year-old to revive his career — and Halifax could make the move permanent if he shows his fearsome form of three seasons ago.
But the man who signed a 10-year contract in 1988 has struggled after two neck operations and is currently in the Widnes reserve side.
Sheffield Eagles aim to prove they're top-four material against Castleford in tomorrow's match of the day.
Eagles boss Gary Hetherington said: ‘It's the best side I've had since I came to the club.’
Aussie stand-off Peter Coyne is set to make his debut for Castleford after flying in on Thursday.
KOLOTO: Struggling
JASON TRIPPED
BERNIE LOVETT
DISGRACED Olympic sprinter Jason Livingstone has made a false start in his bid to become a professional footballer.
Livingstone, sent home from Barcelona in July after testing positive for drugs abuse, yesterday trained with Third Division club Cardiff City.
The club was expected to give him a run next week in one of two friendlies against non-League opposition, but last night coach Eddie May said: ‘He is a good lad but is just a non-starter now.
‘At first I didn't realise who he was.
He showed a fair bit of talent.
‘But when I found out about his background, I just had to blow it out of the water.
It will end there.’
LIVINGSTONE: No go
CITY SLICKER
HUGH JAMIESON
NEW signing Les Sealey has been ordered to be a big noise at St. Andrew's by Birmingham City manager Terry Cooper.
Sealey, signed on a month's loan from Aston Villa, makes his debut at Oxford today with Cooper saying: ‘He's a good goalkeeper but he is also extrovert and loud.
‘That's the way I want him because we have a quiet bunch of lads who need bossing about.’
Birmingham's first-choice goalkeeper Andy Gosney is currently out of action with a shoulder injury.
Sealey has been kept out of the first team picture at Villa by Nigel Spink.
SEALEY: Extrovert
CLOSE SHAVE!
HUGH JAMIESON
WOLVES have won a race against time to clear £325,000 Paul Blades for tomorrow's televised clash with West Ham.
They clinched the deal for the Norwich defender just six minutes before the deadline.
And delighted Blades, who began the season on a month's loan at Molineux, insisted: ‘I never wanted to leave in the first place.’
Said Wolves boss Graham Turner: ‘He will strengthen our squad considerably.
Promotion is the priority and I hope our missing fans will see this as a positive move in the right direction.’
BLADES: Rush job
Ardiles swoops
WEST Bromwich Albion manager Ossie Ardiles has strengthened his Second Division table-topping side by signing Huddersfield Town midfielder Kevin Donovan.
Ardiles moved for 20-year-old Donovan after watching him star for Huddersfield during their Coca-Cola Cup clash with Blackburn Rovers.
The fee for the move will be decided by a tribunal unless the two clubs can agree a figure.
Donovan looks set to be named in the Albion squad for today's trip to Burnley.
MARCO'S GOALO!
DERBY County's ton-up striker Marco Gabbiadini is hungry for more goals today against Cambridge.
The 24-year-old, who scored his 100th goal last Saturday, last night warned: ‘I'm out to double my total.’
Saints battle
SOUTHAMPTON are battling to prevent talented England B winger Matthew Le Tissier following Rod Wallace and Alan Shearer out of the Dell.
Saints manager Ian Branfoot is fighting off strong competition from Liverpool, Tottenham, Aston Villa and Everton by offering Le Tissier a new contract even though his present agreement does not expire until July.
Branfoot said: ‘Matt has not come back with an answer but we are still in the early stages of negotiation.’
LE TISSIER: Offer
TOO HOT TO TROT
NEW England recruit Richard Jobson celebrated his full England call-up yesterday — in bed.
Oldham's classy defender was told to stay at home after phoning Boundary Park to say he was running a temperature of 102.
He is likely to miss tomorrow's televised home game against Everton.
Boss Joe Royle also has doubts over midfield ace Nick Henry (ankle), Neil Adams (knee) and Norwegian international Gunnar Halle (calf).
‘We look to have a few problems,’ he admitted yesterday.
Royle has named five Goodison old boys in the 16-man squad to face the club where he started his career.
The Oldham manager added: ‘It is always nice to see old friends, but there will be no divided loyalties — we need the three points.’
JOBSON: Bedridden
Sharp test faces Paul
RICHARD TANNER
PAUL Rideout goes into a Sky TV shoot-out with Graeme Sharp at Boundary Park tomorrow, anxious to prove he can be the latest in a long line of great Everton centre-forwards.
Still waiting for his first goal since his £500,000 summer move from Rangers, Rideout has been unfavourably compared with the Scots striker who left Goodison for Oldham last year.
Rideout, boosted by scoring twice for the reserves in midweek, admitted last night: ‘Graeme's been one of the top strikers in the game for several years and he is a hard act to follow.
‘He was one of the best at his job and enjoyed a lot of success at Everton.
I know I've got to start scoring and it would be nice to get off the mark at last on Sunday.
‘I've had a shoulder injury for the last three or four games and it's the last thing you need when you are struggling to score your first goal.
But getting two for the reserves was encouraging.’
Everton's early season bubble has burst dramatically with five defeats in their last six games.
But Peter Beardsley could be back earlier than expected.
He faces a fitness test today on the hamstring strain that has kept him out for two matches.
COUNTY'S TOP MARK
BARNSLEY centre-back and skipper Mark Smith yesterday joined Notts County for £70,000.
Smith, 32, was earlier offered in part exchange for County striker Kevin Wilson, 31 — but the deal fell through.
Wilko's revenge
COLIN DIBALL
MIDDLESBROUGH players are out to get their own back against the team that killed their dream of a first-ever major Wembley final.
Manchester United pipped them in last season's Rumbelows Cup semi-final thriller and could pay for it today.
Said Boro striker Paul Wilkinson: ‘We would love to put one over on them.
‘We could not have got any closer to Wembley than we did in those two games.
‘If we slip up and drop into mid-table, people will say that our start to the season was just a flash in the pan.
‘We know otherwise.
We firmly believe that we are top eight material and we'll score against the best teams.
Star
‘This gives us a great chance to put things right.’
Boss Lennie Lawrence believes that last season's cup conflict was written in the stars.
Manchester United went on to lift the trophy, but missed out on the Championship, while losers Boro followed up by clinching promotion.
‘I firmly believe United would have won the title but for Wembley, while if we'd got there we wouldn't have gone up.
‘Whoever tops them this season will win the League.’
Lawrence dug out videos of the semi-final clashes to show his players this week.
Boro will be backed by a full-house 26,000 crowd today.
But they won't have injured duo John Hendrie and Willie Falconer in their bid to down the Reds.
WILKINSON: Confident
TOP GUN!
Graham tribute to Adams the Amazing
NIGEL CLARKE
TONY ADAMS heads for the World Cup heights boosted by George Graham's belief that he can become one of the greatest Arsenal captains of all time.
As his skipper celebrated his recall to the England squad, Gunners boss Graham said yesterday: ‘I can tell you categorically from talking to the top managers that Adams is the player they'd all want in their side.
‘I can understand why Graham Taylor selects him.
He's 25, has already won two championships and is a winner.
‘Ask anybody at this club just what his value is to Arsenal.
He's a great leader and although he has done so much, he still has a great future in front of him.’
England boss Taylor has made no secret of his admiration for the pride and passion Adams puts into his efforts for his country.
Only a UEFA ruling prevented tiger Tony coming to the rescue of Taylor's injury-hit squad in Sweden this summer — and now he's back in the frame for the Norway game on Wednesday week.
The taunts and torments from the terraces that made Adams’ life a misery have now been shaken off once and for all.
Marvellous
And Graham claimed: ‘Frank McLintock was a marvellous skipper — I should know because I played in the same team with him.
‘But Adams could run him close and I can't see any reason why he can't go on to get still more honours with Arsenal.’
Graham reckons it's time his side went gunning for trophies again — starting with today's clash against Chelsea.
He said: ‘I look at myself and what I have achieved on a time-scale of every two years.
‘We didn't win anything last season, so I'm looking for success this season.
‘I'll be very disappointed if Arsenal don't pick up something.’
In 1987, the Gunners won the League Cup, followed by the Championship in 1989 and then a second title in 1991.
That has whetted Graham's appetite for more honours — and he accepts he'll have to keep filling the Highbury trophy room if he is to guarantee his future at the club.
‘Winning is my driving force,’ he admitted.
‘I put that before anything.
I've never been out of work and I don't want to be.
I have to pay the bills.
‘But I know I've got to be as successful over the next five to eight years as I have been so far.
‘I want to produce a winning side, that's what motivates me.
I tell that to my players.
‘There are stars I have simply not brought to Highbury because they have been more concerned with the money they could make rather than what they could achieve for Arsenal.’
Rapid
With the Gunners looking to make a rapid movement up the Premier League, Graham added: ‘I would like to be higher in the table and now it's time to put things right.
‘All I know is that we are good enough to be up there at the end of the season.’
TONY ADAMS points the way to new glory — and George Graham says he can become an all-time great as Arsenal captain
HANDING IT TO ADAMS: George Graham rates Tony in the McLintock class
DOPEY DAUM IN DRUGS STORM
special on the man at the centre of Leeds Euro storm
Stuttgart boss gave his squad steroids
HARRY HARRIS
STUTTGART manager Christoph Daum, the man who blundered in using four foreign players against Leeds United, is at the centre of a drugs storm in Germany.
And he is known for his after-match tantrums, which include an incident when he kicked down an advertising board.
The 38-year-old Daum blurted out his drugs secret in a hotel bar after Stuttgart had beaten Hanover to win the German Super Cup.
‘Doping in the Bundesliga’ screamed one newspaper headline the next day — and Daum backtracked fast.
‘No club dopes its players,’ he insisted.
‘I explained myself badly.’
Daum claimed that his players had been given the new sports designer drug Clenbuterol simply to heal persistent muscle injuries.
It had NOT been used to enhance their performance.
The Clenbuterol row was an innocent mistake, according to Daum.
Just like using four foreigners against Howard Wilkinson's men in the European Cup had been a mistake…
Daum later explained his Hanover confession, saying that he was not a doctor and that he had mixed up one or two things.
Banned
But, surely, he must have known that German sprint star Katrin Krabbe was banned after being positively tested for Clenbuterol?
And this was also the drug that caused British weightlifters Andrew Saxton and Andrew Davies to be booted out of the Barcelona Olympics.
The German Soccer Federation weren't convinced by Daum, the man who was often controversial in his long association with Cologne.
Hamburg president
Manfred Ommer has been especially outspoken, even casting doubts on Stuttgart's championship win.
The Federation are investigating the Daum drugs affair.
And they are looking into an incident last month when Daum angrily kicked in an advertising board.
Daum now wants UEFA to accept that the rules regarding foreign players are for everyone else — but not for him because he had yet another excusable lapse of memory.
The rules are specific and well-known.
They can hardly have come as such a surprise to Daum.
He might just get the benefit of the doubt — because his side were under such intense pressure in the last ten minutes at Elland Road that his mind was concentrated on the battle on the field.
But Daum coolly, cynically and calculatingly named the four foreigners in his squad from the start.
And that, in itself, broke the rules!
If he had no intention of using four foreigners, why did he have them among his sixteen?
Today Daum hopes UEFA will not disqualify Stuttgart when they debate Elland Road.
Daum said that he had thought before Wednesday's 4-1 defeat that it was possible to field four non-German players.
‘The problem was not with UEFA's complicated regulations,’ he said on German radio.
‘It was with me.
I should read through these things carefully.’
But Stuttgart had those four non-nationals on the pitch in the last seven minutes, one outsider too many.
Stuttgart were last night wary of commenting in case they influenced the UEFA ruling.
They hope that the fact they reported the matter will help them avoid a disqualification.
Wary
A Stuttgart source denied a statement by Leeds secretary Nigel Pleasants that the English club had instigated the UEFA inquiry.
‘Our president informed a leading UEFA official straight away on Thursday morning at a memorial service for the former German soccer federation president,’ the source said.
‘It was a matter of us owning up ourselves.’
But the rumour in Germany is that a member of the public shopped Stuttgart by making a call to UEFA.
They broke the rules.
Let's hope that UEFA remember there must never be one rule for the big boys and another for the rest.
Chris crisis
BOSS Christoph Daum blunders (right) with his fatal substitution, and (left) his team look relieved at the final whistle, unaware of the shock in store.
RIVAL boss Howard Wilkinson must sweat today while UEFA reach a verdict
Yesterday's sensation
Francis pledge
TREVOR FRANCIS last night prepared to pile on the torment for German football.
The Sheffield Wednesday player-boss was handed a tough UEFA Cup second round draw with former German champions Kaiserslautern.
But after seeing Celtic sensationally overturn a two-goal deficit against Cologne and Stuttgart land in the dock for fielding too many foreigners against Leeds, Francis said: ‘Their League has suffered a bit from an exodus of top stars to Italy.
And my players can be greatly encouraged by what happened during the week.
‘Although any draw against German opposition represents a big challenge, because I've got the greatest respect and admiration for what they've done at club and international level for over 20 years.
‘But we can take heart from the Celtic and Leeds results and carry a lot of optimism with us into the first leg in Germany.
‘I don't know much about Kaiserslautern, except that they finished fifth last season and were champions the year before, but we will certainly have them watched.’
England marksman David Hirst has trained for the first time in five weeks after recovering from a cracked ankle, and is desperate to link up with Chris Waddle.
FRANCIS: Respect
BATTLE OF BRITAIN
CROWD FEARS
JIM RODGER
THE Battle of Britain between Rangers and Leeds United is the European tie that nobody wants.
But it's not for football that they fear — it is for the danger of crowd violence.
Rangers' boss Walter yesterday refused to be drawn into any speculation about the possibility of the champions of Scotland and England meeting.
Leeds have protested that Stuttgart broke the rule of playing four non-nationals instead of three in their first round clash and UEFA bosses will make their decision today.
Said Smith: ‘At the moment chaos reigns.
The only thing we can do is to send our spies to watch Leeds United and Stuttgart.
‘Our director's secretary Campbel Ogilvie is over for the draw and he will stay until a decision is made on the situation.’
Smith and Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson don't fear a clash of football skills between their champion teams.
But last night police and safety experts admitted they were worried.
They are fully aware that Rangers, who have Englishmen Mark Hateley, Dale Gordon and Trevor Steven in their squad, have a great record of avoiding trouble in recent years.
But the nagging doubts of the Scots being involved with their English rivals could be a headache.
For the clashes between Rangers and English clubs when they invaded Newcastle, Wolverhampton and London are best forgotten — as are England's blackest moments when they were banned from Europe because of Liverpool's trouble abroad.
Should they clash a solution could be that both clubs be allowed to play only before their own supporters with live television at Elland Road and Ibrox to be watched by the stay at home fans.
Rangers faced Leeds United in the season of 1967-68 in the quarter final of the Fairs Cup, now the UEFA competition.
Leeds defeated Rangers 2-0 at Elland Road and had a no-scoring draw at Ibrox, and went on to win the competition.
In 1970 Leeds lost to Celtic 1-0 at Elland Road and 2-1 at Hampden before a crowd of 130,000.
SECOND ROUND EUROPEAN DRAWS
EUROPEAN CUP.
-Gothenburg (Swe) v L Poznan (Pol); RANGERS v LEEDS or Stuttgart (Ger); Sl Bratislava (Cz) v AC Milan (Ita); Din Bucharest (Rom) v Marseille (Fr); Bruges (Bel) v Austria Vienna (Aut); Sion (Switz) v Porto (Por); AEK Athens (Gr) v PSV Eindhoven (Hol); CSKA Moscow (Rus) v Barcelona (Spn).
CUP-WINNERS' CUP.
-Spartak Moscow (Rus) v LIVERPOOL.
UEFA CUP.
-Kaiserslautern (Ger) v SHEFF WED; HEARTS v Standard Liege (Bel); B Dortmund (Ger) v CELTIC.
Ties to be played over two legs, Oct 21, Nov 4.
MADE IN ENGLAND: Rangers' Hateley and Gordon
ARABS IN SHEIKH-UP
CHARLES FAWCUS
STEVE CAUTHEN collected his eleventh ton at Newmarket yesterday — wearing the maroon livery of boss Sheikh Mohammed — but that could be a thing of the past.
Racing's big spenders from the Middle East are threatening to pull the plug — and take their horses to France in search of bigger prize money.
The Maktoum family paid out fortunes for horses in the eighties and owned the stars as well.
But they have not made a single bid at Britain's top yearling sale this week.
Family member Sheikh Mana said: ‘We like British racing best of all, but when you are losing money you have to review your policy.
‘If your horse wins and is placed a couple of times you still lose and that is ridiculous.
But prize money isn't the only reason.’
Yesterday's Middle Park Stakes was won well by Zieten, ridden by Cauthen, after Frankie Dettori had nearly stolen the race on Pips Pride.
‘There was no pace and he got a big advantage when he quickened up.
My horse did well to catch him,’ said Steve.
‘He's a fighter,’ agreed trainer Andre Fabre, who runs his No 1 youngster Zafonic at Longchamp tomorrow.
Favourite Silver Wizard ran too freely and Willie Carson said: ‘He's gone over the top.’
Crazed
GREEK fans invaded the pitch, throwing stones and fireworks at the referee and Paris St Germain players in the UEFA Cup match in Salonika.
The match was abandoned, PSG going through 4-0.
£10M BENN-ANZA
Eu can cash in Nigel
IAN GIBB
NIGEL Benn hauled himself back on Millionaires Row here in Italy by cutting up Mauro Galvano and grabbing the WBC world super middleweight title.
By conservative estimates the Dark Destroyer can earn at least £1million in the next 12 months.
He can start in Scotland on December 13 by going back to his world title roots with a defence against rugged American Doug DeWitt, against whom Nigel first became a world champion by winning the WBO middleweight crown back in April 1990.
And he can finish a golden year late next summer with the much-awaited showdown against Chris Eubank, who took Benn's WBO middleweight title nearly two years ago before moving up himself to the 12 stone limit.
All that and Benn has made the grand gesture of giving his new WBC belt to his first conqueror, Michael Watson, who is slowly recovering after the brain damage he suffered against Eubank last year.
‘Yes, I want the Eubank return and Iran Barkley as well because he gives me the fear I thrive on,’ said Benn.
He'd just become the first Briton to win two world titles on foreign soil and added: ‘I want to be the first British fighter to win three world titles at different weights.’
And now Benn can claim he has the senior crown as the WBC title is regarded as more prestigious than the WBO version held by Eubank.
Benn said: ‘Before, it was Eubank dictating the pace — not any more.’
And even the watching Eubank had to admit: ‘He has everything I want and I've got everything he wants.
Now we're on mutual ground.’
But it all nearly went horribly wrong as Benn cursed the ‘scumbags’ who tried to rob him of this title.
The Italian dirty tricks department worked overtime as Galvano's management tried to scream ‘no contest’, claiming a head clash caused the badly cut left eye that meant their man couldn't go on after the third round.
Benn said: ‘I thought they'd give it to him or a draw or some rubbish like that.
I was ready to cry.
‘There are so many scumbags in boxing — but I have to thank Barry Hearn and the American referee Joe Cortez for standing up for me.’
The Italian crowd went berserk when they realised their man had lost his title, and showered Benn with coins and rubbish.
Benn promised that the first thing he would do when returning home would be to go straight to see Michael Watson.
Benn said: ‘The WBC belt is his now.
I am happy enough just being world champion again.’
ANGRY TV fight fans rang LWT to protest over Nigel Benn's language.
After a clash with ITV interviewer Gary Newbon, Benn rounded on the ‘armchair critics who said I'm washed up’ and blasted: ‘They aren't worth a hand job.’
‘We had a handful of complaints,’ said a spokesman 
TRIUMPHANT Nigel Benn will give his new WBC belt to Michael Watson.
Hulme dies
DENNY Hulme, world Formula One champion in 1967, died during the Bathurst 1000 motor endurance race near Sydney, Australia, yesterday.
His BMW hit an embankment and coasted slowly off the track with Hulme, 56, apparently already dead at the wheel from a heart attack.
MATT HUGHES
Two players were sent off as BRIDGEND fought out a 12-12 draw at home to PONTYPRIDD.
Ponty skipper Nigel Bezani was first to go for a high tackle in which he elbowed centre John Apsee, but the Bridgend man admitted: ‘I was surprised he was sent off.’
Following Bezani's early exit, Apsee's team-mate Jeff Jenkins was also dismissed for a late challenge on Ponty's Nick Jones.
Luc Evans kicked four penalties for Bridgend.
Wales' outside half, Neil Jenkins, in his first game after suspension, also replied with four penalties for the visitors.
RED HOT
Good times are ready to roll
MATT HUGHES
ALAN DAVIES believes the good times are about to start rolling again for Wales this week.
The national coach sends his dragons into battle in Cardiff on Wednesday, already breathing fire and ready to scorch Italy in Wales' opening international of the season.
World champions Australia are then the next visitors to the Arms Park in just six weeks, with grand slammers England on the guest list to open the Five Nations Championship.
But Davies insists: ‘I'm very encouraged by what I've seen in Welsh club rugby this season.
‘The new rules are perfectly suited to traditional Welsh running rugby.
They could be brilliant for Wales.
I love them!’
Davis was at St Helen's to see Heineken League champions SWANSEA continue their unbeaten start to the season with a superb 29-12 victory over rivals NEATH.
With Wales' top clubs running in sackfuls of tries and playing to packed houses, Davies believes the national side are poised to reap the benefits.
‘We now have five or six clubs in Wales that could hold their own against any in Europe,’ he said.
Swansea's victory kept them top of the First Division and was another display worthy of any defending champions.
Wales star Scott Gibbs grabbed a brilliant try against his former club and others came from skipper Stuart Davies, Aled Williams and a blistering individual effort by flying wing Simon Davies.
SWANSEA'S Robin McBride challenges Neath's Andrew Thomas, as the League champions sweep to an impressive 29-12 win at St Helen's
IT'S OVER
MIKE LANGLEY
MANCHESTER UNITED and Leeds were first and second on this day last year — and they kept it a two-horse race to the end in the old First Division.
That won't happen this time.
I believe we've seen the end of Norwich.
They'll never come back from that 7-1 slaughter at Blackburn — at least, not as champions.
I see the Canaries' fall as the shake-up into a new, possibly permanent, top four: Blackburn, United, Villa and QPR.
Should Blackburn hold on to the end, don't taunt Kenny Dalglish about buying the title.
He has the answer pat: ‘Money's the quickest way to build.
Ask anybody who hasn't got it!’
Or ask Alex Ferguson — after only three goals in United's last six matches, how must he feel now about being outbid by Kenny for £3.3million Alan Shearer?
FANTASIAARGH!
NIGEL CLARKE
YES, Clarke's Cauliflowers still prop up Radio Five's Fantasy Football League.
But the Cauli-wobbles are at an end.
Advice from England No 2 Lawrie McMenemy has helped me survive my first crisis as a manager.
We were leaking goals but I've plugged the gaps and with McMenemy's help, got a vote of confidence from chairman Keith Fisher.
That's what worries me most!
Rules for fools
MIKE LANGLEY
THE ‘three foreigners only’ rule is an anti-British measure, framed by envious Continentals.
There was no coincidence about its introduction as our champions ended six years of exile from the European Cup.
The influential Germans were particularly jealous.
Manchester United, Liverpool, Forest and Villa had all won Europe's champion trophy — with only Bayern and Hamburg from the Bundesliga being successful.
The flashy Italians also lagged behind us, so did the Spanish, Portuguese and Dutch.
What a crafty remedy to attack the source of Football League strength, the historic blend of English, Scots, Welsh and Irish?
Suppose George Best, Pat Crerand, Shay Brennan and Tony Dunne had been ‘foreigners’ in 1968.
Would United have won the European Cup?
How comical that an English club should benefit from the rule.
Good luck to Leeds.
But when the replay's over, they must campaign in UEFA for an all-British assault on this clumsily drafted daftness!
ARC ACHE!
User Friendly pipped on post
CHARLES FAWCUS
USER FRIENDLY came within an ace of a French fortune yesterday as the Arc was snatched away from her in the shadow of the winning post.
Britain's four-legged champion failed by just a neck to add Europe's toughest race to her unbeaten haul, but she proved a fighter to the end.
And George Duffield knows she has the star quality to come back and go one better next year.
Battle ‘You can't be disappointed by a run like that,’ said the jockey after User Friendly's head-to-head battle with Subotica had gone so narrowly the wrong way for her army of fans.
‘We got beaten today by the slow early pace which made her too keen and, in hindsight, a pacemaker would have helped, but we weren't to know that.
‘Every time Subotica looked to have her beaten she came at him again and it was only in the last two strides that she lost.
I honestly believe that she is good enough to win the King George and the Arc next year.’
Most British observers will remember Subotica having a desperate run in the Coronation Cup, but things went his way yesterday although trainer Andre Fabre believed that Pat Eddery's mount Jolypha would be his No 1.
St Jovite was in a winning position on the final bend, but the race soon developed into its final desperate duel.
Outsider Vert Amande kept St Jovite out of third, with old rival Dr Devious two places behind.
Earlier in the afternoon Arazi returned to form in brilliant style.
He slaughtered tough opposition headed by Calling Collect, and Steve Cauthen smiled all the way from the winning line to the unsaddling enclosure.
‘When he's good he's electric.
It's fantastic to see him back,’ said Cauthen, and  Arazi now bids for Breeders Cup Mile glory in four weeks.
Lester Piggott is another comeback expert and he eased home on Mr Brooks in the British-dominated Abbaye.
Keen Hunter was second and luckless Elbio third.
Cauthen was second again on odds-on Kindergarten in the Boussac won by outsider Gold Splash, with Love Of Silver third.
Ruby Tiger was third as well in her race, but it was User Friendly who became the Princess of Longchamp yesterday — all set to be crowned Queen next year.
IT'S A FACT
WYC-WHACK
RUNAWAY leaders of the GM Vauxhall Conference Wycombe had a better gate than ten Football League games — 4,120.
A WEE PROBLEM
GARY SPEED LEEDS United's Gary Speed had a wee problem when being dope tested after the recent match against Everton.
Unable to ‘hit the bottle’, Gary had to take the official doctor home with him before he could provide the required sample.
GOAL GUY
POMPEY'S smart Guy Whittingham scored his second hat-trick of the season but couldn't keep the match ball as a memento.
A delighted fan had taken it home 
GOOD SHOW
COLIN DIBALL
S'land 2, Millwall 0
DON GOODMAN grabbed the goals that took the heat off boss Malcolm Crosby…but gave the credit to striker sidekick Peter Davenport.
‘He was my man of the match,’ said two-goal Goodman.
‘I thought he was superb, and I got the benefit.’
Transfer-listed Davenport couldn't remember the last time he'd played alongside deadly Don in the league.
‘It could have been as long ago as last Christmas,’ he said.
But, on this evidence, the 31-year-old former England international won't have to wait another ten months before linking up again.
Davenport asked for a move last month because he couldn't get a first team chance.
Now Crosby insists: ‘If he keeps playing as he did today he's not going anywhere.’
Davenport had a hand in both goals, hit the post and laid on the ball that should have brought Sunderland a penalty — and Goodman his hat-trick — until referee Bill Flood decided otherwise.
Said Davenport: ‘All I want to do is hold down a place in the side.
I've kept myself fit and I was raring to go.
I enjoyed it.’
It was Millwall's first defeat in eight games and Crosby said: ‘It has been a hard time.
People have criticised us with some justification, but I don't feel under pressure.
‘Now I hope this result lifts everybody's confidence.’
GOODMAN: Thankful
Clarke facing final KO
Leigh 16, Wigan 36
GREAT BRITAIN star Phil Clarke was sent off as ton-up Wigan took their points tally to 114 in five scintillating days.
Loose forward Clarke was given his marching orders by Widnes ref Stuart Cummings seven minutes from time for a high tackle on Aussie centre Scott Mahon.
That means Clarke will miss the Greenalls Lancashire Cup final in a fortnight, assuming Wigan beat Oldham in tomorrow's semi-final and he receives more than a one-match ban.
Wigan notched seven tries against luckless Leigh, including Australian centre Andrew Farrar's first touchdowns for the club.
Farrar, in his fourth outing for the Central Park giants, notched a try in each half with Shaun Edwards also sweeping over for a couple.
Edwards took his season's tally to 17 after bagging ten in Tuesday's 78-0 destruction of Swinton.
But Leigh, trailing 20-0 after half an hour, produced some fine rugby highlighted by surging runs from props Tim Street and Tongan Lee Hansen.
Winger Gareth Pratt, signed from Rochdale amateur club Mayfield, bagged a debut try for the home team after David Hill and Mike Blakeley had also crossed.
CLARKE: Sent packing
BRISTOL ROVERS boss Dennis Rofe was involved in a war of words with counterpart Neil Warnock after their 3-3 thriller with NOTTS COUNTY.
Warnock claimed that both Andy Reece and Geoff Twentyman should have been sent off.
But Rofe hit back: ‘Reece's challenge on Chris Short was a bit late but the ref was ten yards away while County's manager was 55 yards away.’
Rovers, always ahead through Paul Hardyman's double and John Taylor, let County in for a gift point.
DESERT STORM
JIMMY ‘Whirlwind’ White was last night blown out of snooker's £224,000 Dubai Duty Free Classic by Willie Thorne.
Thorne, who twice came close to winning an £86,000 car for a maximum 147, won 5-1 to reach the last eight.
ESAPE!
IAN GETS A WRIGHT RESULT
MATT HUGHES
IAN WRIGHT looks certain to escape action over his latest brush with rival fans.
As police probe allegations that the controversial Arsenal striker made a V-sign at Chelsea supporters on Saturday, Wright found an unlikely ally yesterday — the FA.
And suspicions are growing that he could be the victim of a dirty-tricks campaign.
It's the second time in a month that the Highbury hit-man has been accused of insulting fans.
But lack of evidence, including close scrutiny of a video, is likely to bring the same ‘not proven’ verdict that followed the Wimbledon game.
Said FA spokesman David Bloomfield: ‘If players are guilty of making gestures it is something we take seriously.
But perhaps you do need to question the motives of some people who report these alleged incidents.’
WE LOVE YOU -YEAH! -YEAH! -YEAH!
KEEGANMANIA AS THE EX-BEATLE HITS LONDON TOWN
KEV GETS BACK WHERE HE BELONGS
NIGEL CLARKE
BRENTFORD 1 NEWCASTLE 2
KEVIN KEEGAN'S Geordie dream lived on yesterday as Newcastle won their ninth successive match and opened up a five-point lead at the top of the First Division.
They swaggered to a classy, confident victory full of irresistible one-touch football that took the Magpies ever closer to Reading's 1985 record of 13 wins in a row at the start of a season.
Like the Beatles, Keegan was a legend in Liverpool and he has given United a dream ticket to ride all the way back to the Premier League.
Keegan was cheered and chanted for by United's 3,000 fans throughout the match — a Geordie version of ‘We love you, yeah, yeah, yeah!
And he has given the club back its pride, passion, and the kind of penetrative football that has awoken the North East.
Terrific
Said Keegan: ‘I've told the lads they can write themselves into the record books.
And I'm just lucky to be manager of such a good side.
‘We've had a terrific start and it's no fluke.
We can stay at the top because we've got a good enough squad to keep us there.
‘The swirling wind took away from us what we are best at — playing neat football — but we still showed what we could do.’
He went on: ‘I told the lads they can create something to tell their kids and grandchildren about because if we do beat Reading's run, the record will stand for a long, long time.
‘We are the biggest club in football not to have had any recent success, but right now the city is rocking.
‘I'm scared to go there at the moment.
There is so much emotion around, and so much expectancy.
‘And there are people now outside Newcastle who want to see us get that record and also be successful.
‘Brentford gave us a terrific battle but we deserved to win even though we missed chances.
‘I was delighted for the fans who travelled 300 miles south to see us.
We are on a roll and it's great to be involved.’
Added Keegan: ‘They say that everything comes to those who wait.
Well Newcastle folk have been waiting a long time, and we all badly want to give them something to celebrate.’
But Brentford boss Phil Holder believes the Geordie dream can still be shattered — and soon.
He said: ‘Newcastle are not unbeatable, but having said that they are a formidable team.
‘Someone will do them, that's for sure.
I'll have a bet with you right now they don't go throughout the season unbeaten.
‘If you put them under enough pressure, if you run at them, they will crack, but I can't be too bolshie about it.’
Holder has a point.
For Newcastle, having built up a two-goal lead could have been caught by the Bees' stirring comeback.
After Gary Blissett had pulled one back in the 78th minute, substitute Marcus Gayle missed a great chance four minutes from the final whistle to level it.
Newcastle began brightly with a goal in the 10th minute that caught the Bees cold.
Steve Howey picked out David Kelly, who was allowed to run through as Brentford played for offside, to bury a right-foot shot inside the near post.
The Bees didn't know who to mark as United switched their play and their players to totally confuse them with classy running that carried the hallmarks of good coaching.
But United had reason to congratulate goalkeeper Tommy Wright for a spectacular save in the 33rd minute that stopped Brentford going level.
Blissett took the ball from Howey, then exploded a right-foot volley that Wright somehow juggled over the crossbar.
United passed the ball sweetly between each other to continue to create chances that should have put the game beyond Brentford, and it was no surprise when, in the 63rd minute, they created a fine goal that stretched Brentford to breaking point.
Beresford fed the ball in to Robert Lee, who turned and cracked a shot against the crossbar.
But Peacock, back in the side after missing five games through injury, was quickest to react and headed the ball home.
HEADING FOR THE TOP: Gavin Peacock grabs the Magpies' second
FROM ME TO YOU Boss Kevin Keegan salutes the Magpie fans after his side kept up their 100 per cent record at the top of the First  Division 
LET IT BEE!
David Kelly gets in a shot — but it went wide of Brentford's goal
Pictures: DALE CHERRY
Leeds Euro blank
JOHN EDWARDS
LEEDS' campaign to get their European Cup decider switched to Elland Road was in ruins last night.
The champions faxed a protest to UEFA after being ordered to meet Stuttgart on neutral territory.
But Europe's governing body left them in no doubt they were wasting their time by replying: ‘It's just not possible.’
UEFA want the game to go ahead on Saturday in Barcelona, and are negotiating the release of Leeds players from World Cup duty.
There is a direct conflict of interest for Scotland's Gary McAllister, England pair David Batty and Tony Dorigo, Wales winger Gary Speed and France's Eric Cantona.
And England boss Graham Taylor has already warned that he would invoke the six-day release rule if the game is played this weekend.
But Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson will be just as keen for his players to throw their weight behind the club's bid for a glamour second-round tie with Rangers.
McALLISTER
DUTCH ace Ruud Gullit last night announced his international retirement ‘for personal reasons.’
CHRIS CRUNCH
CHRIS Pyatt begins a three-fight chase for the chance of a world title with Matchroom promoter Barry Hearn warning: ‘It's make or break time.’
Pyatt, who has cut off his dreadlocks, takes on Colombian tough-guy Adolfo Caballero for the WBC international middleweight crown at the Granby Halls, Leicester, on Tuesday, October 27.
B-ROOSED!
AUSSIES ARE HERE
MARTIN RICHARDS
THE MIGHTY Kangaroos touched down in Manchester yesterday and betrayed their Wembley nerves.
Coach Bobby Fulton admitted Great Britain are favourites for the World Cup on October 24 and said: ‘It's a gamble conceding home advantage.’
Britain won the last encounter between the two sides at Wembley when a 52,000 crowd lifted them to a famous first Test win in 1990.
The occasion seemed to get to the Aussies then, and this time there will be a 78,000 full house to worry them.
With this summer's titanic battle for the Ashes still fresh in the memory, Fulton added: ‘Everything is stacked against us, but that doesn't mean we won't win.
‘We've come three weeks early so that we can get in plenty of training, plus the three warm-up games.
‘We can't afford to lose.
It's a one-off and we have to prove we are worthy world champions.’
Eleven of the squad haven't played for six weeks.
But Fulton said: ‘We have a strong squad with new names to look out for in Tim Brasher, Brad Godden and Steve Renouf.’
Injury has stripped Fulton of full-back Andrew Ettingshausen and stand-off Laurie Daley.
The dazzling Steve Renouf is expected to team up with Meninga in the centre, and Newcastle's Mark Sargent will wear the No 8 shirt.
Hopes are still alive that the planned world club title game between Wigan and the Brisbane Broncos will go ahead at Central Park the week after the final.
The Rugby League are still talking to sponsors and an announcement is expected on Thursday.
The Walker brothers — Kevin, Kerrod and Stephen — jet in with the Aussie team yesterday Picture: KEVIN FITZPATRICK
Stock take
QUEENS Park Rangers are enquiring about Ipswich's play-anywhere star Mick Stockwell.
The £700,000-rated Stockwell has this season excelled at full-back, in midfield and as a goalscoring makeshift striker.
Gordon Durie's misconduct case was today re-arranged for Friday, October 16.
The Spurs striker is alleged to have feigned being head-butted by Coventry's Andy Pearce.
Don't talk just play!
ALAN WEST
DALIAN ATKINSON doesn't want to hear any championship chat around Villa Park just yet!
The £1.7 million striker declared: ‘We are building a squad, but to talk about winning titles at this stage isn't on.
‘This team is getting stronger and stronger and, just like every other club, we hope we can win it.
But it's much too early to have a load of championship talk going on.
I know it's a cliche but we really do have to take it from game to game — it's the only way.’
Atkinson scored a wonder goal in the 3-2 win over Wimbledon which had namesake Villa boss Ron Atkinson declaring: ‘For me Dalian has got the goal of the season.’
Portsmouth manager Jim Smith was yesterday preparing to hold off a bid from Nottingham Forest for £1.5 million rated striker Guy Whittingham.
The man who cost Portsmouth just £450 when they bought him out of the army netted his second hat-trick of the season on Saturday and in turn became leading scorer in the First Division.
Now Whittingham is the target for Brian Clough to help end his side's disastrous start to the season.
But Smith, who turned down a £1 million offer for Whittingham from Wimbledon earlier this year, said: ‘He's not for sale and that's that.’
YOU'LL BE ALL WRIGHT Says Millwall chief
Gunner told Den is safe
HARRY HARRIS
MILLWALL chairman Reg Burr last night gave assurances that Ian Wright will be safe at the Den tomorrow night.
There are fears of reprisals after Wright was involved in a controversial coin-throwing incident at Highbury in the first leg.
Wright was accused of feigning injury, despite his claims he was definitely hit, which was apparently backed up by video evidence.
Plea
The local police will advise the referee to instruct Wright to avoid any exaggerated goal celebrations that might provoke crowd reaction.
And Burr has issued a personal plea to Millwall fans in the match programme.
He has asked for them to behave, and stated that any fans caught throwing coins or taunting Arsenal's black players will be banned for life from the ground.
Burr said: ‘I am sure Ian Wright will be perfectly safe at the Den.
He's been here enough times in the past.
‘Any behaviour that causes us potential damage will be unacceptable.
I can never condone coin-throwing or racial abuse.
We don't have it at the Den.
If we do we shall stamp it out.
‘Ian Wright will be safe…
I just hope our goal will be safe from him!’
Millwall are set to sign Sunderland's FA Cup hero John Byrne.
Millwall boss Mick McCarthy made an approach for the striker three weeks ago, but was given the cold shoulder.
Said Byrne: ‘I have no plans to leave Roker.
But if a move was on, I would fancy Millwall.’
HIT MAN ARSENAL'S Ian Wright won't receive any racial abuse at the Den, according to Millwall chairman Reg Burr
Hot time for Howey
NEWCASTLE'S Steve Howey will face the toughest examination of his new life at the back tomorrow.
The 20-year-old, a reserve team striker less than a year ago, is now a key man in Kevin Keegan's all-conquering outfit.
But Howey and his defensive colleagues are the players targeted for an all-out assault by derby rivals Middlesbrough in the Coca-Cola Cup showdown at Ayresome Park.
Boro midfielder Andy Peake insisted yesterday: ‘I don't think anybody has had a real go at Newcastle's back four this season.
‘Now they are coming to play a Premier League side on their own ground.
It will be their toughest test so far.’
Boro's in-form strikers Paul Wilkinson and Bernie Slaven will be quick to punish any mistakes by Keegan's men.
But Howey insisted last night he was relishing the challenge of a tie balanced on a knife-edge after the goal-less draw at St James's.
‘There are times this season when we have been under pressure and coped well,’ he said.
‘We know Boro will come at us, but that won't bother me — and I'll get plenty of help from the rest of the defence.’
Howey's career has been transformed since former boss Ossie Ardiles switched him to centre half last season.
MAC MAGIC
Chesterfield of dreams
REDS FACE NEW BOX OF TRICKS
JOHN EDWARDS
PLUCKY Chesterfield sent a tremor through crisis club Liverpool last night by warning them: ‘We've got a few more tricks up our sleeve.’
The little Third Division side caused a sensation at Anfield a fortnight ago by storming into a 3-0 lead in the first leg of their Coca-Cola Cup tie.
Shell-shocked Liverpool recovered to force a 4-4 draw, but the ordeal isn't over yet, says Chesterfield boss Chris McMenemy.
He has vowed to put Graeme Souness's side under the cosh again for tonight's return leg at Saltergate.
‘If Liverpool are at their best, they will be too good for us,’ he said.
‘But we have been working on a few things, just as we did before the first leg.
‘My players didn't freeze at Anfield, and I know they won't be overawed about facing Liverpool again.
‘They are really looking forward to it and are determined to put Liverpool under just as much pressure as at Anfield.
‘If they manage that, I just hope we can force Liverpool into making as many errors as in the first leg.’
Chesterfield's front three of Andy Morris, Steve Norris and Dave Lancaster are planning another bombardment of the Liverpool defence.
‘Our strength is up front and we will be looking to exploit that,’ added McMenemy.
‘This is going to be more difficult than the first match, but I feel we're ready for it.’
But Liverpool birthday boy Bruce Grobbelaar, 35 today, is ready to stop the party-poopers.
Grobbelaar, who won back the goalkeeper's jersey from David James after the home leg, said: ‘We will have to weather the storm.
‘That's what you always expect when you go to lower division grounds and this one will be no different.
‘If we can keep them contained for the first half then we've got a chance of pinching a couple of goals.’
Chesterfield, who haven't been past the second round stage for nine years, have lost both their League games since their night of glory at Anfield.
INSPYRED CHOICE BOSS Chris McMenemy is hoping his strike-force of Dave Lancaster (left) and Steve Norris (right) can lift the Spyrites to beat Liverpool
CLOUD BURST
BOTH Steve Cauthen and Pat Eddery rode winners at Saint-Cloud yesterday.
Cauthen captured the Group Three Prix Eclipse on the Andre Fabre-trained Elizabeth Bay.
Eddery took the Listed Prix Massine on Matador, trained at Marlborough by Roger Charlton.
MICHAEL ROBERTS was in form at Pontefract yesterday, rattling off a 959-1 treble to make 190 — a lead of 30 over Pat Eddery.
Roberts was on target for different stables, scoring aboard Branston Abby (Mark Johnston), Aradanza (Mick Channon), and Good For The Roses (Matt McCormack).
A British double-century looks very much on for the 11-times South African champion, who was the first man to achieve that feat in his native land.
Roberts said: ‘I should get to 200 with a bit of luck, especially as Alec Stewart and Clive Brittain have plenty of ammunition left between them.’
Talented hurdler Ambuscade finally broke his Flat duck at the 22nd attempt to initiate a 34-1 double for Kevin Darley.
TENBY was all the rage yesterday for the Derby down to 8-1.
Ladbrokes go 33-1 bar.
JACK IS MAGIC
CHARLES FAWCUS
JACK BERRY went ton up for the second time with two Warwick winners yesterday, just to prove that no one needs a magic carpet to be a hit.
Three trainers have now crossed the hundred barrier this season and, of them, only Henry Cecil is backed by oil-rich sheikhs.
Jack and Richard Hannon keep on banging in the winners while others are rushing about like headless chickens in the belief that the sky is falling down.
It is rubbish to think that, because Sheikh Mohammed and his brothers did not bid for a single horse at Newmarket last week, the racing game is about to die on its feet.
There are over 300 horses chasing each other round three Flat meetings today — not much death there.
The truth is that there is too much racing and too many horses.
If the sport was pruned, there would be more prize-money to go round.
It's not surprising that the Maktowm brothers are  considering trimming their operation, but they will still have a huge stake here.
The family is well aware of the poor level of prize-money in Britain, but their decision not to bid had more to do with a clash of personality with Tattersalls than any pull-out threat.
‘The Maktowms have been big spenders at Newmarket, but they have never been made really welcome there,’ an insider told me.
‘Sales companies in America and Ireland go out of their way to make them feel at home.
There is little doubt they will be bidding in Ireland to-morrow.
‘There was another row at Newmarket last year when Sheikh Mohammed bought In The Groove privately rather than at a Tattersalls  auction .’
FERGIE IS A JOKE
THE TRUTH about United and ME
‘He made me an outcast at Old Trafford’
PAUL McGRATH
TED MACAULEY
WHEN Alex Ferguson joined Manchester United as the new boss he wanted me out of Old Trafford so badly he tried to make me redundant.
And it nearly worked.
I was so downhearted and at such a low ebb because he made it painfully clear I didn't figure in that great club's future, however much I loved the place.
He was so tough, so unbending and uncompromising, and I don't think he's changed.
He made doubly sure I realised I was an outcast in a heavy-handed way — and he couldn't get rid of me fast enough.
I felt then as if my whole life had collapsed.
And he's made it even worse just now by raking ashes that are three years old.
Why?
What's he trying to do to me?
He got rid of me and that should have been the end of it.
But in a book he's written he's had a real big pop at me in a sour way.
And it's just not on.
Concerned
Fergie has been saying that he was so concerned about my life-style away from football he called in Sir Matt Busby, the club doctor and even a parish priest to try to get me sorted out.
What absolute rubbish — he's gone right over the top with a load of old cobblers there and I don't know why.
He's making it sound as if I was stretched on a couch, locked in a room with a ‘Do not disturb’ sign on the door while Sir Matt, the doc and a priest I have certainly never met, got to work straightening me out, socially, medically and religiously.
What a joke.
I'm not the least bit religious so the idea of a priest having any influence on my life is ridiculous.
I can't ever recall even meeting a priest when I was at United, though there always seemed to be plenty of them around.
As for saying Sir Matt was called in to counsel me — well, that's sheer nonsense.
I only ever spoke to him socially and not very often at that.
The great man just was not in my orbit.
So I feel I have every right to defend myself.
And I'm sure I would have left the club readily and earlier if I'd known what he was going to say later.
Collision
He's making me out to be some sort of thick, brainless  loony on a self-destruct road to ruin.
And that me and my old pal Norman Whiteside were on a collision course with him, that we needed to be split up.
And with him adding that he had to get rid of a notion in football that Manchester United was a drinking club.
I don't know Norman's reaction to Fergie's story but I can say they have left me with a bitter feeling.
All my dreams of playing for United to the end of my career — and I was on a seven- year contract — vanished when Ferguson called me into his office and offered me a cash pay-off to clear out and go and do something else with my life.
Rise
I was staggered.
I'd only once asked for a transfer and not because of any discontent or fall- out with the club.
I wanted a pay rise because I found out I was way behind most of the first-team lads and barely on much more than the apprentices' wages.
It was amazing how little the money was at such a famous and unbelievably well-supported club.
And when I found out after a bit of dressing-room chat what the other lads were on I had to make a point.
I figured that if I asked for a transfer I'd either get a rise or would be able to work out a better deal for myself if I went elsewhere.
In truth, I didn't want to quit United if it could be avoided, I was totally hooked on the place.
But things just went from bad to worse.
Ferguson refers to a pub and club session that Norman Whiteside and I had, and that come Friday I couldn't train — even though, he said, I was supposed to be playing against Queens Park Rangers.
He says that after he doesn't know how many reprimands, I refused to play on Saturday protesting that I wasn't fit enough.
Fergie's memory has failed him there.
He had already told me on the Friday at the training session, and in front of about 20 of the lads, that I wasn't in the team.
And that was that.
But he changed his mind and only wanted me to play against QPR when Lee Sharpe went down poorly.
But I really wasn't fit.
Agony
One of the bigger problems was that Fergie believed I was taking the mickey out of him by either cheating or going soft and feigning injury.
And I was missing too many games complaining of a bad knee when there was nothing really wrong with it.
I honestly believe that's what he thought.
But I knew differently.
I finished some games in absolute agony, but said nothing and kept it to myself.
But it worried me.
I trained as often and as hard as I could, as hard as anybody on the staff — and that includes my old pal Bryan Robson, who was notorious for his unflagging effort — but the pain was excruciating.
Crazy
No professional likes to miss the chance to play — that's why, really, we're in the game — and I was no exception.
But Fergie wanted more from me than I was able to give.
What with that and a few crazy reports to him about my off-duty life-style flying about he decided United and me were going nowhere together.
He wanted me out.
FERGUSON: Tough and unbending
ATKINSON: Sorry to see him go
SIR MATT: We only spoke socially
THE former Manchester United defender, now a vital man in Aston Villa's surge to the title, reveals the torment of his days at Old Trafford.
Terry's offer boosted me
THE TRUTH about United and ME
PAUL McGRATH
TED MACAULEY
TERRY Venables restored a lot of my confidence by asking me to join Tottenham.
I admired Venables, his flamboyant style and attitude, but I could see the dangers in the temptations of life in London and I regretfully turned down the move.
It wasn't such a bad idea, even though Spurs are one of the truly great clubs and Venables one of the brightest bosses.
I knew it wouldn't be a wise move for me.
Redundancy and a wrecked career as a forgotten man seemed inevitable until right out of the blue Graham Taylor threw me a lifeline and persuaded me to join him at Aston Villa.
Angry Blades up for sale
MATT HUGHES
SHEFFIELD
United were put up for sale yesterday in a shock move at Bramall Lane.
It means chairman Paul Woolhouse may have to quit the club after claims that he has missed a deadline to pay for £3million worth of shares.
A controlling block of the club's shares is going back on the market and a new owner could emerge in the next few weeks.
Former managing director Derek Dooley is being invited to return as temporary chairman until new owners take control.
But Woolhouse yesterday insisted he was still chairman.
The shares held by Else 1982 Ltd, a trust chaired by Len Brealey, brother of former chairman Reg, should have passed to Woolhouse last year.
But yesterday the company issued a statement saying the payment schedule had not been met.
Said Len Brealey: ‘The plain facts are that after Mr Woolhouse failed to reach payment in an original contract we set up a new agreement.
‘Again he has not honoured his pledges.
A deadline was set up but it has come and gone and we no have no alternative but to reclaim the shares and place them back on the market.
‘If my brother Reg wants to buy them he must come up with the money, but there are a number of interested parties, individuals and consortiums who have expressed a desire to take over the club.’
Reg Brealey said yesterday: ‘I am sorry to see the club in this position.’
But he refused to comment on whether he wished to return to Bramall Lane.
TIGER BILL: THE GREATEST
AUSSIE cricket legend Bill O'Reilly, rated by Sir Donald Bradman as the best bowler he ever faced, has died aged 86.
‘Tiger’ O'Reilly, who at 6ft 3in bowled medium-paced leg-breaks, played 27 Tests between 1931 and 1946.
He took 144 wickets at an average of 22.59, including three hauls of 10 wickets in one match.
He formed a devastating partnership in many Tests with leg-spinner Clarrie Grimmett.
It has been said that ‘when O'Reilly appealed it was not a request but a demand for the blood of the victim.’
Bradman said yesterday: ‘I am very sorry indeed to hear of the passing of my old friend and colleague.
‘He was the greatest bowler I ever faced or saw, and in my opinion certainly the best bowler Australia ever produced.’
O'Reilly later became a well respected newspaper columnist.
Botica is the spark
MARTIN RICHARDS
Wigan 48, Oldham 8
WIGAN swept into the final of the Greenalls Lancashire Cup with a merciless hammering of Oldham.
Classy stand-off Frano Botica rattled up 20 points with a try and eight goals from ten attempts.
Shaun Edwards chipped in with his 18th try of the season but it was the Wigan fans' new hero — 18-year-old winger Jason ‘Billy Whizz’ Robinson — who stole the show with two tries.
Full back Joe Lydon also grabbed a couple in an impressive performance.
And another of Wigan's promising youngsters — second rower Barrie-Jon Mather — scored the final try three minutes from time, courtesy of Phil Clarke and substitute Martin Crompton.
Oldham gave Wigan more problems than the scoreline suggests and they were well served by prop Tiny Solomona and scrum half Steve Terry.
But all they could show for their efforts were two second half tries for Barry McDermott and Richard Russell.
BOTICA: 20 points
Toulouse la trek
ENGLAND fly-half Rob Andrew is returning to Wasps after playing less than a year with French club Toulouse.
‘It's a business move and I am sorry to be leaving French rugby as it has been going well,’ said Andrew.
Wasps hope to have Andrew playing by November.
Ron plea
DAVID MOORE
RON Atkinson has ordered his high-riding Aston Villa team: ‘Be ruthless — there's no room for mistakes.’
Villa's sharp shooters, mounting a serious championship bid, switch their sights to the Coca-Cola Cup tonight aiming to gun down Oxford.
But boss Atkinson warned: ‘We need to be on our guard after giving Oxford the lifeline of a late goal at their place in the opening leg.
‘A lead of 2-1 guarantees nothing, except the fact that we need to be on our toes against a side who will relish the big occasion.’
Big Ron, robbed of ace defender Paul McGrath by hamstring trouble, and England Under-21 winger Steve Froggatt, because of an ankle injury, is hoping for a 20,000-plus crowd this evening.
He explained: ‘I'm enjoying watching Villa play and it will be interesting to see how many fans want to show their appreciation.’
ATKINSON: Order
CLINCHED
WOLVES have agreed a £100,000 fee with Coventry for defender Paul Edwards, 29, who has been on loan with them since the start of the season.
Edwards could complete his move before tonight's Coca-Cola Cup clash with Notts County.
EDWARDS
Botica is the spark
MARTIN RICHARDS
Wigan 48, Oldham 8
WIGAN swept into the final of the Greenalls Lancashire Cup with a merciless hammering of Oldham.
Classy stand-off Frano Botica rattled up 20 points with a try and eight goals from ten attempts.
Shaun Edwards chipped in with his 18th try of the season but it was the Wigan fans' new hero — 18-year-old winger Jason ‘Billy Whizz’ Robinson — who stole the show with two tries.
Full back Joe Lydon also grabbed a couple in an impressive performance.
And another of Wigan's promising youngsters — second rower BarrieJon Mather — scored the final try three minutes from time, courtesy of Phil Clarke and substitute Martin Crompton.
Oldham gave Wigan more problems than the scoreline suggests and they were well served by prop Tiny Solomona and scrum half Steve Terry.
But all they could show for their efforts were two second half tries for Barry McDermott and Richard Russell.
BOTICA: 20 points
Eagles fly high
Sheff 12, Hull 8
SHEFFIELD Eagles soared to the finals of the Yorkshire Cup for the first time — despite Hull's stunning opening when Lee Jackson touched down in less than nine seconds.
The Great Britain international hooker charged down full-back Garry Jack's  clumsy attempt to kick up field and then pounced over the line, Paul Eastwood adding the two points.
But shell-shocked Sheffield forged into the lead after a Mark Aston penalty goal and a try by Bruce McQuire.
In the second half Aston stretched Sheffield's lead with another penalty.
BATTLE
KEN LAWRENCE
KEITH Curle goes back to his roots tonight as Manchester City face a survival battle.
Curle, who started at Bristol Rovers, said: ‘It's easy to be intimidated by the Rovers fans but we're not afraid.’
City could only manage a 0-0 draw in the first leg of their Coca-Cola Cup-tie.
TV bonus
HARRY HARRIS
LEEDS fans will be able to watch their team's European Cup play-off against Stuttgart on Friday live on ITV, who will pay around £200,000 for the rights.
‘It's brilliant news,’ said Leeds secretary Nigel Pleasants.
‘We've chartered a plane for the team and press, but there's not much time for our fans to make their arrangements.’