

SPECIAL 40th BIRTHDAY ISSUE NEW MUSICAL EXPRESS Ruby Tuesday (think about it) 96 PAGES BIGGEST EVER!
The records, events, films, TV, megastars and no-hopers we've loved and loathed over four decades
NEWS
Harvey hall clangour!
PJ HARVEY,(singer Polly pictured) whose highly acclaimed debut Too Pure LP ‘Dry’ topped the Indie charts last month, have announced details of a 15-date spring tour exclusively to NME .
The band, currently re-equipping after most of their instruments were stolen in Burnley last month, play  and London Finsbury Park Cult In The Park Festival (headlining the second stage).
The band also appear in Paris at the Bataclan.
P J Harvey are planning to issue just one new single before the end of the year, with a second album tentatively scheduled for February '93.
Cult-Jah club
JAH WOBBLE AND THE INVADERS OF THE HEART are confirmed to headline Cult In The Park Festival's Mean Fiddler stage on June 6.
Completing the top alternative line-up on the Fiddler stage are Spiritualized, Captain America, The Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy, Miracle Legion, Fabulous, 25th Of May, Stereolab, Pulp and Jacob's Mouse.
Super barrio brothers
THE KLF have announced a temporary ‘departure from the music business’, in the wake of rumours that the band is to be permanently dissolved.
The controversial duo, last seen performing with Extreme Noise Terror at the BPI awards in February, offered the following statement to NME : ‘Jimmy Cauty and Bill Drummond left for Mexico City on May 5 to research a non-music project, the nature of which is yet to be disclosed.’
Drummond and Cauty are reportedly ‘worn out’ after producing six hit singles and the Number One ‘White Room’LP over the last 18 months.
Despite the fact the duo are renowned in the music industry for their bizarre publicity stunts, the band's spokesman continued to insist that ‘nothing sinister is afoot’ as NME went to press.
However, insiders are convinced that Drummond and Cauty, who have previously released material as The Justified Ancients Of Mu Mu, The Timelords and The JAMS, are likely to end their term as The KLF, and return after their sabbatical in Mexico under an entirely new guise.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN is set to play his first UK dates since the Tunnel Of Love Tour stopped off at Wembley Stadium in 1988.
A spokesperson for The Boss confirmed that Springsteen is currently scheduling a run of major stadium dates in early summer.
Full details are expected next week.
Meanwhile, Springsteen issues a new single, ‘Better Days’, through Columbia on May 11.
The track, lifted from the recently released ‘Lucky Town’ LP, is backed with ‘Tougher Than The Rest’, recorded at the LA Sports Arena on April 27.
CD formats also carry one exclusive new track from his ‘Human Touch’ recording sessions titled ‘Part Man, Part Monkey’.
THE POGUES celebrate the recent completion of their first world tour accompanied by Joe Strummer, with the release of a new single.
The track, a cover of The Rolling Stones' ‘Honky Tonk Woman’ featuring the vocals of Spider Stacey, is issued through WEA on May 11. 12″ formats are backed with two previously unreleased tracks ‘Curse Of Love’and ‘Infinity’, while CDs carry a rare '85 B-side, ‘The Parting Glass’.
The single is a taster from the forthcoming Pogues compilation of out-takes and oddities, ‘The Best Of The Rest’ set for release on June 8.
Meanwhile, the band are currently writing songs for a new studio LP which will feature a host of guest vocalists — many of whom have been affiliated with The Pogues during their nine-year history.
Steve Lillywhite will produce the new LP, scheduled for autumn release.
Come as you Eire
NIRVANA have announced two Irish dates, exclusively to the NME .
The Seattle three-piece are confirmed to appear at Dublin The Point and Belfast King's Hall.
The shows are re-scheduled from the band's last European tour when two Irish appearances had to be cancelled due to Kurt Cobain's throat condition.
These are the band's only dates in the British Isles before their headline appearance at Reading Festival, after which it's unlikely that the band will play here again this year.
THE SISTERS OF MERCY, who stormed the Top Five last week with their biggest hit to date ‘Temple Of Love 1992’ featuring Ofra Haza (pictured above with Eldritch), have announced a major UK arena date.
Commandant Eldritch and troops interrupt preliminary work on a new studio album to play Birmingham NEC on June 27.
It will be the band's first British show since headlining at the Reading Festival last summer.
Tickets priced £12.50 and special guests for the night will be confirmed shortly.
Meanwhile, the Sisters' first complete compilation album, ‘Some Girls Wander By Mistake’, is released this week through Merciful Release/east-west.
The collection includes the original version of the current ‘Temple Of Love’ smash.
Carter's latex release
CARTER USM celebrate this week's release of their new LP ‘1992 The Love Album’ with a mass balloon launch today.
Jim Bob and Fruitbat, whose ‘The Only Living Boy In New Cross’ single crashed into the Top Ten last week, will release 5,000 balloons from Sheep's Green in Cambridge.
All balloons carry an entry form to a competition to win VIP passes to Glastonbury Festival 1992.
Simultaneous launches have been organised for all EC countries, with passes for each country's own festival offered as the prize.
Carter's current UK tour with special guests The Frank & Walters and Holy Joy continues throughout May.
SUPERCHUNK, last week's NME cover stars, have announced a date change on their forthcoming UK tour.
The North Carolina based popcore four-piece now play Liverpool Krazy House rather than Leeds Duchess Of York as previously announced.
PRINCE's next LP is to be a 16-track double album, according to sources at his Minneapolis label Paisley Park.
The new LP, which follows last year's ‘Diamonds And Pearls’, is tentatively entitled ‘Whispers And Echoes’.
However, two other possible titles, ‘My Name Is Prince’ and ‘From A Whisper To A Scream’, are currently listed as reserves.
Tracks records thus far include:.
Prince is also reported to be compiling a soundtrack and story for a new movie entitled The Dawn .
A 16-minute tribute to Miles Davis entitled ‘MD (Miles Is Alive)’ is expected to be included in the film score.
Meanwhile, a planned September official release for Prince's ‘Black’ album, which has sold an estimated five million copies on the bootleg market, has been cancelled without explanation.
THE BEASTIE BOYS, whose third LP ‘Check Your Head’ is now out on Capitol, follow their riotous one-off Marquee show in March with four UK dates next month.
The hip-hop trio play Glasgow Barrowlands .
Tickets are £9 in London and £8 at all other venues.
THE FALL follow their recent Top 40 ‘Free Range’ single with three May shows at .
Suede support in Glasgow and Brighton.
THE HOUSE OF LOVE play a one-off date at Middlesbrough Town Hall with guests The Real People and Pele.
Tickets are £8.
THE ORB's Alex Patterson and SYSTEM 7's Steve Hillage are confirmed to appear as special guests on London's top alternative radio station XFM at 10am on May 10.
Meanwhile, XFM executives have commissioned an independent survey in the boroughs of Camden and Islington, to determine the number of people tuning into the station.
THE LEVELLERS have announced details of a new EP and an extensive May tour.
The four-track ‘15 Years’ EP is issued through China on Monday, and features ‘Dance Before The Storm’, ‘Riverflow’and ‘Plastic Jeezus’in addition to the title track.
The crusty stalwarts play .
THE STAIRS have announced details of their debut LP and a June tour.
The 14-track album, ‘Mexican R'N'B’, features the band's first two singles, ‘Weed Bus’ and ‘Woman Gone And Say Goodbye’, and is issued through Go!
Discs on May 26.
GALLON DRUNK have been approached by MORRISSEY to appear as special guests on his August tour which will accompany the release of his new Mick Ronson-produced LP ‘Your Arsenal’.
Sources told NME Moz offered them the support slot after being ‘knocked out’ by a recent performance.
Cardiacs Levitate
LEVITATION and THE CARDIACS have announced details of a 17-date spring tour together, to conclude with new LPs by both bands.
The new Cardiacs album titled ‘Heaven Born And Ever Bright’ is issued on their own Alphabet Business Concern label on May 5.
Levitation's debut LP, ‘Need For Not’, which was produced by Cardiac Tim Smith, will be released through Rough Trade on the same day.
Meanwhile, the two bands play .
Sampled Notes
THE TELESCOPES play three May dates at  prior to the release of a new LP on May 26.
POWER OF DREAMS release their second album, ‘2 Hell With Common Sense’, through Polydor this week.
The 12-track LP includes both this year's singles, ‘Slowdown’ and ‘There I Go Again’.
The feisty Irish unit showcase their new material at .
WAS (NOT WAS) issue a new single on Monday, a version of the mid-'80s INXS hit ‘Listen Like Thieves’.
It's the band's first release since their ‘Are You Okay?’ album in 1990, and is a taster for a new Fontana LP, ‘Hello Dad I'm In Jail’, due later in the summer.
Meanwhile, Don and Davis Was have confirmed two shows at the London Town & Country Club, on June 21 and 22.
BJORN AGAIN, Abba clones who made considerable impact in the UK last year, return for a string of dates at .
CUD play a ‘secret’ gig as Carefree Sud at London's Borderline on May 14.
Carl Puttnam and co have also added an additional date to their forthcoming tour, at Huddersfield Polytechnic on May 13.
KITCHENS OF DISTINCTION, who release ‘Breathing Fear’, their first single in over a year, through One Little Indian this week, have reshuffled three dates on their accompanying tour.
They now play .
NEW MODEL ARMY fans have been invited to a clog clinic at the Walkley clog factory in Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire.
Britain's only clog plant will carry out repairs on clogs worn by followers of New Model Army between May 9 and 10.
NMA, whose nationwide tour begins on May 15, have a long-standing association with wooden footwear.
NAPALM DEATH, who are about to commence their ‘Campaign For Musical Destruction’ tour, are to give away a free EP with their ‘Utopia Banished’album, set for May 18 release through Earache Records.
The EP, consisting of four tracks recorded after the LP was completed, are to be deleted the week after release.
Zoo what a scorcher!
U2 have confirmed full details of their UK dates, ending months of speculation about where and when the band's Zoo TV tour will stop off in the UK.
As exclusively revealed in NME last month, U2 will play one-off shows at .
However, U2 will have sorely disappointed fans who rely on the music press as their solo source of information.
The band failed to advise said fans, who have endured a five-year wait to see them play live in the UK, that tickets went on sale last Saturday, and sold out on the same day.
U2's Greenpeace benefit in Manchester's Heaton Park next month has been attacked by councillors, on the grounds that it is ‘environmentally unfriendly’.
The campaign to ban the show is being  led by Tory councillor for Bury, Mervyn Turnberg: ‘People don't want this nightmare again,’ he told the Manchester Evening News .
‘I'll be trying to get the concert stopped.
Why can't they hold it somewhere else in Manchester?
People living near Heaton Park had enough last year.’
Turnberg, aged 40, claims to be a fan of U2 as well as The Beatles, Queen and Happy Mondays.
His opposition to the use of Heaton Park for the benefit is supported by Liberal Democrat Victor D'Albert.
However, Manchester City Council are currently considering granting a licence for the event, on condition that U2 meet their safety requirements.
Meanwhile, Bono is rumoured to have sold his first screenplay,Million Dollor Hotel , to Mel Gibson's Hollywood production company.
Filming is scheduled to  begin early next year.
FUGAZI, the Washington DC hardcore four-piece, kick off their first UK tour in two years this week.
The band, whose highly acclaimed ‘A Steady Diet Of Nothing’ album was issued on Dischord last September, play .
Special guests Jesus Lizard, Shudder To Think and Leatherface appear with Fugazi at Brixton Academy.
Carpets' ‘World’ tour
INSPIRAL CARPETS have announced details of a new single to follow their hit, ‘Dragging Me Down’, and an extensive autumn tour.
The Pascal Gabriel-produced single, ‘Two Worlds Collide’, was mixed by Mike Pickering and is issued through Mute on May 18.
Meanwhile, the band are currently working on a third album to follow '91's ‘The Beast Inside’.
The new LP is scheduled for release in autumn to coincide with dates at , which follow an appearance at Feile Festival in Cork on August 1.
Tickets, priced £9 in London and £8 elsewhere are available from usual agents or by post:.
Cheques and postal orders should include a 75p booking fee and all orders must enclose an SAE.
SUEDE's showcase date at London Covent Garden Africa Centre last week was marred by trouble when fierce arguments and scuffles broke out after the venue's management closed the doors on ticket holders.
Accusations that tickets had been over-sold were refuted by the management, who blamed the crushed conditions inside on the band's huge guest list.
Suede, whose NME SOTW, ‘The Drowners’, is released through Nude Records on Monday, have dates at .
MADONNA, EMF, GEORGE MICHAEL, LISA STANSFIELD and SEAL are among artists contributing to a new AIDS benefit LP.
The ‘Red Hot And Dance’ album is scheduled for release through Sony next month, and features three new George Michael tracks; ‘Happy’, ‘Do You Really Want To Know’and ‘Too Funky’, which is also issued as a single on May 18.
The remaining tracks are star remixes of previously released material.
THE CURE were forced to cut short their set at Cambridge Corn Exchange last Tuesday after singer Robert Smith was taken ill with severe stomach pains.
The band also cancelled a scheduled performance of their forthcoming single ‘Friday I'm In Love’ on Top Of The Pops , although bass player Simon Gallup and keyboard player Perry Bamonte did introduce the promo video for the single on the programme.
The new 45, lifted from their Number One ‘Wish’ LP, is backed with two exclusive tracks, ‘Halo’on 7″ and cassette formats, plus ‘Scared As You’on 12″ and CD, and issued through Fiction on May 15.
REVOLVER, Pulp and The Bardots are among 15 bands confirmed to appear at London's Smashed!
The club, at Islington Powerhaus, plays host to Pulp and The Mouth .
Jon Fat Beast comperes at all shows.
Tickets are £5 before 11pm, £4 after 11pm, and £3 after 11pm with a Smashed! flyer.
SEPULTURA, SUGARBLAST and FRONT LINE ASSEMBLY are believed to have lost master tapes of records and videos in a fire at Roadrunner Records in London.
The blaze, at the Harrow Road offices which also house Emergo, Third Mind and Lafayette Records, broke out on Easter Monday, raging through two floors.
Police, who found petrol canisters nearby, suspect that the fire was the result of an arson attack on an Afro-Caribbean hairdressers situated on the ground floor.
METALLICA have announced details of a new benefit 45 for the Mercury Phoenix Trust AIDS charity administered by Queen.
The CD single, issued through Mercury this week, will feature three tracks, their '91 Top Five ‘Enter Sandman’ 45, plus ‘Sad But True’and ‘Nothing Else Matters’recorded live at the Freddie Mercury Tribute.
Ticket scramble!
SILVERFISH (singer Lesley pictured above) follow their prestigious support slot on EMF's April tour with one major heading show in the capital and a debut album.
The Camden-based guitar assailants play their biggest bill-topping show to date at London's Astoria on June 19.
A supporting cast of special guest bands is currently being finalised.
The band, whose ‘Silverfish With Scrambled Eggs’ single stormed the Indie Top 20 in March, have completed their first album for the Creation label.
The LP, titled ‘Organ Fan’ was recorded in New York with producer Jim Thirtwell, of Foetus fame, and will be released on June 15.
GUNS N' ROSES' bass player Duff McKagan has been hit with a $20 million dollar suit after allegedly assaulting financier Rodolfo Curbelo.
Curbelo, who is seeking damages for ‘physical and mental anguish’, claims McKagan and three GN'R bodyguards attacked him.
He was knocked out in a brawl at a Hollywood restaurant, suffering a broken jaw and three shattered teeth.
The fight broke out after McKagan allegedly accused Curbelo of ‘staring’ at him.
EAT, who issue their first single of '92, ‘Golden Egg’, through Fiction on May 26, have announced details of an 18-date spring tour.
The band headline dates at .
VERVE, currently touring as special guests of Spiritualized, headline London New Cross Venue on June 12, prior to the release of a second single through Hut in late June, which will follow their Number One Indie debut ‘All In The Mind’.
Radio One shake-up on the way?
RADIO 1 is likely to be restructured, following the publication of an advisory report for BBC executives and governors.
The Charter For The 1990s report leaked last week recommends that Radio 1 should distinguish itself from commercial stations by implementing new discussion and documentary programmes, and ape up-market Radio 3 with regular pop music concerts.
However, the report also warns against a big switch to more ‘worthy’ youth programmes, and emphasises that the station should remain a mass audience service built around music.
The Charter, backed by David Hatch, managing editor of Radio 1, is considered a defensive move by the BBC as it prepares for difficult negotiations with the government over the issue of privatisation of the national network.
Meanwhile, RADIO 5 have hit back at allegations in The Sunday Times that the station is to close.
The paper reported the station would be axed at the annual meeting of BBC governors on May 20, following criticisms in the recently leaked internal report, which criticised Radio 5 for low listenership figures and duplicating services.
The troubled station has, however, denied that closure is inevitable, accusing The Sunday Times of ‘premature speculation’.
A Radio 5 spokesperson said: ‘The internal report made a number of suggestions for restructuring network radio and only one of them involved a major change to Radio 5.
No decisions can be taken until the May meeting of governors.’
However morale at the station was lifted last week when two R5 presenters, Richard Coles and NME old boy Danny Baker (see interview, page 38), triumphed at the annual Sony Radio Awards.
US NEWS
MICK JAGGER's next album may be produced by Rick Rubin, according to rumours circulating in Los Angeles.
The Def Jam supremo has been seen clubbing around LA with the aged Rolling Stone.
Rubin refused to comment on the rumour, but didn't deny it.
THE KLF will be pleased to learn that the Mississippi state legislature has approved the renaming of a 13-mile stretch of motorway in honour of Country singer TAMMY WYNETTE.
FLAVOR FLAV found out that 911 isn't a joke when he dialled his local emergency number after a recent motorcycle accident on Long Island.
When the ambulance crew turned up, the PE rapper, who suffered a minor neck injury, enquired nervously ‘You won't rough me up will you?’
Instead of seeking revenge for PE's criticism of the service, which the band claims responds slower to black callers than to white, the ambulancemen invited Flavor Flav to ride with a medical emergency crew.
He accepted, but a PE spokesperson said the group's comments still stand.
CHUCK D., KEITH RICHARDS and ELVIS COSTELLO will contribute tracks to ‘Weird Nightmare’ a tribute to legendary bassist Charlie Mingus.
The album producer is Hal Wilmer, the man behind the Walt Disney and Kurt  Weil tribute records.
THE CHARLATANS, THE SUGARCUBES and PEARL JAM raised more than $150,000 at the recent Earth Day Edge Festival in Dallas.
The money went to benefit local environmental organisations.
MEGADETH have revealed they've been in group therapy for the past three years.
The Speed Metal group contacted a psychiatrist to get members ‘to start talking to each other again after losing focus as to why the band originally got together’.
Dave Mustaine & co also sought help with drug and alcohol-related problems.
MADONNA has several projects in the works under the terms of her new megadeal with Warner Bros.
Niki Harris, a ‘Blonde Ambition’ back-up singer, will reportedly be one of the first acts on Madonna's Maverick record label, along with tour dancers Jose Gutierrez and Luis Camacho.
Madonna's film company may sign Alek Truth Or Dare Keshishian to direct its first feature.
Under discussion is a remake of Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights , plus James Baldwin's Giovanni's Room .
GEORGE HARRISON and ERIC CLAPTON have apparently had a falling out, resulting in Clapton's diminished presence on the upcoming live album of the pair's recent Japan tour.
Whatever transpired between the two long-time friends must be really serious.
Even when Clapton stole Harrison's wife, Patti Boyd, from the former Beatle, the two guitarists remained friendly.
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN is said to be planning an extensive arena tour this summer, starting in Europe.
London shows are slated for late June, with US dates beginning in August.
VAN HALEN have come to the defence of a 19-year-old fan arrested for wearing one of the band's T-shirts.
Sean Pierce of Fort Smith, Arkansas, was charged with violating a law banning the public display of obscene material.
Pierce was sporting a T-shirt emblazoned with ‘For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge’— the title of Van Halen's latest album.
Local authorities were upset because the initial letters of the phrase were highlighted, spelling an obscene word.
If convicted, Pierce faces up to a year in prison and a $1,000 fine, which Van Halen have offered to pay.
The band will also record public service announcements for local radio stations, urging petitions to protest the arrest.
RECORD NEWS
45s
PALE SAINTS ‘Throwing Back The Apple’ Leeds-based pop troupe recently found on co-headlining dates with The Boo Radleys, issue a fresh four-track — out now 
ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT ‘Tennessee’ debut ‘cultural-southern-hip-hop-folk-ethnic-funk’offering
BLAB HAPPY ‘Inside Out’ Leicester based four-piece's first single of '92
MAIRE BRENNAN ‘Against The Wind’ first taster from Clannad singer/songwriter's forthcoming eponymously titled debut LP
SIMON DARLOW ‘Hot’ dance debut from the man who wrote Grace Jones' ‘Slave To The Rhythm’
DIGITAL UNDERGROUND ‘No Nose Job’ wacky hip-hop troupe protest against plastic surgery
CELINE DION WITH PEABO BRYSON ‘Beauty And The Beast’ from the Oscar-nominated full-length Disney cartoon feature of the same name
THE DYLANS ‘Mary Quant In Blue’ a Hugh Jones remix of a cut from their guitar pop debut LP
EON ‘Basket Case’ hardcore meets horror, inspired by the schlock masterpiece of the same name
JULIA FORDHAM ‘I Thought It Was You’ the modern ‘aware’woman's torch singer lifts from her recent ‘Swept’LP
JELLYFISH KISS ‘Big Driving EP’ new three-tracker from Peel favourites, currently working on their next LP and a track from Imaginary Records' forthcoming Monkees tribute album
R KELLY AND PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT ‘She's Got That Vibe’ reissue of a track which went big in the clubs late last year, from the Number One dance album ‘Born Into The Nineties’
LOVE & SAS ‘Call My Name’‘sensual’ New York-based female duo offer three Steve Silk Hurley, Blaze and E Smooth mixes of their debut
MIDNIGHT OIL ‘Sometimes’ a taster from the Antipodean unit's forthcoming live LP, recorded in Sydney in 1989, and originally released on the ‘Diesel And Dust’LP
OCEAN COLOUR SCENE ‘Do Yourself A Favour’ sometime baggies attempt a relaunch with their cover of the track written by Syreeta Wright and Stevie Wonder in the '70s
JOHN O'KANE ‘Stay With Me’ third single from the balladeer's ‘Solid’album
OMAR ‘Your Loss, My Gain’ long-awaited new stuff from the smooth crooner who hit big last year with ‘There's Nothing Like This’— out on Monday 
SCARLET ‘Piccadilly In The Rain’ female songwriting trio from Hull present their debut four-track EP, produced by former Bible basher Boo Hewerdine
KATHY SLEDGE ‘Take Me Back (To Love Again)’ former lead singer of '70s disco sensation Sister Sledge attempts a comeback
SYNAESTHESIA ‘Feel The Dream’ hardcore from Brighton, courtesy of an outfit who claim to have been profoundly inspired by Elvis Presley, via their ouija board
TNT ‘Money’ already a big hit in the clubs and on Kiss FM, this 12″ and CD features six mixes by Tony Humphries of Soul II Soul and Chaka Khan fame
LPs
ARC ANGELS ‘Arc Angels’ bluesy LA based four-piece band  led by grown-up guitar hero Charlie ‘Cheekbones’Sexton, who played with David Bowie and recorded with Bob Dylan and Keith Richards aged 17
BIG CAR ‘Normal’ Texas-based four-piece  led by ex-PiL guitarist Mark Schulz make an aggressive debut
BECAUSE ‘Mad, Scared, Dumb And Gorgeous’ debut from a new duo, one half of which is former Furniture vocalist Jim Irvin
CIRCUS LUPUS ‘Super Genius’ debut from a Wisconsin four-piece featuring actor Chris Thompson
ELECTRO ASSASSIN ‘Big Violence (Compulsory)’ debut from Kevin Gould and Ian Taylor, late of Johnson Engineering Co
FRONT LINE ASSEMBLY ‘Tactical Neural Implant’ eight new songs, including an edited version of the current indie hit ‘Mindphaser’
HALF JAPANESE ‘Fire In The Sky’ latest from the combo that features Teenage Fanclub producer Don Fleming, plus guest spot from Velvets drummer Moe Tucker
LYNCH MOB ‘Lynch Mob’ ex-Dokken guitarist George Lynch's LA Metalhead fourpiece follow their '90 debut ‘Wicked Sensation’
PETER MURPHY ‘Holy Smoke’ ex-Bauhaus leader's fourth solo gothic outing
MY SISTER'S MACHINE ‘Diva’ debut from a band comprising various past remnants of Seattle outfits Mistrusts and Alice In Chains
THE NEVILLE BROTHERS ‘Family Groove’ New Orleans' based soul brothers offer their third for the label, ‘a strong political statement dealing with everything from homelessness to crack dealing’
OZRIC TENTACLES ‘Live Underslunky’ crusty godfathers release a live collection of their inimitable (ahem)‘spacedancecoremusic’.
Apparently — out now
POI DOG PONDERING ‘Volo Volo’ lunatic California-based unit follow their eponymously-titled warp-world influenced debut
LEON RUSSELL ‘Anything Can Happen’ first album for ten years from the much-respected musician and songwriter who has previously worked with Phil Spector, Bob Dylan, George Harrison and the Rolling Stones
DAVID SANBORN ‘Upfront’ latest instrumental collection from multi-Grammy-winning saxman, features Eric Clapton among guest musicians
JANE SIBERRY ‘Summer In The Yukon’ the story so far, choice cuts from her previous four albums, including the recently released single ‘The Life Is The Red Wagon’
FRANK SINATRA ‘20 Golden Greats’ 20-track compilation featuring ‘The Lady Is A Tramp’and ‘That Old Black Magic’among the cream of the first ever pop icon's recordings for Capitol ('53 –'61); SWIRL ‘Plumptuous’their first release since the EP ‘A Matter Of Attitude’well over a year ago
VARIOUS ‘Moods 2’ the second in the label's ambient compilation series featuring Enya's ‘Caribbean Blue’, Fleetwood Mac's ‘Albatross’and Mike Oldfield's ‘Tubular Bells’among its 20 tracks
ALYSON WILLIAMS ‘Alyson Williams’ second from the fierce US soulwoman, with which she plans to prove that she is ‘more than just a loud broad in a loud hat!’
Pale Saints: who said throw back?
TOUR NEWS
THE ADVENTURES make their first UK appearance since '88 with shows at .
BECAUSE, ex-Furniture man Jim Irvin's songwriting duo, who release their ‘Mad Scared Dumb And Gorgeous’ LP through Haven Records next week, play London's Mean Fiddler Acoustic Room and support Boo Hewerdine at London's Borderline.
BLAB HAPPY accompany the release of their ‘Inside Out’ single this week with dates at .
BLIND MR JONES accompany the May 11 release of their ‘Crazy Jazz’ 45 on Cherry Red Records with dates at .
BOB play a string of dates at .
JOCELYN BROWN flies in from America for a one-off show for the Songwriters Network at London Subterania on May 6.
Robert Owens is amongst the special guests appearing.
THE COUNTERFEIT STONES, Britain's very own Mick'n'Keef impersonators, play .
DELICIOUS MONSTER play Birmingham Barrel Organ on May 6, supporting Adorable.
FAMILY GO TOWN, hectic guitar popsters, play early summer dates at .
FGT dates end at Newport TJ's, supporting The Sandkings.
THE FAT LADY SINGS take leave of the UK for an American tour after a one-off date to open a new concert venue .
FRUIT, Bristol popsters, play a one-off date at .
GOD MACHINE support NICK CAVE on this week's dates at .
GOREFEST, the Dutch grindcore legends, play a one-off date at London Happy Jax Moshpit on May 13, with Necrosanct and Korpse supporting.
ALI HUSSAN KUBAN & THE NUBIAN BAND, Arabic-African world music rhythm maestros, play Hebden Bridge Trades Club .
HEADCLEANER, grungy Brixton noise merchants, accompany the release of their ‘Headcleaner’ EP on Eve Recordings with dates at .
HOMAGE FREAKS, sing-a-long funk-punk-dirge blenders, play a  string of London dates at .
JULIA SCREAMS play Birmingham The Pen And Wig on May 14.
LAVERNE & SHIRLIE, South London groove popsters, play a pair of London dates at .
THE LEVELLERS 5 accompany the May release of their ‘Pressure Drop’ EP with dates at .
LOS LOBOS, East LA Tex-Mex five-piece, accompany the May 18 release of their new album ‘Kiko’ through London Records with their first UK dates in two years.
The band play .
MILK, thrusting grunge merchants, support L7 at .
THE MONEYGOODS carry on plugging their debut ‘A Perfect Case For Celibacy’ LP with dates at .
MORE MONEY THAN GOD, Bath-based trash noise pop junkies, play .
THE ORB, ambient-dance explorers, play an all-night rave at London's Brixton Academy on June 5, with Sensurround supporting and a premier of Orb movie Adventures Beyond The Ultraworld up for the night.
OZRIC TENTACLES, who released their live LP ‘Live Underslunky’ through Dovetail Records last week, wheel out their psychedelic tour bus for dates at .
THE REVS promote their ‘Buzz’ EP, out now through Vinyl, with London dates at .
SCARLET, all-girl Hull songwriting trio, accompany the release of their ‘Piccadilly In The Rain’ 45 on Haven Records with a date at London Mean Fiddler Acoustic Room.
SUNSCREEM, major-label rave-pop groovers, play .
TABITHA ZU, fronted by the sister of Daisy Chainsaw's Katie Jane Garside, play .
TERMINAL POWER COMPANY take their cyber-club experience on the road with dates supporting PIG at .
THERAPY?
Belfast noise-blast trio, celebrate the chart entry of their ‘Pleasure Death’ mini-album with a one-off date at London ULU on May 21.
Support comes from Jacob's Mouse and Loveblobs.
THRILLS
EDITED BY STUART MACONIE
CLASH OF THE CURMUDGEONS!
SCENE: McDONALD'S, New York.
LOU REED steps up to the counter.
McDONALD'S BLOKE: Hi!
Can I help you?
LOU: I told you, dickweed — don't mention The Velvet Underground.
BLOKE: I didn't.
I don't even know what The Velvet Underground is.
LOU: What!
They were the most important force in rock ever!
The fact that we never sold any records and loads of rotten indie music is our fault has nothing to do with it!
Now where's my food?
BLOKE: You haven't ordered any yet.
LOU: Right.
Hey!
That's not because I'm a heroin addict, you know!
I only write songs about drugs!
Drugs are for losers!
I wrote a song about a satellite once but that doesn't mean I am a satellite, does it?
BLOKE: You wouldn't care to order some food now, would you?
LOU: Yeah.
Right.
I'll have the kid's meal please.
Is there a toy this week?
(Before the bloke behind the counter can reply, an enormously fat man with no neck and an absurd fly-blown haircut barges in front.)
VAN MORRISON: Gimme nine Big Macs, a quarter-pounder with cheese, 25 root beers and a hundred apple pies!
And some herrings!
BLOKE: I think this gentleman was before you, sir.
VAN: In the name of Finn MacCool and all the poets of the Mabinogion!
Are you going to serve me or do I have to step behind the counter and cram as much food into my face as possible myself?
LOU: Hey!
Get to the back of the queue, fat boy!
VAN: By Satan's sweetbreads!
Am I to be troubled by a skinny old fool in mirror shades?
Away before I eat you!
LOU: Do you know who I am?
I am rock's foremost poet and ill-mannered grouch.
Now get out of my way!
VAN: Lies!
For I am rock's foremost poet and ill-mannered grouch!
Why, my merest whim sends tour managers into fits of gloom!
And my poetry is unparalleled since the bards hung up their rhyming shoes!
LOU: Get stuffed!
Hey, McDonald's guy!
BLOKE BEHIND COUNTER: What?
LOU: Listen to this poem: ‘Some of my friends dress as women/Some of them like to take smack/Some of them died of diseases/But all of them think I am crap.’
Hang on!
Someone's been at this — probably the lickspittle English rock press.
Now go away and die, junkie fag.
BLOKE: Oi!
That's enough!
VAN: Pathetic!
Listen to me have a go!
Hey, hopeless casualty of junk food-serving!
I heard you moving your arms earlier!
You're sacked!
BLOKE: But I don't work for you, fatso.
Now why don't you take your croaky-faced mate and sod off back to boring boxed set land and bother the world no more!
Lloyd Cole's worth five of you old fools!
Lou and Van burst into tears and Hamburglar kicks their heads in.
Lou and Van: ill-mannered?
Grouchy?
Who would suggest such a thing?
EXCLUSIVE!
Thrills proudly presents an EXCLUSIVE EXTRACT from Johnny Rogan's exciting new book, Joyce And Rourke: The Ones Who Didn't Get Paid (Much)
‘…
St Whip's School For Boys was a repressive place.
Over the door hung a motto which Morrissey was later to read and inwardly digest: ‘EVERY DAY IS LIKE SUNDAY’.
One day at lunch, a fist fight broke out in the dining hall.
‘Morrissey was off school that day,’ remembers Bob Manc, now a plumber.
But Bob is in no doubt that the young Steven Patrick would have been deeply affected by the event had he witnessed it.
‘I never met him,’ confirms Bob.
‘I'm not even sure if he was at school at the same time as me.’
‘Ten year later, Granada TV screened a half-hour play as part of its Armchair Theatre series.
Its name was to haunt Morrissey: We Hate It When Our Friends Become Successful And How Soon Is Now, Anyway?
‘I don't think Steven had a telly at the time,’ confirms long-time Morrissey acquaintance Len Levenshulme, adding cryptically, ‘Steven Morrissey?
I thought you said Steven Morris !
I've never heard of this Morrissey bloke.
Is he famous?’
‘At the time, young Steven was working for the Inland Revenue near Strangeways Prison.
‘Strangeways, here we come!’ quipped Morrissey every day to his workmates — probably — quoting, of course, the famous line uttered by Barry Grant in Brookside five years later, which Morrissey could have seen if he videoed that episode while The Smiths were on tour.
‘The group's name itself has often been the source of some speculation — especially for writers anxious to pad out biographies for a few extra paragraphs — but the name ‘Smith’ has always been significant in the Morrissey hagiography.
There's Mark E Smith, who comes from Manchester, WH Smith's, who sell books by Morrissey's idol Oscar Wilde, and, not five miles from Morrissey's old flat in North End, there is a grocer's shop called Smith — which Morrissey doubtless visited to buy vegetables when he was lost.
Er…
And it is hard to ignore the significance of Smith's Crisps, whose many non-meat flavours must have appealed to the young Morrissey.
‘I expect he prefers cheese and onion to beef,’ confirms long-time total stranger Kevin Costner, ‘Most vegetarians do.’’
(Can we have our advance back now, please?— Omnibus Books)
The Smiths BK (Before Kelly)
‘BIG MOUTH’
‘The biggest turn-on about having shitloads of money is the ability to do what you like.
All that shite about being the biggest, the best, the loudest; it's all meaningless.’
Bono
‘Everything you read about the Stones is totally true.
The drink, the drugs, the women, the lot.
And we did it with them.’
Gun's Mark ‘Rank’ in
‘These days we're absolutely massive pop stars, we have our own separate band bus.
Just the four of us and our manager and about 50 groupies.’
Ride's Steve Querault
‘My agent was aghast when I did Freejack .
But it was a fun film, it only took a few days work — and I got to meet Mick Jagger!’
Anthony Hopkins
‘I hear they're making a sequel to The Silence Of The Lambs .
It's going to be called The Flesh Prince Of Bel Air or Miss Thai Gone ’.
Billy Crystal
THRILLS BELIEVE IT OR NOT!
In 1972, due to a technical error, MIKE OLDFIELD appeared on the NME cover six weeks in a row.
One of the scientists involved in the recent discovery that the big bang theory is essentially correct was former BAY CITY ROLLER DEREK LONGMUIR.
Actress Patricia Routledge arranged the strings on BRYAN ADAMS' last album.
AVAILABLE IN THE SHOPS — NOT!
A HIP and amusing name change didn't fox you bright young things out there in readerland, did it?
Congrats to the many thousands of you who sent in correct answers in last week's ‘rock rubbish’ bonanza quiz.
But a big NME ‘must do better’ to the 3,788 entries that believed cute, foppish Lancastrian Stuart Maconie to be Irish!
Sadly, there can only be one winner…and that is M J Gill of Manchester, who correctly spotted that twinkly-eyed Albums Ed Big Stuarty Bailie is a son of the Emerald Isle.
Now gasp and faint at the little lot on offer this week!
Some fab ‘Join Our Club’ badges (and a sticker!) from those lovely ST ETIENNE people!
A REVOLTING COCKS video!
A JAMES RAY'S GANGWAR lighter.
Search me!
A cassette of SPINAL TAP's ‘Bitch School’ song.
(WARNING: NOT A REAL GROUP!)
A fantastic BLACK CROWED ‘Remedy’ first aid kit!
Some ace Batman Returns notepaper.
This really is exclusive!
A fab yellow scale model of a woman playing a guitar!
And all you have to do is name an NME writer from Lancashire.
Think about it!
All correspondence to (God, I hate doing this every frigging week) AITS-N!
Goodbye, my children.
St Etienne: dodgy stickers
LOCK UP, YOU DAUGHTERS
WANT YOUR locks changing by an exhibitionist yokel with a Patti Smith fixation?
Then look no further.
Only joking.
She's a strong and individual woman making it in a man's world.
MATERIAL WORLD
FLOWERED UP
WHERE ARE YOU AND WHAT ARE THE VIBES LIKE?
Round at Terry's.
Messy (like Terry)
WHAT WAS THE LAST THING YOU ATE?
Chateau Neuf De Pap Chup-A-Chups
WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED?
IF YOU WERE PM, WHAT WOULD BE THE FIRST THREE THINGS YOU'D DO?
1)
Set up rehabilitation for all Sun readers
2)
Install Alex Nightingale as Minister For Health
3)
Free washing facilities for all Crusties
FAVE HEAVY METAL BANDS
FAVE BOARD GAMES
WHICH SPORTS ARE YOU GOOD AT?
Bedroom gymnastics, underarm darts, speed fishing
FIRST RECORD YOU CAN REMEMBER
FAVE BRITISH CITIES
For various reasons.
WHAT WOULD YOU FAX BOBBY GILLESPIE
The bouncing Kylie photos
WHAT SCARES YOU?
WHAT BORES YOU?
FAVOURITE SPORTING MEMORY
Being sent off in the Metropolitan Police five-a-sides
FAVE CHILDREN'S PROGRAMMES
CAN YOU QUOTE A LINE OF POETRY?
‘The pointy birds, all pointy pointy/Anoint my head, anointy anointy’
NAME A RECORD THAT CAN MAKE YOU CRY?
KEY FILMS IN YOUR LIFE
WHAT BOOK ARE YOU READING?
(Are you sure, Barry — Ed)
FAVE COCKTAILS
WHERE DO YOU GO FOR YOUR HOLIDAYS?
Hiking and Youth Hostelling (Back door, of course)
WHAT WAS THE LAST GREAT RECORD YOU HEARD?
WHAT GOOD CAUSES WOULD YOU SUPPORT?
AIDS research.
The homeless
HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO BE REMEMBERED?
Where's that bastard?
He owes me a grand!
MOTTO
When the going gets weird, the weird turn pro
Dr. Crawshafts World Of Pop
The Annual ‘Former Girlfriends Of Rod Stewart’ Convention
Yes, he did actually ask me if I thought he was sexy!
As a strong feminist I found his ‘laddish’ humour conflicted with my own firmly held views on an equitable sexual and social relationship.
THIS size, honestly.
I expect he'll be flying over to Sweden to see Scotland in the European Championships.
Ronnie Wood came over once and it took me three months to clean up the mess.
…
Completely embarrassing nowadays…
ON ON ON
EDITED BY STEVE LAMACQ
Did the earth move for you?
Then meet BACK TO THE PLANET, agit-popping, space-dub squatters who are not — honestly!— crusties.
Plus, the best kick-carcass experimental rock band featuring old Loop members in the world — THE HAIR AND SKIN TRADING COMPANY
PLANET OF SOUNDS
The pub landlord's sigh of relief metamorphoses into a gigantic shit-eating grin as BACK TO THE PLANET and entourage depart his suit-heavy establishment.
The colourfully-attired fivesome — all patchwork jeans, hair extensions, lurid T-shirts and warm demeanour — repair to the crash-pad next door to explain why their profile has suddenly been heightened after years of tolling diligently in underground circles.
Most groups form after a shared devotion to the works of some particular group or an affinity for a particular style-sound-wash, but Guy (keyboards), Fraggle (guitar), Carl (bass), Henry (drums) and Fil (vocals) hatched their idea whilst squatting a disused dole office in Peckham, South London, just because they had an attitude in common.
Four European tours and one cassette-only release later — they're still bleary-eyed from the most recent jaunt — there's a cracking debut single to sink your fangs into.
Recalling the hybridisation and agit-pop of the early '80s, but infused with '90s spirit, ‘Revolution Of Thought’ has been remixed into space-dub shape by underrated twiddlers Llwybr Llaethog.
If the term ‘crusty’ slips into your mind, desist.
Back To The Planet might appeal to a section of the so-called dregs of society, but they feel they're setting a different agenda.
‘We haven't got the money to go out and buy the clothes,’ Guy states, ‘to take us to the next stage of achievement.
You could see a band that plays the same type of music as us on TOTP but they wouldn't look like us…
You could get called a crusty band, it doesn't matter what type of music you play.
(Adopts sarcastic tone ) The Levellers are a crusty and so are we.
We sound the same…‘
Not!
‘We're just basically taking everything that is around us in our environment and society and making people aware of it.’
Fil continues: ‘We just happen to be in this bit…(much laughter )…of no money and knowing what it's like to have no prospects.
The bottom line is that we all love music and want to play it.’
If that sounds like standard talk, Back To The Planet make it seem heartfelt.
They certainly didn't choose to drop out of society like their New York City equivalents who could always return to daddy's money; rather, theirs is a quest to reflect the plight of the dispossessed and let them know they're not alone, to offer the disaffected hope, and to somehow go beyond merely preaching to those who already understand.
Back To The Planet want to be massive, but theirs are still down-to-earth concerns…
‘The dole don't even give you payments any more if you say you're a musician,’ Carl says, ‘'cos they've said they're not gonna fund the arts any more anyway.
Musicians and artists to them are the same as tramps and winos, whereas, in a place like Germany, musicians are respected for their occupation.’
Fraggle: ‘We're not a product.
We don't use gimmicks.
I used to work for a record company as an office junior ages ago and they were always talking about music as being a packet of cornflakes: you just have to make it look right and make it so it's easy to recognise and people will buy it.
We haven't done that.’
Back To The Planet say: organise yourselves.
The Peckham Planet Posse 
FOLLICLE THE LEADER
They're sweeter than Big Black and they're less technologically minded than Kraftwerk, but THE HAIR AND SKIN TRADING COMPANY manage to learn and use whatever they can (or, indeed, Can) lay their hands on.
They're DIY-ing themselves around experimental music and they're holding it together — but only just.
‘We went into this basement and smashed up loads of glasses, tables, chairs — anything that was in the room — and recorded it,’ whispers bearded, bass-playing vocalist Neil.
‘There was also this electric in the studio fan that was making a horrible squeaking noise, we couldn't get it to stop, so we sampled it.’
Ex-Loop-ers Neil and drummer John originally formed the Traders as an  offshoot-cum-hobby when Loop took an extended break from music, but are now wrapped up in the band full-time.
They decided to employ a similar philosophy to German Bands like Can and Faust, refusing to use them as a mere influence, more an entire concept.
‘I read The Can Book ,’ says Neil, uneasy with having to conduct the entire interview without the help of fellow band-members John and guitarist Nigel.
‘They seemed to be really open about everything, I like the way everyone in the band should have full input into every part of what's going on.
One of the reasons Loop fell to bits was because we lost control of what was going on and did too many stupid things.
It's just a philosophy thing, really, we're not into ripping anyone's ideas off.’
There is something mysteriously appealing about The Hair And Skin Trading Company's music — the space that they manage to create amidst the diseased disorder of guitars and samples.
Their debut EP, ‘Ground Zero’, is a wonderful piece of bewildering dance alternatives, while the album, ‘Jo In Nine G Hell’, is instantaneously strange and cautiously painful.
‘It must be really hard for somebody to listen to because in a way it's untogether, but I like chaos, it has its place.
I find the music extremely humorous, there's something ridiculous about it.
Luckily none of us are massive egotists, we're down-to-earth people, really.
Some people think we're complete freaks but we're pretty normal, boring human beings.
Well, not really.’
I wasn't convinced for a minute, weirdos.
The Hair blare bunch 
SINGLES
REVIEWED BY DAVID QUANTICK
PALE SAINTS: Throwing Back The Apple
Pale Saints are these days a trip to jollity farm; this EP is a delightful set of different things.
Thus the title track thumps its way along in baseball mitts shouting and employing illegal Tango taste sensation manoeuvres, ‘Blue Flower’ is daft King's Road wafting slightly à la ‘Kinky Love’, ‘Half-Life Remembered’makes Brian Eno looks like Dumpy's Rusty Nuts, and the very weedily named ‘Reflections From A Watery World’is a charming Michael Nyman meets John Barry harpsichord shagathon.
Ha!
THE WEDDING PRESENT: Come Play With Me
The Wedding Present will, at the end of this year, have had more charting singles than several proper bands with good songs and, trainspotniks, higher chart positions, too, because you only have to sell nine records in 1992 to go to Number One (or something).
This must be stopped.
Perhaps other bands could be persuaded to up their releasing to one single a month; this would slow Gedge down, until, presumably, he resorted to bringing out a single every week and, indeed, every day.
‘Come Play With Me’ is the usual, a slow canter that collapses into a deranged flail towards the end.
The B-side is a fair trot through The Monkees' great ‘Pleasant Valley Sunday’, albeit one sung by Gedge as though constipated.
MEDALARK II: Snake
Named, naturally, after Meadowlark Lemon who, if memory serves me right, was the ‘zany’ one in the Harlem Globetrotters cartoon.
Medalark II are neither yer average Creation band nor yet average Manc band despite a chirpy sense of rhythm akin to Factory-era James.
‘Snake’ is an appropriately twisty piece of steel-wire guitar dance music and dead spooky with it and suggests a happier early ACR.
Fresh!
Zippy!
Plangent!
Odd!
This is what we pay Alan McGee his weight in diamonds for.
THE ROSARIES: Leaving
THE SUGARGLIDERS: Letter From A Lifeboat
SECRET SHINE: Ephemeral
So Lemmy's in the pub, arm-wrestling with Hulk Hogan when — ZANG!— with a mighty kick, a titanium boot laced up with human intestines smashes down the door of rock.
Dressed from head to toe in space armour and waving the legs of horses still bloody from where they have been gnawed off, The Rosaries cross the room and eat Lemmy — alive!
Then The Sugargliders — their hair still glossy from the blood of Metallica, who tried to stop them coming in — stride across the shattered bar-room floor and pull their own heads off and ram them down The Rosaries' throats.
The Rosaries retaliate by drinking napalm and spitting up on everyone.
‘Funny,’ says Hulk Hogan, just before Secret Shine turn up in their bloodied butcher's aprons and dismember him with their thumbs so they can use his torso to stir some soup made from doctors, ‘I thought all the bands on Sarah were useless, overly well-spoken, terminally passive rock inadequates wallowing in their own love of wimping insipidness.’
‘No,’ spits the useless singer with The Sugargliders as he stuffs Hulk's head through his stomach and up through his own neck, ‘that's just the records.
Now they are rubbish.’
SIMULATED CHAOS FUN OF THE WEEK
THE AQUANETTAS: Whoa!
Way!
‘Nettas!
The Aquanettas are a New York female four-piece who, in concert, are a guitar-crazy history of rock with a penchant for AC/DC-like riffs.
On vinyl they are more a twitchy, jangling beat group and ‘Whoa!’ is something like ‘How Soon Is Now’attempted by Talking Heads and The Charlatans in bizarre collusion with Enya and Booker T. Which is probably why it's five minutes long.
‘Whoa!’ is constructed slyly, so from the outside it looks like it was made by tramps in their lunch hour, but in reality it is a nifto exercise in song-building that starts off quiet and nervous and by the end is running about the room shouting and pouring lager into flowerpots.
An excellent and, indeed, exuberant single.
(‘Whoa!’ can be obtained by mail order.
GEORGE MICHAEL: Too Funky
SCORN: Lick Forever Dog
Life is ever disappointment and tears.
‘Too Funky’ is, in fact, by several miles not funky enough.
George's contrib to the upcoming ‘Red Hot And Dance’ album is a plonking, KC And The Sunshine Band pastiche with a few hooks but nothing else.
Michael reminds me of a cardboard version of Prince; his experiments with pastiche and his fusion of pop and soul make him an eclectic chap, but a dull one.
Prince wrote ‘Kiss’ and we danced nude of rooftops.
Michael wrote ‘Faith’ and we put our trousers back on and returned to our places of work.
Scorn, strangely, have managed to make a record that would have to be called ‘Lick Forever Dog’ even if, in error, the band had wanted to call it ‘Bob The Kitten’.
It is a slow, stomping thing with grunting; the guitars hate us and the drums are thick and stupid.
Quite charming.
MASSACRE: Inhuman Condition
What a splendid week it is for Earache Records.
Massacre have a singer who can do that belching voice which normally causes people to vomit up their intestines and a tendency to change tempo at random.
The theme of this EP, if the sleeve is owt to go by, is that aliens are going to put us in big test tubes full of pink bubbles.
Massacre debate the pros and cons, while belching.
A happy whale of a record.
THE LEVELLERS: 15 Years EP
Ah, The Levellers.
Real music for real people.
Keep music live.
Mandolins.
WAR DEATH HELL MURDER HORROR FEAR TERROR!
FIDDLES!
FOLK MUSIC!
CLOG ON A STRING!
AAAARRGGGHHH!!!!!!!!
THE HINNIES: Doodle EP
Quite what these people are on about is unclear but their odd mixture of Country rock Beach Boy Prefab Sprout Lloyd Cole pop (yup, that old one again.
Don't you get fed up with Country rock Beach Boy Prefab Sprout Lloyd Cole pop all the time?) is an appalling one.
You are particularly directed towards ‘Jesus In The Driving Rain’ which is a very good song.
A stupid one, admittedly, but very good.
Most odd.
ANIMALS THAT SWIM: King Beer
Another weird one.
They're all weird this week.
Sadly not, as I had thought, a record by King Beer called ‘Animals That Swim’, ‘King Beer’ is a slow sort of talking ballad that sounds like a posh Jonathan Richman having a muse and a chorus that arrives very late in the song indeed.
Ambitious and peculiar.
The Aquanettas: women in lager-and-shouting riff-monster shock
SIMON BONNEY: There Can Only Be One
The chap from Crime & The City Solution follows the great Australian rock tradition of  making a record in Berlin and getting more and more swamp rocky as the years advance.
‘There Can Only Be One’ is an epic and yet, spookily, restrained pop song, the sort of record Marc Almond would make if he didn't like shouting so much.
Dead good in a sort of Glen Campbell-in-jail way.
PAUL McNULTY: Very Well, Let's See What Happens Vol 2
DARLOW: Hot
Conceptual corner tie, for both these blokes are totally unknown and have both written hit songs for people called Jones!
Wow!
McNulty wrote a song for Tom and Darlow wrote one for Grace.
McNulty is odder: he has a picture of himself when young with Patrick Moore on his sleeve, his tunes are called things like ‘Sex’ and ‘University’and the overall effect is very like Gilbert O'Sullivan working with Victoria Wood.
Darlow's main point of interest is that he has a backing vocalist called Bunny Hull (but not, sadly, one called Frunkie Huwerd).
His single is INXS-style cackfunk of the highest water.
Not much in common at all, eh, readers?
DEL AMITRI: Always The Last To Know
Strictly for those of you who think Bruce Springsteen's latest kipathon is rock at its best and find Deacon Blue a little too raw, the new Del's single is produced in AOR hell and tied up in studio rock toss.
Which is sad, because it has a nice tune, like a puzzled Wings.
Apart from that, as they say, nothing happens at all.
TZ: EP
The kind of name that saves me a lot of typing.
TZ's ‘EP’ is all the usual dance noises only more so.
‘Discotech’ is the top track, going as it does ‘WOOMP!’and ‘SHWOB!
SHWOB!’ very frequently.
There's even a sort of early '80s disco track spirit with some nice weird synthesisers and pretend scratching.
Very much fun indeed.
THE BLAK PROPHETZ: Chapter One
KATCH 22: Return To The Fundamentals
The Blak Prophetz are a Birmingham-based rap duo with a nice line in stripped down rhythms and being annoyed.
Unfortunately, their record appears to have been wrapped in thick cloth while being records; it is muffled as anything.
Which adds an interesting edge to it, I suppose.
More fun is to be had with the excitable Katch-22, who favours the talking-about-himself approach to rap and a wider range of noises, most notably on the sprightly ‘Service With A Smile’, which may well be the first tune ever to contain the line ‘You paedophile ’.
KILL LAURA: Gall And Wormwood EP
This record sounds deranged at either 33 (where you can pretend it's a fat bloke singing) or 45 (where it becomes apparent that an agitated woman is handling the vocal chores).
An intense field of humming guitars and amplified noise, Kill Laura's songs similarly bear little or no resemblance to the rest of contemporary music, which is fine by me.
THE VIOLET PEOPLE/UNION SUNDOWN: UVEP
The BPI would class this record as an album since it has seven songs on it, but as the BPI are the catamites of despair and the handmaidens of drear, it's here as an EP and it's very odd.
The Violet People are all charging guitars, sort of power pop with boggly eyes, and not without charm.
Union Sundown appear to share their guitars and their squeaky vocal style but their songs are longer and have a grittier tone.
Separation is advisable to avoid confusion and aid development.
TSUNAMI: Geniuses Of Crack
THE MAD SCENE: Falling Over Spilling Over EP
Homestead were dead close to being a totally hip label about five years ago, even though all their bands wore check shirts and were students.
Then Sub Pop came along and that was that.
Now Homestead are just another indie label and no-one cares.
These two singles suggest that all is not lost, however.
Sort of.
The Tsunami single has a rotten fast side and an interestingly moody slow side, and God knows which song is ‘Geniuses Of Crack’.
The Mad Scene feature an ex-Ex Lion Tamer and experience in said Wire covers band is what makes them a sort of glum The Might Be Giants with guitars on the title track and a kind of Beatle Fall on the rest.
by no means the next Nirvana as too prone to cuteness.
OCEAN COLOUR SCHEME: Do Yourself A Favour
The Oceans attempt once more to dent the charts, this time with a splenetic version of a Stevie Wonder song that I for one have never heard of.
The results are a bit like a small version of ‘Trampled Underfoot’ that has come from inside a Kinder egg.
Just as the singer is getting all Mick Hucknall and sweating and funky, the record stops for a bit to demonstrate the rather disappointingly ‘blues’ -orientated riff.
This record is a bit‘we are ordinary’.
THE TAMBOURINES: You're So Beautiful
Liverpool with guitars.
The Tambourines espouse a sense of melody, some noise and yer actual tinny round percussion instrument.
‘You're So Beautiful’ is a very loud song indeed but soon drifts into rock ordinaire .
THE BEATMASTERS FEATURING ELAINE VASSELL: Dunno What It is About You BOMB THE BASS: Keep Giving Me Love
Rhythm King have, of late, gone barmy.
Losing Betty Boo and getting The Sultans Of Ping FC is not what I call a good deal.
Notwithstanding, they have retained The Beatmasters and Bomb The Bass, both former titans of 1987-era dance pop.
‘Dunno What’ is a fine record with tinges of Sterling Void and an attractive hypnotic twitchiness.
‘Keep Giving Me Love’ is very strange, with a large, loping bassline and a lot of echoing sultriness.
It is a little too cumbersome to be charming, although that bassline becomes increasingly frightening.
GARY MOORE: Story Of The Blues
Not, alas, the Wah! song of the 1980s, but a dragging arseflap of a song.
However, to quote Pete Wylie — himself quoting The Situationists, readers — this record does indeed have a corpse in its mouth, said cadaver being pub rock.
Dear God; why do these old men discover they can get new careers lumbering ape-like through rock history.
One awaits the geriatric Techno of the next century with interest.
Not.
ROCKBEAST OF THE WEEK
MONSTERLAND: Peanut Butter Karma
Who the facknellmatey are these people?
Monsterland are some kind of weird Beatles from hell, Hüsker Dü without the ennui factor, badly-produced feedback guitar shouters from Nowheresville who start off like Mudhoney, turn into late-era Byrds and then go haring off on their revving guitars before we can have them arrested.
The B-side, ‘Sunburn’, is remarkable in that it appears to have less than one chord on it and happily informs us that ‘everybody has to die ’ before going completely mad forever.
A top notch slab of noise; I know bog all about Monsterland or their music but ‘Peanut Butter Karma’ is a rockbeast.
Hurray.
GTO: Elevation
ISOTONIC: Everywhere I Go
DEVIATION: Hammond Song
A trip to dance town now and three tunes of variable merit.
The sleeve of ‘Elevation’ contains a map of Scotland, which is nice; the actual music is busy dancefloor chaos with some weird operatic humming and what appears to be an entire hockey team shouting ‘Yo!’at various points.
‘Everywhere I Go’ is an echo-filled House piano job which doesn't, er, go anywhere at all much.
And Deviation's ‘Hammond Song’ reminds one of the music they have in those appalling films about surfing that go on for ever, except with a dance beat.
Best bit: someone going ‘Bwaa!’ every so often.
THE WEREFROGS: Don't Slip Away
I'd slip away sharpish if I were you, oh vocatively-indicated abstract object of The Werefrogs' attentions.
This record is rubbish.
Weedy guitars nervously brush at the hem of one's robe as the singer evokes the force and passion of his discourse in a voice unintroduced to Mr Tune and Mr Singing Lesson, ‘Don't Slip Away’ is the sort of record that will one day consume all of indiedom in its lolloping, lardy inertia.
DISCO UNIVERSE ORCHESTRA: Soul On Ice
Worthy of review for being by something called the Disco Universe Orchestra (I want to join) and for bearing the wise slogan LOUD AND WOBBLY MUSIC FOR THE '90Ss.
‘Soul On Ice’ is a self-styled disco record, which is fine by me; unfortunately it is also a rather monotonous record with a plodding beat that owes little to the glories of mad '70s dance music.
Why, even Edwin Starr's astonishingly silly ‘H.A.P.P.Y.
Radio’ is a smidgeon better than this.
A shame.
Weird Beatles from hell Monsterland: more slabs of noise, please
vibes
EDITED BY SHERMAN
LET THE BRAIN TAKE THE STRAIN
Dark, malevolent and powerful, MESSIAH are proof that a murky goth past needn't hold you back in the dance arena.
Plus, ULTRAMARINE's Techno trio, and Rising High compilations to be won
Chosen ones Mark and Ali Messiah, spreading the Techno message to gothdom
RHYTHM DIVINE
‘Do you know where we can get any dwarves?’
Sorry?
Aren't we here to talk about Techno?
‘Yeah.
But we really want some dwarves to go in our video.
Have you got any phone numbers?’
Just when you think you're in for an in-depth discussion on the technicalities of the Joey Beltram mix of state-of-the-art frightcore Techno duo MESSIAH's last single, you find yourself caught up in a debate about doom and dwarf procuring and rock 'n' roll giants.
Messiah, however, are not simple rave gibbons.
They are a one-time indie rock past, with disturbing goth-loving tendencies, who met at an Iggy Pop gig while studying at East Anglia University.
It might not be the most rave-friendly background, but Ali Ghan and Mark John-Davies put their student rock past to startlingly original effect.
A Messiah record will never pass you by in a blur of bpm functionalism.
There is a dark power to their fastidiously constructed nightmare pounders which has pushed them to the fore of hardcore.
Signed to Kickin' Records, the pair's debut single, last summer's ‘20,000 Hardcore Members’, and autumn's follow-up, ‘There Is No Law’(complete with Beltram remix), scythed up the competition like grim reapers of the dance charts.
Creepy cyber-samples and malevolent noise overload have set Messiah apart as Darklords Of Apocalyptic Techno.
So who the devil are these two engaging, literate, drug-free chatterers sitting down the pub?
They have no skull rings and no 666 scalp marks.
I checked.
So where does the evil aura come from?
Mark: ‘I think it's just that there's aggression there.
Because we are angry when we do it.
It's just the same as with any band reflecting their environment, and our environment is affected by the whole end of the century.
At the end of the 18th Century there was the French Revolution, at the end of the 19th Century there were people like Nietzsche writing and there were the Expressionists and there was a real feeling of disquiet and apocalypse.
There's a common feeling now, only the tools are computers and the further you go the more serious that feeling seems to get.’
Ali: ‘We don't want to make bland music.
You need to have an emotion in it, and something that's a bit dark is more likely to be remembered.
I'm not saying we want loads of 15-year-olds sitting in their bedrooms being morose over Techno songs instead of Morrissey songs, just that you can have soul in this type of dance music.
You can convey that with dance things, it's just the way you use your equipment.’
Having grown up via the personality cult-littered path of doom rock, with Mission and Sisters Of Mercy fixations amongst the skeletons in their closet, the Messiah pair have no intention of accepting a fate as an anonymous disco duo, knocking out the odd hit.
Moby, Prodigy, N-Joi, Altern 8 and Shades Of Rhythm, they reckon, are given a raw deal by a blinkered establishment media.
Messiah want all that to change.
Ali: ‘So many people have barriers about dance music.
Especially with things like Top Of The Pops , which is designed to make dance bands look shit.
Because the people who run those things are 40-year-old ex-rockers driving Porsches around, they feel threatened that people can make music with computers that other people like.
‘With your average white guitar band, they go on the road, they get pissed, they  f— anything that wears a skirt and that appears interesting, so you write about it.
Because with rave music there's not really the same live thing, it doesn't appear interesting, but if you actually meet the people behind it, you find that they are.’
Mark: ‘We get really strong reactions when we play.
We played in Guernsey and this man came after us waving a stick and shouting that we were heretics and ‘Thou shalt not be a false Messiah’.
He was off his  f—in' tree.’
The new Messiah single takes the pair's anti-pigeon-holing policy further.
Having proved to themselves that they can make successful hardcore tracks, ‘Temple of Dreams’ stomps boldly into oddball crossover territory by coating the robo-deth rhythm loop in sugary vocals nicked from 4AD indie band This Mortal Coil.
And they won't be miming along to it at club PAs either.
These boys want to offer the full band treatment.
Faces, albums, longevity and traditional scream-up star-show gigs.
And dwarves in the video, of course.
Mark: ‘I want to do a tour in the same way that The Cure or people like that tour, like a theatre production.
I don't see why you can't, or maybe do a Nine Inch Nails, Lollapalooza-type thing, because we want to get to people who aren't already converted.’
Ali: ‘I DJed at this event a while ago and the place was full of goths.
I was playing loads of rave music, and at the end they were begging us not to go off because it was the first time they'd ever heard it properly.
We want to change the whole concept of how dance music is appreciated, so that people can see it for what it is.
In fact, we've stolen some nuclear weapons and we're going to tell the government we're going to blow up the whole country unless they let us play Wembley.’
Stadium giants in the making.
Chosen ones Mark and Ali Messiah, spreading the Techno message to gothdom
GROOVE CHECK
VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK
INNER CITY: ‘Pennies From Heaven’
ISSUED HERE as a double 12″ white label pack, so it's impossible to say which mixes will actually end up on the street.
No doubt the ‘Tunnel Mix’ will be the main carrot.
Delightfully deep Garage with a pop sun-tan that finds vocalist Paris Grey back in full flight.
The ‘Reese Dream A Lot Mix’ is club music at its absolute best; deep and moody bass heavy loops, chilling out on a Paris sample in much the same way as their last hit, ‘Hallelujah’.
The sort of mix Techno jocks could do with being a lot more open-minded towards.
ULTRAMARINE: ‘Saratoga’ /‘Nova Scotia’
WELL WHAT do you know?
A good old-fashioned seven-inch single.
Whispering Robert Wyatt drifts in and out of‘Saratoga’, as the Marine boys continue in much the same vein as their splendid LP.
This is a meandering, innocent instrumental structured so that, at any moment, you expect the vocals to drop in and the ‘song’ -proper to begin, but you know it never needs to.
‘Nova Scotia’ is a laid-back, somewhat funky groove hidden inside an eggshell rhythm, defying all the traditions but laying down the ground-rules for a music destined to be the ‘rock’of the future.
PASSION FLOWER: ‘Urban Belle’
A PHILLIP Glass-style loop is the basis for a long, trancey, free-flowing, ambient workout, a floating journey around the cosmos cut with geometrically perfect shapes of sound.
When a whispered vocal juts in towards the end, it becomes reminiscent of Jade 4 U's ‘Phantasia’ project.
Take your head off and give it a rest.
FUTURE RHYTHM: ‘Sonic Mind Explosion’ VOOV: ‘It's Anything You Want It To Be And It's A Gas EP’
GERMANY IS firing on all cylinders these days, and labels like MFS epitomise where the scene is headed over there.
Four cuts of trancey  exchange from Future Rhythm, with the pay-off being hugely psychedelic.
Noise for your granny, with a Plus 8 feel.
Deep, pulsing, mind-boggling and overlaid with a cloak of dark and haunting atmospherics, Voov come at you like an express train on Uptime.
Never mind the boring breakbeat rubbish going around, this is the real story, which trips you up and hoses you down in a shower of sparkling special effects.
EFFECTIVE FORCE: ‘Complete Mental Breakdown’ NEUTRON 9000: ‘Neutron 9000 Vs The Mysteries Of Science EP’COSMIC BABY: ‘Transcendental Overdrive EP’
WORTH IT for the ‘Relapsed Remix’ alone, and proving that not everything coming out of Deutschland these days leans towards the industrial.
‘Breakdown’ is a compound of dreamy keyboards etched into a dark, Techno backdrop.
Soundtrack to an assassination.
Dominic Woosey purveys his own brand of ambient House, lightly peppered with acidic loops, whilst Cosmic Baby turns the acid machines up full and demonstrates why Germany is about to take off in the same way that Belgium did last year.
Inner City's Kevin waits for the pennies to roll in
3 DECREES
ULTRAMARINE
1 FILA BRAZILLIA: ‘Mermaids’
‘The ULTIMATE Desert Island Disc.’
2 NEW COMPOSERS: ‘Sputnik Of Life’
‘Bizarre structure: like nothing on earth.’
3 BABY FORD: ‘Milky  Trés ’ EP
‘Reminds us of ambient raving on the beach after a day's canoeing.’
RISING HIGH COMPETITION
TECHNO CLASSICS Vol 1’ is the well sorted compilation to come out of the mighty Rising High stable, and Casper and his mates have given us FIVE CD copies to give away!
With contributions from The Irresistible Force, HHFD, Earth Leakage Trip, Interface and many more you'll not find another UK label as dedicated to nuttycore as this lot!
All you have to do to win a copy is tell us: What name does label owner Casper Pound record under?
ACCESS
BOLD AS LOVE
Last year JIMI HENDRIX sold a staggering four million albums worldwide — proof that interest in this guitar savant is still alive and kicking.
No further excuse was needed to organise a saleable exhibition of king-hell Jimibelia.
EDWIN POUNCEY previews the result with credit card at the ready.
Had he survived the maelstrom of the psychedelic '60s, guitar god Jim Hendrix would be pushing 50 this year.
But, as everybody knows, it wasn't to be.
Hendrix had just managed to squeeze his way into the '70s when the Grim Reaper of rock 'n' roll dragged him out of this world, leaving only the man's music and ‘wild man’ image behind for future generations to remember him by.
The Jimi Hendrix Exhibition, which opens at The Special Photographer's Company from the beginning of May, celebrates the guitarist through a series of images which show the man, the musician and, more importantly, the rock icon which immediately flashes to mind whenever the name Jimi Hendrix is mentioned.
It is an impressive body of photographic, graphic and specially commissioned work which has been put together by former NME photographer Adrian Boot and editors Neil Storey and Rob Partridge, with encouragement from Island boss Chris Blackwell and the head of Are You Experienced Ltd, Alan Douglas.
In his Chiswick-based headquarters, where The Jimi Hendrix Exhibition was pieced together, Neil Storey explained how the project was more complex than he had first imagined.
‘With the Bob Marley exhibition (which toured last year ) Adrian had taken most of the pictures, so we knew what the images were.
With Hendrix we didn't really know what to expect.
The difference between this and the Marley one is that with Marley we didn't really have any poster work, it was mainly concentrating on black and white photography.
‘With the Hendrix show the work goes right across the range and it covers all the bases.’
To acquire exhibits, contacts were made with the world's most notorious Hendrix archivists and scholars, fanatical characters obsessed with the guitarist.
‘There's a guy called Bill Nitopi and a guy called Michael Ochs who own picture archives more or less devoted to Hendrix.
There's also a guy called Ron Tyson who collects every magazine article ever written about Hendrix…so long as it's got Hendrix on the front cover.
There's a guy called Michael Fairchild who collects Hendrix quotes, he has books full of Hendrix quotes and what other famous people have said about Hendrix.
I've used certain Hendrix lyrics and poems throughout the exhibition and I get grief from Fairchild if I've put a comma in the wrong place.
They are absolutely fanatical and exact in what they do.
They are invaluable people to us.’
Other invaluable fanatics who have contributed to the project include Caesar Glebbeek (who, with Harry Shapiro, co-authored last year's definitive Hendrix biography Electric Gypsy ) and poster specialist/Artrock supremo Philip Cushway, who has supplied examples of psychedelic art (including Rick Griffin's seminal ‘Eyeball’ image that will be on sale at £1,000 a print!) and has added an extra dimension to the Jimi Hendrix image.
While such graphic interpretations of how Hendrix and his music influenced artists of the '60s were important, the brains behind the exhibition felt that the man was too big an icon to remain stuck in the past.
‘We figured that we could bring in artists from the '90s to interpret Hendrix using the computer technology that was only a dream in the '60s,’ explains Storey.
One such contributor was one-time NME illustrator Ian Wright, whose multi-eyeballed ‘cannibal’ portrait of Jimi is strikingly different alternative view to the more softly focused cartoon imagery of Rick Griffin, Victor Moscoso and Moebius.
What is it about Hendrix that appeals to the artistic eye, though?
‘He is a music influence and that's what has turned them on.
I have spoken to Ian Wright extensively about this and he was saying that Hendrix was one of his three musical idols.
He used to listen to his music all the time when he was not at college, so the opportunity to do something like this was like a homage to Hendrix, a thank you for letting him discover music.’
It is that same voyage of discovery that the organisers of The Jimi Hendrix Exhibition are hoping the public will experience through the 100 pieces of work they have put on show.
‘It's not an exhibition for the fans,’ insists Storey.
‘This is for people who have had a passing interest in Hendrix or have caught up with his music in the advent of the CD age.
You've got to understand that the Hendrix market is a very young one.
There are more 17 to 24-year-olds buying his records now than there are 35-year-olds.
These are people who weren't even alive when he was actually making music.
This is more a celebration of his life in which we've tried to present as many different facets of it as possible.’
The Jimi Hendrix Exhibition opens at The Special Photographer's Company  on May 1.
Yummo!
Jimi gets through his third Fender before lunch
THE WITCH REPORT
HIPS, LIPS, TITS, POWER!
Meet the new breed of enchantress, the spell-binding women who are taking the male bastille and giving it some earthily female perspective.
BETTY PAGE greets the new PMT dawn with a deep, personal view of Women In Rock and lets the new women of substance have their say.
Let's frock!
‘Any unusual ability in a woman instantly raised a charge of witchcraft…
Sometimes the accusation of witchcraft was a form of punishment for women who were too vocal about their disillusionment with men…
Women of outstanding reputation in any field were at risk, since almost any women's accomplishment could be defined as witchcraft.’
The Women's Encyclopedia Of Myths And Secrets
‘This thing has been smouldering for years and now it's finally broken through.
I think women are realising their own aggressive side — a side that has always been suppressed before.’
— Lesley, Silverfish
Incantrix…lamia…femina saga…maga malefica…sortilega…venefica…fascinatrix…screech-owl…pixidria…
There were hundreds of exotic handles used in the Middle Ages to describe a witch.
All you had to do to qualify for torture, persecution and death was to be a female who dared step out of line with patriarchal society.
Millions of women died and with them a certain untamed aspect of the female spirit.
That suppressed anger has had its volcanic eruptions in many aspects of popular culture, but never has it had such a lava flow in the realm of rock'n'roll.
Until now.
Women have grabbed rock by the balls and made it squeal in agony.
With their banshee wails, squalling guitars and naked aggression, they are baring their souls and they are angry.
Bloody angry.
They are reclaiming rock from the strutting, posturing macho Metal peacocks and the fey, fumbling, characterless boys and dragging it down into a cathartic sexual/emotional hell for a slice of long-overdue feminine judgement.
Women are suddenly not afraid to rock.
The fem-grunge onslaught in America has produced the celebrated, scathing foxcore of Babes In Toyland , confrontational noise merchants Hole , LA fem-metallists and ‘female Nirvana’L7 , and an ever-increasing groundswell of newer names —Come ,Mudwimmen ,Dickless ,Calamity Jane ; the list continues to grow.
Here, we've witnessed the splattercore frenzy of Daisy Chainsaw's Katie Jane Garside , the earthy directness of North London crusty-grunger Lesley of Silverfish .
But others favour the quieter storm; the strength and presence of Lush's Miki and Emma and MBV's Bilinda and Deb , the magnetism of Curve's Toni Halliday , the raw, unadorned honesty of Polly Harvey , are no less effective.
All prime candidates, a few hundred years ago, for the Witchfinder General.
Women In Rock.
It has a hackneyed, distasteful, condescending ring to it and an overview by its very nature risks marginalising and trivialising a group of totally unique individuals whose artistic endeavours cannot be conveniently grouped underneath one big frilly umbrella.
By treating Women In Rock as a phenomenon, one risks oversimplification — hell, it's hardly a new thing.
But the importance of being a woman in the rock arena cannot be over-emphasised — even in 1992, after over 30 years of the genre, it must be celebrated, because the new breed, this new chapter is gaining power, momentum and energy.
It cannot be denied that rock has always been the province of men, even if they have often aped the female.
Its anthems are more often about women than played by them.
For too long women have been the hidden gender in rock, all too often fixed in the position of worshippers at the phallic shrine, bewitched by their own male idols.
Now more and more of them are taking their place on that very same stage.
In Cool Cats :25 Years Of Rock 'N' Roll Style , published in the early '80s, journalist Cynthia Rose wrote: ‘Rock music has failed to take on woman except as an idol or a target.’
Her argument was that it had offered the women of rock ‘much worship with little esteem…choosing their image from among the already available fantasies and maybe undercutting it with a little irony.’
In her view, women in rock fought against male supremacy and got little further than choosing their earrings, with the moneymen conspiring to craft an image suitable for their market.
Things have changed for the better, but how?
A SELECTIVE HERSTORY OF WOMEN IN ROCK
THANKS LARGELY to Doris Day , pop singers like Sandra Dee ,Helen Shapiro and Connies Stevens and Francis , were sweetly feminine — nice girls, all looking for that one special guy, in their songs at least.
They were hugely successful, squeaky clean purveyors of teen romance in the late '50s and early '60s, selling the great romantic myth to a generation of women.
But the female pop psyche was split; its dark underbelly exited in the black R&B and jazz singers of the time, for whom commercial success was rare and sexuality wasn't such a taboo; it was OK for them to wear come-hither clothes, drink hard liquor and sing about bad men.
By the time the pop charts were dominated by the girl groups of the '60s, the split wasn't as apparent.
Most of them were black; now black and white girls were singing about their boyfriends.
However, the whole lot of them were being manipulated by the men who ran the music business…
The British Invasion was underway, but the women were still good girls looking for great guys —Cilla ,Sandie ,Dusty ,Lulu — while the blues boom lads were getting laid and getting all the plaudits.
In America, flower power came to the rescue and beatnik culture welcomed in the scrubbed, bohemian but politicised folkies —Joan Baez ,Judy Collins ,Joni Mitchell .
Then, finally, came the real women rock stars —Grace Slick and Janis Joplin .
By '68, the latter was being dubbed the ‘High Priestess of Rock’.
She set an important precedent, because she never conformed to the accepted feminine ideal — she had acne, weight problems, scraggy hair and a masculine voice.
THE '70s brought gender-bending from both men and women, first in glam rock — the androgynous Bolan and Bowie , brickies in make-up Slade and Sweet , leather-clad angel Suzi Quatro , and then disco — the struttingly sexual Labelle and Nona Hendryx , and androgynes Amanda Lear and Grace Jones who played out the role of dominatrix.
And then punk happened.
Everything changed for both sexes, but it was particularly liberating for women.
They could suddenly reject glamour and create their own, strong images.
Siouxsie became the female punk icon, the nice middle class girl who flirted with every taboo, wearing S&M gear, fascist symbols, anything to shock and subvert.
Poly Styrene wore plastic and shrieked, the lead singer of the phallocentrically named group Penetration was a woman called Pauline and there was the only all-female punk groups,The Slits , who were years ahead of their time, wearing girls' dresses, subverting traditional female rock images and appearing on the cover of the NME dressed only in loincloths and smeared in mud.
Post-punk feminists The Raincoats were equally influential with their indie antifashion, anti-glamour stance and sawing guitars.
Toni with Silverfish screech-owl Lesley: nothing sells like real female spirit
Burn baby, burn: Toni Halliday contemplates the immediate immolation of whoever thought of this ‘amusing’ female-torso style cigarette lighter
Meanwhile, in America, there was Patti Smith , fully fledged cult idol and female rock star whose own heroes were largely male (Morrison, Richards, Jagger, Rimbaud) and whose sexuality was ambivalent in her look and in her poems and music.
She was the  tomboy, skinny in jeans and men's waistcoats, the vulnerable yet tough girl in big frocks and bigger boots and not afraid to expose her body — she was frequently photographed without clothes.
But behind everything she did was a raw power that emphasised she was her own woman.
In her wake came the likes of Chrissie Hynde , who found it easier just to wear the trousers.
Deborah Harry was a very different kind of role model.
Blondie were a group, but Blondie was also Debbie's alter ego, a cartoon character come to life, a girl that has fun even if her heart gets broken.
‘I never wanted to approach rock'n'roll from a man's point of view,’ she say in Making Tracks :The Rise Of Blondie .
‘I was always in a position of setting a precedent, which gave me a definite advantage.
Even if I went onstage and did a direct rip-off of Jagger or Bowie it would never come off as a complete copy because Blondie is a girl.’
Harry never compromised or cheapened herself.
However much boys in her audiences shouted for her to get her tits out, she always rose above it.
It was the first sign of a woman who fitted the feminine ideal really being in control — of her image, her success, her music.
THE '80s , in every way, belonged to Madonna .
She was the living embodiment of '80s values — the self-made, in-control businesswoman and keep-fit fanatic, heroine of a materialist generation, who ruthlessly and determinedly made herself an icon, flirting, taunting, toying with sexual and religious imagery and playing dangerous games with the madonna/whore complex at the very heart of the feminine psyche.
Ambitious, competitive, manipulative — but the tough woman exterior masks a vulnerable I-wannabe-loved little daddy's girl.
It's for all these reasons that Madonna has been accused of setting back the women's movement 30 years, but she's never claimed to be speaking for the cause.
‘I never set out to be a role model for girls or women,’ she said in a recent interview, ‘and I don't conform to any stereotype.
I don't act like a man but I play in a man's world.
I think the public is tired of trying to figure out whether I'm a feminist or not.
I don't think of what I'm doing as gender specific.
I certainly feel I give women strength and hope, particularly young women, so in that respect, I think it's feminist.’
Americans can now do a course in Madonna iconography, so the argument continues, but whatever the positive or negative aspects of her behaviour, the fact is she changed the rules for women; if nothing else she showed that female sexuality was powerful, and in that sense transformed the possibilities for women in rock.
It's no coincidence that there are consistent rumours that Madonna is interested in talking to women like Courtney Love and Katie Jane Garside as she starts to build a roster of acts for her very own record empire.
She may not be a feminist, but she knows the power of the female.
Honourable but brief mentions must also go to Annie Lennox and Sinead O'Connor , for their uncompromising attitudes, bravery, outspokenness, passionate commitment to their music and because they prove it's OK to be strong and to be vulnerable.
And, finally, as the Mother Of All Fem-Grunge,Kim Gordon , who proved that women can and will make a noise…
THE NEW WOMEN OF SUBSTANCE — VICTIMS OR VICTORIAS?
SO, WE have the foundations: women do now have more control.
But Madonna isn't and never has been a musician.
The new breed are using boys' phallic noise toys to take rock in their own direction.
As Babes guitarist and vocalist Kat Bjelland says, ‘all the best music is angry’, and the electric guitar can make the angriest music.
But with the new noise come all the old preconceptions and problems of how women present themselves.
Hole have been right up front with the anger thanks to newly pregnant Mrs Cobain,Courtney Love .
It'll be interesting to see how this marriage between leading male and female grunge lights will affect their respective careers.
Will the erstwhile crimson-lipped peroxide devil-doll, the very anti-Madonna, be raging with paranoia and brutal honesty on her next record?
Or will motherhood soften the blow?
Love has already come out firmly as a feminist who believes that a certain female viewpoint needs to be given space, but even she sees the dichotomy between feminism and her ‘battered slut in baby dolls’ image.
‘I have a very good, politically correct feminist side,’ she said recently, ‘and a very glamour-oriented attention-getting whorey side, and they clash.’
The way Love was originally sold — as the teen-prostitute-victim embodiment of her songs — was certainly questionable, but it caught the imagination of boy writers everywhere.
It's this ‘woman as victim’ angle that particularly bothers other female musicians, especially Miki Berenyi , who was moved to write to Angst after Steven Wells' Daisy Chainsaw interview (wrongly) alluded to Katie Jane Garside having been mentally and sexually abused as a child.
‘I am worried about misrepresentation,’ says Miki.
‘You can't say it's a coincidence that in every interview you see with these women the journalist always picks that five minutes where they're going on about abuse or victimisation.
Then it all gets out of proportion.
A bit more responsibility is called for.’
Kat Bjelland states, quite simply: ‘All press coverage of ‘female’ bands leans towards irresponsible since there is nothing to do with music asked.’
Katie Jane — matted hair, torn dresses, baby's bottles et al— presents a Dickensian image of demonic possession, self-mutilation and all.
But it's the undertow of precocious sexuality, the child-woman come-on, that's more worrying.
Katie Jane absolved herself of all responsibility for this when she recently claimed in the NME that is was all the onlooker's problem.
Lesley of Silverfish has been portrayed in these very pages as crude, intimidating, loud, menacing, a woman who boasts about shagging exploits rather like a man.
This hardly fits the reality of what she is — a sensitive, intelligent, attractive, opinionated woman with a strong will.
L7 LOOK like the women most likely to break into the big-time mainstream rock market, pushed along by constant comparisons to big male guns like Metallica and Nirvana.
Soon they will have a global platform, which is just the place for active feminists to be.
The most stubbornly uncategorisable woman musician to have emerged in all of this is Polly Harvey .
Sure, you can sketch in bits of influence from early Siouxsie, Kate Bush, Sinead O'Connor, Patti Smith, but she steadfastly refuses to fill in the picture.
She will not be drawn on her lyrics or motivation.
She declined to be interviewed for this article, saying that her role as a musician is more important than the fact she's a woman.
Despite the fact that she sings about uniquely female experience, she denies having feminist leanings.
Her appearance on the cover of the NME sans chemise has caused no end of consternation and misguided comment.
She refused to discuss why she did it, and that's her prerogative.
Her flesh was exposed in the photograph, but as with The Slits, Patti Smith and Siouxsie before her, it isn't remotely titillating.
To suggest that it is shows how preconditioned some people are to react to the female body as pornographic.
To me, it's a celebration of her nakedness, she's ‘sky-clad’, to continue the pagan theme of ‘Sheela-Na-Gig’.
‘It was widely recognised that the magic of the goddess dwelt more in the reality of her flesh than in her garments,’ says the Encyclopedia Of Women's Myths And Secrets , ‘since creation was a function of the female body.
Moreover, it was her nakedness that exerted its mysterious power over the bodies of men.’
Don't forget — clothes maketh the man , not the woman.
Polly seems mildly surprised that there aren't any men singing similar lyrics to hers.
But then who could imagine a man writing a song about a ‘vulva woman’(‘Sheela-Na-Gig’) displaying her genitals and laughing?
Harvey's songs are rich in imagery, raw and bleeding with the grist of the female experience.
There is no doubt she will grow into a songwriter of some depth and power; whether she acknowledges any responsibility for breaking new ground for women in rock is another matter.
All these women are expressing a primal female energy that's perhaps unconsciously trying to balance out the spirit of rock, super-macho style.
But let's not ignore the fact that, despite this, rock has been undergoing a certain process of feminisation over the last couple of years.
Men aren't afraid to be soft, girly and foppish and celebrate the inner life.
Much has been made of the ‘feminine shape’ of My Bloody Valentine 's music, and this also extends to the ‘wombadelia’of Spiritualized and the neutered fumblings of the shoe-gazers and much of the second division of indie rock.
Lush ,Ride ,Curve ,Blur — all pretty, soft names.
So maybe the men are discovering their feminine sides while the women are discovering their masculine sides.
MBV and Lush are perhaps pointing the way with their 50/50 male-female splits.
In the future, perhaps all groups will be yin and yang: in perfect harmony.
But enough of the theory: let's find out what's happening in the grist of the mill…
GIRLS ON TOP — THE WOMEN OF ROCK HAVE THEIR SAY
A DETAILED questionnaire covering a variety of issues on the subject of women in rock was sent to a cross-section of female musicians, with instructions to answer the questions they felt most moved by.
Their answers varied in length and opinion and the only common ground was a sense of gratitude that finally, someone had thought to ask them their views on the subject…
Do you consider that there has ever been an acceptable or unacceptable role for women in rock groups?
Silverfish's Lesley thought the only unacceptable role was the ‘sexploitative pretty-face-and-big-tits-to-sell-the-record’ image.
Curve's Toni Halliday was more evasive.
For her, the acceptable role for women has yet to be defined, and such a definition denies women's complexity.
Babes In Toyland's Kat Bjelland simply said she doesn't believe in fences.
Lush's Miki Berenyi, however, was considerably more specific:
‘I have a massive problem with Kylie Minogue because she epitomises the acceptable role.
She makes records for men.
Loads of blokes like the Manics and Bobby Gillespie go on about her being a great pop star, but can you remember the words?
Kylie is totally talentless, she does nothing for me.
It's a shame she gets so much credibility when there are so many women worth 100 times that; it annoys me that Sinead O'Connor has a great voice but people slag her.’
She also decries the double standard that dictates what men can do, women can't.
‘Iggy Pop can be tarty onstage but if Wendy James does it, it's tacky.
As a woman going onstage you have to have a degree of responsibility.’
Have you ever felt constrained by the male domination of rock music?
Kat Bjelland rather teasingly answered that she's never felt constrained by male domination —unwillingly .
Toni Halliday said she's learned a great deal about women from men, ‘and some men are able to write about the women we dream of being.’
Lesley feels it in the sense of there being so few strong female images in the business: ‘People still have a preconceived, stereotyped ideal of what women in bands are supposed to be and how we're supposed to perform or behave.’
However, she hasn't let it get to her: ‘I don't think I have suffered from the male domination thing as much as other women might because I'm a belligerent, stubborn, loud-mouthed bastard, basically!’
Would you accept that the major role models are, at one end of the spectrum, Debbie Harry and Madonna, and at the other, Joni Mitchell and Tracy Chapman?
Who was yours?
Kat would like it if the only role model was Diamanda Galas.
Babe Kate: screeeeee!
Idol eyes: the uncompromising, influential Patti Smith and (inset) Mother Of Fem-Grunge, Sonic Youth's Kim Gordon
Lulu: toothsome grins a-go-go
Sandie: barefoot in the dark ages
Polly Harvey: the picture that launched a thousand misguided comments
L7's Donita and Jennifer grew up with bands like Motorhead and The Ramones as role models, but agree that women definitely have better role models now.
Jennifer came up through the LA rock  scene where plenty of women were playing; Donita and the others came from Chicago, where it was a lot sparser.
‘The only women we really saw come into town were Ivy from The Cramps, Tina from Talking Heads, Chrissie Hynde and Patti Smith,’ said Donita.
Toni thought it was up to the individual: ‘Madonna and Debbie Harry fulfil your iconic dreams, a possible ideal.
Joni Mitchell makes you feel alright about yourself.
It's up to you to calculate the risks.’
Lesley hedged her bets: ‘Yeah, at the one end there's the sex goddess and at the other the ‘serious musician’.
But I think it's pretty much the same role for men, there's the poodle-boy rock problem, and there's REM.
I think if I could ever call anyone a role model, for me it would be someone from both categories — Madonna for her strength of character and Joni Mitchell for her musicianship, and her lyrics are bloody great.’
Do you think some female musicians sacrifice their femininity for the sake of being in a rock group?
‘It depends what you call femininity,’ said Lesley.
‘I've always resented the ideal of the frilly frock and girly giggle as the symbols of femininity — dungarees and big boots should not be considered any less female or feminine.
Unfortunately, it's still the case that you have to dress down to be taken seriously.
That's why I really appreciate the frilly frock and big boots image of Hole, babes, etc — it symbolises a finger up the nose of the feminine stereotype — two opposing images together — frocks and boots and loud, trashy, aggressive music.
It's a spanner in the works, and that's got to be good news.’
Toni: ‘It depends how important femininity is to them.
You rarely come across anyone, male or female, with enough gall to get onstage who doesn't at least, at some point, try to display their true nature.
The possibility of witnessing someone's true nature is the main reason for wanting to see music performed live.’
Miki, who's often been portrayed as ‘one of the boys’: ‘It's bollocks really.
Lesley and even Emma and I are being seen as lads, unfeminine, trying to be blokes.
Lesley's like she is onstage and off, so's Kat.
People think feminine is getting your tits out and being vulnerable and weak, all doe eyes and pouting.
Men define what women should be like.
Page Three girls are traitors.
Wendy James getting her tits out in The Face was.
It backfires on most people.’
Have you ever found it difficult to express yourself and your sexuality in your music?
Kat's not experienced any problem: music for her is the ‘ultimate outlet for all emotion’.
Toni has : ‘Lyrically, no, but sometimes on a performance level.
However, I think this is English reserve and nervousness.’
Lesley still has to deal with idiot boy hecklers: ‘Women cannot express their sexuality freely in any area of life, especially in popular music.
Basically, because yer average gig-goer is still stuck in the ‘wink wink, nudge nudge’ mentality of the '70s.
When it comes to women and sex, most men have still got a really crap attitude.
To them, a woman talking about sex is like a come-on.
‘I know that every time I mention sex in the press or in a song, the next few gigs I do, I'm going to get stupid, sexist, sexual heckling from at least one dickhead in the audience.
It's all so predictable but I'm  f—ed if it's gonna stop me.’
Are you comfortable with the image of the angry female dressed in little girl's clothes?
Kat seemed offended by this one.
‘What's that supposed to mean?’ she asked.
‘Who cares?
No-one,’ came the rebuff.
Lesley was totally happy about it.
Toni felt it was a loaded question: ‘I don't see any harm in the world seeing women as they see themselves,’ she commented.
‘You reflect your personality.
That can only be good.’
Jennifer and Donita maintained a diplomatic distance on the subject.
‘Whatever they do is fine,’ said Jennifer, ‘we're not here to dictate what other people should do.’
‘Even if you want to dress really scantily clad that's your business,’ reckoned Donita.
‘We're for choice right across the board.
Doing the whole male fantasy trip's always been a negative image for women to project, but we're not gonna change it by telling people what to do.
We can only do what we do and if it rubs off, then fine.
If doesn't, f— 'em.
‘I happen to believe variety is the spice of life, it just happens to be that women end up victimising themselves a lot, or subjecting themselves to a lot of bullshit to get some sort of coverage.
They're selling themselves short.’
Miki had her reservations: ‘I've met Kat Bjelland a few times, she was first with the dresses and socks, and I thought it was a good image.
I don't have a problem with it.
But once it catches on it gets dissipated, and people start thinking ‘in order to be angry, you have to be a child’.
‘I'm not too keen on Katie Jane, though, she looks like she's been pulled through a hedge backwards, and all this drinking out of a baby's bottle, it sounds like she's using it as a gimmick.
I don't see ‘Love Your Money’ as a feminist anthem.’
Do you think it's necessary to stress the femaleness of all this, or should men and women in rock groups be considered in the same way?
The issue of equality struck a similar chord in all responses; a resounding yes, they should be considered in the same way, and that means, as Kat said, ‘being asked about music, not gender or clothes’.
Lesley wants sexual equality, but doesn't believe attitudes have yet changed enough: ‘We don't yet have true equality; until we do, women will have to overstress themselves and overprove themselves just to be given the same level of respect as their male peers.
Until there are as many and varied women in bands as there are men, we will always have to shout a bit louder just to be heard.’
‘Men's and women's experiences are obviously related,’ stated Toni, ‘but I believe they're transposed in a very different way.
Usually, their transposition appears in the songs, but men and women are definitely capable of the same things.’
Have you ever felt so angry about men that you've been moved to write a song about it?
Kat's songs have been described as ‘virulently anti-male’, so it came as a surprise when she said: ‘Who said I was angry about men?
I love them.’
But maybe she was being ironic.
The other two replies were short and to the point.
Toni: ‘Frequently.
They're a constant source of amazement.’
Lesley: ‘I think at least 50 per cent of our songs' lyrics come from my anger at men and sexism generally.’
Have you ever felt angry about the misogyny rampant in the lyrics of certain rap groups?
A resounding yes from all but Kat, who contrarily stated that she thought the direct, uncensored attack of rap is beautiful and even quoted NWA as an example of this.
The Breeders' Kim Deal takes a very strong line on this.
And I mean,strong …
‘I think they're completely disgusting, gross.
The people who think they're true rappers, they dog women: ‘You!
You bitch!
You slut!
Bend over!
Do this one for me!
Yeah, bitch, with the big butt, let me stick it in you, suck on this!’
‘Men who are rappers have to be sexist or they're gonna lose their credibility, so they're gonna continue to dis women for as long as it proves their manhood.
The ones on the cutting edge will, to the day they die, hate white people and women with as much passion as the KKK would hate a black person.’
Toni was rather more circumspect: ‘Yes,’ she said, ‘but doubt has bitten my tongue.
I know I'll never know what it's really like.’
Lesley?
Angry?
‘CONSTANTLY!
The easiest way for a male rapper to make himself look big  amongst his equally stupid male peers is to put women down.
Because he thinks a woman is not gonna get up and smack him in the face.
The thing that really pisses me off is the hypocrisy — these guys all rant on about how they're so shat upon because they're black but it's OK to shit on women.
Bigotry is bigotry whoever's dealing it out.
‘When are these guys gonna start using their brains instead of relying on their balls — macho arseholes.
They come up with excuses when they're accused of misogyny — like ‘We don't dis women, just some women — just bitches and ho's’.
 F— OFF!
They're so full of shit.
There!
I'm glad I got that one off my chest!’
Have you ever felt you've been judged as a woman first and a musician second?
The old problem: a different set of rules for each sex.
The general view was that yes, women are seen as females first and musicians second.
Lesley doesn't really judge herself as a musician anyway, but was quite happy to be judged as woman first because she is ‘immensely proud’ of her gender.
Miki saw it as a battleground: ‘What gets to me is if there's a woman in a band it's quirky, it's got a negative vibe to it.
It's a war, there is something to fight for; you shouldn't stick up for Kylie, she should be fought at every turn.
Everything that someone like Toni does, Dannii is pulling in another direction.
Toni might do it, she's seen as sexy, but she's taken seriously.
She might pull it the other way.’
Kat brought it right back to basics: ‘Good thing they don't burn at the stake these days.’
What do you think has provoked women musicians to start singing rude and violent rock songs and why has it happened now?
‘Just because some women are screaming, it doesn't mean they're being rude or violent,’ wrote Kat, putting it into perspective.
‘It's just the right place, right time,’ penned Toni.
Lesley saw it more as a letting-off of repressed energy: ‘I think this thing has been smouldering for years and now it's finally broken through.
People used to ask ten, 15 years ago, why weren't many women playing aggressive music.
Now everybody's askin' why are all these women playing aggressive music.
Yer answer's in there somewhere.
I think women are realising their own aggressive side — a side that has always been suppressed before.’
Donita attributed it directly to the feminist line: ‘Because this is the first generation that's grown up with the women's revolution.
When we were in school they were saying ‘you can be anything you  f—ing wanna be’, and I think that was the first generation of women that ever heard that, except for thousands of years ago.
We grew up in the '70s, and that's what we were told, and then we grew up and all of a sudden they say no, you can't do that.
It's really weird.
I didn't experience sexism 'til I was an adult.’
Miki was worried that this important development might be passed off as a fad, a ‘scene’ people will get tired of: ‘To some people it's already a gimmick, but it's very important, a lot of people have a lot to say.
I'm worried that the whole scene will be looked at as women who are abused screaming at patriarchy, as if the uniting force is that they're victims.
This is supposed to be the strongest set of women to have turned up in rock for ages, but it's not healthy if it's based on  f—ed -up women.’
While applauding the women of anger, Miki was worried that it might mean that anyone who writes about anything less traumatic and violent is considered to be less important.
‘Myself and Emma have been criticised as being ‘not as substantial as Courtney Love’, which is massively limiting.
Lush don't sing about the sort of thing that Hole and Babes sing about, but it doesn't say anything less worthwhile about women's experience.
Female music in general is denied.
What about all that's gone before, like Delta 5, Au Pairs, Raincoats — this hasn't suddenly happened.
Male music has a heritage which is admired, men are allowed to have that.
Women's music is a progression of the feminist ethic in society.
It should be acknowledged.’
THE HALL OF SHAME — TOP TEN GENDER TRAITORS IN ROCK
1
WENDY JAMES: For grabbing her crotch and (almost) baring her breasts in the name of the ‘strong woman’ when all it did was titillate and reinforce the objectification of the female form.
And for trying to be a second division Madonna.
2
KYLIE MINOGUE: For her video performance in stockings and suspenders and an uplift bra, all pouting and sexually available, giving a dangerous message to the young girls to whom she's a role model.
And for trying to be a second division Madonna.
3
FUZZBOX; For appearing on the cover of the NME with kittens, thus falling into the ‘pussy’ joke trap.
(And this very paper for being sexist enough to do it.)
4
SHEENA EASTON: That ‘sexy woman in control’ thing won't wash — don't forget, this is the girl that sang ‘My baby takes the morning train/He works from nine to five and then/He takes another home again/To find me waiting for him’, without a hint of irony.
5
SAMANTHA FOX: For trying to make out that there's no harm in Page Three and going on to her pre-destined role as a bimbo rock chick exhorting her listeners to touch her and feel her body, helping another generation of idiot males think that women are there purely for their own gratification.
6
VANITY/APOLLONIA 6: For willingly allowing themselves to become Prince's wet dreams, and for thinking that performing in basques and suspenders was a good idea.
7
KIM WILDE: For allowing herself to be subjected to year after year of pathetic changes of image which only serve to make her look uncomfortable, especially the latest one, with the expensive Marilyn Monroe dress, loads of cleavage and sub-Belinda Carlisle rock balladeering.
8
ANNABELLA LWIN: For allowing Malcolm McLaren to exploit her girlish sensuality and feed a thousand under-age sex fantasies.
9
All the female rappers who've fallen in line with the misogynist myth by calling themselves degrading names like BYTCHES WITH PROBLEMS, OVERWEIGHT POOCH and HOES WIT' ATTITUDE.
10
All the women that appear in American Metal videos in various states of soft-porn undress, notably the blonde in Warrant's ‘Cherry Pie’, a sexist's dream of tawdry suggestiveness (you can imagine the lyrics).
Lush's Miki Berenyi takes a breather after another skirmish in the war against preconceptions and, erm, Kylie…
Wendy James: ‘tits out for the lads’, her boy fans cried, so she obliged
Sex Kylie in her now familiar squat-thrust position
FILM
ICE PICK OF THE WEEK
Sexy, scandalous, ultra-violent and ultra-vilified,Basic Instinct is the movie that's nagging at America's conscience.
Director PAUL VERHOEVEN tells EDWARD MURPHY about courting controversy and growing up in a nightmare, while KIM NEWMAN casts an eye over the overblown finished product
DIRECTOR PAUL Verhoeven's recurring nightmare starts as a hollow whisper: a child chorus of quiet, muffled cries which gradually build into a hideous concert of screams, induced by some blinding fireball of heat and light.
Given the ferocious imagination of his subconscious, it's hardly surprising that his celluloid output is laced with lethal barbed wire.
So maybe it's apt that he should have become entangled in Basic Instinct , a new psychosexual thriller starring Michael Douglas and Sharon Stone, which is based on a controversial script by Joe Eszterhas.
Verhoeven's movie has lit a small bonfire under the gay community in America.
Eszterhas' notorious $3 million script came under scrutiny due to the portrayal of Sharon Stone's character; a bisexual killer with a fondness for ice picks and her fratricidal psychologist lover.
Gay activists stormed the San Francisco set of the movie during filming last year, accusing the script of being homophobic and sexist.
On release in the States last month, 42 seconds of screen violence had been trimmed from the movie, adding to its critical notoriety.
Do these surrounding events fuel Verhoeven's nightmares?
‘It was an uncomfortable situation for everyone, but I don't think there was any guilt on our part.
We believed that what we were doing didn't infringe on the characters of any group of people, and therefore we had a clear mind.
‘I think that the publicity on the events has been grossly over-exaggerated.
Some elements of the script had been leaked during production of the movie, and there was a reactionary movement against what we were trying to put onscreen.
But the outrage was based on supposition and hearsay.
I don't think that the protestors knew the full story.
‘Essentially, they were accusing our movie of being homophobic.
But I was conscious of the sexual deviancies in the story, and I had fixed in my mind the idea of making the movie asexual.
Not in the physical sense, but in the emotional sense.
So I think that the sexual politics in the film is very difficult to pigeonhole.
That was the attraction for me as a director.’
VERHOEVEN HIMSELF is no stranger to controversial sexual politics in his movies.
In The Fourth Man , a 1979 film-noir -ish comedy about a homosexual writer, he highlighted a scene with two men kissing that doesn't spare the saliva; in Spetters , he knee-capped American audiences with his depiction of Holland's teenagers and, in his sword'n'sorcery adventure Flesh And Blood , his damsel in distress Jennifer Jason Leigh is abducted and raped — and enjoys it.
‘Back in Holland, I'm known for making movies which very broad sexual and political statements, and they are my statements,’ he adds.
‘I don't think that I've ever been questioned about them.
Then I arrive in America, I make Robocop and I'm grilled for the violence.
I make Total Recall and I'm grilled for the violence.
I make Basic Instinct …and I'm grilled for the violence.’
Verhoeven's demons were born of a harrowing, uniquely European childhood.
He lived in The Hague, the centre of German-occupied Holland, between the ages of two and seven.
‘They were bombing continuously,’ he says.
‘I remember sitting at the table with my parents having dinner, and whole windows being blown in our face, because there's a bomb in the next house.
Exactly like in the movies — it's a special effects shot — and you look up, and the house right in front of you is in flames.’
As a consequence, it is impossible for Verhoeven to make films that do not embrace brutality.
‘My brain has been involved with violence when I was a kid so much that, when I close my eyes, I see burning houses.
In fact, I have no protection against the violence in my brain.
When I start to read a scene about violence, it's like a nightmare, and I can see it evolving.
Whatever unpleasant things happen in the scene, I think, ‘Yeah’.
So it's more complex than just saying, ‘Well, violence is basically human’.
It's also basically me.
‘Sometimes I think I have the problems of the world on my shoulders.
I don't think for a minute that I can work them out in movies.
But it's my best shot.
I think, psychologically, it gives me peace of mind.
‘Career-wise, I would love to take my vision into another genre.
Comedy would still be my favourite.
But most of the stuff I get, of course, is action and science-fiction.
But I don't know what it'll be until I begin work.’
Paul Verhoeven may soon be sleeping a little easier.
BASIC INSTINCT
BASIC INSTINCT is already famous, a) for the precedent-setting and record-breaking three million bucks writer Joe Eszterhas got for the screenplay, and b) for the concerted efforts of the American lesbian and gay community to harass the production because of its alleged depiction of lesbianism and bisexual women as homicidal maniacs, and standing outside theatres giving away the surprise ending.
In the event, a) turns out to be peculiar insofar as this if the fourth time Eszterhas has reworked the basic theme of Jagged Edge (see Betrayed and Music Box ), of an authority figure hero suspecting that one of their nearest and dearest is responsible for appalling crimes.
If you saw the other films, you won't need a gay activist to give away the ending, although the spin on the story here is that the hero is a male cop (Douglas), as opposed to the female lawyers and FBI agents of the earlier movies.
The loved one is an ice-cool blonde genius murder suspect (Stone), and the finale isn't quite as cut-and-dried as expected, which gives protestors a problem: in order to give away the ending, they'll have to understand it first.
As for controversy b); there is some truth in the moan, in that the film does contain a supporting character who is a lesbian and a child-murderer, and the bisexual lead, guilty or not, is certainly implicated in several ghastly ice-pick stabbings.
However, it's hardly fair to single out these strand because writer Eszterhas, gleefully backed up by director Verhoeven, links all forms of sexual activity to violence and death, with the heterosexual male hero spiralling out of control, led by his dick into drug abuse and manslaughter, and sweaty, beautifully-lit straight sex scenes segueing into bloody carnage.
Verhoeven, coasting off Total Recall , has to inflate the claustrophobic story into a cinematic chainsaw massacre complete with car chases, gore, extreme close-ups, hugely art-directed settings and a climax that Brian De Palms would find overdone.
Although dragged out at over two hours, this is certainly watchable on a trash level, although it's essentially an adequately-acted dumb-ass melodrama dressed up with enormous operatic tat.
Michael Douglas gets physical with Sharon Stone in Basic Instinct
Stone freeze, the ice pick-up
REELING AROUND
Film classics preserved…
MADONNA boobs again?…
LYNCH's Peaks without end…
CIMINO returns to Heaven…
BATMAN — let the marketing commence…
Cue cleavage overflowing from 17th Century ball-gown — talks are under way with MADONNA for the part of Lady De Winter in a new version of The Three Musketeers saga.
How sadly predictable…
Meanwhile, Anne Archer and Julianne Moore have been added to the cast of Body Of Evidence , the sex/murder/mystery starring Madonna, Joe Mantegna and Willem Dafoe.
BOB HOSKINS and JOHN LEGUIZAMO (Hispanic-American actor who starred in Hanging With The Homeboys ) begin shooting the Super Mario Brothers movie, the first film based on a Nintendo game, soon.
Featuring the brothers on a romantic adventure in the mushroom kingdom (it says here) the film is directed by Max Headroom creators Rocky Morton and Annabel Jankel.
DAVID LYNCH will unveil Twin Peaks :Fire Walk With Me aka Twin Peaks The Movie at Cannes Film Festival this month.
Lynch may make a flying visit to the French festival but he's a busy man, preparing three new films — a real life action version of UK kids comic strip Ronnie Rocket , a version of Kafka's Metamorphosis and a second Twin Peaks movie.
But that's not all — Lynch plans to make his Twin Peaks movie series almost as long as the TV series with a third and possibly fourth in the pipeline.
Paramount have thrown caution to the wind and employed MICHAEL CIMINO to write and direct a movie entitled Heaven Is A Sometime Thing .
The movie, which bears no relation (we hope) to Cimino's notorious 1980 megaflop Heaven's Gate , is the follow up to Desperate Hours , the Cimino remake of a '50s Humphrey Bogart classic which starred Anthony Hopkins and Mickey Rourke.
SIDNEY POITIER is to play Nelson Mandela in Apartheid with a supporting cast that will include MARLON BRANDO and JANE FONDA.
Mind your new world wotsits!
Despite the demise of cast member FRANKIE HOWERD,Carry On Columbus is set to go full steam ahead with JULIAN CLARY, RIK MAYALL, ADE EDMONDSON, JIM DALE, BARBARA WINDSOR and HARRY ENFIELD.
The movie is directed by Gerald Thomas, veteran of many Carry On movies.
Coca Cola and McDonalds are among the companies who plan to get a slice of the real financial action when Batman Returns hits the screens.
Giveaways and in-store advertising will guarantee saturation coverage for the movie across the States.
Toy makers, breakfast cereal producers and clothes manufacturers are all hoping to benefit in a merchandising bonanza that aims to beat the $500 million spin-offs generated by 1989's Batman .
The film, starring MICHELLE PFEIFFER (yes, folks, you'll be able to buy a body-hugging replica of the skin-tight catsuit), CHRISTOPHER WALKEN, DANNY DE VITO and MICHAEL KEATON opens June 19 Stateside.
The drive for preservation of cinema's heritage reaches these shores with the inauguration of the BFI's Film Classics series.
To fight the physical deterioration in the film stock of the national archive, the institute has compiled a list of 360 key films in cinema history with the aim of acquiring a perfect showprint of each film to be screened in a year-round repertory at London's Museum Of The Moving Image.
To tie in, the BFI have launched the first of four booklets to accompany the first four movies named in the series, THE WIZARD OF OZ, DOUBLE INDEMNITY, STAGECOACH and WENT THE DAY WELL.
Carry on, you old git
VIDEO
GWAR
Phallus In Wonderland
WITHIN THE first five minutes of Phallus In Wonderland , a surly youth vomits over a tramp, has a hook shoved through the back of his head and is transported off to a distant planet to meet cartoon barbarian grunge rockers GWAR.
After that is gets a little weird…
Crap title aside, this excellent 60-minute fantasy appears to be some sort of morality tale of the decline of America, complete with idiots in Elvis masks, transvestite judges and the usual GWAR characters (The Sexecutioner, Sleazy P Martini, etc.)
Mindless violence punctuated with live performances,Phallus In Wonderland falls somewhere between tacky Troma horror Tiswas and Top Of The Pops .
Stupid but cool.
THE DOORS
‘WE TOOK drugs to expand our minds, man!
Not to escape!’
This is without a doubt the greatest drug movie ever made.
Plot: Jim takes drugs and starts hallucinating that he is Ian Astbury out of The Cult.
Val Kilmer as Spooky Jim trips from slim butterfly to fat-bastard-with-a-beard-dead-in-the-bath through Ole Stoney's unashamed and thoroughly blasted corpsebumlickery.
Groovy space out unadulterated kick-ass rock 'n' roll hero-worship.
Rent it.
Buy it.
Take drugs.
Watsh.
BIG AUDIO DYNAMITE: BAD I AND II
THEY LIKE their movies, these people.
Less than an hour of BAD-style promo fun brings us excerpts from Nic Roeg and The Cotton Club , steals from James Bond and Sergio Leone, plus a rumble on the Westway directed by Jim Jarmusch.
Mick Jones is in good form for the duration, messing with his old buddies Strummer and Simonon in ‘Medicine Show’, grooving a bit with Neneh Cherry and storming Trafalgar Square (‘The Bottom Line’) before it got trendy.
The ‘Megatop Phoenix’ era finds Mick wrestling with poor returns, but with the inception of BAD II he's on the track once more, wearing daft hats and running with the oldest, coolest street gang in the business.
REVOLTING COCKS: You Goddam Son Of A Bitch
HEADS UP: UK Domination Tour 1991
REVOLTING COCKS are American deca-dance hedonists who take far too many drugs to be considered proper role models for British youth.
How many teens will be corrupted by this rambling pot-pourri of dry ice, simulated (oral, animal etc) sex and swearing?
Not many, I think.
The FF button will be pressed, the eager teens will search for something — a visual image, a ‘song’, anything — that will excite and delight them.
They will not find it.
Why do bands make these amateurish, plodding ‘live’ videos?
They're not ‘fun’.
They're not ‘interesting’.
They're the rock'n'roll equivalent of your Auntie Maureen's holiday snaps album.
Heads Up look like a fun sort of band, all headscarves and neat little funk-metal riffs.
I bet their gigs are quite fun too although why anyone would want to sit and watch a video of one made by a stoned roadie is anyone's guess.
The only advantage these videos have over the live experience is that you're guaranteed a clean toilet with paper and towels and you can stop them to make a cup of tea.
But then the same would be true if you stayed in and watched Thelma & Louise instead and actually had a good time, wouldn't it?
SOUND AND VISION
WEDNESDAY 6
Easing you through that difficult mid-week period, the easy on the ear mellow runnings of Napalm Death are Mark Radcliffe's live in the studio guests on HIT THE NORTH.
Bumptious Memoirs Of An Invisible Man star Chevy Chase guests on WOGAN.
Paul Morley presents THE THING IS…our obsession with motorways with J G Ballard, Iggy Pop and an anonymous commercial traveller.
Sean Hughes falls in love on a Greek holiday and back home his friend tries to save his love life in SEAN'S SHOW.
Blur provide the music on MARK GOODIER, and there's more at the same time tomorrow.
THURSDAY 7
Comic look at American racism in MRS DELAFIELD WANTS TO MARRY, where Katherine Hepburn shocks her family with the news she's to wed a Jewish doctor.
Come one come all ye slags of alternative comedy for it is the compilation edition of THE FULL WAX with Jennifer Saunders, Joan Rivers, Mike McShane and quick, hide the sugar bowl, Grace Jones.
Smash and Nice visit a retirement home for old DJs on HARRY ENFIELD'S TELEVISION PROGRAMME.
FRIDAY 8
Orson Welles and Joan Fontaine star in JANE EYRE.
Self-styled funniest programme on telly HAVE I GOT NEWS FOR YOU dusts itself off after a very poor return to the screen last week with well-known wit Charles Kennedy of the Liberal Democrats.
That'll really have them rolling in the aisles.
Vintage comedy doesn't mean and here's ON THE BUSES to prove it.
Slime ball supremo Lloyd Grossman scans the boudoirs of the rich and famous in THROUGH THE KEYHOLE, with David Frost on hand to keep up the grease quotient.
Mad quest for gold in AGUIRRE, WRATH OF GOD with Klaus Kinski as the conquistador leading an expedition up the jungle.
Action Swingers and Loudspeaker guest on JOHN PEEL.
ROSEANNE faces potential Thanksgiving Day dinner disaster, CLIVE ANDERSON TALKS BACK and there's appalling horror in DREAM DEMON with Jimmy Nail and Timothy Spall.
SATURDAY 9
THE FA CUP FINAL takes place on TV today.
Hurray for Jimmy Hill —not .
In radioland CROSSOVER begins a history of black music, JOHNNY WALKER has The Black Crowed in session and Abana Ba Nasery is, incredibly, in session, on both ANDY KERSHAW and JOHN PEEL.
THE EUROVISION SONG CONTEST offers Terry Wogan further opportunities for ‘hilarious’‘quips’.
WET AND WINDY is a night of progs about how interesting the weather is and encompasses Paul Gambaccini, Peter Greenaway's ACT OF GOD and the original THE THING.
Ireland's The Subterraneans guest on ACROSS THE LINE and David Lynch and Angelo Badalamenti's INDUSTRIAL SYMPHONY features Julee Cruise, Nicolas Cage and Laura Dern.
SUNDAY 10
David Lynch again, this time working with Twin Peaks collaborator Mark Frost, on a documentary called AMERICAN CHRONICLES: FAREWELL TO FLESH about Mardi Gras.
THE MILAGRO BEANFIELD WAR is an OK film with Robert Redford and Ruben Blades in it.
EDGE OF DARKNESS begins a re-run in a flurry of weird radioactive thriller shag frenzy and John Huston's THE DEAD is on C4 at 10pm, followed at 11.30pm by two shorts — VIRILE GAMES and ADAM — by totally great Czech mad animator Jan Svankmajer.
Watch ‘em!
MONDAY 11
Normski returns with DANCE ENERGY HOUSE PARTY and fun from EMF.
TELEVISION'S GREATEST HITS snoozes its way in the direction of Galton and Simpson.
Ned's Atomic Dustbin are seshed up on MARK GOODIER.
What's in Nawaz's flat?
Sinbad knows!
BROOKSIDE.
FEMALE PARTS is a new documentary series, this week looking at ‘Rude Women’.
THE MIX is always fun so listen to it.
TUESDAY 12
RED DWARF is back.
Why?
More Neds in session on GOODIER and Michael Hutchence and Andrew Farris yawn their way through INXS' ‘Kick’ on RICHARD SKINNER.
Antoine De Caunes goes film-funning in NOW AVAILABLE IN CANNES and there's fun with Schoenberg when his sexy 1ST STRING QUARTET IN D MINOR goes clang bonk spling on C4 at 12.10am.
And why not?
FILM
SINGAPORE SLING
ANY FILM which begins with two partially-clothed women flashing their breasts and pubic hair while burying a wounded man alive has much to live down.
This uniquely disgusting piece of Greek trash succeeds admirably.
Mother Valley and daughter Herold share an isolated house, a passion for decadent sex games, and a morbid fascination with a dead woman called Laura.
Similarly fixated is the dying man, known to them as Singapore Sling, who — in flashback — arrives at the house looking for his missing lover.
But before you can say femme fatale , poor old Singapore Sling has been captured, tied up and subjected to all manner of indignities by the unhinged pair.
A weird cocktail of fragmented narrative, crazy characters, gross-out eating scenes, bizarre sex (at one point Singapore is strapped to a bed, given electric shock treatment and then straddled by the squealing daughter while still convulsing), this is obscurely related to Otto Preminger's classic 1944 film noir,Laura .
However, despite being photographed in glistening black and white, its meaning remains murky and it is more of an endurance test than a movie.
The inane dialogue, mannered acting, and would-be hypnotic voice-over demand more dedication than all but the most dedicated bondage enthusiast, vomit-freak or sleaze-hound will be prepared to give.
Yet having endured it, there is a certain frisson of self-congratulation to be had from simply having survived the experience.
VOLARE VOLARE
LAST YEAR's quirky and award-winning Icicle Thief established Nichetti as an adept mixer of colour with monochrome, tragedy with comedy, classic cinema techniques with  joky contemporary gimmicks.
It was — doubtless deliberately — the perfectly filmschool graduate's portfolio, self-referential and stuffed with enough technical trickery to please festival judges and casual cineastes alike.
Having proved he can handle the tools, Nichetti's sequel should ideally have toned down flashy self-consciousness and demonstrated his emotional depth.
But not so, as Volare Volare hangs its flimsy raison d'être around a Roger Rabbit -style conceit of cartoons spilling into the real world and interacting with human beings.
Impressive enough as a light visual snack, but ultimately a ten-minute gag stretched far past breaking point.
Nichetti once again casts himself as the noble little guy in a bewildering universe — more Buster Keaton than Woody Allen — this time dubbing sound effects on to animated features which gradually stray from their screens and absorb his entire body.
Struggling for a Purple Rose Of Cairo effect, Nichetti fails because his cartoon capers have no symbolic significance beyond mere slapstick japery.
A deeper exploration of his protagonist's bizarre affliction and its implications in real life is totally bypassed by a throwaway plot which leans far too heavily on comedy of the loud-shirts-and-checked-trousers variety.
Did I say Buster Keaton?
Make that Jeremy Beadle.
VAN GOGH
THE POPULAR myth of Vincent Van Gogh — a mad genius, unhappy in love, who died in poverty and whose greatness was acknowledged only after his death — is an invitation to bio-pic cliché.
Previous films about the Dutch painter have tried to circumvent this problem in various ways: Vincente Minnelli's Lust For Life cast Kirk Douglas as the tortured artist and used broad, melodramatic strokes; Paul Cox's reverential Vincent used only extracts from Van Gogh's letters; Robert Altman's Vincent And Theo dished the dirt on Van Gogh's quixotic personality while never losing sight of his extraordinary artistic gift.
Now this stunningly photographed and skilfully acted film by French film-maker Maurice Pialat (who made To Our Loves and Under Satan's Sun uses an accretion of naturalistic detail to present an emotionally restrained but utterly compelling account of the last three months of Van Gogh's life.
Living in Anvers-Sur-Oise with his sensitive and knowledgeable patron, Gachet (Sety), Van Gogh (Dutronc) works quietly and steadily, flirting meanwhile with Gachet's precious daughter Marguerite (London).
However, his ill health, a brief return to the debauched world of brothels and drunkenness and irrational resentment of his brother Theo's failure to commercially exploit his then unfashionable work, provoke erratic mood swings, from brooding introspection to frustrated anger.
Since Palat has no desire to canonise the artist, there is no attempt to trace the origins of his creative genius; neither does the director explore his subject's troubled soul.
In the leading role, singer-turned-actor Dutronc has exactly the right quality of physical frailty and stooped sadness to complement Pialat's beautiful, poignant images.
MOBSTERS: THE EVIL EMPIRE
A CLASSIC example of schizophrenic movie-making at its worst, this paralysingly confused account of the birth of modern gangsterism can't decide whether it wants to be a hard-hitting action pic, a gooey teen idol vehicle or a convoluted docudrama.
In New York 1917, rising thug Lucky Luciano (Slater) forges new pathways into organised crime with the help of his fellow hoods Bugsy Siegel (Grieco), Meyer Lansky (Dempsey) and Frank Costello (Mandylor).
Everybody talks in a mixture of mumbling whispers and hysterical screams, and every time somebody starts making small-talk it means they're about to kill somebody.
That's about it for the plot, except to say that it all ends happily with the birth of a new egalitarian mobster alliance.
Hooray.
Struggling vainly to inject some sense of brooding threat into the proceedings, the brat pack cast experiment endlessly with tough-guy grimaces but end up looking like a bunch of snotty schoolkids with soap in their eyes.
Christian Slater makes the best of a bad job, turning in a moderately acceptable portrayal of the 24-year-old Luciano, but the plastic-faced Grieco is dismal beyond belief as the womanising Siegel.
With enough graphic violence (face slashing, gut piercing etc) to exclude younger viewers and nothing whatsoever to lure anyone over the age of 14, this is a film which aims for (and hits) a totally non-existent target audience.
Bullseye!
LOST IN SIBERIA
DASHED RUM sorts, these bally Russkies.
A chap can be supervising a spiffing archaeological dig on the Eastern fringes of the Soviet Union one day, only to find himself banged up in a Moscow jail on highly dubious spying charges the next.
Before you know it, you're freezing your boots off in a Siberian labour camp.
Awfully grim business.
Co-producer Andrews turns in another of his trademark refined Englishmen, gritting his teeth against the appalling injustice and rampant paranoia of Stalin's genocidal regime.
He works this kind of stiff-upper-lip colonialist nostalgia very well, of course— if only the material he chose had been less plodding and lightweight, he might have emerged as more than a typecast cypher.
Here we have a co-production of mini-series ambitions, but without the necessary budget or pomposity to puff out to epic proportions.
It retains the genre's limitations — cramped televisual style, stiff dialogue and generic plotting which sacrifices all complexity or realism to simplistic human interest — without its grandiose sweep or compelling soap trimmings.
Unsatisfying compromise the only result.
Despite being utterly inevitable, our hero's hesitant romance with the camp nurse takes painfully long to blossom.
So one-dimensional are incidental characters — cute kids with ailing relatives, cackling prison guards and poetic young inmates desperate for protection — that scenes of genuine brutality and suffering seem equally superficial.
What should be a harrowing 90 minutes in hell ends up another tedious tourist nightmare devoid of historical perspective.
Sanitised Solzhenitsyn for Mills & Boon readers.
The original Van the Man (Dutronc) cops an earful
Christian Slater (right) in Young (Machine) Guns
EURO FAT BASTARDS
Have CARTER USM gone rock dinosaur on us, or are they merely having a joke at their record company's not inconsiderable expense?
STEVE DOUBLE grabbed his camera and notebook and joined 93 other British journalists to fly to Carter's Brussels press conference to find out.
It used to be said in World War Two that careless talk cost lives.
But, in the strange case of Carter The Unstoppable Sex Machine and the 1992 Brussels press conference, careless talk just costs .
And so it came to pass that on Friday 24 April, at 11am our time, 94 ladies and gentleman of the British press are gathered at Stansted Airport inside a privately chartered plane whose previous occupants were Neil Kinnock and the Labour Party election campaign team.
Cheers.
We taxi on to the runway, midday on the murder mile, to fly to the capital of the New United States Of Europe.
We are to drink beer, eat cheese, get herded around in coaches, grab every photo-opportunity with ‘the two lads who made it all possible’ and officially launch the new Carter long-player (EC-standard length)‘1992 — The Love Album’.
A month ago, when Jim Bob and Fruitbat jokingly suggested that it might be vaguely amusing to tie in the, if you will, ‘concept’ of the album with a foreign press conference to promote it, they didn't think that the marketing johnnies at Chrysalis and EMI would take them at their word.
'92 is the year when trade barriers are removed between countries in the EC, to form a trading community to rival America and Japan.
Allegedly.
It is also the year when Jim Bob Morrison will apologetically say: ‘We're only doing this because we thought it would be funny…once!
We were going to have an 80-foot Brussels sprout flying above Battersea Power Station — and it nearly happened!
But we were only joking !’
Boom, and indeed, boom!
IT IS something of a public statement of Carter's record company's faith that they are prepared to spend £20,000 of unrecoupable readies on a major aerodynamic lig for the British press (faith that is vindicated, one could argue, by the band's confirmed Biggest Ever Hit ‘The Only Living Boy In New Cross’— Number Eight last week and rising).
Judd Lander, head of Chrysalis Records Promotions Dept, and prime mover behind this trip says, ‘We wanted to hire the European Parliament building but there was too much bureaucracy involved and, in the end, no-one could make a decision.
So we settled for the International Press Centre…
‘We also enquired about painting the LP sleeve on the side of the plane, but when we found out that it would cost another two and a half grand for the paint job we drew the line.’
So we have to settle for the Carter head-rest covers, Carter condoms, Carter badges, Carter balloons, a specially-pressed Carter interview CD (complete with printed questions that accompany Jim Bob and Fruitbat's recorded answers to create the effect that ‘the lads’ are actually in the studio with you on Chiltern Radio!) and, of course, a copy of the ultimate object of all this marketing desire, a Carter album.
All of these accoutrements are dispensed in a once-in-a-lifetime, never-to-be-repeated, Chrysalis carrier bag to the 94 Brits and 60-odd continental journalists who finally file into the International Press Centre at 2 pm Brussels time — primed, not-so-primed, willing, able and ready to pit the wits of the two South London jokers with attitude.
But first, the showbiz build-up.
And I don't mean Jon Beast (or should that be Jean Bête ?
We are treated to a ‘talk’ from Judd Lander, large-screen videos of ‘Sheriff Fatman’and ‘GI Blues’from In Bed With Carter , and then the promo clip for ‘New Cross’.
Then John Williams, head of Chrysalis A&R, makes a few crap jokes about the wonderful marketing campaign the EC have been doing, plastering the blue'n'yellow LP cover all over Europe, before weighing in with a Mike Smash-style ‘cue the music’ and actually playing three ‘cuts’from the album.
And then, finally, a door at the side of the room opens, and in walk Jim Bob and Fruitbat, accompanied by freshly-cropped manager Adrian Boss.
It is strange but true how all the razzmatazz and glitz of showbiz promotion manages to distance members of pop groups from real people and real life.
Even a produce of such divine mateyness as Carter.
It builds them up into superbeings so that, when you actually meet them face to face, there is that unavoidable feeling of being let down.
Badly.
In Carter's case, this ungainly, elaborate, opulent press conference is their first giant step into the mad, bad world of record company hype — a joke that got out of control — and, after all the fanfare and foreplay, to have them finally sitting there in the middle of a hall in Belgium almost seems like a punchline that isn't very funny.
NATURALLY, BOTH Jim and Fruitbat have the wit and honesty to carry the whole affair and actually make a go of the potentially over-sanitised ‘indie’ event.
After a handful of meandering questions about Fruitbat's fractured elbow and the bizarre cycling accident ('the dog was OK’) from Mr Daily Mirror , a representative from a German mag weighs in with ‘About this European concept…
Don't you think for a rock'n'roll band it is somewhat stupid to promote this government idea, especially here in Belgium?’
Incisive, cutting-edge questioning or what?
Straight to the heart of the matter.
And Jim Bob's reply?
‘We're taking the piss.’
Cue a somewhat confused looking German hack and much heartfelt laughter from the rest of the audience.
‘We're promoting real European unity,’ Jim continues, ‘not just a lot of countries having the same currency.’
And from  there on in, it's more of the same, frankly.
A mixture of upfront honesty and nervous shyness, countering a bizarre and awkward situation with a fair smattering of the linguistic humour that makes Carter's recorded work so appealing and entertaining.
When a Dutch journo asks why condoms are included in the press kit, Jim's immediate retort goes ‘Because you're all going to go and shag each other afterwards,’ swiftly followed by ‘Did you all get the heroin as well?’
Throughout the entire 50 minutes of grilling on low heat, Judd Lander sits nervously, looking around for more people to ask questions.
Only about 20 per cent do, yet this is supposed to be why we're here.
Linda Duff of The Star says afterwards, ‘I've got a couple of stories on them anyway and, with another tabloid present, I wasn't about to give them away…‘
The very fact that The Star is even interested in Carter marks out the rather sizeable arena they are currently entering.
Not bad for two blokes whose life story is ‘We've been making music as a hobby for eight years, and now we want the money!’
Carter are unlikely and entirely pop stars, the kind of phenom that could only happen here.
‘The Love Album’ is certainly Carter's finest work to date, a coming of age, a removing of trade barriers.
Recorded in 21 days in a Mitcham garage, the fact that it is on Chrysalis is a mere coincidence.
‘The difference between Rough Trade and a major label is that one's a corner shop and one's Sainsbury's,’ states Jim, wisely if somewhat bleedin' obviously.
CONFERENCE OVER, the assembled hordes, Euro-dizzy on Euro-beer, are returned to the coaches and taken to Brussels' big tourist attraction, a model village of Europe with landmarks from the 12 member states in miniature.
Carter dutifully pose for snaps in front of a scaled-down Houses Of Parliament and toy with the idea of burning the wooden model to the ground.
Then it's group shots and off to a hired room for buffet lunch, more lager, TV interviews and an assessment of the day's events.
Jim Bob says that no way would they have done this if it had been their money, and hopes that everyone got the joke.
Looking out over the Brussels skyline, it occurs to me that Carter may well not have that many more opportunities to have the last laugh on a scale like this.
From  here on in, things could get very serious.
Charter USM — the evidence
Today, Europe — tomorrow, well, Brixton again, hopefully
The Man's model pop puppets pose in front of the model (global) village
The star of the show (right)
NEW MUSICAL EXPRESS
40 YEARS OF ROCK'N'ROLL
LISTEN UP!
THE EDITOR SPEAKS — A NATION SHRUGS
Forty years…phew!
As all around me a nation explodes into an orgy of joyous celebration, I feel a little of what Mrs Thatcher must've felt when the tabloids went into rapture about her ‘ten glorious years’.
The truth is that for a weekly paper in something as effervescent and ethereal as pop, all that we've done over the last 40 years is not as important as what we do next week.
And the week after that…
Having said that, though, there is undoubtedly something wild and magnificent about an institution quite as cussed, mercurial and downright weird as the NME making it through four decades of turbulent cultural and commercial waters.
Some think the NME is the best because it has survived; in truth it has survived because it is the best.
Not by any means always, but more often than not; and much more often than most.
Notebooks out plagiarists while I reveal the secret of NME 's enduring success: some music papers have been good at treating Rock as An Art Form, others have been great at capturing the essential triviality, sensuality and sheer stupidity of pop;NME , when it's been at its best, has managed to combine the two things without going stark staring schizo-bonkers.
We've been able to follow a six-page retrospective on Iggy Pop with a Lingerie-in-Rock exposé, and do both things with equal conviction.
There's nothing big or clever about it, but readers seem to like it.
Which is more than can be said, it seems, for artists.
We polled whole rafts of them to get their comments on our birthday.
Loads of them, with varying degrees of politeness, refused to have anything to do with us, and, of those that did reply, over half (see pages 34 to 37) appear to loathe, despise and abominate us.
The explanation for this is, of course, quite simple.
In a world overflowing with media, artists have become used to an easy, questioning ride from press, radio and TV outlets desperate for their participation.
NME remains one of the very few places the featherbed treatment isn't guaranteed.
Even if every other aspect of the paper were a shambles, the maintenance of that critical independence would be (and is) a source of justifiable pride.
What of the future?
People keep telling us that the NME can't go on because music is so boring.
Such pessimists are wishing their life away.
The last few months alone have seen us tripping over stranger and stranger Techno records born of computer game consoles and febrile imaginations, wave after seemingly inexhaustible wave of new rap, the  grimy grungy hordes of post-Nirvana American noiseniks and the endless fireworks let off by our homegrown rock scene.
There may not always be Summers Of Love, winters of Punk, Acid House explosions and Madchester madnesses, but there is always great and exciting (new and old) music out there.
You just have to have the wit, imagination and guts to go out and find it.
The other thing the knockers are fond of saying is that as more and more media get to grips with rock and pop, so NME will wither and die.
To that we say ‘bring 'em on!’.
The more competitors we have, the more the basic raw material of popular is presented in bland supermarket-commodity ways, the more the NME , by dint of the few extra degrees of vim, suss and humour it puts into its coverage, will seem different from everything else.
And more necessary.
Which brings us to the most important constituent of the whole NME recipe that has seen us, scarred but hopefully unbowed, through 40 years — the readers.
I never cease to be amazed, nor draw encouragement, from the floods of letters we receive (a few of them even complimentary!) and the level of response that competitions and requests for info/opinions/lies/rubbish precipitate.
It's obvious that the people who buy and read the paper care as passionately about music (and much else beyond) as we do and are unwilling to let us, or anyone else, off the hook lightly.
They,you , are our inspiration, the reason we've come as far and done as well as we have, the energy that drives us forward into the future.
And it's to you, the readers, that we beg one week's indulgence as we uncurl our lips, pat ourselves on that back and take you, in the next 46 pages, on a runaway rollercoaster ride through the stuff and nonsense, faces and fads, ecstatic highs and miserable lows that have littered 40 years of doing battle with the monster that is popular culture.
Normal service will, we promise, be resumed next week.
In the meantime, let's rock!…
Danny Kelly
EDITOR 
MUST WE FLING THIS FILTH AT OUR POP KIDS?
Governments come and governments go (or rather they don't), pop idols streak through the firmament and disappear, but there is one constant in a topsy-turvy world, the beacon of truth and clarity that is the NME .
And 40 years ago you — or rather your semi-erect ancestors — were asking us why we didn't just change our name to New Accordion Express .
Since then, a lot of good writing and bad puns have passed under the bridge — as heroically rounded up here by STUART MACONIE in this (gulp!) warts-and-all history of your favourite rock weekly…
Common misconception has it that rock'n'roll was invented when Alan Freed first foisted this brash new music on the unsuspecting good burghers of Cleveland in April 1952.
Wrong.
Rock'n'roll was born in a London office two months earlier when the first issue of the NME was ‘put to bed’.
In February 1952,The Musical Express bade farewell to its readers with a final issue that blazed proudly on its cover ‘Tommy Dorsey For Olympic Games’, the accompanying story telling of how bandleader Dorsey and his orchestra had been booked to play for four hours daily at the games in Finland that summer.
This story, perhaps somewhat less than scintillating to today's thrill-seeking reader, was nevertheless hot news at the time and, moreover, speaks volumes for the then ethos of the paper; a lightweight, trade bulletin largely concerned with the doings of big band leaders and crooners, the dominant pop music of the time.
Two weeks later, the paper re-emerged as The New Musical Express , the name if not the publication that you know and love today.
The paper had been relaunched by Maurice Kinn, a successful London agent and promoter who, by turning up at an agreed location on the stroke of noon with £1,000 pounds of borrowed cash in hand, acquired the title and promptly added the New .
One of the NME 's first innovations was the introduction of Britain's first chart based on record sales rather than sales of sheet music.
The lead news story in that first ish blazoned NME Exclusive — Britain To Have Commercial Radio’.
Changes were afoot in the world of Britpop but even so, the NME of the '50s was still a big band paper first and foremost, and one that saw its typical reader as a working musician rather than a fan.
‘Be Modern — Play Old Time’ advised Sydney Thompson to fellow bandleaders whilst Jack Parnell spelt out, rather controversially, ‘What I Expect From A Rhythm Section’.
In these first few years of NME , the paper's style recalls nothing so much as a Pathé newsreel crossed with Harry Enfield's Mr Cholmondoley-Warner character; stuffy, uncontentious and groaning under the weight of its own deference to the celebrities.
You may wince at the ‘blurbs’ at the top of features today but how about this from 40 years ago: ‘A new feature called ‘Argument’— a spontaneous tape-recorded discussion by leading personalities on a topic of the moment faithfully transcribed by assistant editor Jack Baverstock.’
A nation read on, no doubt inflamed.
But let's not get too smart-aleck with the benefit of hindsight.
Circulation before the re-launch as NME had dwindled to 20,000.
Under Kinn's astute guidance, milking his showbiz contacts and using the paper to promote ‘gigs’, the tide turned.
The NME established itself quickly, even if the musical world it reflected was to remain dominated by Geraldo, Humphrey Lyttleton, Johnny Dankworth, differing varieties of big band jazz, and the showbiz gossip direct from ‘Tin Pan Alley’(Denmark St), where the paper had its offices) as reported by a variety of wackily pseudonymous hacks such as‘The Slider’ and ‘The Alleycat’.
If the lowdown on Vera Lynn's recent successes at her local tennis club or Joe Loss' new sailboat got you salivating, then these were the columns for you.
Again, mock not.
Simply substitute the names ‘Kingmaker’ and ‘Bobby Gillespie’.
As the '50s drew to a close, so trends in British popular music began to whiff of a sea-change.
Dance bands, jazz and crooners of indeterminate age gave way to the new imported sound of the States — rock'n'roll.
By 1959, it had established itself as the pop sound and a fledgling British rock culture was throwing up performers such as Cliff Richard as challengers to Elvis.
But still this new music was far from established as a credible art form in the pages of the music press.
The triple death of Buddy Holly, Richie Valens and the Big Bopper in February 1959 didn't merit a lead story in any of the weekly music papers.
In NME , it came a bad second to Cliff Richard's sore throat and his summer season at the Palace Theatre, London.
In common with most papers of the time, the NME was only very cautiously supportive of this new teenage music, seeing in it little of the virtues of musicianship, family entertainment, versatility and maturity.
However, of its contemporaries, your soaraway NME was undoubtedly the most diligent in bringing you news of the latest teen pop sensations.
The music press of the late '50s grudgingly conceded the popularity of rock but the implicit assumption is that this teenage fad had no staying power.
Oh dear.
In the early '60s, all of the pop press welcomed with open arms the rather curious emergence of a ‘trad jazz’ revival.
Curious in that with the bulk of the country's youth taking their cultural signposts from America and the more visceral thrills offered by rock'n'roll, it seems strange that such a dated and wrinkly musical form should enjoy such an upsurge in fortunes, particularly when it faced competition from sexier young pups operating in the rock idiom such as Tommy Steele and Cliff Richard.
As veteran commentator George Melly remarked: ‘The trad boom was both unexpected and untypical; its heroes were far older than the norm and had been around for much longer; the emphasis was instrumental rather than vocal; the sexual aspect was almost non-existent.’
The standard bearers of this non-existent sexuality were ageing musos such as Chris Barber (whose ‘Petit Fleur’ from April '59 is credited with instigating the ‘trad’boom) and Acker Bilk, playing inconsequential variants on ditties like ‘The Saints Go Marching In’that had had their day in turn of the century Lousians.
With hindsight, it's easy to see that the kids had been the victim of a conspiracy.
The Beeb liked the cut of ‘trad jazz’ 's jib; it was safe, it was old, it was uncontaminated by ideology, it was never going to set anyone's liberty bodice on fire.
And they had willing collusion from the music press, including the NME , sadly.
The tried and trusted jobbing musicians culture of ‘trad’ dove-tailed nicely with the trade paper ethic and it was much easier to write articles such as‘Kenny Ball Concerts To Be Waxed’and ‘We Salute Acker!
Trad's First Number One!’ than dwell on the antics of the bequiffed teddy boys.
‘Is Trad Killing Rock?’ blazed the paper in April 1961 with no little glee.
There was the odd dissenting voice from jazz modernists and pop vocalists but in the main even young rock and pop celebrities such as Cliff, Billy Fury and Helen Shapiro were cornered into making facile compliments in print along the lines of ‘What's The New Trend?
It's Trad, Dad!’
1964, and Cliff wins NME Best Male Vocalist award.
‘Cheers, all my mates at the MME!’(not)
The NME office, circa 1956
Fabulous take the stage at the NME Poll Winners Concert, 1958
Staged or not, by 1963 the trad boom was dying out and NME was beginning to pin its colours to a new mast; the emerging British pop sound.
True, there  were no Sex Pistols here, not even a Housemartins if the truth be known, but at least the papers were beginning to take on board a youth culture.
The NME led the way in this shift of attitudes.
Of all the music publications, it was quickest to spot the implications of the Mersey sound, the Surf groups from the States, etc.
NME was also introducing innovations in the way musicians were dealt with.
A ‘Life Line’ feature, grandfather of our ‘Material World’section, was introduced in which, should the fancy take you, you could find out what Freddie Garrity's favourite food was or what Gerry Marsden wanted for Christmas.
Elements of genuine critical evaluation were introduced to the paper such as the awarding of different numbers of ‘bells’ according to the merit of particular singles (prior to this, the announcement that a record was available was considered enough).
Interviews began to take a more lively, if still far from inquisitorial slant.
NME news editor Chris Hutchin interviewed Elvis' manager and found that Colonel Tom Parker had yet to see any of his charge's films: ‘I went to see Kid Galahad but the theatre was full an’ I didn't see the point of taking a seat that could be sold to a paying customer.’
Also Parker confesses that he has never been to one of Elvis' recording sessions: ‘That's his job — mine's getting him as much money as I can.’
This is hardly a stream of invective and obscenity but it's a long way from the stuffed shirt formality of the '50s interviews.
It was slowly becoming less necessary to present artists and their management as either a) choirboys or b) fairy godmothers.
Indeed,NME was coming to terms with the rapid turnover of the new pop.
New faces were constantly sought, while old ones lived in fear of being discarded.
Looking back, it almost seems as if a policy of ‘build 'em up, knock 'em down’ was being formally instituted.
But surely not?
As the '60s progressed, so the new British pop, as characterised by sexy girls and boys with guitars, took hold both of the music scene and the NME .
The nature of pop was changing.
Bands were becoming self-contained, responsible for their own material and instrumentation, vocal performers were becoming younger and more individualistic, and from American music came a greater awareness of social issues in the confines of the pop song.
Nonetheless, there was still a strong family entertainment culture in the world of British pop.
The Beatles, The Rolling Stones and The Who were breaking the mould but still could be found ‘thumbs up’ and smiling in the glamour-stuffed pages of the NME who, with its circulation well in excess of 200,000, was firmly established as the British pop bible, a title we have never let slip from our grasp.
Proof of the paper's central role in pop at the time can be seen in the regular NME Poll Winners' concerts held in London each spring.
For many years, these had been a fixture of the concert schedules and had attracted large crowds to venues such as the Albert Hall and the Empire Pool (now Wembley Arena).
Courtesy of these NME shows, you too could join a long queue for a booth in which Cliff or Dusty or Adam Faith sold kisses for two bob a time.
But as Britain's burgeoning pop culture came to full bloom in 1966, so did its mirror, the NME Poll Winners' Show.
The Maya 1966 Show is barely believable with hindsight; The Beatles, the Stones, The Who, The Walker Brothers and, by way of backup, a whole host of minor attractions such as The Yardbirds, The Small Faces, Roy Orbison, Cliff Richard, The Spencer Davis Group, Dusty Springfield and Herman's Hermits.
For once, you can't accuse us of self-promoting hyperbole when we described the show as ‘the mightiest concert ever!’
The Wembley show was attended by over 10,000 people thousands more on the following two Sundays when it was shown on TV.
The Who smashed things up, The Walker Brothers created hysteria amongst the girlies and Jimmy Savile pranced around in a patchwork quilt coat.
By all accounts it was an extraordinary day.
With the brilliance we have come to expect from TV companies, it appears that the whole poptastic caboodle has been erased.
But as the swinging '60s drew to a close, pop's cheery effervescence began to lose its fizz and the kids developed a taste for stronger stuff in the shape of ‘rock’.
Rock meant heaviosity, abstract lyrical concerns, an end to the chirpy three-minute single in favour of lengthy and weighty instrumental explorations and, in general, weirdness on an undreamt of scale.
Under the auspices of Scottish/Canadian editor Andy Gray, the paper was faced with a dilemma and one that it had great difficulty resolving, namely how a paper still steeped in show business traditions could come to terms with a new music that was deliberately and defiantly anti-commerciality and the supposed ‘circus’ of the pop world.
In theory, no problem; the NME reflected trends in contemporary music regardless of what those trends might be.
But in practice, the New Musical Express at the end of the 1960s was a curious beast indeed.
The American experience of Rolling Stone and Creem had shown that there was an enthusiastic market for a new way of writing about music; working on the assumption that readers were literate, broad-minded and critical in their evaluation of music rather than at the mercy of pop trends.
In Britain, the emerging ‘underground’ press took as their stock-in-trade drugs, rebelliousness and the doings of the ‘counter-culture’.
Meanwhile,NME was trying to chronicle the new movements in rock but retain its established position as the bright'n'breezy pop weekly with all the gossip on Cilla, Lulu and the lovable moptops.
Except, of course, that the lovable moptops weren't so lovable anymore.
The NME of this period is a mutant hybrid where reviews of Engelbert Humperdinck, Andy Williams, The Doors and Led Zeppelin sit uneasily side by side on the page.
In the April 18 issue of 19970, chirpy chart regulars of the time, Blue Mink can be heard bemoaning the onset of ‘Progressive Rock’ in terms that are extremely revealing: ‘The ‘underground’scene has been rammed down people's throats for too long.
I don't understand the music so I won't say it's no good but if Rolf Harris can sell a million and so can ‘Sugar Sugar’ then there's obviously a market for that type of thing too.
I hope people buy ‘underground’ because they like it and not because they're trying to understand it.
The young kids want to dance and have fun, they don't want all heavy stuff.
Jethro Tull is no fool, he's got a clever brain, the way he dresses up to attract attention.’
‘Peter Noone in Thrills?’
‘26 across, five letters, Christian crooner, also a large land-miss found on the coast…hmmm…‘
‘Not another Dave Dee, Dozy, Beaky, Mick & Titch Material World!’
‘When's David Essex next playing the Digbeth Barrel Organ, Beaky?’
Some ropey NME Poll Winners Concert —(l to r) The Yardbirds, The Beatles, The Stones, The Who — surprise, surprise, no Cilla!
So, ‘heavy’ music had both the NME and Blue Mink worried.
Even if neither we nor they were quite clued up enough to realise that Jethro Tull was a group and not the inventor of the seed drill!
The schizophrenic duality of the paper at this time is amply illustrated by the ad on the next page.
‘Be A Spare Time Hairy!
An executive by day, a swinger  by night! 39/6 moustache, 89/6 full beard and sideburns.’
But clearly being a spare time hairy was proving too difficult for the NME of the early '70s.
Alan Smith had joined the paper in 1962 from the local Liverpudlian press and had gained kudos/notoriety from being one of The Beatles' early champions.
‘Even at that point,NME writers would still ask me how my mates The Cockroaches were doing,’ he says.
As The Beatles rose inexorably, so did Smith and by the time ‘his mates’ were splitting up in 1970, he was approached to take over the editorship of NME .
Smith remembers well the confusion of the paper at this time.
‘It wasn't uncommon for us to be putting out a 16-page issue at the end of the 1960s.
Times were not good, we had basically clung to outdated ideas and we were on the verge of closing.
When I was offered the editorship, I was told the clock stood at five to 12.’
Alan Smith is now recognised by many as the man who overhauled the NME with, as he is the first to admit, the backing of an extremely gifted team comprising ex-musician Roy Carr, deputy editor Nick Logan and two of the leading lights from the demi-world of underground journalism, Charles Shaar Murray and Nick Kent.
The partial collapse of the underground press had propelled many of its leading lights into mainstream rock journalism and the NME was quick to capitalise on this.
Kent and CSM (as his hipster soubriquet became) added much-needed cult cachet to the paper.
One of Smith's early innovations was the introduction of a London Pull-Out , a listings section for the capital and news section combined that was the forerunner of our formidable and auspicious Gig Guide .
The London section rapidly became the most popular section of the paper, a reflection of the live music boom and the importance of the ‘new’ progressive music which it covered.
It soon became apparent that the future for NME was to model the whole paper in its image; make it harder, more rock-oriented and move away from the chatty, showbiz legacy.
The issue of January 29, 1972 offered readers a taster of the future in the shape of a small box proclaiming ‘We're Freaking Out At NME ’ and hinting arcanely at big  changes afoot.
The following week those changes became apparent, the February 5 issue containing on its cover a ‘freaky’ drawing by Roy Carr of a weirdo Uncle Sam figure bearing a placard proclaiming ‘We Will Dominate You’.
Beneath this was a message from Editor Smith.
‘You'll notice some big changes in your NME .
More features, more in-depth coverage of the real issues of rock and pop.
We're not going ‘heavy’.
We're happy to stick pretension where it belongs.
Simply,NME will be an intelligent weekly for people who rate Beefheart but don't slam Bolan…
’ Note the ‘We're not going heavy’sweetener to the Blue Mink and Cilla fans in amongst what is basically a declaration of the paper's commitment to weirdo shit and Jethro Tull!
‘Basically it was a complete re-launch.
I wanted to introduce irreverent humour combined with real passion for the music,’ says Smith today.
‘I set out to wilfully parody other music papers like Melody Maker who were so pompous (plus ça change !) so I did things like call our letters section Gasbag after MM 's rather earnest ‘Mailbag’.
I wanted to encourage street crazies and the like to come and work for us.
People like Roy Carr and Nick Kent and Charlie Murray.
They were heady, wonderful days.’
The change was immediate and profound.
Within two weeks we were encouraging our readers to lobby their MPs concerning the restrictive Night Assemblies Bill, Robert Tripp was regaling us with tales of groupies and interviews had taken on a new air of contention, seriousness and madness.
The new NME , with its concentration on ‘heavy’ acts such as‘the Tull’, ELP, Led Zeppelin and King Crimson and its stylistic appeal to the ‘heads’worked.
The May 6 issue proudly boasted a new circulation of 300,000 plus.
The glory days had begun.
Throughout the mid-'70s, the NME built a reputation as the rock paper.
In the cramped Covent Garden offices, a chaotic hubbub of creativity was the paper's modus operandi .
The NME 's owners, IPC Magazines, rapidly became delighted by the paper's status and profitability but occasionally embarrassed by the weekly outpourings of radical dementia, its enthusiasm for all (ahem) manifestations or rock culture and its (ahem again) colourful, demotic language.
The world at large began to notice this roaring weekly enfant terrible .
‘Must we fling this filth at our pop kids?’ boomed The Sunday People next to its revelation that Cliff Richard ‘wouldn't have NME in the house’.
(This may provoke wry smiles amongst anyone familiar with The Sunday People 's weekly diet of sex-op housewives and randy vicars.)
The kids didn't care and neither did we.
Indeed ‘Must we fling this filth…’ became the paper's catchphrase for the best part of a decade.
After Smith's departure, his deputy Nick Logan began a glittering career at the helm.
Logan's name is now synonymous with publishing success and under his benign and brilliant regime the NME went from strength to strength.
The mid-'70s are now seen as something of a cultural wasteland for rock and it is no exaggeration to say that Wednesday's NME was the highlight of the musical week for a generation.
Logan was keen to court that generation both as readers and as potential writers.
With the latter in mind in 1976, he ran the now legendary ‘Two Hip Young Gunslingers Wanted’ ad.
The two lucky gunslingers turned out to be Julie Burchill and Tony Parsons who narrowly beat a young lad from Manchester at the final cut.
Sensibly, Logan decided to take on Paul Morley anyway.
Folklore surrounding this period abounds.
In order to keep its wayward offspring under surveillance, IPC moved the paper from its cheerful Covent Garden hovel to the monolithic King's Reach Tower.
This didn't go down too well.
The NME quickly attempted to stamp its personality on the soulless office space; Burchill and Parsons turned their turf into the infamous Kinderbunker, a sectioned-off area defended by entirely apocryphal barbed wire and glass.
CSM and Mick Farren instituted ‘Kitsch Corner’ decorated with all manner of gaudy tat.
The NME 's resistance to the move was legendary and was reported in The Guardian of May 12, 1976, an article by Robin Denselow detailing the fact that the journalists had removed ceiling panels, daubed graffiti and generally run amok.
A week's issue was missed after a spate of illness and walk-outs and eventually IPC agreed to give the paper its head and sanction a move to Carnaby Street.
Reports persist that the final straw came when an emotional Mick Farren threw a typewriter through the windows, from whence it travelled the 21 floors to ground level at high speed, narrowly missing terrified pedestrians.
Just the thing for the Summer Of Punk.
NME can't claim to be the first off the blocks with coverage of this splenetic musical bastard — that honour has to go to the now sadly defunct Sounds .
But it was NME that embraced the intellectual nettle most firmly.
NME took the cultural high ground of punk via the acerbic and impassioned prose of Burchill, Parsons, CSM, Morley, Kent et al .
Intelligence and savagery were the order of the day, though Fred Dellar remembers fondly that the most terrible of the enfants , Tony P and Julie B, would bring him cream cakes every week.
Tony Black and other top 1972 sex gods receive their coveted awards
The NME darts team vs Radio 1 during the Flared Years.
This tournament was actually won by a team from Sounds called The Bulls Hitters.
Fact!
Composition: What has sartorially-challenged hack ‘Rob’ Geldof just asked The Stylistics' Russell Thompkins Jr?
The great man himself, Nick Logan
Above: One of these men is a Rock Star — Joe Strummer and Nick Kent.
Below: Kent, the late Pete Erskine and Charles Shaar Murray endure another frantic day, 1979
NME Christmas ‘Party’, 1976 — spot Chrissie Hynde in Dr Feelgood's audience
Punk had turned pop music and its attendant culture on its head.
The vitriol, talent and critical edge of NME made it indisputably the thinking kid's po paper, especially after its nearest rival Sounds nailed its colours to the laddishness mast in the shape of Oi! and New  Wave Of British Heavy Metal.
NME was unashamedly smart-aleck, political and cooler-than-thou.
In 1978, Logan left NME to mastermind the setting-up of Smash Hits .
His deputy, Neil Spencer, became editor with, he recalls, some clear ideas of how the paper should develop.
‘I wanted to carry on the great work that Nick had done and I wanted to broaden the paper's scope.
I wanted to keep music integral to the paper but to allow us to cover books, movies, politics; the whole gamut of pop culture.
And I wanted to become less partisan about rock.
To become more sympathetic to reggae, soul and other types of music.
‘Remember that then there was no Word , no MTV, no plethora of rival mags.
It was largely up to NME to cover all the bases at the time.
And in people like Danny (Baker), Tony, Julie and Paul etc, we had an array of dazzling talent to do it.’
Under Spencer, the paper continued its diversification.
The early '80s were characterised by wit and polemic on everything from Wim Wenders to ABC.
But as the decade wore on, there came the first rumblings that something was wrong.
The emergence of the so-called style magazines such as The Face and i-D and teen glossies like Smash Hits put NME into a quandary.
In an attempt to counter their rise,NME became more and more lifestyle-oriented, dabbling in fashion and ideology to an ever-greater extent and carrying on a crusade for black music with a barely disguised contempt for mainstream rock.
Slowly, the NME was alienating its natural constituents, the reasonably liberal and informed rock fan.
At least one reader saw red at the inclusion of ‘Best Reggae Record’ in the poll of 1985.
The paper, it seemed to some, was no longer merely informing the readership about new and different musical forms, it was actively sneering at the tastes of its supporters — if you didn't have a favourite reggae record, something was the matter with you.
Matters came to a head under the editorship of Ian Pye.
Unbeknown to the readers, a war was taking place behind the scenes of NME , the so-called ‘hip-hop wars’.
Then a lowly foot-soldier, current editor Danny Kelly remembers those days well.
‘The paper had effectively abandoned rock music.
And, to an extent, with good reason.
Apart from The Jesus And Mary Chain and The Smiths, rock was in bad shape.
But things like the ‘C86’ movement, however minor they might appear now, were evidence that there were still things happening in rock music, and usually outside London.
As much as NME tried to pretend otherwise, the average reader was not spending his nights watching Trouble Funk at the Town & Country Club.
They were watching The Shop Assistants in Leeds.
No-one wanted to admit this.’
The NME 's circulation fell steadily as the hip-hop wars raged.
Wars that were to end abruptly and, ironically, for reasons that had nothing to do with internal musical divisions.
For some time, the NME 's controversial style had attracted censorious interest from the Establishment press.
An innocuous Thrills item about Little Richard had arch-Tory John Junor frothing in his Sunday Express column about filth and homosexuality.
The infamous ‘Sex Sex Sex’ issue raised eyebrows everywhere.
Eventually the crunch came when the paper proposed to run a shot of H R Giger's ‘Penis Landscape’ Dead Kennedys sleeve as part of a spread on banned album covers.
The picture (a graphic representation of anal intercourse) fell foul of the independent colour laboratory, who took the matter to the highest echelons of IPC.
Resignations followed and several key players in the hip-hop wars became un-persons.
This has become something of a cause célèbre in rock press folklore, but in truth the NME had been in worse scrapes before and no doubt has many more ahead.
The ‘Penis Landscape’ controversy fell conveniently at a time when something had to give at the ailing NME .
Give it did.
It was the end of a particular kind of NME and the start of a new one.
New editor Alan Lewis was a veteran of the weekly rock press, having been a senior writer on Melody Maker and editor of Sounds during its late '70s glory days.
More importantly, he had also run a pub, which made him very much NME 's kind of man.
NME quickly reverted to what it was best at; being an irreverent, broadly-based rock inkie that played to its strengths of barbed humour and critical authority.
Rock was no longer a dirty word but  f— was.
Circulation rocketed.
The new NME was typified by James Brown, a youthful and obstreperous Yorkshire dynamo whose tenure as live and then features ed, was both fiery and fierily productive.
He brought, on the one hand, an attitude and, on the other, a brace of new writers to the paper who form part of the backbone of today's NME , a place where people argue, fight, get drunk and get worked up about pop under the benevolent and sardonic regime of the mohicanned tartar of rock publishing, Danny Kelly.
Will this do?
The continuing success of NME in the '90s has gone hand in hand with the continuing life and longevity of pop and rock as a medium.
The paper enjoys a symbiotic relationship with new trends as they emerge; Madchester, baggy, shoe-gazing, you name it, we go drinking with it.
We maintain a passionate but insolent affair with the beast that spawned us — rock'n'roll.
We've been together now for 40 years and…
And we'll blow our own trumpet somewhere else and sometime else.
We think we're ace and so do you, it appears.
Neil Spencer provides the perfect concluding sound-bite.
‘The NME can be the most exciting place in the world.
It is where the renegades of our youth culture gravitate.
The Greta Garbo home for wayward boys and girls, it will outlive us all.’
And why don't we just change our name to New Morrissey Express and be done with it?
Grateful thanks are due to the following, without whom I could have written this piece but it would have been rubbish 
Shining example Alan Lewis
We do a lot of work of charidee but don't like to talk about it!
A typical NME ‘ideas session’, 1990
‘It's rubbish, don't buy it!’
NME educates the Americans, New Music Seminar, 1990
Carter try to ingratiate themselves at our Circulation Not So Bad After All Party, 1990
The future in shafe(ish) handsshh; our current editor, Captain Pugwash
FANTASTIC!
NOT!
A BRIEF GUIDE TO UNDERSTANDING NME SPEAK
The Beatles/Stones/Kinks/Peters And Lee have come up with a real smasher this time
FOR THE entire 1970s, this was the standard NME favourable review, enabling our non-hippy staff to write about anything weird without listening to it.
Wally!
THE HILARIOUS cry of the '70s rocker, dragged out for all festival reviews, particularly as a photo caption for the picture of a naked man who has taken too much acid and is lying up to his neck in a mud pool.
Nudge nudge wink wink!
NOWADAYS WE say ‘not!’ and ‘way!’all the time, but in the mid-'70s the only funny programme on TV was Monty Python's Flying Circus and so every second feature was headlined ‘This Parrot Deceased’or ‘Too Silly’or similar.
Is this man a prat?
COINED, CURIOUSLY enough, to describe the then critically-mocked Freddie Mercury, this one ran and ran in endless witty permutations, ie Patti Smith — Is This Woman A Prat?
Old farts
OLD FARTS, boring old farts, hippies…punk rock brought a searing new line in invective to NME slang, ie ‘Genesis are boring old farts — and their hair's too long.’
Rockists
IN THE early '80s, we all went round wearing zoot suits and drinking  daiquiris and we thought rock music was crap.
‘Rockist’ was the term invented to describe people who played rude guitars and were noisy, ie U2, Echo And The Bunnymen and Motorhead.
Erm…
PART OF our immense stock of phrases stolen from Private Eye .
See also ‘Those BRIT Awards in full’.
‘Who he?— Ed’ etc.
The Man
WEIRD SLIGHT return (see below) of '70s-ism dug up by Charles Shaar Murray to describe drug dealers/big record corporations.
Currently enjoying an Indian summer of popularity.
Where Is Beatles Band?
PHRASE USED to describe anyone who currently resides in the Where Are They Now file?
From classic letter to NME by one Samuel K Amphong, ie Danny Baker.
Slight return
MOCKING PHRASE used to describe bands who repeat themselves, ie ‘Honey's Dead’ is pretty much ‘Automatic’(slight return)’.
From Jimi Hendrix's ‘Voodoo Chile (Slight Return)’— natch.
Shoe-gazing
JUST ONE of many genres invented by us, ie baggy, fraggle, Camden Lurch, Friedrich Nietzsche, shambling, positive punk, C86, New Cool Rock, grunge, cowpunk, reggae, soul, eclectro, vegcore, Chumbawamba, big dog's cock punk, Ska Revival, Ska Revival Revival, etc.
Hully-gully
BIZARRE IRISH expression invented to describe The Waterboys, The Pogues, etc.
A dance in the 1950s;cf also ‘Yodey bodey!’,
‘Raggle-taggle’, etc.
Saddo
OR, IN its long form, ‘indie saddo’, the cool tag of the 1990s.
See also ‘inaddo’ and ‘Andy Weatherall (yawn —Ed )’(The polar opposite of ‘saddo’is, of course, SexKylie).
‘IT'S NOT NEW, IT'S NOT MUSICAL AND IT'S NOT PARTICULARLY EXPRESS’
OUR ‘FRIENDS’ THE STARS GIVE A CELEB'S-EYE VIEW OF NME
TEENAGE FANCLUB
What does NME mean to you?
New Musical Express
Favourite cover?
Elvis (41)
Nicest/nastiest things ever written about you?
Don't know
Who would be in your dream issue?
INSPIRAL CARPETS
Not Music Experts; Naked Men Ejaculating
The front one
‘Tom's voice was so flat, the walls were jealous.’
‘The Inspirals look like they've just had a charisma bypass operation.’
‘Caravan’ is ‘The Only One I Know’played on pneumatic drills.’
Our dream issue would be four inches wide, perforated top and bottom and with a wee picture of Bobby Gillespie on every page Put up the price so Mark E Smith can't afford it The incredible rise of fame of Simon ‘Fabulous’ Dudfield
VIC REEVES AND BOB MORTIMER
V: A good read on the hovercraft over to Calais.
Yes
B: A pleasant read and a vital source of information about my pin-ups 
V: 1966 picture of a man (Cat Stevens?) making model of SR1 hovercraft.
Yes
B: The one in 1983 with a picture of Yazoo in a science factory 
V: Nicest — owner of fastest, most beautiful hovercraft in UK.
Yes
Nastiest — insufficient downward draught from aerofoil
B: Nicest — I had good fun
Nastiest — I had rough skin on arse 
V: Cockerell, inventor of the hovercraft, for making crossing the Channel a reality at long last.
Yes
B: Nude tramp carrying wicker basket 
V: More information on the hover mower.
Yes
B: I would make it more interesting to the little lads 
V: Ideal paper to be used in test in wind tunnel.
Yes
B: Funny little dogs
BRUCE DICKINSON
Er…
Nicely Murdered Edwardians?
New-age Mudfingered Enema?
Nearly Musical Entertainments?
Norma Major's Endorphins?
Neuro Mammary Endoscopy?
Newly Mashed Entrails?
Normal Mature Edam?
‘…
Iron Maiden are the quintessential essence of the deflation of psychic virginity.
Eschewing the willy in favour of a well-adjusted McCulloch chainsaw, they cut to the intellectual quick with a violence born of years of journalistic abuse.
As for Eddie — well — this journo had to get a new gerbil.’
Change from rectangular format (too boring, a different shape every week — circular, pentagram, triangle, jigsaw puzzle, build your own — free packets of Smarties (except the brown ones!).
Oh yeah!
The ink comes off on yer bum!
Bit of a passion killer.
Recyclability!!!
THE SUNDAYS
It means it's Wednesday — it means Joy Division to the present day
John Lydon swathed in wrapping paper, around Christmas '81  
Huge piles of paper carefully stacked in enormous number of bedrooms
MIKE EDWARDES (JESUS JONES)
Miserable Wednesday mornings
Miles Hunt in drag
No idea of the nicest, but the nastiest was our January '91 cover with the words ‘Jesus Jones Arrive At Last’— the words ‘On The Front Of The NME ’ were conspicuously absent.
Some of the staff
The foisting of crap pop trends on unsuspecting Australians, Japanese and Americans
PETE TOWNSHEND
Do you really think I can remember that?
Bring back Nick Logan to edit it
It has discovered some extraordinary photographers and some diabolical journalists
CARTER USM
Getting nothing done in the recording studio on a Wednesday.
When we're touring outside Britain and the management or record company come out to see us, they have to bring us a copy of the NME , otherwise we moan like  f— 
We can't remember any, but the first time we were on the cover was one of the high points of our short and illustrious career (pass the sickbag please, stewardess)
Probably the nastiest — if not the only nasty — thing was when Stuart Baillie called us ‘a cross between Bob Dylan and The Exploited’.
Even that was funny, of course, and probably right.
Wyld Stalyns on the front cover, cast of EastEnders reviewing the singles, Fred from The Family Cat doing Fred Fact , Sonia compiling the crossword, Postman Plod (he's a miserable bastard) doing the letters page and the editor from Press Gang as editor
Why change something so perfect?
PAUL HEATON
No Muff on Everest
Christmas issue — Happy Mondays with spliff, Sinead O'Connor with baldy hair cut
The only people who can hurt or compliment me are my friends
Mark E Smith in the middle with no clothes on and Lush stood around him — cover shot
The stupid pun headlines, eg ‘Heaton's Trifles’
I don't understand the question
JOE ELLIOT (DEF LEPPARD)
Absolutely nothing, it's politically biased and as much to do with music as The Beano 
The one with me on the front
Who cares?
Def Leppard on every page, with a free pull-out on Mott The Hoople
The entire staff would be fired and replaced with robots (oops sorry, that's already been done)
 F— all  
Lydon: see witticism (right)
‘Gee, thanks guys…
’ Jim Bob delights in an old Jamie Wednesday slag-off
Vic 'n' Bob try to recall NME's last hovercraft feature
ALISON MOYET
It can be absolute validation and extremely joy, a rope with which to hang or totally non!
‘She is singularly the most inspired individual of our time.’
(Prove you didn't print that, and if it was said of someone else, that you weren't tacitly implying it of me)
Honestly, I only but it for the sports features
Southend United's promotion to the First Division with me as mascot — getting fab reviews and a signed football
It has stunted the growth of many a fine band — and promoted horseshit to sheep.
Both of which I have suffered and benefited from
THE MANIC STREET PREACHERS
More than school.
Gesture politics — say yes!
Paul Morley 
‘You are just a concept/You are just a dream/You're just a reflection/Of the new regime/You are just a symbol/You are just a theme/You're just another figure for the sales machine.’
More writers who care less about music
Sex, pills and cheap red wine
BILLY IDOL
It's not just 65p a week — it's an adventure
Me, all me
Both wouldn't fit in this space 
More international news
Introducing the world to the ‘Peroxide Prat’
THE FARM
The NME encapsulates the spirit of an era — reflecting youth culture, addressing issues, documenting movements — and is undoubtedly the wittiest, most credible, intelligent weekly music organ around.
It is also quite soft on the bottom, and the newsprint does come off far too easily.
The one with Bill Dean aka Harry Cross on the cover
Nastiest: Barbara Ellen's comments in the gossip column about The La's and The Farm desperately trying to convince their mothers they did the right thing in not aborting them
Nicest: everything else
John Lennon interview, Hendrix tips on how to set your guitar on fire, Bob Marley (on his relationship with his Liverpool father),
Get some print that stays on the paper, you bastards (invest in laser printing and join the 20th Century)
Certainly not the rather sad, pathetic, melancholic drinking partnership of Terry Staunton and David Quantick.
Probably printing the US$ price on the front cover in mad numerals, and the German and Spanish in really small print at the side of the page — you colonialist hypocrites
BOY GEORGE
Absolutely nothing except on those rare occasions when I am being praised 
Nicest — That ‘Generations Of Love’ was an optimistic record
Nastiest —‘There's nothing worse than an ex-junkie.’
Bring back Anton Corbijn; put it on to recycled paper
The last Happy Mondays interview
CATHAL COUGHLAN (FATIMA MANSIONS)
My private teenage retreat from the cultural isolation of my homeland; being pissed on by babies in the East End of London 
Nastiest — Duncan Bartlett January '91: ‘All of the songs are complete bollocks…‘
Nicest — Too, too numerous to single out.
Honest
(plus in-house gallows for me)
Force all staff to take good acid every Friday
The triple dot: the continued glamour of adolescence-as-career-move; lists in leisure hours
KARL WALLINGER (WORLD PARTY)
Neurological and Mental Evacuation 
‘He's not bad I suppose’— David Quantick on Ecstasy ‘From the side if you squint and wear shades he looks almost human and not Welsh at all.’
A special issue devoted to all-girl, naturist, punk-rock, go-go, dance bands
I'd change its name to Alan
Indeed
JOHN PEEL
An hour of pleasure every week, I suppose.
I tend not to read long interviews with top celebs, as much to avoid discovering that they are dickheads as anything else, so I look for the news, gossip and reviews.
With the latter I like the thrill of discovering whether your writers are (1) highly intelligent or (2) imbeciles — depending, of course, on whether or not their assessments agree with mine
I suppose it is a bit crass to say the one with me on it — on my 45th birthday, I think — but that's the one alright.
The thrill of coming out of Oxford Circus tube and seeing a pile of me at the news-stand was pretty hard to beat.
Apart from that, the recent — and controversial — P J Harvey one was good.
I'm not quite sure what her motives for being nude were — has she said?— but if that's the way she wants us to think of her that's fine
God — I shouldn't say this but the music press generally has been pretty decent to me.
There has been the odd dig at me, of course, oddly enough usually in the course of singles reviews and usually by women on the staff.
The nicest things — well, I just like it when the programmes are mentioned casually, in passing, almost as though they were like one of the elements.
An old hippy speaks!
I like it when someone spots that a record being reviewed has been played by me on Radio 1
I'd love to read something about Beefheart again — for me he is still just about the only person who has been described as a genius in your august organ who might just be one.
I think the occasional piece which encouraged your readers to rediscover the genuinely great figures of the past — Gene Vincent, for example— would be useful, especially if it wasn't tied in with some promotion or record release
I get the impression that the disappearance last year of Sounds and Record Mirror caused more than a slight fluttering in the dovecote and that the paper has since tended to concentrate more on This Week's Sensation and less on the diverting things going on on the fringe.
I understand the commercial need for this, but would appreciate pages devoted, say, to minute American labels (from which come yer Nirvanas etc) and maybe music from Africa.
I mean, it may just be possible that Diblo Dibala actually is the best guitarist on Earth
Perhaps greater than you imagine.
I have for years been recycling my NME s, principally to Eastern Europe.
I have a friend called Ionel in Romania whose life has genuinely been improved in a small way by my sending him your paper, the contents of which he shares with his friends and so on.
Before that I used to have — and this is true —NME s smuggled into East Berlin via Poland.
They did — and still can — mean much, much more than you probably imagine as you're putting this week's issue together
UB40
Enemy, Enema, No Musical Experience, Non Marketable Excreta 
UB40 are brilliant/shit!
The hands of the receiver
Only the enemy and both of their readers could possibly consider such a question.
You stupid crap bastards!
Richey designs the next Manics' sleeve
Hooto: ‘Keef — he's from the ‘Pool, la’
George protects himself from the stink of UB40's ‘witty’ bile
X MOORE (THE REDSKINS)
For ten years it was The Apostles writ in eight point Univers (Don't call us —Production Ed )
PHILIP CHEVRON (THE POGUES)
So,NME , you've reached 40 and I've been reading you for more than half that time.
I think my first issue was about September 1970 and do I recall a two-page debate along the lines of ‘Does Bob Dylan Really Want To Be Elvis Presley?’
Of course, the Zim's rock 'n' roll and Country leanings have become obvious to us over the years, but back then this was provocative stuff indeed.
I have rarely missed an issue since: Thursday was always ‘NME day’ for this Dublin teenager, though in later years the paper was frequently frustrating in its often flippant assessment and misunderstanding of perfectly good WORK, including some of my own.
There were times when the writers' arrogance or pomposity had the opposite of the intended effect of taking the often hapless victim down a peg or three.
But then, at its best,NME never recognised the artificial divisions placed between journo and muso by an ego-pampering music business; besides, there was too much to forgive of a paper that included the impassioned writing of Ian MacDonald, Charles Shaar Murray and Nick Kent, to name just three from one of several fertile periods.
Punk rock almost caught the NME on the hop, despite soothsaying the ‘phenomenon’ in the fabled ‘Sinking Of The Titanic’piece a year earlier.
But you caught on fast, unleashing a whole new generation of so-called ‘hip young gunslingers’.
And ever since, while the styles of writing have constantly changed, it's fair to say the standard has stayed high, if in more recent years, less abrasive.
Of course, the NME has consistently only really been as good as the contemporary music, film etc it celebrates and criticises, and remains a decent barometer, despite the sporadically desperate-seeming attempts to apply bellows to no more than a small flame.
A few regrets along the way also — the ‘politics’ disappeared along with the F-word in a clean-up by your proprietors at a time when most quality dailies were dispensing with asterisks.
Ironic.
Nominating favourite and least favourite covers, there are so many of both to choose, so I'll have to make this a personal choice.
The sensationalist cover in 1977 which followed the death of a fan at a gig by The Radiators (my then combo) will take some beating as the PITS.
But on the plus side, I always thought the 1985 picture of Elvis Costello, Agnes Bernelle and myself sitting in a bar in Camden was quite charming.
The contrast illustrates that music moves on, the NME moves on, grudges don't last forever, and I hope this may be so for at least another 40 years.
Happy birthday.
POP WILL EAT ITSELF
Not Much Enymore
First Blondie cover
James Brown when receiving our first album ‘Box Frenzy’—‘I was expecting the first Clash album and got the third Sham 69 album’— which we thought was a bit of a compliment.
Singles Of The Week for ‘Cicciolina’, ‘X Y & Zee’ and ‘Poppies Say Grrr’were nice 
Make it glossy and more throwaway 
DAVID LOVERING
Add a Page Three (We have one —Ed )
KYLIE MINOGUE
Nicest —‘No-one makes better records than Kylie Minogue…what Kylie Minogue does next will be infinitely more exciting than what most of pop will be doing.
She is…a genius of pop.’
Nastiest — I haven't read any nasty things NME has said about me but I'm sure there have been some over the years  
I'd stop the ink coming off on your hands 
Spreading the word about music (?) or alternatively, with the poor quality of the paper used, on might assume that it is ‘environmentally friendly’.
So minimising exploitation may be the NME 's contribution?
MAT (NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN)
Absolutely nothing thank you very much
The crucified baby Jesus with nuns and various farmhouse animals
Nicest —‘Mat — isn't he the sexy one?’
Nastiest —‘Jonn — isn't he the sexy one?’
Thora Hird on the cover and editing the letters page, Nick Drake to review the singles, Neil Kinnock to review the LPs, Archie Duke and The Ostrich to be in charge of the live section and an 18-page feature on Half Man Half Biscuit
Make it edible
LOZ (KINGMAKER)
Bedclothes to sleep under when I'm completely drunk and homeless, in the middle of Hyde Park
The second cover of January 1992, on the cover were Kingmaker and I dreamt of having sex with lead singer of Kingmaker, who is Loz
The nicest thing was when they printed that I had a tattoo of Reg Varney on my chest.
NME has yet to print anything nasty about Kingmaker, and I wish they'd hurry up and do something because NME are a completely unchallenging and boring music paper who do nothing to contribute to today's thing.
They did try and imply that I went to the toilet for some sexual activity with the lead singer of Suede, which is a bit boring, and something that I'd probably wish for more than think was nasty
I'd make Mark Goodier the editor because he's truly vibey, in touch with the music scene, and let's face it, he knows about things
Underestimated in England, because everywhere Kingmaker have visited abroad has taken the NME 's word as gospel — far more seriously than people do who read the NME in England.
It's part of the English culture of being obtuse, not fitting in with Europe and the rest of the world, the NME is an extension of that
DAVID WAS WAS (NOT WAS)
NME is the source: I don't eat, think or chew peyote without consulting this bible in newsprint
The one with Pavarotti and Sid Vicious fighting over a vial of dope
Nicest — When they started those salacious rumours about Madonna and I vacationing in Antibes
Nastiest — Keep the vitriol flowing!
May the vilest nastiness be uttered after my humble name 
Change the name to Nude Mules in Excess
Confounding the ignorant, belittling the proud, chronicling the insignificant
SEAN DICKSON (THE SOUP DRAGONS)
We are all prostitutes
Us under the Brooklyn Bridge, classic shot with the New York skyline in the background.
But you used the one of us on top of the aircraft carrier on the Hudson which looked like it was taken down Strathclyde Park
Nicest: ‘The Soup Dragons are the greatest band in the world.’
Nastiest: ‘The Soup Dragons are the worst band in the world.’
Whitney Houston and Serge Gainsbourg with assorted vegetables 
GERARD LANGLEY (BLUE AEROPLANES)
Nostalgia, necessity (once upon a time), narrowness (increasing), music, majority vote, excess (hopefully)
The one(s) we haven't been on yet, and a Bob Dylan one
That we were a reincarnation of The Jam
Nick Kent interviewing Syd Barrett; a round table with Ray Davies, Sandy Denny and Michael Stipe, flexi-disc per page and no weak humour
Move head office to New York (Yeah !—Sub's room )
It confirms most people's impression of the British
JOSEPHINE WINGS (THE BREEDERS)
Siouxsie Sioux, about ten years ago, adopting a pose very similar to that of P J Harvey a few weeks ago, only she was wearing a Greek fisherman's hat
Nastiest: ‘Used to pretend to be a heroin addict.’
This is not true.
However, I admit to being a heroine addict.
Nicest: ‘Jo is a diplomat.’
Sandra Bernhard, writing her own column
To introduce a recipe page —‘Favourite Foods Of The Stars And How To Make Them.’
I can't even begin to think about such a question
CURVE
The other paper everyone buys
The Clash by Pennie Smith
Nicest — The Gig Guide 
Nastiest — Simon William's Single Of The Week for the ‘Frozen’ EP —‘Curve stink of fabrication, reek of formularisation and I resent the ‘Frozen’EP being  f—ing brilliant.’
Elvis Presley in his nappies
The Editor
Putting the  c- in country
BILLY BRAGG
When I was 17 it was the place I most wanted to be
The one where you are forced to have a group photo of the three acts you have separately promised to put on the cover that week
Who cares?
I would make it less coy about its radical tradition
Inky fingers!
Chevron: a very nice man
Sexkylie: today's top pop empresses love us
PWEI scour four decades of NME for half-decent review
Curve regret ‘change the editor’ error
PADDY MacALDON
Nick Kent's Brian Wilson piece, Burchill and Parsons, Danny Baker's Michael Jackson (1978), Roy Carr's Phil Spector interview 
Probably that I'm a genius and that I look like a donkey — or something like that
Jimmy Webb, Phil Spector, Burt Bacharach, and Stuart Maconie's list of favourite things (because he's very funny)
Ban photographs of people looking at their shoes while they play guitar
Erm — I'll get back to you on that
DONALD JOHNSON (ACR)
Shaun Ryder climbing on a big E
We are the best and worst band in the world…that was in the same issue!
Bez, Bez and more Bez
The date on the front covers
It makes the world's best fish and chip wrappers
ANTHONY H WILSON
Rage, happiness, boredom
Anything by Kevin — honest
Mick Farren on So It Goes in 1976 — the bastard
Musicians with interesting things to say
Journalists with interesting things to say
Small but attractive
RICHARD FAIRBRASS (RIGHT SAID FRED)
New Musical Express
The centre page spread of The Stranglers' JJ Burnel in the nude.
It wasn't actually a cover, but it was my favourite piece
The last interview by Stephen Dalton was brill and I don't think you've been too nasty yet, but I'm sure our time will come!
Frank Sinatra would appear on the front cover, back cover and every page in between I'd make the pages smaller and the mag thicker, I'd staple the pages together, I'd print on glossy but recyclable paper, I'd…
About 50 football pitches' worth of trees from South America
EMF
Nuuuummmmineeeeahh.
A cup of lemon tea
The one with the monkey was good.
The one advertising tyres
‘God, they are so ace.
Yeah, they're really good.’
‘Are you alright son, you don't look very well?’
The sports page.
The N to S with G on the end.
A welsh nanny goat
EDWYN COLLINS
Nick Kent, Mick Farren's ‘Sinking Of The Titanic’, Paul Morley, Ian Penman's pseudo-Structuralist ramblings, ‘Capitol Radio’ EP, The Lone Groover's codpiece, Tit Pics, Herbal High, Imagine if they gave a war and nobody came, SOD.
Off, Smile if you've screwed today, Fly United, 40-pleat Bowie bags 
Paul Morley threatening to commit suicide if the follow-up to ‘Simply Thrilled Honey’ wasn't a hit was both nice and nasty
Last night I dreamt I was eating a rubber NME .
When I woke up the next morning my incontinence sheet had gone
Concessions for pensioners/UB40 holders
Minimal
STEPHEN MORRIS (NEW ORDER)
Not Much Eventually  
(only joking)
Ban all bands with names of one syllable or less
Kevin Cummins ha ha
BLUR
You can buy it on a Tuesday up in London, which is one of the good things about London
The sweaty Blur cover
‘Blur are only the present of rock'n'roll.’
(applies to both)
Kevin Cummins in bed with Morrissey
Just make it two millimetres wider
It has kept down sales of Melody Maker 
MARK E SMITH
It does not mean market research like this
The colourful ones with no gimmicks
I do not differentiate
That's your job — now do it
Kick out the Q -style retrospectives
JOHN LYDON
‘I will never speak to the NME or Sounds ever again.’
EMF: breading a frog's ironing board
The godlike fizzog of Mark E Smith.
That's all.
Eldritch: too cool to like us, of course 
YOU CAN CALL ME ALUMNI
Yes, it really was sex 'n' drugs 'n' rock 'n' roll in the '70s for legendary top NME rock journos-turned-media celebs DANNY BAKER and TONY PARSONS.
It's amusing anecdote central with the rent-a-gob Cockney git and erstwhile punk rock Hip Young Gunslinger as they fondly reminisce about their halcyon days at The World's Greatest Rock Weekly with a greenly envious IAN McCANN
The world knows Danny Baker as Dunny Bayker, old, unfashionable rent-a-gob Cockney git on radio and television, current holder of the Radio Personality Of The Year award and the man daft enough to present The Game , a football series composed entirely of contests between pub sides on East London's Hackney Marshes.
But there's another side to him.
His backside.
He parks it on the carpet in the bay window of his plush Deptford Park, south-east London terraced house, surrounded by Sega Megadrive games, and thinks about the long-lost days when he was a young, hip rent-a-gob Cockney git on NME .
It's easy to see how Baker makes out on the airwaves.
More front than Margate they'd say in nearby Deptford Market, and they wouldn't be far wrong.
Danny Baker was born to banter, conceived to chat and has a remit to rabbit.
He fills a room with words and, unlike some NME contributors of yore, he can still recall the minutiae of office life in the latest '70s at the world's greatest rock paper.
Here he is remembering Nick Kent standing around in the old NME offices in Carnaby Street talking about what Keith Richards had said to him once, when he noticed something hanging out of his leather trousers.
‘Erm, Nick…’ said Baker.
Kent stops in full flow, looks down and says, ‘Uh…my balls,’ and hitches them back aloft into a hole in his strides and carries on talking.
Rock 'n' roll.
Phew.
Danny Baker was never a Nick Kent.
Reading him at his NME peak, you got the impression he never cared what Keef or Ron reckoned, nor that the rock 'n' roll lifestyle was anything for rock writers to aspire to.
Baker grew out of a mixture of punk and funk, but didn't kiss the ass of either in print.
Whether he was meeting Wacko Jacko in LA or reviewing the latest Lurkers 45, Baker had perspective.
He was just as much of a mad  f—er as anyone else on the paper — he recalls sulphate-fuelled weeks spent in East Germany, for example— but he didn't take it too seriously.
He was immersed in rock, but remembered how to swim.
You can understand the attitude from the way he still says ‘punk rock’ instead of‘punk’.
Although he had four years of orgies with Debbie Harry and Joan Jett at the paper between 1978 and '82, he never kidded himself that he was on first-name terms with pop.
‘I was at the NME because of punk rock really,’ he says blandly.
‘A mate of mine (Mark Perry) started the first fanzine Sniffin' Glue .
He was about three issues into it when he lost access to his typewriter.
So he came round to use mine and to be honest I didn't have too much interest in punk rock at the time but did this fanzine for 12 issues and I got into it.
‘When it finished, Tony Parsons said, ‘Why don't you come up here (NME ) and work as a receptionist?’
I'd never thought of myself as working at the NME because I was in awe of it; I used to read it all the time, Tony Tyler, Charles Shaar Murray and people like that.
I though Tyler was the best writer NME ever had and I've since found out that him and Ian McDonald were the ones that gave the NME its style in the first place.
So Parsons got me this job and I used to sit up there and answer the phones.’
What was the first thing he did for the NME ?
‘A review of a punk rock film for the Silver Screen page.
They said, ‘You was into punk rock, wanna go and do a film?’
So I said yeah, although I was more into soul music at the time, the sort of thing they played in pubs: Kool & The Gang, Earth Wind & Fire, even Michael Jackson before he was an industry.
So I had a market cornered and good access to American trips because I used to like writing about that, even though on the early stuff I must have affected a punk rock stance long after it was all over.’
A rifle through old issues of NME during the Baker era reveals only a few features here and there: his singles reviews columns remain legend in the NME office to this day, but Baker was never the interview machine that, say, Tony Parsons or Paul Morley were.
Instead, he'd spend much of his time penning captions and headlines.
‘I used to go to the printers in Kettering on press day and think up captions, sometimes six or seven for each photograph.
Sometimes they ran all seven, which was most gratifying!
And I used to do T-Zers (the forerunner of Public NME ) all the time.’
Why didn't he do any features?
‘I dunno.
I only done about eight or nine in all the time I was there.
I think I knew early on that the musicians weren't very interesting, but I was.
Which is the basis of the NME .
The writers are interesting but the musicians aren't.
Even though you quite like their records they're all dull old spuds and you just have to interpret what they'd say if they were literate.
‘You write up the more interesting parts of what they say and leave out the dull bits to do them a favour — if you like them.
If you don't like them, you leave all the boring bits in and take the piss.
And I could never sit through all these interviews, transcribing them off the tape afterwards.
It was too boring.’
BAKER SAYS that although he's done all sorts of jobs since — mostly on telly — he's never ‘had a time’ like he did at the NME .
‘It was an extremely unprofessional organisation.
Probably still is.
We used to play football in the office.
Deadlines came and went, people didn't show up, there was no hierarchy and it just all fell together somehow.
‘Tony Stewart, Phil McNeill and Neil Spencer used to run the NME and Cynthia Rose used to try to do the serious side of it.
They were the people in top hats that the rest of us used to throw snowballs at.
The rest of us were just…a rabble.’
Despite such a poor start, he's subsequently risen to massive heights of fame, being second only to Cher in the showbiz hierarchy.
‘I couldn't spell, and I still don't know to this day where a paragraph is meant to go.
And the paper was shambolic in the way it came together.
But by the same token we were convinced that we were the best writers there were.
‘It was so lax.
Cover features just were not delivered.
Ian Penman did that time and again.
I certainly did that with Boy George.
I got to the printers with my Boy George piece and it was finally time to say, ‘Look, this is only a thousand words long and I still haven't got to the interview.
Can we run it as a part one and I'll write part two next week?’
And this is a cover feature!
‘And they did.
They ran the first thousand words with me meandering on about going to meet Boy George as a cover feature.
Part two to follow.
I never wrote it.
And it was grossly unprofessional but I really didn't think that much of it.’
SURPRISINGLY, DANNY says he doesn't remember arguing about music in the office at all, save Neil Spencer telling him that Earth Wind & Fire sounded like ‘a toothpaste advert’.
Even reggae writers with ‘the full Camberwell carrot’ between their lips were tolerated.
It was a weird, time, with white rastas, art-school escapees, old rockers and punk fanzine costermongers coming together to discover that maybe they did have something in common after all.
‘I was hired as a voice from the streets!
So if I wrote, ‘The next day was a  Fuesday ’ because I hit the wrong key on the typewriter, they used to leave it in, thinking that was what the kids were saying at the time!
Nobody knew what was meant to be going on.
There were loads of trips abroad, which there wasn't a guilt thing about then, and I used to take them with both hands.
‘I sometimes think now, Oh gawd, I must have really looked like a schlepp when I used to turn up at Motown or somewhere taking a punk rocky attitude with me.
Punk didn't mean shit to a palm tree to them even if it meant so much to us.
It must have been so embarrassing.
I never used to prepare a question, I just used to turn up, think ‘This is good’ and have a drink with them and try to be funny about it later.’
His drink-and-a-rabbit interview attitude didn't always pay off.
An interview with Paul Weller, for example, turned out to be a fiasco.
‘It was a Hamburg hotel and Paul was sitting with his girlfriend who he was breaking up with.
I'd known him from the start of punk.
He asked me when I wanted to do the interview, I was going out of the hotel and so we'd do it when I got back.
Paul didn't drink a lot, but when I got back he was drunk.
It was around the time of ‘Strange Town’ and he was starting to think that punk rock had had it and he was getting very emotional.
Deep personal friend of ours Danny Baker with his Radio Personality Of The Year award: ‘I'm now terminally unhip.’
Inset: In hipper days with, erm, Rick Bukler
‘So he started pouring all this stuff out about how The Jam were finished.
I had a flat tape recorder with a directional mic  and I stuck it on the table and above me was a speaker through which all this muzak was coming out.
Paul was giving it all this, ‘I really think the band can't go on…’ and I thought ‘brilliant …‘
‘When I got back, I switched the tape on and all I got out was ‘ Small and tanned and young and lovely the girl from Ipanema goes walking…
’ It had just picked up the muzak.
So I thought, ‘Ah, I'll just write it anyway,’ so I made it up from beginning to end.
I bumped into him four weeks later and he said, ‘Oi, you made it all up’ and I swallowed something sharp and jagged, shrivelled like a salted snail and said, ‘Yeah I did’.
And it still turns up in Jam books to this day.
But it wasn't trash: I'm sure that if he'd had long enough, he'd have said exactly what I wrote!’
THERE WERE other fiascos.
He left a Bonnie Raitt concert early, and his review was the only one that omitted to mention that Elton John had been an unexpected guest.
‘Overwhelmingly, doing the singles, the review was written before I'd heard the record.
I'm sure it's not unusual: you look at the title or the cover and you know all about it.
And it's right: you're not a service to pop groups, you're there to be a good writer and to entertain people.
‘I was doing a thing about Club 18–30 for London Weekend telly.
This fella came over in an 18–30 steward's blazer and he said, ‘You're responsible for me working here’.
‘Oh yeah,’ I said, ‘How might that be?’
He said, ‘My name's Danny.
I used to be the drummer for The Merton Parkas.
We broke up after your review.’
He didn't seem all that worried about it.
It was a headline that did it, I think I put something like, ‘Like Lambrettas To The Slaughter’…
‘The last thing you ever thought about was being confronted by anyone you'd offended.
I did a terrible thing to Kate Bush.
I had a great time with her, we were chatting away and I fancied there was a twinkle in her eye because I was quite a catch then.
Me and Kate were getting on great.
I was just sitting at her feet thinking ‘What a wonderful person you are’ because she was so good-looking.
‘But when I got behind the typewriter I thought, ‘That ain't gonna make a very good piece’ and so I took the piss out of her something rotten.
Everyone said, ‘Very funny, this Kate Bush thing.
Is that what she was like?’ and all I could do was say well, no, not at all…but that was the licence you got at the NME , because the most important word in the paper is I .’
Although Baker once earned £58.17 a week at the NME , he is now a millionaire several times over, appearing as a game-show host (Win ,Lose Or Draw ) and asking housewives if they'd swap their two packets for one on Daz adverts.
‘Although everyone remembers Tony Parsons and Nick Kent at the NME , they forget about me because I'm now terminally unhip, like Elvis joining the army.
But I've got no problem doing what I do at all .
I'm doing the Mars ads in the summer, it's a fantastic thing to do.
If it wasn't, I'd be up in the loft poring over old NME s.’
Baker doesn't read the paper anymore, jokily citing the argument ‘when you get to 26, something terrible happens to music’.
However, he still spends £150 a week on records, saying ‘It's just that I don't feel so judgemental about music any more.’
Don't let it happen to you, kids.
Tony Parsons sits at a table in his tastefully grey-decorated house in the moderately fashionable Canonbury area of London.
Behind him is a desk on which an Apple Mac computer blinks silently.
Some piano music tinkles gently in the background, a black Armani shirt clings softly to his chest.
It's a sunny, spring afternoon and, on the surface of it, we're in media heaven.
Except that Tony Parsons isn't the sort of prat that's stumbled into all this from public school as if he's got a divine right to it.
He's garnered the accolades and the money that have come his way by being good at his job, by knowing his strengths, and by a modicum of luck.
He may have made a cool £250,000 out of writing George Michael's biography, but he was cute enough to identify a demand for the tome, and lucky George didn't want to rip him off for the proceeds.
Luck, talent and application: perm any two for success.
Any three, and you've got to be exceptional.
If he was less of a man, Tony Parsons might never have outgrown his role as enfant terrible in NME 's punk era.
He might have been forever boy looked at Debbie Harry's punk rock knickers/ex-Julie Burchill's old man , but he's not.
He's typed his way out of that corner, no trouble.
He's just a bit cleverer than the rest, but willing to take advice with it, and is happy being the writer he always wanted to be.
‘I was 21 when I first wrote for the NME .
It was 1976,’ he says, in a plain, laconic London voice.
‘Nick Logan had, I think, saved the NME .
He was made editor when he was 26.
He turned it round when IPC seemed to have a death warrant on it.
It was just an alien little pop paper left over from the '60s and that market wasn't really there anymore.
Nick turned it around by hiring Nick Kent and Charlie (Shaar) Murray from the underground papers.
They were still good, I loved those guys and read their stuff and it was a very big deal to work alongside them.
I covered it up and I was aggressive towards them, because I was so threatened by how good they were.
Anyway, Nick realised that the paper wasn't completely on top of the punk thing.’
Parson's interest in music began in the early-'70s, but his Bowie-fandom foundered at the Aladdin Sane gig at Earl's Court in 1973.
‘It seemed to have nothing to do with my life, it was so distant.
People always talk about Emerson, Lake & Palmer as being aloof, but even people I liked, like Bowie and Rod Stewart, seemed so distant.
So I lost interest for a few years.
Then I saw all these punk bands — and I couldn't believe it.
There were all these kids with short hair in the audience, disenfranchised rock fans, and I just thought, ‘that's me’.
I loved it right from the off.’
THAT SORT of conversion the road to Damnedmascus sounds like a cliché today, but people did go through it then.
Parsons attended the 100 Club, Hope & Anchor and the Nashville and became part of the scene.
When Nick Logan at NME advertised for ‘Hip Young Gunslingers’, he was looking for kids like Parsons who could articulate the inarticulate: punk.
Parsons remembers his time at the paper as ‘Three very intense years of a lot of music, a lot of drugs, a lot of girls and a lot of fights.
I look back on my time there with a lot of affection, but I feel that if a rock writer is doing his job properly, three years is about it.’
The ‘Hip Young Gunslingers’ ad, according to legend, provoked 5,000 applications.
‘That's true,’ says the former crackshot, ‘but they didn't open all the letters.
When I started, my desk was piled high with the unopened envelopes.’
He had been working nightshifts at an Islington distillery, but NME was his second attempt at writing for a living.
‘I'd had a novel published when I was 16, really quite a poor novel called The Kids , the kind of thing that people write when they're in the fifth form, except that mine got published.
I made £700 from it.
So when Nick advertised, I could send my novel.
And that looked quite impressive.
I was a jaded novelist at 21!’
He was on a short-list of 15, and it was whittled down to five.
He arrived at the interview in shades, because he'd been up all night speeding, and a leather jacket.
He got the job.
Who were the others?
‘Nick Logan said ‘I've got a girl from Bristol and a boy from Manchester.’
The girl from Bristol was Julie Burchill, the boy from Manchester was Paul Morley.
The other two people on the list were Ian Cranna (journalist who also managed ,among others ,Orange Juice ), and David Houscham, who's since vanished into the ether.
And that's when my life changed, that's when I was let into the world I wanted to be in and got paid to do something creative, which I'd always wanted to do.’
Parsons with deep personal buddy Bruce Springsteen, when he was in The Clash (not!)
NME's punk enfant terrible Tony Parsons in 1992: now it's all Apple Mac and Armani, then it was chiefly amphetamine and aggression
The new arrivals — Parsons and Burchill on the staff, and Morley as a freelancer — were, at first, minor members of the NME oligarchy, but almost by default stamped the paper with an attitude that was almost entirely of their own creation.
‘Because the new wave became important, my job became more important.
I knew the guys in the punk bands because they were the people I spent time with: people like Joe Strummer and Paul Weller I felt a great affection for as men, as well as admiring what they did.’
Parsons became a kind of spokesman for a generation, within the music press at least.
He knew everyone who mattered, and it was luck as much as anything else — what if reggae or jazz-funk had been the dominant force then?— but Parsons was still capable of grabbing the opportunity when it knocked.
If he had been crap, it wouldn't have mattered who he knew.
And at first, being ‘in’ with a punk band meant nothing, as a story about a visit to one of '70s London's trendier clubs illustrates.
‘I can remember going down the Speakeasy with The Clash to look for models to give us cocaine and blow jobs.
They wouldn't let us in.
‘Tony Parsons, music journalist?
Never heard of yer.
The Clash?
Never heard of yer.’
It was embarrassing.
And people like Greg Allman and Cher were swanning past us.
All punk was was a few inky columns in the music press at first.
It didn't matter at all.’
Far from being a divisive arrival at the NME , the elder members of the NME staff were, according to Parsons, ‘almost loving’ towards the new punk writers, despite Parsons' and Burchill's reputations for being surly and unapproachable — it was, after all, they who smothered their corner of the NME office with barbed wire!
On a more personal level, Parsons was ‘very good mates with Johnny Thunders.
I'd loved the New York Dolls.
It was a big deal for me to meet Johnny Thunders on the Anarchy Tour.
Nick Jones and Steve Jones introduced me to him.
But there was this fear that I'd become a junkie if I hung out with these people.
There was never any danger of that, because I'm terrified of needles and I never wanted to make drugs my life's work.
People like Nick (Kent) and Charlie (Murray) were fraternal towards me and would say, ‘Listen Tony, people like Johnny Thunders are a real  f—-up .
You don't wanna get too matey with him.’
It was touching that they cared about you.’
EVENTUALLY THE fashions changed, punk became obsolete and Tony Parsons moved on.
The Boy Looked At Johnny , the now alarmingly naive book he'd written with Julie Burchill (soon to become a temporary Mrs Parsons) had caused a splash, and both writers resigned from the NME on the same day.
He wrote three novels, one of which,Platinum Logic , was spectacularly successful, and did TV work as a researcher and presenter.
(He's also made a chat show pilot for Channel 4 that the station are currently considering.)
Apart from occasional projects like the George Michael book,Bare , he's been pretty much a print writer and won the Magazine Writer Of The year award (a Tony Award?) a couple of years ago.
His work for Elle and Arena in particular has always been a finely-crafted, intelligent read, a long way different from the style-over-content of his NME days.
He also contributes a fine weekly music column to The Telegraph .
Although he found going freelance ‘hard at times’, he has far outstripped his NME reputation.
‘You could see how you could get stuck in the (NME ) job, because it is a very easy life.
Bad behaviour was expected of you in those times.
If you got into a punch-up in the office, that was the zeitgeist , it was kinda mandatory to be incapable and falling over.
I loved the paper, particularly Nick Kent and Charles Shaar Murray: I admired them like I admire Tom Wolfe or Nik Cohn or Jack Kerouac.
It meant a lot to me than and I still buy it today.
If it doesn't mean so much today as it did, it's because rock isn't as strong as it was, it doesn't matter so much anymore.’
As for punk, he says, ‘There was never a clear-cut agenda.
When The Clash got offered the CBS deal there were big discussions about whether or not they should sign, because nobody knew what to do.
It sounds hopelessly like a student life but we took it deadly seriously.
Punk was a mix of idealism and hedonism: can we change the world and how many girls can I  f— this week?
I felt possessive about those bands, and felt jealous when other people wrote about them.
Although there was a desperation at first, everyone trying to get off the dole queue, there was also a sense that it was the start of a lot of careers, a big break.
That's when the bitterness crept in, with musicians more than writers.
‘There were a lot of preconceived notions in punk, like if you went to interview Freddie Mercury you had him nailed right from the start.
And because I knew a lot of people, you'd do things for different motives.
Like if I interviewed Johnny Thunders, it wasn't to meet him for the first time, it was to try to save his career.’
‘No, but Nick (Logan ) would send you on jobs you didn't want to do for various misdemeanours.
I remember he sentenced Julie (Burchill) to review Gilbert O'Sullivan in Croydon as a punishment for taking amphetamines in the office.
I was put on the road with Lynyrd Skynyrd when they thought I was getting too big for my DMs, but they were real wild men and I liked them a lot and we got on very well.’
Parsons left the NME before he became just another hack, taking with him memories like this:
‘I remember the cover story I did on The Clash in 1977, the thing that became ‘Capital Radio’.
We got on the Circle Line with a bag of sulphate and went round and round and got off at Liverpool Street.
I remember cramming into a photo-booth with Nick, Joe and Paul to take amphetamine sulphate and there was a policemen standing outside wanting to know what was going on.
I remember Jubilee Day quite clearly, being on a boat with the Sex Pistols.
I haven't seen anything so violent before or since.
The way the police beat up Malcolm McLaren…
’ He still looks horrified at the idea of it.
‘I'm not saying any of it was great writing, but you can't beat a first-hand report.
Like Paul Weller's 18th birthday, going down to Twickenham in a mini-cab with him to try to meet Pete Townshend.
It was being in a position to suggest those things that gave it the edge.’
What else?
Fighting another NME writer over a woman; having a pint of beer in the Roxy with Robert Plant; realising that Sid Vicious could be fronted out because he only picked on those that he was likely to win against.
Bright enough to draw what he could from his NME days and survive outside, he's carved a unique niche for himself.
SOME OTHER NME OLD BOYS AND GIRLS WHO DONE GOOD
MICHAEL WINNER: Film reviewer in these pages in the '50s who went on to direct the Death Wish series, and step out with actress Jenny Seagrove.
Not sure if all that qualifies as ‘done good’.
CLIVE JAMES: The remarkably-featured TV talk guru was an albums reviewer in these pages in the late '60s.
CHRISSE HYND:(without the ‘E’ in those days) was an early '70s feature writer (speciality: Suzi Quatro!) who went on to have tons of hits with The Pretenders.
BOB GELDOF, saint and Boomtown Rat, was another who earned a crust writing features within these walls (see page 30 for amazing visual proof)
DAVE DORRELL, one half of M/A/R/R/S, went from writing about The Smiths here to 12 weeks at Number One with ‘Pump Up The Volume’.
PAT KANE, the ‘singing’ half of top jazzy-combo Hue and Cry, was the author of, among other things,NME 's now-legendary semiotic analysis of Mars Bars).
STUART COSGROVE, once Media Editor here, now a Big Cheese in independent TV production and a world expert on drugs (cf Hooked !)
JULIE BURCHILL: squeaky-voiced punk Boadicea left these pages to become top Mail On Sunday iconoclast and writer of sex 'n' shopping novels.
PAUL MORLEY: unintelligible art-punk mastermind (8,000 words on The Members!) now presents TV programmes that are on the other side while you're watching The Bill .
EDWIN POUNCEY: Renowned noisenik also better known as Savage Pencil, legendary ink-abuser responsible for classic sleeves from The Lurkers to Sonic Youth
NME hacks have spread through the world of pop journalism like a virus: the current editors and/or publishers of Q ,Vox ,Select ,The Face and Arena are all ex- NME grunts.
So you see, zere is no escape…
Other NME journalists who've had hits, indie or otherwise:
Queen of the tambourine (and 1,200 word Suzi Quatro profile) Chrissie Hynde (née Hynd)
Punk Boadicea turned columnist-with-attitude Julie Burchill
SET ADRIFT ON MEMORY DISCS
40 RECORDS THAT CAPTURED THE MOMENT
1952 and this groovy odyssey begins.
The pages of NME are on fire with angsty exchanges between trad jazzers and the ‘hep-cats’.
Sinatra is screen-testing for From Here To Eternity , Hank Williams is fixing to die, and rock'n'roll is jerking and bobbing — ready to go overground and transform the entire galaxy.
Then, as now, each year could be defined by one king-hell slice of perfect pop that said it all.
Here, then, is the music that hit the bullseye through all those changing styles, tastes, faces, fashions and fads of what we call ‘rock'n'roll’— the 40 tracks of our years
1952
‘Cry’ Johnnie Ray
POOR OLD Johnnie.
They tagged him the Nabob Of Sob, the Prince Of Wails and the Cry Guy.
The NME opens its books in '52 to find a ready-made freak out there, complete with hearing aid, nerves like a poodle and a ghoulish, wailing style — a lovely singing voice, if you went for self-pity and emotional incontinence.
The girls thought he was brill and ‘Cry’(released here in Jan '52) sells like anything.
Johnnie's boy-outsider style made Elvis and the rest possible — he was the prototype of the rock 'n' roll disaster area.
‘I am surrounded by a synthetic world of fantasy that I live in,’ Johnnie tells this paper on his first visit to the UK, the first of a million metaphysical whingeings to be directed towards the NME .
1953
‘CRYING IN THE CHAPEL’ The Orioles
‘THE ORIOLES probably started the whole R&B scene in black music.
They were innovators in that they were the first ones who didn't try to represent the melody as written.
They were the ones who  f—ed over melody and did it in their own way,’ said Bobby Schiffman of The Harlem Apollo.
‘Crying In The Chapel’ was first recorded by C&W singer Darrell Glenn in 1953 and immediately covered by The Orioles, a group headed by the glorious voice that was Sonny Tills.
Later, in 1965, Elvis Presley remembered the ditty and took it back up the charts.
1954
‘SHAKE, RATTLE AND ROLL’ Big Joe Turner
ALL THE way from Kansas City, Joseph Vernon Tucker was banging out loud, dirty and jumping blues songs with a southern flavour before the war.
By '51, he had 50 singles on the go, but '54 was the all-conquering year for Joe.
‘Shake, Rattle and Roll’ is a throbbing, sexquake of a song — masses of exciting carnal codes fêted by Joe's wobbly, shouting voice that stayed in the R&B charts for seven months.
Even a shite version by Bill Haley couldn't take away from the glory of Turner's creation.
How often do you get a 43-year-old singing that way now?
1955
‘TUTTI FRUTTI’ Little Richard
‘AWOPBOPALOOBOPAWOMBAMBOOM!’ declares the bloke with the panstick and mascara, as he goes frugging around the piano, flashes his gorgeous doll-eyes and makes some astonishing claims about a girl named Daisy.
She must have been an exceptional item, because Rich can hardly get the words out for trembling woooh noises and peculiar  scatological asides.
If Joe Turner sang about the anticipation of sex, then Little Richard was already in there with ‘Tutti Frutti’, embracing hormone-frenzy in all of its weird and fantastical varieties.
1956
‘HEARTBREAK HOTEL’ Elvis Presley
‘FROM OUT of the blue, 21-year-old Elvis Presley has rocketed on to the popular music scene with all the scorching fury of a meteor,’ reckon the NME on May 11, 1956.
Too fuggin' right; with the Sun Studios experiments in the previous two years, Presley had discovered some remarkable things in the music, and with a major label intro of ‘Heartbreak Hotel’ the rest of the world heard the news.
‘Heartbreak Hotel’ has much of the spooked-out feel of ‘Mystery Train’(a Sun label epic), plus tons of anguish and theatre and ripping guitars, all wrapped up in a lovely, echoey treatment.
For the John Lennons, Dylans and their like, this was the premier, rockin' agenda.
1957
‘WHOLE LOTTA SHAKIN’ GOIN' ON’Jerry Lee Lewis
TOMMY STEELE, the first Brit rocker, was doing the business in London, but across the pond, something far more disgusting and mercurial was on the move.
Jerry Lee was a pill-eating, gun-slinging yahoo who shagged his boozed up 13-year-old cousin and made tangible all the horror and lawlessness that was implicit on the Elvis records.
His wayward energies soon got him kicked out of the pop club, but ‘Shakin'’ is a magnificent entry, an untrammelled mother-humper of a tune.
1958
‘JOHNNY B GOODE’ Chuck Berry
‘HE COULD play the guitar just like a-ringing a bell.’
Well, that's not much use, is it?
Play, Johnny!
Play!
DING DING DING!
Despite this, ‘Johnny B Goode’ was the Chuck record that moved music one step away from R&B and rock'n'roll and into RAWK!
Yeah!
It also may be the first single to have celebrated the guitarist as icon and as such has been the target of many awful cover versions by people like Michael J Fox, who want to be guitar heroes.
1959
‘WHAT'D I SAY’ Ray Charles
RAY HAD a knack for singing a peppy tune, an impressive talent given that he'd been blind since the age of six (one of his last sights was the drowning of his brother) and a heroin addict for most of his adult days.
His early recordings were rather slick, but some musician friends turned him onto Gospel music and soon he was blasting away, moaning and chanting and stuffing in Latin rhythms and bits of C&W and inventing soul music along the way.
‘What'd I Say’ sounded so possessed that many radio stations refused to play it.
1960
‘WILL YOU STILL LOVE ME TOMORROW’ The Shirelles
TEEN ANGST taken to new extremes.
Where previous boy-girl ballads dealt with prom night nerves or playground jealousies.
The Shirelles sang about ‘doing it’.
Carole King, the sharpest female lyricist of all time, ponders going all the way and whether her lover would still respect her in the morning.
A pointed articulation of the oncoming New Permissiveness.
1961
‘RUNNING SCARED’ Roy Orbison
DITCHING HIS Sun rockabilly stance of the '50s, Orbison entered the new decade as the ultimate teen tragedian, the Johnnie Ray it was OK to like.
The typical Orbison single contained more drama and incident than the average 90-minute movie of the time, and ‘Running Scared’ was one of his finest.
A mini-opera of doubt, uncertainty and all-conquering love.
1962
‘YOU REALLY GOT A HOLD ON ME’ Smokey Robinson & The Miracles
‘I DON'T like you, but I love you…
’ More than any other writer or performer, it was Robinson who affirmed Motown as a major pop force to be reckoned with.
Smokey could churn out the dance stuff at will, but his voice truly took flight on shimmering smoochers like this.
Incredibly never a hit in Britain, ‘You Really Got A Hold On Me’ was ‘rediscovered’a year later by the Fab Four on their ‘With The Beatles’album.
1963
‘SHE LOVES YOU’ The Beatles
‘YEAH!
YEAH!
YEAH!’ is, of course, the only thing you really have to say about this record, the first DEAD LOUD pop song whose chorus was the most vulgar thing a British group had ever sung, whose chords were monsters, whose drums suggested the possibility of imminent noisy sex.
At once making Gerry And The Pacemakers, Buddy Holly, Pat Boone, The Shadows and Kenny Ball redundant and taking rock'n'roll away from white America — which had forgotten what to do with it —‘She Loves You’ is also the archetypal single from the archetypal pop group.
The NME called it ‘a bright, entertaining and catchy sample of the Mersey sound.’
Yowsa!
1964
‘YOU REALLY GOT ME’ The Kinks
REVIEWING IT in a contemporary pop mag, Des O'Connor noted ‘You Really Got Me’ 's resemblance to The Kingsmen's insane ‘Louie Louie’.
What Des failed to notice, however, was Dave Davies' splendid, absurd guitar solo, which, combined with the thumping moron riff and  stupido singing, makes ‘You Really Got Me’ the first HM record.
1965
‘LIKE A ROLLING STONE’ Bob Dylan
1965 WAS the year when rock'n'roll went barmy and deliciously productive.
The Rolling Stones released ‘Satisfaction’, The Byrds had ‘Mr Tambourine Man’, The Beatles banged out ‘Help’ and ‘Rubber Soul’and James Brown came through with ‘Papa's Got A Brand New Bag’.
Then you had Dylan with two of the most incendiary LPs ever (‘Bringing It All Back Home’ and ‘Highway 61 Revisited’), with ‘Like A Rolling Stone’arriving in the middle of all this — six minutes of majestic, wiggy wordswirls.
The length of this diatribe was something; the sneering voice and the ‘vomitific’ writing style was another revolutionary deal, a pop put-down of Miss Lonely, a slumming, rich-kid friend that used every molecule of Dylan's bitchy talents.
From here on in, surfacing as a nasty, clever bastard became a valid career move in rock.
1966
‘PET SOUNDS’ The Beach Boys
BRIAN WILSON, The Beach Boys' goofy, gifted auteur , decided he was going to whup Phil Spector and The Beatles — the former in the immense production stakes, the latter on the ability to craft an album of thematically linked, consistently great songs.
‘Pet Sounds’ was all of that: big fluffy clouds of studio-driven glory and a mass of dreamy, angsty impressions about falling in love and growing up and feeling extraordinarily sensitised about life's rich business.
‘I have lately become very aware of the spiritual side of life,’ Brian tells the NME just before his head explodes trying to make a follow-up.
1967
‘THE VELVET UNDERGROUND AND NICO’ The Velvet Underground And Nico
JUST AS the world succumbed to the vile peace and love mumblings of ‘Sgt Pepper’ and San Francisco flower-in-the-hair wearers, former session hack Lou Reed, art bod John Cale and friends teamed up with foghorn-voiced German model Nico and made the album without which no-one from The Jesus And Mary Chain to Ride would have a clue.
‘Produced’ by Andy Warhol, ‘The Velvet Underground And Nico’is 45 minutes of drugs, death, grunge production, atonality and sick melody.
From ‘Waiting For The Man’ to ‘All Tomorrow's Parties’, this is anti-hippy New York hate and as such has no peer.
1968
‘JUMPING JACK FLASH’ The Rolling Stones
FED UP with being Beatles copyists, the Stones invented the riff that would sustain them forever, flipped the finger to the authorities that wanted them jailed, punched hippies in the throat and threw the blues into a seething vat of hydrochloric sex acid.
From the revving intro to Jagger's absurd Robert-Johnson-on-the-acid vocals, ‘Jumping Jack Flash’ single-handedly did change the face of rock, and for the first time provided a fitting soundtrack for The Rolling Stones as devil bastards from Planet Murder.
1969
‘ASTRAL WEEKS’ Van Morrison
‘THE LOVE that loves to love the love that loves the love that loves to love…
’ You want intense?
Van Morrison had intense by the barrowload on ‘Astral Weeks’.
A crystallisation of hundreds of currents, from Gaelic lyricism, personal reminiscence, folk, pop, soul, Dylan, emotion, pain, salvation and the best string arrangements of all time, ‘Astral Weeks’ still sounds like nothing else ever recorded; it is a unique album whose experiments and innovations have often been imitated (those who have tried, like Mike Scott, how had a plough through ‘Sweet Thing’, have made appalling fools of themselves) but no-one — not even Van — has ever come close to its achievements.
1970
‘LIVE AT LEEDS’ The Who
SEVEN MILLION tons of feedback and distortion, teeth-grindingly immense versions of ‘Summertime Blues’ and ‘Shakin' All Over’, with Roger Daltrey twirling the microphone above his head like a helicopter a lot— it was a classy night out, alright.
This was The Who touching down after the conceptual splurge of ‘Tommy’, knocking out faves like ‘Magic Bus’ and re-reading touchstone '50s songs in a deranged but affectionate way.
‘Live At Leeds’ is therefore one of the first ‘back-to-roots’live albums (witness subsequent efforts like ‘The Song Remains The Same’and ‘Rattle And Hum’), as well as a taster for how grossly ugly the '70s were going to be.
1971
‘WHAT'S GOING ON’ Marvin Gaye
THIS, ALONG with Sly's ‘There's A Riot Going On’, attempted to articulate a black America dazed and confused by the failure of the Civil Rights movement and the continuing disaster of Vietnam.
Where Sly went for an inward-looking drum-numbed indifference (made bearable, glamorous even, by a wonderfully impenetrable jungle funk), Gaye wrought a song cycle that takes the whole world through doubt, disillusion, destruction and eventual redemption through the power of love and community.
Stunningly arranged and orchestrated and devastatingly sung, it changed our expectations of soul, indeed of all pop, forever.
1972
‘THE HARDER THEY COME’ Various Artists
THE WAILERS' ‘Catch A Fire’ was out by then, sure, but it was this soundtrack (to a fantastic star-shoots-his-way-out-of-the-ghetto film starring Jimmy Cliff) which finally and unimpeachably established the fact that skinhead ska really had metamorphosed into rude boy reggae and that the island of Jamaica was about to embark on a decade of musical creativity unmatched anywhere before or since.
Hyperbole?
Listen to this stuff — boss, beautifully primitive sounds from The Maytals, Desmond Dekker, Scotty, Cliff himself and the Slickers' ultimate wild youth anthem ‘Johnny Too Bad’— and believe …
1973
‘20TH CENTURY BOY’ T-Rex
‘NUR NA NA NA/NUR NA NUR NUR!’ went the riff.
Led Zeppelin for teenagers, Bolan in very metal guru mode, sexy and loud.
‘20th Century Boy’ is the moment where glam meets rock, where the oafish Sweet were shown the door and David Bowie's hopes of being The Velvet Underground (only attractive) were dashed against the bejewelled rocks of his own ego forever.
After this, most T-Rex records were rubbish, but who cares?
‘NUR NA NA NA/NUR NA NUR NUR!’
1974
‘TALES FROM TOPOGRAPHIC OCEANS’ Yes
FOR MOST of the '70s and all of the '80s, this monumental folly-cum- tour de force was universally derided as the cypher standing for all that was preposterous about the British progressive rock movement.
Nowadays, with psychedelic craziness back on the agenda, it seems overdue for a revival.
Not that the earnest Yes bear any resemblance to  Primal Scream, but maybe the '90s will look a little more kindly on this fantastic and ludicrously over-ambitious piece.
Put simply, ‘TFTO’ is an attempt to illustrate the whole development of human thought and culture in a double album of quasi-classical gonzo rock (though Yes head honcho Jon Anderson puts it a whole lot more verbosely in his very silly liner notes).
When it's bad, it's dire, but when it's good ie, the visceral guitar madness of ‘The Ancient’ or the percussive fury of ‘Ritual’, it's actually pretty amiable.
If nothing else, it has cast a mighty long shadow down the years.
If your idea of bliss is a 20-minute semi-symphonic blow-out called ‘The Revealing Science Of God’, get that mid-price CD now!
1975
‘AUTOBAHN’ Kraftwerk
BEEP BEEP!
Cunningly disguised as an electronic novelty record, ‘Autobahn’ is in reality a tribute to the German motorway system and the ordered freedom it brings.
The lyrics, in English and in their entirety, are ‘We drive/We drive/On the motorway’, thereby precluding any Bruce Springsteen-style nonsense about the wind in one's hair and a girl on the pillion.
‘Autobahn’ seeped into the ears of a pre-punk generation to emerge, fully formed, in the 1980s as electro-pop and avant-garde synth music.
Hurray!
1976
‘ANARCHY IN THE UK’ The Sex Pistols
‘I THINK your record is lousy,’ writes an NME saddo in '76, ‘…
Johnny Rotten sings flat, the song is laughably naive, and the overall feeling is of a third-rate Who imitation, but even so there's a certain neurotic aggression that distinguishes it from the rest of this week's insipid bunch.’
Nevertheless, a billion excitable spike-heads shout ‘Bog off, daddy-o!’ as the Sex Pistols embark on a king-hell programme of sulphate-snorting, icon-busting magnificence, and the cosmos is never the same again.
1977
‘LOW’ David Bowie
THE COUNTRY's on its knees and snotty kids in bin-liners are abroad in the cities.
David Bowie, one of the last rock musicians to mean anything, is in the thrall of smack and depression and has holed up in Berlin to brood.
Out of this unlikely scenario comes one of the most awkward, unclassifiable, brazenly catchy and bleakly powerful albums of the pop era.
‘Low’ is right out there somewhere but Bowie has never sounded more masterful.
Cyber-punk bubblegum (‘Sound And Vision’, ‘Speed Of Life’) vies with biker torch songs (‘What In The World’, ‘Be My Wife’) and, in a curious, brave and cocky gambit, a whole side is given over to Bowie's new love, his opaque and enigmatic instrumental collaboration with Eno.
However long ago it was made, ‘Low’ will always sound like the future.
1978
‘PUBLIC IMAGE’ Public Image Ltd
PUNK ROCK has already become horribly stymied, yet bands like Magazine and The Banshees are checking out the fresher, stranger places to take the music.
So Johnny Rotten changes his name, finds a bunch of left-field players and stakes out a gamey musical patch with ‘Public Image’— a future-tense, dub-disco, self-conscious rant with spidery guitar frills.
Suddenly it was cool to be ‘progressive’ again.
1979
‘GOOD TIMES’ Chic
IT MIGHT be quicker to list the things that this record didn't invent.
The career of artists as diverse as Queen and Public Enemy would have been very different if Nile Rodgers and Bernard Edwards hadn't come up with this landmark tune.
The whole  thang is bigger than the sum of its parts, but the parts are pretty tremendous too; a shimmering funk arrangement, a mordantly witty lyric extolling the virtues of the unashamedly high life (‘Clams on the half-shell/And roller skate, roller skate’ indeed!) and that uncoiling, insinuating bass riff that stopped the world in its tracks.
Goodbye disco, hello rap music, hello New Romanticism, hello the 1980s!
1980
‘CLOSER’ Joy Division
WHEN JOY Division recorded ‘Closer’, they weren't to know it was their last album.
Or were they?
How else do you explain this record?
After the febrile, twitching neurosis of ‘Unknown Pleasures’, ‘Closer’ is the sound of a defeated but dignified reconciliation with the world and its punishments.
It begins with the fetid and claustrophobic ‘Atrocity Exhibition’ and slowly works towards its grave and deadly conclusion; the dank and timeless sadness of ‘The Eternal’and the twilight romance of ‘Decades’.
But let's not get too heavy.
The legendary ‘Here are the young men/The weight on their shoulders’ line is reputedly Curtis taking the piss out of Echo And The Bunnymen.
If so, it's the one black joke in a masterpiece of imperious gloom.
1981
‘ADVENTURES ON THE WHEELS OF STEEL’ Grandmaster Flash
WHAT THE  f— was that , asked Britain's disoriented youth, as a bonkers DJ from New York made a record out of bits of other people's tunes — splicing up Queen, Blondie and Chic, cross-referencing lyrics and scra-scra-scratching the needle back over the same stretch of vinyl.
We'd already come to know rapping via The Sugarhill Gang's success a couple of years before, but this was a novel thing, a glimpse of what music would be like in the future.
1982
‘DO YOU REALLY WANT TO HURT ME?’
Culture Club
YOU CAN always spot people who don't know anything about pop music when they can't tell the blokes from the women on records.
Boy George caused terrific confusion and ambiguous squaddie stiffies when he became the archetypal 1982 pop star — cross-dressing, camp, six foot tall and sexy.
‘Do You Really Want To Hurt Me’ was total '80s pop, all glamour, gold, harmony and, as they used to say in them days, like punk never happened.
1983
‘BLUE MONDAY’ New Order
BY 1983, New Order had three things: a deep desire to break away from the son-of-Joy-Division guitar glaciers with which they'd become associated, a new-found interest in the electro dance vibe that was filling the UK's clubs, and a brand new drum machine.
With these — and one of Peter Hook's patented lead bass lines — they fashioned an orgy of percussive brutality and plaintive pleadings.
Bits of it actually sound accidental , but that only adds to the shocking brilliance of a record that allowed rock a way into the previously terrifying world of dance, and that showed dance a way forward too.
Still the biggest selling independent single of all time, and not without reason.
1984
‘THE SMITHS’ The Smiths
AFTER TWO singles, it was ridiculously clear that The Smiths were one of the most exciting groups in years.
After this debut LP, it became plain that we were talking a complete re-think about English pop.
Salvaged in days after a disastrous false start, it's tempting now to think of ‘The Smiths’ as merely an hors d'oeuvres for what was to come but that is to forget the vigour/languor with which this entered the lives of a generation.
There was no precedent for this holy marriage of radiant beat tunes and absorbing, idiosyncratic words and few parallels since, no matter how hard a welter of imitators tried.
Maybe ‘The Queen Is Dead’ is better (only maybe) but by then we had grown to expect the remarkable as a matter of course.
1985
‘PSYCHOCANDY’ The Jesus And Mary Chain
HOW, SEVEN years on, do you explain the impact of this life-saving record?
Suffice to say that, with the exception of The Smiths, Britrock's fields were an arid desert, seemingly beyond resuscitation.
And then…this .
A tidal wave of untrammelled rock noise and imagery, an overpowering siren screaming from the world where leather jackets, switchblade kisses and girls with mouths that kill still mean something.
OK, so it spawned a slew of pathetic imitators, but they're all gone now and ‘Psychocandy’ still remains — black and hard and juddering, the guitar highpoint of the '80s.
1986
‘KISS’ Prince
‘KISS’ IS the record that made Prince unnecessary; it contains everything that is great about him and after he had released it, he could quite easily have gone to live on the Moon and he would not have been missed.
‘Kiss’ is sexy, funny, daft, sounds like James Brown, Sly Stone, T-Rex, jazz, pop, funk, does not outstay its welcome by a nano-second and Prince comes over all funny when — during the guitar solo — he ecstatically declares ‘Ooooh.
Little Wendy's gonna play now.
Ooh!’
‘Kiss’ is a perfect record.
1987
‘PUMP UP THE VOLUME’ M/A/R/R/S
BITS OF Colourbox and AR Kane got to hang out with CJ Mackintosh the DJ plus conceptual obermeister /NME vet Dave Dorrell, and together they made a dance record that was different from everything before.
It didn't have a chorus and the bass line was frug heaven and guitars were abstract-sounding while the new thing, digital sampling, was in there somewhere too.
House music was taking over the galaxy, and this was an indication that you could do whatever the hell you liked with the genre.
1988
‘IT TAKES A NATION OF MILLIONS TO HOLD US BACK’ Public Enemy
THE ALBUM that launched a thousand NME headlines and, more pertinently, confirmed once and for all that rap was no passing fad and was, in fact, nothing less than an art form.
A quantum leap on from PE's brilliant debut, ‘Nation Of Millions’ is a perpetual catherine wheel of militant ideas, brain scrambling noises, language loops and old fashioned hooks.
It was, and is, a steel gauntlet to the mush of the ‘rap's not real music’ whiners.
As great an album as any genre has produced — TURN IT UP!
1989
‘FOOLS GOLD’ The Stone Roses
‘SIMPLY STUNNING, a rhythmic, hypnotic, widescreen wah-wah washed, mind-widening chunk of funk, it'll scare the reproductive organs off yer guitar purists, but ‘Fools Gold’ is nigh genius; their finest ten minutes to date reiterating what we already knew — that the Roses are a great band — and confirms what we blithely guessed, that they are going to be MASSIVE,’says Danny Kelly.
1990
‘LOADED’ Primal Scream
ONCE UPON a time Primal Scream were a dismal Byrds-obsessed ‘C86’ jangle rock band with a biker fetish.
Then drug culture happened and Bobby Gillespie discovered dance music and Andy Weatherall.
‘Loaded’, in Weatherall's hands, was transformed from a Suzuki rock anthem into a frightening bastard big brother to ‘Sympathy For The Devil’ /‘You Can't Always Get What You Want’-era Stones.
It spawned a trillion imitators and forced Primal Scream to become space-age voodoo rave psychedelecists.
Which is a good thing.
1991
‘NEVERMIND’ Nirvana
‘NIRVANA HAVE made an LP which is not only better than anything they've ever done before, it'll stand up as a new reference point for the future post-hardcore generation,’ confirms Steve Lamacq, as ‘Nevermind’makes a gigantic, instantaneous cross-over, welcomed by all of the diverse colonies like hardcore, HM — anybody that's partial to vitriol and cool tunes, attitude and your classic, penned-in teenage howl.
‘Nevermind’ catches the industry with its proverbial kecks down and the plan is once more in pieces, peculiar and all-possible.
Plainly, rock'n'roll is a durable item, and after 40 years, Big Fun is still to be found within this excellent medium.
Hooray!
STARS ON 45
The notion of a Single Of The Week started to creep into the NME about 1974 and has now become a staple part of our weekly rock diet.
But is this much sought-after — and, despite constant hints from us, never bought — accolade, any guide to ‘Making It’ in the wonderful world of popular music?
Not necessarily…
Who, for instance, criticism-wise, is the most successful singles artist of the NME era?
Erm, CHAMPION DOUG VEITCH, actually.
Yes, that's Doug Veitch, self-styled king of Caledonian Cajun swing, who flourished briefly in the London drinking holes of the mid-'80s.
Of his six singles, no less than four achieved the hallowed status of NME Single Of The Week, an amazing success rate that no-one else can touch.
The honour of the most SOTW awards goes, to no-one's particular amazement since they make millions of records every fortnight and are beloved of rock hacks everywhere, to THE FALL.
Here's the full list of those who've achieved multiple recognition in the section they're all calling The Singles page.
IN QUAD WE TRUST
HI-FI FADS AND FLOPS 1952 –'92; Sitting comfortably, idly flicking the shuffle function on your CD remote whilst musing on the stereo imaging afforded by the new Digital Compact Cassette players?
Then spare a thought for the poor sods stuck with eight-track cartridge players, quadrophonic sound, Betamax videos and stereos with two needles.
Just to prove it wasn't all matt black phonographic excellence back in '52, FRED DELLAR rummages in his attic for the real history of recorded sound…
1952: The first stereo discs are released.
But they feature two separate mono tracks on one record and are playable by means of a tandem arm kitted out with two cartridges.
In Britain, HMV release 45 rpm singles during October.
EMI also announce their first batch of 33 rpm albums .
But Decca has been releasing such goodies since 1950, EMI adopting a wait-and-see policy.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the Atlantic, Americans have been enjoying Microgroove releases since 1948!
NME publishes the first-ever UK singles chart in the week ending November 8.
The initial Number One is Al Martino 's ‘Here In My Heart’, an almost operatic ballad.
It clings to pole position for nine straight weeks.
1953: A new UK label,Philips , is launched in January using the slogan ‘Records Of The Century’.
By April a Philips single, ‘I Believe’ by Frankie Laine , is top of the charts and proves to be another nine-weeks-at-the-top monster.
1954: Studios move into the future, as stereo recording on tape becomes the norm.
The move is helped by the invention of Mylar, a polyester-based film that takes the place of the brittle acetate — up to that point the only suitable produce for tape recording.
Bill Haley records ‘Rock Around The Clock’, the first rock'n'roll hit.
1955: During the year EMI deletes some 7,500 titles, the majority of them being 78 rpm discs .
The Polydor label takes its bow in Britain.
EMI buys Capitol Records.
1956: As ‘Talking Book’16 rpm albums are released in Germany, UK Decca report that they are working on a single-groove stereo disc, as visualised by a certain Alan Blumlein way back in 1931.
But, while the wait for the modern stereo disc continues, stereo tapes are released for the home market.
And Ampex produces the first video recorder .
1957: America's Westrex Corp produces a successful single-track stereo disc .
RCA also come up with a tape cassette but shelve the idea as LPs begin to dominate the audio market.
1958: Audio Fidelity, a record company noted for excellent-sounding discs, markets the first commercial stereo discs in the USA.
Pye takes the lead in Britain, with EMI and Decca following later in the year.
A new British label is announced — Fontana, a Philips offshoot.
Also in '58, the first LP to sell one million copies is announced — the Original Cast's version of ‘My Fair Lady ’.
1959: On January 31 virtually every remaining 78 rpm disc in the EMI catalogue is deleted.
As stereo discs become popular, four-track home tape records begin appearing in audio shop windows.
A British company, Garrard, manufactures the forerunner of the modern cassette system using standard width tape and two five-inch spools.
But the lack of true miniaturisation proves its downfall.
Orchestra conductor Hermann Scherchen invents a system called a ‘Stereophoner ’ that enables mono discs to provide a stereo sound by splitting output frequencies and feeding the results into two speakers.
The device is cheap and works.
Interest is minimal.
1960: The Warner Bros label makes its UK debut with April releases by the Everly Brothers ,Bill Haley ,Connie Stevens and Ed ‘Kookie’ Byrnes from the TV series 77 Sunset Strip .
1961:The Beatles make their first recording as The Beat Brothers , for Polydor in Germany.
1962: EMI introduces its Stateside label, licensing material from scores of US companies including A&M ,Tamla Motown ,Vee Jay and ABC , all of whom have no British outlets of their own.
Island Records also takes a bow, Island WI 001 being ‘Independent Jamaica’ by Lord Creator , a record celebrating Jamaica's independence within the Commonwealth.
1963: A cassette-tape system, very similar to those in use today, is demonstrated at a Berlin hi-fi show.
On the disc front, Island launch UK Sue Records , an R&B label.
The first release (in December 1963) is Inez and Charlie Foxx 's ‘Mockingbird’.
1964: On March 31,The Beatles hi-jack the US charts.
The week's singles listing shows the Fabs occupying the complete Top Five, with ‘Twist And Shout’ at Number One, followed by ‘Can't Buy Me Love’(2), ‘She Loves You’(3), ‘I Want To Hold Your Hand’(4) and ‘Please, Please Me’(5).
In the album charts, the foursome also grab the top two positions with ‘Meet The Beatles’(1) and ‘Introducing The Beatles’(2).
1965:Tamla Motown becomes a UK label in its own right during March, the first singles stemming from The Supremes ,.
During November, Philips launch the mini-cassette for home consumption.
At the same time there is a major launch for a rival format, the eight-track cartridge , which uses an endless loop system and seems likely to sweep the in-car market.
Which it does for several years.
1966: Dr Ray Dolby develops his Dolby noise reduction system .
Dolby A becomes the norm in professional tape mastering, while the Dolby B version is taken up by manufacturers of domestic tape decks and software.
1967: Say hello to the Stax label, with initial releases that include ‘Memphis Gold’, ‘Hit The Road Stax’,Booker T & The MGs ’‘And Now’ plus Sam & Dave 's ‘Double Dynamite’.
Liberty Records opens a London office.
1968: MCA sets up a British operation.
And The Beatles launch Apple Records .
1969: The record companies drop retail price maintenance.
Until this time, record prices have been kept at exactly the same level in every shop in the country.
But, just before a case is due to be argued in the Restrictive Practices Court, the British Phonographic Industry pulls out and price-fixing ends.
The first price war begins in British record shops.
And in Neasden,A&M opens a shop in a rented room.
John Peel and Clive Selwood launch Dandelion , a label that's destined never to make a profit.
1970: Philips unveil a video cassette recording system at the International Music Industry Conference but, as usual, another company emerges with a rival cartridge concept.
The DBX noise reduction system is introduced.
During June,Pickwick International releases the UK's first pre-recorded budget cassette.
Titled ‘Top Of The Pops’, it emerges on the company's Hallmark label and retails for 29s 6d instead of the usual 47s 6d for pop cassettes.
Warner Bros release the first picture disc album —‘Airconditioning’ by Curved Air .
1971: After stereo comes quadrophonic — a four-track sound system that requires special equipment and four speakers.
EMI releases a seven-inch single playing at 33 rpm —Grand Funk Railroad 's ‘Inside Looking Out’— but the format is quickly dropped.
Richard Branson opens a shop in London's Oxford Street, flogs bootlegs and other desirables — and takes over £6,000 in his first week.
1972: Quad comes to Britain, but there's no standardised system.
Records made by one manufacturer will not play on equipment designed with rival configurations in mind.
The result is ultimately destined to be a four-track flop.
Plygram is formed — a company whose network spans 16 countries.
Once the preferred listening format of Capri drivers everywhere, now the treasured heirlooms of a few, sad fans of wow and flutter — eight-track cartridges, NME salutes you!
John: ‘A couple more of these nicked Little Richard riffs and we'll be able to afford a mic each, lads!’
Ringo: ‘Who's Mike?’
1973: EMI announces that, from August onwards, all its cassettes, cartridges and quad releases will be Dolbyised.
Philips, who have refused to accept the existence of eight-track cartridges, feeling that all their efforts should be channelled into forwarding the advance of the cassette, finally cave in and begin marketing cartridges themselves.
phonogram announces that its best-selling cassette to date is ‘The Best Of The Stylistics ’, which has sold 133,000 copies.
Richard Branson launched Virgin Records and notches a huge money-spinner with the label's first album —Mike Oldfield 's ‘Tubular Bells’.
Virgin shortly release ‘The Faust Tapes’, an album that retails for just 48p.
1974:TV advertised discs go into overdrive as Arcade ,K-Tel and Ronco plough over one million into the UK music biz.
1975: The Betamax VCR system, the first video system available for home use, arrives during Mary.
1976: The first-ever Stiff single,Nick Lowe 's ‘So It Goes’, gets an August 14 release.
In November the same label issues The Damned 's ‘New Rose’, hailed by many as the first true punk single.
At the year's end Buzzcocks record their ‘Spiral Scratch ’ LP and herald the beginning of the do-it-yourself indie scene.
In London's Notting Hill,Geoff Travis opens his Rough Trade shop.
1977: Virgin release Steve Hillage 's ‘Rainbow Dome Music’, reputed to be the first clear vinyl album.
Wings' ‘Mull Of Kintyre’, issued in November, becomes the first single to sell over two million copies in the UK.
1978:Metal tape makes a bow — and cassettes benefit from increased dynamic range.
1979: Virtually every music lover in the entire world becomes oblivious to all other extraneous noises as Sony launches the Walkman .
Amazingly, all Sony's competitors doubt the success of the mini-portable and fail to come up with rival versions for almost a year.
1980: UK Decca is taken over by the growing giant that is Polygram.
1981: The year of medley madness — over 20 arrive in the shops within a few weeks, the tally including ‘Stars On 45 Vols 1 & 2’, ‘Hollie Daze’, ‘Beach Boy Gold’, ‘A Tribute To The Punks Of '76’ and a ‘Supremes Medley’.
1982:Compact discs make their debut.
Noel Edmonds presides over a launch party in London, but the demo machine doesn't function all that well.
Even so, vinyl receives its first notification of redundancy.
1983: Decca UK changes its name to London Records .
It's reported that the price of CD players will shortly tumble as Matsushita market a machine that retails for the low price of £280 — about half the price of the company's launch model.
Philips display a prototype in-car CD player at a Berlin hi-fi show.
1984: Shock horror as authority takes exception to the amount of obscenity on record.
Police raid Norwich's Spectrum Records and seize seven discs on the Crass label and two on Cherry Red , amongst others.
Records by Dead Kennedys ,Crass and Icons Of Filth are played in court but the case involving one disc is thrown out because the magistrates cannot hear the lyric!
Amstrad 's ad for a double-headed cassette player also heads into a court-action, as the BPI anti- home-taping folk nearly have a heart-attack.
The first ‘Now That's What I Call Music ’ compilation arrives.
1985: The BPI admit that home-taping has become a way of life and produces a booklet that estimates some 466 million hours of music were taped in the home during 1983 alone.
During May, Polygram sells it millionth CD.
And HMV ,Tower and Virgin all announce plans to build record superstores in London.
1986: The first pirate CD is reported.
It originates in Denmark and contains early Elvis Presley tracks.
EMI state: ‘In Denmark, where copyright expires in 25 years, they're legal.
But in the UK copyright lasts for 50 years, so they can't be sold here.’
The Discman , a small,portable CD player , makes its debut.
1987: During September,Music Week announces: ‘At last,DAT has arrived’ and hails digital audio tape , a kind of super cassette developed by Sony .
Boasting a sound equivalent to that of CDs, it would seem to be a contender.
But the price, as far as the home market is concerned, is prohibitive, with initial machines costing £1,200 while two-hour blank tapes are priced at £10 a time.
1988:Low-price £2.99 CDs make an appearance in UK shops.
They are mainly culled from old and sometimes dubious material, but there's a bargain here and there and the trend is welcomed by hard-up punters.
EMI announces that, by March, virtually everything ever released by The Beatles will be available in CD form.
Tandy , an American company, claim to have invented a recordable CD system.
But there are those who prefer to promote the rumour that CDs are hardly long-lasting and likely to self-destruct after a few years.
Also in America, Berry Gordy sells Motown Records to MCA and Boston Ventures, a Massachusetts banking firm, for a reputed $61 million.
Compact-disc video makes its entry into the British marketplace during October, but punters generally can't afford any new format because they are buying the various versions of singles that are deluging the record shops.
Someone estimates that the average number of formats for each single is four.
Voice Of The Beehive 's ‘I Say Nothing’ comes as a seven-inch, a 12″, a shaped disc, a compact disc, two specially packaged seven-inches and two 12″ remixes!
1989: As CD outsells vinyl for the first time , rumours are rife about the impending arrival of a blank,recordable CD .
Polygram goes shopping again and this time buys A&M and Island Records.
1990: In February, the US Tower Records chain issues its store managers with an instruction not to purchase any new seven-inch vinyl singles .
But, as vinyl hits its final downward path, Tokyo's Finail Technology company introduces the first laser turntable for vinyl discs .
‘Nothing touches the record.
No scratching.
No grinding.
No contact.
No wear’ reads the promo ad.
If only it had come a few years earlier.
1991: Recordable CD (CD-R ) becomes a reality, with demonstrations of a Denon -manufactured system at a September hi-fi show held at a Heathrow hotel pulling huge crowds; the time when punters can make their own CD compilations looms ever nearer.
Hopefully they will not include Bryan Adams' ‘(Everything I Do) I Do It For You’, which grabs the Number One spot in the UK singles chart and remains there for an unprecedented 16 weeks .
1992: It's announced in Las Vegas that yet another new music format, the Digital Compact Cassette , will be launched in September.
And, as Sony announce that their recordable-erasable 2.5″ Mini Disc , providing 74 minutes of digital recording, will be available to consumers later in the year, vinyl heads for its final tumble in the UK as the WH Smith chain sells off all its old stock at giveaway prices to make more room for CDs, cassettes and videos.
Answers on a postcard please, to: ‘My dad spent precious florins on useless hi-fi accessories’ at the usual NME address
The '70s energy crisis gave us the world's first solar-powered loudspeaker.
Probably
The Walkman: an end to domestic intercourse as we knew it, or a handy educational tool for budding DIY types?
Who cares…
‘Yeah, nice one Richard, but shouldn't it be called ‘Tubular Bongs’?’
An early Virgin Records A&R meeting (allegedly)
Is it any wonder the Stowaway was such a huge success?
Morrissey's very own picture disc!
Not quite as big as a CD.
Not half as good either: All hail the mini disc!
SOMETIMES WE GET IT RIGHT…
‘Never judge a book by its cover’ goes the old adage.
This is all very well if you're into those book-type things.
If, however, top-selling weekly music papers are more your cup of tea, then this well-worn proverb goes right out of the window.
To whit: ALWAYS judge the NME by its cover!
Page One, as it's known, of this most influential organ, is like no other page.
It is the one that speaks volumes, the one that counts, the sleeve upon which NME wears its heart.
It's the part that catches your eye on WH Smith's ankle-height shelf, it is the visual reference point, the crux .
Not only does it influence whether or not you fork out the requisite 65p, it can make or break a band.
Since 1972, it would be true to say that the NME cover cannot be bought.
Prior to this date, the cover took the rather uninspired form of an A3 advertisement paid for by one of the big record companies.
Cynics would suggest that an under-the-counter version of this system still applies — but they would be wrong.
The decision over who goes on the cover is one that causes all the wailing and gnashing of teeth and stamping of feet every week.
Editors threaten to resign, partisan journalists are foolhardy enough to stake their reputation on an act charting the following week, anxious record company operatives jam the switchboard — and all over one editorial decision about which photograph to use.
There are only 51 of these decisions in a year, admittedly, and the kudos connected with ‘getting the NME cover’ is a priceless commodity.
Sometimes it's a story that lends itself to cover status — from The Four Skins/race riot report in '81 to the death of Will Synott last year — but more often than not,NME 's prime site acts as a simple celebration of an act's greatness.
That week.
As a handy visual rundown of rock'n'roll heritage, as a gallery of photographic brilliance, or as an ordnance survey map of the NME 's changing landscape over 40 years, the covers provide a rich and colourful parade of faces, fads, guitars, deserts, baseball caps, and people's backs.
Here then, is our own selection of some of the greatest NME covers of the past four decades.
And if that's too back-slappy for you, over the page is a spread of the worst .
Enjoy.
In bed with Morrissey.
Us?
Yeah, a bit, but oh the shock of a publication with no words on the cover.
And, personalities aside, what a beautiful image…
The ‘Sinatra/Jagger/Jive Bunny's Back’ joke has seen us through many a long winter.
Here's an early, and rather startling, example of the genre.
Sometimes we do get fooled by all that beautifully packaged, silver-tongued hype of the record companies.
And sometimes we don't.
While the rest of Britain fopped about in lace-fronted pinafores and all the other collected frippery of the New Romanticism, NME smashed you in the teeth with Henry Rollins' forearm.
The Clash (Potential): Stark, fiercesome, bold; just like the band itself.
Elvis was a hero to millions, but every other paper, hogtied by the new Punk orthodoxy, slagged the burger king off when he popped it.
NME flew in the face of such reactionary tosh.
It's not all coke-snortin' trips to LA.
Music — the hateful youth supremacy of Oi — was the catalyst for a mob outrage in Southall.
You can't bury your head.
The Clash (Legacy): A classic image burned indelibly on the retina of rock.
Most of our covers, to be sure, confirm and approve the tastes and prejudices of our readers.
But a rare one — often the best ones — challenge them.
The ‘Bowie's Back’ cliché and in glorious colour.
With whom will  we be doing this in the year 2004?
Sometimes a single image says more about a time, a scene or a group than any amount of blather and jive ever can.
The face of bemused opposition.
It wasn't just the major record companies that found themselves unable to cope with '89's burgeoning Rave scene.
Occasionally, it's the image broadcast first from the cover of the NME that defines a band, that sticks with them forever.
…
AND SOMETIMES WE DON'T
‘It was a quiet week…
The interview fell through at the last minute…
We were convinced the single would go storming into the Top 20…it was the best we could do with that photo session…‘
These are just some of the excuses you'll hear after what's deemed a ‘bad’ cover.
You never know it's a bad cover until afterwards, of course— plus, it's all in the eye of the beholder anyway.
One man's Derek B is another man's Morrissey.
However, lined up alongside such vintage stuff as seen on Pages 48 and 49, we think you'll agree that the following rogues' gallery is a pretty ropey showing.
The NME at its least incisive, least selective, least artful and most un-excellent!
Blame cannot be laid at the doorstep of any single photographer, designer, journalist or editor — this is not intended as a smug pop at our predecessors, nor a dig at individuals.
No, the bad cover is always a committee cock-up, a sign of its times, or at the very least, one that got away…
Once again, enjoy.
April 5 1975 His latest album was ‘The Myths And Legends Of King Arthur And The Knights Of The Round Table’.
‘Nuff said.
April 19 1975 A slant-eyed look at Japanese rock, sensitively headlined ‘Lock'n'Loll’ inside.
Crass racism?
We got it.
Dec 18 1982 ‘Next year they'll be battling it out with Wham!’ said one Gavin Martin of Glasgow's Set The Tone.
Amazingly, he is still working.
Sep 10 1983 Why was Virginia Astley on the cover?
Check that week's opposition — Animal Nightlife, Alan Vega, Squeezzzzz…
Oct 2 1983 Industrial metal-bashing was the shoe-gazing of its day.
And SPK were its Chapterhouse.
‘Nuff said.
KER-LLANGGG!!!
Dec 24 1983 Modern Yuletide office quip: ‘Well, if the Stone Roses session falls through, we can always use a silhouette of Father Christmas…‘
Nov 17 1984 Don't know much about art, but we know we don't like this kiddy cartoon of a ZZ Top car with a hat on
Nov 23 1985 Debate rages over whether this notorious period was an intellectual renaissance or indulgo-dilettante ego-tossery.
You decided.
April 5 1986 Alternatively, born to have two more Top 60 smashes and die like dogs.
Doesn't Mr Hipsway look cool, ladies?
April 11 1987 Take note of the writer who gave the world Baby Amphetamine in 1987 — three Virgin shopgirls in a massive Alan McGee scam.
Sep 19 1987 A long and complex office-political story lies behind this '80s classic — a cover story that is exactly half a page long inside.
Don't ask.
April 30 1988 Warning: Never use rubbish Minder -esque Cockney colloquialisms on NME covers.
Or Nasty Rox Inc.
July 23 1988 The Hothouse Flowers.
Barefoot Gaelic troubadour joie de vivre captured, well, somewhere else, frankly.
Dec 10 1988 Pick yourself up, gentle reader — we apologise for knocking you sideways with this psychedelic carnival of visuals and ideas.
May 8 1976 An early influence on Jonathan King's Revolution magazine, this one.
Sep 27 1975 The majestic drug-crazed poet warrior that was Jim Morrison, and, erm, this Sixth Form drawing of a lizard reflected in some sunglasses.
Sep 8 1984 Stark Dadaist design classic, included here because it is the only cover story EVER to carry not a single picture, inside or out.
Oct 13 1984 Aaah, those were the conceptual days!
Some glasses and a couple of theatrical masks = sexee NME cover about The Art Of Noise.
Not!
June 13 1987 Cor, talk about backing a loser…
Aug 22 1987 Skateboarding was back — a movement (as spearheaded by The Stupids) that currently thrives under a bridge in Waterloo.
Aug 29 1987 New Swimwear Express perchance?
Highly-paid photographers went hungry as the NME used kitsch '50s postcards.
March 4 1989 Next week: Guy Chadwick's wife, Shaun Ryder's granny, Miles Hunt's window cleaner, need we go on?
March 10 1990 OK, so the Australian Midnight Oil photo sesh didn't happen — but was there really any need to put Jack Barron's noggin on the cover?
April 14 1990 We are a newspaper — not a tool of the music PR industry.
So, if Lenny Kravitz stands up against a wall with Slash, we're there.
Nov 8 1986 Again, many experts claim this none-more-black cover was a classic.
Others say ‘why don't you just change your name to New Express.’
COVER STARS
‘Why don't you just change the paper's name to New Morrissey Express and have done with it?’ goes the usual enquiry, ‘he's on your cover every bloody week anyway!’
It's an easy mistake to make but it's WRONG.
Since we started doing ‘proper’ front covers (ie, not flogging them to Tom Jones' and Cilla's record companies for ads) in 1972, the great man has had plenty of the hallowed Page Ones, but others have had more.
And here are those who've had the most…
And if we're combining Morrissey and The Smiths' covers, it's only fair to point out the relative regularity with which three others have had their mugs used to shift copies.
Between the Sex Pistols, PiL and his own good self, JOHN LYDON has appeared on no less than 13 covers; combining The Jam and The Style Council, PAUL WELLER has made 11 fronts; while assorted Joy Division, New Order and Electronic stories have seen us do some eight BARNEY SUMMER covers, with more to come no doubt.
Why don't we just call it New Mancunian Express and have done with it?
UP CINEMASCOPE!
NME'S GUIDE TO THE HITS AND MYTHS OF THE SILVER SCREEN 1952–91
Born less than 100 years ago, cinema became the art form of the 20th Century.
Before the tyranny of television, movies, in tandem with rock 'n' roll, reached their creative peak during the last 40 years.
The studio system that had allowed film to become a vibrant force commercially and aesthetically gave way to a newly wrought independence.
Brooding loners, obsessive visionaries and rough-hewn icons like Brando, Monroe, Scorsese, De Niro and Cronenberg provided the visual impetus for the rock 'n' roll era.
Rock 'n' roll and the movies grew hand in hand, often tackling the same phobias, spouting the same philosophies, having the same fantasies, crossing the same frontiers, inhabiting the same gritty streetlife scenarios.
But where music has been a constant right through the ages, cinema has been a product of its time.
Some of the greatest names in film — Howard Hawkes, Sam Peckinpah and Robert Altman — are absent from our list.
To include outsiders like Kurosawa, Tarkovsky and Fellini would have been untenable.
While the latter have undoubtedly had a powerful influence, we've tried to select movies that best reflect that amorphous beast we call Rock Culture.
After all, this isn't the New Movie Express 
1952 — SUNSET BOULEVARD
HOLLYWOOD, THE plump, opulent self-satisfied centre of the movie-making industry, had thrived in an ether of celebrity mythos for nearly half a century.
Billy Wilder's movie was a cynical, lacerating indictment of this hollow self-image, narrated by a corpse and centring on a vampish silent star who was thought long dead.
William Holden plays a hack scriptwriter down on his luck, and his purple prose gives the film its biting tone.
Gloria Swanson's Grand Guignol performance, the film noir fatalism, the rats in the swimming pool all make it a never-bettered portrait of Hollywood gothic.
1953 — FROM HERE TO ETERNITY
SHE: ‘I'VE got a swimming costume under my dress.’
Him: ‘Me too.’
Hot rumpy on the beach, with Deborah Kerr and Burt Lancaster inadvertently heralding the libidinous fury of the rock 'n' roll revolution that lay around the corner.
Frank Sinatra was rumoured to have enlisted the Mafia to help secure his first major serious acting role (see The Godfather ).
Both the characters played by Sinatra (reckless and high-spirited) and Montgomery Clift (seductive and hard-headed) were harbingers of a new stance, a new type of icon.
Set in a US army barracks in Hawaii just before Pearl Harbour,Eternity was garlanded with Oscars and depicted a world on the precipice, about to lose its innocence.
After it, movies would never be quite the same again.
1954 — ON THE WATERFRONT
AT THE box office it was the year of White Christmas ,20,000 Leagues Under The Sea and Hitchcock's Rear Window .
At the Oscars, Marlon Brando's powerhouse performance as a punch-drunk boxer hired to do strong-arm work for a corrupt union boss, blew away everything in sight.
Waterfront had odious intent — a simplistic anti-union message, a director and scriptwriter who had informed to the McCarthy commission and used the movie to justify their actions — but Brando's churning frustration, played out in several classic scenes, rose above it all.
The movie have been politically motivated, but it was Marlon's passion that took control and made the impact.
1955 — THE NIGHT OF THE HUNTER
SEX FEAR, money lust, tattoos, dream sequences, false prophets and Christian redemption.
A killer in the cleric's cloth.
Robert Mitchum stalks the depression-era Deep South as a sex-obsessed soul saver with murderous intent.
Mitchum's preacher is a revivalist nutter who wields power over adults but scares children to flee into the netherworld.
Mitchum excels in a genuinely frightening, audaciously mounted movie, which matches scenes of awesome beauty with gothic horror, religious parable with fairytale fantasy.
The movie flopped and Laughton never got the chance to direct again, but Hunter remains the greatest David Lynch movie Lynch never made.
1956 — THE SEARCHERS
RACE HATE, rape fear, miscegenation, a battle-scarred outsider's fight to come to terms with the new society — the themes of Ford's massively influential movie would provide rich pickings for '70s brats in the years to come.
Compressing the physical beauty and epic scope of the best westerns into the tale of John Wayne's Ethan Edwards, Ford created a compulsive portrait of the warped WASP mentality.
Edwards' racism towards Indians is inexcusable, but he is tied to his feelings for his abducted niece.
Edwards' catchphrase (‘That'll be the day’) was stolen by fellow Texan Buddy Holly for a monster hit.
The closing image, the door shutting as Ethan heads into the wilderness, suggests a search for redemption that continues beyond the movie.
Very rock 'n' roll.
1957 — THE SWEET SMELL OF SUCCESS
WHAT WILDER's Boulevard did for the fading grandeur of old Hollywood, Mackendrick did for the furious pulsating rhythms of New York's sleazy showbiz scene.
A feral world of backbiting malice, veiled threats, liars and blackmailers.
A place where sex is traded for favours, where money, fame and power are sacred cows and Burt Lancaster's sadistic gossip columnist JJ Hunsecker rules the roost.
Teen idol Tony Curtis gave his greatest performance as the snivelling press agent, a slimy toadie in a den of vipers.
1958 — TOUCH OF EVIL
OSTRACISED FROM the mainstream for his flamboyance and hard-headed artistry, Orson Welles' career after Citizen Kane was a constant battle.
Set in Mexico,Evil goes to the outer limits of his persistent theme — potentially great men perverted and destroyed by power.
Welles is Quinlan, a bloated, corrupt racist police chief, Marlene Dietrich the cantina owner who delivers his valediction and Charlton Heston the man who uncovers the awful truth about his past.
Evil has all the flair, technical brilliance and imaginative construction of his most celebrated work (the classic opening sequence, the taunting of Janet Leigh by a motel keeper).
It is Welles at his most brutal and uncompromising, soul-searching in a sea of sleaze.
1959 — SOME LIKE IT HOT
SEXY, FUNNY, teasing, farcical role-reversals, movie in-jokes, endlessly witty script and tremendous, touching and titillating performances by Marilyn Monroe, Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon.
One of the finest comedies ever made,SLIH has a jazzy pace and vitality.
Set in the prohibition era, it gleefully played with conventions, maximised Monroe's diaphanous (cf the scene where she attempts to arouse the supposedly impotent Curtis) and coaxed a manic, uproarious turn from Lemmon, on the run from gangsters, disguised as a woman and pursued by a randy millionaire.
1960 — PSYCHO
HITCHCOCK HAD primed his shock/suspense tactics to perfection by the time he came to make Psycho .
The director said the film was a black comedy, but the mass hysteria engendered by the goings on in Bates Motel bore more relation to his aim ‘to provide the public with beneficial shocks’.
Famed for its set-piece shower stabbing (in which neither Janet Leigh nor Tony Perkins were involved, and the blood substitute is actually chocolate sauce) and sudden, violent murders,Psycho may also be Hitchcock's saddest film.
Mother-fixated Norman Bates is a harrowing portrait of a neurotic impotent schizophrenic (!) unable to see beyond his nightmare world and Leigh's Marion Crane — a woman whose impulsive lunge for freedom leads to his door.
1961 — THE HUSTLER
THE OBSESSION with winning and the determination to find what makes a man tick come under the spotlight, as Paul Newman's boozy pool-shark Eddie Felson sets his sights on Jackie Gleason's Minnesota Fat's crown.
Like Psycho , this was a film that used monochrome to capture its milieu , the sleazy underbelly, the forgotten nooks and crannies of the American dream.
Newman's emotive and energetic portrayal of a young man pitched against the old guard brought a weary tone and new twist to teenage triumphalism.
Nominated for nine Oscars, but this was also the year of West Side Story , which swept the board when it came to the statuettes.
1962 — A KIND OF LOVING
FEW MOMENTS in British cinema cling so bleakly to the memory as that of Alan Bates vomiting copiously behind the settee under the withering gaze of Thora Hird.
Having for years either aped Hollywood or presented us with cheery Cockney families braving the Blitz, a whole slew of films came along (A Taste Of Honey ,Saturday Night And Sunday Morning , etc) that simultaneously both oddly dissected and glorified the northern working class experience of the early '60s.
Grim landscape and gallows humour and the beginnings of the whole Smiths iconography.
1963 — DOCTOR STRANGELOVE
DECIDEDLY BIZARRE even at the time, every year further away from the Red Menace makes this charred black farce seem weirder still.
No less a masterwork though, as the military complexes of America and Russia are reduced by circumstances to mere personal bickering while the countdown to global destruction (and a life of harem-shagging in coal mines for the ‘lucky’ survivors) ticks relentlessly away.
In the same vein,Failsafe is actually a more scary and realistic film, but Strangelove managed to make the end of the world seem both inevitable and hilarious.
We shall not see its like again.
Hopefully.
1964 — THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE
COLD WAR brain-washing, conspiracy theories, a Presidential assassination plot, domineering, military-minded mother, and drugged dream sequences.
Frank Sinatra stars alongside Laurence Harvey in this wild, fearless look at political extremism played out on American soil after the Korean War.
Sinatra also held the rights to the movie and withdrew it from the public domain shortly after release because it closely shadowed the Kennedy assassination.
A fact not half as weird as the movie itself — a dazzling tumble of possible coup and counter coup, intrigue, outrage and madness.
The American military industrial psyche laid bare.
John Wayne in The Searchers: bold themes of redemption
Dunaway and Beatty playing violent and sexy in Bonnie And Clyde
God's lonely man Travis Bickle (De Niro) in Scorsese's vision of urban America as purgatory, Taxi Driver
1965 — THUNDERBALL
JAMES BOND was the requisite '60s fantasy role model for repressed males.
Travelling the world on a handsome expense account, bedding the babes, the latest in technological gadgetry at his disposal — all in the service of  Queen and country.
What an absolute cad!
The fourth in the series,Thunderball , was notable for its underwater effects, tongue-in-cheek humour, the unveiling of Bond's moon buggy and the spin-off merchandising the movie cultivated.
Thunderball was third in the 1965 box office stakes, pipped only by The Sound Of Music and Doctor Zhivago .
1966 — THE CHASE
AN INTENSE melting pot of American society in decline, Arthur Penn's adaptation of Horton Foote's play was far more popular in Europe than the country in which it was set.
Perhaps its approach, an uncompromising look at gnarled racism and incipient decay in the Deep South, was too close to the bone.
The movie escalates into a fierce round of bloodletting and violence, as the tangled relationship between wronged escaped convict Robert Redford, Jane Fonda (his wife and mistress of oil baron James Fox) come to a head.
Marlon Brando had a small but perfectly formed part as the detective who leaves town after being beaten up by three upstanding racist citizens.
1967 — BONNIE AND CLYDE
THE POSTERS said: ‘They're young.
They're in love.
They rob banks’, and Bonnie and Clyde were transformed from depression era outlaws to '60s counter-culture folk heroes.
Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway played with phallic imagery, played sexy, played violent and played Robin Hood by robbing banks to help farmers who'd been foreclosed by the banks.
Beatty sealed his reputation by funding a ground-breaking movie where the violence is shockingly off-hand, viscerally captured by director Arthur Penn.
It introduced new stars like Gene Hackman and Gene Wilder and what started out as a low budget film featuring little-knowns became Warners' biggest grossing movie of the decade.
1968 — 2001 A SPACE ODYSSEY
BOLDLY ENTERING the future, preparing the way for the high-tech innovations that were to come, Stanley Kubrick's sci-fi masterpiece was a visionary work combining an astronaut's human drama with a psychedelic outer space exploration; tripping through galaxies, pondering the very nature of existence, man's dependence on machines and the evolution of extra-terrestrial intelligence.
2001 , a thing of awesome beauty and shimmering wonder, posited the not unreasonable idea that the link between the apes and civilised man is the human being.
That's us, folks!
1969 — ONCE UPON A TIME IN THE WEST
THE ULTIMATE example of the ultimate '60s genre — spaghetti westerns — and that's just the half of it.
An opera of violence that unfolds with a painfully slow gravitas, this is an outsiders' (Leone and Morricone, Europeans — the film was shot in Spain) yearning fantasy of America before the forces of civilization ‘spoiled’ it.
The throat-constricting landscapes, the classical-statue cinematography, the orchestrated flesh-mangling, and the fly-blown soundtrack add up to a unique and hugely influential whole.
And the early realisation that avuncular old Henry Fonda is actually a child-murdering son of a bitch remains one of the cinema's great shocks.
1970 — PERFORMANCE
MOVIES THAT get under the skin of the British national character and movies that use rock stars well are hard to find.
Performance , withheld for two years before its release, does both.
A reclusive ex-rock-star's London mansion is used as a hideout by a violent protection racket thug, played by James Fox.
The mansion becomes a sort of cultural Hades, the extreme tendencies of both characters grappling in an orgy of drugs, sex and violence.
Roeg uses Mick Jagger as the rock star to confront the ambivalent images and grotesque fascinations that flared around The Rolling Stones when their '60s dream ended in death, despair and Altamont.
1971 — THE LAST PICTURE SHOW
BOGDANOVICH WAS advised by Orson Welles to use monochrome to make this picture, an adaptation of Larry McMurtry's novel about a fading Texas town in the early '50s.
The maestro's counsel was well taken.
This wistful elegy to the post-Bomb small-town America,The Last Picture Show was probably the first film that pined nostalgically for a generation's lost innocence, soundtracking Hank Williams' lonesome holler to great effect.
Painstakingly emotive character observations concentrated on adolescents coming to terms with the challenge of anomie in the heartland and the adult world.
The movie introduced Jeff Bridges, Cybil Shepherd and Timothy Bottoms.
1972 — THE GODFATHER
‘I BELIEVE in America.
America has made my fortune.’
The opening line of Francis Coppola's Mafiosi epic was, appropriately, spoken by an undertaker.
The Godfather was extraordinary — a grand neo-opera where underground crime becomes a nightmare of free enterprise.
Ranging over ten years and introducing a large number of characters, it managed to remain gripping, coherent, a lavish explication of family loyalties and obligation.
Remarkable cast included Marlon Brando in Oscar-winning title role, a young Al Pacino, Robert Duvall, James Caan and the late John Cazale.
The movie gave the world the catchphrase ‘I'm gonna make him an offer he can't refuse,’ and showed that a character reputedly based on Frank Sinatra got his starring role in a top movie (see From Here To Eternity ) when a horse's head appeared in the bed of a top Hollywood producer.
A suggestion Frank did not like, at all.
1973 — MEAN STREETS
THE HOTTEST rock 'n' roll movie jukebox of them all, Scorsese graphically captured the earthy street punk life of small-time Little Italy hoods with great improvised acting skits and a wired, combustible sound track.
Though it centres on Harvey Keitel, who is trying to be a saint in the city, the film hatched the greatest celluloid partnership of the last 20 years with the introduction of Robert De Niro as the reckless Johnny Boy.
Frenzied, speedy and a shocking jolt of personal film-making, which had to come to Britain before it was recognised as a classic.
1974 — THE GODFATHER 2
INCREDIBLY, COPPOLA'S sequel actually deepened the richness and meaning of his original masterpiece by widening the time frame, and book-ending the original story with sombre meditations on the implacable nature of crime and retribution.
It contrasts the blood-thirsty dynasty of Michael Corleone as he builds up his gambling empire from a base in Nevada in the '50s with the story of how his father Vito (Robert De Niro, playing Brando's original role) left Sicily to become the protector of poor Italians in a New York neighbourhood at the start of the century.
This marked the only occasion when a sequel won a Best Picture Academy Award and led to an ill-advised third instalment in 1991.
1975 — JAWS
ONE CURIOUS explanation for the mega-success of Spielberg's adaptation of Peter Benchley's blockbuster novel is that the mechanical sharks graphically depicted the syndrome psychiatrists call vagina dentata .
Well, it's certainly one theory, but then the mass hysteria engendered by Jaws , a return to the sci-fi cold war monster movie tradition of the '50s, AND the birth of the movie as phenomenon, was ripe for such cod analysis.
But that overlooks the bravura technique, the shock imagery that put the viewer in the midst of terror and sparked off waves of swimmer fear and the great macho-debunking humour that thrives between police chief Roy Scheider, shark hunter Robert Shaw and ichthyologist (look it up) Richard Dreyfuss.
1976 — TAXI DRIVER
GOD'S LONELY man Travis Bickle came home from the Vietnam War with a timebomb ticking in his head.
Driving through the New York night, Bickle views the city's excesses as diseases waiting to be wiped out.
Raising the stakes of youth rebellion, Bickle is impotent, resorting to firearms and a hellish bloodbath when he's unable to express his churning emotional confusion.
Based on scriptwriter Schrader's personal experience (and John Ford's The Searchers , see 1956) it's set in Scorsese's New York world of paranoia, hatred and insanity.
Taxi Driver veered between drama and nightmare and, viewed almost entirely from Bickle's alienated speed-freak perspective, it was a vision of urban America as hell on earth.
1977 — SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER
PRODUCER ROBERT Stigwood espied a new craze in an article by pop culture writer Nik Cohn called ‘Tribal Rites Of The New Saturday Night’.
Cohn's article described how hard-pressed Brooklyn kids found their thrills and created an escape at weekend discos.
Stigwood turned a local scene into an international sensation, launched John Travolta as a box office star and cult hero and masterminded the biggest-selling soundtrack album of all time with a movie that encapsulated the energy and release of the disco age.
From start to finish, it's pure dance madness.
Travolta even tells his friend, ‘If you dance with some of these girls, they expect you to sleep with them.’
1978 — BLUE COLLAR
FROM THE opening piston pump and steamhammer beat of Captain Beefheart's ‘Hard Working Man’, through its coked-up party time desperation, to its despairing sign-off line, this is a provocative, unrelenting and fatalistic look at three Detroit steelworkers ground down by the system.
Richard Pryor (who was never given another chance to explore this side of his acting ability), Yaphet Kotto and Harvey Keitel star as the workers who attempt to break the chains that bind with a break-in at their corrupt union's headquarters.
Schrader's film — darkly humorous, intensely claustrophobic — isn't anti-woman in the way On The Waterfront was, but it is a pessimistic and probably prophetic parable about men destined to remain cogs in a remorseless, unfeeling machine.
1979 — APOCALYPSE NOW
IT TOOK ten years to get this thundering, pyrotechnical ode to the mayhem and pointlessness of the Vietnam war off the ground.
Ten years in which the battles for the film's production and the sanity of its maker began to resemble John Milius' script, an update of Joseph Conrad's Heart Of Darkness .
Described, only half jokingly, as the longest rock video ever made,Apocalypse is a journey into madness following Martin Sheen's mission to kill Marlon Brando's Kurtz, a US officer who has gone crazy in the furthest reaches of the jungle.
Along the way he meets Robert Duvall's Kilgore, who loves the smell of napalm in the morning, Dennis Hopper's loony photographer and, ultimately, Kurtz, the shaven-headed mumbling philosopher with a penchant for putting heads on sticks.
By contrast, the top grossing movie of the year was the Dustin Hoffman divorce weepie Kramer Versus Kramer .
Brando as icon in On The Waterfront: a powerhouse performance, all passion and churning frustration
Our old deep-sea mate Jaws, responsible for a million castration complexes, apparently
The original transvision vamp, Gloria Swanson in Sunset Boulevard
Top hysteria from Perkins and Leigh in Psycho
1980 — GREGORY'S GIRL
AS THE sound of young Scotland dominated every cool kid's turntable, along came a film that celebrated all the Caledonian virtues of the time; charm; laconic, urban wit, youthful experience and wonky enthusiasm.
Gordon John Sinclair is Gregory, a gangling, amiable misfit who falls in love with Dee Hepburn but eventually cops off  with the infinitely more desirable Clare Grogan on a balmy evening in East Kilbride — which looks like heaven.
A life-affirming movie that cost tuppence to make.
Too many great catchphrases to quote.
1981 — THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY
EAST END gangster Harry Shand (terrific, tough-talking turn by Bob Hoskins) wakes up to the new age and discovers the IRA muscling in on his turf.
Shand finds things slipping out of his grasp as events take one violent turn after another, an ideal scenario for Hoskins to give his greatest performance — a mixture of Cockney wisecracking and seething anger.
Shand is not unlike John Heard's crippled alcoholic in Cutter's Way , the year's other stand-out movie, raging against the dying light, fulminating at forces beyond his control.
But Shand is less sympathetic than Cutter, his rage has a dubious moral basis and the film is filled with venom and relish as it watches empires collapse.
1982 — BLADERUNNER
THE ULTI ULTI ULTIMATE futuristic urban nightmare set in LA 40 years hence.
Based on a prescient Philip K Dick short story, it depicts a place where the poor roam the streets and moneyed dwellers live either on nearby planets or well-protected fortresses.
Harrison Ford plays the title role, a detective who falls for one of the replicants (Sean Young) he's been hired to exterminate.
Ford's mission resolves itself in a duel with Rutger Hauer, but it's Bladerunner 's extraordinary look, a clogged, polluted decaying megalopolis where the neon shines and the acid rain falls constantly, that grips the imagination.
1983 — VIDEODROME
‘THE FLESH is dead, long live the new flesh’.
Soft-core porn merchant James Woods becomes obsessed with a cable channel showing non-stop torture and mutilation.
Woods' concepts of reality and illusion become blurred and he ends up the living incarnation of the television lie, developing a slit in his stomach that can accept video cassettes, guns, hands — anything.
Cronenberg's crazed, controversial, body-rebelling movie had some salient points to make about the video nasty furore then current, but scenes like the one where Deborah Harry stubbed a cigarette out on her breast got all the attention.
1984 — SCARFACE
A HILARIOUS, misunderstood and grossly-inflated gangster morality play filled with blood, guns and mountains of nose candy.
Everything about this update of Howard's 1932 Scarface is excessive — the swearing, the drug use, the lavish designs, the violence, the blood-letting.
Al Pacino's Tony Montana, one of 25,000 Cubans who entered the US in the Cuban boatlift of 1980, is the comic caricature of the big screen gangsters who stalked The Godfather .
Sinking in a sea of druggy paranoia and coked-up psychosis, Montana infects the highlife that's become his own with his dyspeptic, withering worldview.
Oliver Stone, who was engaged in a cocaine nightmare of his own, wrote the script, and Montana has a thinly veiled incestuous longing for his sister, played by a glacial Michelle Pfeiffer.
1985 — REPO MAN
‘WOW…
THIS is intense!’ mutters Emilio Estevez, as he flies about in a glowing car.
Repo Man is an insane, stupid film which poses as a satire on dead America (cans of food and drink labelled FOOD and DRINK, TV evangelists, rich suburban punks), but in reality is a top silly comedy.
Harry Dean Stanton is what we used to call the embodiment of anomie , cynical and dried-up, Estevez is dopey and deadpan and the only sane character is a derelict who believes in aliens and that ‘The more you drive, the less intelligent you are’.
Cox was never to make a better film.
1986 — THE FLY
REMAKES HAVE become an easy option for a moribund movie business, but Cronenberg's biggest box office movie was a total reinterpretation of the 1958 Vincent Price horror picture.
As the brilliant loner scientist Seth Brundle, Jeff Goldblum thinks he has developed the perfect, instant form of transport between two telepods.
Unaware that a fly has accompanied him on his maiden voyage, he turns into a sex-obsessed, sugar-addicted mutant.
A work of trash cinema par excellence , wit and sublime effects backed up by ideas,The Fly is a bleak modern fable where love, sex and faith are rent asunder by arrogance and human folly.
Funny, moving and genuinely scary.
1987 — BLUE VELVET
‘LET'S  FU— !
MMUH!
NNUH!
LEEETTT'S  F— !’
Frank, the oxygen mask-toting psycho, is one of the least charming figures in movie history.
Dennis Hopper's crazed murderer — together with Isabella Rossellini's tortured spouse, Kyle MacLachlan's clean-living small-town kid and his belle, Laura Dern — make Blue Velvet an alarming and disturbing film.
That and David Lynch's unsettling direction.
Blue Velvet starts with things in the grass eating each other, continues in a surreal Norman Rockwell setting of red fire engines and sunny weather, and finally unfolds into the sexual violence of Hopper and Rossellini's scenes (whose use of blue velvet is not one Bobby Vinton had envisaged) and the sheer terror of MacLachlan's night ride into hell.
Blue Velvet is Twin Peaks with most of the jokes missing, Lynch taking the lid off mom's apple pie America and waving the maggots around.
Plus it has a great speech about robins.
1988 — TALK RADIO
FAMED FOR his big, blaring, action-packed war movie, Oliver Stone's most persuasive picture is centred almost entirely in a radio station.
Eric Bogosian's performance as Barry Champlain is an adaptation of his one-man show based on the life and times of talk show host Alan Berg.
Berg tapped into the unpalatable side of public opinion, becoming addicted to verbal wind-ups and hostility with fatal results.
Stone's movie — tension-packed and highly-pressured — goes deep into the psyche of both DJ and his rude, foul-mouthed, flippant, remorselessly cruel audience.
1989 — HEATHERS
THE ULTIMATE teen movie, a sharp-edged black comedy which mercilessly swipes at adolescent angst, peer pressure, consumerism, and that old favourite, the generation gap.
Winona Ryder is the reluctant member of the elite ‘Heathers’ crowd who becomes an unwitting murderess after hooking up with the new boy at school, rough diamond Christian Slater — giving his best Jack Nicholson impersonation.
Peppered with infinitely quotable one-liners and featuring some seriously over-the-top set-pieces, Lehmann's film is a relentless attack on the vacuous youth of America, let down by some lame moralising in the last 30 seconds.
The perfect antidote to Beverly Hills 90210 .
1990 — GOODFELLAS
THE TRUE-life story of New York mobster turned FBI witness Henry Hill presented Martin Scorsese with a ripe opportunity to re-examine the milieu he uncovered in Mean Streets .
A drama-documentary that captured the social rituals, amoral machismo and gruesome, off-hand violence of gangster thugs,Goodfellas was hyperbolic and exuberant, mixing electrifying images and operative use of pop classics to get inside the characters' mindset and mania.
Three grandstand performances — De Niro as the most menacing mobster of them all, Joe Pesci as an unhinged psycho and Ray Liotta, who fulfils his childhood dream and watches it turn to nightmare.
1991 — THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS
THOMAS HARRIS' book provides half this film's momentum through its psycho violence and invention of Dr Hannibal ‘The Cannibal’ Lecter, lovable liver-eating sociopath psychiatrist, and the rest is largely up to Anthony Hopkins in the role of said Lecter.
Despite being in only half the film, Hopkins — staring, whispering and pulling people's faces off — reduces Jodie Foster's Clarice Sterling to a near-supporting role.
Not as suspenseful, or as gross, as some claim,The Silence Of The Lambs is still horror's most glamorous film yet, elegant, vicious and even drily amusing.
Videodrome's TV lie
Lambs' glam horror
MacLachlan, Rossellini in Blue Velvet: Twin Peaks without the jokes
None more black: Winona Ryder plots in Heathers
Happy Hauer in Bladerunner
Do they mean anomie?
Estevez gets intense with Dean Stanton in Repo Man
Travolta forms late '70s  iconography in Saturday Night Fever
FANCY SEEING YOU HERE!
15 UNEXPECTED APPEARANCES BY POP STARS IN MOVIES
An early Grateful Dead performing in the inevitable hippy party scene in Petulia 
The Yardbirds performing to catatonic Chelsea mods in Blow up 
Superbad James Brown performing for the white bread teens and Frankie Avalon in Ski Party 
The Clash as a bunch of rowdy street rats in The King Of Comedy 
Alice Cooper performing ‘I'm 18’ while Carrie Snodgrass picks up Frank Langella in Diary Of A Mad Housewife 
Blink and you'll miss Bob Dylan as a chainsaw artist in the Dennis Hopper-disowned Catchfire 
Bauhaus performing ‘Bela Lugosi's Dead’ at the start of the suitably vampiric The Hunger 
Fine Young Cannibals performing ‘Good Thing’ in The Tin Man 
Guns N' Roses hovering like vultures at the graveside in a drug casualty's burial scene in Clint Eastwood's latterday Dirty Harry vehicle The Dead Pool 
Nick Cave performing ‘The Carny’ and ‘From  Here To Eternity’in Wings Of Desire 
Ron Wood ligging (what else?) in 9½ Weeks 
Keanu Reeves getting the brush-off from Lou Reed in Permanent Record 
The Pogues playing terrorists in Eat The Rich 
ZZ Top playing a raggle taggle cowpoke outfit from the Old West in Back To The Future 3 
The Pretty Things performing as Happy Apple House Band in the Norman Wisdom star vehicle What's Good For The Goose 
SPROCKET SYMPHONIES
TEN STAND-OUT FILM SOUNDTRACKS
Taxi Driver De Niro's voice-over and Bernard Hermann's last ever score
Apocalypse Now ‘The End’, The Rhythm Devils and a journey to the black night of the soul.
The Harder They Come Jimmy Cliff and various reggae rockers in heart-rending excelsis.
Repo Man Glorious assortment of US post punk types.
And Iggy Pop.
The Good, The Bad And The Ugly ‘Der ner, ner, ner, ner wah wah wah.’
Rumblefish A teenage world in turmoil, Police man Stewart Copeland writes good score shock.
Performance Ry Cooder, Mick Jagger, Jack Nietzsche and The Last Poets singing ‘Wake Up Nigger’.
Genius.
Superfly Curtis Mayfield's superlative score makes superfluous blaxploitation pic that it accompanied redundant.
Purple Rain Prince's rock album, tailor-made for the best Elvis movie the cheeseburger never made.
Saturday Night Fever ‘You can tell by the way I use my walk, I'm a woman's man.’
Indeed.
ALLOW 28 YEARS FOR DELIVERY
Yeah, we know.
Nowadays it's all Nirvana imports and ‘Needed.
Bass player.
Must like Lush’.
But once upon a time the ad pages of NME throbbed with the heady thrills of Loon pants!
Afghan coats!
Cheesecloth shirts!
Stick-on sideburns!
Over the next four pages we salute those long-gone, daring mail order Del boys who dressed successive generations in shrink-to-fit 100% non-natural fibre finery.
But remember kids, send no cash…
YOU HAVE BEEN WATCHING…
40 STEPS TO TV HEAVEN
‘Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, it is with great pleasure that I introduce you to the magic of television…‘
That was Leslie Mitchell's catchphrase.
In 1936, ten years after some Scotsman had first given the world his ‘wireless with pictures’, Mr Mitchell uttered those seminal words from the heart of Alexandra Palace, and the BBC was born.
Three years, 326 TV plays, one Coronation and 5,000 television sets later, it shut down again, so that signals from Ally Pally's mast didn't alert enemy planes.
By 1950, 342,882 people owned TV sets, mostly in and around the major cities.
By 1952, about 100,000 of them were too busy reading the excellent new music paper,New Musical Express , to watch them.
Had they been able to put down for a minute our in-depth features on Geraldo, Victor Sylvester and some accordions, they might have seen something half-decent on the box.
Here, then, are NME 's fave 40 TV shows from the last 40 years.
Your host: ANDREW COLLINS
1952 Hit Parade
COINCIDING WITH the very first New Musical Express chart this was, essentially, the Top Of The Pops of its day, except without the arbitrary graphics, arbitrary dry ice and arbitrary ex-hospital radio DJs getting the names wrong.
But with Cyril Stapleton And His Augmented Orchestra breezing through the top sheet music hits of the day.
Guest vocal stars were often from the States and of the sex-calibre of Frank Sinatra.
There was no miming debate for Number One singing sensation Al Martino in those innocent days.
And the Red Hot Chilli Peppers wouldn't have even been allowed through Ally Pally's front door.
1953 What's My Line?
THIS PIONEERING panel game began in '51 and fast became the tabloid-fodder equivalent of EastEnders in the '80s.
Introduced by Eamonn Andrews, its eminently ‘BBC’ panel (dickie bows and twin sets) would attempt to guess the trade of a prole, and 90 per cent of the telly-owning public tuned in.
Top panellist was self-styled ‘rudest man in Britain’, ex-copper Gilbert Harding, sacked as co-presenter for the kind of snooty, bullish behaviour upon which Robin Day would build an entire career.
Bob Monkhouse once appeared on it wearing an eye-patch and this made the papers, such was the sexy allure of the show.
When revived in '73 it was presented by David Jacobs, and in '84 Penelope Keith — both versions were shite.
1954 1984
THE DEATH of rationing signalled the beginning of Never Had It So Good Britain, and Quaternass creator Nigel Kneale cashed in on this by adapting Orwell's nightmare Stalinist futurevision for Sunday evening viewing.
It caused probably the first mythical switchboard (since phones were only just installed), the cancelling of the Thursday night repeat was discussed in Parliament, Prince Philip loved it, Peter Cushing (as Winston) became a star, and the genuine sewer rats used for ‘that’ sequence all passed out under the studio lights.
Plus, it was performed live — sit on that,The Camomile Lawn !
1955 Dixon Of Dock Green
UH-OH!
ITV began broadcasting in September, bursting BBC's cosy parlour-game-and-flower-arranging bubble forever.
Winston Churchill called it a ‘tuppenny Punch & Judy show’(before resigning) because it inherited game shows that gave prizes.
Meanwhile Constable George Dixon (later Sergeant) came to embody 1950s Beeb spirit.
Played by Jack Warner, Dixon is now an extinct creature — the bicycle-riding honest bobby, and these 367 episodes stand as his epitaph.
Over on ‘the other side’ there was Benny Hill, Hughie Green, and sexy vaudeville fun from the likes of Norman Vaughan, Gracie Fields, Frankie Howerd, Italian mouse puppet Topo Gigio, Tommy Trinder and (some years later) The Rolling Stones on Sunday night At The London Palladium .
The choice was yours.
1956 Hancock's Half Hour
‘A PINT?
That's very nearly an armful!’— that was his catchphrase.
Unfortunately .
For tragic Tony Hancock's TV career had a lot more going for it than the poorly-performed Blood Donor in 1961, still his most famous show, even though it was all acted off cue cards.
Back in '56, Hancock was transferred, in time-honoured comedy tradition, from radio to telly, and was an instant hit.
His beleaguered, sexless pseudo-intellectual made rewarding cut-price TV (no better than when played off Sid James’ superb guffawing spiv), and continued paying off for five years, seven BBC series, abut four key sackings by the Great Man, and at least 500 better gags than the ‘armful’one.
1957 Six Five Special
HULA HOOPS, frisbees, a dog in space and Jailhouse Rock .
Yes!
It was all youth-sex-madness in '57! and Pete Murray.
The Spesh was BBC's first teen show, a-jivin' and arattlin' ‘over the points, over the points’ with a live studio audience in pedal-pushers and polite quiffs, plus live rock'n'roll from the likes of Adam Faith and Laurie London.
Jon Pertwee appeared as A Kid once, one of Pete Murray's co-presenters was a boxer and, when mentor Jack Good was sacked, he went to ITV, invented Oh Boy ! and, erm, derailed the ‘Special ’ for, erm, good.
1958 Blue Peter
SO MUCH for the jitterbug.
While Cliff Richard was accused of ‘crude exhibitionism’ by the moral majority for his regular slots on Oh Boy !, the BBC was putting together a youth institution.
Leila Williams (a former beauty queen) and Chris Trace were its virgin presenters, the show a seven-week experiment that caught on and gave the world John Noakes' arse, the most famous shitting elephant ever, many an expedition to Ceylon, sticky-backed plastic, ‘soldier dolls’, umpteen dogs, Sarah Greene (cheers) and a hell of a lot of jeeps paid for by old forks and ring-pulls.
If you can honestly say you never watched, you are medically dead.
1959 Face To Face
AS YOU yawn through this week's promo-treadmill that is Wogan and wonder why Parkinson went to Australia, imagine, if you will, an interview programme with one guest, a shot of the interviewer's back only, no stairs and the sort of questions that make grown men break down and cry.
This was Panorama hack John Freeman's brainchild, whereby an assortment of prominent media folk were grilled, nay,roasted on a spit.
Hancock gave the first public clues as to his deep insecurity, the aforementioned Mr Rude, Gilbert Harding, wept about his mother's bereavement and Carl Gustav Jung agreed to go on it!
Incredibly, Mr Jung did not have a book out that week.
1960 Tales Of The Riverbank
THIS BOUGHT-in piece of Canadian whimsy was basically five minutes of real rodents travelling about in tiny boats, with voices provided by future Animal Magic guru Johnny Morris.
Hammy Hamster, Roderick Rat and, perhaps least impressively, Mr Guinea Pig were all played by trained pets who only worked ten-minute stints at a time.
The show is honoured here because skiffle, the Lady Chatterley trial, Kennedy's election and Cassius Clay seem rather brash and silly by comparison.
Coronation Street began in 1960 but, as any  fule  kno , it didn't catch its stride for a good ten years.
1961 The Flintstones
THE LAST great cartoon ever made.
Except for The Rescuers .
Funny how cartoons ‘aimed’ at kids but clearly made by adults to amuse one another are the best.
Fred and Wilma, Barney and Betty — these stock East Coast American sit-com couples provided satirical laffs a-plenty in their moderne Stone Age netherworld, all mod cons dependent not on trendy plastic but granite, and powered not by supa-clean electricity but, well, pterodactyls, usually.
This was Hanna Barbera before she went rubbish and made Josie And The Pussycats .
1962 That Was The Week That Was
PERHAPS OVER-celebrated but nonetheless pioneering, sanitised satire from TV's first Oxbridge generation.
Fronted by sneering beatnik David Frost, one-trick Macmillan impersonator Willy Rushton, spoiling-for-a-fight interview boffin Bernard Levin and others, it attacked ‘Great’ British institutions like a pitbull in a china shop.
Made by the Current Affairs Dept rather than Light Entertainment,TW3 was undoubtedly the father of Not The Nine O'Clock News ,Have I Got News For You ,Who Dares Wins (etc) and, to an extent,Monty Python — a sort of televisual Private Eye .
It was considered so influential by The Man that it was taken off air in '64 for fear of jaundicing the electorate.
Beat that,Drop The Dead Donkey !
1963 Dr Who
BANG!
NOVEMBER 22 — Kennedy shot!
Ding-a-de-ding-ding-a-de-ding!
November 23 — first episode of Dr Who !
And where were you?
It is now widely acknowledged (except by saddoes) that Dr Who stopped being good after Jon Pertwee in 1974 — but that makes 11 glorious years of top-class, home-spun cheap thrills in out space — a reign untouched by later, more sophist TV sci-fi.
One eccentric old git (who ‘changed his appearance’ every five or six years, handily enough), a string of daft ‘assistants’, enough latex to make a condom for Concorde and the sort of ripping good-vs-evil yarnery that encourages grown adults to hold Dr Who conventions to this day.
Natch, the early ones look fuzzy and stilted now, but Doctor One, William Hartnell, left in '66 because he thought it was too evil for kids!
Yo.
Ladeees and gennelmen…
Cyril Stapleton, sadly less than augmented by his Augmented Orchestra
Where is John Noakes presenter?
Blue Peter's Chris Trace and Leila Williams
The Flintstones…
I suppose a rock's out of the question?
Small-screen Moz Tony Hancock prior to his trip to TV Heaven
1964 Steptoe And Son
THE BEST sit-com ever made  actually began a year earlier, written by estranged Hancock creators Ray Galton and Alan Simpson, but in '64 an episode was actually postponed on Election Day at the request of opposition leader Harold Wilson, who feared Labour voters might stay at home (See?
The BBC was in the loony left's pocket even then!).
He won by four seats, and Steptoe went out at nine o'clock.
This most popular show, which ran for 12 years and hooked 22 million viewers at its peak, operated under all the usual constraints of economy sit-com — restricted set, small cast, tiresome re-establishment of norm every week — but somehow extracted magic from little more than the relationship between Harry H Corbett and Wilfrid Brambles.
The former is clearly Hancock reborn as a rag and bone man, the latter, well a ‘dutty old man ’.
Nigel Havers and Tony Britton never quite pulled this one off.
1965 Stingray/Thunderbirds
THE DEATH penalty was abolished in Britain, and Puppetmaster General Gerry Anderson took wooden acting to its natural end with not one but two seminal new junior spy-action-hardware shows.
Crystallising the success of earlier ‘Supermarionation’ hits Supercar and Fireball XL5 , the latest pair featured memorable characters (Troy Tempest in the former, Lady Penelope, Parker and Brains in the latter), more explosions, a lot of water (always a problem in the scale-giveaway stakes!) and excellent music.
The puppets themselves, fact fans, were 20″ tall and cost £300 each to make.
And they belonged to no recognised union.
The Magic Roundabout also began in '65, but this paper does not promote the use of illegal drugs.
1966 Cathy Come Home
IF IT'S all sounding a bit friv, this listing, then cop a load of '66.
Aside from dowdy, depressing comedy Till Death Us Do Part and banned nuclear scare-a-thon The War Game , BBC also gave the world its own stab at kitchen-sink realism à la cinema's Saturday Night Sunday Morning , a one-off play directed by Mr Misery himself, Ken Loach.
Cathy was a too-real story about inner-city squalor, broken marriages, homelessness and a shot-to-hell welfare system.
It was harrowing stuff, made a temporary star of Carol White, caused parliamentary fireworks and stayed in the memories of all who saw it, rich or poor.
PS: The BBC almost took Pinky & Perky off the air on Election Day for fear of its ‘political content’(ie the two jolly piglet puppets get into Downing St) but changed their minds.
1967 News At Ten
THE NOW-trademark Big Ben chimes at the outset of this benchmark news show were a mistake!
A sound engineer was supposed to fade them out at the start of the first edition in July '67, but failed.
So they kept 'em in — forever.
News At Ten was the first news programme to get in the ratings Top Ten, the first to employ two newsreaders (Alistair Burnett and Andrew Gardner on the first edition), and the first to make use of foreign reports and the catchphrase ‘Brent Sadler,News At Ten , Dagenham’.
Plus, it gave the world Anna Ford, Gordon Honeycombe, Selina Scott and, most excellently, Reginald Bosanquet, rug-wearing alleged drunk who was actually suspended for a month in 1976 to ‘sort out his private life’.
1968 Dad's Army
ENSEMBLE SIT-COMS are, as a rule, no good.
Twice as contrived as ordinary sit-coms, the ungainly cartel of characters generally spells a lot of standing in a line and Gang Show mentality.
How odd that inspired Dad's Army creators Jimmy Perry and David Croft went on to write every other useless ensemble sit-com!
Walmington-On-Sea's arthritic Jerry-bashers were an unlikely hit, rescued from doooom by top-quality acting (Lowe, Le Mesurier, Laurie, Pertwee, Frank Williams as the vicar) and the same sense of Little England that bogged Last Of The Summer Wine down like treacle.
As Martin Luther King was assassinated, the Russians moved into Czechoslovakia, and Northern Ireland flared up big-time out there in the real world, Captain Mainwaring's gentle old duffers with one bayonet between them were an avoidnik's wet dream.
1969 Monty Python's Flying Circus
FEW TELEVISION programmes are actually seminal.
Python was.
Its debt to Spike Milligan was huge, but its wayward deconstruction of accepted format coupled with vague (hypocritical) anti-Estab satire was a first.
During its debut series, the BBC insisted on moving it about willy-nilly (to the extent of not showing it at all some weeks) like a high court judge discovering his penis and not knowing quite what to do with it.
By '72 it was BAFTA-endorsed, and, in '76, the Pythons sued the Beeb for flogging the series to America.
Like the band constantly fighting to retain independent artistic control on a major label, the Oxbridge fops can never erase or taint the effect their original shows had on comedy and the world at large, no matter how much rich men's folly (children's books, crap US film cameos, endless cash-in-books and records, the SDP) they involve themselves in now.
1970 The Goodies
PYTHON for kids.
The Goodies have — unfairly — never been afforded the same mystique.
Yet they moulded their own lofty Oxbridge falling-over routines into a highly successful format — a trio of odd-job men on a bike who will do anything, anytime, anywhere — a gift, really.
Bill Oddie was the first comedy hippy, they had stupid hit singles (something Python only managed ten years after the event), they got stuffy BBC presenters to do daft things (Raymond Baxter in string underpants) and, true to form, they went to ITV in 1980 and were crap.
1971 The Comedians
IF THE Angry Brigade had chucked a bomb through the window of one particular Granada TV studio instead of Employment Secretary Robert Carr's front room in '71, the world would be free of Bernard Manning, Jim Bowen, Mike Reid, Stan Boardman, Frank Carson, and Tom O'Connor, such was the northern Working Men's Club potential and future might of Johnny Hamp's Comedians line-up.
But the idea was a beaut.
Stand-up comics, standing up.
And that's it.
A legacy larger than Manning's money belt, this show would stink on ice, ideologically, if you saw it today — and you can ; none of The Comedians have updated their acts since.
1972 Colditz
NOT A vintage year.
Emmerdale Farm ,Crown Court and General Hospital arrived some time in the middle of the afternoon — in those days, we made our own crap daytime drama.
Emily married Ernest Bishop, Sandy Richardson was crippled in a car crash.
But BBC teamed up with Universal to make a 28-part epic yarn about WWII's most notorious Leipzig priz, Colditz.
The Yanks didn't even bother to screen it, but we Brits lapped up the handlebar-moustachioed plotting and a-planning of David McCallum and Robert Wagner, not to mention the dastardly swagger of Nazi stereotype Anthony Valentine, who became a sex symbol.
1973 Whatever Happened To The Likely Lads?
FROM 1964 to '69,The Likely Lads (Rodney Bewes and James Bolam) won the nation's heart with their coming-of-age, male-bonding wit and wisdom up north.
However, four years on, and in colour, their uncomfy reunion following Bolam's spell in the army provided comedy classics a-plenty.
Bob and Terry's excellent adventures threw up much biting observation about class-hopping, conformity, age, the demise of the swinging decade and sexual liberation.
Writers Dick Clement and Ian Le Frenais would go on, a year later, to unleash Norman Stanley Fletcher on the public.
And yet remain unknighted to this day.
1974 The Family
WHO REMEMBERS Margaret, Terry, Marion, Heather and Gary Wilkins from Reading?
For 12 weeks they were the most famous ‘ordinary’ people in Britain, when the BBC decided to popularise the fly-on-the-wall documentary by discreetly invading the lives of the Wilkins and attendant boy/girlfriends and a key dustman from mum Margaret's past.
This was mostly gripping, frequently squirmworthy and occasionally hilarious telly, spoilt only be the BBC's belief that the Wilkins represented a real family when, in truth, they were superhumanly unpleasant, stupid and dowdy.
1975 The Naked Civil Servant
A QUANTUM leap ahead of Grace Bros' Mr Humphries, Thames' brave portrayal of real-life ancient closet-free homosexual Quentin Crisp in a sensitive, sympathetic, and, more importantly,amusing manner was a TV breakthrough.
John Hurt's central performance was award-winning, the 90-minute play made Crisp himself a TV celeb, and (ha!) the BBC originally turned down Phillip Mackie's script.
Rather pathetically, only one line was IBA-censored —‘Sexual intercourse is a poor substitute for masturbation’.
Cheers.
Knock knock!
Who's there?
Doctor, etc…
(Trad)
Currently residing in the ‘Whatever Happened To’ file
Python: Oxbridge poshoes lampoon, erm, other Oxbridge poshoes
1976 Starsky & Hutch
WHO PUT all those empty cardboard boxes in that alleyway?
The cop series came of age (for better or worse, depending on how much affection you had for Frank Barlow) with this racy, chasey New York scruffbag  buddy-buddy series, whose instant success relied on Paul Michael Glaser and Singing David Soul's very physical maintenance of law and order, sparking much copycat jumping-on-to-parked-cars within Britain's younger generation.
The anti-violence lobby resulted in a lot of romantic schmaltz being grafted on to the fifth series.
But Starsky's cardie was a constant source of amusement during the blossoming of punk rock.
1977 Abigail's Party
SINISTER BLACK drawing room comedy?
We got it.
Less than cheery playwright Mike Leigh's vicious attack on the nouveau riche starred his wife Alison Steadman (for a change —not !) as dinner-hostess Beverley, wound up to the point of implosion with niceties, niggles and appearances.
As with Leigh's later TV and big screen works (Nuts In May ,High Hopes , etc), the viewer discomfort level is excruciating, making for a kind of garish English suburban Eraserhead …
With Alison Steadman.
This was the BBC's first part-improvised drama, and everyone in the world must watch it.
1978 Grange Hill
50,000 TONS of crude oil in the Channel, mass suicide in Guyana, Winter Of Discontent — who needed a kids' series that blew the lid (comparatively) off Britain's comprehensive school system?
Well, The Kids, clearly — since Tucker Jenkins, Pogo Patterson, Trisha Yates and Gripper Stebson all became household names and (hurrah!)
Mary Whitehouse denounced it for encouraging in-corridor insurrection, while Russell Knott from the National Association Of Schoolmasters complained that it made the teachers look like twats.
Bargain!
By '87,Grange Hill was watched by 36 per cent of all children and, when Zammo beat heroin addiction in '86, the ‘Just Say No’ single went to Number One and all heroin addicts went cold turkey (Ernest Bishop was shot in '78, by the way).
1979 Minder
COCKNEYS R Us, in the form of former Sweeney sidekick Dennis Waterman as Terry McGann and one-time St Trinians spiv George Cole as ‘shifty’ car-coat con-man Arfur (sic ) Daley.
Euston Films' future Christmas Period Stand-By was not an overnight success.
Trimmed down from a much nastier pilot to the duelling clowns schtick,Minder became even more popular than the true grit series like Out and Fox it originally sought to follow.
Along with crappy old Del Boy, It unfortunately gave idiotic Cockneyisms (‘My son ’, ‘Wind-up ’, ‘lovely jubbly ’ etc) national credence.
1980 Dallas
BANG! 27.3 million Britons tuned in to see who fired that long-overdue bullet at Southfork's J R Ewing in November.
Five hundred million the world over.
Thus, the arch US soap (which started in '78) reached a peak of public mania, and made the Nine O'Clock News .
Albion Market failed to do this.
Dallas set a glossy, high-powered, ruthless, kill-your-own-mother precedent with its fake grins, fake shoulders and fake breakfast camaraderie; a great, towering monolith of Hollywood buttocks, all expense spent.
Larry Hagman haggled almost four times his own fee to re-enrol after the (un-mortal) shooting.
Dynasty was never as good.
1981 The History Man
BACK IN Britain, the fashionably reactionary History Man , by Malcolm Bradbury, managed to tap into a rich vein of fading radicalism and shifting sexual politics with its raunchy tale of a shag-mental sociology lecturer Howard Kirk (Anthony Sher) working his way through the University of Watermouth (in real life, Warwick) and falling foul of authority.
Many RSC actresses removed their clothes, and it cost a lot less to make than that year's high-brow smash,Brideshead Revisited .
1982 The Young Ones
THIS WAS the year that Channel 4 was launched in a flurry of bogus controv about some swearing on Brookside (‘CHANNEL SWORE’ said the oh-so-clever Daily Express ).
But the real bombshell was busy occurring on that other ‘minority’ station, BBC2.
Co-written by then-nobody Ben Elton and starring then-nobodies Mayall, Planer and Edmondson, it took the half-hour sit-com framework and smashed it to bits with a sawn-off cricket bat.
Combining carbon violence with well-honed student stereotypes (as road-tested on the live alternative cabaret circuit), it made huge, mainstream stars of its three main protagonists, plus writer Elton and cameo star Alexei Sayle.
And it — quite literally — made ‘bastard’ an acceptable TV word.
1983 Auf Wiedersehen Pet
AS NEWLY-formed TV AM said Good Morning Britain , those likely lads Clement and Le Frenais waved goodbye to Blighty, and threw a disparate gang of regional archetype brickies together in Dusseldorf for good-humoured, working class comic-drama on-site.
A dumb Brummie, a tough-nut Geordie, a light-fingered Scouser, a cheeky Cockernee — it could so easily have been a clichéd mess.
On the contrary, well-rounded performances (especially from mild-mannered Kevin Whateley of future Morse fame and lovable brick shithouse Jimmy Nail) and gently interweaving domestic plotlines gave it much long-term potential.
When transplanted to Marbella and then an English country manor, it continued to flourish — despite that  f—ing awful theme song by Joe Fagin.
Dallas cowboy JR: ‘Who nicked mah NME?’
1984 Spitting Image
IT'S GONE right off the boil, armchair doctors of satire will inform you now.
But when top impressionists like Harry Enfield and John Sessions were doing the voices, and the very idea of a moving 3-D caricature commentary on topical matters with a genuinely daring anti-royal agenda was new and sexy,Spitting Image was unmissable.
Still ploughing onwards into the '90s — but with Steve Coogan and Hugh Dennis as its rather disappointing vocal suppliers and a rubbish PM to lampoon — it has had many ups and downs, usually within the space of one show.
No competition is its strength and, indeed, its downfall.
1985 Edge of Darkness
ECOLOGICAL CATASTROPHE, Star Wars, the CIA, bloody death, sabotage, weapons grade plutonium, running sores, a clothes Joanne Whalley, and all written by Z-Cars creator Troy Kennedy Martin,spoookeee serial Edge Of Darkness was '85's big BAFTA-hoover.
The most excellent and beaky anti-sex-symbol Bob Peck won one, for his spell-binding performance as Northern ‘tec Ronald Craven, and American Joe Don Baker was fab as Agent Jedburgh — interestingly, he was paid more than any of the British actors, grafted on to the show to appease US backers.
This Transatlantic co-operation was very definitely the way forward for big-scale Brit drama.
Bet Lynch took over the Rovers Return.
1986 Casualty
BRIAN DIVORCED Gail.
And the BBC turned the — one might think — mundane, depressing and unpleasant comings and goings of a city casualty department into a sexy soap-style drama.
Staff Nurse Charlie Whitehead (Derek Thompson) was the very first New Man sex-symbol — confused, caring, heart of gold, yet often incapable and flawed, and Brenda Fricker's sturdy performance as earth mother Megan led ultimately to her nabbing an Oscar for My Left Foot in 1990.
Each week, a comedian from the '50s or '60s would be wheeled in for cameo relief (eg Jimmy Jewel, Peggy Mount, Arthur English) as a cantankerous alcoholic old patient, and you were guaranteed one horrifying accident per 60 minutes.
1987 Tutti Frutti
AN UNLIKELY winner, John Byme's bright, affectionate (and, as usual, part-autobiographical) comedy may have been based on the dubious allure of flabby men playing rock 'n' roll in the '80s (Scotland's The Majestics, led by the formidable Robbie Coltrane) but it provided umpteen memorable supporting characters, some genuinely touching, if wacky, romantic interludes and tons of '50s classics for the nostalgia vote.
A sort of Celtic Spinal Tap for Teds, it also gave us seminal TV villain Eddie McClockerty, played by the god-like Richard Wilson.
Even Emma Thompson was bearable in it.
Phew.
Hilda Ogden left.
1988 Neighbours
AN EVEN more unlikely winner,Neighbours was bought in from Australia and only took off when Michael Grade moved it from lunch hour to teatime because his daughter, Alison, asked him to.
Sixteen million viewers thanked him for it, very soon dangerously hooked on the bronzed domestic shenanigans of Ramsay Street's self-pollinating families.
The buck-toothed actress behind girl mechanic Charlene — one K Minogue — took Nick Berry's course of action, stormed the charts and guaranteed the junior Antipodean Crossroads a massive cultural grip on the nation's consciousness.
Telly snobs will, of course, dismiss the show as lightweight, contrived pap.
Yeah, so?
1989 Roseanne
THE SIT-COM had died, to all intents and purposes.
Which is why the Americans saved our lives in '89.
Already treated to Taxi , then Hill Street Blues , then Cheers , then Golden Girls , even the most insatiable Yankophile was unprepared for the shot in the comedic ass that was Roseanne .
The brainchild of rotund, drawling comedienne Roseanne Arnold (née Barr), it dragged television into the less than perfect mid-western world of (cor!) working class folk.
Bud-chugging Dan turned John Goodman into a huge (ha ha) star, a remarkable portrayal of the sit-com hubby — neither a blithering, henpecked twerp who can't work the dishwasher, nor a big-mouthed house-yob, he is still dogged with outdated gender-expectations and prefers the company of motorbikes and poker-buddies.
In other words, a real character — who happens to talk in hilarious one-liners.
That's Roseanne !
1990 Twin Peaks
TELLY IS forever used as a springboard into the movies.
Sometimes, though, a big screen name ‘puts something back’.
David Lynch gave the box a piece of his (sick) mind with Twin Peaks , a tailor-made cult with wilful obscurisms, neat catchphrases, a truly scary plot about violent sex and lumber-town espionage.
Cherry pie, logs, eye patches, Killer Bob, damn fine coffee, backwards dwarves, Diane, that stunning Julee Cruise theme song — it was like the world of Stephen King hung upside-down, and, for the first series (eight weeks) at least, it was the Wednesday morning talking/quoting point.
Audience figures fell off during the weaker second series (21 episodes), but TV had already received its enema, and things would never be the same again.
1991 GBH
ALAN BLEASDALE had already carved his name into TV history in '82 with the harrowingly funny Boys From The Blackstuff .
But last year's GBH was seven hour-and-a-half episodes of broad, jaundiced political satire laced with classic double-bluffs, highly effective set-pieces, a touch of (Tory) evil and an abundance of food for thought.
Michael Palin played goody goody headmaster Jim, Robert Lindsay the deeply insecure bad guy allegedly not based on militant councillor Del Hatton — both lent the vastly ambitious saga the power and sympathy crucial to flesh out Bleasdale's artful comic polemics.
1992 TV Heaven
APART FROM the glorious Reg Holdsworth, and an occasional inspired dash of comedy (Harry Enfield, Angus Deayton, Vic'n'Bob) the best television of the early '90s is The Strange World Of Gurney Slade followed by On The Buses and Randall & Hopkirk Deceased .
Yep, stranded in the ITV franchise desert ('93, here we come!), it comes as no surprise that recession-hit telly has turned to its own back catalogue for a morale boost.
Channel 4's TV Heaven is the equivalent of Now That's What I Call Music — shameless retro zeitgeist wank split into individual years and presented with just the right tone of sobriety and knowingness by Frank Muir.
A bit like this article really…
Laura Palmer looking a bit Peaky
Roseanne: stars and Barr's
Anytime, anywhere, any place…
The Carter of their day, The Goodies
Neighbours’ Craig MacLachlan: ‘What?
Still no Cold Chisel retrospective?’
NME ON TELLY
EMMERDALE FARM
ENTIRE EPISODES in 1988 centred around a clandestine teen love affair; the ostensible excuse for the lovers to meet was always ‘I must show him/her my new copy of NME .’
(When they split up, she screwed up her copy of the paper, symbolically.)
THE BILL
WITH SEARING social accuracy, a young offender was nicked by the Sun Hill mob whilst sporting the exciting and attractive NME Elvis T-shirt, natch.
BROOKSIDE (1)
THE LOVELY Karen Grant tells her porcine pa, Bobby, ‘I want to be like Julie Burchill and write for the NME .’
We're still waiting for your Hoovers live review, ‘Kags’.
BROOKSIDE (2)
BIZARRE REDHEAD Gordon Collins forms a synth band.
Pompous pater Paul inquires: ‘Are you like Echo And The Bunnymen or Wah?’
As Gord looks on incredulously, Paul proclaims, ‘Oh yes, I read the NME every week.’
THE YOUNG ONES
AT A benefit gig held in the front room (featuring Radical Posture, led by Alexei Sayle) Rik berates the non-existent audience thus: ‘Don't you read the NME ?
It's as if Cliff Richard had never been born.’
CELEBRATION
ITV'S TIMELY Madchester documentary of 1990 was in theory an analysis of the then-post-burgeoning scene.
In reality, it was a thinly disguised plug for the world's most attractive rock weekly, and featured such vital footage as Peter Walsh photographing Stuart Maconie pissing in the Dry Bar toilets and James Brown looking at the ceiling.
ELECTION NIGHT, 1992
DURING A discussion about political bias in the press, Tim Rice stated that ‘Time Out ,The Guardian and NME support the Labour Party’.
‘I don't know,’ quipped Ben Elton.
‘These days, it seems to have a definite swing towards the Lib Dems!’
Cheers.
TELLY ADDICTS
THREE CHEERS for quarter-finalists The Collins Family from Northampton, whose wayward eldest son lost them millions of cred points by sporting a black NME T-shirt, thus causing Noel to be biased against them.
‘Is that still going?’ he asked, stupidly.
CORONATION STREET
EVEN THOUGH there has been a copy of the NME in The Kabin every week since 1974, no-one has ever bought one.
Except the MacDonald twins.
MACONIE'S MIX
ELP-STYLE fun and games with a harpsichord, presented by NME 's own Wigan Phil Oakey, for the lonely people of Border Television country.
Still being repeated at two in the morning on Scottish TV.
NME'S TV HEROES
GEOFFREY PALMER
ODD COVE, Johnny vacuum cleaner,Reginald Perrin ,Fairly Secret Army …nuff said.
Those minimalist lamb ads are shite, though.
OLD MAN STEPTOE
MORE DISGUSTO than The Levellers, more prone to emotional blackmail than Morrissey.
BASIL FAWLTY
SEXUAL REPRESSION, bigotry, neurosis and misplaced arrogance as Godhead.
STAN OGDEN, HILDA OGDEN AND EDDIE YEATS
CORONATION STREET 's menagerie à trois .
‘Where's me mushy peas, woman?’
That was the question.
NORM
LOUD POST-punk US Garage aficionado and bar gnome — he went to Smashed!, you know.
Erm,Cheers .
LEONARD ROSSITER
FOR RIGSBY, Reggie Perrin and saying ‘M-y-y-y God !’ like a sarcastic sheep.
YOSSER HUGHES
 ALL TOGETHER NOW —‘I can do that, gissa job!’
REGAN
SWEENEY BIG Cheese — like Inspector Morse only vicious, sadistic and worth watching.
ROBERT LINDSAY
‘POWER TO the people!’
Yeah, right on.
‘I wish I was a good man.’
Yeah, right on.
Me And My Girl on Broadway.
Whoops!
BOSS CAT/SGT BILKO
BOSS CAT (real name Top Cat, banned by the BBC for fear of accidentally advertising cat food) was an ace rip-off of the even more ace Bilko .
WIL E COYOTE
LIKE THE NME , ACME's most loyal mail-order customer never gives up chasing that elusive (beeping) grail of Rock Truth.
HOMER SIMPSON
‘BART!’
FAT, stupid, balding, selfish, Homer is a role model for us all.
And he's yellow.
VALERIE SINGLETON, JOHN NOAKES AND PETER PURVES
HANDS UP who still thinks it's funny to say ‘Here's one we made earlier’?
It's must cleverer to say ‘Last week we visited a model village in Scandinavia made entirely of coloured interlocking building blocks,’ ie, Legoland.
Earth to Blue Peter , Earth to Blue Peter .
SPOCK
HE HAD pointy ears and never took any shit from the fat ones in the wigs.
Hurrah!
And he had green blood and taught an entire generation to do splitty hand salutes.
BRIGADIER LETHBRIDGE STEWART
HOW COME, if he was head of the Killing Aliens Section of the army, he never believed Dr Who when he said there were aliens?
What a top bloke — especially in the episode nicked off Star Trek when he plays the evil Brigadier with an eye patch from another dimension.
NME'S TV BASTARDS
JIMMY HILL
WITH A beard, without a beard, same difference.
CHRIS TARRANT
HE LAUGHS and laughs and laughs.
We don't.
JIM DAVIDSON
NICK NICK.
Shut up, shut up, shut up!
Some of his best friends are black, you know.
ARTHUR FOWLER
EVEN IN the context of the glum, grey, morbid, maudlin Cockney Hell that is Albert Square, Arfur (sic ) stands out like a crumbling, unhappy mausoleum in the rain.
KEN BARLOW
THE ONLY man who could actually get Deirdre nicked off him.
We bet the Weatherfield Advertiser was a rattling good read under Ken's editorship.
Not !
OLLIE BEAK
WALLY WHYTON's avian puppet stooge, this lovable owl disturbs Stuart Baillie to this day.
The wanker.
INCH HIGH PRIVATE EYE
HANNA BARBERA's worst moment (though debate rages about Touche Turtle and Hong Kong Phooey), in which the ultra-diminutive ‘tec loses control of his height seemingly at random.
ALL NESCAFÉ ACTORS
IF YOU find yourself in a kitchen, making masturbatory gestures with a fistful of coffee at Diane Keen — sack your agent!
You have died and gone to TV Hell.
TONY HART
WE'RE SORRY we can't return any of your Gallery pictures, but not half as sorry as we are for inflicting this smirking, high-voiced, tubby toff with less personality than a plasticine man on you.
FRED DINEAGE
HOW ?
WHY, more like.
EVERYONE ON THE GOOD LIFE
BOMB SURBITON — pausing only to nail Felicity Kendall to a wall and throw Richard Briers’ severed head at her.
COWLEY
EVEN LESS memorable and vivid Gordon Jackson characterisation than class traitor Hudson.
JEREMY BEADLE
SOMETIMES YOU have to state the bleedin' obvious.
YOUNG, ‘GIFTED’ AND HACK
‘Yes?
Can I help you?’ goes the traditional but intimidating greeting, as a New Kid creeps humbly into NME's reception area, taking his/her very first steps into that mythical epicentre of Rock Wordage, that hallowed den of sex, filth, depravity, drug babble and staplers.
You have your own ideas about what the NME nerve centre is like — so did we.
And so, an indulgent round of reminiscences from some of the current crew about Their First Day At The NME — the expectations, the illusions, the public school waggery from the older boys…
Next week: My Last Day, by whoever thought this was a good idea…
STEVEN WELLS 1984
‘SO!
THIS is the cat who's going to save our asses!’ said NME editor Neil Spencer.
He went on to use the words ‘pad’, ‘chick’ and ‘street’in the next sentence.
I knew I had found my spiritual home.
Unfortunately I soon blotted my copy book by stating that Pete Townshend of The Who should be tried for cultural war crimes and made to issue a public apology.
‘Townshend has nothing to apologise for!’ screamed Spencer.
‘Nothing!’
I was a speed-freaking northern oik brought up on the afro-d ultra-hip gibberish of pre-senile Charles Shaar Murray, the manic sulphatic babblings of Tony Parsons and my then hero, Julie Burchill.
Unfortunately, the NME offices at this time were dominated by sad, prematurely middle-aged post-modernist bores, sneering at anything enthusiastic of smacking of the political in pop.
Having already written for the NME for several months as the transvestite sex-poet Susan Williams I was nervous, a straw sucker acting brash in a den of sophisticates.
It took me two minutes to realise what a bunch of inaddo wimps the hacks who had managed to destroy the NME 's ridiculously high punk circulation were.
My biggest disappointment?
NME hacks of the early '70s were given free drugs and sex by record companies.
By the time I got there, a recession and punk rock had knocked all that on the head.
Bastards.
TERRY STAUNTON 1986
AFTER SEVEN years of perfecting an original and incisive style of investigative journalism in the provinces, I relished the opportunity to move to the big city and expose the callous greed and avarice that had poisoned the cynical entertainment industry for so long.
Then editor Ian Pye gave me my first assignment: ‘Do the gig guide.
We write it out in longhand, each of the 700 or so entries on individual sheets of A4 paper and then put them into alphabetical order.’
When I had finished at 10pm, I joined Steven Wells and Dele Fadele at my very first lig.
We went to see a long-forgotten Arista band who had Julia Fordham on backing vocals.
Swells has two cans of Budweiser, called the MD a fascist and left before the band came on.
Dele told the A&R man to go choke on his own vomit.
I knew I'd found my spiritual home.
I got very drunk, boarded the wrong tube home and ended up at Heathrow at one in the morning.
STUART MACONIE 1988
I WAS eminently unqualified to work for NME .
I had a proper job teaching mad scallies in the people's republic of Skelmersdale.
I had never edited a fanzine and never heard anything by SPK or Bunny Wailer.
On the other hand, I had read the paper since I was 11 and had about half a dozen good jokes about The Cure that I was keen to share with the nation.
Having had three reviews printed and received a veiled death threat from The Godfathers, I was already something of a celebrity in my native Wigan when I took the train to Commonwealth House.
What a terrific afternoon it was, readers!
The big boys tried to make me feel at home by taking me to the greasy spoon for a pie but what did I care for food as the table rang with drug quips and acerbic one-liners about Danielle Dax from Gavin Martin, James Brown and Danny Kelly.
I was impressed by many things; Jack Barron's beret, Kevin Cummins' accent, Steve Lamacq's thinness.
I knew that the streets of the north would never seem the same.
At work the next week, the secretary popped her head through the door of the A-level sociology class and said ‘James Brown is on the ‘phone.
Can you fly to Seattle on Monday with Michael Hutchence?’
It was difficult to control the class after that, what with them jeering and making masturbatory gestures.
I often think of them now as I share a strawberry  daiquiri with Morrissey and Loz from Kingmaker in the Hyatt Buenos Aires.
I think I had found my spiritual home.
ANDREW COLLINS 1988
‘WHO ARE you looking for?’ enquired a soul boy behind a typewriter (who I later surmised to be Paolo Hewitt, author of Beat Concerto ).
I was looking for then features ed James Brown, who'd phoned me up on the strength of Issue One of my fanzine This Is This (which went on to sell in excess of 30 copies to my friends and family).
He's the little runt who sits there,’ snorted Mr Hewitt.
I was impressed with this ribald inter-office banter.
No-one was sitting at James Brown's desk.
I waited, thinking ‘What a tiny office this is.’
‘Who are you looking for?’ inquired a huge bespectacled gentleman (Danny Kelly) striding purposefully about.
‘Do you know what he looks like?’
No, I said.
He then produced a life-size cut-out of James Brown the Godfather Of Soul.
‘This,’ he smirked, proudly.
I had fallen for the oldest James Brown/James Brown joke in the book.
And I knew I had found my spiritual home.
James Brown interviewed me in an even smaller cupboard full of old NME s.
An aspiring writer, much inspired by the work of TS Eliot, Stephen King, Galton & Simpson and David Quantick, I was a little disappointed to be sent to be interviewed by the art editor for a job in the NME art room.
I got it.
Within weeks, I was features editor, had met Bon Jovi, grown my shifty Morrissey quiff out and got on the Music For Nations mailing list forever.
Issue Two of This Is This never came out.
You are reading it.
Ha ha.
FRED DELLAR 1972
THE NME was housed in a rambling, ramshackle, rabbit-warren of a building in Covent Garden's Long Acre.
Hi-tech it wasn't.
Alan Smith had just been appointed editor and was about to change the whole face of the paper, ditching those who revered Cilla as the greatest swinger on the block.
He had granted me a job interview.
Why, I still don't know.
I don't have any of the qualifications stipulated in the ad for a new writer.
‘Have you any new ideas?’ he enquired.
I hadn't, but I decided I'd better think of a few.
‘You've got to get ahead of the rest,’ I blurted.
‘They review records that are just getting into the shops.
But you should be in the studios talking about records that are being made, or in the import shops, writing about important albums that aren't available here yet.
Also, cassettes are about to grow into an important part of the market.
A lot of things are appearing on tape that are not on vinyl.
The NME should be covering this.’
Alan looked impressed.
Certainly I'd impressed myself.
I was even more chuffed when he said, ‘Right, you can supply a regular import column, a studio column and a tape column.’
I worked it out — I'd be receiving £21 a week, a living wage.
Every week.
And writing about music.
The world suddenly looked pretty good.
I knew I had found my spiritual home…
ROGER MORTON 1988
IT WAS a two-part induction process that dragged me into the brawling hostelry in the sky of NME Towers.
First, cavorting lunatic- savant features editor, James Brown, snogged my mate at a party.
I reckoned I could blackmail him into a job.
At a clandestine meeting in a North London bar, Brown tested me out by seeing if I could listen — without puking — to his stories about shagging wild women who dipped his dick in chocolate mousse.
I held on to my dinner like a man, which disappointed Brown, who clearly thought I wasn't.
Next was a brief chat with Editor Alan Lewis in his office.
‘You seem a little laid back,’ he said.
A sentence formed in my head.
‘Well that’ just the way it is when you're on smack, Alan.’
But I held on to my tongue, and got sent to interview Scottish big ears, Paul Haig.
I dropped the tape recorder on Old Compton Street and none of the in-depth mumbling came out.
So I wrote a piece about slugs and handed it in to Brown.
The bastard scribbled red lines through it and handed it back.
I knew I'd found my spiritual squat.
STEPHEN DALTON 1988
YOU KNOW those whining crapoids who write to Angst every other week vainly hoping to land a job at Britain's coolest, sexiest music paper?
I was one of those.
Disqualified from normal employment due to maverick intellect and sartorial eccentricity, I stepped off the dole into the Bacchanalian orgy of unbridled depravity that is contemporary rock'n'roll in late 1988.
On my first venture into the spanking new penthouse offices, clutching some very crap live reviews of some extremely crap bands, I encountered a bizarre race of pointy-headed mutants who had remained hidden from civilisation for countless generations.
Rushing for the exit, I found my escape blocked as a chorus of sinister cackling closed in around me.
Since then, this deserted corner of King's Reach Tower has been my spiritual home, but I gradually overcame the contemptuous disdain which is heaped on all outsiders and now, finally, I feel the natives are accepting me as one of their own.
EDWIN POUNCEY 1986
‘CAN YOU do an exploding monster drawing for the letters page?’ enquired the then art editor over the ‘phone.
‘Errmm…
I'm sure I could,’ I blearily replied.
‘BY TOMORROW THEN!’ he barked back, and slammed down the receiver.
I had just received my first commission from the world's greatest rock read and I had less than 24 hours to deliver the goods.
‘Easy!’
I thought.
With less than two hours to go, I had yet to design the perfect slime beast and I was beginning to have panic attacks.
What if I wasn't up to the task?
What if all this was merely a wind-up?
Oh, the shame and humiliation.
With only one hour and 30 minutes to go I squirted out a cheap-looking burning skull design, slapped on a logo and sent the damn thing off with only minutes to spare.
‘S'great!’ came back the response from King's Reach Tower.
‘Can you do us another one for next week?’
I had a career!
I have since given up (well, almost) drawing ‘exploding monsters’ for NME and have become their correspondent for anything weird, wonderful and, occasionally, musical.
I must confess to the odd panic attack every so often, though…
Now when was this memoir supposed to be in by?
Yesterday!
Oh Gawd!
A few inmates of the NME home for wayward boys and girls (l to r): Dele Fadele, Sherman, Steve Lamacq and Stu Bailie — sorry, girls, they're all spoken for!
SHERMAN 1990
ARRIVED AT Techno Towers to discover that computers had not yet been invented.
Installed an Apple Mac sampler at every desk and things have never been the same since.
Got squashed in the photo files by Brendon Fitzgerald, broke the photocopier, got lost looking for the canteen, uncovered the truth about IPC tea, became Dele Fadele's personal typewriter ribbon engineer (have been ever since), discovered House music had not yet reached Waterloo, realised that guitars really are the work of the devil, mended the then extremely sad NME stereo (ie, plugged it in) and was quickly appointed technical supervisor to anything mechanical (plugs, electrical toothbrushes), invented dance music, formed Subbuteo league with James Brown and Simon Dudfield which eventually became fixed beyond all belief, tried to blag a Misty In Roots CD and failed.
In the evening I went out to a club, stayed up all night, was late for  work the next morning, got sacked and ever since then the rest of the staff have been kind enough to pretend that I'm still one of them.
GAVIN MARTIN 1979
CARNABY STREET was awash with the detritus of the punk generation.
From the third floor offices of the NME you could gaze down on the clueless hordes below.
Ahh, such a warm feeling of superiority in the cultural heart of the megalopolis.
Newly arrived from foreign parts, I was amazed to find how casual, even slovenly, were the writers on the world's top selling music paper.
Still they were a generous, friendly bunch and they told me to make myself at home until the editorial meeting later in the afternoon.
I wandered round the office and entered the windowless iron lung that they called a review room, heavy with the smell of exotic cheroots.
I noseyed around some more and came to the kitchen full of mould filled teacups and, in the fridge, some cans of beer.
Excellent!
I polished off the lager, put my feet up and waited for the editorial meeting.
When it came, what a bore — no beer, no fancy cheroots, just a long discussion about the validity of putting Sham 69 on the cover.
I was just about to nod off when the editor, wrapping up proceedings with the customary ‘Anymore for anymore?’ query, was interrupted by a large-bellied, red-faced, bearded bloke.
‘I'd like to know what  c- is stealing my lager from the fridge,’ he thundered in a none too amiable Cockney accent.
Brought down to earth with a bang, I sheepishly confessed, not yet aware that I had found my spiritual home.
Allegedly.
STUART BAILIE 1988
I MOSEYED into the NME offices bearing a still-throbbing psychic wound and a mittful of rejection letters.
I said hello to everybody and looked into their eyes for hints of recognition — that these famous musical arbiters and copy- fuhrers might remember my earlier attempts to bum a job on the journo rollercoaster.
There was Gazza Martin, the man who'd slashed out his verdict, ‘The tone and attitude of your piece stinks’ in response to my idealistic scribblings.
There was Danny Kelly, the man who'd binned my review of The Blubbery Hellbellies at The Bull And Gate.
Both of 'em were extremely cordial — the bastards.
So was old Jacko, who'd made me re-write at Thrills piece twice and still didn't run it.
So I'd spent the intervening three years elsewhere, writing for a fun pop paper and then polishing turds in the press office of a hateful record company.
Now we were to be reconciled and it was the beginning of a thrilling era for both parties.
Who else would have done those things for the NME — hanging out in Dingle Bay with Mike Scott and an accordion-bashing cow farmer, taking in the transvestite clubs with Fabulous, and singing ‘Would You Take It In Your Mouth, Mrs Murphy?’ atop a hotel table in Moscow.
I knew I had found my  spiritual , hully-gully home.
MARY ANNE HOBBS 1990
WITHIN THE first three minutes, I had punched NME photographer Kevin Cummins squarely on the nose.
And have never regretted it.
Because this cuffing left the illusion that I am ‘harder’ than most of the ‘boys’in the office.
Except Danny Kelly, whom I feel will always be considerably more formidable than I.
Anyway, James Brown — who ‘poached’ me from Sounds to procure information on ‘rock’music, an alien genre to NME staff flourishing on a staple diet of Ecstasy and Ribena in the halcyon daze of ‘indie dance’in 1990 — ordered me out on my first ‘job’to interview Page Three ‘model’Maria Whittaker, whose debut single had stormed the UK Charts at Number 138…with Kevin Cummins…
DELE FADELE 1985
TWO WEEKS after I'd made an appointment to see Neil Spencer (editor) with writing samples and DJ charts from the UK, it was time to hand in my first article for the beloved, much-worshipped NME .
Determined to follow in the stellar footsteps of Paul Morley, Chris Bohn and Ian Penman, I had spent hours sculpting a live review of Mark Stewart And The Mafia at the then-vibrant Camden Electric Ballroom.
I took the tube to Carnaby Street, walked past the colourful street bazaars and ended up in the office, heart almost in mouth.
The bohemian squalor that greeted my eyes was quite appealing.
Not that anyone was shooting up heroin at their desks or anything, but the glazed eyes of some of the dishevelled staff suggested that they were well acquainted with the teachings of Robert Nesta Marley and perhaps worse.
I knew I'd found my spiritual home.
Don Watson was all dressed in black and hiding in the dark room, I heard.
Cath Carroll looked at my hole-filled jeans and nascent dreads and tittered.
Then I had an audience with Danny Kelly, then the live editor.
‘I'm afraid, Dele, we can't accept this,’ he said.
‘But…but I thought the NME could handle this,’ I stuttered in reply.
‘Call us when you find something else you're interested in doing,’ were his final words as he turned away.
Only now do I realise my series of mistakes.
Apart from the almost unspeakably dense prose, I had written the piece in three different colours of pen (NME is professional, not a fanzine; you have to type everything) and signed the piece ‘Dele Heroin’ which was too close in pronunciation to ‘Deal Heroin’for comfort.
DAVID QUANTICK 1985
WHEN I was a boy, running naked daubed in human blood with the Mod gangs of pre-Thatcherite East Devon, we read NME and Sounds and spat the venomous arguments of Burchill, Morley and Baker in the faces of the sofa-lounging Genesis fans of the soft sixth form.
Five years later, I picked up an NME and read a huge, slavering review of bloated AOR rock beardie Bob Seger.
Bob Seger?
What a git!
I immediately sat down and wrote my one and only letter to NME , an angry broadside detailing what was wrong with the paper.
BOB SEGER IS NOT ENOUGH!! it seethed, rather absurdly.
A week later, editor Neil Spencer wrote back, inviting me to do better.
I went to see him.
The NME offices were in a scabrous Carnaby Street hovel full of pre-war typewriters, hacks coughing huge clouds of non-Silk Cut type smoke and loads of drunken men and women swigging cheap wine from plastic cups.
‘This looks like a good job,’ I though, unaware that I had arrived in the middle of Danny Baker's leaving party.
Neil invited me into his office — the only room in the building with even the vaguest resemblance to modern architectural demands — and gave me some cheap wine and a Benson & Hedges.
He asked me what writers I liked and looked strange when I mentioned Paul Morley.
Neil gave me a Peter Tosh album and a record by The Urban Dogs.
Ten minutes later, drunk as a judge, I staggered out into the afternoon with the two LPs under my arm and ten years of getting paid once every two months ahead of me.
I knew I'd found my spiritual home and I still think Bob Seger is crap.
PRISCILLA WATKINS 1990
THE FIRST thing I had to do at the NME was draw a cucumber.
Something to do with a Bob Geldof feature needing an underlay.
I don't remember the rest — I was too scared.
I still am.
BETTY PAGE 1990
HAVING BEEN a close follower of The Lone Groover and loon pant ads in the NME of the '70s, I had formed a lasting impression of The World's Greatest Rock Weekly as an impenetrable fortress of wit, intellect and sneering clever-gits.
Thus, I spent ten years working for Other Music Papers, never daring to aim for The Big One, editing Record Mirror and blooding young pups like Stuart Bailie and Roger Morton for greater things.
Some time later, I was persuaded to try for a spot in the formidable writer's Waterloo that is the NME Subs' Room.
On the first day I pass the acid Fitzgerald test.
Spookily enough, I had come full circle: I was back working for Alan Lewis, the man who'd given me my first music press job — as his secretary at Sounds , back in (gulp) 1977.
Then I laughed at the first of Danny Kelly's many amusing jokes, met The World's Greatest Rock Photographer, realised there was no NME clique, and knew I'd found my spiritual home.
STEVE LAMACQ 1988
ARRIVED to start as a sub-editor with the people who, among other things, are responsible for spelling and grammar in the paper.
Was appalled to find myself given a first task of writing a blurb for a feature on the dreadful Gaye Bykers On Acid.
The disparaging rant I wrote contained no less than two spelling mistakes.
Thus was set the standard for my spell in the Production Department…
DANNY KELLY 1984
IT WAS the winter and I had a proper job at my spiritual home, British Rail.
I had been freelancing reviews for NME , but always sent them by post, when the very nice man at Sounds poached me to go and do nice juicy features.
Six weeks into my ‘Sounds career’, however, the phone ringing shattered the velveteen calm of the Area Manager's Office at Victoria.
It was Neil Spencer, editor of NME , suggesting rather embarrassedly that I come and see him.
Two days later, I approached his office in the NME 's bunker in Carnaby Street with a mixture of excitement and trepidation.
It was my lunch hour and I was dressed classic BR Clerk Chic (beer-stained jacket, tightly knotted skinny tie, crimplene shiny ass pants and shoes with animal tracks and a useful compass in the heel).
I had quite forgotten that NME was, in those far off days, obsessed with fashion and that Spencer, lovely man in every way, was the leader of the Style Police…
Thus it was that, as I was wheeled perspiring into the editor's office, that the first words ever spoken to me by an NME bigwig will remain with me for the rest of my life.
With his hand pressed firmly to a creased brown, Spencer uttered: ‘Oh man, if I'd known you were gonna wear shoes like that, we wouldn't have been having this conversation…‘
BETTER READ THAN DEAD
AND THERE BUT FOR THE GRACE OF GOD…
The big issue…
People see music publishing as a licence to print money, which, to an extent, it is.
There's nowt folk like more than reading about a good tune, so for as long as there is pop music, there will be glossies, inkies, monthlies, weeklies, columns, companions, fanzines, tradezines, pull-outs, poster-mags, flexi-mags, the lot.
But 40 years is a long, long time in the publishing caper.
While NME has thrived, dipped, flourished, teetered and survived , countless others have not been so lucky.
Here is a catalogue of those titles (some influential, sadly-missed, essential, colourful and legendary, others not so) which have ‘gone down’ during our time.
Again, this is no gloating sesh — without competition,NME wouldn't be this good — merely a roll-call of those that died so that we may live…
KEY TO ROCK MAG GRAVEYARD
1.
 REVVOLUTION : Not strictly dead, of course, but ‘resting’ according to publisher Jonathan King.
2.
MUSIC SCENE: Early '70s attempt to do glossy NME.
Not bad, actually.
3.
NUMBER ONE: Once sister title to NME and rival to Smash hits.
Bought by BBC in 1989; closed by BBC in 1991.
4.
BLITZ: Massively successful in the Groucho Club (Soho media watering hole).
Mostly about the Groucho Club.
5.
THE HIT: Highly expensive girls style magazine for boys launched by IPC, gulp, which flopped a big ‘un.
The first issue had a massive article on archery!
6.
NEW MUSIC: Three or four issues only.
Attempted cash-in on the punk fanzine boom.
7.
ZIG ZAG (1): Once rather excellent rock and punk bible that spawned many ace writers.
8.
ZIG ZAG (2): Watered down relaunch notable for high Goth content and astonishingly unreadable layouts.
Designed to be ‘read’ by candle-light.
9.
ZIG ZAG (3): Diluted re-launch of the watered down relaunch (see above).
Lasted one issue.
Lucky.
10.
NEW SOUNDS, NEW STYLES: Early '80s attempt to emulate The Face .
Which is exactly what it fell on.
11.
POPSTER MONTHLY: Excellent one-band-per-month profile mag that folded out into giganto poster of said stars.
12.
JAMMING: Punk fanzine that grew into glossy monthly and then didn't grow any more.
Edited by The Alarm's official biographer.
Fact!
13.
CHARTBEAT: Sounds a bit like ‘Heartbeat’.
Clever wording, we know.
Cheers.
14.
MUZE: Manchester scene 'zine before there was a Manchester scene.
15.
RAGE: Recent recession casualty set up to cash in on Manchester/Acid/Rave thing.
Edited by ex-NME switchboard operator Gary Crowley.
16.
UNDERGROUND: Brave attempt to do truly alternative ‘indie’ mag.
Printed on worse paper than NME, curiously .
17.
NOISE: Ill-starred precursor to the whole teen-'zine glossies boom, edited by now NME publisher Alan Lewis.
What chance did it stand?
18.
SUPERSONIC: The magazine of Mike Mansfield's once ‘groundbreaking’ TV prog.
And cue closure!
19.
PUNK'S NOT DEAD: This magazine, however, is.
20.
FLEXIPOP: Brilliant, ahead-of-its-time pop mag that came with a free flexi (Blondie, The Jam, Adam And The Ants etc) on the cover.
People nicked the records and left the mags clogging up WH Smith's shelves.
A shame.
21.
STRANGE THINGS ARE HAPPENING: Wacky and occasionally fascinating late-'80s psychedelic update.
22.
POP PICS: Absolutely no words!
23.
EX: This is an ex-magazine.
24.
MUSIC PARADE: In the '60s, Music Parade was the NME, while the NME was Cilla Black Weekly!
25.
SOUNDS: Sadly missed rock 'n' roll weekly that gave a start to half NME's current glitterati.
First on the scene with punk, while NME argued over Supertramp's ‘latest waxing’!
26.
FABULOUS 208: Started life as Fabulous and then became house mag of Radio Luxembourg.
Finally ended life as Fab 208.
Always had 11 colour pin-ups and an article about The Walker Brothers!
27.
STREET LIFE: Attempted mid-'70s cross between NME and Rolling Stone.
You know, like salmon and chocolate flavour mousse.
28.
POP STAR WEEKLY: Weakly.
29.
SUPERPOP: The magazine's logo says it all.
30.
RECORD MIRROR: Another much-lamented victim of the current resesh (unless you count the sad rump left in Music Week, which we don't).
In its time, the best chart pop mag and a DJ's bible.
31.
NEW WAVE NEWS: It was new wave (whatever that means!).
It had no news.
ALSO RANS:
DATE OF THE ART
Win a fabbo personal CD player!
Birthday fun!
We've teamed up with Kodak, Kenwood and our own Live Ads section to bring you a top competition.
The two winners will get a fantastic Kenwood CD player complete with carrying case, headphones, battery charger and all manner of other desirable add-ons.
The 250 runners-up will get a consolation prize of a pack of six Kodak extra-life batteries, manufactured without mercury so they're well green!
All you have to do to get your hands on the goodies is to study the adverts on this page and pick, from the choice below each ad, the year in which they actually appeared in our Live Ads section.
Fill your answers on the coupon provided, send it to LIVE ADS  by June 1, and Roberta is your aunt.
Simple as that.
GREAT POP THINGS
40 YEARS OF THE N.M.E.
‘WHY OH WHY DID THEY TRY TO CHANGE THE WORLD BY REPEATEDLY CONTRADICTING THEMSELVES (AND WERE WE REALLY AT THE SAME GIG?)
1952: Queen Elizabeth 2nd crowned: music in the doldrums.
Nobody is any good, and the only thing on TV is this windmill going round.
Something has to be done…
NME launched midst great clamour
1956: after years of writing about nothing much happening 'cos everything is crap THE BEAST IS BORN…
Rock'n'Roll explodes all over the scene.
The NME rushes to embrace Cliff Richard, the young ‘bete noir’ of this movement…
We were afraid that Brian might fall off
Buy hipsters!!!!
Early 60s: NME becomes a with-it teeny-bop magazine covering the Beatles, Stones Freddy and them Dreamers etc.
The Rollers make the cover when they refuse to go on the circling stage on ‘Sunday Night at the London Palladium’…
QUESTIONS IN THE HOUSE
What's all this about?
Late 60s early 70s: FLOWER POWER: NME is taken over by the complete staff of OZ magazine.
FREE plastic flowers on cover, rest of issue unreadable except for Ray Lowry cartoon depicting Rupert Bear doing sex with Harold Wilson…
1974: Twilight of Cool, the dream is over etc etc…
Emerson, Lake, Bruford and Palmolive win every category in the NME poll even though they are never featured in the paper and no one will admit voting for them.
NB: everyone who did NOW VOTES TORY!!!
1977: THE PUNK ROCK!
NME consists entirely of rude words out of other music papers (eg. ‘****’) and stuck on with earwax.
Controversial Gary Burchill, a lesbian-jewish-Nazi-transvestite, creates controversy with her unorthodox views…
Early '80s: New Romanticals…twilight of NME, the staff reject ROCK music in its entirety, labelling it ‘ROCKIST’ and tell the kids to all go to night clubs in London and buy expensive cocktails and read the FACE…where are they now?…
OOOH LOOK HOW RUDE A GIRLIE'S BARE BACK!
HOW DISGUSTING TUT TUT!
1992: The NME puts popular chanteuse P.J. Harvey's naked back on the cover.
Several journalists from rival publications take umbrage at this and a ‘is the human back a naughty bit’ controversy/debate ensues…
HAPPY BIRTHDAY…
The End.
WRITE SAID FRED
EDITED BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR
SPECIAL
NME RECORDS & TAPES 1972 –'92; debate Love it or hate it, the one thing you can never deny about the NME is that — even when it isn't immediately evident from the paper's contents — we've always adored music.
Hence was born the catalogue of NME -only releases that has stretched over the last 20 years.
The good (The Clash's ‘Capital Radio’, ‘Pocket Jukebox’, tons more), the bad (that Emerson, Lake & Palmer EP) and the ugly (that ELP EP again!)…
Since that cracking debut (‘Exile On Main Street’ pre-release excerpts!), we've put out a succession of records and tapes.
Some have been classics of their genre (some of our reggae and C&W compilations, for instance), some have captured, however controversially, the spirit of the age and set the debate buzzing (‘C86’) and others just made piles of dosh.
Not for us, though…
‘Sgt Pepper Knew My Father’ and ‘The Last Temptation Of Elvis’made, thanks to the generosity of the participating musicians and you, our open-fisted readers, over £750,000 for kids' charidees…
Anyway, enough guff.
Here, for the nostalgic or merely curious among you, is the complete list of all the stuff we've put out over the years.
Let's, erm, rock…
STOP PRESS: Due to genuine public demand, we are currently in the process of getting together a bunch of our classic compilations for reissue on CD (NME leaps into the 20th Century!) in the near future.
Let's hope your particular favourite is among them.
Watch these pages in the next couple of months for full and exciting details.
YOU ARE NOW JUST 1 WEEK AWAY FROM NEXT WEEK'S RATHER NORMAL NON-BIRTHDAY ISSUE
Yes!
It will be 52 pages big!
It will cost 65p!
It will be full of regular features!
Next week's NME is a new dawn of rock publishing.
In 40 years' time they'll say ‘It was the first one out after the 400th Birthday Issue’.
No back-slapping, no nostalgia, no history, no round-ups, no reprints, no celebrating whatsoever.
Guaranteed.
Instead,.
Plus all the usual tawdry, grey, bog-standard filler you  know and love as the NME .
Sod the past, let us face the future together, kids!
It's certain to be hanging hopefully around the nation's news-stands in big piles until about Saturday, so don't put yourself out ordering it or anything.
That was then, this is wow
OK, so why's he on the cover, and why don't we just change our name to New Morrissey Express and be done with it?
Weeell , to our knowledge, no-one else quite sums up the paper over the past ten or so years — rarely has a pop personage and his relationship with a music paper produced so many sparks, so much debate, so much excellent copy, and (ahem) so many yards of Angst .
And no-one likes a spot of moist-eyed nostalgia as much as Moz!
Not only that, but he was an NME contributor in his own right back in the late '70s — as fired-up man of letters.
Here, then, are those Morrissey missives in full…
SPARK PLUGS
TODAY I bought the album of the year.
I feel I can say this without expecting several letters saying I'm talking rubbish.
The album is ‘Kimono My House’ by Sparks.
I bought it on the strength of the single.
Every track is brilliant — although I must name ‘Equator’, ‘Complaints’, ‘Amateur Hour’ and ‘Here In Heaven’as the best tracks, and in that order.
STEVE MORRISSEY,
Migawd.
Conviction oozes from every sentence like the very ichor of life itself from the metal life-support systems of the Bronze Giant of Fangorak.
The eyes of Mr.  Morrissey gleam with a missionary zeal that shames into submission the cringing doubts of those yet unconvinced.
Me?
I dunno.
I ain't  heard the thing yet.
S'pose it's all right, though.
I THOUGHT it was terrific when David JoHansen of the New York Dolls delivered such quips a: ‘Who cares about the music when one has such sense of drama?’ and, ‘We don't play too good but we can dance as bad as we want,’and ‘We don't hold concerts — we throw parties!’, and ‘It doesn't bother us when people say that we can't play, when we met we actually couldn't,’etc, etc, but all these sweeping statements were launched in 1973, and when those same  epigrams are repeated three years later by lesser mortals (i.e. Sex Pistols, Runaways, Ramones and Kiss), things begin to look synthetic.
Methinks that the Dolls weren't the ‘damp-squib’ that Nick Kent would have  led us to believe, because if you look closely at the increasing number of British ‘punk’bands emerging by the shipload, you will see in each one, a little bit of the Dolls.
I think  it's time that NME broke the office rules and had an article on the New York Dolls.
You know it makes sense.
STEVEN MORRISSEY
It does?— N.S.
It does — D. JoHansen.
A MERE further mention of punk rock would no doubt bring bellowing yawns from all quarters, as its five minute stint at serious musical acceptance seems long overdue.
The elements of punktitude are still apparent within my good degenerate self, however, and I have the impertinence to inform the masses of a quartet infamously known as Buzzcocks who seem to fit so neatly into the punk category, yet have been eschewed from all chances of recognition.
Buzzcocks differ in only one way from their contemporaries: they possess a spark of originality (that was important once, remember?), and their music gives you the impression they spent longer than the customary ten minutes clutching the quill in preparation to write.
Indubitably, Buzzcocks will hardly figure strongly — or even weakly — in the NME poll, and in these dark days when Patti Smith, Loudon Wainwright or even the New York Dolls fail to make any impact on Radio One DJs, common sense is therefore not so common.
Both this letter and Buzzcocks themselves will probably be filed and forgotten.
But for now, they are only the best kick-ass rock band in the country.
Go and see them first and then you may have the audacity to contradict me, you stupid sluts.
STEVE MORRISSEY,.
I hardly feel like replying to your letter since No-one (especially Velda) likes to be called ‘a slut ’.
However, since you have no doubt spent hours piecing this letter together (must have taken you hours , my dear, to get all those words out)— I'll grudgingly acknowledge its existence.
Finally the Editor says to tell you, though I don't see why I should, that a Paul Morley piece on Buzzcocks — such a vulgar name — is even now being typeset at our printers for use in a future issue.
Now go away , you nasty little brat .
AFTER WITNESSING Johnny Thunders & The Heartbreakers live, my much revered Carly Simon, Loudon Wainwright, Jefferson Airplane, Buffy Sainte Marie, N.Y.
Dolls, Phil Ochs and Patti Smith albums are presently smouldering nicely on a low light.
Don't talk to me about any band but the Heartbreakers because I just won't listen — these boys are newer than the New Wave and (surprise!) they can play!!
What's even more amazing is that the Heartbreakers' music is both memorable and professional, something which is seemingly least expected from a New Wave band.
The seventies start here.
STEVE MORRISSEY .
P.S. I work for the Inland Revenue — am I still allowed to be a punk?
You lie.
You work for Johnny Thunders & The Heartbreakers.
CHAMOIS 69
Last year they were just another band; now pearls of suave SUEDE are steamingly hot pop-fop property.
SIMON WILLIAMS enters their world, where style, glamour, sexiness and tack are kings, and hears a glorious noise not unlike The Smiths beamed back to 1973.
They've got it, and they flaunt it.
The wonder buff: STEFAN DE BATSELIER
Some time last summer, a flamboyant bunch of young fops could be found flaunting their weirder-than-thou wares around the stalls of London's musical marketplace.
They wiggled their hips when everyone else was too self-conscious to sniff on stage.
They wriggled their basslines where others feared to have fun.
They pinched the backside of the indie monster when sexy flirtations were as fashionable as tank-tops.
They were called Suede, and nobody gave a toss about them.
‘When we were messing around last year, we were playing the same songs to the same music biz people,’ asserts softly-spoken guitarist Bernard Butler, softly.
‘And although we probably weren't as proficient as performers then, those people were still saying, ‘ F— off, you  c—s !
You can't do that!’
So were Suede crap at that time?
‘Erm, no!’ responds surprised singer Brett Anderson.
‘There has always been a germ of what we are now, it just wasn't as focused.’
‘Basically,’ announces bassist Mat Osman, emphatically, ‘last year we were just another band…‘
Aha!
QUITE HOW it happened is open to public conjecture, but from being ‘just another band’ a few milliseconds back, the sumptuous, swaggering pearls of suave currently referred to as Suede today find themselves the red-hottest property on a lukewarm market.
Rumours a-rumble of half a million pounds deals being thrust beneath their fringes.
Gratuitous responses — whether they be wondrous or scathing — are already de rigueur at their shows.
And, from being part-time entertainers on the toilet circuit, Suede have been disturbingly promoted to potential saviours of the entire music industry.
So who the bally hell are they?
They are a group of impeccably-mannered, youngish tykes with alarmingly pallid complexions and lazy, floppy brown locks to a man.
Except for drummer Simon Gilbert, who's a screaming redhead, which is brilliantly ironic considering he says one thing throughout the entire two-hour interview.
And even that's some disparaging mumble about a Bum video.
Fortunately, his colleagues aren't so averse to a spot of enunciation: if Verve have got a nerve and Adorable have the babble than Suede have a warming way with words that's more matter-of-fact than mad as a hatter.
Basically, every compliment that has been chucked in Suede's direction during the past ten minutes the band wholeheartedly, erm, agree with.
‘We've been completely ignored for a long time, which has been a pretty good thing because it's given us time to develop,’ beams Brett.
‘If we'd been pounced upon a year ago we'd have had maybe one good song and we would have been shit and not ready, without our style defined.’
‘Style’?
Eeeeek!
‘I'm happy to be seized upon now because it's in a positive, rather than desperate way and I'm ready for it,’ continues the chap who puts the ‘entertain’into ‘entertainment’.
‘People are seizing us because we're able to write good songs in a stylistic vein that's quite different to the way songs have been written recently in contemporary music.
I also think we've got a certain accessibility in our performance that people haven't really seen for a while: we're willing to perform.’
Ouch!
The nail is hit fairly and most squarely on the head.
ON THE sleeve of Suede's debut single, ‘The Drowners’, there is a picture of a female model made up to look like a man, with her naked body hidden beneath a painted-on outfit.
As a veritable web of gender contradictions, it says a tremendous amount about Suede as artists.
The image is also the perfect entrance for what's occurring on the record.
Inside lurk three songs of head-wobbling grandeur and limb-twitching turmoil: blame the pseudo-tribal beats, or Brett's falsetto flurries, or Bernard's bonkers guitar, but ‘The Drowners’, the massive ‘To The Birds’ and ‘My Insatiable One’all ooze intelligence, drip with drama and spurt forth dollops of sexual, erm, spunk.
Brett howls ‘He's my insatiable one’ like a man who's going to get wicked pleasure from baffling passing milkmen, and it's all rather lurid and glamorous and hilarious and marginally affected and hugely,wildly effective.
Suede know precisely what they're doing.
Shame we haven't got space in which to write it all down.
‘It's all about appealing on a number of levels and none of the levels are more important than any other,’ explains Brett.
‘You can stop at any point and be satisfied with the level you've explored.’
So Suede are like a tower block, while the shoe-gazers were merely bungalows, right?
‘It depends what kind of scenarios are going on on each floor and in each room of the tower block,’ ponders The One Who Doesn't Object To Wearing (Hopefully Fake) Fur Coats.
‘We're an infested, interesting tower block.
I would describe the Shoe-gazers as being a bungalow, but they're in a…slightly empty tower block, where no-one's particularly interested in living any more.’
I ask Brett to define the ‘style’ he mentioned earlier.
Brett asks Mat.
Mat wakes up — a particularly scary experience as the bassist is eight feet tall.
‘Our style?
Ummm…
I think it's just about being a bit more total about the whole thing than more bands are,’ he decides, unnerving the public ceiling.
‘There's been a reversal to bands saying, ‘We're just in it for the music’, and we're not like that at all.
We want Suede to be a whole world — we're incredibly concerned about the way we're presented.
I find that loads of people around today are remarkably unambitious.
They don't seem to want to make every part fantastic and extreme and beautiful, and it has to look fantastic…‘
And so the shirts — like your '70s relics — have to look naff?
‘Oh, I don't think they look crap at all!’ he protests, casually.
‘There are some people who think this is like a camp joke, the way we dress is so bad it's good.’
‘I think it's so good it's good, actually,’ purrs Brett.
‘We're not into clever puns on previous generations and, oh, isn't it cool that we're doing a Don McLean cover version?
Bollocks!
I remember a while ago someone told me he thought I should be wearing platform shoes, but we're not into having symbols of different generations, we're just into style as a ‘thing’: we're into flaunting things, it's just part of what we are.’
After all, tack is essentially intentional and, according to Mat, that's the last thing Suede are.
‘Every time we've tried to do something we just fail miserably.
Really!
If we sat down now and tried to write something fashionable, we couldn't do it — our hearts wouldn't be in it, and it would sound bollocks.
It's like a year ago when no-one liked us we were thinking, what are we doing wrong?
And we realised that this is all we can do.
We haven't got a manifesto.
And we're not a reaction — we're not saying, ‘Oh, the past five years have been bollocks, here we are!’
TRYING TO imagine Suede on Top Of The Pops , one pictures a mint condition Morris Minor Traveller (with the wooden bits on the window frames) in a stock car race comprised of BMW 320s or some other Yuppie-scum-sucking vehicle of that nature.
That doesn't really grasp the point, but it sets Bernard off on another low-fi tirade against ‘jump up and down bands’ becoming part of the mainstream and generally bringing the whole world down: ‘I could imagine Revolver being on Top Of The Pops , but I couldn't imagine David Bowie being on,’he seethes, delicately.
‘I could imagine the Senseless Things, but I can't imagine Marc Bolan being resurrected from an enormous star in the sky and having Pan's People dancing around him, and that was what was good for me!
‘Our ambition doesn't end after our initial appearance on Top Of The Pops and maybe having a party after gig or whatever,’ he perseveres, passionately.
‘It seems almost cool to play 200 gigs a year and get in the Top Ten, when that's all it is, you don't even need to be that good!
That's because there's no-one else around who can offer anything else — no-one!’
Except Suede, right?
This, dear reader, is just the tiniest tip of an absolutely enormo iceberg: there's heaps more stuff about the macabre, the theatrical and the perverted; the awkward, the romantic and Suede's ‘extraordinary intensity’; not to mention fairground mirrors and all the other fevered topics of conversation and how Suede are so quintessentially English the term could have been invented for them.
That's without mentioning how important it is for Suede to hurtle into people's lives…
‘It's very important — that's the kind of band we are,’ breathes Mat.
‘There's not much point in it otherwise.
I think we've got aesthetics to offer that aren't around in contemporary music.
We're doing something stylistically which should be encompassed in people's lives at the moment.’
Fact: Brett Anderson shares the same birthday as the Bros twins.
The stars are already shining in Suede's eyes.
The new new romantics Suede (l to r):
LONG PLAY
EDITED BY STUART BAILIE
IRON MAIDEN
Fear Of The Dark
HAIL THE Masters Of Their Own Particular Universe!
With added pick-ups on!
And flangers to go!
Iron Maiden are the kind of people who put the ‘demon’ into guitarwank demonstrations.
They're also the sort of chaps who've spent the past dickhead-infested decade defining their own crotch-sweating  sTyLe and they ain't about to give it up for any passing sausage-munching, garlic-gnashing, cake-shovelling Eurocats or Europrats — 1992 or no 1992.
Hurrah!
Are Brian Maiden sophisticated?
Have grizzly bears mastered the art of go-kart racing?
Nope.
This is good old-fashioned fish'n'chip rock'n'roll: Maiden England (the middle of Essex, to be precise).
‘Fear Of The Dark’ is the bitter-slurping antidote to Def Leppard's sugary sweet, sweat-free Metal fiasco.
Luckily, the Devil cares not for checking visitors' bus passes to see if they're over-the-hill and struggling down the slope on their Zimmer frames.
So the Peter Cushings and Christopher Lees of the world can ham it up in filmland, dead or not, and the likes of Bruce ‘Brusque’ Dickinson can howl, ‘Hell ain't a bad place — Hell is from here to eternity!’like a teenage terror, while chucking bits of ‘The Lord's Prayer’into the frame.
As the title suggests, ‘Fear’ is a pretty significant word to the Maids.
That would explain why it appears in half the songs, which apparently deal with starvation, AIDS and the end of the world along the way, although we'll have to take the press release's word for that.
The guitars go wibbly wibbly wibbly splang, Bruce goes ‘Urg urg screeeeek!’ and ‘Wasting Love’is a bold, ballady effort played with all the subtlety of two rhinos shagging in the back of a Mini Cooper.
Hail Brian Maiden's millionth album!
And buy it in your legions, lovers.
ALTAN
Harvest Storm
ALTAN'S LAST record, ‘The Red Crow’, arrived in the final weeks of 1990, a season when the huge stars normally hog all the attention and life is quiet in the Bush League of humble folkie bands.
Yet against the odds, Altan got a terrific reaction, even taking an Album Of The Year award in one of the big magazine's folk round-up.
The band's popularity is down to many things; a mega line-up that can muster three fiddle players, a flute hero in Frankie Kennedy, and some brill, floaty singing from Maread Ni Mhaonaigh.
Their peppy ensemble style and ambitious sound gets you thinking of the '70s boom era for Irish acts like The Bothy Band and Clannad, a time when there seemed to be masses of energy and ideas around.
Also, ‘The Red Crow’ was basically a blinder of a record.
‘Harvest Storm’ is a great successor, drawing on the weird, Scots-Irish flavour of Donegal music (check out those strathspeys and highlands!), mixed in with some cool airs and a few cosmopolitan touches.
At one stage a dancer cracks out the rhythm to a delicious reel, and in another place Liam ‘Hothouse’ O'Maonlai plays some batty  didgeridoo lines and sings along a bit.
Altan clearly aren't bothered about making any kind of cross-over deal, and the music sounds good for that, full of integrity and soul.
Probably the greatest reeling feeling you'll get this year.
SCORN
Vae Solis
IT'S PANTS-cacking time for atheist scum 'cos soon God's gonna kill everything and he knows whether you've been good or not.
Do be good, for goodness sake, and the last thing you'll hear before the cosmic Hoover sucks you heavenward and then spews you into the fiery pit forever is Vae Solis — the terrible trumpet tootling of the Seventh Angel — and it'll sound something like this…
Featuring!:
Wee Mick ‘Mick’ Harris on drums and Deathmangle Robochef Sythnocomputer Mk IV, the evil little man who revolutionised Napalm Death and went on to help make the greatest record in the world ever ie ‘Guts Of A Virgin’by Painkiller PLUS Justin out of Godflesh and ex-Napalm Death and Nick ‘is obsessed with pain and death’Bullen.
Doing a deathblackgrindthrashmetalultrafastfrashyfrashydoomgloom versh of PiL by absorbing spacey dubs from all sorts of tingly musics, ‘Vae Solis’ is a killer of an eclectic wee masterpiece.
We particularly liked the screechy feely-touchy feedback of the spooky ‘Hit’, the deranged ghostchainrattling bump'n'grind-your-bones-to-make-my-bread of ‘Walls Of My Heart’, the demonic lurch of ‘Lick Forever Dog’, the machine-like degradation of ‘Thoughts Of Escape’, the rinky dinky oriental dancey-dancey bliss of the absolutely AWESOME!!!!!
‘On Ice’(at a disco near you soon!), the space-menace goffshock of ‘Heavy Blood’ and the murmuring utter horror of the extremely scary indeed ‘Deep In — Eaten Over And Over’.
Tension!
Excitement!
Thrills!
Spills!
Groovy graveyards full of dank and menacing shapes and subtly swirling green fog and evil zombies with attitude and maps showing exactly where you live and how to get there on public transport!
You will shit yourself!
DINAH WASHINGTON
Mad About The Boy
IF THE life stories of Billie Holliday, Loretta Lynn and  Pasty Cline were interesting enough to inspire major Hollywood movies, it's surely only a matter of time before the Dinah Washington biopic arrives.
After winning an amateur talent contest in Chicago at the age of 15, the woman who came to be known as the Queen Of The Blues spent the next few years singing in low-life nightclubs, occasionally supplementing her meagre income by cleaning lavatories.
Washington's career went from strength to strength in the '40s and '50s, but her private life is the stuff of folklore.
She became addicted to alcohol and diet pills, had seven or eight husbands (depending on which reference book you read), and was not averse to the odd bout of fisticuffs when she got off her head.
In 1963 she overdosed and died in the arms of her last husband, baseball star Dick Laine.
She was 39.
This 17-track album follows on the heels of the latest Levi's ad, but it's a pretty lazy compilation.
Rather than delve more into the riches of Dinah's more earthy blues recordings, it concentrates on her versions of all too familiar standards, the staple diet of supper club crooners the world over;
Still, it does feature her blistering R&B duets with Brook Benton ‘You Got What It Takes’ and ‘A Rockin' Good Way’(strictly part of Benton's back catalogue) plus her aching renditions of ‘September In The Rain’and ‘What A Difference A Day Made’, so it's not all bad.
It just could have been a lot better.
RIGHT SAID FRED
Up
‘HALF THE world blows and half the world sucks…’ sings Richard Fairbrass and he's not talking about soup.
Right Said Fred tread a fine line between sex and seaside postcard humour; they are the late Benny Hill with a personal fitness instructor, somewhere between gay disco and Club 18–30. and ‘I'm Too sexy’ is a great record, not least because it's a piss-take of people who fancy themselves sung by people who fancy themselves.
‘Up’(and I think we're talking more than the one level of ambiguity in that solitary two-letter word) is a record that actually makes you feel happy, in that all of it is uplifting (oi! spiritually, not trouserly), you can dance to some of it and sing along to the rest, the words are rude and witty and always smart, and Richard Fairbrass is a fantastic pop singer, all post-Bowie and Ferry and languid, a sort of brightly-coloured Neil Tennant.
But best of all, ‘Up’ is full of songs that are about the daftness and power of love, bizarrely enough.
You would quite literally have to be a practising Satanist gone stupid from self-abuse to not know that ‘Deeply Dippy’ says more to you about your life than, ooh, lots of other camp ironic pop singers we could mention.
Who could resist Fairbrass as he very seriously asks us, ‘Is it true about God? /Is it true about shoes?’.
This album's minus point is that it's only 40 minutes long; its plus point is that none of its songs are even a millimetre below excellent.
Right Said Fred are the sort of band who make the kind of music ABC and The Human League were always too busy talking about making to actually do; ‘Up’ is a completely charming album, all past, present and future singles and one day Right Said Fred will be bigger than Prince, Madonna, Michael Jackson and even Blur.
CROWES' FEAT
THE BLACK CROWES
The Southern Harmony And Musical Companion
AT FIRST listen there was little on The Black Crowes' first LP ‘Shake Your Money Maker’ to separate it from a hundred other rock'n'roll records which were desperately trying to get their sound across after the Guns N'Roses media boom of the late '80s.
Strains of The Rolling Stones, The Faces, Bad Company and Free floated to the surface (mainly due to Chris Robinson's earthy vocal), but dig a little deeper and, like all good things, something special eventually showed itself and The Black Crowes proved that they were birds of another feather entirely.
As good and as joyfully boisterous as ‘Money Maker’ most certainly was, it pales significantly beside the band's second outburst.
Originally titled ‘The Southern Harmony And Musical Companion Featuring A Choice Collection Of Tomes, Songs, Odes And Anthems From The Most Eminent Authors In The United States’, this is the record that was struggling to be heard inside the more studio-constricted ‘Money Maker’.
For one thing, this new record hits you straight at gut level the first time.
A mixture of God-fearing gospel, bare-knuckled blues and solid Southern tried and tested rock'n'roll that brings to mind such masterworks as Big Star's ‘Sister Lovers’ and the Stones' ‘Exile On Main Street’, in short, this is a classic rock record for right now!
Chris Robinson's vocal has developed just the right pitch to keep you straining to hear his every word, the kind of kick-ass, hell-for-leather growl that sounds great and is heightened by the honey sweet gospelly chorus of backing singers Barbara Richardson and Taj.
Their presence gives extra clout to the opening song ‘Sting Me’, the current 45 ‘Remedy’ and especially the band's acoustic cover of Bob Marley's ‘Time Will Tell’.
Equally sensational to experience is the twin guitar team of brother Rich Robinson and not so raw recruit Marc Ford, who was formerly axe man for Burning Tree and now replaces the ditched Jeff Cease.
Their playing is the perfect foil for Chris' ragged vocal, a sound that shimmers in the background one second and then roars into life the next.
Ford's solos are the record's most exciting moments and he makes the most of the time allotted to them.
The entire ambience of ‘The Southern Harmony And Musical Companion’ is that of a live performance, a natural echo that leaves all the noises of amplifiers crackling, valves popping and equipment being shouldered on the tape as if to say, this is for real!
This time it is for real and The Black Crowes know it.
Although the music they are dealing with is as old as the hills they have still managed to inject a little of their own venom into what was once regarded as a mummified corpse.
Southern rock (remember Lynyrd Skynyrd and The Allman Brothers?) may leave a bad taste in the mouth for many rock elitists, but The Black Crowes' brand of Southern comfort packs the kick those other bands (although worthy) failed to deliver.
One hit of ‘String Me’ or the overflowing ‘My Morning Song’will prove that the band's new testament is the gospel truth and the embodiment of this crazy little thing called rock'n'roll.
‘The Southern Harmony And Musical Companion’ tells it straight…with no chaser.
2 GOOD 2 BE TRUE
POWER OF DREAMS
2 Hell With Common Sense
THERE WAS a chance that Power Of Dreams would have burned out by now.
Too fast, too young, too much of a good thing in a hurry, their earlier days before and around ‘Immigrants, Emigrants And Me’ had the band rip-roaring through some off-kilter funfair where all the rides were free and curfews and the like did not exist.
The teenage PODs lived for the moment and their songs, all crash-bang-wallop-bang-crash, reflected this.
But for all of this high and anxious excitement, they appeared to fall between unsteady stools.
An indie band on a major label, the PODs spurned the homogeneous spit and polish this set-up normally brings and tried to do things their own way.
Thus they've stopped and started and stopped again while others have used this route to slip inside the Top 40 net.
It's frustrating for, as ‘2 Hell With Common Sense’ shows, the twentysomething Power Of Dreams are a grown-up, muscular, focused unit.
Craig Walker now has far more than his native Dublin and its age-barred ghetto to examine and write about.
There is still confusion and doubt and guilt and angst, but there's nothing small-town or one-dimensional about it any more.
‘Happy Game’, for instance, has a chorus about celebrating the end of an unhappy relationship, a state of affairs that in ‘Immigrants…’ days would have seen the band crying their guitars out at high speed for three minutes or so.
‘Metalscape’ captures the POD venom with a massive thump — the song's arrangement lets the lyrical flow build and build until, just as you're wondering if Jim Steinman is in the house, the whole thing falls back and gently rises again in an enchanting manner.
The two singles, ‘Slowdown’ and ‘There I Go Again’, are more at home on repeated listens, the latter a giddy, infectious track lighting fires and brightening blues with each listen.
‘Raindown’ again impresses because of the newly-found POD focus, its guitars taking time to breathe and plan their next assault, while Craig's voice breaks away from its usual comparisons and finds its own piece of sky to lark about in.
Even the tracks that wash over you the first time around act as aural traps on second and third listens.
The lightweight ‘On And On’ gains pounds as that naggingly effective chorus does what all choruses are supposed to do and lodges itself in your memory banks.
‘Shoot Me Down’ is positively back to the future, taking the Guy Chadwick feel of far earlier days and twisting it, guitar face up and hands behind his back, into the new swing of things.
‘You Bring Me Flowers’ is more of that adolescent yell now married to a punch and swagger light years from schoolyard bravado.
There's a depth here which goes far beyond pint-glass level and uncovers a songwriting strength which may become the big POD ace in the pack.
This is one unexpected major indie noise.
‘2 Hell With Common Sense’ does just what its title urges and comes up with a startling, confident clutch of songs.
Eire straits: POD go for the major effort
THE MONKEYWRENCH
Clean As A Broke-Dick Dog
AS VOCALIST with Mudhoney, Mark Arm has proved conclusively that well-off, well-educated Caucasian brats do have blues to sing, and also that he's the man best-equipped to sing them.
With fellow Mud-man Steve Turner along for the ride on bass, Arm has hooked up with a pair of Seattle luminaries who, though hardly household names in these parts, provide such virile guitar bursts and songwriting savvy to vouchsafe our rightful respect from now on.
Tom Price is a no-nonsense plank-basher, once with pre-Sub Pop legends The U-Men, currently with Gas Huffer and responsible here for the gritty foundation to these 13 expositions of hurt and hard-knocks.
Yet it's with one Tim Kerr that Arm has made such a fruitful creative bond, a veteran of many a Seattle minor-legend and prime mover behind The Monkeywrench's persuasive slant on this historic sound.
Suitably moved by the warm, fuzzy substances emanating from Kerr's garage, Mark Arm grabs his harmonica, eases that ever-improving voice up several notches on the pain-ometer and dispenses such homages to excess as ‘Flat on the floor, flat on my back/Let me tell ya baby I've found where it's at,’ from the scrappy bustle of ‘Great Down Here’.
True to the genre, most of ‘…
Broke-Dick Dog’ is lyrically non-specific, and the onus is on the singer to render these hand-me-down couplets with the requisite conviction.
Arm never wavers.
His thick-set holler lifts what might otherwise have been a cool but minor diversion into a work of real significance.
VARIOUS
Club For Heroes
ONCE UPON a time The Face was the style bible not of gits in fake fur-trimmed parkas and yups looking for new big ties, but of crazy over-made-up early '80s youth, for whom mum's old curtains and too much eye-liner signified SEX and REVOLUTION.
Binning their Two Tone pork-pie hats, the kids went wild for The Cult With No Name, aka Peacock Punk aka — New Romance!
Yeah!
New Romance was the bridge between gothpunk and 1980s pop; it was a mixture of dressing up, fancying a change from punk austerity, going dancing and liking David Bowie perhaps a little bit too much.
It was insane and No Smiling was its tight-lipped motto, but it was a lot more fun than liking The Exploited.
God knows why Telstar thought the world needed a ten-years-on reminder of those heady days, but here we have ‘Club For Heroes’, a collection of 18 mad old pop singles and a largely accurate document of the time, in that Duran, Spandau, Ultravox, Landscape, Classix Nouveaux and Visage are pure New Romantic and ABC, Teardrop Explodes, Blancmange, The Passions and Soft Cell aren't.
Virtually everyone sings with a clothes peg on their nose and a space Cockney accent, no-one is very happy and Mr Synthesiser is given a free rein.
The best song here is still ‘Are Friends Electric’ and Icehouse are still the worst band in the world.
The overall effect of all these songs in a row is a curious mixture of nostalgia and emotion-free blankness, a bit like a Gary Numan conversation.
The misplaced appearance of the Teardrops' ‘Reward’ comes across here like an acid-crazed drunk gate-crashing a fashion show (but then it always did).
It didn't last; Spandau and Duran, along with Culture Club and Wham!, became future corporate Live Aid company rockers, 1980s pop lost its ABC-style irony and became the commodity it had always mocked.
As the decade ended, SAW took the tunes, Pet Shop Boys took the jokes and Gary Numan carried on regardless.
JEFFREY LEE PIERCE
Ramblin' Jeffrey Lee & Cypress Grove With Willie Love
JEFFREY LEE Pierce is the head honcho of the massively underrated Gun Club, a band of musicians who consistently produce fine records which are then ignored by the world at large.
Rather than scowl and growl at his durn bad luck, Pierce hooks up with another bunch of musical buckaroos and ambles out on to his porch to sing the blues…the real blues, that is.
Ramblin' Jeff hooks you in with the opening ‘Goin' Down’, a cover of a Don Nix song that lurches drunkenly out of the speakers and sets the mood for the rest of the record.
When Pierce abandons his band to pluck at his acoustic and wail a Son House/Charlie Patton song like ‘Pony Blues’ or Robert Wilkins' ‘Alabama Blues’, it is hard to tell his performance from the original.
The same passion, pride and hurt is in the playing and, illuminatingly, the purpose and intricate invention of the blues suddenly starts to take shape.
By the time we get to the man's boisterous, almost redneck, version of Lightnin' Hopkins' ‘Good Times’ the conversion is complete and a hunger for the music starts to take hold.
To complete this, his second solo, JLP includes a couple of his own songs for good measure, both of which are high quality rock outings, with ‘Go Tell The Mountain’ being the best of the bunch.
His guitar here may stray towards free-form psychedelic freak out, but the pain remains the same.
Pierce finishes off with a ghostly version of the great Skip James' ‘Hardtime Killin' Floor Blues’, one last acoustic cry before the tape runs out and proof positive that the blues has never been in better hands.
Eric Clapton eat your heart out.
VARIOUS
Gothic Rock
JAMES RAY'S GANGWAR
Dios Esta De Nuestro Lado
MICK MERCER fancies himself as world authority on goth music; Dark Overlord Of Anal Retention.
Ex-journo turned editor, his recent tome Gothic Rock enjoyed the unlikely publishing coup of having no competition .
QED, it is the best goth book ever written.
Thus, the companion record is currently the best goth album on the market.
Admirably compiled by Count Mercer (how did he get all these bands to agree to be called goth, when it is, in truth, the genre that dare not speak its name?), it is, alas, his rather clumsy sleeve biogs that lend ‘Gothic Rock’ an unforgiveably tawdry air.
A shame, since some of the ‘classic’ material (put your sneer away, soulboy!) is truly grand and loaded.
Bauhaus' ‘Dark Entries’ remains a ferocious blue (black) print; Danse Society's ‘We're So Happy’is surprisingly epic and coolly resonant; and mid-'80s music hall like X-Mal Deutschland, Sex Gang Children, Specimen and Alien Sex Fiend stands up to the test of time.
If you like it then , natch.
The state of goth — as catch-all historical movement for the too-ugly and the too-grim and as a modern phenom — is given little credence by UK Decay, the ridiculous Virgin Prunes, the talentless and misguided Christian Death, The Neff's rubbish psychobilly and the new blood's slavering adherence to the Sisters Of Mercy songbook (eg Rosetta Stone, James Ray, Nosferatu).
The Sisters, you'll note, are not included herein.
This is like releasing a skiffle compilation without Lonnie Donegan.
The aforesaid James Ray and his Gangwar take Andrew Eldritch at his word.
Check the typefaces, the cod-military insignia, the song-titles .
These Step-Sisters will no doubt sustain a reasonable doubt sustain a reasonable following among disenfranchised post-safari suit Eldritchites with this faithful Xerox, but its pounding drum box, caterwauling guitar, second-hand imagery and low, grumbled vocals only serve to advertise other people's back catalogue.
SHUDDER TO THINK
Get Your Goat
IDEALISTICALLY SPEAKING, music offers adventure, a glimpse into an artist's realm of liberated self-expression.
In reality, rarely are ideal notions followed through to literal extremes.
Shudder To Think are a rarity.
These Washington DC labelmates to Fugazi have palpable roots in hardcore, but open up the term considerably with their oblique, textural workouts.
The antithesis of riffaholic Metal and punk, STT's approach is reminiscent of the early Throwing Muses, a heady forge into unexplored terrain.
This is hardcore completely devoid of anger and aggression, yet which is profoundly confrontational and uncomfortable.
‘Get Your Goat’ follows last year's ‘Funeral At The Movies’album in using unconscious streams of thought, barely filtered into conventional trappings like choruses and verses, as ingredients for songs.
By the end of each track, so many fleeting emotions and ideas have slithered past, only a sparse recollection of what just went before remains.
It's like listening to a band suffering from perpetual memory loss, they live so relentlessly in the present.
As a consequence, ‘Get Your Goat’ 's maze-like melodies will charm the tenacious and already convicted, but disconcert the bulk of pop-orientated mortals.
For the latter lot, only ‘The Hair Pillow’, illuminated by singer Craig Wedren's glorious, bizarre falsetto, sticks close enough to convention to be more a pleasure than an endurance test.
Interesting, but perhaps for expert mind travellers only.
LIVE
Mental Jewelry
HAVING SOLD 200,000 copies of this LP Stateside, Pennsylvanian four-piece Live must be full of hope that ‘Mental Jewelry’ will see them emulate Nirvana in providing a fresh and exciting rock/pop crossover in Britain.
Lead singer Ed Kowalczyk has a voice somewhere between Mick Hucknall and Michael Stipe, while his band take their lead from such disparate rock forces as Green On Red, Guns N' Roses and The Hothouse Flowers.
This leads to a slightly bizarre and unconvincing fusion of musical forces which all end up clumped awkwardly together.
Plus they rely far too heavily on Chad Gracey's bionic drumming to get them noticed, the tinny snare effect soon becoming as annoying as a catfight underneath your window at 3.00am.
Lyrically, Live do seem to have something to say, as they consider a stream of interpersonal and social dilemmas but then, on ‘Tired Of Me’ they blow it: ‘Hope is a letter that never arrives/Delivered by the postman of my fear.’
‘Mental Jewelry’ does have its finer moments, like on the moody ‘Good Pain’and ‘10,000 Years (Peace Is Now)’which has a surprisingly unembarrassing ‘all aboard the freedom bus’sentiment.
Ultimately, though, Live have a way to go if they are to find the rock niche they seek and ‘Mental Jewelry’— despite possessing a great level of enthusiasm and commitment — is not representative enough of any one particular musical genre to fully captivate a specific audience.
ON THE FINGERS TIP
MR FINGERS
Introduction
VARIOUS
Reactivate Volume 4
Breaks Bass & Bleeps 4
Give Peace A Dance
IT'S ALMOST impossible to define exactly what constitutes House at the moment.
There's Techno in hardcore and commercial guises, there's traditional soul singers gone dancefloor in Mass Order, gospel remixed in Sounds Of Blackness, there's Italian, still popular and always liable to reduce the charts to linguini.
Add to this all the industrial noise merchants who include a certain amount of Techno in their repertoire, and the mirror becomes more cloudy.
And what of Larry Heard, AKA Mr Fingers?
Where's the round hole for his square peg?
Larry has been through it all.
‘Introduction’ as a title for an album by Mr Fingers is a joke: he's been hardcore, soul-House, deep acid, acid; half of The It, a third of Fingers Inc, all of Gherkin Jerks and Mr Fingers.
Chicago Larry's been around.
While others, like Adonis and Sterling Volid came and went, Larry's still here.
And ‘Introduction’, currently with a three-track freebie thrown in, invests all his experience in the pursuit of perfection.
Heard explores jazzy grooves, gets funky, sings agonised ballads, gets former Fingers Inc man Robert Owens to sing an agonised ballad and even rediscovers jazz-funk, but beneath it all throbs the foundation heartbeat of House.
A gentle, remarkably tender affair in a Blue Note-inspired cover, it (Mr) fingers the soul like no other House you've (Larry) heard.
After Mr Fingers, everything else sounds like the musical equivalent of  elephantiasis .
The ‘Reactivate’ series maintains its remarkably high standard of Techno tracks, offering GTO's perfectly stupid ‘Elevation’, Tox Two's unstoppable (unless you turn the power off, of course)‘Rave Generator’and the almost legendary Prage Khan's ‘Injected With A Poison’.
Ten long hits, or 12 on CD.
‘Breaks Bass & Bleeps’ has also flown, head in clouds, into a fourth volume, kicking off with the furious and bass ,how fast can u go ?
‘Oblivion’ from Manix.
A record guaranteed to make any soulboy puke, it's a dance compilation as nutters' paradise: anyone not technological had better turn away now.
Also on offer: the breakbeat-based: ‘Further Out’ from Sonz Of A Loop Da Loop Era, Nebula II's total noise ‘Atheama’, and The Feedback Principle's ragga in a rocket ‘Sick Society’.
While there's nothing wrong with the principle or music of the CND ‘Give Peace A Dance 3’ compilation, it's a little worrying that tracks with titles like ‘ F— Off Mix’and ‘Jihad’(holy war, or am I wrong?) should have crept on to it.
No matter, since Pied Piper's stunning ‘Kinetic’ throws it into gear and it soars all the way.
You may have heard too much of Moby's ‘Go’ by now, but there can be few complaints otherwise: Meat Beat Manifesto, DJ Carl Cox, Nightmares On Wax, Orbital etc, provide a mixture of the subtle and the hardcore in aid of peace.
With lots of noise too.
James Ray's Gangwar: Sisters songbook not included
Mr Fingers, AKA Larry ‘Mr Chicago’ Heard: taking House back to its foundations
LIVE
VELVET CRUSH
PERSPEX WHITEOUT
IF EVER any miserable bastards were looking for evidence in the tedious ‘American Bands Are Better Than Their Limp Bit Counterparts’ argument, then the imbalance between Yanks Velvet and Glaswegian wranglers Perspex would (unfortunately) send the US-ophiles sprinting around a victory lap at Wem-ber-lee Stadium.
True, it is Crush drummer Ric Menck's (30th) birthday, and he's out for a grinningly good time, whatever the weather.
But while the Velvet ones seem deliciously free of hang-up and come-downs, Perspex Whiteout appear to be hamstrung by all the social conventions that have crippled a worrying number of home-grown guitar could-have-beens.
Theirs is a marginally endearing noise, yet still tainted with that dishevelled (dis) grace which suggests that there isn't a fulls et of cogs a'spinning in the Consummate Professionalism Department.
There are stacks of wobblingly barmy basslines and the Whiteouts have a way with scratchy guitars which hints at rather more fevered performances in the future.
This, however, is right now, and Perspex Whiteout are merely adequate instead of equator-quiveringly great.
All things being relative and all that, Velvet Crush are, equally, hardly the kind of combo to cause turmoil in the Continental Plate system.
But at least they attempt to entertain in their own shagpile style.
Velvet Crush take their long-term devotion to the Goddesses Of Jangle, Indiedom and Power Pop and give it a bubblegum blast that — of late — only Redd Kross have chewed on more ferociously.
Potentially insipid womblings are fired up by the kind of melodies that demand attention first and slip into something more comfortable later on.
So, if buoyant, flamboyant tremblings are your bag, Velvet Crush are your shoulder strap.
AND THE ASS SAW EAST ANGLIA
SOUND CITY '92
SUNDAY
SO SOUND City turned out fine, then.
Aside form the odd gripe from local bands either overlooked by the organisers or unable to gain a prestigious spot during the week, this inaugural music biz fest went swimmingly, with an earnest enthusiasm for proceedings and a general bonhomie which belied the corporate overtones.
Even the bloody weather stayed nice!
Sunday night rounds the event off with a bizarre juxtaposing of gigs: downstairs in the main hall it's Mayhem Central, where the venue's somewhat implausible design means that unless you're stuffed on to the raised dancefloor you can see bugger all of the bands.
Still, on with the show, and THE FARM give as good as they get against the ubiquitous torrent of abuse from those increasingly charming and tolerant (arf arf arf) Carter fans.
Come the close of their allotted half hour, a wired Peeter Hooton is turning the anger against Thatcher (Try and keep it up ,Peter —Ed ) and an ecstatic ‘All Together Now’ silences the Sex Machine's lambs.
Kind of.
Upstairs in a 200-capacity room, more monstrosities are being committed against the soul of rock'n'roll.
Local chaps the CATHERINE WHEEL give it some rocktastic welly, continuing to show their truer, head-caving colours now they don't have to satisfy indie sensitivities.
Weirder — and better — still, watching NICK CAVE while standing 18 inches away from the stage is akin to catching the alarmingly gaunt one down the blinking Bull & Gate.
Not only is this a thoroughly terrific experience, but The Bad Seeds give it their marvellously deadpan all.
Nick dances his very own furious fandango in a suit from Hell's own tailors, and if a steaming set littered with ‘Jack The Ripper’, ‘The Good Son’ and ‘The Mercy Seat’isn't your cup of tea I can only offer my sincerest condolences.
Back in Mayhem Central, STARE have already caused several sorts to jump up and down in a post-punk, pre-rockist rock kind of way, which leaves just enough time for CARTER USM to get blindingly colourful and brattily hectic in their usual mind-spinning manner.
Scattering particles of ‘1992 — The Love Album’ amidst old chestnuts like ‘Sheriff Fatman’, the duelling duo eventually (w) rap things up with a hysterical rendition of ‘Down In The Tube Station At Midnight’(‘Woah — oh-oh-oooh-oh!’) and a sombre, sneering slump through ‘Another Brick In The Wall’.
Floyd up, indeed.
Jaded old hacks?
 F— off.
The head-caving Catherine Wheel
Nick Cave: Beelzebub's own fandango specialist
SOUND CITY '92
FRIDAY
LET THE tribes decrease!
And please make the dayglo-encrusted followers of the so-called Techno phenomenon, the smiling vibed-up whistle posse, and the casual sceptics open-minded.
After all, there's no reason, bar some weird dictate of trendiness, why they should define themselves against indie-kids; no reason why they should be so consumed by some spurious culture to become impervious to the outside world.
I say this because these bods are completely enraptured by N-JOI to the point of becoming mere vessels for affirmative emotions.
It's as if time has stood still, people have lost themselves and the only avenue left is to worship.
No-one seems to notice that this nascent group's biggest asset, Saffron, has left the fold to pursue a solo career.
As long as the noises are ‘hardcore’, nothing else matters.
N-Joi bravely mix up and showcase their current output, but the problem is basic.
Only those with extremely short attention spans or those in orbit can appreciate all the chopping and changing.
I counted at least 15 snippets of tunes in the half-hour slot and none resembled a conventional song, just a patchwork quilt of ideas.
At the other end of the scale,ORBITAL might not offer immediate visual thrills, but they work as alchemists: these are sleepers at the controls.
Electro-bass driven rhythms flex sinewy muscles while all manner of noises and squiggles float in and out of the mix, never drawn-out enough to become boring but well-defined enough to make their presence felt.
Somehow Orbital manage to remix their hits live until these are unrecognisable but still effective.
The whole room sways as one (We're upstairs drinking in the smaller stage).
And these brothers defiantly possess their own individual signature.
Back on the main stage,BASTI are the night's anachronism, but their errant percussiveness sees 'em through.
It'll be interesting to see how a major label tries to curtail their waywardness, but for now you're wide awake in a dream thinking of a more menacing early ACR, what with horns like scythes, found voices babbling, shouted, hoarse semi-raps and two funky drummers.
When the bass cuts in we're in dirty funk horizons, and even if you can't make out what's being said, it sounds as urgent as life.
THE PRODIGY are quite, quite insane in contrast.
I'd expected some Chart Show clothes horses purveying diluted Techno, not an androgynous keyboardist, a commanding dancer and the mad hatter MC who'd just as soon sing the praises of spliff as he'd stare out the crowd, bug-eyes in effect.
‘The Horns Of Jericho’ could be just that, an electronic approximation of that fateful trumpet blast that shakes the rafters.
You get so scared you scuttle downstairs to await THE SHAMEN , a shudder of sanity in eye-opening Norwich.
With an assured and calmly poised new backing singer, a new bod on keyboards and Mr C and Colin Angus at the helm, the Scottish explorers keep developing.
Their peculiar Techno mutation is the one most likely to find favour with music lovers, as they don't discard a sense of melody at the altar of rhythm.
With DAT enhancement, familiar tunes are re-worked into glistening monuments, tracks like ‘Move Any Mountain’ forming a cogent argument for the inclusion of verbals beyond MCs stoking up the crowd.
At once cerebral and aware of the business at hand, The Shamen turn Techno into positivist (ignore the connotations) poetry and the soon-come single ‘Love, Sex, Intelligence’ is set to be an anthem, pitched as it is exactly at the right level, ie not over our heads.
Roll on '93!
THE BEAUTIFUL SOUTH
THE BEAUTIFUL South are possibly the most subversive, sugar-coated chart act of the last two years.
A peachy, picnic-in-the-park pop group whose politics merrily stab a finger at habitual thinking, society's hang-ups and the staid music business.
From a cynical surface viewpoint it is all perms and pastel-shaded followers, tanktop tunes and cute anorak sentiments.
It's too easy to shrug them off as drippy MOR bores because popularity, ultimately, has its price.
Paul Heaton and friends are definitely not Hull's answer to Deacon Blue; more they question why Deacon Blue even exist.
Songs like ‘Let Love Speak Up Itself’— as with all Heaton's love songs — harshly attack indoctrinated theories to love and relationships.
TBS take the subtle approach and then stuff the songs full of sarcasm and humour, reminiscent of Madness in their downbeat joviality and sense of fun.
Add to that the rather sassy backdrop which screams ‘NORTHERN SCUM’ and you're faced with a top pop northern night out.
If it's hits you want, you got ‘em, loads of them, every one of them perfectly performed from ‘Song For Whoever’, ‘You Keep It All In’ to ‘A Little Time’.
All soft footy anthems and all way too polite, too professional and — except for the hysterically inappropriate ‘You Should Be Dancing’ encore — too lacklustre.
There's nothing really daring about their show, no gambles, unless you amuse yourself by guessing which of the three vocalists will leave the stage next.
There is also a definite lack of activity from the audience; they're screaming their white socks off and their perms are frizzled, but they're not dancing.
I'm surrounded by droopy embracing couples, swaying gently, looking as sickeningly cheesy as a huge slab of rancid Stilton.
Thankfully there's always Dave Hemingway's grin, Brian Corrigan's Grogan-esque voice and Heaton's foppish dancing to cheer us up and turn it into a gorgeous and lurvely night.
Back at the hotel in the tiny hours, Paul Heaton has overcome his post-gig sombreness (‘It was rubbish,’ he claims) and is surrounded by his own Sunday League friends.
Spirits are raised — then downed very quickly — and it's all very cosy.
Not so much rock'n'roll as all heart'n'soul.
O Scum, all ye faithful: Heaton closes up from his fans
MEF LEPPARD!
EMF
SILVERFISH
A CYNICAL credibility-boosting exercise, or the most inspired coupling since Arthur Miller and Marilyn Monroe?
As the EMF/Silverfish bandwagon rolls into Sheffield, the awkward prospect of witnessing a (Silver) fish out of water seems a distinct possibility.
The gig sold out months ago and, despite EMF's claims to be moving away from the teeny audience, Silverfish are forced to open the show a good two hours earlier than normal to accommodate the expected exodus of punters heading for an early bedtime.
The stunned reaction to ‘Vitriola’ provides a worrying moment, as Lesley's vocal contortions fly headfirst into a brick wall of bemusement.
Or maybe it was just the shock of the volume, the decibel-heavy onslaught leaving trousers flapping at every pounding bass line, and young ears bleeding whenever Lesley presses her gurning face to the mic.
With her hair dyed red and body hunched over the monitors, Lesley looks like a Cronenbergian Miki Berenyi, her face contorted and spewing out ‘hips, tits, lips, power’ and generous quantities of beer with alacrity.
Her control of the stage is consummate, impossible to ignore and intimidating in the extreme.
There's not a tune in sight.
Just withering thrash grooves that shoot past in a punch-drunk blur, leaving their peers way behind.
Silverfish are an awesome experience, and purely on that basis EMF should be applauded for introducing them to a wider audience.
The danger, and therefore the excitement of tonight's game, is that Silverfish could well upstage the ‘Mef.
They're hard, aggressive and uncompromising, all the things, in fact, that EMF themselves are reputedly aiming for.
No longer content to be just four pretty boys (and Ian Dench) with a bag full of toytown tunes, daft haircuts and even dafter trousers, EMF want to be taken seriously.
But wait!
Singer James is wearing…it can't be…it is, it's a cow's udder…on his head!
You cannot expect to be taken seriously with a bovine's milking tackle perched on your bonce.
But that's all part of the irresistible appeal of EMF.
No matter what they say, they're a pop band, and a damn fine one at that.
From the opening gambit, ‘Long Summer Days’, EMF make it plain in which direction they're heading, and the choice of Silverfish as cohorts looks increasingly natural.
The sequenced clatter that each song is built around has been hardened, sharpened and tightened.
Dench's guitar has become as prominent as his hooter, squealing and squalling throughout.
Although the set is heavily reliant on newer material, the enraptured audience unsurprisingly reserve their most fervent greetings for the ‘Schubert Dip’ numbers.
‘I Believe’ and ‘Children’benefit immeasurably from the toughening process, both transformed into massive stabs of energetic stagediving fodder.
Yes!
The ‘Mef have got a growing audience of hardcore stagedivers who have absolutely no doubts about the band's credibility.
Standing with his hands behind his back like Prince Charles (with an udder on his head), James addresses the audience: ‘This is a new song,’ he whispers.
Bollocks!
It's ‘Unbelievable’, and this is a riot!
Undoubtedly their best moment, and the song's that doomed them to have bricklayers shouting ‘Un-belief-a-boll’ at them for the rest of their lives, ‘Unbelievable’is the ultimate pop-panto.
There's no need for James to even attempt to sing the chorus, the entire audience are as one shouting that word out to him.
Fast, punchy and exceedingly tight, the song is three minutes of pop-fabness, and even gets Lesley Silverfish out of the dressing room and diving into the rabid audience.
EMF have proved themselves capable of transcending their teenybop image, but have they gained credibility?
The answer, pop-pickers, is an EMF-atic you bet !
The full-force, sweet-sweat, shirts-off EMF rock ‘session’, lead by Zak (left) and James
Moshkids go ‘Getting Through’ the barrier, while James (left) turns the udder cheek
PETE ROCK & CL SMOOTH
MC MELL ‘O’
RAMPAGE CREW & TIM WESTWOOD
THE VISITS of promising American rap acts seem to be inexplicably linked to the frequency of London night buses after the shows — you wait bloody ages and then they all come at once.
Easter Monday saw both Leaders Of The New School and the Pete Rock & CL Smooth partnership playing debut UK gigs at different London venues, a situation made all the more frustrating when they're on the same label.
A rap-tastic breakdancing fashion show (seriously!) from The Rampage Collective managed to send the 2,000-strong Palais crowd into palpitating party mode, leaving Tim Westwood's deft selection from the recent hip-hop hall of fame to turn an event into a carnival.
Raving?
Pah!
All the more surprising, then, that the arrival of MC Mell'O’ should merit so cool a response.
The excellent Mell'O’, ably assisted by co-rappers Sparkie & Flint and DJ Pogo, bravely plump for an all-new set that indicates a stunning new LP in the pipeline.
Not that the crowd at Le Palais noticed, of course: British audiences' antipathy to homegrown rappers is as legendary as  it is ignorant, but the real surprise was the startlingly similar response for Pete Rock & CL Smooth.
The duo's set seemed lethargic, a muddy mix robbing them of the textured subtleties that make their records so invigorating.
When even their monster dancefloor hit, ‘The Creator’, fails to spark much life back into the crowd, it was just one final twist to a resolutely odd evening.
VERVE PURESSENCE
A NEW sub-style is born.
Slash'n'sideburn pop is what you get when Manc yoof grows up angry and facially bristling.
There are four just-past-pubescence Puressencers, fronted by nonchalant, sidied-up lead crooner James Mudriczki, and they have the demeanour of sociopathic fourth-formers put in detention for setting fire to the science lab.
They like a bit of a burn-up, these boys.
There's a blistering streak o'heads-down, no-nonsense blitzkrieg-bop-pop basis for the songs.
‘Telekinesis’ roars away like a kamikaze jet nearing target.
‘Suck The Knife’ rides on a mad axe-hero riff brazen enough to bring out the cigarette lighters.
At times they veer towards the kind of sulk-metal that dodgy punk bands used to come up with when the guitarist was a closet Jimmy Page buff.
But Mudriczki's stylishly disaffected hollering keeps the pain-wracked prole edge sharp.
It's basic but effective, and all they need is a little more spontaneous combustion on stage and the barricades of bed-sit land will have been stormed.
If Verve expand any further, they'll have to apply for a live music permit in the next door dimension.
Already they've scaled up their fluid star-burst psychedelia into something that sounds more suited to outdoor festivals than stuffed solid mini-venues.
Tonight they play a slowed-down set of overwhelming, spaced-out rock that makes the idea of The Stone Roses ever making another record seem, well, unnecessary.
The crowd are climbing on each other 's shoulders to get close to them and the hippychicks are dancing acid-trip hand jives in pairs.
It's one of those occasions that feels like an occasion .
Bassist Simon and guitarist Nick stand back and sculpt away at the booming waterfall dazzle textures and crow-headed singer Richard Ashcroft flips out in spasms of electric eel ecstasy.
Gob open and arms flapping, Ashcroft has the rare ability to sing about how he's ‘born to fly’ while looking like he was born to be institutionalised, and make it convincing.
The smash and grandeur of the current ‘All In The Mind’ is the only real glimpse of the fierce intensity that Verve are capable of tonight.
The rest is a dark drift of smouldering purple, hanging in the air like smoke from a pyre of burning shoe-gazers.
It's proof of Verve's complete control that they can get away with this sort of  laval-like show.
They will be bigger than drugs.
GORGEOUS SPACE VIRUS
GORGEOUS SPACE Virus are into multi-sensory stimulation, the world's first ever scratch 'n' sniff rock combo.
They are also about to be upstaged by their own big intro.
It all begins when a gloomy figure blindly stumbles forth — on to a stage which couldn't possibly be any more black — clutching a minor forest of fuming joss sticks.
Then, from the bowels of the stage, surges the soundtrack to some bizarre red indian ritual…drums, chanting,the works .
Great electrical bursts of dazzling blue and purple light explode behind copious amounts of dense smoke which obscures the entire stage.
Twenty minutes later, give or take an hour, four long-haired, flower-shirted men dribble on stage.
The place stinks, and Jesus are they LOUD.
It's instruments out, and time to slaughter whoever's left in the audience — about 30 of us, to be precise — sacrificed before the would-be lords of gothic rock (in a March Violets/Sex Gang Children/Beelzebub cream-tea-on-the-patio kinda way).
It's a strange genre, gothic rock, especially when you're barely given the opportunity to contemplate the fusion of goth and rock beyond the actual live experience .
If you are a fan of grisly goth and retarded rock then wallow in this: A dark and dull combination of styles which is going nowhere fast.
If not, avoid like the plague.
NME GIG GUIDE
NICK CAVE celebrates the release of his new LP, ‘Henry's Dream’, this week with a handful of dates.
The tormented troubadour lets rip in Glasgow  with God Machine supporting on all three nights.
The Bee Gees, circa 1967: Little does Mr Third-from-the-left know that he is next
NME CHARTS
Crush in the presence of ‘Post-Greatness’
Kim Wilde relaunches her career with divine intervention
The ‘Weekender’ starts here
Brian's Ken: he understands
1982: The crotch-thrusting Haircut 100
FRED FACT
‘HE WHO is tired of London is tired of being on Top Of The Pops ,’ said Dr Johnson, following a gig with Boswell.
Well, maybe they weren't his exact words, but I expect he would have come up with something like that had he been asked for his thoughts on Carter's ‘Only Living Boy In New Cross’.
The song really owes its existence to the Big Apple, the title being a play on Paul Simon's ‘The Only Living Boy In New York’.
But though New Cross isn't so good they had to name it twice, it's still a place worth a song of its own, having once lent its name to New Cross Records, a Charly offshoot that provided a home for some Dillinger and Bob Marley releases.
Then, time and time again, composers in various categories have felt moved to serenade places located in one London postal area or another, the charts being regaled with such hits as .
Chubby, bubbly jazzman Fats Waller was among the first to really get bitten by the London bug.
In 1939 he fashioned a six song ‘London Suite’ embracing ‘Piccadilly’, ‘Chelsea’, ‘Soho’, ‘Bond Street’, ‘Limehouse’and ‘Whitechapel’, though, due to World War Two, the masters were lost and said to have been destroyed.
Happily they were located in a music publisher's office during 1951 and finally released.
Another great jazz composer, the late Billy Strayhorn, wrote ‘Chelsea Bridge’, a side that figured among Duke Ellington's greatest recordings.
But this proved to be misnamed.
Stunned by a Thameside painting by Whistler, it was only later that Strayhorn discovered it was actually a view of Battersea Bridge that he'd admired!
Scots-born Al Stewart fashioned a folkie's A to Z via sides such as‘Swiss Cottage Manoeuvres’ and ‘Soho, Needless to Say’, while The Kinks continued the Cockney capering with ‘Denmark Street’, ‘Muswell Hillbillies’, ‘Holloway Jail’and ‘Willesden Green’.
At one point it seemed that any would-be London cabbie seeking to learn ‘the knowledge’ had only to memorise Ray Davies' song output in order to locate any part of the Metropolis.
Then, there's never been a shortage of contributions for London's musical guidebook; have all helped to flesh out its pages, along with‘Kings Cross’, a song that the Pet Shop Boys wrote (a)‘Because it's the London terminus you reach if you come down from the North-East’;(b) Chris Lowe lived there; and (c)‘It seemed like a good title about people waiting.
Waiting for a train, waiting in a dole queue, waiting for things to get better.’
Not so different, in a way, to Manfred Mann's ‘Up The Junction’, the title track to the film version of Nell Dunn's book about factory workers in the Clapham/Battersea area.
A song penned in an era when jobs were easier to find, it nevertheless reflected the frustration of workers ‘With open eyes and open minds/Conditioned to the human grind/Who start to lock their dreams away/There's nothing new about today/Only what the papers say’.
Nowadays, as the structures rise higher and higher at Canary Wharf, they rise even faster in Cardboard City.
And that's something that no-one in London really wants to sing about.
Ray Davies: London belongs to him
Never ending tours, never ending ANGST
Send your niggles and squiggles to Angst, the page that couldn't care less, at .
Blunt crayons only, please.
SHITE SAID FRED
What a sickening feast of hypocrisy we were served up courtesy of the Freddie Mercury Tribute.
The presence of that racist homophobic scumbag Axl Rose did little to enhance the credibility of an event that merely seemed to provide yet another photo opportunity for fat-walleted pop stars to offload their liberal guilt on the global stage.
And didn't a significant number of these artists appear on the bill at the Mandela birthday party?
Hell, forgive and forget because it's all in a good cause.
Let's do some of those numbers that went down so well in Sun City!
If we really want to fight AIDS then let's turn our anger on the newspapers who spread lies and distortions; on a government that refuses to put money into AIDS education and research and those drug companies that appear more interested in patents than cures.
The platitudes of rich pop stars won't change a thing — direct action just might.
Some things you won't read in the media: Queen were overblown, pompous shite and don't forget it.
The sad death of Mr Mercury does nothing to change that.
Some showbiz ponces claim that Freddie did a lot to bring the pain of AIDS to public awareness — only by dying, surely.
Maybe Freddie put millions into AIDS charities, and it's great if he did.
It's a matter for someone's own conscience how they cope with illness, publicly or privately, but to say that in life Freddie did anything to publicise the agony of AIDS is bullshit.
As for Axl, Sun City and the rest, the entertainment business doesn't care shite.
As long as its greater glory is maintained, as long as the glitter continues into death and charidee, it will help out.
When it comes to ass on the line commitment, forget it.
But what were NME readers doing watching a pile of shite like that anyway?— IM
THE CANDY-COLOURED TANGERINE FLAKE MOTORISED KNOB-END STREAMLINE POTATO PEELER SWEET BABY JAMES BROWN — 1
From somewhere in the capital, by our intrepid reporter: The dog dirt injected into my pulsing thighs by a beautiful buck-naked half-robot half-Samoan woman was finally starting to take effect.
Gradually, the thump of the shit — and when I say shit, I mean SHIT — intermingled with those bouncing throb merchants emanating from the light aircraft pilot's stereo.
At 60,000 feet it was harder to tell which was giving me the better high: the puppy poo, the Beastie Boys album or the Cessna.
I had hardly had time to consider this problem: rip P J O'Rourke off, or get dressed, before the pilot jerked us into a vertical dive?
Landing in the Beastie Boys' swimming pool, I was amazed to find I was both naked and still in employment.
In the corner of the pool sat Debbie Harry who leant into my face and — looking for all the world like Benny Hill's mum — said ‘Is this the same James Brown who championed The Wonder Stuff and Happy Mondays?
What are you doing on drugs in Beirut?’…
Article continues with little mention of artist in accompanying picture whilst scribe pours forth ridiculous but gaggingly witty comments on lifestyle of music journalists.
I have recently been released from jail, hate Daisy Chainsaw and would like to walk around American hotels naked.
Is there any chance of a job or has the Godfather Of Soul got the market sewn up?
Sewn up?
Stitched up more like.
Welcome back to the mid-'60s, everyone.
We've missed you — IM
That article on Beastie Boy behaviour was the funniest spermiest glory read since U2 flying corps.
Can we have more drugs, sex, fast cars, loud noise please?
Yes, if you want.
I took an  aspirin , thought about having a wank, heard a car go by (quickly) and put Simon Bates on at top volume.
Will this do?— IM
THE CANDY-COLOURED TANGERINE FLAKE MOTORISED KNOB-END STREAMLINE POTATO PEELER BABY SHETLAND PONY AND TRAP (RHYMING SLANG)— 2
I have just experience the new Primal Scream video Screamadelica .
WOW!
Welcome back to the mid-'60s, David.
Please stop there — IM
A TAXI DRIVER WRITES
Dear Mr A Collins: I am a taxi driver and have seven Cure albums.
Disturbing, naturally.
Dear Mr EB Davies.
I am not a taxi driver and I do not have seven Cure albums.
Small world, eh?— IM
A SKY PILOT WRITES ABOUT GOD AND GREENBELT
NME: 40th birthday congratulations.
You and I have had a great time over the last 32 years…most of the time.
However, the toenail in the pint of real ale, for me, has been your relentless inability to represent Christian music positively, as represented again by your article ‘For Easter's A Jolly Good Fellow’.
A great deal of so-called Christian music is worthy of a grade-A slagging off.
There is, however, also a fair amount of talented stuff out there, both within the Christian music ghetto and in the world at large.
Give yourself a present.
Join 30,000 punters this August Bank Holiday at Greenbelt, where you will see examples of both extremes in abundance.
May you have another 40 years unless, of course, Jesus returns before then.
Lots of letters from Ilford this week.
Anyhow Mercurial Rev Paul, are you trying to tell us that we should change our official devil-worshipping policy?
You've only been a reader for 32 years.
Where were you for the first eight?
That's when we really were Christian.
We had Nick Kent on The Joystrings, Julie Burchill on the road with Sounds Of Blackness, and Charles Shaar Murray considering whether or not The Man represents a returning Jesus in Lou Reed's ‘I'm Waiting For My Man’.
If you were too late…that's two big events in your life you missed — IM
A FAT DEVIL MOSHER USES GREENBELT TO HOLD HIS PANTS UP
I am the devil's fattest spawn.
My favourite pastimes are:
1.
Finding weedy 17-year-old  c—s at concerts and stage-diving on to their heads to try and  f— up their whole night
2.
Putting puppies and kittens into hot ovens
3.
Making a circle around myself by punching anyone near me
4.
Mugging grannies
5.
Grinding weedy 17-year-old bastards' faces into the floor after they dive on to me and…
6.
Being a terrible overweight despot of humanity.
Oh no!
Arrest me and put me on a diet fast!
Death to all weedies!
Jonny, FAT AS  F— AND PROUD OF IT 
You're one Jonny I wouldn't like on my knob, Mr Fat Spawn of Beelzebub.
May you rot in the  foulest mosh-pit of Neds.
May you be forced to listen to The Beautiful South albums.
May you have to hold your mum's wool when she's knitting.
May Mark King of Level 42 pat you patronisingly on the head with the palm of his hand.
May you get a spot of wee on your pants every time you cough.
May you turn vegetarian in Germany.
May Michael Barrymore decide you are fairly talented.
And other terrible things like that — IM
WHERE HAVE ALL THE DIVERS GONE, WHEN WILL THEY EVER LEARN ETC
Re: Mark Benney's letter .
I agree that headbutting idiots are a problem, but it's compounded by the fact that stagediving is no longer allowed in most venues.
From what I can see, stagedivers consist of both ‘nice’ and ‘nasty’people — the nasty attempting to cause as much pain as they possibly can by kicking and punching people as they land.
Fortunately we know who they are after they land and next time (You mean you don't kick 27 Dulux shades of shite with a hint of peach out of them while they're on the floor ?
You mugs — IM) we make a gap in the crowd, allowing the nasty person to dive on to the floor.
I have never seen anyone create a gap in the crowd for one of the nice people, who are stagediving either to have fun or get out of a painful suffocating position in front.
But now stagediving has been banned in most venues, where have the divers gone?
The nice people are still there to enjoy the music, although perhaps not as much as if they'd been allowed to express themselves and some of the nasty people are beginning to appreciate the actual music.
But from my experience, the majority of the nasties now enjoy headbutting people all around them (in time to the music, admittedly) or forming extremely violent moshing grounds, sometimes to the most unlikely music.
Most people manage to avoid these areas like the plague, though they wouldn't have been bothered by stagediving at all— so I'm afraid that Wiz's well-intentioned argument that people can go near the front when there are no stagedivers fails.
You can avoid nasty stagedivers, but not nasty headbutters.
In conclusion (about time too — IM), bring back stagediving please.
Anonymous female,
Stagediving was always banned.
That's how it came about — idiots would clamber onstage and either get slung off or would dive off before Penge's answer to Sid Justice got hold of them.
But to call this ‘expressing themselves’ truly takes the Garibaldi.
Are you kidding?
Try dancing, the movement of limbs and body to the beat of the music.
You may enjoy it.
You can also sing along to the songs if you wish.
Headbutting was a proud part of punk and I'm glad it's returned to the scene: it usually hurts the butter as much as the buttee.
The answer: wear crash helmets.
Get the over-ears sort and you won't go deaf when Wiz turns up his guitar either.
And isn't Wiz a po-faced git these days?
No wonder he claims his fans are all threatening to top themselves; they're so stupid that they don't realise jumping off a five-foot-high stage won't kill them — IM
MEMPHIS.
NEW YORK.
LA.
LIVERPOOL.
DETROIT.
SAN FRANCISCO.
PHILADELPHIA.
AKRON.
COVENTRY.
MANC.
ILFORD.
AND NOW: NORWICH.
For many years Norfolk and the whole of East Anglia has been neglected and ridiculed by the music industry.
Whoever decided that Sound City '92 should be held in Norwich deserves a good pat on the back (a knife would be better — IM) for bringing decency and respect to the East of England.
Hopefully this event will become permanently fixed in Norwich and make the youth proud to come from Norfolk.
Nick Edwards, Walton, Norfolk, definitely not Ilford
Neglected?
Ridiculed?
Elsewhere mebbe, but never here — IM
Your Norwich Sound City pull-out was interesting and informative, but in places almost offensive (GOOD .
Death to turnips — IM).
The good points: It showed East Anglia as a region with more to it than farmers (And bloody Tories ,you forgot about them ,didn't you ?— IM).
It mentioned Ipswich's VIC organisation, fighting for a venue in the town.
It recognised local talent from the whole region.
However, what offended was that you lumped Ipswich in with Norwich in ‘ten recent Norwich releases you should own’.
It should have been ‘ten recent East Anglia releases you should own.’
The pull-out also seemed to encourage venues to regard Norwich and Cambridge before Ipswich.
It is this type of attitude which keeps Ipswich the poor relation, musically, to the other towns and forces music lovers to travel too often to Norwich and Cambridge.
This is a similar distance as between Liverpool and Manchester, but without the benefit of a motorway.
Public transport is a joke: you can't get a train home from Cambridge after about 10pm.
Next time you do an article on the region, treat Ipswich equally to Cambridge and Norwich.
Somebody who says Ipswich Town will slaughter Norwich City next season, Ipswich, definitely not Ilford
Norwich!
What's that ever given to rock?
Sale Of The Bloody Century , that's what.
Ipswich has done even less.
And no doubt next time we do a piece on East Anglian rock — it took us nearly 40 years to do this one, so the next one should be in 2032 — we promise to be nice to Ipswich.
Before that though, we're going to get a huge fretsaw and cut along the borders of Essex and Suffolk and then saw down from The Wash to meet the other line.
Then we're going to rub onions on our eyes, wave handkerchiefs (small squares of cloth used for wiping noses: I expect you use the cuffs of your smocks up there), and pretend to cry when we watch you turnips drift out into the North Sea.
And you can take bloody Steve Lamacq and Jacob's Mouse with you — IM
POLLY STRIPPER
Doesn't the Polly Harvey cover photo resemble an NME cover pic of Siouxsie Sioux circa '82?
Poison Pen, Nowhere (ie, probably somewhere in East Anglia), Not Ilford
POLLY TECHNICAL
We believe the critically acclaimed PJ Harvey are in fact a record company hype and do not exist.
Having attempted to attend two of their concerts we arrived only to find the gigs were postponed (Leicester and Derby).
Now come clean: PJ Harvey is actually Nick Cave in drag and too embarrassed to appear in public.
At last!
A serious question about existence.
First thing this morning we were lying in bed and I asked Polly whether she was real, but all she said was ‘What the  f— are you doing in my bed?’ so the jury's still out on that one.
However, if theoretical physicists can prove the existence of God by the use of mathematics, I can almost certainly prove that she's not Nick and his Cave by the same means.
If P is equal to Polly Harvey and N is equal to Nick and his Cave, what is the relationship between P and N?
Answer: P is the first letter of Paddy and N is the last letter of Ashdown and since both Polly and Paddy live in Yeovil it can therefore be extrapolated that they are one and the same and hence God exists.
And the less said about big bangs the better.
Does that make things clearer?— IM 
WHAT'S THAT TUBULAR STEEL THING BEHIND THE AMPS?…
THAT'S BOB'S ZIMMER, MAN!
‘It's my new, rationalised storage system.
I pile the CDs on top of the tapes which balance on my redundant vinyl collection that's heaped on top of the ancient 78s I've had for years.’
PUBLIC NME
The old debate rears its ugly head once again— is there room for politics in pop music?
Well, if the scenes of Fred's bar in Soho are anything to go by, the answer must be a resounding ‘No way!’
Public NME had the good sense to decline an invitation to a party for FLOWERED UP and their short film Weekender .
Not that we've got anything against the group, you understand, but certain other guests would have ruffled our feathers, so it was in everyone's best interests that we stayed away.
For among the noteworthy (?) in attendance was none other than the Right Horrible DAVID MELLOR MP , the newly appointed so-called ‘Minister For Fun’ in JOHNNY MAJOR 's cabinet.
Mellor confessed to not being particularly au fait with Flowered Up's fine body of work, but claimed to be well impressed with the artistic quality of the film.
The band themselves, whoever, were apparently none to impressed by Mellor, to the point that they didn't even bother showing up for their own party!
Instead they were down the road taking part in the pilot for a new Channel 4 indie pop programme, where their contribution to the proceedings was a ‘spirited’ rendition of the RIGHT SAID FRED hit ‘Don't Talk Just Kiss’.
Ooh, we can't wait to hear that!
Meanwhile, the infinitely more cred KEN LIVINGSTONE cropped up at the Africa Centre for SUEDE 's sweaty showcase.
Public NME , however, were far too busy swigging large amounts of Corona at the swish Mexican eaterie Down Mexico Way with many of our dearest pop-making chums, including JESUS JONES ,VOICE OF THE BEEHIVE ,BILL DRUMMOND and a bespectacled ZODIAC MINDWARP .
Highlight of the evening was undoubtedly the rather drunken arm-wrestling tournament during which losing contestants had their fists pressed into plates of guacamole and refried beans.
Public NME is proud to announce that our very own DAVID QUANTICK was victorious over Jesus Jones JERRY DE BORG in the final.
The Jones boys were busy preparing themselves for a whistle-stop tour of Texas, fuelled by the news from their American promoters that they'd be playing Dallas and Houston the same nights as GENESIS , and that they were out-selling PHIL ‘Two Houses’COLLINS and his Tory mates by three tickets to one.
Hurray!
Speaking of all things Mexican, our ragga tipping acquaintances SL2 didn't have the best of times when they headed out for a Big Rave in the land of tequila.
First up, they were stopped at the US border for the customary van search and their local driver was found to be in possession of a dozen or so ready-rolled ‘recreational’ cigarettes.
The van was impounded and SL2 had to hire a car on their Visa card and make their own way to the rave — which had been cancelled!
Oh blimey!
Still, they decided to hang out for a couple of days and party with the likes of SHABBA RANKS and KRS-1 .
A full report on the rave that never was will appear in next week's issue.
How about an update on our CAPTAIN AMERICA versus C&A story?
As readers from last week may recall, the clothing giants were taking legal steps against the Scottish grungers for an alleged infringement of copyright, ie the ‘borrowing’ of the C&A logo for a single sleeve.
Captain America's main man EUGENE KELLY got in touch to tell us the latest development, namely the withdrawing of the sleeve, and added: ‘I have for a long time been a devoted customer of C&A and will only wear socks and pants with the C&A label.
‘I am disheartened by C&A's corporate clothing attitude and have decided that if the sleeve of my record must remain blank then I shall boycott C&A from now on, and my feet and bottom will remain bare until we settle this like grown men.’
Sticking with clothing, those hapless popsters OCEAN COLOUR SCENE are grieving over the loss of more than £2,000 worth of T-shirts which managed to fall out of the back of their van while they drove through the Moseley area of Birmingham last week.
Phonogram are offering a reward of sorts for info about the shirts' whereabouts and anyone who's got something to say should give the boys in blue at Belgrade Road station a call on 021 626 4010.
‘Dangerous’ comedian BILL HICKS is among us again, playing lots and lots of outrageous concerts up and down the country.
When he returns to the US he will start work on his first film script, which he describes as an allegorical tale about ELVIS PRESLEY actually being alive.
In Bill's script, Elvis comes out of hiding and tries to resurrect his career, only nobody believes he's really Elvis because he looks too old.
It's a long way from completion, but Bill says he's already approached ROBERT DE NIRO to play Elvis.
And while we're on the subject of outrage, those sexy boys from FABULOUS had a curious welcoming committee in Bournemouth on the first night of their current tour.
Various local councillors and moral guardians were waiting for them at the venue, having read local press reports that the Fabs' travelling show included a rather racy striptease revue.
Not!
Councillors stayed for the entire show to make sure nothing untoward occurred, which meant SIMON DUDFIELD had to keep his fly buttoned for once.
There was first night outrage when the MANIC STREET PREACHERS finally reached America last week, with NICKY upsetting a lot of music biz types at their New York showcase.
Casting a disdainful eye around the room, Nicky declared: ‘The only good thing about America is that you killed JOHN LENNON .’
Various grown men were seen to be weeping and Columbia Records have since been inundated with complaining telephone calls.
Big wow!
Closer to home, those naughty boys from SUGARBLAST were chased out of Hyde Park by jobsworths after disrobing for a photo session by the Serpentine.
It appears the naughty boys were in the altogether just as a primary school field trip walked past.
Hey, look on the bright side, at least it gives them a head start for their biology GCSEs.
And finally we return you to America to party on down with those incredibly nice chaps from TEENAGE FAN CLUB , who have been winning over all and sundry with their boyish charm, roguish antics and, occasionally, pop music.
Guests at their big Los Angeles show included KURT COBAIN and COURTNEY LOVE , who were so impressed by king of the skins BRENDON O'HARE that they are seriously considering naming their imminent first-born after him!
Bloody hell, hope it isn't a girl.
Also in attendance were PERRY FARRELL and a bare-chested SLASH , although neither stayed for the after-show party at a sleazy ten-pin bowling alley, where a fun knock-out contest was held.
However,Public NME is a little suspicious of the outcome of the tournament, as all four members of the Fannies made it through to the semi-finals.
We smell a rat.
Ay caramba!
That BART SIMPSON dude is most ubiquitous!
Having ‘jammed’ with fellow fictional celebs SPINAL TAP (above) in the US last week, Bart blew into Blighty to take his place in the new, improved HOUSE OF LOVE line-up!(below)
Payola isn't what it used to be.
The days of little envelopes of happy powder being dropped into expectant palms have long since gone, and what's taken its place?
Well, these days top bands like CARTER USM are bribing us with bloody Brussels sprouts!
Pathetic!
Next week, that U2 baked potato in full.
LONE GROOVER
WHAT DO YOU THINK 1977 HOLDS, EH!
MAESTRO??
FAME, WEALTH, COUNTLESS CHICKS, SELF ABUSE…
FILM CONTRACTS, MUCHO LIQUOR, DRUGULES, TRAVEL…
FOR EVERY TALENTLESS BASTARD OTHER THAN ME…
Anniversary ish spesh!
Erk alors!
This, dear readers, is a prime example of biting NME cartoon satire at the height of punk rock.