

PART ONE
When, sometimes, I think back on the beauty of life on a South Seas island, I start to wonder how fate could possibly have propelled me from the rain and bedraggled leafless winter trees of England to such distant enchantment.
And when I daydream of its beauty I think, too, of the people I met on Koraloona, of Doc Reid, the eccentric, wayward medic who first taught me about the island; Bill Robins, the captain of the Mantela when our ship was attacked, and who before that was to become my first real friend; Jason Purvis, the starving beachcomber and would-be great novelist who at last did achieve a kind of fame; Paula Reece, the beautiful American with cold, appraising eyes who so loved the island — and several of its free and happy inhabitants.
Then there was Tiare, named after Polynesia's whitest flower, who had inherited a secret hoard of paintings from her artist father, paintings that were to be a turning point in the history of the island.
Above all, there was Tiare's daughter Aleena.
I can still see her as I first met her, a skinny, energetic schoolgirl with a flower in her shining black hair, who quickly grew into a beautiful woman and whose life became entwined with mine as together we triumphed over disease, over prejudice and even over war.
Our travels led us to places as far apart as Sanderstown, San Francisco, New York, and London — all in search of an ‘insurance’ that would guarantee for us peace and tranquillity on Koraloona, the most beautiful island of the whole beautiful Moto Varu archipelago.
There was no reason, except chance, why I should ever have travelled to live in a remote island on the other side of  the world, for my future in England had been mapped out.
Our family, which lived in Renishaw Road in Nottingham, was always well off, if never rich.
My father, Herbert Masters, was an electrical engineer, and enlisted in the army soon after I was born, in 1914.
He saw service in France, the Middle East and England as a captain in the Signals Service of the Royal Engineers, and learned his future trade well.
By the time he was demobbed he was the nearest thing to a genius when handling the military gadgetry of radio signals and wireless telephony that the army produced.
I suppose it was inevitable that in 1918 he should capitalise on his expertise at a time when the post-war craze for the new-fangled wireless sets was at its height.
Before the year was out my father had invested his small gratuity, his savings — for my mother had worked while he was at war — and opened a shop near the Market Place, specialising in selling components for those who wanted to build their own sets.
It sold spare parts that were never stocked in larger shops.
More important, my father had learned the theory as well as the practice of ‘wireless telephony’, so he was that rare individual, a man who could offer practical advice on how best to use the components he bought from Marconi's, Cossor, Edison-Swan, Oldham Batteries and other suppliers.
He was astonishing.
Why, he even once built me a tiny crystal set in an empty match box saying, ‘Here, Kit.
That'll give your friends something to talk about.’
Early in the 1920s, Father opened a second shop, then a third, this time in Mansfield.
He was so successful that ‘Masters of Notts’ seemed almost as much of a neighbourhood byword as ‘Boots the Chemists’.
One thing my father instinctively knew: I would never join his firm unless events forced me to.
I don't think he minded, for once he said to me, ‘You can't do a job like mine unless you're fascinated by it’, and I wasn't.
Though I spent my outdoor time playing any game I could, from cricket, tennis, football or boxing at the local gym, all my indoor time was spent buried in books.
I was an insatiable  reader, and whenever I did visit Father at one of his shops, I invariably managed to wheedle a couple of batteries out of him — so that I could read in bed under the bedclothes.
One day, after a particularly good school report, Father took me for a walk past a second-hand bookstore where I often browsed enviously.
‘I saw a book here that might interest you,’ he said.
It was a heavy leather-bound copy of Don Quixote , dramatically illustrated by a man whose name meant nothing to me at that time, Gustave Doré.
But the full-page pictures brought the heroic figure to life.
‘Let's call it an extra prize for this term.’
Father carried the parcel as we walked back.
‘Because I've been thinking, Kit.
If you agree, I'd like to send you to Oxford.
Your headmaster says he can get you a place.
And Oxford!— it was something I was never able to do myself.
How do you feel about it?’
I did not hesitate.
‘I'd love to,’ I cried.
By now I had a baby sister Clare, and it was something that happened to her which helped to shape my destiny and provided the first step on my road to Koraloona.
Clare had been born in 1919, and by the time she was twelve she had grown into a tomboy, excited by all sports — not only hockey, but sometimes she even helped out if we were short of a player for an improvised soccer game in the park.
Mother disapproved.
She was a loving mother, tall and thin and delighted at the social success of ‘Captain’ Masters, the polite way the bank manager doffed his hat to her, and that she was not the only mother who was sending her son to Oxford.
But as for sending Clare Masters to play football!
‘It's undignified and unladylike,’ she said.
Even worse, Clare, with her ruddy, apple-red cheeks, used successfully to beg Father to get stand seats at Meadow Lane for her as well as me and himself when Notts County played at home.
I sympathised with her for, after all, Notts County was the  oldest league club in the world, and this was the season when Tom Keetley scored a record thirty-nine goals and we came top of Third Division South.
‘It'd be like missing part of the world scene,’ cried Clare.
‘It's like behaving in an unladylike fashion,’ sniffed Mother, for, of course, Father could refuse us nothing, and Mother did add, ‘Well, let's forget it.
Sit down all of you in the dining-room, and have your tea.
The muffins are hot and buttered and sprinkled with salt.’
Clare had such a sense of adventure — and it was this love of an active life that made what happened doubly hard to bear.
That was the year — 1931 — when the Youth Hostels Association was formed, and Clare went on one of their first trips, organised by the local school, to a hostel in the Dukeries, not far north in Lincolnshire.
This despite another sniff of disapproval from Mother.
The trip was supposed to last a week.
After three days, the schoolmistress in charge phoned.
Mother answered, then she came into the sitting-room and announced, ‘Clare's coming home.’
‘Coming home?’
Father echoed.
‘Has she done something wrong?’
‘No.
She's got a bad cold or 'flu and she's running a temperature,’ said Mother in an ‘I told you so’voice.
‘One of the mistresses is driving her back.
She says do not worry, but it's wiser to be on the safe side.
She'll be home this evening.’
When she did arrive, my parents at first thought it was 'flu.
Hundreds of thousands had died in the post-war 'flu epidemic, so anyone who caught it — especially children — was bundled off to bed, as Clare was, with a hot water bottle, some aspirin, and a glass of hot milk with an eggspoonful of whisky in it.
There was no improvement; she continued to have a temperature.
The usual 'flu stiffness and aching in the muscles didn't go away as it should have done, so Father sent for Dr Allott, our family physician, a patient, gentle old man who always arrived in an Essex sedan and — more  important to us — always carried a pocketful of toffees to give away to children.
I wasn't present when Dr Allott examined Clare, of course, but I could sense the worry in my parents.
Clare was told she was in for a long stay in bed, and Mother moved in a divan to sleep next to her.
Dr Allott came every day.
He, too, looked grave, and I caught snatches of meaningless (to me) words…‘cerebrospinal fluid…lumbar puncture…muscular reflexes’.
All these phrases occurred frequently.
Fascinated, I finally waylaid Dr Allott in the street one day, just after he'd paid us a visit, and I plucked up courage to ask him what these strange words meant.
I shall always be grateful to him for not giving me the usual reply of an adult to a curious child's questions, ‘You're too young to understand.‘
‘Well,’ he said, ‘it's not too easy to answer without giving you a long lecture on the structure of the body.’
He handed me a toffee, climbed into his car, beckoned me to sit on the other front seat for a few minutes, and removed the celluloid sidescreen to give us more fresh air.
‘What it amounts to,’ he explained, ‘is that your sister has a mild attack of a disease we call infantile paralysis.
It's an illness we don't know much about, but sometimes it affects the muscles of a leg or an arm.
Perhaps if it's a bad case the patient has to wear a special boot or keep the leg held straight with iron braces.’
‘Will Clare have to wear a brace?’
I asked — with, I must admit, rather more clinical curiosity than compassion.
‘I hope not.
I'm going to send round a nurse who'll massage the affected muscles and help her with exercises.
In the present state of medical knowledge, there's little more we can do.’
‘It's a funny sort of name,’ I said.
‘Well actually,’ said Dr Allott, ‘infantile paralysis isn't its real name.
When we're among ourselves we call it by its proper name, which is poliomyelitis.
That's been its name since 1880, but it's a bit of a mouthful, even when we  doctors call it polio for short.
And it means nothing to the layman, two Greek words meaning ‘grey’ and ‘marrow’, so we've given it an easier name, infantile paralysis, which at least is English.’
I didn't take in all he said, but I learned something.
And I felt anger and bitterness.
I jumped out of the car with a polite ‘Thank you, sir’, but when I went in, I kicked our gate shut with a burst of temper.
How could they do this to Clare, who loved to play games?
Father shook his head sympathetically, but said, ‘Temper, Kit, never did anyone any good.’
Clare never fully recovered.
She had to wear a brace for many years before she was well enough to walk with two sticks, and I still carry in my mind the picture of her trying to walk around the room and on the landing, hobbling in her iron braces.
When she got back into bed I used to cry ‘Poor Clare!’ and almost burst into tears as I hugged her.
‘Don't worry, I'm going to get well,’ she said spryly.
‘Dr Allott has promised me I will.’
‘Well, I'm going to see that this sort of thing never happens again,’ I said.
‘You are?’
She managed a smile.
‘How?’
‘I'm going to become a doctor.
A famous one.
And I'm going to find out how to cure polio.’
Though I was only sixteen, it was a decision from which I never wavered.
I was at Nottingham Grammar School, I always came top in science, and literature, and I loved reading and learning, which I knew would be vital to become a doctor.
Perhaps it was one of those impetuous decisions that were always earning me reproaches, but it was also a logical step because of my interests.
And it delighted my father.
Apart from other considerations, he — and specially Mother — believed that my becoming a doctor would be a step up the social ladder.
Dr Allott advised me to be entered for Wadham, Oxford's ‘medical’ college, and I arrived there when I was eighteen.
The trouble with Oxford, as Bernard Shaw has written, is that it is the only place where you can both have your cake  and eat it.
I loved the cake and ate it all.
The university opened up for me a freedom I never knew existed.
From one friend I learned to appreciate classical music played on his HMV portable.
Many of the records —‘pinched’ from or discarded by his musical family — were scratched and worn, but it was Music with a capital ‘M’and the first time I heard the Chopin first piano concerto, we nearly had a fight because I insisted on playing it right through four times.
Another friend was equally enthusiastic about a new kind of ‘pop’ music, the lilting sound of Hawaiian guitars.
A third introduced me to the delights of the art world, which meant cheap day-trips to London to browse for hours in the Tate or the National Gallery.
All these were treasures unrevealed to me by my doting father who was more concerned with induction coils.
And I was fortunate in that I had friends — musical and artistic — who knew so much more about these subjects than I did, and enjoyed sharing their knowledge with me.
They were two loves which never deserted me.
With equal excitement I entered into the sports side of Oxford.
Perhaps because I was hot-tempered at times, I became what used to be called a ‘natural’ as a boxer.
Bashing one of my peers in the ring released a kind of spring inside me.
I didn't enjoy hurting friends, but each blow did in some way help me to cope with a temper.
And in the end, to my father's real pride, I got a Blue.
But one thing was niggling away at my conscience (for want of a better word).
I was enjoying Oxford so much that I sometimes forgot that moment in Clare's bedroom when I made my decision about my future vocation.
I wasn't doing anything to speed up my role as a would-be doctor, so during my last year at Oxford, where I had planned to stay for three years before going to London for the real hard medical training, I arranged (again through Dr Allott) to spend my final long vac helping out as a general dogsbody at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases in Queen Square, central London, where there was a special unit investigating Heine-Medin's disease, the original name for  polio, and — especially in the 1930s — doing research into the spinal aspects.
The team was led by a remarkable man, Dr Harvey Cushing.
It took me only a few weeks to realise that the medical world would never come to grips with polio until it could isolate the virus which caused it.
Finally I was enrolled at the Royal College of Physicians.
My father paid for my digs in Paddington and gave me a pound a week pocket money, together with what he called ‘travelling expenses’ for my regular visit home (home and a good, square meal), and to spend some time with Clare who was fifteen and slowly, very slowly, improving.
Usually, to please Father, I would also go on a quick visit to one of his shops and sometimes I wondered if they were doing as well as he pretended.
Trade seemed slack.
The Depression didn't help.
But he shrugged off falling receipts.
‘It'll pick up,’ he said.
I didn't give the matter much thought, specially when Clare remarked that same evening that she had heard Father tell Mother, ‘Don't worry.
We can weather this bad period.‘
And, of course, when you are young, you are always looking forward, and I had all the answers ready when Clare asked me, ‘But what about your plans?’
‘Well, Father's promised to buy me a small practice when I'm qualified, which will be in a few months.
Of course, I'll have to do an internship first, then a stint as a registrar before I can even think of looking around for a practice of my own.’
‘But that's wonderful.
It'd make you happy.’
‘Everyone likes to be his own boss.
That's always been one of Father's maxims.
And, of course, a practice of my own — maybe somewhere in the East End of London to start with.’
‘Why not in Nottingham?
Why the East End of London?’
‘Cheapest,’ I laughed.
‘I want to stay in London, because  only then will I get the chance to do some research into polio, like I did during that long vac.’
We were all so busy making plans, living dreams, that somehow Clare and I — and perhaps Mother too — were blinded to the truth, so evident around us: the unemployment figures, the era of mass production, a new industrial revolution in which machines did the work of thousands of men; even the fact that ‘wireless’ was no longer a novelty.
Wireless had become radio — an item of furniture, often bought in a big store together with a fridge.
We never noticed it during the time it took for me to qualify and start work as an intern at St Andrew's in Marylebone.
The first warnings of impending disaster arrived in a letter from Clare who wrote, ‘Poor Father is feeling very down, he's had to close the Mansfield shop’.
By the time I had been an intern for a few more months, doing my rounds in my white coat with stethoscope dangling round my neck (and feeling very important), Father had had to close down the second branch, leaving — for the time being— only the original shop which he had opened near the Market Place where the annual Goose Fair was held.
I went up for a weekend.
Father was very quiet, Mother was dejected beyond words.
She had never been a snob in the unpleasant sense of the word, but she had always set great store by Father's material success, and later by my having been to Oxford and then on my becoming a doctor.
Now the world seemed to be crumbling around us — her world especially.
‘I don't see how we can carry on much longer,’ Father admitted to me.
‘It's the end of an adventure that I thought would last for ever.
Thank God you're qualified.
If this had happened a few years earlier —’
‘But if you do close the whole business down,’ I asked, ‘how…what will you do for money?’
He gave a wry smile.
‘It's a funny world,’ he said.
‘Financially I won't be too badly off.
I can realise my stock  and pay twenty bob in the pound if I go into voluntary liquidation now, before Masters of Notts gets deeper into trouble.
And I've already been offered a job as buyer for a group of chain stores which have each got a radio department.
It won't pay as much, but we won't starve.
But it's the nasty business of disposing of stock, and having to fire men who've been with me for years.
I can do nothing to help except give them good references and a few quid to tide them over.
But,’ with one last sigh and a brave smile, ‘there's nothing quite like being your own boss.
Thank God you'll be your own boss as a doctor.’
A few weeks later Masters of Notts went into voluntary liquidation, paying twenty shillings in the pound as Father had said they would.
In a way the actual liquidation brought with it a curious sense of relief.
The prospect had been hanging over us for so many months that once Father ceased trading, it was as though the weight of worry was lifted.
But Father's new life did have a few problems.
The promised job with the chain stores was cancelled at the last moment ‘due to the Depression’, the standard excuse.
Father had to draw on his modest savings.
He applied for job after job, unsuccessfully, for weeks: he was in his early fifties, and this was the era of ‘too old at forty’, let alone fifty.
We had to move from Renishaw Road to a smaller house in Thorne Road at the other end of Nottingham, a move dictated by financial considerations, but which in a way pleased Mother as it helped to distance her from her old set of friends.
In the end Father landed a job that wasn't too bad, working as a technical engineer for Marconi's, whose goods he had bought for so many years.
There was no money left over for me to live in any ‘style’.
But I moved into cheaper digs near the hospital and did manage to keep the second-hand Austin Seven I had bought five years previously.
But slices of bad luck never come singly.
And when I recall the shattering consequences of what happened one night a month or so later, I think of Hamlet, saying ‘When  sorrows come, they come not single spies, But in battalions.’
I had no premonition of disaster when I was sent off to answer a call from a Mrs Dunston.
I looked up her address on our hospital street map in the reception room — Rockingham Gardens, just behind the Elephant and Castle; and it was a hell of a drive across London, on streets glistening after a day when heavy rain had hardly stopped.
The local doctor had sent for St Andrew's (hardly expecting me) because the patient had been bringing up blood, and St Andrew's had a specialist unit dealing with internal bleeding.
I was no expert, but I would know enough to make a preliminary diagnosis and summon an ambulance if I had to arrange for her to be taken into hospital.
In fact, there was nothing really wrong with her, and I did what I could to soothe her.
She had been spitting blood after a bad bout of coughing, but one look at the sputum told me it was clean blood.
She had probably broken a tiny blood vessel in the lung area and it was bleeding, but not seriously.
All the same, heavy coughing always meant the possibility of water on the lungs which in turn could lead to pneumonia, so I gave her an injection of vitamin K, to thicken the blood, a sleeping pill, some linctus which contained a tiny amount of morphine, and also told her, ‘Take one of these pills every morning for a week.’
They were diuretic pills to encourage patients to get rid of excess water quickly.
‘And if you don't feel any better in a couple of days — if the bleeding doesn't stop when you cough — let us know.’
I set off back to the hospital — not in the best of tempers after a foul drive in filthy weather — and it was on the way home, as the wet lamps marched towards me, that it happened.
I was driving through the warren of small, mean, shop-lined streets towards St George's Circus where Lambeth Road meets Blackfriars Road, leading to the bridge.
In one small street — later to be identified as Keyworth  Street — I saw what seemed to be a fight ahead of me outside a shop.
My first instinct was to back the car and find a different way round, but then in the headlights I saw that three or four men were all dressed in black shirts.
And they were attacking one man, while a woman, presumably his wife or daughter, was crying by the side of the street.
I knew immediately who they were — Oswald Mosley's Blackshirts, indulging in their favourite pastime of Jewbaiting.
I still hadn't actually thought of doing anything until the woman ran towards me and cried, ‘Help, please.
They're going to kill my father.’
‘You run for help,’ I cried.
‘There's always some police by the Circus,’ I knew they were there because of the Jewish population around the area — and the frequent Mosley British Fascist parades.
She ran off.
I jumped out of the car, still not knowing quite how to argue with those toughs a bare twenty yards away, until I arrived; but the sickening sight settled my course of action.
Instinctively I had carried with me my heavy medical case; perhaps I might need it.
But then I saw the victim.
He was old, bent, bearded, and one man was holding him back while the other two kicked and thumped him.
Without a second's thought I swung my medical case straight into the face of one of the thumpers.
The case burst open, the contents flying all over the place, and with a cry of astonishment the man fell, his face bleeding.
The other man turned with a snarl to attack me, while the third grabbed the Jew.
I had dropped my bag as I hit the first man, but that didn't matter.
With my boxing Blue, I wasn't afraid of a thug.
As he tried to grab me, I feinted, slipped back to make him follow me, knowing he would think I was afraid, and then I let him have a classic straight left that hit him on the point of the jaw.
He fell on to the pavement, out like a light.
And as I started to go for the third man, I heard the  sound of police whistles, and then two policemen arrived with the woman, and the third thug ran for it.
The old man had sunk to his knees, so, ignoring the Blackshirt on the pavement, I tried to rescue what I could from my medicine case and give him some first aid.
I laid him further along on the pavement, under his broken and smashed shop front, which proclaimed his trade: Rabinowitz Tailors.
The shop owner wasn't too badly hurt and as the policemen arrived and asked me, ‘You all right, sir?’
I replied, ‘Thank you, Officer.
I'm a doctor.
I was driving past and tried to stop this poor devil getting beaten up.
I hit this man in the face.’
‘And this one here?’ asked the policeman.
‘I gave him a straight left.
He'll come round soon.
Thanks for coming to my help.
If you get a basin of water from the old man's shop and pour it over the man, it'll help.’
I prepared to collect the rest of my medicines and make for the hospital, when the policeman said to me, ‘Excuse me, sir.
Don't you think you'd better take a look at this fellow you knocked out?
His 'ead's hanging in a funny sort of way.’
It was the first time I had taken a close look at him.
I lifted his head gently with my right hand — and felt the hot, sticky blood covering the back of his skull.
I knew instinctively what had happened.
As I hit him he must have fallen and hit the back of his head on the edge of the sharp pavement.
With the help of one of the policemen I turned the man over.
The back of his head was split wide open.
I didn't need any further examination to know that the man was dead.
‘Better send for an ambulance,’ I said heavily, taking in the scene as I wondered what to do next.
It had started to rain again, not heavily but miserably.
A few yards away, sitting on the pavement, was the thug whose face I had hit; he was shouting, ‘You killed him, you bastard!’
The other policeman was helping the man and his daughter into their  shop.
On the left lay a corpse.
And facing me was a thoughtful policeman.
‘I'll have to report it to the station, doctor,’ he started.
‘Of course you must,’ I said.
‘It was an accident, but you must do your duty.’
I gave him all the particulars he needed — my name, address, the hospital where I worked, and the number of my Austin Seven.
‘Let's hope for the best, sir,’ he said.
‘As far as I'm concerned, I'd like to see all these bleeding fascists dead.
But —’
‘Don't worry,’ I said more cheerfully than I felt.
‘Can I go now, Officer, while you summon the ambulance?
Or can I help you?’
‘Thank you, sir.
Don't worry.
The station's only five minutes away along Waterloo Road.’
And turning to his colleague he said, ‘Charley, keep an eye on these buggers while I nip round to the station.’
‘Do you think I could go now?
I'm only anxious that the hospital might wonder what's happened to me.’
‘I don't see why not.
We know what's happened.
I'm afraid someone from Waterloo Road Station will contact you.
They'll want you to make a statement.
After all, a man has died, sir.’
‘Of course.’
Then, at last I went.
And the next morning told the hospital authorities in full exactly what had happened.
Three days later I made a statement.
The police were very sympathetic, but as the inspector in charge told me, ‘I'll have to hand over the papers to the Director of Public Prosecutions — or one of his staff.
To decide what action to take, whether to charge you.’
‘You think they might?’
I was only asking for confirmation of what I expected.
They would have to charge me with manslaughter.
‘I'm afraid so, Doctor.
It's a bit of bad luck for you, getting entangled with a group of bastards, and if it's any  comfort to you, I'll lay a pound to a penny that you'll go free if there's a trial.’
‘That's some consolation,’ I said wryly.
‘But it's the publicity that worries me.
You know what stuffed shirts the medical profession are.
Especially the older doctors.’
‘We'll do everything to keep it out of the press,’ he promised me.
But no one could.
Even before I was charged, one of the evening papers — there were three in London then, the Standard , the News and the Star — had a front-page headline: BLACKSHIRT DIES IN FIGHT WITH MYSTERY DOCTOR.
No name was mentioned at the time, and ten days later I was formally charged with manslaughter.
The case was adjourned for ten days, and I was allowed bail, but the hospital governors thought it best for me to be suspended on full pay until after the inquest had been held.
So after giving details of my ‘movements’ to the police, I drove up to Nottingham to spend a few days with the family.
Even that provided little consolation.
Over the years we had become so attached to Renishaw Road that our new, smaller house in Thorne Road seemed cold and indifferent to our worries.
The only good news to offset my ‘disgrace’ was that Father had proved such a success at Marconi's that he had been appointed an assistant manager in the research department dealing with radio materials.
It did his ego a power of good.
‘All the same,’ he sighed, ‘you're so impetuous, Kit!
How often have I begged you to keep that temper of yours in check.
You're so impulsive.’
‘I think he was brave to do what he did.’
Clare stood up for me.
‘You're a hero.’
‘Not to Mother,’ I said sadly, for she was taking the ‘disgrace’very badly.
‘After all,’ she said, ‘you didn't have to help.
The police station was only five minutes away.’
On the other hand, the inspector's belief that I would never be punished proved only too true when I returned to London and the inquest was held.
The evidence that it was an accident brought about by bullies was overwhelming, especially at a time when 9 out of 10 Britons were engulfed in a tide of hate for Hitler's British Mosley stooges.
But what really made it impossible for anyone to convict me was when, to my astonishment, a frail, bent old man appeared in the witness box.
At first I didn't know who the bearded man was for (as I realise now) I had been too busy participating to see.
But this was dear old Mr Rabinowitz himself, spruced up, a new suit, who told in a quavering voice how this perfect stranger had come to his aid after the Blackshirts had smashed open his tailor's shop.
‘Sir,’ he said to the court, ‘I would be a dead man by now if it had not been for this gentleman.’
Added to that, the policeman gave evidence, mentioning my concern, and also adding that ‘It was a clean-cut blow to the jaw, sir, as you would expect from a man who got an Oxford Blue for boxing.’
I was found Not Guilty.
That was fine, but I had not reckoned with the excitement the case aroused in the popular press.
They seized on every detail of the evidence and plastered them over their front pages.
Clare, walking with a stick now, though still in braces, had come to London to lend me moral support — Father, of course, couldn't just leave his job at will.
And it was she who brought me the first evening paper.
‘Oh God!’
I groaned over coffee at Lyons' tea shop.
‘That's ruined me!’
‘Ruined you!’
Her eyes were sparkling.
‘You're a hero!’
‘Not to the hospital.’
I managed a smile as I read the page-one story: OXFORD BLUE BEATS MOSLEY THUG SAVES LIFE OF JEWISH VICTIM.
And underneath the story started: Gallant young Dr Kit Masters, Oxford Boxing Blue, beat off a gang of three Blackshirts when he found them attacking an old man who ran a tailor's shop.
He hit one so hard that he later died, and  injured another so badly that he is still in hospital.
The victim he helped said he owed his life to…and there was more of the same.
‘They'll fire me for this.’
I paid the fourpence for two coffees, and after I had seen Clare to her train back home, went to St Andrew's to make a few notes of plans to defend myself, for I knew it would not be long before I faced a new ‘trial’— by the hospital's board of governors.
Two days later I was summoned to appear before them.
I had never met the head of governors, Dr Arnold Barton, though I had seen him at several functions, a thin, tall, stern-faced, lantern-jawed streak of a man who rarely seemed to smile.
After I had been kept waiting for a few moments in an ante-room, I was ushered into the main boardroom where Dr Barton and six colleagues were seated around a long, rectangular, polished table.
One chair at the bottom of the table was empty, and as I came in Dr Barton, with hardly more than a nod in my direction, indicated the chair and said sternly, ‘You may sit, Doctor Masters, while we ask you a few questions.’
I sat without a word.
‘Though I appreciate your bravery in going to aid an old man,’ Barton began, ‘the medical profession cannot countenance the kind of newspaper scandal and unsavoury publicity that you have brought to St Andrew's.’
‘But, sir,’ I protested almost angrily.
‘You wouldn't want me to let an old man get beaten up and do nothing.’
‘Why didn't you call the police instead of getting mixed up in such an event?’ one of the governors asked.
‘Because I didn't know where the police station was,’ I retorted.
It seemed so unfair to have faced one trial to prove my innocence, and now to face a kind of drumhead court martial as though I were guilty.
‘Sir,’ I addressed Dr Barton.
‘I have had my trial.
I have been declared innocent.
Just as there can't be one law for the rich, one for the poor, there can't be one law for men, one for doctors.
It's not fair, sir.’
For a moment the expression of the stern-faced Dr  Barton softened and he said more gently, ‘I'm afraid you are wrong, Doctor.
There are two sets of laws.
You have proved your innocence, and you are not on trial to prove that again.
What is at stake here is not innocence of a crime, but your reputation , and by a medical, not a legal tribunal.’
Another member of the panel added, ‘We have nothing but admiration for the way you tackled those thugs, Doctor.
But please remember what Doctor Barton has pointed out — you are not being judged twice for the same crime.
There are two different problems, and we all know that in order to gain the confidence of patients, every doctor has to be seen to behave in an impeccable manner.
The medical profession is guarded by the confidence of its patients.’
‘And in this case,’ said Dr Barton, ‘you struck a man with such force that he was killed.’
‘He slipped.
The court accepted that.’
‘He died, and as a direct result of your intervention.’
For another hour the inquisition continued, almost, I felt, as though the ‘judges’ were scraping for any dirt they could find.
One member asked for details of how my father had gone into voluntary liquidation.
On the other hand, one did try to come to my aid.
‘Aren't you the young man who spent some weeks with the research unit at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases?’
‘Yes sir, I did.’
‘I thought I remembered your face,’ he said.
‘Why did you do this?’ asked Dr Barton.
I was able to explain my interest in helping with polio following Clare's illness.
‘I see,’ said Dr Barton.
‘That will be all, thank you.
Will you wait in the ante-room while the governors discuss your case.‘
I knew the answer before I was recalled twenty minutes later, and Dr Barton pronounced judgment.
‘It is the considered opinion of the board of governors,’ he said, ‘that in the interests of the good name of the  medical profession, and’— he gave a diplomatic cough —‘of St Andrew's, it would be much easier for all concerned if you were to resign.’
‘And leave medicine!’
I cried.
‘Please moderate your voice, Doctor,’ the chairman rebuked me.
‘But, sir,’ I begged.
‘The only thing I want in life is to be a doctor.’
‘You are a doctor,’ he said.
‘You are free to practise anywhere — only not here.’
‘It's grossly unfair,’ I insisted.
‘Why should I be penalised for helping someone in trouble?
Isn't it part of a doctor's work to help the sick?’
‘It is not part of a doctor's work to become involved in brawls,’ he said firmly.
The verdict was delivered with such casual brutality that I flushed with the shame of it — being kicked out like a clerk caught pinching pennies from the till.
I was about to shout those very words out when, for once in my impetuous life, Dr Barton prevented me, for as the other members of the board filed out, he said, ‘Doctor Masters.
Will you remain behind, please?
I would like to talk to you for a minute or two.‘
Sulkily, and seething inside, I remained.
‘Now, sit in this chair next to me,’ he said, and with a sudden change of tone and manner, said, ‘You must not blame us for keeping up such high standards of public behaviour.
And I want to help you if I can.’
Somewhat mollified, I remained silently waiting for him to talk.
What could he do — what could anyone do — when a doctor was blamed for something of which he was not guilty?
‘I know how you feel,’ he said.
‘But I was particularly interested in one thing: the interest you have shown in the treatment of polio.
And the extra-curricular work you did when you were a medical student.
Tell me, have you ever heard of a place called Koraloona?’
Slightly bewildered, I said that I hadn't.
‘I didn't imagine you had.
It's a small island, barely twenty miles long, one of the seven South Sea islands in the Moto Varu archipelago.
Moto Varu, by the way, is Polynesian for seven islands.’
‘But what has this to do with me?’
I asked, still feeling bitter.
‘There's a vacancy for an assistant doctor there.
Appointments are in the hands of the St Stephen Sisters of Mercy Mission which operates in the South Seas.’
He coughed.
‘I happen to be chairman of the medical panel.’
I had never thought about the South Seas, beyond the instinctive yearning to escape the treadmill of an office desk, the clanking trams, the yellow fog, the rain.
And even now I really didn't want to go.
I wanted to succeed in a normal way.
‘There's one thing I haven't told you.’
Dr Barton judged his words carefully.
‘It's a beautiful place, a real tropical island, but it has a drawback.
It has regular outbreaks, for which we can find no reason, of one particular disease.
That disease is polio.’
My mouth must have dropped open.
‘You see, Doctor Masters,’ he continued, ‘we have been placed in a difficult position, but that is no reflection on your qualities as a good doctor.
And I became interested when I heard of your interest in polio.
In return for your resignation, I am offering you the opportunity to study a dreadful disease in a living laboratory.
You'll never get another chance like it — if you really mean what you say.’
‘How would I — well, get there?
And when would I leave?’
An inner excitement gripped me as I saw in my mind's eye an image of Clare trying to hobble round her bedroom.
‘By ship to Australia, and then the authorities will arrange your passage by schooner to the islands.
I'll cable if you accept and you can sail in about a month.’
Normally a twice-monthly passenger and cargo ship, the Island Princess , sailed from Sydney to Tahiti, calling on the way at Sanderstown, the capital of the Moto Varu archipelago, and also on the return voyage to Australia.
From Sanderstown a local vessel would take me to Koraloona.
As it happened, I was given an alternative.
The Australian representative of the Mission, who drove me to the Southern Cross Hotel in Sydney, explained that the Mantela , a Sanderstown boat of 5,000 tons which normally plied between the islands, had just finished a refit in Sydney and was about to sail two days after my arrival.
I jumped at the opportunity of travelling on her.
I was fed up after weeks of playing deck quoits and shuffleboard, and the Mantela appeared to be the perfect introduction to the South Seas for, instead of going straight to Sanderstown, she would call at Rarotonga, and spend a day or two there, so I would be able to fit in a visit to another island and see something of it at a leisurely pace.
I knew nothing really about the behind-the-scenes activities of missions working in remote islands, but the Australian representative, Brian Parker, explained that he worked for several missions of different denominations, arranging facilities, transfer of funds, booking hotels for newcomers and whatever might be needed.
He was a short, precise man with a small moustache which reminded me a little of Hitler's, but he had none of the German leader's belligerence.
He couldn't do enough to help.
He laughed when I asked him if he was a clergyman.
‘I'm just a businessman,’ he said.
‘My experience of Christian missions has proved that they may be very good at saving  souls, or bodies if they're medical missions, but for the most part they're not very good at business.
I just run local affairs for a dozen or so missions.’
‘But is there much business to attend to?’
‘I'm also in the import-export business.
But in answer to your question, yes.
For example, I've received a request from the doctor on Koraloona for a large parcel of drugs.
It's much easier for me to centralise all requests, arrange the shipping — or, in this case, give them to you to take to the island.
You'll like the Mantela .
You'll be sailing under Captain Robins and you'll like him too.’
I did, from the moment we met, almost as soon as the first throb of the Mantela's engines announced that we were on our way.
Captain Robins was a Yorkshireman in his fifties who had long since lost his accent amidst the welter of a dozen dialects.
He was a tall man with a craggy, rubbery face which twisted and turned, often into a sardonic grin.
He had a mop of grey hair and, under it, steady grey eyes.
The Mantela , which had berths for six passengers in moderately comfortable cabins, boasted no luxuries like private bathrooms or toilets.
But the saloon, where we ate, as well as drank our aperitifs, was spick and span, and shone with the polished mahogany and brass of a house-proud owner.
She might not have been as glamorous as the great vessels loaded with equally glamorous cargo, but she was just as important in her own way.
Not especially gracious, but squat and workmanlike, plodding with tenacity from port to port.
The Mantela was an honest ship, with no frills, but ready to take on all comers.
Besides myself there were three other passengers, but they all disembarked at Rarotonga, and after that, for the three days at sea before we reached Koraloona, Robins and I were more or less on our own.
The first mate and the ship's engineer took their meals at different times, and did not use the saloon as a sitting-room.
Occasionally I would join Robins on the bridge; at other  times, when all was going well, he would come into the saloon to join me in a drink served by a Cockney steward called Tomkins; the choice was limited, but I didn't drink much anyway.
‘Ever try this after dinner?’
He pointed to a bottle of Crème de Menthe.
‘Best after-dinner drink in the world,’ he pronounced, ‘I call it Sticky Green.’
When I shook my head, he said, ‘I suppose it's not a young man's drink.
But it does wonders for dyspepsia.’
‘An expensive kind of medicine,’ I said.
‘I can give you something that doesn't cost a quarter of that.’
‘Mebbe, but don't forget I get my drinks duty free.’
After Tomkins had served the second glass, Robins looked at me almost quizzically, and said, ‘I've seen a few doctors come and go in the islands, but you don't seem to fit into the usual pattern.’
‘Too young?’
He searched for the word he wanted then said, with a grin, ‘Too posh!’
‘That I'm not,’ I laughed.
‘No insult intended.
But you'll find your new boss, Alec Reid, a very different proposition.
He's a real character.
He certainly fits into Koraloona.
A made-to-measure Scotsman.’
‘Not even posh?’
‘In one way, yes.’
He didn't rise to my teasing.
‘He's a good doctor, and he's in love with the island.
He'll never leave it.’
‘Is it that beautiful?’
‘You'll see for yourself before long.
In the meantime, while I check on the bridge, read this, I brought it down from my cabin to show you.
It's the cheapest adventure story in the world, and it'll tell you more about Koraloona than I can ever put into words.
I'll be back in an hour, then we'll have a final Sticky Green.
What say?’
Captain Robins left the saloon, I peeled a couple of the red bananas that grow wild on the islands — my dessert — and  picked up the book.
It was a tattered copy of Sailing Directions .
KORALOONA, eighteen miles long, eleven miles wide, is one of the smaller islands in the Moto Varu (Seven Islands) archipelago, of which Sanders Island is the largest (pop.
94,000).
The capital is Sanderstown which contains a major British naval base.
Koraloona is 130 miles west of Sanders Island and is dangerous to shipping because it is encircled by a coral reef at times fifty miles long, marked on all Admiralty charts.
Two passages through the reef, both navigable for vessels up to 5,000 tons.
Main town of Koraloona is Anani.
Smaller town to east is Tala-Tala.
Several small villages, unnamed.
Regular vessels bring supplies from either Sanders Island or Apia, Pago Pago or Rarotonga.
Abundant water supplies, fruit, vegetables, staples, fish plentiful.
Note : The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty feel that pilots should advise would-be visitors that Koraloona has only one small hospital and one doctor.
In that respect their Lordships were wrong; by the time the Mantela docked Koraloona would have gained, at the ripe old age of twenty-four years, four months and seven days, their first assistant medical officer.
There is something about the sea that invites the exchange of confidences.
You meet perfect strangers, listen politely to their life stories and then, when they cock an inquisitive ear, you need no encouragement to answer their unspoken questions.
On land it can take years for two people to become close friends, yet at sea the years are telescoped into hours.
Maybe the huge wilderness of the sea helps.
A man feels so insignificant against its vastness that confidences no longer seem something to keep to oneself.
And, of course, in most cases you know you never will meet again.
With Captain Bill Robins, though, it was rather different.
He  told me that he called regularly at Koraloona, and that I probably would run across him from time to time.
In my case it was also different, for though I had done no criminal act I had by force of circumstance set sail for Koraloona to build a new life there.
True, Bill Robins had started the confidences.
Perhaps because he spent so much of his time alone, he told me all about his wife, his two children, the home they had bought in Sanderstown, how long he had been married, where the children went to school — all the details of life in a town of about 60,000 people.
Especially on the second night, I had the feeling that he wanted to talk, and what made it the more interesting was the variety of his experiences and the mature way in which he alluded to them.
He was a man of books as well as of the sea, and knew his history as well as his geography.
Leaning forward in the rattan chair, on the after deck, he said, ‘I tell you, Doctor’— he always addressed me thus, showing the respect of one professional man for another ‘in over thirty years at sea I've become a specialist in islands.
Funny lot, the people on ‘em.
There's the Andamans, where they never talk, just converse entirely in song — a sort of chant.
It's like being in a permanent opera!
And Zanzibar — now there's a place.
That's where the Arabs prohibited the import of jasmine because the scent depresses the men and excites the women.
And once I spent three weeks on Thursday Island.
Lived on one of the world's most expensive delicacies — turtle.
I never want to see turtle soup again as long as I live.’
‘You've talked about several islands,’ I said, ‘but there's one thing I can't get straight.’
‘What's that?’
‘My bearings.
The Moto Varu group.
How big are they?
How far is one from the next?’
‘Come into my cabin and I'll show you.
The Mantela doesn't boast a chart room so we may be a bit cramped.’
His room was indeed tiny, all brass and mahogany, a bunk bed with a red blanket on it, a wash basin that folded  away, a desk.
There was little else, except a small bookshelf from which he took one of several charts.
Spreading it on the desk, he showed where we were, steaming due north from Rarotonga.
‘Of course, all the islands are volcanic in the sense that they've been thrown up from the depths by submarine upheavals thousands of years ago; but only one of them's got a crater.
We'll come to that in a minute.
First and most important is Sanders Island, to the east of Koraloona,’ he explained, pointing.
‘As you've read, the population is around sixty thousand in Sanderstown itself.
It's a city.
Flourishing.
Aided by the naval base, of course.
The island's got five towns as well as the capital.’
‘And Koraloona's — what?
About a hundred miles to the west?’
‘Give or take a few sandbanks.
But I won't dwell on her.
You'll learn all about the island in half an hour once you're there.‘
He pointed again to the chart.
‘Almost due north of Koraloona is Hodges Island, named after the painter who accompanied Captain Cook on his second voyage, then went on to paint India for Warren Hastings.
It's only thirty miles away, but there's no direct method of getting there because of the reef.
You've got to sail south, then half way round the reef.
As a result, nobody ever goes there.
Anyway, it consists of one enormous coconut plantation to make copra — from which you get coconut oil.
It stretches for nearly fifty miles, and the entire population cultivates copra.
Stinks to high heaven.
I don't land there unless I have to.
The copra company has its own ship.’
He showed me a speck on the map to the left of Hodges and said that it was named Banks Island, after Cook's naturalist friend.
‘There's already one Banks Island just north of Australia, but Cook must have liked him to name another after him.’
‘And inside the huge lagoon of Koraloona?’
‘There you have an oddity.
It's called Penal Island, thirty miles from Koraloona.
A launch calls there regularly.
The  name tells you everything.
It was founded, so to speak, as a sort of Devil's Island — but not so tough: you can't be tough in the South Seas.
But trouble-makers in the old days used to be left there until they died.
Always plenty to eat.
There are few prisoners that I know of, and a hundred people live there, including two or three who are official security guards.
Cushy job, if you ask me.’
‘That's five.’
‘Only two left, and they're simple.
High Island isn't far away, inside the lagoon to the west of Koraloona, and is uninhabited.
That's the dormant volcano.
Low Island — thirty or forty miles long and near High Island — is the richest.
Centuries ago the birds themselves chose Low Island as a sanctuary and the droppings over the years made it rich in guano — a fertiliser.
Ten years ago a New Zealand company was given a licence to dig it out.
The five hundred locals who live there are better off than any of us, because they get a percentage of the profits.’
His rubbery face twisted into an unpleasant sniff, as he added, ‘I wouldn't recommend it for a honeymoon.
The smell is terrible.
I've only been once.
Never again.’
‘But that, I take it, doesn't apply to Koraloona?’
I was laughing, but I sensed his sudden excitement.
‘You'll find it's like Paradise, or the Garden of Eden,’ he said.
‘As though it's just been created and hasn't had a chance to get fouled up with so-called ‘civilisation’.
I've read my Homer in my time, as no doubt you have, Doctor.
And I always remember the Lotus-land in The Odyssey where everybody lives in ease and luxury — though not the luxury we Europeans think of as such.
That's just material.
The luxury in Koraloona is of contentment .’
He paused and leaned forward again.
‘It's something to do with metabolism — eh?’
I doubted it.
I expected the Polynesians there to be just as subject to the ailments of the flesh as anywhere else in the world — especially polio — otherwise what would they need a doctor for?
But I knew what Robins meant.
Somehow time, which in the Europe I had left was always  being talked about as ‘of the essence’, seemed of no account in this part of the world.
One remark he made puzzled me.
‘Why did you say I was too posh?’
I asked.
‘Did I?
Must have slipped out.
When I was a kid, in Hull, my father and mother took me to Hessle to have tea with his boss, and I remember Mother telling me that she had stayed up half the night making me a new sailor suit and saying, ‘Behave yourself, Bill.
Remember these are posh people.’‘
‘And did you behave?’
‘Almost,’ he grinned.
‘But Mother went scarlet when the boss's wife told me what a nice suit I was wearing, and I told her that Mother had spent nearly all night making it.’
It was very quiet that evening, the steady rhythm of the ship's engines interrupted only by the occasional guttural cry *om the deck above.
The sea was flat, faintly streaked by a waning moon, and through the porthole of the saloon I could see the Southern Cross and the Milky Way, unblemished by cloud.
The peace and tranquillity of the moment stirred all kinds of memories.
I was thinking of Robins' house and then my own before I left home; his mother making a sailor suit, my mother forever — in retrospect, anyway — making patchwork quilts.
I suppose that at that moment, the night before I stepped ashore to build a new life, it was time to say goodbye to the old.
Robins interrupted my thoughts by saying, ‘Sorry about the word ‘posh’, but I'd heard before we left Sanderstown the last time that a young man had been appointed assistant to Doctor Reid, and I was a bit surprised when I met you.
My first impression was that you'd be more at home putting up a brass plate in Harley Street.’
‘That was exactly what I did intend to do.
You must have a sixth sense,’ I said.
‘But plans have a habit of coming unstuck.’
It didn't take long to tell him my story.
I spared no  details — there was no good reason why I should.
It was not criminal to be impulsive; only foolish.
‘Not always foolish,’ he challenged me.
‘It isn't foolish to be right, is it?’
I said nothing.
After all, I was only twenty-four and Captain Robins was in his fifties.
And though I did hold passionate beliefs, I was a bit young to express them all.
‘We were talking about reading Homer,’ he went on.
‘I remember one line from the Iliad , ‘One principle is for the best, to fight in defence of one's country’.
That's what you were doing.’
His rubbery face twisted into its familiar grin, ‘Fighting fascism.
Maybe it caused you a few problems, but you might be about to get your reward in heaven.
No, I don't think you're going to die yet, rather a paradise on earth.’
‘I'll drink to that,’ I laughed.
‘Yes, even half a glass of Sticky Green.’
‘Talking of fascists’— Robins made sure his pipe was drawing well —‘are they going to drag us into a war?’
‘I hope not.
But it was touch and go at Munich.
I'm no expert, but what worries me is that, when you're dealing with madmen, they increase their demands at the slightest sign of weakness.’
‘No war would ever reach this part of the world,’ said Robins, ‘but I remember the last in Europe.
And I still have relatives living in Hull.
It wouldn't be fun being there, with zeppelins or whatever.’
Again I wondered at myself, only just into my twenties, debating the world with a man old enough to be my father.
‘It may never come.’
‘I'll drink to that !’
It was Robins' turn to laugh.
‘Just one final nightcap before I turn in.’
That was the last night.
The following day, shortly after lunch, we sighted Koraloona on the horizon.
At first all I could see was the hazy black outline of a jagged peak, little more than a shadow on the pallor of a dead calm sea, and then, as the air shimmered and danced and drew nearer, I  could make out colours, mostly green.
Finally I saw shapes of valleys, hills, crags, the white flash of waterfalls and then after Bill Robins lent me his binoculars, even houses, mostly thatched with palms or with roofs of red corrugated iron, the trademark of Polynesia, with the occasional roof of startling white.
‘Coral,’ explained Robins.
‘Usually European.
They're expensive but they collect pure rainfall, because coral never gets dirty.’
Within a couple of hours the silence that had wrapped the sea in peace was changed for a distant roar-like thunder.
‘The reef,’ Robins explained.
‘We'll be okay as soon as we're through the passage.’
When we actually reached the reef, with calm water erupting into foaming waves twenty feet high as they hit the rocks, the Mantela bucked like a frightened horse, sank into a trough, reared up again, and then, as suddenly as it had started, the old tub was through the creamy foam of the passage and had settled into the lazy waters of the lagoon.
The island was spread in front of me, outrigger canoes paddling towards us from the silver beaches lined with tall, bending palm trees and feathery casuarinas, while, behind, the green volcanic mountains rose until they seemed to meet the sky.
In the distance I could see two flagstaffs, one with the Union Jack fluttering, the other with the blue flag and stars of New Zealand.
As we approached the ramshackle pier the Mantela stopped her engines, waited, then, as though changing gear, trembled into a slow approach.
The crew threw out the lines, and those on the pier pulled the heavy ropes attached to them and made fast.
I looked out and saw for the first time the main street of Koraloona's largest town, Anani: a dusty white strip of road, a long row of assorted shops, a few cars.
One man was carrying a huge bunch of red bananas over one shoulder, another was driving a small open truck loaded with oranges.
At the far end of the beach a dozen kids were running  and splashing into the blue water without a care in the world.
All except one, who hobbled after them, hampered by the club foot that is the hallmark of polio.
Apart from that one pitiful figure, the scene looked idyllic.
I hoped it would live up to its promise.
As the gangplank of the Mantela was lowered, an extraordinary-looking man climbed on board.
He wore a topee, the original colour of which was uncertain, it was so battered and stained with sweat; a bright red shirt; and a pair of khaki shorts held up with an old red and orange tie.
Even I recognised it as being the flamboyant colours of the Marylebone Cricket Club.
No socks covered his hairy legs, while on his feet he wore only sandals.
He looked to be in his early-to-mid-fifties, and was running to fat, and when he took off his topee it was to wipe the sweat from a pink, bald head.
I hadn't the faintest idea who he was, but he looked jolly.
Without hesitation he approached me, held out a hand, smiled and said with a touch of humour, ‘Doctor Masters, I presume?’
I smiled in assent.
‘I'm Doctor Reid.
I wanted to be the first to welcome my new assistant to this benighted spot.’
‘Benighted!‘
Dr Reid wiped his sweating head.
‘I'm known for my feeble sense of humour,’ he laughed.
‘I shouldn'a make jokes like that.
I've put up with the place for nearly twenty years.’
Between shouts to the dock hands unloading my trunks he asked, ‘You've got the drugs I cabled for?’
I nodded.
They had been my constant care since Mr Parker had handed them to me.
As we walked on to the  jetty, I was watching carefully to make sure none of my trunks was left on board.
‘We've got you a wee bungalow,’ said Dr Reid, adding with a touch of pride, ‘Two bedrooms.’
I soon learned that in the islands a bungalow meant any house, large or small.
‘But it might be better to spend a couple of nights with Mollie first.’
‘Mollie?’
Laughing from the depths of his shaking frame, he explained, ‘Mollie Green.
But don't get any ideas.
Mollie's nae for bedding.
She keeps Green's Hotel — famous all over the Pacific.
People who've never even been within a thousand miles of Koraloona have heard of Mollie Green's place.’
He looked at my mountain of luggage.
‘How much of your clobber will you need for your first two days?’
‘This'll do.’
I pointed to two suitcases.
‘Right then.
I'll send the rest to the bungalow, and when you've rested you can explore the town and,’ with a sly chuckle, ‘go on a shopping spree.’
I laughed politely, my mind mainly concerned with making sure that I would find all my belongings.
The islanders in their shorts or sarongs didn't look ‘professional’.
The jetty was large but needed a lick of paint and its wooden supports were green with sea slime; it also lacked (to my inexperienced eye) any sense of efficiency.
And the heat of the day, combined with a natural anxiety, made me sweat, though not as profusely as Dr Reid, who was continually wiping his pink, bald head.
It was true that the happy-go-lucky dockers, working for a few pennies every time a ship came in, were being watched carefully by Captain Robins on the bridge, but it all seemed rather haphazard, as though I would be lucky if I ever found all my trunks.
I assumed they would all have been stowed in one corner of the hold and would reappear at the same time.
It was something of a shock to see one Polynesian, his face a wide grin, trot down the gangplank carrying a sack of flour on his head and one  of my suitcases in his right hand.
On the other hand he did, once on the jetty, bend his knees carefully so that he could deposit my suitcase next to another item of my luggage before loping off somewhere else with the sack still on his head.
‘Don't worry,’ Dr Reid assured me.
‘They've got enough method in their madness.
Ah!’
He spotted one crate.
‘Yon'll be the drugs?’
He indicated a large parcel and, as I nodded, said, ‘I'll send them straight round to the dispensary.’
He gave orders in what I took to be the local dialect.
I knew I would have to learn it quickly though, since Koraloona was connected with the Cook archipelago, most people spoke English.
‘Shouldn't I keep the drugs?’
I asked.
‘In case they get lost or into the wrong hands?
I could bring them round to you later.’
‘Don't worry,’ said Dr Reid.
‘Nothing gets lost here.
And everybody knows everything.
They know all about you, where you're going to live.
And I've already fixed up a local lass to come and clean up for you every day.’
At that moment Captain Robins, who had been busy shouting orders, hailed Reid.
‘Afternoon, Doc.
How's things?’
‘Fine,’ cried Reid.
‘You staying at Green's for the night?’
When Robins nodded, Reid added to me, ‘Bill Robins is one of the best.
I'm glad you won't be on your own for the first night.
I'll walk you to the hotel and show you round the hospital tomorrow.’
I thanked him, and soon we were making our way along Anani's main street, from which lanes led to the houses in the foothills behind.
What struck me immediately was the extraordinary background silence.
Cries, laughter, all those, yes.
But few motor cars, no big city life: instead, an almost uncanny, disconcerting stillness, the only constant sound the distant boom of waves on the reef.
And was there — I could not be sure — a lilt of the Hawaiian music we used to listen to at Oxford, mingling with the waves?
The biggest — and busiest — building was the ship's chandler opposite the pier.
‘Jim Wilson runs the place,’ said Reid.
‘Used to be an engineer in the RFC in the war, so he not only keeps the ship's stores, but knows everything about motor cars — and ma plane.’
‘Captain Robins told me you flew a plane.’
‘An old Gloster,’ Reid said.
‘She was once owned by a flying school, so she has dual controls.
The flying school went bust.
She's an ancient lass, I call her Nellie, but she can take me all the way to Sanderstown if I want a night out with bright lights.
She takes off from a field behind the hospital.
I had her shipped out from England as deck cargo.’
Not far from the ship's chandler was Mick's Bar, a local pub with green shutters and heavily protected doors.
‘They're needed sometimes.’
Reid saw me looking at the iron bars.
‘There's some wild evenings there when the ships stay overnight.
It's about the only crime we get here.’
He pointed to the next building.
‘Our local cinema.
It's open every Friday.’
A tattered bill advertised Tom Mix.
‘And this is the general store.
Come in for a moment and meet Mr and Mrs Johnson.
They run the store.
They've even got a telephone so you can open an account now, then phone each time you run out of anything.’
‘Come on in, and park your bag by the door.’
Reid put my other bag there and said, ‘Nice day, Mrs Johnson.’
Mrs Johnson was a cheerful woman of enormous energy who was bustling around the shop, despite a pair of huge, heavy breasts which bulged beneath her dress.
She was a local Polynesian girl, duskier than most, perhaps with a touch of true Samoan blood.
Sitting on a rocking chair in an office at the back, smoking and sipping beer, was a weedy little man with decaying teeth, glimpses of gold fillings, heavily tattooed arms and a cigarette drooping permanently from a weak mouth.
That was Mr Johnson.
He had a shifty air — as well as an obvious aversion to work of any  kind — and I didn't really take to him.
But he was polite enough, and got up to greet me.
His ‘office’ was separated from the main store by a glass partition, and included a fridge with some glasses on top, and an ancient desk.
‘Morning, Doc,’ he cried.
‘This your new assistant?
Pleased to meet you, I'm sure.’
He spoke with a Cockney accent and dropped aitches, oddly out of place on this paradise with its lilting voices that matched the gently waving palms.
As we looked around the store, Reid explained to me, ‘Johnson worked on a pearling lugger, stashed a bit of money away, looked around for the healthiest woman on the island, married her and set up shop.
He's never done a stroke of work since.’
‘Bit rough on her.’
I watched her expertly snip off a length of trade cotton, then almost run to a shelf and move a fifty-pound sack of flour.
‘Not on your life,’ chuckled Reid.
‘She's never had it so good.
She's aye the envy of every other girl on the island.
Overworked?
She's even got a girl to help.’
Johnson's, I was soon to learn, was typical of other South Seas stores — more like a warehouse than a shop, with new lines that had just arrived by boat piled up against the shelves of the barn-like building.
They seemed to sell everything from bolts of brightly coloured, imported cloth for making sarongs or Mother Hubbards — the island dress that hangs in a straight line from shoulder to ankle — to penknives and a large assortment of tools ranging from chisels to axes, from fishing lines and hooks to pots and pans.
There were also large stocks of that old standby of the islands in the rainy season, primus stoves and tins of paraffin, even oilskins, repair outfits, and copper tubing.
The prices seemed more or less the same as those in London at the time I'd left — a box of matches or a bar of Cadbury's chocolate cost a penny.
I saw Colman's mustard at twopence a tin.
In one corner a modest selection of Penguin books cost 6d each, and nearby were cigarettes at the same price — a tanner for a packet of ten.
The range of everyday articles on the shelves reminded me abruptly of things at home, and I found myself thinking of my last night before leaving London.
I spent those final few hours extravagantly, staying the night at the Strand Palace Hotel for ten shillings for bed, bathroom and a cooked breakfast thrown in, with sixpence extra for a haircut at the hotel barber shop — three times as much as the Underground fare of twopence from Paddington to Trafalgar Square, where a Nippy served me at Lyons' Corner House with a sirloin steak for a shilling.
Sitting in his office, Mr Johnson offered us both cold beers from a pail of water in which a few pieces of ice floated.
We sipped them gratefully, but I must have been miles away, for Mr Johnson said, ‘Daydreaming, eh?’
As I said a smiling ‘Sorry’, he asked, ‘Is there going to be a war in Europe, do you think?’
He was the second man in two days to ask me that.
‘It doesn't look too good, Mr Johnson,’ I said.
‘After Munich I thought we'd saved the day.
But now it's all bubbling up again.’
‘Well, it won't affect us.’
Johnson lit himself a fresh cigarette from the butt end of the one he was smoking.
‘But it's a terrible thing if it comes.
Blimey, that feller Hitler must be crazy.’
‘All political figures are mad,’ said Reid as he joined us on the veranda.
And after we left and were walking into the street, he asked, ‘Do you think there'll be a war?’
‘Yes, I do,’ I sighed.
‘There's no way of stopping Hitler short of fighting him.
If we don't, he'll overrun all Europe — probably England too.’
‘You wouldna want to go back?’ asked Reid.
‘No.’
I shook my head.
‘I won't deny that if I were in London and war broke out I'd probably join up.
But I've signed on as medical assistant with you.
And somebody has to cure the sick here as well.’
‘Well, you may lairn there's more to cure on the island than ye bargained for.’
I waited for him to go on, but Reid said nothing more and it left a moment of awkward silence between us.
In Main Street a healthy, smiling young man was striding by, effortlessly carrying, as though he hardly noticed it, two baskets of fruit, suspended at each tip of a bending bamboo arched across a shoulder.
You could see his muscles ripple, for he was dressed only in a lava-lava, the traditional kind of Polynesian loin cloth.
He must have come from the country for the lava-lava was rarely seen in the towns, however small.
He cried, ‘Morning, Doc.’
So did two or three naked kids playing on the strip of beach.
Dr Reid gave them all a wave.
The man with the baskets tried to kick a couple of scrawny hens out of his path and they fluttered towards the edge of the road.
A dog lay down by the side of the building, its pink tongue lolling out with thirst.
My medical eye noticed two things immediately: there were virtually no flies near the children playing on the beach; and the dog lying down was no scrawny, starving mongrel.
It was well fed.
A couple of elderly men walked past with the slow tread of dignified bishops, their naked footfalls almost silent on the hot dust of the road.
‘Well, ye've seen the Harrods of Koraloona,’ said Reid, nodding back in the direction of Johnson's.
‘Let's take a look at the rest of Main Street.’
The side of the dusty street facing the sea was lined with houses all the way along from the pier, but it was difficult to know exactly why many of them were there.
It had only taken a glance to recognise the ship's chandler, the site corroborated by the smell of tarred rope; the same with Mick's Bar and Johnson's store.
A little further on there was a sign ‘Lee Chong Hairdresser’ and underneath the surprising information, ‘Ears also pierced’.
Near it was a more imposing building with a sign proclaiming ‘Pacific Island Steam Packet Company’ and in smaller letters, ‘Koraloona Branch Office.
Manager, David Truefitt’.
A pink-washed, one-storey, stone building nestled  near to it, looking strangely out of place; it was a prettified building, which might have been transplanted from the South of France.
I wasn't surprised when Alec Reid told me, ‘It was built by a woman artist from New Zealand.
It was her idea to come here each summer, but she hasn't been for three years now.
She was of a certain age, so mebbe her painting days are over.
It's used now by Mr and Mrs Gilbert.
They're from the UK.
Retired.
Ye'll meet them.’
‘It's a bit odd to live in Main Street,’ I said.
‘I'd have thought that, behind —’ I waved a hand towards the beginning of the volcanic hills.
‘Aye, that's where all the nicest bungalows are.
Behind Main Street.
More space.
Coconut groves and lots of flowers.
That's where ye'll be living — near our hospital behind Hill Street which runs parallel to Main Street, but a wee bit up the hillside.’
Occasionally a space divided two buildings and then I caught a glimpse of attap huts, children playing, chickens scratching in the dust, pigs rooting, the vivid red of a flame tree, coconut and breadfruit trees, more what I expected than the pink-washed ‘retirement bungalow’.
Next to it as we walked towards the end of the street was a two-storey white building, freshly painted, though the old sign was weathered, ‘New Zealand Government.
Cook Island Land Office’.
‘Land?’
I asked.
‘Is it expensive?’
‘Get along with ye!’ replied Alec.
‘Nobody buys land in Koraloona.
Ye take what ye like as long as nobody else lives on it or uses it.’
I must have looked puzzled for Alex went on, ‘Ye probably know that the Moto Varu archipelago is a Cook Island dependency.’
But, he explained, it was only a paternal relationship.
Sanders Island was virtually independent and so were the other islands of the archipelago, providing they behaved themselves.
Reid was convinced that the British Empire had given New Zealand the Cook Islands mandate because  the Americans wanted it for their sphere of influence.
‘So we kept it in the family,’ he said.
‘And this is their office?’
I asked.
‘Aye, but there's nae any real work to be done.
They have a staff of three to help administer Koraloona.
Ye'll be meeting Colonel Fawcett, ex-Royal Engineers, who's the head man, and his two assistants, Bill Shanks who runs the radio link, and Jack Haslam, general factotum and the — best tennis player on the island.
They all live in the houses dotted on the hillside above Main Street.’
We had by now almost reached the end of Main Street, where a group of girls was washing laundry in a stone trough under the shade of two huge, ancient mango trees.
They looked up, saw us and, waving to Reid, cried, ‘Good morning, Doc!’
‘Better be polite to them,’ advised Reid.
‘They'll be washing your smalls as soon as you settle in.
Hulloa ladies!’ he returned their greeting.
Taking off his topee, he wiped his head, looking almost comical in his shorts and sandals, but obviously all the Polynesians knew and liked him.
There was a great deal of giggling and whispering as we passed by, and then Reid said, ‘At last!
Here's Green's Hotel.’
At first sight the outside of the hotel resembled a third-rate boarding house in a British resort; three storeys the white paint flaking off the walls and window sills.
I must have looked crestfallen, for Reid said at once, ‘It's the heart of a person that counts, Laddie, not the clothes they wear.
Same with here.
And Green's has got a bathroom on every floor'—as if that settled it.
It was certainly taller than the other buildings in Anani's main street and, despite its shabby exterior, I could sense the air of warmth and welcome the moment I passed through the front door.
The reception room was little more than a hall.
Behind the small veneered wooden counter a dozen or so keys dangled from hooks on a numbered board, together with a few dog-eared official-looking proclamations.
On the  counter itself was a bell, the old brass kind on which one banged a button.
By the side of a registration book stood a tray on which rested a bottle of Scotch and four small glasses.
As Reid and I put down the cases we were carrying, Reid uncorked the bottle and offered me a shot of whisky.
‘Custom of the house,’ he explained.
‘A free drink for the weary traveller.’
Downing his tot in one go, he smacked his lips and said, ‘Come on, Laddie, a thimbleful won't hurt you.
And it always tastes better when you dinna have to pay.’
I nodded, and at that moment, as I downed my drink, gasping as the fiery liquid burned my throat, a large woman in her late forties emerged from the office behind.
‘Morning, Doc,’ she said to Alec Reid.
Turning to me she smiled and said, ‘I'm Mollie Green.
And you must be Doctor Masters.
My pleasure.’
She held out a podgy hand.
She had a twang that at first I didn't recognise; it was New Zealand, for though her mother had been local, the late Mr Green, her father, came from Auckland, and had lived there before opening Green's Hotel.
However, it was not until she came round from behind the reception desk that I realised how huge she was.
‘Come on, sit down and let's all have a beer,’ she said, and with a look at Dr Reid added, ‘It's better for you than that rotgut at the bar.’
She banged on the bell and shouted, ‘Lee Ho, two large beers and three glasses.’
A Chinese, wearing none-too-clean ducks and a singlet, appeared with a tray bearing our drinks.
A moment later, as he set them down, Mollie patted a chair and said, ‘Come on, take the weight off your feet, Doctor Masters.’
She was not gross in any disgusting way, though she had to sit down carefully, for it was a tight fit for her to squeeze into the chair with its wooden arms.
She was just cheerfully fat, her obesity partly disguised by the fact that she, too, wore a Mother Hubbard.
Two other factors detracted *om her massive size: her agreeable, welcoming smile, and her extraordinary absence of wrinkles.
She wore no make-up, so that her fatness was disguised by her warmth of character.
‘I'll show you your room if you like,’ she offered.
‘But there's no need really.
Lee Ho will take up your bags.
The room's clean and tidy and there's only one other guest — Captain Robins.
You'll have met him, of course.
He usually stays the night here when the Mantela comes in.
Likes a change from his cabin.
But don't worry: I've put him on a separate floor.’
I must have looked puzzled.
‘You're the only two guests, so if you're on separate floors it means you've each got your own bathroom.
He'll be coming in when the deck cargo's cleared.
You'll be staying to dinner.
Eight sharp.’
Mollie wasn't asking a question, more making a statement, knowing there was nowhere else to eat until I settled in my own home.
‘Lobsters do you?’
‘Lobsters!’
I had visions of London prices.
‘All meals included in the tariff,’ said Mollie, grinning.
‘And dinna get fashed,’ said Dr Reid.
‘Lobsters are two a penny here.
The boys spear them on the reef.
When you've been here six months you'll nae want to see another lobster in your life.’
‘You don't know how to cook them,’ Mollie Green sniffed.
‘We have dozens of ways of making lobsters taste different.’
After a second beer, Dr Reid prepared to leave, explaining that he was going to the dispensary.
‘When does surgery open?’
I asked as we stood outside the front door of Green's Hotel.
‘When I feel like it,’ he retorted.
‘Or in future I'm hoping that on three days a week when ye feel like it.’
He had half turned to walk to his car, which he had left down by the jetty, when we heard the sound of a horn, pressed just once — not to warn us against danger but to attract our attention.
I turned round and saw an old Austin Ten slowly approaching us.
It braked as it drew abreast.
In the driving seat was a woman in her late thirties perhaps, white, but  with the almost stern aquiline features of someone with a trace of Polynesian blood.
I smiled a polite greeting, but the woman hardly acknowledged me.
Dr Reid turned to her and said almost formally, ‘Good morning, Tiare.
May I present my newly appointed assistant, Doctor Masters?
Princess Tiare.’
She didn't shake hands — it would have been difficult for her, anyway, sitting in the car — but as I pondered on the word ‘princess’ and bowed slightly, she said, ‘So you are Doctor Masters?
How old are you?’
‘Twenty-four.
Not too young?’
I smiled, and taking my cue from Reid added: ‘I hope I can be of service to Koraloona, Princess.’
‘Thank you,’ she smiled back, yet retaining a slight sense of reserve or dignity.
‘It's wonderful to be here,’ I said, making conversation.
‘I was surprised that you came on the Mantela .’
I could see her looking at the vessel by the jetty.
‘I thought you'd have taken the regular boat to Sanderstown and spent a night or two there.’
I explained how by chance the Mantela had been in Sydney for a refit.
‘And I enjoyed every minute of the trip,’ I said with genuine enthusiasm.
‘We all love the Mantela ,’ she agreed.
‘She's part of our lives.
My daughter Aleena travels on her regularly.
She goes to boarding school in Sanderstown, but,’ with a smile, ‘always seems to be coming home for the holidays.
You must come round with Doctor Reid for a drink at our home,’ she said, again with that slight formality.
‘I'd love to, thank you, Princess,’ I replied equally formally.
Turning to Dr Reid, she asked, ‘Are you going to the cinema on Friday?’
‘Aye — unless a new bairn arrives to spoil my weekly fun,’ he replied.
‘Are any expected?’
She didn't ask the question idly, but with the authority of one who expected to be kept informed of everything happening on the island.
‘There's three on the way,’ Reid told her.
‘But I hope not for two weeks — and then with any luck not on a Friday, or I may have to ask Doctor Masters to deputise for me.’
The ‘Princess’ then asked to be told the names of the three expectant mothers.
When these were given her she nodded and said, ‘Of course.
I remember now.
I'll go and visit them.
Good morning to both of you doctors.’
With that she slammed the old Austin into gear, then almost as quickly put it back into neutral.
‘Aleena's got a bit of a cough,’ she said.
‘Have you any linctus?’
‘You'll have some medicine in an hour or so,’ Reid promised.
‘Thank you.’
As the old car started up again, I asked him, ‘How old is Aleena, the daughter?’
‘She's a thirteen-year-old.
Lovely kid.
Ask Captain Robins about her this evening.
He'll explain how one day she'll not only be a princess — but an heiress too.
Worth a hundred thousand pounds.
A bonny sum,’ he mused.
‘You're joking,’ I said.
But I could see he was perfectly serious.
I thought of the pearl fishers who often visited the South Sea Islands, and of the many who had made fortunes.
‘Not pearls!’ cried Reid, reading my mind.
‘Aye, there are pearls in these waters — enough for a king's ransom.
But I doubt if they'll ever be fished.
If we started that we'd spoil the island.’
‘Well, then — what?’
‘Why don't you come and join me for dinner tomorrow evening, and I'll tell you then.’
‘I'd love to.
Thanks.’
After Reid left I went to my room.
It was a clean, white, rather clinical-looking room, with its white wooden towel rail, its bowl and pitcher of water for those who didn't have the time or inclination to take a bath.
And I noticed that in the wardrobe was a spare pillow.
Good — I liked two.
I put away the few clothes I had brought, together with photos of Mother and Father, and another one — a head and shoulders portrait of Clare, looking happy and unconcerned about her legs.
I had a couple of books which I had slipped into my light case — Somerset Maugham's novel The Moon and Sixpence , which I was looking forward to reading again because it was, of course, based on the life of the painter Gauguin, who'd lived here in the South Seas; and a collection of Guy de Maupassant stories, in English.
It suddenly occurred to me that I had been so busy enjoying myself on the Mantela that I had never even opened either of them.
Only one thing worried me — my trunks, particularly the one containing all my own medical ‘supplies’.
I didn't like the idea of leaving them unattended overnight.
Supposing someone pinched them — where would I be?
To a young doctor like myself, these were my ‘valuables’— the Zeiss Ikon microscope in the scuffed leather case, its precious lenses protected from dust by silk covers; the glass-lidded box of stainless-steel instruments — retractors, forceps, hooks, scissors and needles; my much-thumbed copy of that heavy-going but essential tome, Gray's Anatomy ; manuals of pharmacology and pharmacy; Belding's Textbook of Clinical Parasitology and Strong's Prevention and Treatment of Tropical Diseases , both of which I'd bought at the last minute in the hope that the young man in John Bell & Croyden in Wigmore Street was right when he assured me that they provided ‘the answers to all tropical problems’; and some bound volumes of the British Medical Journal which I had picked up cheap in Charing Cross Road.
I decided to return to the jetty and see if I could store them overnight.
Perhaps Mrs Johnson could take them in?
I went out into Main Street and started off for the pier.
Two fishing boats were approaching the small harbour, and at the far end of Main Street I could see the bulk of the Mantela .
Then I saw the spare figure of Captain Robins walking towards me, bag in hand: even on land after such a  short voyage he had the kind of rolling gait that proclaimed him a man of the sea.
‘I was on my way to see about my trunks,’ I started.
‘Don't worry,’ he replied.
‘Jim Wilson, the ship's chandler, is storing them for you until you get settled.’
‘Thank God — that's a relief,’ I thanked him.
‘I saw you meeting your new boss,’ he smiled.
‘You'll get on with him fine.
Why not let's go back to the hotel?’
‘Suits me.’
I was eager to talk, especially after the intriguing encounter with the Princess.
We walked back together, and once in the hall of the hotel Robins dumped his small bag, shouted, ‘Mollie!’ and at once drained a small glass of her whisky.
‘I don't really know much about Doctor Reid,’ I admitted, ‘except that he seems to have a great sense of humour and is — well, perhaps a bit unconventional.’
‘He's one of the best.
But I'll not bore you with second-hand accounts of the way he lives.
He'll soon tell you himself.
He loves it.
You going to have dinner with him tonight?’
I shook my head.
‘Tomorrow.’
‘Fine.
You and I'll have dinner together then.
But how's about a drive round the island — just so that you can see for yourself what it's like.’
‘What about a car?’
‘Mollie will lend me hers.’
At that moment Mollie Green appeared, and both took it for granted that Robins could borrow the car.
Her only admonition was, ‘Don't be late for supper.’
Robins duly promised, and a moment later we were on our way in Mollie's Ford 8.
There was nothing more to see in Main Street except the eternal fascination of boats bobbing in water as we set off past the ship's chandler — and behind, as casually as an oak or a beech tree in England, dozens of the orange trees which had given the town of Anani its name.
‘Next stop Tala-Tala!’
Robins gave his rubbery lop-sided grin and added sardonically, ‘If you can call it a town, despite its double-barrelled name.
At least it had a church there before they built one in Anani.
If I'm in port on a Sunday I always go to church at Tala-Tala.’
‘You don't strike me as a religious man,’ I said frankly.
‘I'm not.
But I love singing hymns, and the organist is better at Tala-Tala.
Going to church is the only chance I get of singing — well, with accompaniment anyway.’
Tala-Tala, he explained, five miles up the road, had the first church on Koraloona because it was built by the first missionaries to arrive on the island.
They landed there, and the locals named it ‘Tala-Tala’— the Polynesian name for ‘preacher’.
It was very pretty, in a picture-postcard way.
Coconuts grew almost to the edge of the silver strip of coral beach, which sparkled in the hot sun.
Naked children splashed gleefully in the shallow water, trying to catch the occasional sand crab before it scuttled underground.
A few scrawny chickens were busy searching for scraps, while half a dozen black pigs grunted among the roots of hedges of sago, or round the slim pawpaw trees bending under the weight of their fruit.
The thatched houses often consisted only of a roof of pandanus or coconut leaves on four poles, with rolled-up slats of interwoven pandanus leaves which could be lowered in case of rain.
Tala-Tala even had its own home-made harbour, a kind of inner lagoon in the outer lagoon, obviously a laboriously built, three-sided breakwater, in which I assumed that every stone must have been carried by hand or on rollers to afford protection for the boats it enclosed.
For Tala-Tala was the centre of the local fishing ‘industry’, and its gaily painted boats searched for big fish like marlin outside the reef.
When I told Robins of the effort it must have required to transport the heavy materials by hand he just laughed.
‘No, it wasn't that way at all.
The New Zealand government transported the rocks by sea and helped to build the breakwater so that the island could start a fishing business.
You see, an island like Hodges is so occupied with  copra that it produces nothing else.
Tala-Tala supplies it with fresh fish — that is, when the chaps feel like fishing.’
In the centre of the tiny harbour lay a sleek white pleasure yacht with, as I could see, one or two white officers in peaked caps and white shorts and shirts standing on the decks.
‘Looks a bit out of place,’ I said with a smile.
‘I'll tell you about that lot in a couple of minutes, but I just want to catch our fisherman and be sure we have enough fresh fish for the Mantela's homeward trip.’
By the time he returned, half a dozen island girls had sauntered past, and their perfume hung in the still air.
‘It's like going into the scent counter at Harrods,’ I said.
‘Frangipani,’ explained Robins.
‘Nothing like so sophisticated as Harrods.
The girls just pick the flowers and twist them into the circlets they put on their heads.
The perfume lasts all day.
Let's move on.’
I looked away from the sea, behind the sliver of beach, where the hills first rose steeply, then flattened out.
I could make out a couple of dozen large buildings.
Some were of stone, some of wood.
All were a cut above the Polynesian houses.
One even had a flagpole and over the top of the trees below I could see the Union Jack fluttering.
‘That's the local club,’ Robins explained.
‘Restricted to expats, preferably British.
Must be white or ‘Caucasian’ as the Americans call ‘em.
Come on — I'll show you round.
It's four o'clock — opening time.’
If I had read a dozen Somerset Maugham books about colonial clubs in remote settlements, I couldn't have bettered my first impression of Tala-Tala's Union Jack Club.
It was little more than a house, really, with one lounge filled with basketwork chairs and with tables littered with old magazines.
There was a bar at one end of the room with a sign above saying ‘No thongs.
No singlets’.
Behind it two men in singlets were serving drinks.
Behind that was a billiard table, and near it a couple of bridge tables.
‘You'll have to join, of course,’ said Bill, adding with a straight face, ‘if the committee accepts you, that is .
You'll  have to be proposed and seconded.
But I can't see the local doctor being blackballed.’
It was obvious that the Union Jack Club was, to its members anyway, the local hub of the far-flung British Empire.
With the exception of a few New Zealand government officials, the other inhabitants had only come to Koraloona because they preferred it to life in reduced circumstances in a big city.
I can't say I blamed them, for though the Union Jack Club might be pretentious, Koraloona wasn't.
And the expatriates were happy.
A sprinkling of members was busy ordering drinks and as soon as we approached the bar, there was a chorus of ‘Welcome back, Captain!’ or ‘Good to see you, Bill’.
The skipper of the Mantela was obviously a popular figure.
One man with a bristling moustache that almost twitched at the corners cried, ‘What's it to be, Bill?
And your friend — what'll he have?’
‘This is Colonel Archie Fawcett.’
I shook hands with the tall fair-haired man in his sixties, ‘and this is your new assistant doctor, Kit Masters.’
‘By gad!
You look young for a doctor,’ cried Fawcett as he handed me a whisky.
‘Colonel Fawcett is the administrator of Koraloona for the Cook Islands,’ explained Bill Robins.
‘No real work involved,’ Fawcett beamed happily.
‘Just a figurehead.’
‘Don't be so modest, Archie,’ said Robins, adding for my benefit, ‘The colonel is responsible for all manner of things — the daily radio link —‘the sked’as it's known all over the Pacific-crime and punishment, what happens if the electricity breaks down.’
‘Sounds a tall order,’ I said.
‘Not really.’
Robins gave a sideways teasing look at Fawcett.
‘Though, of course, he's responsible for the financial arrangements — sorting out the island's modest economics, including the allowance the New Zealand government pays Princess Tiare to support her honorary status as a princess.’
Innocently I pointed to a sign above the bar and asked Robins, ‘What's a thong?’
I had never heard the word.
‘One of those Japanese-style rubber slippers with a thong between the big toe and the next one — the only way to keep the slipper in place.
Bad form to wear them in the club.’
‘Strictly for the servants — and Japanese of course,’ added a lady who introduced herself as Mrs Fawcett, and asked anxiously, ‘Do you play bridge, Doctor?’
I said that I did, if only fairly well.
‘Wonderful,’ cried one lady member.
‘We're always short of a fourth.
Can you stay for dinner?’
Interrupting quickly, Bill Robins said, ‘We've already been invited, I'm afraid.
A sort of semi-official dinner with Doctor Reid.’
‘What a pity,’ said another woman.
‘It's gala night — a three-shilling three-course meal.
You can't do better than that, even in London, can you?’
‘You certainly can't,’ I said, as another member shouted to ‘George’for drinks.
‘Are both the stewards called George?’
I asked a mystified Robins, who explained with a laugh that it had been Colonel Fawcett's idea.
He had read that, at the exclusive Beefsteak Club in London, every steward was addressed as George, and the colonel had decided to adopt the same rule to save people from remembering unnecessary names when stewards were changed.
‘I'm afraid we have to be on our way, Colonel,’ Bill Robins explained.
‘But I'm sure that Doctor Masters will be in touch with you about joining.’
‘A mere formality, dear boy.’
The colonel gave me a friendly pat on the shoulder, and we made for the outside world again.
As he started up the car and we made our way further round the island, Robins explained, ‘They're good sports, but every new face is welcome.
Some of them were bigwigs in the administration of the islands.
And now that they've retired on half pension, they're a damn sight better off than they would be in Sydney or Auckland, let alone London.’
We had gone about a hundred yards when one particular house caught my eye.
It was much larger than the others and set in a grove of coconut palms above the beach.
‘That's the Villa Faalifu, which means ‘coconut’.
It belongs to a rich American, name of Paula Reece.
She owns the yacht in the harbour.
She's quite a lady.’
The dusty road encircled the island, here and there broken by small fishing settlements —‘village’ would be too pretentious a word — the country around us laced with waterfalls on the hills behind, small bays, one very shallow, the next a deep creek where the beach became a small headland, the pale colour of the sea turned indigo because of the depth.
As we turned another corner we came across a few villagers handling copra.
Robins stopped the car and we walked towards them.
‘What's the difference between — well, how do coconuts become copra?’
I asked.
Robins picked a piece up off the beach.
‘There's not much difference,’ he admitted.
‘Copra is the dried-out guts of the coconut, the endosperm and the embryo of the seed.
Remember desiccated coconut in cakes?
That's shredded copra.’
Several men were splitting the hairy husks on iron spikes driven into the ground.
‘Then they put them in the sun to dry out, and when the meat curls away from the shell it's put into sacks.
It's one of the staple exports of the islands, especially Hodges.
Cocos nucifera .
For years I used to carry the stuff.
It takes five thousand nuts to make a ton of copra, which sells at twenty-four pounds a ton; and that in turn will only produce about a third of a ton of hair shampoo.
Looking at these fellers work, it makes you think!’
We returned to the car and drove on until we came to a small wooden bridge spanning a rivulet of water coming from a waterfall not far up the hillside behind.
‘Like a walk?’
Robins indicated the waterfall.
‘This is one of the few private properties on the island.
There's a  secret pool where Princess Tiare's mother used to swim with her lover.
Kind of romantic.
When Tiare's mother died Tiare bought the land And now only she and her daughter are allowed to swim there.
And me.’
‘Why you?’
‘Old friend of the family.’
He twisted his face into a grin.
‘I've been given permission to swim in the pool when the family's not using it.
And it's easy to tell if they are because there'd be their car by the roadside.’
From the rickety bridge I looked upwards to the waterfall, perhaps fifty feet above us; at the spot where it vanished into ferns and flowers it was frothing like a diaphanous white ball gown.
But the pool I could not see.
Robins led the way up the sloping path from the roadway, narrow but clearly defined, towards thick undergrowth, ferns, bushes, lined with every flower from hibiscus, tiare and oleander to the bougainvillaea curling round and clinging to the trees behind.
‘It's only five minutes’ walk,’he said, and sure enough, we soon reached the pool at the foot of the waterfall.
Where the fall hit the pool the water threshed as though boiling, but a few feet further on it was limpid, still, crystal-clear, hedged in by banks of ferns and tulip trees, and at the far end was the outlet where the water drained away to the sea.
‘We're not there yet — not quite,’ said Robins.
‘Follow me, it's quite safe.’
He led the way about six feet further up where the path ended in a flat ledge, and then I could see what had happened.
Immediately behind and above the waterfall, the sloping hillside had become a fifty-foot smooth rocky cliff, so that the water poured not only over the edge above, but out into the pool, leaving a ledge along which Bill Robins now beckoned me.
It was as dry as a bone, under a never-ending, roaring waterfall.
‘Extraordinary, isn't it?’
He stopped to peer at the pool below through a ‘crack’ in the water, rather as though someone was peeping through lace curtains.
‘There's a cave in there.’
He pointed to a cliff behind the waterfall.
‘Never gets wet.’
He glanced at me.
‘Can you dive?’
‘Sure.’
‘Diving into the pool is like a blind date,’ he laughed.
‘It's deep.
I've dived into it dozens of times.
But you have to dive through the waterfall without seeing the pool until the last minute.
Game for a try?’
I nodded eagerly.
‘Anything once.’
‘We can undress here in the cave if you like.
No need for a costume in this part of the world.’
It was a curious sensation, diving into water I couldn't see, but once Robins had led the way, and was treading water in the pool, I followed without any fear.
How wonderful it was to be able to stop a car on impulse and bathe in a pool of crystal-clear water!
We swam for about quarter of an hour and then walked back to the cave, dried ourselves as best we could on our shirts, and drove on, chests bare.
‘It could tell quite a story, that pool,’ said Robins.
‘Sacred ground, in a way.
That's why it belongs to Tiare.’
‘You're sure we weren't trespassing?’
I felt a touch of the sinister that rules so many of the islands; there was no reason to shiver in that warm spot, but I did, and experienced a slight sense of embarrassment, as though I had been intruding, thinking perhaps not of Tiare but of the great love all those years ago which had produced her: forty years ago when the water was cascading over the same cliff in just the same way as it had today, Princess Tiare's mother and her lover had bathed in the same secret pool and later, perhaps, made love in the cave behind.
It fascinated me, though at first I could not tell why.
It was not the beauty alone that had made me draw in my breath.
Somehow, even to my youthful reasoning, it was as though the past was speaking to the present, that something of the love between these two people still lingered.
‘You're not the first to be affected by the pool.’
Robins read my thoughts.
‘It's extraordinary, really.
The scent of a  deep, passionate love still clings to it.
I expect it sounds silly to you.’
‘No.
It might have sounded embarrassing if I had said it,’ I smiled.
‘But I know what you mean.’
‘I'm glad,’ he said simply.
‘I understand this title of ‘Princess’,’ I continued, ‘but Doctor Reid talked about a fortune.
I find that hard to believe.’
‘Better let him tell you about it,’ Robins advised.
‘Alec Reid likes to tell his stories in his own goo-l time.
There's no other way of entertaining strangers.’
His face creased in its twisted, ironic smile.
‘Doctor Reid did tell me about Tiare's daughter.’
‘Aleena?
Lovely child,’ Robins said, echoing Reid's words.
‘She goes to school at Sanderstown College, and I've got to know her well because she sails on the Mantela every holiday.
That's why I'm allowed to swim in the secret pool — a reward because her mother made me responsible for Aleena whenever she's on the Mantela .’
Dusk was falling swiftly, as it always does in the tropics, and the silence that had so impressed me by daylight suddenly became noisy with the night life of the jungly-type trees in the mountains behind-the bull frogs, strange bird cries, the never-ending background of the cicadas.
‘Too late for any more sightseeing now,’ said Robins.
‘Let's make tracks for Green's or we'll be late for supper.
Mollie's a stickler for punctuality.’
The clinic and the cottage hospital were up a small hill at the other end of Main Street, beyond the ship's chandler and the jetty where the Mantela was moored.
A few fishing boats sat in the lagoon, some outrigger canoes were drawn up on the sand and one small pleasure yacht, which must  have come from another island, was anchored to a buoy.
In the deck well I could see a couple of girls and two men in bathing suits.
Three or four cars wheezed past us on the dusty road.
When Dr Reid arrived to fetch me at Green's he announced that he had left his car by the pier.
‘We'll walk there, but no further.
I puff too much for mountaineering.’
His car was an extraordinary contraption, an ancient Ford truck from which some amateur carpenter (or maybe the ship's chandler?) had stripped off a ten-hundredweight body, and on the chassis had erected a kind of ambulance — with a stretcher bed in it and one chair firmly screwed to the floorboards.
‘This is ma private car and ma public ambulance,’ Reid announced solemnly.
‘No doot ye can drive?’
I nodded.
‘Is the clinic far?’
‘Nothing's far here.
There's a second road, parallel to Main Street, up the hill because it's cooler.
The Princess lives at the end of the same road.
There's a couple of Mission schools, nothing elaborate ye ken, for the local kids.’
As he spoke I could make out the red roofs of the bungalows dotted among the green trees.
‘And,’ he added, ‘there's half a dozen small lorries to carry heavy supplies — stuff like diesel to run our own generator for electricity if the hydroelectric power fails.’
‘Captain Robins drove me around the island last night,’ I said.
‘We stopped for a swim near Tala-Tala.
It's a pretty village.’
Reid nodded.
‘Most of the fifty or so Europeans prefer to live in Tala-Tala rather than Anani,’ he said adding, with a touch of sarcasm, ‘They say they dinna want to get contaminated by big-city life.’
We drove up the hill.
‘And soon’— Dr Reid waved a hand dramatically —‘you'll be seeing the eighth wonder of the world.
My clinic.
I call it ‘Harley Street’.
Here we are.’
Reid switched off his decrepit Ford in front of a building visible only in patches through the railings of a once-white wooden veranda, over which trailed bougainvillaea, syringa, convolvulus, and hibiscus in a riot of colour.
The sun splashed down in patterns of light and shade.
Beneath the flowering plants were slats of the veranda half eaten by ants or crumbling with tropical humidity.
Above, I saw where a hole in the tin roof had been repaired with a flattened-out biscuit tin that had once contained Huntley and Palmer's ginger nuts.
Inside the single-storey building a leathery-faced, middle-aged white woman hacked with a kind of parang at branches of flame trees which had worked their way through the open windows.
‘Miss Sowerby,’ Reid explained, ‘has been with us for several years.
Her father was a missionary and she felt the call to help him.
And helping the sick is holy work, eh Miss Sowerby?’
She looked like the daughter of a missionary; and I don't mean that in a derogatory way.
But in this warm and pleasant climate she was dressed in a long black dress which looked as though it had been made at the time of Heathcliff.
It had long sleeves; a tightness above imprisoned her neck with its white linen collar.
Her belted dress had a piece of string attached from which dangled a pair of old scissors.
She was dressed as though ready for church.
Everything was there except a crucifix, and I didn't doubt that this was hidden underneath a thick petticoat.
But was her obvious intensity entirely based on religious grounds?
I wondered.
Most of it, certainly, but — in the way a doctor always judges character as a routine diagnostic procedure — I wondered if she wasn't repressing the normal feelings of a woman.
I don't mean sex in any simple way.
Many women can ache for the love of a child more intensely than for the love of a man.
It seemed to me that she looked older than she was, using her age as a shield against unwelcome advances which she might secretly long for but would never permit.
She could have been any age, for though her face was weathered by the sun, no wrinkles marred her face.
‘Pleased to meet you, Doctor Masters.
’ She put down her heavy curved knife and held out a gnarled hand.
‘You'll  no doubt find us primitive compared with what you're used to.’
As Reid led me on a tour of the hospital he said, ‘She's a po-faced old girl, but her heart's in the right place; and she understands the islanders.
Now, here's the ward.’
The ‘ward’ was scarcely bigger than the waiting-room of St Thomas's teaching hospital, but its six iron bedsteads were meticulously lined up.
Every leg of every bed stood in a jar of water to frustrate the ruthless ants, while the ‘hospital corners’ of the bedding were aligned with a draughtsman's precision — even though the linen, I noticed, was yellowish and patched.
At one end of the ward a door led to a bathroom in which the ‘bath’ was a large caulked wooden tub — the sort one saw in the back-to-backs of the mining villages.
There was a flush toilet, and near it what Reid called ‘the wash-up’.
It had a large earthenware sink and an electric stove where one could heat water in a huge blackened kettle.
He led me back through the empty-ward to the other end.
‘And this, Laddie, is the ‘admin’ section.’
A tin trunk from the Army & Navy-Stores tropical department stood there, the lid thrown back to reveal files and cards held together with elastic bands.
I was fascinated by it.
‘You mean that's all the Mission bought in the way of filing cabinets?’
‘Nae, ye mustn'a get it wrong.
This house was first built back in the 1890s as a residence for the local missionary.
There was nae a doctor there in those days.
The missionary looked after the islanders’ health as well as their spiritual welfare.
Then, when the first priest arrived, he wanted to live in Tala-Tala near the kirk, so this became the first hospital, and this,’ he almost kicked the battered old trunk, ‘became the first filing cabinet.
Tiare's mother gave it to the mission.‘
Along one wall was a big cupboard with double doors, warped with heat and humidity and bearing the word Dispensary .
The doors were fastened with a padlock which a child of five could have picked with a paper clip.
‘Another gift from Tiare's mother,’ said Reid.
The contents were pathetic.
Some four-gallon jars contained different-coloured liquids; these were numbered 1 to 4.
Reid nudged me.
‘Placebos.
But the patients are always fascinated by the colours.
I tend to dish out the red for man trouble, the blue for woman trouble, the yellow for baby trouble, and green for anything else.
Plus, of course, real treatment if the case demands it.
But you'll have 'em buzzing round you like bees at a honeypot if you aren't fairly strict.
To them medicine men are like gods.’
The next shelf down contained an array of jars and bottles of proprietary disinfectants and medicines — Lysol, iodoform, Condy's fluid, peroxide, aspirin, Germolene, cough linctus and yeast tablets, together with blue-wrapped packets of cotton wool, bandages, ligatures.
Needles were stored in a two-pound Robertson's jam jar; and in a long glass-topped case was a selection of knives, scalpels, forceps, scissors and syringes.
My confidence wasn't enhanced by the limited number of blue glass bottles and jars comprising the available pharmaceuticals — chloroform, morphia, prussic acid, cannabis, strychnine, atropine.
I noticed that my case of drugs had been opened in one corner of the room, but still, it was a pitiful supply.
It was very different from when, during my student days, I had spent some time in the specialised wards of the Hospital for Tropical Diseases at St Pancras, where patients were treated for cholera, yellow fever, elephantiasis, malaria, leprosy, encephalitis lethargica, and a dozen other diseases that might have originated in the tropics.
When I examined the new drugs, I was glad to see some acriflavine — a useful all-round skin antiseptic which has to be used with a bandage to prevent evaporation because of its alcohol base.
There was also some gentian violet and Eusol.
Reid saw me examining the Eusol — an antiseptic used since the turn of the century — and chuckled.
‘Wouldn't be without it,’ he said.
‘We discovered it.’
‘We?’
I must have looked puzzled.
‘Edinburgh, the world's finest medical university.
That's why it's called Eusol — E for Edinburgh, U for University and ‘sol’ for solution.’
He took my arm and said, ‘Now come and see the operating theatre.’
The ‘theatre’ ran parallel to the ward and we reached it through a short, glass-enclosed passageway.
The room contained little more than a long wooden table covered with lino, a barber's chair that had been slightly modified to accommodate dental patients, another deep earthenware sink, and a basketwork bed — mounted on what looked like pram wheels — for patients forced to lie supine.
It was used here, I assumed, for transporting the patients from the ward to the operating ‘table’.
Reid must have sensed my dismay, for he took my arm in a friendly grip and said, ‘Dinna take it too much to heart, Laddie, I've done my ‘trops’ too.
I know the perfection of it all, but the ideal and the reality rarely match.
It's like life itself — the prettiest girls are always on the Up escalator when you're on the Down.
And remember, if we need an urgent op I can fly a patient to Sanderstown in under the hour.
I can even fly a stretcher case.’
One patient only was in bed, a pitiful slip of a girl aged perhaps seven or eight.
Though she was dry-eyed she looked in great pain.
‘Here is another case of the scourge of Koraloona,’ sighed Reid.
‘And one that I know you have a personal interest in — polio.
’ Reid drew back the sheet to expose the girl's dropped foot.
‘I'm going to operate later on tomorrow.
You see — the calf muscle on the left leg just doesn't work, so if I don't do something quickly she'll end up a cripple.
No power to keep the foot up like a normal one.’
‘How did it start?’
I asked as Reid pulled the sheet back over the little girl.
‘The usual way,’ he sighed.
‘Undetectable at first.
That's the trouble with this bloody disease.
All these viral infections have the same symptoms in the first few days — a patient might have ‘flu, measles, hepatitis — ye canna tell  during the porodomal period'—he used the technical term for the period of incubation.
‘I give them aspirin and hope for the best.
Then muscular stiffness suddenly develops, the patient is in agonising pain — just like cramp in the leg — and she shows signs of insecurity when walking.
Then you know — and you have to operate.’
I had a sudden flash of memory of one of the most remarkable women I had ever met — Sister Kenny, a woman who had made a great impact on me because of Clare.
She was Australian, had no real qualifications, but had created a furore in the medical world by her determination to use unorthodox methods in the treatment of infantile paralysis.
Heat treatment, self-help on the patient's part, and rehabilitation of the affected muscles by massage and exercise were the tenets of her faith — and I had to admit that a great deal of what she practised depended on scorn for the accepted methods of treatment with splints, braces, and corsets which only assisted the patients in coping with unhealed limbs, not in any actual sense curing them.
Having a strong personality, she had battled her way into the medical profession and convinced many doctors by demonstration that at the very least they couldn't shut their eyes to the possibilities of her treatment.
I had witnessed Sister Kenny's unusual treatment when I went to see her at work at Queen Mary's Hospital for Children in Carshalton, one of several hospitals we had visited during our advanced student days.
I blurted out, ‘Doctor Reid, could I try to see if I could stop the disease without using splints or operating?’
He looked at me in astonishment.
‘Certainly not,’ he said.
‘You can't just ignore everything that medical science has taught us.’
I would have liked to say that, so far, medical science had taught us nothing about polio, but I held my tongue.
He looked at me more kindly.
‘You're thinking about the so-called ‘miracle cures’ of Sister Kenny?’
I nodded and he continued, ‘You've only just arrived on the island.
Have a wee bit of patience, Laddie.
Maybe soon I'll let ye have a chance to see if you can do anything — but remember, miracles are often caused by good luck.’
‘But I saw her perform those so-called miracles.’
‘I promise you, you'll have the chance.
After all, the main reason I asked for an assistant was because of the danger of an epidemic of polio.
And I was told of your particular interest in the disease.
But —’ he held up a hand to stop me interrupting —‘let's take it slowly.
And let's remember that Sister Kenny isn't even a professional nurse.
She helped some bairns when she was living in the Australian outback.
She did cure them, I grant you.
But maybe there they had only a mild form, or maybe it wasn't even real polio.
Remember, no one ever saw those bairns until they were cured.’
‘But in London I did —‘
‘I know.
And I appreciate your enthusiasm.
Just let's get settled in and then I promise to give you a chance.
In the meantime, I suppose you've seen an operation performed for a dropped foot?’
I nodded.
‘In med school,’ I said.
‘Come and see it again tomorrow,’ he suggested.
‘A local anaesthetic will be enough.
I'll give the girl quarter of a grain of morphia dissolved in water and inject it to calm her down.
Half an hour later I'll inject fifty millilitres of half per cent Novocaine.
She'll be out in ten minutes, but I'll pinch some loose skin just to make sure there's no reaction.’
How often I had seen that pinching of the skin!
The operation, I knew, was simple enough.
It consisted of stretching the Achilles tendon.
With a scalpel Reid would cut half way through one side of the tendon, half way through the other a little higher up, then pull the tendon which would stretch and later heal and join up.
This would enable him to restore the foot to the proper position of function, and he would keep it like that by strapping it into a right-angle splint, with a kind of plate under the foot attached to splints up the calf.
‘Poor kid,’ I muttered.
‘Aye,’ agreed Reid.
‘But don't forget she'll be lucky not to have a club foot.’
As we walked back to the dispensary he asked me, almost casually, yet in a way trying to find out how much I knew, ‘Tell me, what's the extent of your knowledge of polio?’
‘I made a study of it — as much as the medical authorities would allow,’ I said.
‘You want chapter and verse?’
‘It's not necessary,’ he laughed, ‘but —‘
So to impress him I told him briefly of the four stages of polio — first the porodomal, second the muscle pain, then the period of muscle destruction which usually took no longer than fourteen days, and finally the period of repair.
‘That's it,’ said Alec Reid.
‘And that's the trouble.
The muscle has the ability to recoil, but when it wastes away, the tissue hasn't.
It's like the difference between a bit of cotton and a bit of elastic.’
During our ‘inspection tour’ I had heard a fair amount of noise from the garden, and now Miss Sowerby announced, ‘There's half a dozen patients, Doctor, including one who's hurt his head badly.’
‘Let's start work,’ Dr Reid sighed.
‘There's nae peace for the wicked.’
Outside the front door stood the patients, including two men and three young girls.
They all stood up as though on parade, with the instinctive straight back of the Polynesians.
One man held a cloth soaked in blood to his forehead.
‘You'd better come in first,’ Reid motioned to him, and with a wave to the others announced, ‘This is Doctor Masters, our new doctor.’
The girls giggled, the other man smiled, and the ‘sick parade’, as Reid always called it, had started.
The other male patient was very different from the man who had hurt his head.
He was white, tall, and wore a scraggy beard.
He obviously looked ill, but what I found terrible was the look of starvation on his emaciated body and face.
Bedraggled, barefoot, dressed in dirty white  ducks, he looked as though he were hovering on the verge of death.
Through a tear in the singlet I could see his rib bones sticking out.
He might have been forty — or sixty.
As Reid led the patient with the bloody head indoors, the white man turned to me, almost stopped me from going inside and said in an educated voice, ‘Good morning, Doctor, and welcome to Koraloona.
I'm Jason Purvis.
I'm a writer.’
He added wryly, ‘As you can see, not a very successful one.
Doc Reid dishes me out a few vitamin pills when I'm feeling lousy.’
He was tall, almost stooping, and with a mouth too sensitive for peace of mind.
Though I remained in the garden or the dispensary, helping some of the less sick patients, I saw Reid beckon Purvis inside, later, give him some pills, and then slip the man some money.
When the last patient had gone, Reid opened the refrigerator in the dispensary and took out a packet wrapped in white paper.
Before I had time to ask about Purvis, he explained, ‘My sandwiches for breakfast.
They keep nice and cool in the fridge.
Want some?
Potted meat.’
I shook my head and Reid cheerfully walked on to the veranda, munching his ‘breakfast’— his day's work apparently done.
‘Tell me about the white patient,’ I asked him.
‘He looked terrible.
Purvis, was that the name?
And is he really a writer?’
‘Aye.
Writes all day long, but as far as I can see never sells a word.
D'ye ken he's only thirty-seven?
He's half starved — and can't do a thing about it.’
‘But surely there's everything a man needs to live here — food, fruit, fish, breadfruit?
He's surrounded with the fruits of the earth.’
‘That may be so, but he canna do a thing to help himself.
He canna climb up a tree for a coconut, he canna go up the mountain for wild bananas.
Can't even fish.
But then, could you, with a spear?’
‘No, of course not.’
‘So there's a paradox for you.
The islanders kill their wild  pigs, they fish, they bake their breadfruit.
They even make their own liquor without it costing anyone a penny — yet there's this poor devil starving amidst plenty.’
‘What's his background.
He's obviously educated.
Doesn't he have any money?’
‘He gets a remittance from England once every three months.
Then he spends it all at Robinson's store on drink, tinned meat, powdered milk and so on.
Once I even caught him buying tinned sardines — with all that fresh fish in the sea!’
While we talked Miss Sowerby had been cleaning up the patient with the head wound and, as the man prepared to leave, Reid cried to him, ‘Head feel'um better?’
The patient beamed and proudly touched his bandage.
‘Pain out now.
No gettum in with mask.’
‘Good.
Now, be goodum feller and take med'cin along Princess.’
He handed the man a bottle and added sternly, ‘And no takum along self, savvy?
Make better, women; make bad, men.’
‘Plenty savvy,’ the man said.
‘Me takum, make ill.’
He loped off cheerfully.
‘He probably thinks it's a cure for the curse,’ chuckled Reid.
‘You'll get used to the pidgin, by the way.
It's a language all its own, with rules and a grammar, but it has no definite article.
Hence the odd-sounding constructions.’
‘Seems very odd to me.’
I could hardly understand all the curious words.
‘Dinna imagine it's the local baby talk,’ Reid went on.
‘It's an international language which started so that people who travel between foreign countries can communicate — the Chinese, stevedores, the old-time lascars, and so on.
When they load or unload a ship they can understand what's wanted.’
‘I'll pick it up,’ I promised.
‘Incidentally, do you always use your patients as messenger boys?’
I couldn't help laughing.
‘Always.
That's their way of paying for the medicine.
One good cure deserves another.’
Then more seriously, after he had crumpled up the paper sandwich bag and put it into the waste bin, he said, ‘You'll find, Kit — it's Christian names, eh, Kit and Alec?— that the inhabitants of Koraloona are the kindest people on earth.
Because they want nothing, they're untouched by the evils of the outside world.
Every now and again some of the pearling luggers come this way.
They get short shrift.
We don't want any get-rich-quick people here.
Everyone on the island's got enough to eat.’
‘Except Purvis!’
I said.
‘He's the exception,’ said Reid.
‘But what about money?’
I asked.
‘Surely —‘
‘If they do want something that costs extra, there's always a way to make a few pennies.
There's about fifty Europeans on the island — including Americans — and there's plenty of men anxious to do a bit of gardening, or women ready to earn a day's wages doing the laundry — you saw them at work — or sewing.
There are fifty times as many Singer sewing machines as motor cars in Koraloona.
And the ship's chandler is always needing spare hands when a boat comes in.
So is Mick the barman.
But they work when there's fun in it, not to live.
Since most people own a plot of land, they have everything they need to keep alive.
A day's casual work takes on an extra meaning.
It's fun, not work; a luxury, not a necessity.
What money there is circulates again and again, into the store, out, back again.’
‘And drink?
Don't they need money for drinking?’
‘Not much.
They like beer, but only as we'd drink champagne — a treat.
They like kava .
They make it themselves, so it's cheap.
It's common all over the Pacific, and they drink it out of big wooden bowls, passing it round the circle.’
‘Like palm toddy?
Isn't that the drink of South-East Asia?’
‘No.
Kava is made of the ground-up roots of the kava bush.
They mix it with water, and it's lethal, I tell you.
But though it's guaranteed to give anyone a hangover, I've nae heard of any islanders getting fighting mad on the stuff.’
‘I hope it tastes good.’
‘Horrible!
But for those with a sweeter tooth there's always rum.
They make that from sugar cane, which often grows wild here.
And then there's orangeade.’
‘Doesn't sound too potent.’
‘Don't fool yourself.
There're so many wild oranges on the island that when they're ripe the boys and girls go out in gangs, pick them by the thousand, squeeze out all the juice and let it ferment in casks until it's ready for a week-long celebration.
You'd think they'd bottle it, make it last over the weeks or months, but they're simple people, and there's no holding them back.
No one would think of hoarding a year's stock for such a free tipple.
And they don't.’
‘And now come and meet Nellie.’
Alec Reid led the way to a field behind the back door, held out an arm, like a conjuror, and cried, ‘There!’
It was a single-engined biplane.
It looked fragile, held together by struts that seemed no longer than bits of wire.
‘I learned to fly the Gloster before I left England,’ he explained, ‘though I could never have afforded to buy a plane.
But my wife — she's a rich woman, and generous — saw an advert in The Aeroplane in 1936 offering one for £1,700.
She bought it as a gift on my last trip to the UK.
It has a Bristol Mercury radial engine of 840 horsepower.
You know, you could pay more for a flashy car.’
‘Still — a very generous present,’ I murmured.
‘Aye, it is that.
My wife and I could never see eye to eye on the business of living.
She's all for the social whirl of Mayfair or Bond Street, while I like my peace and quiet.
So I see her on leaves, and she gives me every so often a new MCC tie!’
He went on more seriously, ‘So we agreed to follow our different ways.
We correspond when we feel like it; there's no bitterness.
It's a pity in some ways, but in others…
’ He shrugged his shoulders.
‘If you're forced to live in a place you hate, it's the surest way to break up a marriage.’
I didn't know quite what to answer, but he saved me the trouble.
‘I think I can say I'm a tolerant man,’ he said, not without a trace of smugness.
‘I make no judgments on man or woman, perhaps because I make no judgments on myself — or my wife I've managed to preserve a friendship between husband and wife living thousands of miles apart, and that's nae a bad achievement.’
Alec moved up to the plane and ran a loving hand along its polished propeller blade.
‘Nellie, the pride of the islands.
She'll do a good two hundred miles an hour, and though she's got dual control you can take out the second seat next to the pilot's to make room for a stretcher.’
He showed me the cunning way in which Jim Wilson, the ship's chandler, had hinged the top of the fuselage so that a patient could be lowered into the plane on a stretcher once the second seat had been removed to give the extra length.
‘Can you fly?’ asked Reid.
‘Good Lord, no.
The only time I've flown was when I paid five bob for a trip in Alan Cobham's flying circus.’
‘You'd better learn,’ he said.
‘It's dead easy — I'll teach you.
It's our only quick link with the islands.
She does sterling work, does Nellie, fetching and carrying.
And if I have to, I can land on a stretch of roadway.
She makes the journey to Sanderstown in under the hour.’
‘Suppose you need to make really urgent contact with Sanderstown.
You've no phone link, I take it?’
‘We've the radio link, twice a day.
Very simple.
It's up in what we call Cook Island House, where the three government officers work under Colonel Fawcett, or say they do.
We can pass or receive radio messages by voice at nine every morning and six every evening.’
The more I had to do with Alec Reid, the more I liked him.
It was easy to ridicule him — his battered old topee, his stout figure, the perspiration which never seemed to dry up however often he mopped his bald pate.
But beneath this exterior there lived a man who treated the islanders with the affection which a good father bestows on his slightly  wayward children.
You needed patience to tolerate the at times stupid, hypochondriacal old island ladies, but Reid offered them his placebos with no thought of the unnecessary work such trivial ailments caused him.
And you needed even more patience when others ignored danger signals warning of serious illness, such as the stiffness in the joints, dismissed as unimportant, yet because of the background of dirt, possibly resulting in tetanus, which could rarely be cured unless it was caught in time.
Alec Reid had no prejudice.
He treated every patient with the same love and care, and so, as I discovered very quickly, he was worshipped by the islanders.
He got on with everybody — including me, to whom he remarked with his easy chuckle, ‘Here's to ye, Kit!
At one stroke ye've halved the white man's burden!’
I think — I hope — that in a sense the relief of having a young assistant was not only that it helped his work, but that he also welcomed the presence of a younger doctor with more up-to-date medical knowledge.
For I could tell that he was a little rusty, and I wondered if sometimes this affable and agreeable companion was worried because he knew that he was not keeping up with the strides that modern medicine was taking.
I never saw a copy of the Lancet lying round his living-room.
After a visit to the cottage hospital one day, Reid said to me, ‘There's nothing to do, Kit.
Take it easy.
I've told you about Paula Reece, the rich American.
She's giving a sort of cocktail party this evening and you're invited.
And after that you and I are going to have dinner together, so just relax until then and I'll pick you up at six.
Tomorrow you can move into your bungalow.’
I did just that.
After a cold bath and a trickling shower I fell fast asleep, before lunch, on the simple but comfortable iron bedstead.
I woke up after an hour or so, and just leaned out of the window looking at the half-empty Main Street.
A few small boats gently disturbed the ripples where the water's edge met the beach.
A couple of  bare-breasted girls in sarongs were returning from the communal laundry, the washing balanced on their heads, their breasts moving gently as they sauntered by, giggling at some private joke.
At the far end of the street, where the beach curved into an arc — and where the water was far enough away from the slops of Main Street — there on my right I could see a grove of coconut palms behind the beach, almost bending over the sand like a canopy as they leaned against the trade winds.
And high above, at the end of the curve, the steep hillsides rose as high as the rim of the dormant volcano on High Island.
Alec Reid picked me up sharp at six, and gave an approving glance at my clean shirt, spotless white trousers (bought off the peg in Sydney) and the fact that I wore a tie.
‘Let's go,’ he said and led the way to the car.
The Villa Faalifu was set on the edge of Tala-Tala, and the sight of its opulent exterior almost left me gasping.
It might have been transported from the South of France, one of those lush semi-palaces I had only seen in photos.
It was all white, with stone steps, instead of the usual wooden ones, and on its huge veranda were several basketwork chairs and tables, and yellow sunblinds.
Every corner of the gardens blazed with colour — bougainvillaea, oleanders, hibiscus and, around one corner of the house, a mass of white tiare.
And all immaculately neat.
Set in a glade of thinned-out coconut palms, it was breathtaking, but what amazed me most was that, within sight of the most beautiful beaches in the world, the garden contained a large pool edged with white and blue tiles.
A pool in such a place!
It seemed crazy.
Around the pool a couple of dozen people were chattering and sipping drinks.
A butler, a Polynesian in a trim white jacket, approached us with a tray of drinks ranging from champagne to gin fizzes or Scotch and sodas.
I took a glass of champagne as Dr Reid whispered, ‘Here is our hostess.’
A tall woman came towards us.
She had the arrogant walk of people with leisure.
She gave Dr Reid, who was  wearing a collar and tie and long white ducks, a kiss on one cheek, then turned to me.
She was dressed in an expensive pair of sharkskin trousers, a silk blouse and sandals.
She had lean flanks and no tummy, and I could see from the way her breasts moved slightly when she walked that she wore nothing underneath her blouse; I also had the feeling that she knew instantly that I knew.
Her hair was reddish — would an actual red have been too flattering a word?
I wondered — and I judged her age at about thirty.
She carried a pair of sun glasses in her left hand and offered me her right hand, smiling as she shook mine.
‘Doctor Masters, isn't it?— or can I call you Christopher?’
‘Kit,’ I smiled.
‘Paula.
I'm sorry we didn't meet before, but it's great to have you around.
We need every handsome new face we can grab– don't we, Alec?’
She smiled, not only with her mouth, but with her very large eyes, a ready smile.
And she must have been fabulously rich to live in a house like this.
As someone took Alec Reid away I said, ‘The house is beautiful.
But isn't it a bit unnecessary — a pool I mean, with the beach on your doorstep?’
‘It's a salt-water pool.
I have it pumped up from the sea, with a small generator of our own.
And I wouldn't like to cause the entire population to come and stare at me every day.’
‘I don't quite understand.’
‘I like to swim in the nude.’
She spoke in a matter-of-fact tone, as though all the best people did.
‘Yes, I see.
’ And, of course, I did.
It was one thing for the pale brown islanders to swim in their Mother Hubbards, or often, as I had been told, bare-breasted.
But for a white American to frolic completely naked…
‘Yes,’ I repeated, smiling.
‘I can see it might cause a few problems.’
‘I hate to lose you, but we'll meet again soon,’ she said.
‘You know Colonel Fawcett, I'm sure.
He's a bit old for me — I prefer young doctors any day.’
She laughed.
‘Come along.’
Near me, in a white open-necked shirt with short sleeves was a stocky, rather wooden-looking man, who gave me a rather uncomfortable feeling of only being at the party because he had to be.
I understood why the moment Paula introduced him.
‘And this is Captain Baker.
Ron is the skipper of my motor cruising yacht.
There, in the harbour.’
She pointed to the sleek white pleasure yacht which I had seen lying at anchor at the foot of the small hill, and chaffed Baker, ‘I always have the feeling he'd rather be on the water than on dry land.
I had to force him to come.’
The word ‘force’ embarrassed me.
Paula was making it clear that she was the boss and that Baker had to do as he was told — whether sailing her yacht or sipping drinks.
‘She's a beauty,’ Baker said as Paula moved on to greet another guest.
There was real enthusiasm in his voice.
‘She's got two 500-horsepower diesel engines which can take the Nymph and six passengers in three double state-rooms from here to Hawaii non-stop.
You must come aboard and see her some time.’
‘Come and say hello to some other guests,’ Paula interrupted us.
She motioned to a man I had not seen before, striking in appearance, with a shock of grey hair and immaculately dressed.
He smoked through a long amber cigarette holder.
‘This is Count Vrinsky,’ she introduced me.
‘He's an American citizen now, but he comes from one of Poland's oldest and most distinguished families.
He collects paintings.‘
The count puffed out smoke through his long holder as we shook hands, and then Paula Reece asked him, ‘Vrin, be an angel and let's have a little piano music.’
As the count walked into the house, I asked innocently, ‘I thought you said he was an art collector.
Is he a pianist too?’
‘You're sweet,’ she smiled invitingly.
‘Every year when I come to Faalifu for four months or so I engage a resident  pianist from California.
It's essential to have those tinkling notes when you feel in the mood.
As a matter of fact, I've also got a resident hairdresser and a resident dressmaker.
It makes life easier for me, and they don't get overworked, so it's a wonderful holiday with pay for them.’
I already recognised some members of the Union Jack Club, and Colonel Fawcett gave me a hearty handshake while his thin, ill-looking wife reminded me about joining the bridge games.
Making up a four was obviously a serious problem.
Immediately she asked me when I might be free, but I was able to murmur, ‘It's a little difficult, Mrs Fawcett, until I get around a bit more and establish some duty rosters.’
‘We're counting on you,’ she said archly.
I was still standing by the pool when I saw Tiare, who walked towards me from her parked car and asked, ‘How are you settling in, Doctor?
Have you got the problem of help solved?
It's very difficult in an island where no one really needs to work.’
‘I've been lucky.’
I told her what had happened, but quietly.
I noticed again the touch of reserve about her.
A doctor sometimes sees people with a different eye from other people, and I wondered for a moment whether, despite her beauty and her apparently special position on the island, she was really happy.
The world is filled with sad women who put a brave face on their unhappiness, even on a tropical island.
But she smiled, especially when another girl in her early twenties joined us, saying, ‘Hello, Princess.
And you must be Doctor Masters.’
‘You're sure?’
I laughed at the times people had used that sentence to me.
‘Well, you're the only white man in Koraloona I've never seen before!
I'm Lucy Young.
I work for Paula.
I'm her general factotum.’
‘Faalifu would close down if Lucy didn't run it,’ said Princess Tiare.
‘How are you, Lucy?’
It's hard sometimes to describe people one only meets casually, one's observations, thoughts even, especially  when interrupted by people serving drinks, or other guests barging in.
So all I can remember from that first evening by the pool is a general physical impression — of a sweet, typically Californian girl in her early twenties, with long legs, a firm bust, wide-apart eyes below blonde hair and — oh yes, of course!— hundreds of freckles.
She looked the sort of girl who is so often a trademark of California — a girl who could dance all night, yet play tennis or golf, ride or swim the next day without the slightest effort.
‘Do you like swimming or sailing?’
Lucy asked.
‘Swimming, yes.
Sailing, only if there's an expert around.’
‘Lucy's an expert.’
Alec Reid had joined us.
‘You'd be quite safe with her.
Well, as far as the sailing is concerned.‘
Ignoring the dig, Lucy said, ‘Paula keeps a small sailing boat with an outboard motor, and now and again she lets me use it.
You'd be surprised how beautiful the other side of Koraloona is when you see it from the sea.’
‘It's a date.’
I tried to match her Californian accent.
‘If you can fix it with your boss, I can fix it with mine.’
We stayed at the party till eight o'clock, but many others, including several members of the Union Jack Club, remained to play bridge.
As we drove to Alec Reid's house for our first dinner together — and the first sight of his house — I said, ‘You know, Alec, I thought this was going to be a simple unsophisticated life on the next best thing to a coral atoll.
Instead I've been thrust into the sort of social whirl I never experienced in Nottingham — or in London, for that matter.‘
‘There's nothing else for people to do.’
He carefully turned the corner leading up to the hill behind Anani.
‘So they throw parties, with the same people in attendance every time.
Thank goodness there's no duty on alcohol!’
‘Super house Paula has.
I liked her secretary — Lucy.’
‘I thought you weren't slow in agreeing to the sailing trip.
But watch your step, Kit.
’ He stopped the car at the end of his garden.
‘Lucy has a job in a million.
I'd hate her to suffer, because of you.’
Dr Reid's bungalow — half a mile or so up the hill — was a house of character, a real home, filled with the personality of the man himself.
This was hard to pinpoint, for as a doctor he was, to say the least of it, a sloppy, unorthodox dresser — a fact echoed by his large airy living-room, with its couple of ceiling fans, lazily turning.
I had the impression that there were hands anxious to tidy up, but never succeeding.
Large armchairs, with loose covers, looked comfortable, but when I sat in one it had a broken spring.
A magazine rack overflowed with rolled newspapers: they had obviously arrived by post, but many were unopened, as though Reid hadn't had time to catch up with news that must have been at least a month old.
Even with the drama of Munich and the prospect of war it seemed as though Alec Reid had not found time for the outside world.
No sooner was I seated than Reid shouted out, ‘Bubble and Squeak!
Old Rarity!’
Mystified, I watched a pale brown girl in her teens enter with a tray on which there were two bottles of whisky — one squarish, one round — glasses, and a jug of water kept clean with a small muslin cover edged with blue beads.
What happened next was evidently part of a carefully rehearsed rigmarole.
‘You'd like what we Scots call a wee dram?’
Reid asked.
‘Love to.’
‘Ice?’
As it happened I didn't like ice in whisky and this pleased Alec.
To the girl, he shouted, ‘Square!’
At which she reached for a bottle of whisky called Old Rarity.
He  explained: ‘I serve ordinary Scotch only to people who like ice.
But Old Rarity's my own favourite tipple.
It costs thirteen shillings instead of twelve-and-six for the standard brands, so I'm not giving it to heathens who spoil its flavour with ice.’
The girl poured out a generous measure and then, obviously without the faintest idea what she was saying, but had learned by rote, she smilingly asked me ‘Saywhenpleasesir?’
She must have thought she was using some magic password known only to the foreigners who drank this strange golden liquid in preference to kava.
After handing me a glass she gave one to Reid, and then, as though unthinkingly, straightened the fringe of hair round the back of his neck.
‘Cheers.’
Reid held up his glass.
‘And welcome to ma modest home.’
‘You seem to have your barman — or rather, bargirl — well trained.
But I'm puzzled by the ‘Bubble and Squeak’ shout you gave.’
‘It's quite simple.
A couple of twin girls do for me.
Unpronounceable names.
As like as two peas in a pod.
I can't tell 'em apart, so I call 'em Bubble and Squeak, and whichever one answers it doesn't make any difference.’
We walked out on to the large veranda and sat down with the lagoon spread out below and in front of us.
I still couldn't believe I was here, in a different world, all peace and beauty.
That and the intriguing touch of intimacy when she had stroked the back of his neck.
At first we just made conversation, but after a couple of drinks Reid looked at me thoughtfully, twiddling his half-empty glass, and said, ‘There's no reason not to tell you this, Kit, but since we've got to work together, I'd rather explain my mode of living before the old cats on the island — the European gossips — start telling you stories.
I have no time for gossips, but in an island like this —’ he called for another round.
‘This is not London, you know, and the local girls are happy-go-lucky, so the relationships when you're living in the same house tend to be even more happy-go-lucky.’
‘I understand,’ was all I could murmur.
‘Don't get me wrong,’ Reid added.
‘I'm a happily married man, but as I told you, I've had to compromise.
When I get to our house on Wimbledon Common — that's every three years, when I get leave — it's wonderful to be back.
But only for the first day or so; after a week I can't wait to return to Koraloona.’
Though I was new to the island, I had read enough — from Henty to the Boy's Own Paper — to understand that the spell of the South Seas, with its different tempo of life, must grow on a man until it reaches the stage where it cannot be resisted.
It forms a part of a man's life, more deeply ingrained as he matures.
So, even though I was young and inexperienced, I felt that I could appreciate some of the feelings of men like Captain Robins, and now this strange and kindly doctor, ‘happily’ married to a woman rich enough to live in a big house facing Wimbledon Common while he preferred a far-off island; each partner more in love with a way of life than with one another.
‘As a matter of fact,’ Alec Reid firmed down a new pipeful of tobacco, ‘I might ha’made a name for meself had I remained in Edinburgh.
I had a guid record, and my wife had it all planned out.
She had a tidy amount of money of her own.
And she'd have bought me a practice.
But then I asked for just one spell of six months as a locum in some exotic place.
As ye know, most doctors in the islands get six months' leave every three years, and I volunteered to take one man's place soon after I had qualified.
Took the wee wife along too.’
He chuckled again at the memory.
‘It happened to be Koraloona.
She hated it.
I fell in love with it.
When the resident doctor whom I was replacing died in Australia during his leave, the missionaries offered me his job.
And ye know, I never hesitated.
My wife went back to Britain.
She said I'd chosen the path to failure.
Aye, we're still friends, but she'll never understand that I'm nae a failure, I'm a success.
I've discovered the secret of happiness.
That's my success.
I want nothing more of life.
I have no  regrets.
D'ye ken anyone who can boast of that?
But maybe ye'll be different, ye just want a taste of the exotic life and then ye'll go back to the big time.’
I wondered.
At that moment I could see no reason for ever wanting to leave Koraloona.
I could visualise, as we sat under the rattan shade of the veranda, passing a perfect life on the island — a comfortable house, a garden in which I could grow everything I needed, enough fish to eat.
Enough work so that I could enjoy it but not so much work that I would be fed up.
‘Ye may stay, at that.’
Alec Reid relit his pipe.
‘But dinna let me persuade you with a lot of sentimental drivel.’
‘I think I'll stay a while,’ I smiled.
‘As your assistant.’
As though reading my thoughts, Reid added, wiping his sweating head, ‘It's the way of life I like, nothing more, ye ken?
You'll find out for yourself, Kit.’
He was a strange man.
He had had all the advantages of what my father called ‘a good family background’; he spoke with an educated voice; he had been raised to respect good manners.
Yet this contrasted oddly with his sloppy clothes, his bare knees and hairy legs, for he seemed to see nothing peculiar about a doctor who behaved like a gentleman but who looked like a beachcomber.
However, even my limited medical training told me that Alec Reid was good at his profession; his medical supplies might be limited, but he knew his South Seas.
In a way, though, that limited him and made him out of touch with modern medicine.
Picking up his last remark, I asked, ‘Do all the girls have the same happy-go-lucky attitude to — well, friendships?
After all, there are girls and girls, even on a South Seas island.’
‘I don't quite understand?’
‘Well, the Princess.
You told me you'd explain about Tiare and her daughter, where they fit into the island.’
‘Oh, Tiare!
She's married for the second time.
Her husband, Aleena's stepfather, is called Mana.
He's half Japanese.
He guards both wife and daughter like a samurai.
He's a terrible man.’
‘What's his full name?’
‘He doesn't have a surname, like many men on the islands,’ Reid explained.
‘And Aleena's real father?’
‘Died.
For no apparent reason.
My belief is that Mana wanted to marry Tiare — maybe for the inheritance — and it's made Aleena very unhappy.
That's really why Aleena, who's only thirteen, goes to boarding school in Sanderstown.
Gives her a bit of freedom.
And of course there's nothing on Koraloona but the two mission schools I mentioned.’
‘It all sounds very mysterious.’
I was puzzled.
‘Look, I've promised I'll tell ye the story of that family, and after dinner I will.
But now, I'm starved.’
With a sudden change of voice he gave a roar, ‘Bubble and Squeak!
Makeum dinner fast!’
‘Coming sir,’ they both trilled, and soon we were sitting down at the dining table in a corner of the living-room.
‘It's only rissoles, I'm afraid,’ said Alec, but if I felt a pang of disappointment that the first meal at his house wasn't going to be out of the ordinary I was mistaken.
No rissoles ever tasted so good.
I gratefully accepted a second helping.
‘What on earth do you put in them?’
‘Actually they're meat and coconut, just mixed together with a touch of coriander.
Like the sauce?’
I did.
‘The Polynesians combine the most extraordinary opposites.
This is basically made of mangoes and chopped green peppers.
Sounds foul, but it tastes good on meat.’
After dinner, sitting on the veranda, with his pipe well alight and with a glass of neat Old Rarity at his side, Alec Reid told me the extraordinary story of the fortune which he said belonged to Tiare.
For the sake of clarity, and since its fate is fundamental to what happened later, I have tried to omit my interruptions and the questions which demanded answers, and reduce it to a simple account based on the facts that Alec Reid told me.
Tiare's mother, the hereditary Princess, who received an allowance from the New Zealand government, was called Marama — which in one Polynesian sense means ‘woman’ but in her case meant ‘Princess Woman’.
When still unmarried, she met a penniless and obviously sick Frenchman who had lived in the South Seas and had come to Koraloona to paint.
It wasn't just the usual liaison: the two of them fell head over heels in love.
From stories handed down, it seems that the Frenchman saw Marama, insisted on painting her straight away, and then said she was the most beautiful woman he'd ever seen and begged her to come and live with him.
Which she did.
Very happily.
Though the artist was ill with tuberculosis and had no money to pay for his keep, Marama looked after him while he painted her over and over again; sometimes nude, sometimes dressed, and nearly always against the background of island scenery — near the waterfalls and the secret pools, in dells that laced the volcanic slopes, in the village market, in the main street of Anani.
The illness — the tuberculosis — slowly worsened, and soon it was apparent that the painter would die unless he received medical attention.
He was racked by coughs that almost tore him apart.
Sometimes he spat blood.
He was undernourished.
And Koraloona in those days had virtually no medical facilities.
The painter told Marama that if he wanted to live he must go to Rarotonga and receive treatment.
He begged Marama to travel with him, but she refused.
For one thing, she said, they could hardly scrape up enough money for one deck passage, let alone two, for in two years he had sold only three paintings for a few pounds.
There was another reason which Marama didn't reveal, until the day before he was due to sail, when she told the painter that she was three months pregnant.
The painter at first refused to sail.
He was, he said, overjoyed at the thought of her having a child.
But staying meant dying, and now the painter had an added reason for wanting to live.
And he knew that Marama, because of her title, would always be looked after if she stayed on  Koraloona, so it would be wrong of him to be selfish and expect her to live in semi-starvation on a strange island.
The painter promised to return as soon as he was well.
And on the last day he led the girl he loved to a shack he had built behind their tiny house and which he called his studio.
She was staggered.
The walls were a blaze of colour — vivid, exciting, dramatic paintings that all but covered the walls, and she was in nearly every one of them.
‘These are for you,’ he told her.
‘They are a keepsake.
There are seventeen of them and a few sketches.
If you are short of money, you might get a few pounds for one, but if not, keep them till I return to see you — and our child.’
‘I'll never sell them,’ cried Marama.
‘That I vow.’
In fact the painter never did return to Koraloona — and Marama, his mistress, always thought he had abandoned her, and over the years became obsessed by bitterness at the betrayal, for she never knew that in 1903 the painter had died, after she had given birth to a daughter, a baby girl so white that her mother christened her Tiare, after the beautiful white flower of the South Seas.
By the time Tiare was ten, her mother made the girl promise never to marry until she was at least nineteen, telling her that hasty love affairs never led to happiness.
Tiare made the promise which was solemnised by the local ‘witch-doctor’.
But when Tiare's mother died and Tiare was only seventeen, she broke the vow.
The local spiritual leaders warned her that she would suffer, after she fell in love and married — and she did, after the birth of Aleena.
‘And I'll tell ye,’ Alec Reid summoned Bubble and Squeak for another drink, ‘that's a guid reason why the young kid Aleena will never wed before she's nineteen.
She knows what happened to her grandma and her mother Tiare, who took a beating and made Aleena take the same vow.
Aleena's a serious kid and she's learned the lesson.’
‘All that's fine,’ I said, though I wasn't particularly interested in the vows of a child who had just gone to  boarding school.
‘You say that the paintings have been handed down.
Is that all there is to the story?’
I was a little disappointed.
‘Will they ever be worth anything?’
‘Aye, they might,’ said Alec Reid drily.
‘After all, the man who fell in love with Princess Marama and left the paintings to Tiare was a Frenchman you might have heard of — Paul Gauguin.’
Suddenly, sitting there on the veranda sipping whisky, I coughed and spluttered into my glass.
‘Heard of!’
It was Gauguin whom Maugham had made the hero of The Moon and Sixpence .
And not long before leaving England I'd read a newspaper item revealing that a Gauguin landscape bought by another novelist, Hugh Walpole, in 1924 for £145 would now in the thirties be worth around £6,000, and that Hermann Goering in Nazi Germany had recently paid Alfred Krupp the armaments boss 10,000 Reichmarks for another of the wayward artist's pictures.
£6,000 was double what a Rolls-Royce Phantom III cost, three times as much as Reid's Gloster plane!
Thus had values increased.
‘Gauguin!’
I said.
‘They must be worth a fortune!’
‘They could be worth a million for all the difference it would make,’ said Reid.
‘They'll never be sold.
The old lady, Marama, vowed never to sell, and made Tiare and eventually Aleena repeat the vow.’
With a dry touch, he added, ‘They take their vows seriously in the islands.
There are native gods and most islanders are genuinely afraid of them.’
‘Gauguin!’
I repeated.
The very name was invested with magic.
‘All here on this tiny island,’ I said.
‘Little more than a coral atoll.
And seventeen times six thousand…‘
‘Plus a few sketches he left behind,’ added Reid.
‘But do you realise what they could fetch one day?
Art prices have been soaring.
People are buying pictures as a hedge against war and inflation.
Who knows, if the Gauguins were left on the island one day they might be worth —’ I drew a breath —‘twenty or even thirty thousand each?’
‘I wouldn'a go as far as that,’ Reid reproved me.
‘But where are they?’
And before Reid could answer, further questions tumbled out.
‘Are they still in good condition?
They must be forty years old, at least.
What about the exposure to sea air?
Are they properly protected?’
‘Don't panic, Laddie!
One question at a time.
I'm not sure exactly where they're stored, but Tiare told me once that her father’— that sounded an odd description of Gauguin —‘had given her mother instructions on how to protect them.
I'm sure they're stored properly.
I'm also sure that they're well and truly hidden from prying eyes like yours or mine.’
Of course, it was none of my business where the ‘missing’ Gauguins were stored, except that I would have enjoyed seeing them, even if prompted only by curiosity.
After all, it's not everyone who has a private view of paintings worth £100,000 — a lot of money in those pre-war, pre-inflation days — but which have never been on public view.
‘Have you seen them?’
I asked.
Reid nodded.
‘Aye, I have.
When Tiare's husband knew he was dying he thanked me and wanted to know if there was anything he could do — a kind of last request.
I asked him if he or Tiare could let me see the ‘inheritance’; and I saw it.’
‘Wonderful?’
‘I suppose so, but it's a matter of taste.
Remember, I'm of Scots descent, and I prefer our own artists like Willie Flint with his pretty titty girls or William McTaggart.
Did you know that Queen Victoria put him in the same class as Landseer?
I don't take to these modernistic people who just splash on daubs of paint.
Whoever saw a beach of red sand, or a woman with a green face?
Give me the Monarch of the Glen any day.
‘But enough about pictures!
Have a wee deoch and dorris afore ye go?’
‘You mean one for the road?’
I smiled.
‘I've never heard the expression before — what did you call it?’
‘Ye dinna say!
Ye never knew how the other half lives!
Deoch means drink and dorris means door.
So it's one for the door if ye prefer it.’
It took me some time to put the fantastic story of the Gauguin inheritance behind me — not out of my mind, but to the back of it, not only because I wondered if they might deteriorate, but also at the bizarre irony of a family sitting on a fortune which they refused to touch.
However, a couple of days later I moved into my bungalow and it was quite a job.
In preparation for a long stay, I had several suitcases, a packing case, a cabin trunk, my portable gramophone and records, all my medical equipment.
I had help lugging the heavy cases from Jim Wilson's truck, but I had to do my share; and even thinking of where to put things was exhausting.
By the time this chore was finished, I was so tired I fell into a doze on the veranda, dreaming of a Gauguin nude of Aleena's grandmother, and then of a painting of Tiare and her daughter, and then how easy it would be if they could all come and live with me and we could just hang the pictures on the walls and enjoy them.
Reality was more drab, I thought ruefully when I woke up.
The only decoration on the walls of my new home consisted of an old half-used calendar for 1935.
Actually it wasn't a bad bungalow, and I soon settled in.
It was impersonal, furnished to the exact specifications of any government building in the islands that goes with a civil servant of a particular grade; the chairs and table in ‘ant-proof’ hardwood, lacquered a pale brown, three armchairs, one sofa, chairs and table on the verandah, a desk, two bedrooms, a couple of beds, their legs in jars of water, a shower.
Impersonal, yes, but quite practical, though of course lacking the warmth and atmosphere I enjoyed at home.
Still, I had an overseas news radio set and sometimes at dusk when I turned it on for the BBC overseas news, the light on its dial welcomed me like a beacon from home.
In a way though, the garden was the best feature.
By  design or nature, it was on the hill above Main Street and was large and ringed with thirty-foot-high breadfruit trees shading the ground with their thick, dark green leaves.
There was a pomelo tree, its fruit tasting like grapefruit, but each one the size of a football.
One hedge was of sago.
Until I first inspected the garden I hadn't even had the faintest idea that you could grow your own sago as a fence against your neighbour and then eat it!
There was one big mango tree, a couple of coconut palms, their tufted branches reminding me of Mother's feather duster.
All of this magical garden was set in an acre of tough, fibrous grass on which a boy with a curved knife squatted on his haunches while cropping the ‘lawns’.
It was wonderful.
If the garden was more exciting than my dwelling, there was a good reason why Alec Reid's house should have a more lived-in feeling.
His wife had come out to the island on his first posting and, before she decided to return to London, she had bought the bungalow and furnished it.
‘She made a good job of it too,’ Alec explained, adding like a good Scot, ‘and of course there's a small benefit to me because now I draw a rent allowance.’
In only one respect were my original living arrangements altered, and it was all for the best.
The girl who had been selected for me by Miss Sowerby never turned up.
It transpired that her family had moved to Tala-Tala and she couldn't face the daily ten miles on foot.
Instead Miss Sowerby had discovered an excellent young half-Chinese man of twenty-two, and like most Chinese he could cook, do the laundry, press and whatever little else was needed about the house.
In other words, a cookboy.
He was called Toma.
Everyone wanted to help!
The feeling of hospitality, of kindness, was warming.
When I said goodbye to Mollie Green she announced, ‘The next lunch is on me, Doc.’
And before Bill Robins left for Sanderstown he gave me his address and telephone number, saying, ‘I'll be really hurt if you ever come to Sanderstown and don't look me up.
’ And then, a few days later, I had an unexpected bonus.
The man responsible was Jason Purvis.
I had been horrified at his scarecrow appearance when I first saw him at the clinic, and when I met him by chance in Tala-Tala I felt so sorry for him that I asked him if he would like to come for dinner.
I'm not quite sure what prompted the invitation.
Perhaps it was because I found it hard to define his place on the island.
He looked like a half-starved bum yet he was evidently a man who had known better times.
I don't quite know why, but he gave me the impression, without uttering more than a few words, that he had much more than superficial knowledge, and an amusing touch of the sardonic as well.
‘I'd love to.
I'm starving.
Literally.’
Then he added, ‘Black tie?’
‘Not tonight,’ I said gravely.
‘I think an open-necked shirt.’
‘By the way,’ he said, ‘I was passing by your bungalow last night when I heard you playing a gramophone.’
I nodded.
‘Well, I've got loads of records but nothing to play them on.
I had to flog mine.
Do you like classical music?
Shall I bring some round?
Do you like piano music?’
With an almost sad look that increased the appearance of melancholy, he said, ‘I remember hearing Pachmann playing the Chopin B Minor Sonata at the Aeolian Hall in Bond Street in 1929.
I can even remember the date, September 29.’
‘I'd love it.
I'll come and pick you up,’ I said, not out of courtesy, but because Purvis didn't look as though he had the strength to carry even a dozen records.
In the end Purvis and his records opened up a new world for me, starting on that very first dinner when we played Beethoven's Archduke Trio, the one in B flat major, ‘Opus 97,’ he added casually.
‘Keep the lot,’ he said, ‘then you'll have to invite me again to hear my own records.
One meal a week with you and I won't even have to go cap in hand to Johnson's store.‘
‘You don't like Johnson do you?’
I didn't either and he knew it.
‘I can't stand him,’ he said.
‘He doesn't do a damn thing for the good of mankind, but makes one hell of a fat living by buying cheap from one worker and selling the same thing dear to another worker.
Just a bloody parasite.’
‘But still,’ I smiled, ‘you do need the go-betweens of this world.’
‘You know what I mean.
You're a doctor with an Oxford education.
You do something useful.
So does a coalminer who's had virtually no education.
I respect both of you equally.
But Johnson!
He doesn't do a damn thing, he doesn't even pay his wife wages — I give up!’
Another bonus arrived within a week, when I had the first glimpse from the sea of the opposite coastline of Koraloona, with its empty sandy beaches and the great dormant volcano of High Island rearing up behind it, while in the distance I could even make out Hodges, the copra island.
And I didn't see this from the decks of the Mantel a but from a twenty-one-foot sailing boat,Faalifu III , piloted skilfully by a skipper wearing white shorts, a kind of woollen T-shirt and a saucy sailor's cap — Lucy Young.
She had promised to take me sailing, and Paula had let her borrow the boat for a few hours, as she had often done before.
I arranged to meet her in the tiny port at Tala-Tala where she was waiting for me.
She looked so fresh and happy that I started grinning as soon as I waved to her, standing below me in the cockpit of the boat, where a servant from Faalifu was carrying some packages while Captain Baker looked down from the bridge.
‘It's beautiful,’ I said as the man stowed the parcels into the tiny cabin.
‘But I warn you, I'm a landlubber: I've never sailed a boat in my life.
I vaguely remember words like ‘mizzen mast’, but I haven't a clue what any of them mean.’
‘Don't worry, we have an outboard motor.
We'll forget the sails.
Then it's just like driving a car.
I've got a packed lunch, a thermos of ice-cold martinis, and some beer and Coke.
Welcome aboard!’
As I clambered into the boat, moored near her big yacht, Lucy took the bottles of beer and Coca-Cola and put them into an open net bag which she lowered over the side, tying the net with a long rope to a hook on the gunwale.
‘Once we start moving,’ she explained, ‘the water rushing past will keep your beer colder than any fridge.’
I went below and peered inside the cabin — a tiny fixed table with divan-type seats on either side.
‘Supposed to turn into beds,’ she said, adding lightly, ‘but not my idea of a honeymoon suite.’
It was a beautiful sunny morning, and at eleven o'clock, after I had done a quick surgery, we chugged quietly out of the harbour, with Lucy at the controls.
Once outside she said, ‘I've got my costume under my clothes.’
She started to pull the jersey over her head.
‘You can change into your bathing trunks in the cabin.
But keep your sports shirt on until we start swimming.
With the sea and sun and wind you'll fry if you don't take care.’
Inside the cabin, separated from this long-legged, tanned Californian girl who never seemed to stop smiling, I felt a tingle of pleasant, uncomfortable tightness in my close-fitting trunks.
What a pretty, unaffected girl she was, full of life and fun.
And efficient!
The way she sailed the boat.
What on earth was a stunning girl like this doing in Koraloona?
‘It's a breath of fresh air having you around,’ I said.
‘What made you come to Koraloona?’
‘I met Paula at a party in San Francisco where she lives.
She needed a manageress, if that's the right word, three years ago — a sort of paid annual summer vacation.’
‘Is it really a vacation?’ echoing the American word.
‘Is it difficult to get away when you're working?
I mean, for a day like this?’
‘Sometimes, yes.
Paula is a perfectionist and everything is fine so long as there are no snags.
Then she can be a little difficult.’
‘But what exactly do you do?’
She smiled, turned course and steered for the deeper  waters near the edge of the reef.
‘I just run the place.
Everything.
I don't do any physical work, if that's what you mean.
Dusting or hoovering,’ she laughed lightly.
‘But I do have to see that the servants do everything, and since they all seem to leave as soon as they've saved up enough money, half my time is spent finding replacements and training them.
I have to check on everything: liquor stocks; whether the pool filter is working; is the garden untidy?’
‘Sounds tough,’ I sympathised.
‘It isn't really, though I've got to watch Paula.
But on the other hand I get $1000 a month tax free for five months every year, and so far in three years I haven't touched a cent of the money.
I'm just about set to realise a dream.’
‘Which is?’
‘I've already paid down two-thirds for an artist's cottage in Sausolito, a village across the other side of the Golden Gate bridge from San Francisco.
Between Mount Tamalpais and the Bay.’
‘And then what are you going to do?’
‘Invite you to come and see me on your next leave,’ she laughed.
‘That's a date — if there isn't a war.’
‘Will there be?’
‘Not here in the Pacific,’ I said, ‘but in Europe — there might be.
The outlook's pretty grim.’
It was a heavenly morning.
Half a mile or so out, we swam in the deep water under the lee of the conical shape of the High Island's volcano.
Later, we sailed out towards the reef.
It was an extraordinary sensation to see the thrashing, churning water on one side while, inside the lagoon a yard or two away, the water was calm.
It seems odd, but I was enjoying myself so much that I hardly gave a thought to the fact that we were alone, miles away from anyone, and that the average man in such a situation…
But I did get another tingle of excitement when I swam a shade too near a jagged reef, and she grabbed me by the shoulder to pull me away.
I must have brushed my back  against her breasts, but then the touch of her was over and she shouted, ‘How about lunch?’
We swam back to the boat, I climbed up the steps fastened near the stern, and gave her a helping hand.
Again I had a sense of excitement as I touched her, holding her hand, then her arm, until she was on the boat, looking for a towel.
But within a few moments we were sipping extra-dry martinis from paper cups, then eating cold chicken and tinned ham, with beer chilled by the sea.
I said with a laugh ‘You're taking an awful risk, inviting me like this alone with you on a boat.’
She gave me a frank, laughing look.
‘I know what you'd like to do — and it may surprise you, Kit, if I admit that part of me may even want to myself.
But rushing things is so wrong.
Let's wait and see what happens, Kit.
Will you?’
‘If I must.
I'm not a professional seducer, you know.
But does that mean —?’
‘I hope so.
There, I've admitted it.
I hope so.
Just give both of us time to get our breath, so that we both feel it's worth it.
Do you understand?’
‘Not really.’
‘Look at it this way.
We're not pretending that we're in love with each other.
We're attracted — and that's a different emotion.’
As I started to protest, she said, ‘No, don't be hypocritical.
We're a healthy normal couple.
I've had the occasional boyfriend in the past, and I'm sure you've done the same sort of thing.
But let's enjoy the pleasure of waiting.
Don't let's be seduced by the easy sexual habits of the islanders.’
‘I suppose I do understand.’
As we made for home, and reached the tiny harbour of Tala-Tala, the silence between us was almost strained.
Neither was angry; perhaps she, like me, was battling with secret thoughts.
Fortunately we had other things to occupy us as we reached the spot in the harbour where the boat was normally moored.
We edged in.
I stood ready with the boat-hook to make sure we didn't bump against the rocks of the mooring.
A couple of the crew members from  Paula's yacht, who were waiting for us, grabbed a line and made the sailing boat fast.
I didn't want her to think I was angry or disappointed, and as I helped her ashore, I smiled and said, ‘I understand,’ and, caught in the no-man's-land between desire and fulfilment, leant forward rather clumsily to kiss her.
But she avoided my lips, so that I brushed her cheek, and as I tried to find her mouth she said, ‘No, Kit.
If you kiss me, I might have to say ‘Yes’.’
Then she added, ‘One day, it won't be long, I think, and it won't be contrived, then I'll come knocking on your door.’
It was amazing how quickly the weeks passed as I settled into the routine of life on Koraloona.
Everything was done at a leisurely tempo.
Day-to-day life was governed by the pace of the inhabitants, and there was no point in running from A to B when everyone else walked slowly.
Yet even so, the dispensary was busy every day, and we did have a great deal of work, dealing with the humdrum, everyday ailments — yaws, measles, ‘flu and accidents — accepted by the Polynesians with a philosophical resignation, as though they were saying, ‘This is the price we pay for living in paradise.’
We had our crises too — including deaths from the dreadful tetanus; I had to keep records of all this in the only ‘office’ I possessed — the old tin trunk bequeathed to us by Tiare's mother so long ago.
But though busy, there was time to swim at least twice a day in warm water, fanned by warm breezes, with an average temperature the year round of between 70° and 80° Fahrenheit, and always against a magical scenic backdrop that never ceased to enchant me.
I felt at peace with the world, even though by the summer of 1939 Europe seemed  to be drifting closer to war and everyone was glued to the BBC short-wave Overseas Service bulletins, or even devouring month-old copies of The Times which had been airmailed to Australia and sent on by ship, together with the Illustrated London News ,Tatler , and particular titles ordered by the expatriates.
There was quite a social calendar to keep me occupied if I ever tired of my own company.
I met Bill Robins regularly when the Mantela docked, sometimes for lunch at Green's Hotel.
Once a week at least Alec Reid and I dined together.
I had been so horrified by Jason Purvis' physical condition that, almost unwittingly, I had taken him in hand.
It was no use offering him money, for he would immediately spend it on drink, but I suggested that he try his hand at very light work — sweeping the hospital floor, later a little gardening, and for this I paid him in meals cooked by Toma at home.
He loved it.
Sometimes I managed to find stocks of surplus out-of-date doctor's forms and he used these to type out rough drafts of his latest short story or chapters of his novel on his old Remington Portable — about the only thing he hadn't sold — and occasionally he would bring one round for me to read.
His work wasn't bad, and I had the feeling that one day, if only he would persist, he might write a novel that would be published.
At least his latest attempt was a story on a subject which he knew about.
It told the story of a man who had searched for happiness on an island like Koraloona, only to be disillusioned, yet unable to tear himself away.
It was very good — even though it left a nasty taste in my mouth, the same sort of shudder I felt when I first read The Turn of the Screw .
Was Purvis influenced by the same kind of eeriness when surrounded by beauty on this island?
He launched into a long explanation, when I tackled him.
‘It is beautiful,’ he admitted.
‘But sometimes events or thoughts or even characters take charge when you're working.
No, I'm not being pompous.
After all, these  islands have been steeped for centuries in everything from witchcraft to ancestor worship.
It's still all around us.
They're really about as Christian as headhunters.
Maybe what I can't help bringing into some of my work is that all this beauty on Koraloona demands a price.
And the happier you are, the higher the price you may one day have to pay.
‘My God!
What balls I am talking,’ he laughed.
‘For God's sake give me a drink, Kit.’
As I poured out his fourth large Scotch, I wondered, would I too ever be disillusioned with Koraloona?
So far, it was love at first sight.
It showed no signs of waning.
But sometimes there was an uneasy undercurrent to disturb the tranquillity — including, of course, the feeling that I was marking time while great and stirring events were in the offing — war, for instance .
If war broke out, would I come to regret having buried myself in some backwater while history passed me by?
These were only occasional solemn thoughts, and there was one easy way to avoid any sense of boredom: go to the Villa Faalifu and see the elegant Paula Reece — with a chance, too, of meeting Lucy.
Paula always held open-house cocktail parties on Tuesdays and Fridays, and if you were a friend, no invitations were required.
So I often popped in, sometimes alone, sometimes with Alec, for a drink after a day's work.
Jason came fairly regularly, and occasionally Baker too was pressed into service.
Once or twice Paula teased me about nude swimming, and once she gave me a brief conducted tour of the gardens and the house.
But not upstairs.
‘Another time perhaps,’ she suggested.
Upstairs included a bed large enough to sleep ten people.
‘My fun bedroom!’ she explained.
But often she had men staying with her.
I didn't actually like Paula very much — she flaunted her wealth as though it was marked with a price tag — but I didn't actively dislike her.
Hard to explain the conflict in our acquaintance, but perhaps I had an instinctive feeling that she, in fact, wanted me to go to bed with her, and she  knew I wouldn't — because if I did make love to her, it would be a victory for her and a defeat for me.
Lucy of course was always fun, and I talked to her at Paula's villa whenever I went there.
But I had to watch my step.
Paula's eyes could be cold and angry if she disliked something.
Once I was talking alone to Lucy in a corner, laughing together and, as I impulsively took one of her hands in both of mine, I heard a sharp cry of ‘Lucy!
We need some more ice.
Tell that damn fool waiter to get some.’
And as Lucy walked into the house, Paula looked right through me.
Alec Reid had treated several cases of polio during my first year or so in Koraloona, but there were never any signs of an epidemic.
Then one day, when I visited the hospital by chance — Alec was ‘on duty’— a boy of eight arrived at the surgery, carried by his father.
The boy was whimpering with pain and his left leg was twisted awkwardly.
I thought I recognised his face, and I was right, for Alec said, ‘Yes, he came in with ‘flu symptoms about a fortnight ago.
I gave him the standard treatment and told him to come back immediately if he didn't get better.’
‘And he didn't come back?’
Alec shook his head in annoyance.
‘They rarely do,’ he said.
‘The trouble is that even when it's a bad virus it always looks like ‘flu — and remember, the polio itself dies out in about a week.
It's the symptoms that are left behind.
Look at this poor little devil now.’
The boy's bright face, with its wide, open eyes, was contorted in agony.
His twisted left leg was bent at the knee, and though the Polynesians are a stoic race, he was fighting a losing battle to stem the tears.
While the other patients crowded outside and Miss Sowerby tried to keep them in order, Alec motioned to the father to carry the boy into the ‘ops’ theatre and lay him down on his back on the operating table so that we could make a more detailed examination.
One look was enough to confirm that this was polio, and  that the delay in coming to see us probably meant that we had passed the porodomal, or incubatory stage.
The patient was probably already in the second stage of muscle pain, leading to the destruction of the muscle, something that could happen in as little as ten days.
Then I saw that the disease had also struck the right leg.
The muscle wastage had caused a dropped foot — like the little girl who had been treated by Alec.
The boy said nothing, only looked at both of us with wide-open eyes, but there were no tears despite the pain.
‘That left leg needs bone surgery,’ said Alec as we asked the father to wait outside.
‘He ought to go to Sanderstown right away and have an operation for arthrodesis by a proper orthopaedic surgeon.’
I knew that — from his point of view — this was the correct treatment.
But I had a sudden vision of poor Clare, imprisoned in irons for the rest of her life.
‘I don't think it's necessary, Alec,’ I muttered.
Almost as though explaining the normal techniques to a med student, he said patiently, ‘You know, Laddie, that what I want to do is restore the affected joint to its proper position of function.’
He was using standard medical terms.
‘Especially if a muscle is wasted.
At least arthrodesis is an operation that will immobilise a joint so that the bones grow solidly together.’
‘I admit that,’ I said, adding bitterly, ‘but at what a cost!
It usually results in the loss of the muscle below the bone.
And then it has to be supported by a brace.’
I looked at the little boy, lying there, and caught a glimpse of the father peeping from the corridor.
The father was a tall, straight-backed man, obviously proud of his suffering son.
What a tragedy if that son had to wear a brace for the rest of his life.
Impulsively — and straight from the heart — I said, ‘Give me forty-eight hours, Alec.
At least I'm sure I can relieve the pain — look at that poor kid!’
Seeing Alec's dour expression, I added, ‘And it won't do any harm to let me try.‘
‘It could, and both you and I know it, Kit,’ Alec replied.
‘Come and have another look.
Ye ken —’ he took the boy's leg again, and with one hand raised the calf muscle below the knee.
‘Those muscles are sagging, they're flaccid, and the whole leg is being pulled out of its true shape by the strong muscles surrounding them.
The leg must be operated on and straightened, then put into splints or plaster, or the kid'll remain in that crippled position for the rest of his life.
Aye, I know that the calf muscles will atrophy, but at least they can be supported by a brace and the boy'll be able to walk.’
‘Only with sticks!’
I said sharply.
‘And anyway, I don't think the muscles are flaccid.’
I paused.
‘At least they might not be.
The pain is being caused by spasms — like sudden bursts of uncontrollable cramp.
It's agony.
Look at the sweat on that little boy's twisted face.
And there's no proof that the boy's muscles are completely dead.
Don't you think we should give him the benefit of the doubt?’
‘There is nae doot — and you know it,’ said Alec, not unkindly.
‘I know how you feel — your sister's problems — and the fact that you saw this Australian woman perform a kind of miracle.
But you have to bear in mind that we are doctors, and as such we should really do what we're trained to do — and are expected to do.’
‘I know all that,’ I began to feel angry and frustrated, ‘but Goddammit, the only reason I came to this island was because of my interest in polio.
Yet so far I seem to have been treating nothing worse than chicken pox and ‘flu.
I know I'm right.
You can't just ignore the fact that people have been cured — all right, I agree, they are unorthodox methods.
But give me a chance.
Have some faith in me — in what I believe in.’
Suddenly remembering a casual conversation, I cried, ‘Miss Sowerby!
Can you spare a moment?’
She came in through the corridor, shuffling in her thick black clothes.
Without waiting, I asked her, ‘You told me once that you'd seen Sister Kenny treat a polio patient.’
It was one of the rare occasions when her tight-lipped mouth opened into something approaching a smile.
‘It was a miracle!’
She was speaking to us both.
‘I never saw anything like it.
She came to one of our mission hospitals when I was training in Australia.’
‘So you'd know how to help me with the treatment — if Doctor Reid allows us.’
‘Yes, Doctor, I would.
And I hope you can do something for this little lad here.
Look at him — the pain.
’ I caught sight of the boy, trapped in an uncontrollable spasm of painful cramp, and I smiled, took one hand, stroked his face, wet with sweat, and said, ‘Be patient and brave.’
‘You didn't tell me this,’ said Alec to Miss Sowerby.
‘Never thought to mention it,’ she retorted, po-faced again.
‘I may be old-fashioned,’ Alec sighed, ‘but I hate experimenting in a lonely spot like this.’
‘We're not experimenting, Alec,’ I cried, my voice filled with passion, ‘we're believing — Miss Sowerby and me.
Yes, even Miss Sowerby —’ and breaking the tension I smiled to her and said, ‘Sorry about the ‘even’.’
‘Well.’
I could see that Alec was hesitating.
‘If anything does go wrong —‘
‘You're not afraid of a report on unprofessional conduct?
If you are, I'll sign now that I've tried this treatment without your approval.’
For a moment another thought crossed my mind — that if I lived in the United States while undertaking an ‘experiment’ I might be sued if I failed.
‘Remember, Alec, the doctor in London who gave me the job did say Koraloona was a living laboratory for the treatment of polio.
Do let me have a chance to prove what I believe in.’
‘I did promise to give you that chance,’ he admitted.
‘But it's on your own head.
And if you fail — you'll have a cripple for life on your conscience.’
‘Can you promise that the boy won't be a cripple for life anyway?’
He shook his head.
‘All right— go ahead,’ he said quietly.
‘And if there's anything you need —’ To Miss Sowerby he said, ‘Give Doctor Masters all the help he requires while he tries this new treatment.’
Miss Sowerby nodded — and not with pursed lips.
‘Thank you, Alec,’ I said, and to Miss Sowerby, ‘You know the drill?’
‘Only vaguely.
You tell me again what to do.’
First I went to find the boy's father and told him, ‘There's nothing you can do by staying here.
Go home to your village.
I will keep your son here — and I hope, cure him.’
‘I will stay,’ he insisted.
‘There's no place here.’
I waved vaguely around the hospital.
‘It's empty now, but it's crowded every morning.
And you can't help.’
Alec overheard the conversation, and said, ‘I'm going back to the house now, Kit.
You don't need me for the moment, but I'll be back this afternoon.
Meanwhile you,’ he turned to the father, ‘stay along and garden my house.
’ With a sigh he turned to me, and said, ‘Sometimes doctors forget that fathers who love their bairns suffer as much pain of a different sort as the children.
Poor man.’
‘You're a good friend, Alec.’
I returned to the ops room ready to start work.
I knew what I wanted to do, and first of all I asked Miss Sowerby, ‘Any spare blankets?’
I knew we must have a store of old army-type blankets for use when patients ran temperatures yet their teeth chattered during bouts of fever — malarial or dengue.
She nodded.
‘Fetch me a couple to start with, please.
And get me some large surgery scissors.
Then boil up a big pan of water.’
I went to try to soothe the agony of the little boy, stretched on his back, one leg bent upwards, the other flat, with the foot dropping.
‘What's your name?’
I asked, mopping his face with some tepid water — the coldest I could find.
He muttered a reply, but I couldn't understand what he said.
‘Jimmabibi?’
I asked.
He managed a shake of his head.
‘Jimbo?’
It probably wasn't, but he was in too much pain to argue, so he nodded, and immediately became Jimbo.
I had to think carefully now — if only to remember the exact procedure.
It had been running through my thoughts so often that I knew it by heart, yet now I was suddenly afraid that I might do the wrong thing!
For this was not a treatment to be found in Gray's Anatomy .
First, while the water was boiling, I had to find some piece of stout wood to hold the boy's dropped foot in the proper position —‘the position of function’ as Reid had called it.
If I didn't, then that could mean an operation for a dropped foot.
But where the hell could I find a large straight, flat piece of wood?
There wasn't a hope in the hospital.
I rummaged around, asked Miss Sowerby, but there was nothing.
‘I'll run down the hill and see if Jim Wilson's got anything at the ship's chandler,’ I said to Miss Sowerby.
It was only three minutes down the road, and Jim always had a storehouse of odds and ends.
Sure enough he came up with the perfect solution.
‘How about this old door?’
He pointed out a flat, tough door from which he had already removed the hinges and nails.
It was just what I needed to do the job of calf muscle for Jimbo.
‘Perfect!
Can you spare it?’
I asked him.
‘Of course.
I'll run you up in the car.
Only take a couple of minutes.’
‘One thing more, Jim,’ I added.
‘Have you any elastic bands?’
He shook his head.
‘Better try Johnson's.’
I ran down the road, bought a packet of large-sized bands and told Johnson to put them on my account.
‘Funny thing to ask for on an island like this.’
He had  come out of his cubbyhole of an office, adding with a trace of Cockney twang, ‘This ain't no place for sending parcels!’
I still couldn't fathom why I didn't altogether trust the man, ‘I must be off,’ I muttered and returned to lim.
By the time I arrived he had loaded the door on his truck, and I drove up with him.
Once back in the ops room, I laid the boy flat on his back, so far down the mattress that his dropped foot hung over the edge at the bottom, just as I had seen the Australian nurse do when I watched her during her London visit the previous year.
Then I stood the door across the end of the bed, so close that Jimbo's right, dropping foot, where the muscle wasn't holding, had no room to drop.
His right foot had to remain at right angles to his leg.
It cost him no effort, no extra pain.
The old door, strategically placed, was doing the work of the muscle.
When I had made him as comfortable as I could — a relative term, since he was in pain with each new spasm — I cut the two blankets into strips, each one two feet or so wide.
I then cut each strip into rectangular pieces, two feet by one.
I was ready now, for the water had boiled while I was away.
‘Take these, please.’
I handed Miss Sowerby half a dozen of the strips.
‘Now, the water's boiling, put them inside.
And give me a pair of tongs so that I can take one out of the water at a time.’
The strong-smelling ‘stewed’ strips of blanket were hot, and as I wrung out the excess water, I needed tongs to hold them for the first few minutes.
Yet when I placed the first hot pad on to the boy's twisted left leg he seemed not to feel any pain; I supposed the pain of the spasms had made him impervious to a lesser pain.
I wrapped one strip around the twisted knee, then a second over the calf muscles below, keeping them in place with the elastic bands.
I did the same with another strip around the right ankle and over the foot, so that it was held between the sole of the foot and the wooden backing of the old door.
But where the muscles had started to waste was  the most important part, and so I asked Miss Sowerby for another square of cloth to reinforce the heat over the ankle.
My theory —‘mine’, I say, but the miracle had been wrought in front of me by Sister Kenny — was very simple.
Though medical science believed that the muscles affected by polio simply withered and could not be restored, she was convinced that the deformities which followed attacks of infantile paralysis were caused by muscle spasms.
I believed this too.
I felt — I could not be more certain than that — that when I had treated polio cases on previous occasions I had actually sensed wasting muscles making slight quivers, contracting with the pain of a spasm; and it was these contractions of muscles which, following normal treatment, so often caused shortening of the leg when the muscles withered.
I know it sounds crazy, but even as I watched this little boy, Jimbo, I thought I could actually see a muscle quiver.
‘Now, young man.’
Knowing that he would speak a little pidgin English, I said to him, ‘You trust me, yes?
This hot cloth help ease pain, and we put a new hot one on every two hours until the pain has gone completely.’
I don't imagine that he felt any easier immediately I applied the hot blankets, but suggestion is a powerful weapon in the armoury of the doctor, and he did at least manage a smile.
‘Don't expect a miracle,’ I smiled back.
‘How long did you say you're going to keep this compress on?’
Miss Sowerby asked.
‘A couple of hours.’
‘And then, Doctor?’
‘Same again.
With blankets heated by being wrung out after immersion in boiling water.’
Just then Alec Reid unexpectedly bustled in from the dispensary.
‘I thought I'd just pop in.
How's it going?’ he asked.
After taking off his topee and wiping his head, he felt the boy's pulse automatically.
I suddenly realised that he was very, very interested.
‘Early days.
But I've put the first hot foments on the two affected parts,’ I explained.
‘Actually on the spots where the spasms occurred — and I'm planning to change them — new ones, very hot ones, every couple of hours.’
‘For how long?’ asked Alec.
‘Three or four days,’ I said hopefully, trying to hide any element of self-doubt.
‘And who's going to do that — every two hours, twenty-four hours a day?’
Alec looked incredulous.
‘Who's going to keep awake for three days or more?
Eh?’
‘Alec,’ I said, a little desperately, ‘I've got to do it the only way I know how to.
Just to see if it works.
I'll get Toma, my boy, to bring in an alarm clock, or whatever.
If it doesn't work because I can't carry the experiment through’— I shrugged my shoulders —‘it wouldn't be worth starting on.
But I'm sure it will —sure .
Only a few minutes ago I felt a slight twitch in the boy's calf muscle.
Yet according to you it's supposed to be dead already and wasting away —‘
Alec was staring at me hard.
‘It could have been involuntary.’
‘True.
But it might not have been.
And I have to believe in that ‘might’.
There's life in there, I tell you, Alec.
As I've explained, I'm going to change the hot strips of blanket every two hours all through the night.
And tomorrow.
To hell with sleep —‘
‘It's against all medical teaching,’ he said.
‘I know, but —‘
‘I'll come in early — four o'clock tomorrow morning?’
Miss Sowerby offered.
‘You will?
That's marvellous.
You've seen us at work.
You're part of the experiment.
It's imperative to keep the treatment going.
And then we'll see — if we can get rid of the muscle spasms, if the pain stops, then I'll go to work on the muscles.’
‘How?’ she asked.
‘Massage.
Some manipulation, I dare say, but gentle massage — and then, once the spasms and the pain have  gone, Jimbo will be so grateful that I'll easily be able to persuade him to start his own passive exercises.’
‘And you think it'll work?’
Alec was still finding it hard to hide his disbelief.
‘Honestly, I don't know.
I only saw that one demonstration.
But she cured that child.’
‘Getting rid of the pain is one thing,’ said Alec.
‘I can see how heat, regularly applied, could alleviate that.
But that's only a palliative.’
‘Maybe that's all I'll be able to do,’ I admitted.
‘But surely that's something — to a little boy in agony.
But you see, the trouble with polio is that once the muscles are dead the nerves which serve them are useless.’
At the risk of sounding pompous — for this was very basic medicine — I thought I ought to explain to Miss Sowerby just what I was thinking of.
‘You see,’ I turned to her.
‘In the end it's the muscles that take orders from the brain if they're to work.
And the nerve pathways are the messengers between brain and muscle.
Once the pain and muscle soreness disappears I'll have to try and restore any muscles that might be in danger — and in doing that restore the nerve routes — the circuits, if you like — that link muscle and brain.’
‘Won't we need a trained nurse?’ she asked.
‘We're experimenting, Miss Sowerby.
I know little more than you do about what we're doing.’
I knew that would please her, and it did.
‘I see two stages ahead,’ I went on.
‘Once the pains are alleviated, Jimbo, as well as us, will have won a supreme victory, especially if he isn't deformed.
You and I'll have to start passive exercises.’
I knew exactly how I would do this and explained in some detail, finding Alec Reid equally fascinated.
Whoever was on duty would move gently any part of the affected limb, trying as they did so to persuade Jimbo that now the pain was gone he might — I did not dare to say ‘would’— be free soon to walk normally.
But I knew that it would be difficult to persuade Jimbo that he had to work at the exercises: yet if the treatment were to succeed, it had to be him — Jimbo  himself — who, in the end, would reopen the pathway of nerves between brain and muscle.
‘And that's out of my hands,’ I said.
All of this was in the hours ahead, for I was now to live through one of the toughest three days and nights I ever experienced.
I moved my pyjamas, spare underclothes, a couple of shirts and a few other necessaries from my bungalow and stayed in the hospital bed next to Jimbo's, snatching sleep and meals when Miss Sowerby took over.
When, that first night, she went to her own bungalow, I was left mostly on my own, though Alec came in early in the evening to lend a hand.
Alec Reid was wonderful — not only physically, carrying pans of hot water to the stove when necessary, but morally, in allowing me to treat a patient in such an unorthodox fashion.
I was dropping with fatigue — mainly because I could not sleep, even for two hours between treatments.
Subconsciously I was terrified of missing my two-hourly deadline.
I would dip blanket after blanket in boiling water, wring them out almost without realising that I was scalding myself, take off the old strips of saturated cloth, wrap the new ones round each leg and tuck them into the corners of affected muscles, but half the time not really knowing what I was doing.
Yet, despite the desperate fatigue and the fear that I might be making a fool of myself, I was seized with a curious elation that kept me going.
For there was no doubt about one thing — after only twenty-four hours the pain was ending.
The spasms had gone.
Earlier on there had been one or two screams, but no more.
And I knew from experience that in the ten to fourteen days during wastage of muscle tissue prior to an operation, a patient should normally suffer intense pain almost every hour of every one of those days.
It seemed to me that the hot compresses had not only prevented the pain, but had done so because there must be living matter there which was capable of being  alleviated by pain.
In other words, it wasn't the spasms that had ended and with it the pain, but the muscle wastage itself.
One of the vital things I had to do — and I was too tired to help him myself — was to keep Jimbo occupied.
As the pain decreased, his restlessness increased.
It was also essential that he believed he was being cured, because of the need he would face soon for what I can only call ‘self-help’.
I telephoned to the Union Jack Club asking for help, explaining the ‘miracle’ that seemed about to occur.
And Mrs Fawcett came rushing up to the hospital with the perfect solution: she lent me a battery-operated portable radio.
‘It doesn't have a long range,’ she said, ‘but it will get the dance music in Sanderstown.’
‘Mrs Fawcett, you're an angel.’
I think she actually blushed a little.
‘Tell me when you next want me to make a four at bridge, and if it's possible, I'll be there.’
Jimbo loved the radio.
He was stunned to find that if he turned a knob, music came out of the tiny speaker, and he never stopped playing with it.
On the third day, unshaven and too tired even to eat, I was examining Jimbo while Alec was in the middle of his sick parade.
Suddenly I cried out, ‘Alec: Come and see this.
Quick!
Before it disappears!’
He came running in from the dispensary, pulling up his trousers, still held up by his MCC tie, the end of his stethoscope bouncing off his fat tummy.
‘Look!’
I cried.
‘Look at that muscle tendon.
It's supposed to be dead, but it can't be because — look! the tendon is moving slightly, the muscle's quivering.
Just feel it.’
Very carefully, as though handling a precious object, Alec stroked the affected calf muscle, then took out his handkerchief, wiped his bald pate and said softly, ‘Laddie, it's a bloody miracle.’
Even better, the left leg was now lying flat on the bed in a more comfortable position.
One of the problems with polio  is that the spasms of pain often cause a patient to twist his limb involuntarily into a crippled position and it becomes locked there.
That is why surgery is needed to straighten it out as the muscle no longer responds.
But now Jimbo was lying on his back, with his left leg almost flat on the bed.
‘This makum better,’ he pointed to the radio, convinced that it was the radio — not the doctor — which was going to make him walk again!
At the end of the fourth day, after hours of gentle massage by Miss Sowerby and myself, I went to bed for a full night's sleep, Miss Sowerby taking over as ‘night nurse’.
I slept with only one dream, exulting in the thought that if I could do this, why shouldn't I one day try to do something to help Clare to walk more easily?
But Clare was ten thousand miles away, I was thinking as I woke up, while Toma made fresh coffee and cooked me a man-sized breakfast of local bacon-cum-ham and two of the island's tiny eggs.
Perhaps one day I would go back to London, and take up my career where I had left off.
The next day, after sick parade, I said to Alec, ‘Let's have a look at the right dropped foot.’
As he watched, I started to drag away the old door that had served us so well as foot-stopper.
‘Remember,’ I reminded him, ‘that his foot has only been held up by the pressure of that piece of wood.
There's no mattress underneath the ankle.’
Even Alec couldn't believe the transformation.
The ankle muscles were holding the foot in an almost normal position — oblivious to the fact that the joints had nothing to rest on, that this was a classic case of a boy who would normally have ended up with a club foot.
‘It's astonishing, that's for sure.’
Alec scratched his head, then examined the right ankle carefully.
‘There's only the slightest malfunction of the foot muscles,’ he agreed.
‘I'll put the restraining board back for a couple of days longer,’ I suggested.
‘Just so that we don't overtax young  Jimbo's powers of resistance.’
I rumpled his dark curly hair but gave him a firm ‘No’ when he asked, ‘If I play radio louder, me get better more quickly?’
‘Let's hope that's the end of any blanket-brewing,’ said Alec, in good humour.
‘I never realised what a sour stink wet blankets can make.
’ Patting me on the back, he added, ‘I'm proud of ye, Laddie.
And you've done me proud too.‘
‘We're on the way,’ I thanked him, ‘but we'll need all the boy's help in getting a permanent cure.’
Though I already felt confident of that.
Sure enough, after a week or so the boy's right ankle was responding to more treatment, and the left-leg calf muscles were quivering.
I knew we were winning the real battle — a permanent cure — after one particular moment I shall never forget.
I had been trying to produce in Jimbo the necessary mental awareness that the real cure — the reopening of the nerve pathways — lay in the end with him.
It was hard to explain to a youngster who was bright but not particularly well educated that I couldn't make a nerve work.
He had to do it himself.
Miss Sowerby — by now an enthusiastic convert — and I had taken turns at massaging the damaged calf muscles, and suddenly I said to him, ‘Jimbo, just imagine it's you that's making the muscles move.’
I used the word ‘move’ because I didn't think he would understand ‘quiver’.
He smiled, the dulled eyes of pain now sparkling with the happiness of being alive, and I added, ‘Go on!
You bloody lazy!
Me fed up, doing the work.
You do it.’
It was a magical moment.
I suddenly felt, under my hands, a few quivers of the muscle.
I had done nothing.
Jimbo himself had made the one effort that only a patient can make.
I knew from that moment that it was only a question of time — and perseverance on his part — before he would be completely cured.
I looked up in triumph — to witness an astonishing sight.
The dour, austere Miss Sowerby was wiping her eyes with a  handkerchief she had tucked under a sleeve.
She was crying gently — tears of happiness.
‘Miss Sowerby!’
I put an arm over her bony shoulder, and she didn't draw back.
‘I know how you feel.
It's wonderful.’
‘A miracle.’
‘Did your father believe in miracles?’
I asked, in fact to stop the flow of tears, to hide any embarrassment she might feel.
‘Yes, he did.
He was a good, upright missionary, but like so many Victorians, so stern.’
She sighed and composed herself.
‘And as a little girl,’ the faintest shadow of a smile touched her face, ‘I was always naughty and disobedient, and so, under Father's guidance, I learned to control myself — all my emotions — for the greater good of serving the Lord.
And now I've given way to my emotions when I swore to my father I never would.
I'm so ashamed.’
‘Nonsense.
It's a good thing to let yourself go,’ I said cheerfully.
‘This is a great occasion, and it would never have been possible without your help.
You shouldn't be so strict with yourself.
People can do great good in the world and still smile.
May I ask you a question — as a doctor to his invaluable assistant?’
She sniffed, hesitated and then mumbled apprehensively, ‘I suppose so.’
‘Have you ever been in love?’
With a blush she asked, ‘With — a man?’
I nodded.
‘Never!’ she cried.
‘And I will never allow such a thing to happen.’
‘And another question — from your doctor.
How old are you, Miss Sowerby?’
I was thinking in terms of between thirty-five and forty-five.
It was impossible to be more precise than that.
She blushed again, and said, ‘I don't think —‘
‘Well, as a doctor to his most trusted assistant —’ I smiled.
Finally, after what was obviously some soul-searching, she said in a barely audible whisper, ‘Twenty-nine.’
Astonished, I cried, ‘Miss Sowerby, you ought to be ashamed of yourself, masquerading under false pretences.
Twenty-nine indeed!
You're little more than a girl.
Why do you try to look so old?’
‘I feel old,’ she said and, the tears dried, she walked away.