

EDITORIAL
Standing astride the Cat's Back ridge in the Black Mountains with valleys on three sides it's impossible for your spirits not to soar with the buzzards flying high overhead.
I say astride, because this ridge, officially called Black Hill but known as the Cat's Back by the locals, is truly a razorback, narrowing to a foot or so wide in places.
Everyone will have their favourite ridge walk, and that's one of mine.
It really is splendid, an easy walk with just a short ascent to reach the beginning of the ridge.
From here you can reach Hay Bluff overlooking the Welsh border town of Hay-on-Wye, some five miles further on.
This month we asked Paul Traynor to choose some of his favourite ridge walks around the country — a hard task as there are so many wonderful walks to choose from.
You can read his selection on page 14.
If none of those grab your fancy, there are plenty of other stomping good walks in this month's issue of Outdoor Action .
On page 18 we've got Part Two of Paul Buttle's exclusively designed circuit of the Lakes, while on page 51 there's our new and improved Out and About section, with no fewer than 14 great walks from all over the country.
Those of us who are able-bodied have so many choices about where to go, what views we'd like to enjoy, how hard we want to make our bodies work.
Not everyone is so lucky.
Reading Roger Davis' account on page 42 is quite humbling.
Roger was a keen walker, cyclist and backpacker before a sleepy driver knocked him off his bike and confined him to a wheelchair for the rest of his life.
Now when he wants go get outdoors he finds so many ways barred to him.
Obviously he's never going to get his chair up serious hills on his own, but is it too much to ask for the planners of country parks and the like to consider less able users when planning level routes such as nature trails?
Read his story and see what you think.
If you're into flora and fauna, Richard Marpole tells you what to look out for in the countryside this month on page 36, while adventurers and armchair travellers alike can enjoy a walking trip to the Grand Canyon on page 27.
So all in all there's plenty to read in this month's Outdoor Action, with plenty of walking routes, a test on dome tents, our comprehensive rucksack gear guide and plenty of other outdoor pursuits.
Happy reading!
EDITOR 
WHAT'S ON
OUTDOOR EVENTS
If something's going on your neck of the woods, we want to hear about it.
Send your event details two months in advance to Vanessa Thompson, Outdoor Action,.
12 MILE HIKE IN NORTH YORKSHIRE
August 23.
Hike the open moorland above Helmsley on this 12 mile route which promises spectacular views and a chance to see the odd grouse or two.
The walk is organised by the North York Moors National Park and starts at 10am from Newgate Bank car park (GR 563890).
The walk is expected to last all day so bring a packed lunch.
The walk costs £1.50 for adults and 50p for children, OAPs and the unemployed.
For more information contact:.
WINDERMERE WATER WEEK
August 10–16.
Enjoy a week of water-based activities in the beautiful setting of Lake Windermere in the Lake District.
Events and activities throughout the week will be aimed at enjoying watersports and highlighting safety and conservation issues.
There will be introductory sessions to dinghy sailing, windsurfing and canoeing — booking is essential for these events, so call .
Water safety demonstrations will also take place and there will be a chance to learn first aid and resuscitation techniques as well as enjoying lake cruises and illustrated talks.
For more information contact:.
WALK IN SNOWDONIA
Mondays August 3, 10, 17, 24.
Enjoy an exhilarating walk in the lesser known areas of Snowdonia on this day event organised by the national park.
The walk will take you among the lakes and hills of the craggy countryside around Capel Curig.
For the first four Mondays in the month a walk will set off at 10.30am from Plas y Brenin National Mountain Centre (GR 1718579).
The walk costs £2.50 for adults, £1.50 for senior citizens and 50p for children.
Bring a packed lunch, warm clothing and waterproofs and wear stout footwear.
For more information contact:.
CONSERVATION IN DUMFRIES AND GALLOWAY
August 19–29.
Enjoy a holiday with a difference on this Action Break organised by the Scottish Conservation Projects group.
The conservation work will focus on maintaining and upgrading footpaths in the Dumfries and Galloway region.
An experienced leader will give training in the necessary skills.
Volunteers should be aged between 16 to 71.
Accommodation is basic, possibly a field centre, small cottage or village hall and everyone takes turns to prepare meals.
Food is provided.
Each volunteer pays £4 per day, £3 if retired, unemployed or a student.
For more information on this and other SCP Action Breaks contact:.
CYCLE RIDE IN NOTTS
August 2.
Guided bike ride exploring the ‘flat lands’ south of the River Trent between Newark and Aslockton.
The route is along quiet country lanes and points of interest along the way include a Civil War battle site, a redundant windmill and a 13th century church.
The ride is organised by Nottinghamshire County Leisure Services.
For more information contact:.
AUGUST DIARY DATES
1
Energetic mountain bike safari around Grizedale organised by Lake District National Park.
Bring lunch and your bike.
Bookings only.
Contact:
1
Open day at Spencer Road Wetlands organised by Sutton Conservation Group in Surrey.
10.30am to 1pm.
Contact 
1
Three mile walk to McCartney's Cave on Thrunton Edge.
Involves a steep scramble.
Dogs on leads permitted.
Starts 2pm from Thrunton Woods car park (GR NU 086 100)..
2
Day course in map and compass skills at Sedburgh organised by Yorkshire Dales National Park.
Indoor and outdoor work.
10.30am to 4.30pm. £2.50.
Contact:.
4
Learn to canoe from 1pm to 4pm in the North York Moors National Park.
Over 10s only.
£6.50.
Meet North York Moors Adventure Centre (Park House, Ingleby Cross).
Contact:.
5
Have a go at orienteering in Calderdale.
Starts 6pm from Jerusalem Farm.
Free.
Contact:.
15
Free guided walk to Howtown via Moor Divock organised by Lake District National Park.
Starts 10.30am from Pooley Bridge Information Centre.
Lasts six hours.
Contact:.
16
Afternoon Ridgeway walk through a Victorian Estate on the edge of the Downs.
Starts 1.30pm on the Ridgeway where it crosses B4494 Wantage — Newbury road.
(GR SU 419842).
Contact .
19 Three hour ridge walk in Nottinghamshire to Bramcote and Stapleford.
Starts 2pm from Bramcote Hills car park, Junction of Ilkeston Road and Coventry Lane, Stapleford, Nottingham.
Contact;.
21–22
Edmundbyers youth hostel multi-activity weekend in County Durham organised by Wakefield YHA group.
Activities include mountain biking, canoeing, climbing or pony trekking. £55 including meals, activities and instruction.
Contact;.
23
Coast path walk in Exmoor.
Starts 2pm for three hours from Hunter's Inn.
(GR SS 655 481).
Contact;.
28
Wildflower walk in the North York Moors, 2pm from the Moors Centre, Danby, Whitby.
Contact;.
30
Two hour walk in the Breamish valley of Northumberland, led by Shaun Hackett.
Starts 10.30am from Ingram Bridge car park.
(GR NU 0171640).
Contact:.
30
Walk the White Cliffs of Dover.
Starts 11.15am from Folkestone Central Station.
Returns by train from Dover Priory station.
Six miles.
Dogs on leads.
Contact:.
LETTERS & QUERIES
Got any problems?
Something you want to get off your chest?
Anything going on in the outdoors which interests, irritates or simply makes you laugh?
If so I'd like to hear from you.
I'll do my best to answer any questions on the outdoors and to let you have your say, so there's no time to waste — get scribbling now.
DORSET HEATH UNDER THREAT
This month's prize-winning letter writer is Andy Glaister of Bournemouth
I'm worried about the future of one of the areas I enjoy walking in most — Studland Heath.
This ancient heathland, which is an ornithologist's paradise, is undeveloped, quiet, clean and astoundingly beautiful.
The easiest way to reach the area is by chain ferry from Sandbanks at Poole.
The ferry can only carry a limited number of cars per hours.
Although this can lead to frustration for car drivers — especially in the summer when large queues build up — it helps limit the environmental damage to this very special area.
However, this is all due to change with the proposed introduction of a new chain ferry which will be able to carry twice the number of cars.
The quiet road on the heath has already been coarsely widened on both sides to form a half mile long car park with Pay and Display ticket machines.
With the building of this new road and planned ferry we are undoubtedly destroying the very thing that makes this area so special.
ABSEILING FEARS
I was a trifle concerned to see abseiling featured in the first section of your A–Z of Outdoor Activities supplement.
At the moment abseiling seems to be something of a craze, however I'd like to remind people that its primary function is as an integral part of mountaineering.
Abseiling is the most dangerous single thing mountaineers do and many of the world's greatest climbers have been killed abseiling.
So for those who are tempted to treat it as a game, please remember that it's not.,
FIRM ON ACCESS
I wouldn't want readers to think I've gone soft on freedom to roam following a comment I made in July's Scottish News.
I said walkers should make a courtesy check with estates when doing a specific trek in Wester Ross, but I was only referring to the peak of the stalking period — mid-August to mid October — and not the whole year.,
FREE GIFT
To help you beat the irritation of bites and stings this summer, we have a 100 bottles of Stingose to give away.
This versatile pump spray treats stings from insects, plantlife and marine animals.
To receive one free just send your name and address on a postcard to ,.
Q
I am planning to travel independently next year to India, Pakistan, Nepal and China.
My aim is to make a photographic record of these countries before the developing world we live in changes them forever.
However I am not sure where I can obtain information about the relevant countries, especially their laws and regulations concerning visitors.
Please could you help?,
A
Get hold of a decent guidebook for each of the countries concerned.
If you don't want to go to the expense of buying them, check out the travel section at your local library.
The Lonely Planet guides are particularly useful for independent travellers.
The books give all the insider know-how for staying and getting around a country on a shoestring budget.
Entry and visa regulations are particular to individual countries, so for details contact their embassies in this country.
When buying your plane tickets it's also worth asking for information relevant to your trip — many travel agencies produce fact sheets on the foreign destinations they go to.
Bon voyage!
Q
I was horrified to find a notice at the bottom of Ben More stating No Dogs Allowed.
Our dog is our constant walking companion and is always kept on a lead.
I would like to know if the notice was legal and if there are any other Munros or Corbetts which display the sign.,
A
The law says that a dog doesn't have to be on a lead but it does have to be under control.
The reason the farmer at Ben More has put up the sign you talk about is that he has been particularly troubled by dog owners who can't control their animals.
His land is crossed by the most popular route up Ben More and so this farmer does tend to suffer more than usual from disruptive behaviour from dogs.
And we should have sympathy with him for the sight of a strange dog — whether on a lead or not — can be enough to make sheep run and if pregnant they can miscarry.
There are other signs in the Corbetts and Munros where farmers suffer from a high level of disturbance.
And it should be noted that a farmer is entitled to shoot a dog if he or she thinks harm is going to be caused to livestock.
HELP NEEDED FOR DISSERTATION
As a mature student studying for a degree in Sport and Recreation studies, I am undertaking research into the Staffordshire Way.
I would be grateful if any of your readers who have walked all or part of the Staffordshire Way could write to me.
Details of how far they walked, how long it took them, when this was done and what sort of overnight accommodation they used, would be relevant to my research.
I would also be interested to know what other paths  they had walked and what their perceptions were of these compared to the Staffordshire Way.
All letters would be greatly appreciated to assist me with my dissertation.
Please send them to me,,.
WIN A LOWE DAYSACK
Each month the writer of the best letter published wins this super Lowe Alpine Walkabout 25 daysack
SCOTTISH NEWS
Rennie McOwan has been hillwalking in Scotland for over 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors
Wild island
The SNH launch in the Western Isles turned out to be a spectacular event.
Over a period of five days teams of people walked, ran, cycled, rode, paddled and sailed from Inverness to the Western Isles, taking with them a marble stone — a 1,200 year old saintly relic of St Ronan.
The stone is thought to have originally been taken from the sacred island of Iona to the island of North Rona where it formed part of the church altar.
On its new journey it was taken in turn by bike, canoe, sail boat, runners, riders, cyclists and walkers to the north-west, on to Skye and ultimately to Ness in Lewis, where the islanders have long had links with North Rona.
North Rona is one of Scotland's most remote islands, lying 30 miles north of the Butt of Lewis in the Outer Hebrides and 30 miles northwest of Cape Wrath in Sutherland.
It was once a retreat for the monks of the Celtic Church.
A few crofting families clung on there until the 19th century but the island is now uninhabited.
For people who collect islands in the same way others do Munros, North Rona is a tantalising target.
The tiny island is now a National Nature Reserve, famous for seabirds and seals.
There is no natural landing place, the seas are fierce, and permission to land is only given to groups who are have a suitable boat, and who are well provisioned, capable, and with a proven interest in an outdoor topic.
GREEN ALGAE POLLUTES LOCH LEVEN
Green algae in Lock Leven proves a timely reminder of the problems facing Scottish Natural Heritage at their south-eastern regional launch
The new government advisory agency, Scottish Natural Heritage, recently invited me to help judge a painting competition for schools.
The contest was judged at the fete-style launch of the South East region held at Kinross, on the shores of Loch Leven.
The standard of the exhibition work by primary school pupils on the theme of National Heritage was very high.
It's good to see that so many children are becoming literate in the ways of the countryside and gaining knowledge of their responsibility for the planet.
Ironically, one of the problems facing the new agency was, literally, on the doorstep.
The waters of Lock Leven, site of an RSPB reserve and one of the most important sites of its kind in Britain, were bright green with floating algae.
Some of the events on the loch had to be cancelled as a result.
The reasons for the algae's growth are complex.
Contributing factors include a very dry, hot summer which helps the algae to flourish, along with the residue of pesticides from farms and effluent from factories which, although greatly improved in modern times and now controlled, have left a residue on the loch bottom which still caused problems.
It was a startling picture of two sides of a coin — a lively launch of an area of SNH by pleasant and caring people, and the inheritance of a mess created by the lack of knowledge and concern of past generations.
Ongoing saga
It is sad to see that conservation bodies seem to have halted their attempts to purchase the key Cairngorms estate of Mar Lodge.
The problem is both simple and complex: the lack of sufficient funds.
Although people are tight lipped about the reasons for the collapse of negotiations, there were clearly bureaucratic difficulties with so many conservation organisations being involved, along with government departments, SNH and even, according to reports, Prince Charles.
One can only pray for an owner with an enlightened view on conservation and access issues.
Blaven path repair
What good news it is that SNH have given a £7,000 grant for repair work on the path to Blaven, one of the most spectacular mountains in the Skye Cuillin.
The Scottish Mountaineering Trust has also contributed and work will be carried out by Pathcraft Ltd.
Visitor problems
The Scotsman newspaper has reported that the National Trust for Scotland has decided to stop publicising three venues because increasing visitor pressure there was harming either the building fabric or the ground.
The sites are Ben Lawers in Tayside, St Abbs Nature Reserve in Lothian and Craigievar Castle in Grampian Region.
The fact that NTS have deliberately cut publicity about Ben Lawers is not new and has been reported many times.
The main problem there is that a visitor centre was erected which, far from solving the access and erosion problems, has created even greater ones.
In my view the problems will only be solved by the centre's removal.
It also proves that the Trust's mountaineering benefactor, the late Percy Unna, was right when in his enlightened ‘Rules’ he said such structures should not be built on mountain properties.
The St Abbs decision is no surprise.
I was there recently and the spectacular cliffs are a wonderful place to see seabirds from close up, but the paths were definitely showing signs of erosion.
Craigievar Castle too has special problems in that it is a tower house and can only take a limited number of visitors at any time.
This sensitivity to the effects of publicity is to be welcomed.
Some years ago NTS members who suggested such a tack were ridiculed for their pains.
Access debate
Management consultant, writer and outstanding mountaineer Alan Blackshaw has been appointed chair of an SNH ‘task force’ set up to discuss the sensitive issue of public access in Scotland.
A preparatory public consultation paper will be issued this autumn and a more fundamental public discussion paper will be distributed next spring.
Access and freedom-to-roam are issues dear to the heart of most Scots, but it is not just boots and shoes that are involved nowadays, but canoes, windsurfers, paragliders, boats of all kinds, and bikes.
Alan has a thorny task and deserves all help.
OUTDOOR NEWS
NEWS IN BRIEF 
Pennine Way
Anyone attempting to walk the Penning Way should equip themselves with a new free leaflet from the Countryside Commission.
It contains practical hints on walking the route, a list of key addresses for information points and explains the work being done to restore eroded stretches along the trail.
The leaflet is obtainable by post from Countryside Commission Publications,.
No to windfarms
Windfarms should not be allowed in the Peak District National Park according to a consultative document.
The latest version of the Park's Structure Plan, which sets out the basic strategy of the control of development in the park for the next 10–15 years, states that the visual impact of windfarms outweighs the net benefit to global conservation.
Cash for conservation
English Nature is making available £250,000 for grants aimed at encouraging local community groups to become involved in nature conservation projects in towns and cities.
This is the continuation of last year's Community Action for Wildlife grants scheme.
For further information contact:.
Walk opens
The Colne Valley Way running from Staines on the River Thames to the Grand Union Canal at Cowley has been officially opened.
The ten mile route uses a variety of public footpaths, bridleways and pavements through Horton, Colnbrook and Iver.
Over 40 new signposts and waymarkers have been installed, new stiles have been constructed and old ones improved.
For a copy of the Colne Valley Way leaflet send an A4 sae to ,.
Changing faces
Well known broadcaster, author and journalist Jonathan Dimbleby has been appointed the new President of the Council for the Protection of Rural England.
He replaces film producer David Putnam who is standing down after seven years in the position.
GOOD TURN OUT FOR RAMBLERS
Environment Minister Michael Howard joined thousands of people who participated in one of the 150 walk events organised throughout the country by the Ramblers' Association for Family Rambling Day.
Michael Howard, along with his wife and son, took part with 50 others in an organised five mile walk in Ashford, Kent.
The focus of this year's Family Rambling Day — now in its sixth year — was to improve young people's map and compass skills.
At each event there was an experienced rambler or Ordnance Survey staff member to help interested youngsters with route finding.
Youngsters could also enter a map drawing competition and have the chance to win a Young Rambler's Adventure Kit of boots, rucksack and waterproofs.
The emphasis on map and compass skills comes in the wake of a near disaster last August when a group of 14 children and their young leader were airlifted to safety after being lost for two days east of Dalwhinnie in the Highlands.
They were wearing only tracksuits and trainers and had no tents, maps, compasses or food.
John Leonard of Ordnance Survey said ‘Learning to use a map and compass is as essential to children as learning to swim.
It gives them both safety and independence.’
WALKERS CLIMB FOR THE WORLD
This year's Climb for the World weekend in early June dawned misty and rainy but thousands of walkers and climbers were not to be put off.
In the Peak District and Northumberland National Parks many people held overnight vigils on appointed summits on the Friday and Saturday nights, while others walked to meet them on the summit.
Some simply made a private gesture and went on a walk of their choice.
All participants were demonstrating their commitment to the philosophy of Climb for the World — One World, One Family, One Nature.
The organisers hope that the event will have raised £25,000 for charitable projects at home and in the developing world.
Founder Edwin Drummond had hoped to double this figure and confessed to disappointment at the response.
‘Given there are some 100,000 climbers in the UK and only 100 or so took part, I can't help but think that a tremendous message of indifference.
It's only thanks to the efforts of walkers that we've got so far.’
Northumberland National Park were pleased at the response and felt it was a very worthwhile event, while in the Peak District 17 schools took part.
Meanwhile in Rio de Janeiro as world leaders met at the Earth Summit, Drummond and colleague Tess Burrows climbed Sugarloaf Mountain to gain publicity for Climb for the World and to highlight the plight of the Rio street children.
READERS WIN GREAT GEAR PRIZES
Kath Bowen of Ystrad Mynach and E Crabbe of Andover, it's your lucky day.
You've each won the first prize in our June competition of a Rohan Shearwater Gore-Tex jacket and pair of the company's famous walking trousers, Rohan bags.
The six runners up will soon be kitted out with a Rohan Gobi Wear outfit consisting of a lightweight breathable jacket and a pair of lightweight active trousers.
They are  .
If fate wasn't going your way don't despair.
Turn to page 31 to find out how you could win a fantastic Phoenix tent, waterproof jacket, or fleece jacket.
A NEW WAY TO WALK
Three outdoor enthusiasts have walked and cycled across the Pennines and through Europe to Istanbul in an effort to promote the proposed Trans-Pennine Way and send greetings of goodwill from 30 local authorities to European mayors.
Scheduled to open in 1996, the Trans-Pennine Way will cover 330 miles (599kms) of paths from Liverpool to Hornsea — about 186 miles (300kms) are already developed.
Along the British leg of the journey Richard Groom, Richard Lang Burns and Shaun Williamson collected signatures from mayors and other civic dignitaries for a scroll sending a message of goodwill from the people of England to the other European countries.
In mainland England the trio spent four weeks travelling from Holland through to Istanbul in Turkey, via countries including Germany and Bulgaria.
Covering between 25–50 miles a day, the trio collected further signatures for the scroll sending messages of goodwill back to the UK.
Two of the trio who walked and cycled to promote the Trans Pennine Way
MORE CYCLE ROUTES
Mountain bikers have been given greater access to Lancashire's most impressive countryside with new routes created by the West Pennine Moors Countryside Service.
After 12 years of negotiation the half mile footpath from Jepsons Gate to Alance Bridge, Anglezarke has been upgraded to bridleway status — this means that both cyclists and horse riders may use it.
The trail is waymarked with blue arrows.
A concessionary one mile bridleway — where use is granted by the landowner — has been opened across the northwestern embankment of Yarrow Reservoir to link in with an existing bridleway.
And more cycling routes have been opened in Roddlesworth Woods and by Roddlesworth Reservoirs near Tockholes.
North West Water have two mountain bike leaflets to the area.
They cost 30p each from the Great House Barn Information Centre at Rivington.
•A new 11 mile cycle route through Great Glen, initiated by Forest Enterprise, gives cyclists an alternative to the busy A82 Fort William to Inverness Road.
•Oxfordshire Council has opened the Judges Ride, a 16 mile circular route for mountain bikers and horse riders through the Chiltern countryside.
News from the National Parks
Bypass plans dropped
Plans to build a bypass around Ambleside in the Lake District have finally been dropped by Cumbria County Council.
Strong public pressure opposed to the scheme and lack of funds led to the decision.
The County Council plans to concentrate on traffic management measures instead.
Coach ban
A limited ban on coaches parking in the village of Grasmere in the Lake District might be imposed to ease congestion.
It was proposed at a meeting of the Lake District Board that the coaches use the car park — which would have to be enlarged — on the outskirts of the village.
The Board narrowly decided that the environmental benefits to the centre of the village outweighed the disadvantages of a larger car park.
Sheep in need
Sheep are being introduced on the coastal slopes around Shrinkle Haven Youth Hostel to stop encroaching scrub and bracken further smothering the traditional vegetation of the area and damaging feeding grounds for coastal birds.
This move follows the successful use of sheep to help the grassland habitat at Carew Castle.
Development plans rejected
A proposal to develop an historic mill in the Peak District into a large scale tourism complex was dismissed by an inspector following a public enquiry.
The inspector said the conversion of Litton Mill into 55 new timeshare units would cause considerable adverse effects to the mill buildings and to the surrounding area.
A spokesperson for the Council for National Parks said ‘This gives us the clear message that conversion of derelict buildings for tourism developments in national parks should be sensitive to the quality of the environment.’
Question over cycle access
Proposed cycle access to the whole of the Taff Trail in Wales is currently being discussed by the Brecon Beacons National Park Authority.
The completed trail will be formally opened next July.
While cyclists can currently travel from Merthyr to Talybont-on-Usk using a combination of disused railway lines, forestry tracks and minor roads, the stretch between Talybont and Brecon is along an unsuitable canal towpath.
The only other option for cyclists is a busy B road which is unsafe for family cycling.
The park authority say that the upgrading of the towpath for cyclists could have an adverse  effect on the landscape and ecology of the area and be in conflict with other towpath users.
Hang gliders cause problems
Hang gliders in the Bradwell Edge area of the Peak District are causing growing concern among local residents.
Problems include unauthorised landing of hang gliders, parking on Bradwell Edge and the surrounding villages, erosion and the effect on wildlife in the take-off areas.
The Peak Park Board can either take enforcement action or establish an effective management system.
News supplied by the Council for National Parks
BIRD SITES WIN SPECIAL PROTECTION
Four important birdlife areas in the north-west of Wales have been designated as Special Protection Areas,(SPAs), by the Welsh Office.
The Glannau Aberdaron and Ynys Enlli SPA, including part of the coast of the Llyn Peninsula and Bardsey Island, is important for breeding Manx shearwater and choughs.
Anglesey SPA will protect tern colonies and Glannau Ynys Gybi SPA, on the western side of Holy Island, is important for its seabirds and choughs, while Traeth Lafan SPA on Conwy Bay is home to large numbers of wintering waders.
Under the European Community Wild Birds Directive SPA designation requires the Government to guarantee the area's future protection and to try to prevent damage to the habitats within it.
Stuart Housden of the RSPB said ‘We hare pleased that these areas have finally been designated, giving protection to their important birds.
However there are nearly 200 equally important areas around the UK which are in urgent need of protection and we look forward to more SPA designations in the near future.’
•Starlings, house sparrows and blue tits are the three commonest birds found in the gardens in the UK according to a survey published by the Young Ornithologists Club.
RIDGE WALKING
ridge WAYS
Nature's natural highways offer walkers a rollercoaster ride through some of Britain's most stunning countryside.
Paul Traynor picks five of the best
Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking and backpacking at home
Whether broad whalebacks or jagged knife-edges, ridges rarely fail to put a spring in the step.
In serious mountains that spring might be influenced by the thrill of being at high altitude, while in lower terrain the jauntiness of stride may reflect the rollercoaster of broad panoramas and changing perspectives.
Wherever you are, progress seems more worthwhile and rewarding when you feel, literally, on top of things.
After a long approach slog, reaching the crest of a ridge usually means you're getting somewhere at last.
You may have a good deal of ups and downs and hard work ahead of you, but sweating on a ridge is, in my opinion, far preferable to plodding up a hillside or toiling along a zig-zag path to a top.
Ridges — in the loose sense of being high ground connecting summits — are natural highways and the clearest and most obvious way of making upland progress.
Climbers' eyes tend to be drawn to the cleanest and most direct route up a rock face, while in a similar way walkers piece together peaks and ridges to create their own ‘direct’ routes — albeit (usually) on a more horizontal plane.
In terms of energy they're often the most effective way of getting around, maximising the return on height gained.
Hence the huge number of popular circuits, ‘rounds’ and ‘horseshoes’awaiting those who have progressed from the straight up and down, I've climbed another one, style of peak-bagging.
Natural highways they may be, but while some ridges are broader than a  motorway, others resemble a tricky combination of obstacle course and tightrope walk.
And as with tarmac highways, weekends and Bank Holidays can bring heavy traffic on the best known routes.
As will travelling by car there is also the risk of breakdown and accident.
When choosing a route consider the capabilities and limitations of all your party to ensure you don't tackle a ridge too far.
Peak District
The name ‘Shivering Mountain’ sounds like it should refer to some awesome peak in the Himalayas — in fact it applies to Mam Tor, standing at a modest 1,696ft but offering a first class viewpoint on this fine Derbyshire circuit.
The ‘Shivering Mountain’ derives its name from being a distinctly unstable lump of land, given to landslips.
This susceptibility led to the closure of the main road at its base.
Mam Tor is the first objective on the walk along the ridge which separates the Hope and Edale valleys.
Castleton makes a suitable base and heading west towards the ridge, you may be tempted to pause at the Speedwell, Treak Cliff and Blue John caverns.
The stepped path to Mam Tor's summit, topped by an Iron Age hill fort, is an indication of the popularity of the hill — there's also a superb view north over the Vale of Edale to the Kinder Plateau.
From here the ridge path dips to Hollins Cross, climbs sharply up Barker Bank, continues along Back Tor to the final ascent of Lose Hill, another splendid viewpoint, which has a summit plate listing surrounding features.
The path is deeply etched all the way along the ridge, but walkers need not look too guiltily at their boots — like many others in the area, the path was formerly a packhorse route and horses are not noted for their ecological delicacy.
From Lose Hill, after descending the long southeastern ridge, the walker has a choice.
The day could be easily extended to take in another popular viewpoint top — Win Hill to the east across the railway line.
Or, with the ridge proper complete, you may prefer to return to Castleton via the path which passes Losehill Farm.
Previous page: north-east ridge of Y Cribyn with a view westwards to northern flank of Pen y Fan, Brecon Beacons.
Below: ascent from Bwlch Dros-bern onto the plateau of Mynydd Tal-Y-Mignedd in Snowdonia.
Malvern Hills
It's not very high, it's nowhere near anything like mountain country, and you'd have to work pretty hard to inject risk or danger into the walk, yet the narrow, ten mile ridge of the Malvern Hills, provides a cracking day out, out of all proportion to the vital statistics.
The highest point is a mere 1,394ft at Worcestershire Beacon, and the ridge averages only between 950ft and 1,200ft.
But it's the way the hills rise so sharply from the plain between Hereford and Worcester that exaggerates their impact — and provides sensational views.
On a clear day — and they're not that uncommon — the panoramas may take in up to 15 counties.
A good path follows the full length of the summit ridge, and it is most conveniently gained by starting at the spa town of Great Malvern, towards the northern end of the range.
North Hill is soon reached, then Worcestershire Beacon, but it is by no means all downhill from there.
On the undulating ridge there is a sharp descent — through Wyche Cutting — but this is followed by a fair climb to Herefordshire Beacon.
Many of those who approached the walk with a hint of condescension have been known to regret it at about this stage.
Further south and the hills are lower and gentler — how far you continue is up to you.
There are a couple of hills beyond the A438 if you fancy, but the road is a convenient enough place to call it quits.
Clearly the easily accessible position of the Malverns near big population centres make them a popular target for picnickers and day trippers, not to mention walkers.
This being the case, summer weekends are not the best time to visit.
Autumn has the benefit of flaming natural colours, but an outing on a sharp winter's day, with perhaps a smattering of snow is perfect.
On days like this you'll only hear the sound of frost crunching, not sandwich munching.
Brecon Beacons
Ridge rovers arriving in South Wales for the first time probably have firm plans to tackle the splendid routes in the Black Mountains and, of course, the classic escarpment topped by Pen y Fan in the Brecon Beacons.
They'd be well advised to add a trip further west to tackle the stunning scarps of  Carmarthen Fan, rising austerely above two solitary lakes.
Gone are the days when you were likely to be alone on the rim path, but if the five miles escarpment is included as part of a longer circuit of the vast moorland, walkers seeking solitude will find their fair share — and a good test of their navigation skills.
From the A4067, a few hundred yards north of the Dan yr Ogof show caves, you make your way, initially quite steeply, to a clear path on the rim of Fan Hir.
Heading along the well-trodden path a tarn, Llyn y Fan fawr, lies below, while to the east the distinctive summits of the Brecon Beacons loom.
From there the path falls and rises to reach the dramatic cliffs of Bannau Sir Gaer above Llyn y Fan fach.
Head west to reach the head of a stream, Twrch Fechan, where the idea is to pick up a right of way travelling south-east to return to the walk starting point.
The path is clear in places, indistinct in others.
This is truly wild country dotted with rocky outcrops and, even on a clear day, occasional compass checks are reassuring.
And in misty conditions following a bearing will prove more reliable than path traces.
If the thought of a lengthy moorland return is unappealing, an alternative way to get to the best of the escarpment in a shorter time is to start from a parking area near a prominent standing stone on the unclassified road to Trecastle.
Llyn y Fan fawr may be easily reached and from its southern end a very clear path, known as the Staircase, climbs to reach the Bwlch y Giedd pass — the ridge is now all yours.
Snowdonia
The pull of mountains which top the magic 3,000ft mark can be hard to resist.
But size isn't everything, as they say, and great days can be had by occasionally turning your back on the Carnedds, Glyders and Snowdon itself.
A superb outing of this kind can be had on the long Nantlle ridge — comprising six miles and six mountains of excellent high-level walking.
If a two-car transport system can't be set up, a double traverse should not be too taxing, leaving the car at the starting point village of Rhydd Ddu on the A4085.
The day starts with a bang — the steep climb to Y Garn (2,080ft)— after this you'll probably be glad to pause a while, enjoy the view of the day ahead and have the chance to get your breath back.
From there the ridge unfolds over Mynydd Drws Y Coed (2,281ft), Trum y Ddysgl (2,329ft) and Mynydd Tal y Mignedd (2,148ft).
There are sensational drops to concentrate the mind, some straightforward scrambles to add spice and great views towards Anglesey and back over the Snowdon massif.
An unpleasant descent to the col Bwlch Dros Bern presents you with a somewhat intimidating view of the next summit — Craig Cwm Silyn (2,408ft).
Progress looks tricky but is deceptive and you shouldn't encounter any problems.
The final summit, Garnedd Goch (2,302ft), is also easily achieved.
Now all you have to do is retrace your steps.
Unstable east face of Mam Tor with view over the Hope Valley towards the pyramid of Losehill Pike in the Peak District.
Scotland
Picking a route from the walking riches of Scotland is always somewhat arbitrary — but needs must and a traverse of the Five Sisters of Kintail will certainly pass muster as a first-rate choice.
Dominating Glen Shiel is the Western Highlands, the steep, shapely mountains are a popular hillwalkers' target — a long, demanding route, worthy of some respect.
Altogether some 10,000ft of ascent and descent are needed, often steep, rocky and energetic, so only fit, capable and committed walkers should attempt this route.
A plus point is that the National Trust for Scotland own the 15,000 acres of Kintail so there are no access complications or restrictions.
The recommended way to tackle the Sisters is from south-east to north-west, starting near the site of the Battle of the Bridge of Shiel, a Jacobite defeat in the ill-fated rising of 1719.
Spanish troops were involved, hence the name of the mountain above the site, Sgurr nan Spainteach, Peak of the Spaniards,(3,247ft).
This is not one of the five Sisters, but is so closely related that its inclusion makes sense.
The first of the Sisters proper is Sgurr na Ciste Duibhe (3,368ft), followed by Sgurr na Carnach (3,286ft).
Atop a steep series of zig-zags the highest and most impressive peak, Sgurr Fhuaran (3,503ft), is now reached.
Another steep descent leads on to grassy col and then yet more superb ridge walking, narrow and exposed, over Sgurr nan Saighead (3,047ft).
By now your legs should be dropping hints about their preferences and if tiredness really has set in, the last top, Sgurr na Moraich, can be avoided by descending to the glen from the final col.
Regardless of the shape you're in at the finish, only a glutton for punishment will relish the long haul back down the road to the car.
Wastwater — a lake not to be missed.
WALKING THE LAKES
Lakeland Circuit
In this second of his circuit around the Lake District, Paul Buttle outlines a further three days of great walking.
The circuit takes 12 days in total and can be walked in sections of two days or more, on high or low level alternative routes.
DAY 5
BUTTERMERE TO ENNERDALE (optional)
The main route follows another classic ridge walk across the Buttermere Fells, Red Pike, High Stile and High Crag where there are impressive views over Buttermere.
After High Crag there is a steep, badly eroded descent to Scarth Gap from where it would be easy enough to descend down into Ennerdale.
However this would make the day rather short.
You should have enough energy to ascend from Scarth Gap onto Haystacks which is a jumble of rocky knolls, tarns and heather, so loved by Wainwright — in fact it is here that his ashes are now scattered.
A mile to the south-east of the summit another path leads down to Ennerdale along the side of Loft Beck.
However, you should have enough energy left to include Lakeland's noblest summit in this day's walk — Great Gable (1.5 miles).
This would nicely round off a particularly satisfying day of sustained high level fell walking.
Main Route
Distance:10 miles
Highest point:Great Gable 2,949ft.
Total ascent:4,200ft.
Maps:OS Landranger sheet 89, Outdoor Leisure 4, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Buttermere.
(NY 176 169).
Public transport:bus service from Penrith Railway Station to Keswick (number 104) and from Windermere Railway Station to Keswick (number 555).
All services operated by Cumberland Motor Services..
Minibus from Keswick to Buttermere.
Runs from Spring Bank Holiday to September, operated by Mountain Goat..
Walk Directions
Beginning from Buttermere, follow the path to Scale Force (2 miles), a deeply recessed waterfall which, at 172ft, is the summit of Red Pike (1.5 miles) is quieter and not as steep as the more popular ascent via Bleaberry Tarn.
And it passes through more unusual heather covered terrain, giving an added contrast to the walk.
From Red Pike follow the ridge to High Stile (0.75 miles) where it is worth wandering a little northwards along the summit spur to get the best views of Buttermere.
From High Stile move n to High Crag (0.75 miles) then descend to Scarth Gap (0.75 miles).
This is a very eroded descent but unfortunately there is not way of avoiding it.
From Scarth Gap ascend up Haystacks (0.25 miles) and once you've reached the top, navigate south-westwards towards Gillercomb Head (2 miles), the gap between Brandreth and Green Gable.
As you near the gap branch off to the top of Green Gable (0.5 miles).
There is actually a thin path to the summit although it is not indicated on the OS maps and in mist would be difficult to locate.
From Green Gable move on the Great Gable (0.5 miles in a south-westerly direction) and from the summit of Great  Gable descend north-westwards to Beck Head (0.5 miles), the gap between Gable and Kirk Fell.
From here descend into Ennerdale (1.25 miles).
There is no path until you reach the River Liza but the ground is easy to descend.
Escape Routes
Red Pike to Gillerthwaite (1.25 miles), Scarth Gap to Black Sail Hut (0.75 miles), the head of Loft Beck to Black Sail Hut (1 mile) and Windy Gap to Black Sail Hut (1.5 miles).
Low Level Route
Distance:3.5 miles
Highest point:1,500ft.
Total ascent:1,200ft.
Simply cross over Scarth Gap from Buttermere using the old packhorse route.
As this is such a short route it is best to combine it with Days Four or Six.
If you are booked in to Black Sail Hut Youth Hostel and the weather puts you off completing the main route, you can make a circuit around Crummock Water before crossing Scarth Gap.
Accommodation:
Bothy:a wooden shed provided by the Forestry Commission.
It is open to the general public as a refuge.
(NY 193 121).
Youth hostel:Black Sail Hut,.
Small, simple, cosy and extremely popular.
Shops:none
Pubs and eating places:none.
Public transport:nearest point Seatoller.
Bus service from Seatoller to Keswick (number 79), Keswick to Penrith Railway Station (number 104) and Keswick to Windermere Railway Station (number 555).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services.
DAY 6
ENNERDALE TO ESKDALE
The main route on this day's walk is via the most exciting mile of path in the Lake District — the High Level Route on Pillar.
This is principally a path following a narrow undulating ledge which runs across the northern face of Pillar.
The path was developed by an early rock climbing pioneer called John Wilson Robinson as a way of reaching Pillar Rock.
This rock was and still is a major climbing crag.
On a prominent knoll near the end of the path is a distinctive cairn built in Robinson's memory.
It also has a beautifully worded copper plaque.
It is from this cairn that you gain your close hand view of Pillar Rock.
The ascent from here to the summit looks fairly fearsome but it is not as bad as it seems.
It involves scrambling up a scree slope and then walking along a ledge called the Shamrock Traverse, before making a direct ascent up to the top.
Main Route
Distance:12.5 miles.
Highest point:Pillar 2,927 ft.
Total ascent:3,300.
Maps:OS Landranger Sheet 89, Outdoor Leisure 4 & 6, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Black Sail Hut.
(NY 195 124).
Public transport:nearest point Seatoller.
Buses: Penrith Railway Station to Keswick (Number 104).
Windermere Railway Station to Keswick (Number 555).
Keswick to Seatoller (Number 79).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
Walk Directions
From Black Sail Hut climb (0.75 miles) to the top of the pass (southwards) after which it is named.
From there move west to Looking Stead (0.5 miles).
After Looking Stead begin climbing the shoulder of Pillar, and look for two cairns placed either side of the path.
Imperceptibly leading away to the right from the right hand cairn is the High Level Route, but if it all looks too daunting simply ascend Pillar by keeping to the ridge (1 mile).
From the summit of Pillar continue (south westwards) to Scoat Fell (0.75 miles) and then (south eastwards) to Red Pike (0.75 miles) before heading in the same direction to Dore Head (0.75 miles)— the gap between Red Pike and Yewbarrow.
From here descend (south westwards) to Wastwater (2 miles) following the course of Over Back before following the lakeshore road to the head of the lake (1 mile).
From the head of the lake the day's walking finishes by crossing southwards over Burnmoor to Eskdale (4.5 miles).
This wide open moorland with spacious views all around stands in stark contrast to the terrain on the rest of the circuit and provides a gentle descent to an especially idyllic lakeland valley.
Escape Routes
Wind Gap to Mosedale (1 mile)— a long steep descent.
From Dore Head to Mosedale (0.5 mile).
This used to be a wonderful scree running down to Mosedale, which was like gliding down an escalator.
But the ‘lubricity’, if that's the right word, of the scree has now gone for over use.
Low Level Route
Distance:8 miles.
Highest Point:1,800ft.
Total ascent:1,600 ft.
Cross over Black Sail Pass down into Mosedale (2 miles) and on to Wasdale Head (1 mile southwards).
Then link onto the path crossing Burnmoor to reach Eskdale (5.5 miles).
On this route you will be able to visit the Wasdale Head Inn, a once favourite haunt of rock climbers.
Now the inn is more geared to motorists, who much to their surprise, find the road terminates at the door of the inn rather than continuing to Windermere.
Just a few yards north of the inn is a farm that serves teas in the summer.
Accommodation
Pubs and eating places:
The Burnmoor Inn and the Woolpack Inn mentioned above both serve bar meals.
Public Transport:the Eskdale Railway, Dalegarth to Ravenglass main line BR Railway Station.
Enquiries .
DAY 7
ESKDALE TO BORROWDALE
Today's main route follows what in my view is the best route of ascent in the Lake District, and appropriately enough, it is to the top of Scafell Pike, England's highest peak.
In both senses of the word then, today's walk should be the high point of the circuit passing through the wildest landscape in the Lake District.
The route concludes with a descent into Borrowdale which is often claimed to be the most beautiful valley in the whole of England.
Main Route
Distance:11 miles.
Highest point:3,206ft.
Total ascent:3,200ft.
Maps : OS sheet 89, Outdoor Leisure 4 & 6, Tourist Map 3.
Starting point:Brotherilkeld Farm (NY 213 014).
Public transport:The Eskdale Railway.
Raven glass main line BR Railway Station to Dalegarth..
Walk Directions
From Brotherilkeld Farm simply follow the eastern side of the River Esk until you reach an area called Great Moss (3 miles).
Here you need to ford the River Esk — it's normally only inches deep — and head for a waterfall, Cam Spout (north, 0.5 mile).
I have never had any difficulty crossing it here but if you are walking in, or just after, a deluge of rain it mist be better to avoid the area by following the path along the western side of the river.
This starts from Taw House Farm which you can reach from Brotherilkeld Farm by crossing the footbridge over the River Esk between the two farms.
From Cam Spout follow a path which climbs steeply uphill to Mickledore (0.75 miles)— a narrow red coloured ridge connecting Scafell to Scafell Pike.
From here walk along a distinct path leading to the summit of Scafell Pike (0.75 miles).
Another distinct path leads north-westwards from the summit across the highest ridge in England — a stone-strewn crest including Broad Crag, Ill Crag and Great End.
Before reaching Great End however, follow the main path which veers to the right, down to a broad elevated col called Esk Hause (1.25 miles).
Now head northwards into Grains Gill and into Borrowdale (4.5 miles).
Escape Route
The Corridor Route, from the summit of Scafell Pike to Seathwaite Farm via Sty Head Tarn (4 miles).
Low Level Route
Distance:10 Miles
Highest Point:2,490 ft.
Total ascent:2,300 ft.
This is the same as the main route until you come to the Great Moss area, but where you cross over the River Esk, continue to follow the river to its source at Esk Hause, where you rejoin the main route.
This is nearly as demanding as the main route so I'd only do it if the tops are covered in mist or you are absolutely worn out.
Accommodation
Pubs and eating places:
The Scafell Hotel (above) has a public bar with bar meals.
Yew Tree Country Restaurant, Seatoller,(NY 244 137).
. Very upmarket.
Public transport:bus service from Seatoller to Keswick via Rosthwaite (number 79), from Keswick to Penrith Railway Station (number 104) and from Keswick to Windermere Railway Station (number 555).
Operator:Cumberland Motor Services..
SEPTEMBER ISSUE Borrowdale to Staveley via Dunnerdale, Elterwater, Grasmere and Hartsop
Ennerdale — one of the many highlights of Day 5 of this special route
GEAR TEST
GEODESIC DOME TENTS
Geodesic domes are stable, roomy and light — ideal for high and low level camps.
Dave Weatherley tests six of the leading designs
Dave Weatherley has been involved in the outdoors all his life.
He is a qualified mountain leader and runs an activity centre in the Lakes
Geodesic dome tents make the ideal all-round home from home.
If you want to camp throughout the year and want the option of taking your tent into the mountains as well as camping at low levels, then these are the designs you should be looking at.
The crossed poles structure gives the stability you need to cope with high winds, together with a good space to weight ration.
The typically inner shape is high and wide so you can at the least sit up comfortably — in some of the models you can just about stand.
We tested six tents over a period of three months in weather ranging from sunshine to horizontal rain.
JACK WOLFSKIN MONTANA
Designated use : three person tent for year-round use.
Pitching:easy — the inner goes up first in around four minutes.
Once the poles are secured the inner is a self-supporting dome.
The outer is then draped over and clipped to the base of inner.
From start to finish pitching takes around nine minutes.
Poles:four shockcorded alloy poles, all the same size.
The  poles pass through the split sleeves and are secured in eyelets on the sides of the inner.
The sleeves are colour coded for easy identification.
Inner fabric:70D nylon taffeta.
Inner:one of the best inners I've seen for a long time.
A self-supporting dome with plenty of height — you could lose an army inside.
Three internal pockets.
Flysheet fabric:75D proofed polyester.
UV resistant.
Flysheet:has an interesting feature which allows you to quickly attach the fly to the inner by means of quick release buckles — an efficient method.
I thought the flysheet looked too short and I worried that rain would get into the inner.
However the groundsheet sides curve up well and my worries proved unfounded.
Groundsheet:75D proofed polyester.
Bellends:rather small for large quantities of gear but adequate for two people.
Two sacks and boots can be stored in one end, while you can shelter in the other end to cook.
There is only one zip, positioned on the side at either end, so door options are limited to side entry only.
Condensation:the first time I used the tent was a still moonlit evening.
The dew in the atmosphere had condensed on the outside of the fly.
This remained until sunrise.
The level of condensation under the fly was minimal.
On other days I found condensation levels were low or non-existent.
Waterproofness:no problems, even in driving rain.
Guylines:four external guylines with 10 ground pegging out points.
Stability:for such a large tent, its stability was good with all the guys pegged out.
Although the sides of the flysheet moved in high winds I never felt for one minute it would take off.
Ventilation:mesh ventilation windows under the flysheet storm flap help prevent a build up of too much condensation.
Mosquito netting:both inner doors are fully protected by netting which zips up independently from the door flap.
Weight:10lb.
Packed size:22″ × 8″.
Zips:all the zips run freely on both the fly and the inner.
Seams:all flysheet seams are fully taped and sealed.
Colours:green.
Price:£299.95.
Dave's verdict:the internal space and design of the inner is exceptional but I'm afraid the design of the flysheet does spoil the line of the tent.
If it were slightly longer at the sides and the bellends were larger to accommodate more gear this would be one of the best geodesic tents around.
The price is very fair.
Contact:,,.
LICHFIELD SKOMER
Designated use:two to three person tent for all season use.
Pitching:the flysheet is erected first and took a little longer than I expected to up on my own — six minutes.
The inner is then attached easily in just two minutes.
It is possible to keep the fly and inner joined and erect the tent all in one.
However, there is little time advantage to be gained from doing this.
Poles:four (thicker than usual) shockcorded alloy poles.
They are all the same length.
Inner fabric:nylon.
Inner:the inner is easily suspended from the fly by using a hook and eyelet system.
The space inside is good, with decent headroom The tent is ideal for two but as the manufacturers say, is capable of sleeping three.
Flysheet fabric:proofed nylon.
Flysheet:a well designed hexagonal flysheet.
Four poles are inserted into external sleeves and placed into their respective eyelets at ground level so the flysheet becomes a free standing structure.
Groundsheet:pu coated polyethylene.
Bellends:on the door there's a curved L-shaped one way zip.
Unfortunately, this is the only entrance.
You can crouch in the small bell section with the fly door closed and there's a small amount of space between the fly and the inner to stow boots and small items.
Condensation:surprisingly little when I used it.
Waterproofness:this tent was used as a base camp for ten days and experienced all sorts of weather conditions.
The proofed nylon flysheet is totally waterproof and doesn't leak around the seams.
However some water got in at the front.
It turned out to have come in through the curved zip which is unprotected by a weather flap.
Rain water had slowly seeped through the top section and dropped onto the inner.
However, this seepage was slight and not a problem.
Guylines:six external guylines with non-slip adjusters.
Six pegging rings by each pole and five elastic tension points on each of the panels.
Stability:I used the tent at low level and was duly impressed.
Ventilation:a small mesh net at the rear of the inner.
As the fly just touches the ground, air circulation from under this area is limited, though there is plenty of room for air to circulate between the fly and the inner.
Mosquito netting:none.
Weight:10lb 4oz.
Packed size:26″ × 8″.
Zips:one curved L-shaped zip on the flysheet and three zips on the inner door.
All of the zips run freely.
Seams:almost a ‘no seam’ flysheet — each of the six side panels of the flysheet are sewn onto the pole sleeves, making an integral join.
Colours:two tone green.
Price:£192.50.
Dave's verdict:certainly not a technical tent with high tech fabrics, but a great tent for someone who wants a reasonably priced geodesic dome with good internal space for campsite camping.
Contact:,,.
Once geodesic dome tents are erected they can be moved in one piece
NORTH FACE VE25
Designated use:suitable for base and high level camps.
Capable of sleeping between two and four people.
Pitching:on one wild and windy night it took just five minutes to put up the inner.
It then took another five minutes to fit the flysheet and peg it out.
It's twice as quick to erect with two people working together.
Poles:four black shock-corded poles are inserted into colour-coded sleeves.
The base of each pole is then inserted into brass eyelets on nylon webbing which are then attached to the groundsheet.
A small arched pole supports the porch.
Inner fabric:ripstop nylon, coated with Scotchguard to help prevent the fabric from absorbing water.
Inner:spacious inner with a good amount of height which makes a free standing dome before the fly is fitted.
Four internal pockets.
Flysheet fabric:ripstop nylon with silicon elastomer coating which waterproofs both sides of the fabric and makes it more tear resistant.
Flysheet:once the flysheet is draped over the inner it fixes onto the poles at ground level so both inner and fly are attached to the poles.
I like this — in high winds there's no chance of the flysheet flapping around or flying over the tent.
Groundsheet:pu coated taffeta nylon.
Bellends:entrances at both ends.
The back fly entrance has a single zip, giving a small bellend space to store boots and a couple of rucksacks.
The front porch has various door openings with room to shelter when cooking and to store gear.
Condensation:condensation was average — a light film on the inside of the flysheet but no droplets.
Waterproofness:the flysheet gave excellent protection from rain.
No evidence of water — other than condensation — was seen under the fly.
Guylines:six external guys with 14 pegging points.
Stability:this is a rock solid tent which stands rigid against strong winds.
With all the external guys pegged out it hardly moves in the wind.
Ventilation:although internal space is large, ventilation to the inner is only achieved by opening the doors a little at either end.
Mosquito netting:both doors have mosquito nets which unzip independently of the door flaps.
Weight:9lb 12 oz.
Packed size:28″ × 8″.
Zips:all zips run freely.
The flysheet zips are protected with a weather flap.
Seams:double stitched, untaped.
Colours:yellow/blue.
Price:£500.
Dave's verdict:a strong well made tent which performs just as well high in the mountains  or at lower levels.
Although it has a high price, this is a top quality tent.
Contact:,,
VANGO ODYSSEY 300
Designated use:a two person tent for year round use.
Pitching:the inner is erected in about four minutes and goes up first.
The poles are quickly inserted along the inner sleeves and placed into their respective eyelets on the edge of the groundsheet.
This is now a self supporting unit.
The flysheet is then draped over the inner and secured to ground.
The whole thing takes eight-ten minutes.
Poles:five alloy poles of which four are used for the inner.
The fifth pole is used in the bellend of the flysheet.
The fly pole is only a little shorter than two of the smaller inner tent poles, so unless you identify this it can be confusing in the dark.
Inner fabric:ripstop nylon.
Inner:ideal for two.
It's long and spacious too, which is good for extra-tall campers.
Flysheet fabric:ripstop nylon.
Flysheet:the fly is easily draped over the inner.
A small pole which extends the porch can be inserted at any stage.
However, if the winds are strong it is better left till last until the flysheet is pegged out.
Groundsheet:pu coated nylon.
Bellends:two bellends.
The back is a more traditional sloping bellend with enough space for two large rucksacks as well as boots.
The front bellend uses an extra hooped pole which extends the flysheet forward giving ample room for storage.
Access in and out is good at both ends.
Condensation:normal levels — a light film on the inside of the fly but no droplets.
Waterproofness:no problems in various weather conditions.
Guylines:five external guylines and 12 ground pegging points, all attached to the fly.
Stability:this is a well designed, aerodynamic tent with excellent stability in strong winds when all the guylines are pegged out.
Ventilation:large triangular mesh netting in the roof of the inner adds to internal ventilation when both doors are fully zipped up.
Mosquito netting:there are nets at both ends which zip separately from the door flap.
Weight:9lb 7oz.
Packed size:26″ × 8″.
Zips:all zips are free running.
The flysheet zips are protected by a small weather flap.
Seams:fully taped.
Colours:purple fly/yellow inner.
Price:£259.
Dave's verdict:an ideal tent for two people to take on backpacking trips, and for use on static camps.
With good storage and stability this tent is excellent value for money.
Contact:,,.
WILD COUNTRY QUASAR
Designated use:two person tent for high and low level use.
Pitching:a fairly standard geodesic shape which is easy to erect.
The inner goes up first and takes just four minutes to put up.
The poles are inserted into continuous sleeves.
It only takes a couple of minutes before the flysheet is in place.
Poles:Four allow poles — two poles cross at the apex of the tent with two slightly shorter poles supporting each end.
Once through their sleeves the poles are inserted into small eyelets which are attached to the edge of the groundsheet.
Inner fabric:ripstop nylon.
Inner:once erected the inner is a free standing unit.
It has good height along the entire length.
Two people don't get in each other 's way.
Flysheet fabric:proofed ripstop nylon.
Flysheet:the flysheet has eyelets at its base which, once it is draped over the inner, fix onto the poles at ground level so that both inner and fly are attached to the poles.
Groundsheet:pu coated strong nylon.
Bellends:I liked the fact that as both ends are the same you have four choices of entrance.
The double zip allows you to roll the centre flap up from the bottom, to be fastened at the top or rolled down from the top for quick access.
Each side panel can also be gathered in to be used as a doorway.
Condensation:low or non-existent condensation levels in warm weather.
Normal levels in colder conditions — a light film on the inside of the fly but no droplets.
Waterproofness:groundsheet and fly are totally watertight.
Guylines:there are ten strong bungy cords at ground level with two external guys.
Stability:if well pegged to the ground tent is unmoveable.
Its aerodynamic shape means that wind is funnelled round its surface causing little movement to the structure.
Ventilation:because the fly sits on top of the inner there's little space for air to circulate in this area.
Ventilation to the inner can be achieved by opening doors.
Mosquito netting:the nets are at both ends of the tent can be zipped independently of the door flap.
Weight:8lb 8oz.
Packed size:24″ × 8″.
Zips:all zips run freely and are protected on the flysheet by a weather flap.
Seams:fully taped.
Colours:yellow/grey.
Price:£356.
Dave's verdict:I like this tent very much, there's lots of room for two and its aerodynamic shape is well suited for high winds.
Its weight to space ratio is excellent.
Contact:,,
PHOENIX PHREEDOME 3000
Designated use:two to three person tent for use in high mountains or general camping.
Pitching:there are two methods of putting the tent up — either flysheet first, or you can leave the inner attached and put it up all in one.
The fly is large, and took eight minutes to erect on my own but just five minutes with a friend.
It then takes a further two minutes to suspend the inner under the fly.
Poles:five shockcorded alloy poles.
Two long poles which cross as the apex and two shorter, hooped poles which provide height and stability to the ends.
A short 20″ pole at the apex gives a little more width to the tent.
Inner fabric:ripstop nylon.
Inner:the inner is symmetrical — so it doesn't matter which way you hook it in place.
It's fixed under the flysheet with a combination of ten elastic cords and hooks.
The fabric does tend to flop down though, which restricts space.
Headroom is good along the length of the tent.
It also has four mesh pockets and a roof strap.
Flysheet fabric:pu coated nylon with UV inhibitors.
Flysheet:the fly is large and protects the inner well.
Poles are inserted into continuous sleeves sewn to the top of the fly.
Groundsheet:neoprene coated nylon.
Bellends:extended porches with a single hooped pole at both ends.
The front has a central panel with parallel two-way zips which allow for front and side entry.
There is one zip at the rear.
Both areas are huge and good for storing gear or for shelter when cooking.
Condensation:a little during morning and evening but nothing too serious.
Waterproofness:no leaks even during heavy downpours.
Guylines:six bungy ground guys and 12 external guylines.
Stability:extremely good.
Ventilation:ample room between inner and flysheet for air to circulate, especially when doors at either end are open.
Mosquito netting:inner door flaps can be unzipped independently from the net.
Weight:9lb.
Packed size:20″ × 8″.
Zips:all zips run very freely.
Seams:all seams are taped.
Colours:brown/yellow.
£360
Dave's verdict:having two large bellends is a great advantage.
This is a very stable tent with ample room.
Contact:,,.
TENT TIPS
1.
Practise putting your tent up in the garden several times.
Do it in daylight, in the dark, when it's raining and in windy conditions.
2.
Seal all tent seams with seam sealer.
3.
If you're basing yourself at one campsite place an old groundsheet or plastic sheet under the tent.
This prolongs the life of the tent's built-in groundsheet.
4.
When pitching in strong winds place the tent on the ground with the entrance you'll be using pointing away from the wind.
Peg out the four corners.
The tent will then be held to the ground while you insert the poles and erect the tent.
5.
Take a repair kit with you — a length of cord to repair guys, poles or broken webbing straps and masking tape for patching up rips.
JOURNEY OF A LIFETIME
Rock Legend
The Grand Canyon is the stuff of dreams — the largest river valley on earth.
Chris Buckley goes exploring
Outside in the darkness I shake the insects out of my sleeping bag and put my boots on.
I fumble around for the rest of my kit and fall over Shelagh, who is shining a torch gingerly in one of her boots.
‘I'm sure I saw something move in there.’
It wouldn't surprise me.
It's 3am and the night is alive with clicking, whirring and flying things.
As we set off we catch some of them in the beams of our head torches, along with the bats which are madly pursuing them.
The insects are out and about for the same reason as us, moving at night to beat the midday heat at the very centre of the Grand Canyon.
Main: flat table lands with steep edges help create a Gothic fantasy landscape.
Small: flowering cacti in Bright Angel Canyon.
We're about to begin the long hike out to the rim.
Above us the sky is beginning to turn from black to purple, and the walls of the canyon are faintly visible as immense dark shapes looming overhead.
They seem to have no colour, although yesterday afternoon's image is still strong — the canyon glowing deep red in reflected light from the walls, the interior an inferno in the midday sun.
After three days in the Grand Canyon I was only just starting to appreciate the size and scale of the place.
It's the largest river valley on earth — cut by the Colorado river in a vast plateau in the American south-west.
The river has been cutting downwards for five million years and more, and in that time it has laid bare rocks spanning half of the earth's history.
It's not a single canyon  but rather a branching series of gorges covering a large tract of land.
One of the odd features when you first arrive in the area is that there is no advance warning of what's to come — nothing visible of the Grand Canyon until you are right on the edge.
Once there, everything comes to a stop with 20 miles of open space ahead.
Below is a Gothic fantasy of plunging gorges and isolated mesas — flat tablelands with steep edges — all in paintbox colours.
From the North Rim, the Colorado river at the centre is invisible, still more than 12 miles away and nearly a mile down.
Few people get to walk in the Grand Canyon, though hundreds of thousands visit the area each year.
For those who do venture in, the rewards are outstanding.
We chose the North Rim as the starting point for our hike, mainly because it's a great place to camp and to recuperate.
The North and South Rims have very different characters.
The South is the classic day-tripper stop on the edge of the desert.
The North Rim is cooler and higher, at around 8,200′.
It's something of a shock after the deserts of Utah and Arizona to be greeted by Canadian-style pine forests and snow showers in early June.
The North gets snowed-in in winter, and the roads are often completely impassable from November until mid-May, while the South Rim is usually accessible all year round.
To see the Grand Canyon it is first essential to obtain an overnight camping permit.
The system operated by the park authorities to limit numbers into the Canyon can be tiresome and bureaucratic, although it helps to retain the essential peace, solitude and ecology of the area.
Well organised folks can book a permit to camp up to a year in advance, but we managed to get in despite having no permit when we arrived.
The key is to be prepared to wait a day or two if necessary, which is no bad thing as the North Rim is a beautiful spot in its own right.
Arriving at the park office early in the morning things looked grim at first.
We were greeted by unnaturally cheerful ranger, who told us that there were 56 people on the list ahead of us so we didn't stand a chance and that it would probably rain anyway.
I think he was employed by the park authorities to scare away all but the most committed.
He must have succeeded since by the end of the next day we'd moved up to fifth place, and we got our permit to camp for two nights by the Colorado.
It didn't rain either.
We planned a three-day trip following the North Kaibab Trail to the Colorado river.
We carried a tent since the forecast was mixed but many walkers carry only sleeping bags and mats in summer.
There are three types of trails in the Grand Canyon — maintained, where there's a good path, semi-maintained where there may be a path, and unmaintained where you need a compass.
North Kaibab is a maintained trail which begins on a series of steep switchbacks, plunging down the side of Roaring Springs Canyon, a tributary of Bright Angel Canyon, which in turn leads to the Colorado.
The trail loses height at an amazing pace, then hugs the side of a steep cliff along the side of Roaring Springs Canyon.
The horizontal rock strata create a vast, stepped geology exhibit.
The harder rocks stand out as ledges, the softer ones form steep slopes.
After half an hour's walking the Age of Dinosaurs had come and gone, and by midday we were deep into the  Palaeozoic .
Along the side of Roaring Springs Canyon the path hugs a ledge of pink sandstone, giving airy views into the rocky chasm below.
Roaring Springs at the junction of Bright Angel Canyon, is like a last oasis before entering the desert.
There's a waterfall and a stream which looks fantastic.
Below Roaring Springs the real desert starts.
Junction of Roaring Springs and Bright Angel Canyons, where the real desert starts
In Bright Angel the heat is intense and cacti with red and yellow flowers grow along the sides of the trail among great sheared-off blocks of stone.
Rattlesnakes are supposed to be common, though they are generally shy and silent and we didn't see any trace of them.
At the end of Bright Angel Canyon — and a long day's walking — is the central canyon and finally the Colorado river — wide, green, fast flowing, and icy cold.
By now we had crossed through half a dozen vegetation zones — the botanical equivalent of a journey from Canada to New Mexico.
Down here we were in a true desert.
At the bottom of the Grand Canyon the oldest rocks of all are exposed in a gorge lined with vertical cliffs.
The Colorado, a buzzing chainsaw of a river, still cuts downwards, scouring the riverbed with rocks and pebbles.
Above, layer upon layer of cliffs rise until the colours are lost in blue and purple.
We made camp in a grove of cottonwood trees, about the only available protection from the sun.
We hung our packs on strings to stop ravenous rodents from getting to the apples and packet mixes.
We didn't escape entirely however — Grand Canyon animals are not fussy and they were happy to eat my sunblock cream.
The following day we set off to walk the Clear Creek trail which winds along the Colorado river, following a high gritstone outcrop about 1,640′ above it.
This is real wilderness — we met no-one else in a day's walking.
On the other side of the trail is a series of vast mesas, cut off from each other like islands.
The final return trip was a substantial hike, involving a climb of nearly 6,500′ in a day.
But the reward for setting off early is the sight of dawn breaking over the South Rim and spilling into the Canyon.
After twisting our way up the long trail we finally reached the North Rim just after midday, feeling like redeemed souls struggling out of a magnificent inferno.
FACT FILE
Chris Buckley travelled independently to America.
The closest starting point for a trip to the Grand Canyon is Las Vegas, though Los Angeles at about a day's drive away has more choice of low-cost fares.
Car hire in the US is virtually essential, but thankfully cheap compared with Europe.
Public transport is as elusive as the wildlife and not recommended, besides which the USA is geared to the motorist above all others.
Trek America offer a 10 day Canyon Adventure trip for £431, excluding flights.
The holiday includes walking, horse riding and mountain biking in the area..
COMPETITION
£1,000 OF PHOENIX GEAR TO WIN
FIRST PRIZE
Our lucky prize winner will soon be able to camp out in comfort and style with a brand new top quality tent from Phoenix.
Weighing in at only 4lb 13oz, the two person Phreeranger EB (extended bell) is ideal for backpackers who like to travel light.
It packs down to a handy 52cm × 17cm, has a taped ripstop nylon fly — PU coated — and cost £250.
SECOND PRIZE
Second prize is the Phreak — an ideal two person tent for the novice backpacker.
It comes in a traditional ‘A’ pole design with lots of storage space and a rear zipped bellend.
It weighs 6lb 11oz and is worth £230.
THIRD PRIZE
Our third prize winner will keep the elements at bay with this waterproof jacket with plenty of useful features.
Costing £225, the Kishtwar jacket is made from Gore-Tex fabric and comes with three zipped external pockets, a two-way front zip and Velcro cuffs.
FOURTH PRIZE
A stylish smock-style fleece jacket worth £120 will soon be keeping our fourth prize winner warn.
The Hercules features a Windstopper lined snap neck, two zipped waist pockets and stylish embroidery on the back and front.
It comes in assorted colourways and sizes s-xl.
FIFTH PRIZE
Three fifth prize winners will each receive a Mist fleece jacket, worth £60.
The jacket is in a smock style and has two zipped pockets and a snap neck closure.
Colours and sizes are the same as for the Hercules.
HOW TO ENTER
To try to win one of these fantastic prizes just answer the three questions.
Answers can be found in this edition of Outdoor Action .
Write your answers on the back of a postcard or envelope no bigger than 5″ × ″ and send it to ,.
Closing date Friday August 28, 1992.
QUESTIONS
1.
How high is Y Garn on Nantlle ridge?
2.
At what wind speed does it become unsafe for novice paraglider pilots to fly?
3.
How large is the site of the Sirhowy Valley Country Park in Wales?
RULES
1.
Entries must be on the back of a postcard or envelope no bigger than 5in × 6in.
2.
Entries are limited to one per person.
3.
No cash alternatives will be offered.
4.
The judge's decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
5.
Employees of Hawker Consumer Publications and Phoenix Mountaineering Ltd and their relatives are  ineligible to enter.
6.
No entry will be accepted after last post on Friday August 28, 1992.
WALKING IN WALES
Changing Pace
Remnants of Wales' rich industrial past make for a fascinating walk in the Sirhowy Valley.
Paul Traynor reports
For generations the people of industrial South Wales took to the uplands separating the Valleys for fresh air and recreation.
A walk on ‘the mountain’— more accurately broad, windswept moorlands with a coal tip or three for good measure — was a welcome escape from the terraces, mines and factories on the valley floor.
Times have changed, and with the rapid disappearance of the pits and much of the heavy industry, at least one welcome side-effect has come about — the gradual cleaning up of the Valleys themselves.
To hope for a return to how they must have looked before mine shafts and blast furnaces — one of the most strikingly attractive regions in Britain — is too much to expect.
But there are now many places where the wooded, steep-sided landscape gives us a reminder of past beauty — and some fine walking.
Add to that a history as rich and compelling as that of any in the country and the possibilities for excursions with a difference take shape.
An excellent example of such a walk has been developed and waymarked by councils in the eastern county of Gwent — a move which in itself is a sign of changed official attitudes and priorities.
And if any readers are quietly asking themselves ‘Why walk in an old industrial area?’, think again.
Many of our most popular and spectacular landscapes have industrial pasts which today's visitors would find hard to believe.
Within a few hours drive of Gwent, for instance, lie some fascinating areas — the Forest of Dean, formerly a major coal-producing area; Snowdonia, where the evidence of centuries of quarrying and mineral extraction is heaped everywhere; Pembrokeshire, where pretty fishing villages once exported coal, and Cornwall where mining was once a much bigger earner than cream teas.
To return to Gwent, the Sirhowy Valley Walk connects the towns of Newport on the Bristol Channel and Tredegar at the head of the Valley — 26 miles which encompass a quite astonishing variety of scenery and illustrate the entire cycle of industrial revolution, heyday, decay and reclamation.
You're never very far from urban centres but the walk sidesteps and swerves as cleverly as the best Welsh fly-halves to follow a largely rural route.
There are pastures which would not be out of place in the Peak District, woods reminiscent of mid Wales, sharp climbs and panoramic views.
We chose to tackle the walk from north to south, not least because the route passes our home in the south — though the excellent official guide provides duplicate maps and instructions for waling it the other way.
There is thorough waymarking but, as ever, signs were of little use in really dense mist on the top of Mynydd Machen.
We needed a compass bearing to ensure we headed off in the right direction, a reminder that even a ‘valley’ walk can land the unwary in difficulties.
For most of the way, though, the comprehensive guide was rarely out of our hands.
Without the background notes we would not have known that, among many other points of interest, our boots crunched long the line of an 1805 horse-drawn tram road and beside a pub used as a meeting for Chartist agitators.
Nor would we have known about the overnight accommodation in a converted farm, now a countryside centre, in the centrepiece 1,000-acre site Sirhowy Valley Country Park.
The walk has a good middle in the form of the countryside centre, but like any decent excursion it also has a good beginning and a good end.
And in this case there is a poignant link between the two.
In the north the walk begins near a grim hilltop council estate, at a ring of stones commemorating Tredegar-born Labour MP Aneurin Bevan, architect of the NHS.
In the south, the walk ends at Tredegar House — the former home of the Lords of Tredegar, now a council-owned tourist attraction.
Lords at one end, a working class hero at the other, and in between an encounter with the history which linked and divided their fortunes — that, surely, is a walk with a theme to remember.
Nature has reclaimed much of the land once given over to industry
NEW SERIES
MULTI-ACTIVITIES
PARAGLIDING
FLYING START
In the first of a new series on multi-activities Henry Druce gets high on paragliding
My first experience of airsports hadn't been a good one.
I was a passenger in a microlight and just after taking off the engine spluttered and we had to make an emergency landing.
It didn't instill much confidence.
But that was a year ago and I was ready to take to the air again.
I went on an introductory course with ParAvion in Wiltshire to find out if I liked paragliding any better.
I joined an eight person group one Saturday morning at ParAvion's centre in Bishops Cannings.
All the others had done some paragliding before — I was the only total beginner.
David Sollom, owner of the centre and one of the three instructors of the day, was enthusiastic about the conditions so we drove straight out to one of the four sites which the school uses.
It looked perfect — gentle slopes within a semi circular bowl of hills.
In the protected area at the bottom of the hill the wind was gentle, but further up the slope it picked up considerably to 16–17 miles an hour.
David decided to test out the conditions — his ten years of experience showed us what could be achieved with practice.
He glided effortlessly from one side of the hill to the other with total confidence, even having time to make jokes while trying to pluck a twig from a bush.
Although the conditions up the slope were ideal for the more experienced, they were too strong for novice pilots.
We went further down the slope to practise parachute landing falls and ground handling skills — everything you need to know before actually launching yourself off the side of a hill.
With David's help I unfurled my multi-coloured paraglider, donned a helmet and strapped myself into the simple harness.
The harness is attached to the paraglider with four thick straps, one in front of the other on either side at chest height — the front and rear risers.
These are then connected to the paraglider wing with many string-like strands of a strong material called Dyneema.
The first thing to do was build up a ‘wall’.
This meant pulling the risers to fill the paraglider — called a wing — with air and then making it lie evenly across the ground.
After practising this for a while the next stage was to get the wing overhead.
The paraglider itself is rectangular and made up of numerous cells or pockets running from the front to the rear of the wing.
These trap the air and so inflate the wing.
It was surprisingly easy to get the wing aloft with a step backwards and a sharp tug on the front risers.
You then turn round so you're facing forwards and constantly adjust the risers to keep the wing overhead.
Once we'd finished our ground handling practice we climbed the hill to check the wind.
It was still too strong so we sat and waited.
You must get used to waiting in this sport as it's so dependent on weather conditions — it's unsafe for beginners to fly in wind speeds over 15mph.
The Gods smiled on us later in the afternoon with perfect conditions and a gentle 10mph wind stroking the hillside.
When David gave the all clear the paragliders were laid out on the hillside forming splashes of startling colour on the green backdrop.
The first person soon flew gracefully to the bottom of the hill, staying up for over a minute.
Butterflies were running rampage as my turn came.
‘Just relax’ said David ‘you'll love it’.
The others in the group were keen to see how I'd cope with my virgin flight.
I pulled the wing above my head, steadied it, turned and faced downhill and with a few steps forward, and a gentle push from David, I was airborne.
It was the most exhilarating sensation, flying high above the ground yet still feeling safe.
Landing wasn't a problem — you just pull down on both hand controls at the same time to slow the paraglider as the ground approaches.
By early evening I'd done five more flights and was beginning to feel confident steering the paraglider.
And all on my first day — this is the sport to capture the imagination.
Henry Druce went paragliding with ParAvion Paragliding,.
.
Cost of an introductory weekend course is £100, a four day course £200.
NATURE WATCH
AUGUST
Richard Marpole highlights the natural wonders you can see this month and outlines a walk in the Berwyn Mountains
STINKHORN
A woodland fungus not easily missed is the stinkhorn phallus impudicus .
It gives off a smell similar to that of rotting meat, so walkers can be forgiven for thinking there's a dead sheep in the area.
When first grown, the top of the fungus is coated in a black sticky jelly containing spores.
The smell of the fungus attracts flies and when they land they collect some of the jelly on their legs, which they then carry away, so spreading the fungus.
The example pictured has obviously been successful in its spore dispersal — there's no black jelly left, so all the spores have gone.
RED ADMIRAL
Surprisingly, the red admiral butterfly migrates to this country from the Mediterranean each spring.
Those seen flying during the later part of the summer will be a second generation, hatched from eggs laid by the migrating individuals upon arrival.
In common with several other species, the red admiral favours the stinging nettle as a place to lay its eggs.
The adult butterflies feed on the flowers of several garden plants, including buddleia and  Michaelmas daisies, and wild plants such as clover and scabious.
HERB ROBERT
Herb robert geranium robertianum flowers in many differing habitats including hedgebanks, damp woods, shingle on the seashore and on scree.
The name robertianum may be derived from a medieval scholar Robert, Duke of Normandy, or perhaps St Robert who founded the Cistercian order of monks.
The fruit has a long pointed protrusion, rather like a bird's beak, and that's how it gets the geranium name, meaning ‘crane’.
Herb robert was once believed to be a flower of importance to fairies and was widely used in medieval medicine.
DAMSELFLY
The damselfly is a striking sight which can often be seen settling on trees and bushes lining the banks of fast, clear streams.
The iridescent green body and dark purple wings make identification easy.
With most damselflies, the male and female differ in their colouring, but towards the end of the breeding season, the female will change colour to look much more like the male.
It is thought that this is to reduce the attractiveness of the females who have already bred and no longer want the attention of the males.
This can cause confusion at this time of year for naturalists trying to identify the sex of damselflies.
REDSTART
The redstart, named for its strikingly red tail, is mainly a woodland bird but will also be found in parks and gardens.
It prefers woodlands with an open canopy coupled with dense undergrowth and some clearings.
Nesting in holes in trees or, as this one, in walls, the redstart may raise two broods a year, each of six eggs.
It may even bee seen on the coast as it prepares for migration to its winter quarters in central Africa.
AUGUST IN THE BERWYN MOUNTAINS
Lake Vyrnwy is massive, capable of supplying 45 million gallons of water per day to Liverpool 70 miles away.
It's a five mile long artificial reservoir set among spectacular scenery in the Berwyn Mountains south of Snowdon.
The dam, completed in 1890 after nine years' work, is 390yds long and 127′ thick at the base.
The walk around it is all on the road, but it is worth a quick circuit in the car.
The scenery really is wonderful.
Guidebooks liken it to the Austrian Alps, but my wife reckons it's more like the Norwegian fiords.
About one mile from the dam on the northern side of the lake is a magnificent Gothic style tower.
This is the Straining Tower, the main outlet for water from the reservoir.
Here the water is passed through massive sieves to remove any larger foreign matter, the first stage of purification.
16,000 acres of the moorland in the water catchment area are managed by the RSPB for the conservation of wildlife in an agreement with the owners of the land — Severn Trent Water — and the owners of the shooting rights.
Birds of prey which rely on the heather moorlands for nesting and rearing their young, such as merlin and hen harrier, can do so without the persecution which sometimes occurs when their existence is in conflict with grouse-shooting interests.
The woodland surrounding the reservoir is managed jointly by the Forestry Commission and Severn Trent Water.
There are both native woodland and conifer plantations which gives a rich mosaic of habitats for wildlife.
Both the red squirrel and the polecat can be found here.
AUGUST WALK IN THE BERWYN MOUNTAINS
Starting from the car park at the west end of Lake Vyrnwy is a four mile trail which takes in several different habitats, including mixed woodland, a conifer plantation, a river, a dramatic waterfall and the edge of the lake itself.
From the car park, go past the picnic tables to a stile with a green marker.
Cross this stile and walk diagonally across the field beyond.
Continue until the path meets a river, turn left and follow the river until you get to a bridge.
Cross the bridge and, after 20yds, cross a stile on the left.
Follow the track until you reach a T-junction with another track.
Turn left here to go to the waterfall Pistyll Rhyd-y-meinciau at the head of the valley.
This is a superb cascade — the ideal place to stop and have lunch.
The intrepid will cross the river — it's not too wide at this point — and explore the height of the waterfall by walking up beside it to where there are superb views down the valley.
On the left of the waterfall, most of the way up, are wet boggy areas full of bright green sphagnum moss.
You can also find sundew and butterwort here.
Both make up for the lack of nutrients in the soil by trapping and digesting small  insects.
Keep a look out too for buzzards soaring over the crags which surround you, and also for the odd kestrel.
Return to the T-junction and carry straight on, not forgetting to look at the lovely wild flowers on the left bank — a mass of yellow pimpernel and birdsfoot trefoil.
When the track meets a road turn left and go along it for 150yds until you come to a bridge made of railway sleepers which crosses the stream on the right.
You should see some impressive herb robert growing on the back between the river and road.
The Straining Tower is where the water from the lake is passed through massive sieves
Go over the bridge and turn right immediately onto a track leading into the trees.
When the track turns sharp left, go right, stepping over a small stream then up the hill to a metal gate.
Cross the stile beside it.
Immediately after the stile is a lovely little mountain stream crossed by stepping stones.
There's a fine sessile oak tree overhanging the path here.
Sessile oaks have leaves which narrow down to a longish stalk, while the acorns, which should be appearing about now, are almost stalkless on their twigs — sessile means without a stalk.
Follow on between two fences with lichen-encrusted hawthorn trees on the right.
This area is noted for butterflies in the summer, and in August the purple hairstreak will be on the wing.
At any time of year you're likely to see plenty of birds, including nuthatch, green woodpecker and jay.
When the path meets a farm track, turn right and go down the hill, through several gates to the road.
Cross the road into a narrow conifer plantation, on the far side of which is a bridge onto Rhiwargor Island, owned by the RSPB.
A nature trail leads through an area of mixed woodland to a bird hide overlooking the top end of Lake Vyrnwy.
This piece of woodland contrasts dramatically with the conifer plantation on the other side of the bridge.
The open canopy allows light to fall on the ground, so a great variety of plants can grow here.
There are many woodland flowers, such as wood sorrel, bluebell, fox glove and wood anemone.
Ferns include the broad buckler, and there are species of fungi such as the stinkhorn.
The hide is a good place to spend some time, not only to see the more common bird species such as heron, coot and several kinds of tit, but you might also be lucky enough to spot less common birds such as the great spotted woodpecker and the kingfisher.
The common hawker dragonfly also patrols this area looking for prey and can be seen from early June until late September.
Very lucky visitors may even see an otter here — but don't hold me to it!
Retrace the route to the road, and walk left, either along the road or through the plantation to the car park.
NATURE WALK FACT FILE
Maps
O.S. Map 1:50,000.
Landranger series, sheet 125.
Bala & Lake Vyrnwy.
Tourist Information Centres
There is a visitor centre in a converted chapel near the Vyrnwy dam.
Information on the wildlife and leaflets on several nature trails are available from this centre..
Campsites .
Outdoor Pursuits .
Climbing, abseiling, sailing, orienteering, canoeing, catering for individuals or groups.
Can also organise courses on local natural history if required.
COMING SOON
SEPTEMBER'S WILDLIFE AND A WALK IN THE CAIRNGORMS
THE NATURAL WORLD IN OCTOBER AND A WALK ON DARTMOOR
NOVEMBER'S FLORA AND FAUNA AND A WALK IN THE LAKES.
DECEMBER IN THE COUNTRYSIDE AND A WALK AROUND SLIMBRIDGE  
MARKET ROUND UP
TORCHES
We throw light on the different kinds of torches currently available in the shops
1
SOLARA SOLAR TORCH Design:a rechargeable torch which uses a solar panel to convert light directly into electricity.
The sensitivity of the panel allows the torch to be recharged, even when it's not in direct sunlight.
It comes with a 240v mains charger to initially charge the torch.
This is also used to boost the charge when the torch hasn't received enough natural light.
Recharged, the torch gives up to 40 minutes of light per day.
Price:£18.45.
Contact:& name;,,.
2
PETZL ZOOM HEAD TORCH Design:the torch is water resistant.
The direction of light is adjustable as the torch rests on a pivot.
The beam is altered by twisting the head of the torch.
It takes either a flat battery (MN1203), three AA batteries (MN1500) with a round cell adaptor E06, or a Petzl E55 rechargeable battery.
Price:approx £17.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
3
MINI MAGLITE Design:a handy sized torch with a twist head which adjusts the light beam.
Comes with a spare bulb.
It takes two AA size alkaline batteries.
Price:£9.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
4
WATERPROOF TORCH Design:a waterproof rubber torch with a wide beam and attachment strap.
Takes two R20 batteries.
Price:£2.30.
Contact:& name;,,.
5
ANGLE FLASH LIGHT Design:a small angled torch with a pen clip.
It takes two AA size batteries.
Price:£6.50.
Contact:& name;,,.
6
EVER READY R SERIES Design:a waterproof torch which can float in water.
It comes with a krypton bulb and uses two Ever Ready R20 Silver Seal batteries.
Price:£7.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
7
DURACELL KRYPTON UNIVERSAL Design:functions three ways as spotlight, hazard warning light or as a free standing fluorescent lamp.
It comes with a wrist strap and uses four Duracell MN 1500 batteries.
Price:£12.75.
Contact:& name;,,.
8
UKE 4AA LIGHT Design:a waterproof torch with a very bright light beam.
It takes four AA batteries.
Price:£14.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
BUYERS' GUIDE
TRIED AND TESTED
PENTAX WEATHER ZOOM CAMERA
This Pentax weather-resistant camera arrived to be tested at a very opportune moment — I was just about to head off for a surfing weekend in North Cornwall.
As I stood up to my waist in water trying to capture the surfing action in Widemouth Bay, I found this fully automatic camera remarkably easy to use.
Apart from its handy size and weather resistant body the most useful feature was the 38mm-90mm zoom lens, simple operated by two buttons.
This meant I didn't have to get risk life and limb to get a good close up shot.
Also useful was the continuous shooting mode ensuring that I didn't miss any of the action as surfers sped past me.
I've since often used the camera out on the hill and have found its many other features very useful.
These include a macro lens at the touch of a button — great for capturing details of flowers — and a fully automatic built in flash which gives out a pre-flash emission to minimise ‘red eye’.
I particularly liked the detachable remote control unit which not only allows you to operate the shutter but also the zoom.
The proof is in the pudding as the saying goes, and in camera terms that means the photographs.
Both the print and slide films I used of landscapes turned out well, although my surfing shots didn't have the same richness of colours.
However it was very bright on the water and perhaps the film speed was too high.
Overall I was  impressed with the camera's performance.
It has all the best features of a modern compact camera with the benefit of a body which makes it highly resilient to outdoor use.
Price:£229.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
THERM-A-REST'R CHAIR KIT
Design:a kit designed to convert Therm-A-Rest mattresses into a chair suitable for camping/outdoor use.
The chair is made by folding the mattress and inserting the two opposite ends into two fabric pockets.
Adjustable straps on the pockets hold the mattress in position.
Material:taslanised nylon and coated nylon Oxford fabric.
Weight:10oz.
Price:from approx £34.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
LOWE HIGH PLAINS RUCKSACK
The Lowe High Plains 70 litre rucksack is a well made bag which is comfortable to carry, even with a heavy load.
The rucksack incorporates Lowe's Paralux adjustable back system which gives four levels of adjustment to fit your back size.
There is also a large lumber pad which rests comfortably against the pit of your back and a well padded hip belt giving a snug fit.
The pack has two aluminium staves running parallel inside the main compartment which give stability and rigidity to the whole structure.
A zip out internal divider gives you the choice of either two inner compartments or one large one.
A small weather flap with a pull drawcord gives added protection at the top of the main compartment.
This is a well balanced rucksack, with good carrying capacity for long trips, at an affordable price.
Fabric:body TXP 700, base TXN 1000s.
Price:£99.95.
Contact:& name;,,.
GRANGERS G WASH
Design:a liquid soap suitable for washing hands and clothing which comes in a compact plastic tube with a flip top lid.
Size:a 50ml tube is sufficient for 100 washes.
Price:£1.99.
Contact:& name;,,.
DISCOVERY BOOTS FROM LLEWELYN WYNNE
Design:a lightweight walking boot with nylon and leather uppers and a man made sole.
Sizes:3 — 11.
Price:£30.
Contact:& name;,,.
ACCESS FOR THE DISABLED
Making way
A little careful planning is all that is needed to make the countryside more accessible to the disabled.
Hazel Constance explains what can be done
Before his accident, Roger Davis was a keen walker, cyclist and backpacker.
‘I depend on a manual wheelchair for all movement away from my car.
This is because of a sleepy driver who knocked me off my bicycle one evening in 1980, breaking my back and severing my spinal cord.
I now try to live as independent a life as possible.
Over the intervening years one of my great laments has been my inability to achieve solitude, as everywhere I can now go, so can everyone else.
I like exploring country lanes with a knapsack on the back of my wheelchair, OS map in hand and binoculars within easy reach.
I'd like to follow footpaths but the obstructions are too frequent.
What obstructions, you may well wonder?
There are many — kissing gates which are too small to allow me through, pathways which drop steeply at the edge so I can't move to the side to open the gate, well-meaning people who put deep grit or gravel onto the surface of the path, making my progress slow and tiring, and deep mud where horses and motorbikes have also used the path.
And of course, there are also natural barriers such as roots, ruts, streams without bridges, deep undergrowth, steep slopes and rock faces.
While attempting to make the wheelchair or baby-buggy pusher's life easier, planners often do not help by making ramps up and over steps too steep for any but the most fearless.
Wheelchairs are easy to tip over backwards so a recommended maximum slope for ramps is an inch in height gained per foot of incline.
I need to be able to see the path ahead in order to plan my route well in advance, or else I may get myself into an awkward position.
In these cases I either have to wait for a passing walker and ask for assistance, try to reverse my direction or take the plunge and risk damage to chair and body.
With laid surfaces such as tarmac, another hazard is the camber — the slight upward curve to the centre of the surface of a road or track.
This can be steep, making progress forward difficult — you have to hold one wheel and push hard on the other just to stop yourself from rolling down it.
My life is now largely spent looking at places, observing the actions of other people and spotting birds and wildlife.
Despite all the drawbacks, I still enjoy getting out and about in the countryside whenever I can.
I could spend hours watching the birds on the coast of Norfolk, where a boardwalk makes access easy for me, or simply pushing myself around Richmond Park.
The countryside is there for us all to enjoy, so please, those of you who are responsible for making it accessible, remember those who, like me, need more than a kissing gate to get in.’
Walking with a wheelchair
Everyone needs exercise to keep healthy.
It may be just a gentle daily stroll or cycle ride or something much more strenuous.
Most of us have the luxury of choice but others are limited by what they can do by their physical disabilities.
Ironically many of these people were once keen sports enthusiasts who, due to injury or accident, find themselves confined to a wheelchair.
These people are not ‘different’— they are the same as you and I, except that they have lost the ability to use their legs and have to rely on a wheelchair to get about.
Many of them are able to get around independently and, like the rest of use, have every right to enjoy a country walk.
Where to go
There are many short walks in some of our forests classified as ‘walks for the disabled’.
But the more active wheelchair user needs a bit more of a challenge than a push along a 1,200 ft path round a Forestry Commission car park.
Possibilities for wheelchair users wanting to enjoy more challenging routes do exist.
Many country parks offer ideal facilities with properly surfaced level paths, specially adapted toilets, accessible hides for birdwatching and special fishing platforms.
The grounds of some of the larger National Trust properties are ideal for those who can push themselves around, and in many cases fairly long distances can be covered.
Old converted railway paths offer splendid opportunities, although circular walks are not usually possible.
Our forests also have some interesting trails, but in some places a strong person is needed to push the chair.
For the independent pusher, it can be frustrating when you wheel yourself around a likely ‘circular’ route, only to discover some steps have not been marked on the map so you have to turn round and come back exactly the same way.
This happened to me in Clumber Park, the National Trust Country Park in Nottinghamshire.
This park is otherwise ideal for wheelchair users with some 13 miles of tarmac roads — although there are some steepish slopes.
Ferry Meadows Country Park, near Peterborough, is another place where long circular walks are possible.
However, wheelchair users will need a helper to negotiate the bridge over the Nene.
Other places with good facilities include Hartsholme  Country Park in Lincoln and Hinchingbrooke Country Park near Huntingdon.
At Wicken Fen in Cambridgeshire there is a 1.25 mile boardwalk, enabling visitors to see much of the interesting flora and fauna of this special place.
And at Tangham, near to Woodbridge in Suffolk, a trail for wheelchairs has been incorporated into the Phoenix Trail, commemorating the replanting of the woodlands devastated in the great storms of 1987.
In the Peak District, the Manifold Trail has eight miles of level tarmac, with access points along the way.
The Bernwood gate was originally designed for keeping out motorcycles and horses from the Bernwood Butterfly Trail in Oxford, while still allowing wheelchairs to pass through.
Sketch: Forestry Commission
Special centres
There are also special centres, such as those run by the Calvert Trust offering outdoor activities for the disabled.
Unfortunately these are in great demand and not everyone is able to take advantage of them.
A fence at the bottom of a flight of steps works as an effective safety measure for infirm walkers.
If they should fall down the steps the fence will stop them going onto the road.
Sketch: Forestry Commission
How to help
So what can we all do to make it easier for our disabled friends to enjoy the countryside?
When you are next out on a walk, take a look and see of a wheelchair could get through a kissing gate.
Special gates are available, known as the Bernwood Gates.
These were first designed to keep out horses and motorcycles from the Bernwood Butterfly trail in Oxfordshire while allowing access to wheelchairs.
One of these special gates is located near the deer-watching platform at Bolderwood Grounds in the New Forest, and allows a wheelchair user access to see the deer — although the platform ramp is rather steep.
Perhaps we should be asking our local authorities to install wheelchair access gates in place of ordinary kissing gates wherever possible.
If you find deep gravel paths in your local park, write to your local parks department and ask that the paths instead be covered with firmly rolled gravel to make them suitable for use by wheelchair users.
If you see someone who you think might need a push, ask first if your help is needed as the chair user might well be undertaking a personal challenge.
If help is required you will probably be asked, although there is nothing wrong with offering your assistance.
Please try to avoid the ‘does he take sugar?’ approach, ask the person in the chair directly ‘Would you like a push?’rather than ask their companion if they have one.
If you're a member of a rambling club why not help organise a walk for local disabled people?
Croydon YHA Group have been organising Wheelchair Rambles for many years.
The group arranges transport and pushers, works out a suitable route and tries to arrange a pub lunch and tea.
They're always great fun and well worth the effort.
Why not see what you can do?
This split barrier is an ideal solution for keeping out undesirables such as motorbikes while giving room for wheelchairs to pass through easily.
Sketch: Forestry Commission
FACT FILE
Books
The Countryside and Wildlife for Disabled People is a useful book published by Radar (The Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation).
It contains a list of more than 900 sites, fishing and birdwatching facilities and adventure centres.
It costs £3 (inc p&p) from RADAR,.
Facilities for Disabled Visitors to National Trust Properties is available free from ,.
Please enclose an SAE.
Several county authorities also publish access guides.
It's worth contacting your local County Council Planning Department for more information.
Useful groups
The Fieldfare Trust,,.
The Trust promotes enjoyment and education in the countryside, especially for those who due to disability or disadvantage are handicapped in pursuing opportunities.
The Jubilee Sailing Trust,, for information on cruises as a member of a mixed able-bodied/disabled crew.
Calvert Trust Kielder,,.
Adventure activities and holidays for disabled people in purpose built centre.
GEAR GUIDE
RUCKSACKS
Buying the right sack is an absolute must for trouble free walking.
Our comprehensive gear guide gives all the facts and useful tips to help you make the right choice
The type of rucksack you need will depend entirely on what you want to do with it so it's essential to assess your requirements carefully before you buy.
A daysack should be capable of holding waterproofs, food and a drinks flask, extra jersey, map and compass and a small first aid kit, plus perhaps a camera.
Most daysacks have a simple padded back, padded slings and possibly a small waist strap.
Weekend and hostelling sacks need to be larger, as you'll have to carry extra clothes, nightwear and washing kit, plus extra food.
For light loads you may be comfortable with a simple padded back system, but many people will opt for some kind of frame at this stage.
If camping overnight you'll need still more space in which to carry tent, sleeping bag and mat and cooking equipment, and for longer periods you'll need extra clothes as well.
At this level you definitely require a frame.
Finally, for backpacking and expeditions in winter time, extra capacity must be allowed for thicker clothing, bulkier sleeping bags, etc.
Crampon and ice-axe attachments will also be needed.
CHOOSING
How much will a rucksack hold?
Most manufacturers quote the capacity of a sack in litres.
Typically, a daysack will hold from 15–30 litres, a weekend or hostelling sack from 35–55 litres, and a backpacking or expedition sack from 60–85 litres.
It is tempting to get a large capacity sack if you know you'll have a lot to carry, but bear in mind that it could tempt you to carry too much!
On the other hand, a sack which is too small to carry what you need will be a nuisance, and uncomfortable to wear if crammed full.
Some rucksacks offer extra carrying capacity by incorporating extendable hoods and expanding side pockets.
Others have optional add-on pockets and accessory straps for carrying extra gear on the outside of the sack.
This type of sack can be useful if you need a pack for backpacking, weekend use and day walking, as it will have compression straps which make it easy to reduce the size.
Occasionally sacks can be obtained with a ‘zip-off’ front pocket which can be converted to a day sack, although these are mostly to be found on convertible sacks used as travel luggage.
FITTING
The back length of a rucksack is critical for comfort, especially when backpacking, and if you don't have the right size you'll soon know all about it.
A well-fitting sack allows the load to be balanced between the shoulder harness and the hip belt without putting a strain on your shoulders or arms.
Quality manufacturers will offer sacks with a ‘fixed back length’ in several different sizes, so be sure your pack fits correctly and try it on with a realistic load before buying.
As a general rule, the centre point of the shoulder harness, where it is attached to the back or frame, should be level with the centre of your shoulder blades.
The hip belt should be adjusted so that it fits snugly on the hip girdle, and not round the waist.
Many manufacturers offer packs with adjustable harnesses, allowing the wearer to get the correct fit.
Some of these designs can be adjusted when the sack is fully loaded and being worn — others have to be adjusted beforehand.
These are particularly useful if the sack is intended for group use, or for young people who are still growing.
Some manufacturers make ‘women's rucksacks’ which have a shorter back length and specially shaped shoulder slings and hip belt to fit the female figure.
It has to be said however, that not all women have short backs, nor all men long ones!
CONSTRUCTION
Most modern sacks have internal frames, designed to fit the shape of the back.
They may be made from aluminium, fibreglass or plastic, and can be anything from a simple pair of flexible aluminium or plastic bars to a complicated collection of alloy pieces riveted together and linked to the harness.
Most can be shaped by hand to get a personal fit.
Some frames are removable, so that when a lighter load is carried it is not necessary to carry the extra weight of the frame.
External frames are sometimes available, but are less stable to carry.
Their main advantage is for carrying bulky pieces of equipment for expeditions.
FABRICS
Most rucksacks are made from heavyweight nylon with a waterproof coating on the inside and often a water repellent treatment on the outer surface.
The fabric may be textured to give it a rougher surface, resembling canvas.
Cotton canvas is still sometimes used.
Generally speaking, cotton canvas is the most hard-wearing fabric, followed by nylon and polyester.
However, proofed cotton canvas can be very heavy, and it gets dirty very quickly.
Most people now opt for one of the textured nylons, such as Ardura, Cordura or Kodra.
Special fabrics are often used for the backs of sacks to assist in combatting perspiration which is bound to occur when the sack is close to your back.
Some, such as Advent, can take up a certain amount of moisture, but also dry quickly.
Although rucksack fabrics are supposedly waterproof, always use a rucksack liner, plus polythene bags round individual items, to ensure your kit is kept dry.
MAIN SACK
Small rucksacks will have one main compartment, whereas larger ones may be divided into two compartments.
Sometimes this can be  converted back to a single compartment when bulky items have to be carried, either by zipping out the dividing panel or by loosening a drawcord.
Some sacks will also have an extension at the top of the main compartment made from lighter fabric which is known as a snow lock.
The lid or hood of the main sack is often elasticated round the edge to give a close fit and prevent rain from getting in.
STRAPS AND BUCKLES
Straps on harnesses should be long enough to give good adjustment, but not so long that the ends dangle!
Top tension straps, or lift straps as they are often called, help to give fine adjustment to the fit of the rucksack on your back.
They can be tightened to bring the top of the sack closer to the back, spreading the load over the shoulder harness and enabling the wearer to keep an upright stance, thus improving the stability.
The straps can be slackened to allow greater air circulation between the back and the sack if sweating becomes a problem.
Chest straps can also aid stability, and help keep the shoulder harness in the right place.
A waist strap may be used on a light daysack to provide extra stability.
Accessory straps can be useful for attaching bulky items to the outside of the pack.
The main closing straps on a sack may incorporate extra sliders to allow for carrying a sleeping mat.
Ice-axe loops and straps should be incorporated on sacks intended for use in snow and ice.
Never try to carry too many items on the outside of your pack — if you need to do this, your sack is too small!
Compression straps allow the contents of a half-full rucksack to be distributed evenly, allowing a balanced load.
Additionally, these straps can sometimes be used to attach extra side pockets.
Most rucksacks have quick-release buckles, particularly on the profile or main closing straps.
Ladderlock buckles are often used on the shoulder harness and lift straps, as these are somewhat easier to adjust when load bearing.
A quick release buckle on the hipbelt is essential in case a pack needs to be thrown off in an emergency.
POCKETS
Pockets on a rucksack need to be large enough to hold the things you want to put in them!
Some people   prefer to carry a stove in an outside pocket, particularly if it is liquid-fuelled, to prevent other gear from becoming contaminated.
Other items which warrant pocket space include camera, lunch pack and first aid kit, as all need to be readily accessible.
A pocket on the hood will often accommodate your waterproofs, and an internal hood pocket makes a secure place to keep your travel documents.
PACKING
How you pack your sack depends on your chosen activity.
Backpackers need to keep the weight high and close to the back, but ski-mountaineers and climbers need the weight to be kept lower to increase stability, although weighty things should be kept close to the back.
Pack anything you are likely to need en route either in a pocket or close to the top.
A good packing routine for backpackers is to pack the sleeping bag and spare clothes in the bottom of the sack, then pack things like food and pans, padded by some of your clothing, with your spare pullover near the top.
Last in should be the tent, which can be carried under the rucksack flap, and your waterproofs.
Pack everything in polythene bags or waterproof stuff sacks, and pack your pans and stove in bags to prevent them soiling other kit.
Never carry more than one-third of your body weight, and aim to carry about one quarter of it.
PUTTING ON A PACK
Putting on a heavy pack is not always easy — the best way is to stand the pack on the ground with the harness facing you and the slings slackened off.
Flex your knees, grasp the top of the harness with both hands, lift the pack and balance it on your right thigh.
Still holding the sling in your left hand, slip your right arm into its sling and, taking the weight on the right shoulder, lift the pack onto your back.
Put the left arm into its sling and lift the pack so that the hop belt rests on your hips.
Fasten the buckle and tighten the hip belt, then adjust the shoulder slings and lift-straps so that the load is comfortable.
Reverse the procedure when removing the pack.
CARE AND MAINTENANCE
Keep your pack clean by brushing off any loose dirt with a soft brush after use.
Remove stubborn marks by scrubbing lightly with a nail brush, using warm water and soap suds.
A reproofing spray, such as Grangers' Super-Pruf or Nikwax's Texnik, may be used on the outside of the pack when necessary.
Check your pack regularly for torn fabric, loose stitching, broken buckles, etc.
Check the frame parts for loose rivets, screws or missing bolts.
Get any repairs done before your packs fails you when in use.
A good pack shouldn't cause problems if it is looked after properly.
If you do have problems, contact your retailer who will be able to put you in touch with a specialist repairer.
GLOSSARY
Accessory straps:Often used to attach additional slide pockets to give extra space, or to attach bulky items which are too big to fit into the sack.
On mountaineering sacks, straps are provided for crampons and ice-axe.
Advent:A synthetic fabric with a cotton feel, which will not rot, holds little water and has good abrasion resistance.
It's particularly effective when used for back panels.
Aergo:The name given to Karrimor's moulded backsystem designed to give good ventilation to the back area and distribute the load between the hips and shoulders, as in an adjustable system.
Air Circulation System:Jack Wolfskin's system of a moulded perforated plate attached to the back of the sack, with a mesh screen stretched over giving maximum comfort and breathability.
Air comfort:Systems often using a shaped and stitched padded back which allows a current of air to pass between the rucksack and the wearer.
Ardura:A texturised nylon cloth with high tear and abrasion resistance, woven exclusively for Berghaus and specially coated to improve water resistance.
Ballistics Cloth:American term for waterproof heavyweight nylon.
Chest straps:Help to keep the shoulder slings in a comfortable position; useful carrying a heavy load.
Compression straps:Straps around the sides of a rucksack which can compress the sack when partially full.
Cordura:Heavyweight texturised and proofed nylon.
Format:Karrimor's shaped and malleable closed cell pad with aluminium frame, mainly used in climbing sacks and in the Papoose Classic baby carrier.
Frame:This may be internal, external, moulded or simply two straight or curved plastic or metal bars.
Some frames may be integral with the harness, and can be adjusted to suit the wearer.
Harness:The arrangement of slings and webbing by which the load is carried.
All shoulder slings have some adjustment and some harnesses are adjustable to suit back length.
The hip-belt may be consider part of the harness.
HD Plus:High density woven nylon cloth with cotton feel and high resistance to abrasion and tearing.
Several coats of polyurethane proofing are applied and the fabric is soft and flexible.
Hip Belt:A padded and shaped belt designed to sit on the hips and take the load from the shoulders.
It should be fitted with a quick-release buckle.
Kodex:A 700 denier-woven polyester/nylon cloth with a heavy textured appearance, coated with polyurethane or PVC.
Kodra:A semi-texturised nylon, available in different weights and densities, may be polyurethane or PVC coated.
KS100e:A 500 denier closely woven nylon fabric with an elastomeric coating on the back and stain and water resistant finish on the face of the fabric.
KS100e Heavyweight:1000 denier version above, higher tear strength.
KS100L:A laminate fabric approximately 10× more waterproof than other rucksack materials.
KS100t A texturised polyester fabric, coated for water resistance.
Similar to KS100e, but not quite to robust.
Lift straps:small straps at top of shoulder slings for fine adjustment to load carrying.
Also called tension straps.
Lumbar Pad:A padded foam ‘cushion’ at base of the back panel for support and comfort.
Some detachable/adjustable.
Nylon:A plain weave nylon.
The denier number is size of the individual threads and indicates of durability.
The higher the number, the thicker the thread.
Oxford Nylon:Medium weight, coarsely woven nylon.
Pack Cloth:Heavyweight woven nylon.
PU Nylon:Nylon with pu proofing.
Ripstop:A construction of fabric using a grid of stronger fibres at regular intervals to improve overall strength.
Texturised Nylon:Nylon fabric from yarns with a rough finish, giving greater tear/abrasion resistance than plain nylon.
Texturised Polyester:Similar to texturised nylon, but woven from polyester yarns, which are lighter.
Tear resistance is about the same as texturised nylon but abrasion resistance is less.
OUT & ABOUT Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country.
Walks compiled by Catherine Moore
1
Wester Ross Long moorland climb around Strath na Sealga
2
Inverness-shire Circuit giving excellent views around Loch Affric
3
Galloway The Loch Trool Forest Trail in the Galloway Forest Park
4
Northumberland Greenleighton moor walk on the Wallington Estate
5
East Cumbria Around Alston Moor through an area rich in history
6
Lake District A walk to the summit of Lord's Seat
7
North Yorkshire The Centenary Way long distance path
8
Snowdonia A challenging walk along Nantlle Ridge
9
Shropshire Valley and open moorland around the Long Mynd
10
Pembrokeshire A three hour walk to the Bedd Morris stone
11
Brecon Beacons Walk to seven waterfalls in the Vale of Neath
12
East Anglia Walking along the 50 mile Suffolk Coast Path
13
Dorset From Cerne Abbas to the Cerne Giant
14
Cornwall Trail to New Stone Age burial remains at Zennor Quoit
CORRIE HALLIE TO THE SOUTH OF STRATH NA SEALGA
This walk involves a long moorland climb in the shadow of high rocky peaks.
At the same time you will be rewarded by impressive views of a quiet inland loch and its surrounding mountains.
Start from the layby next to the Dundonnell River which is two and a half miles south of Dundonnell on the A832.
From here you follow a tractor track climbing the opposite slope which passes through a gate and continues through the birch woods beside Allt Gleann Chaorachain.
The path becomes very rough where it leaves the burn and climbs steeply out of the glen.
Soon afterwards the path splits — marked by three cairns.
Take the right hand path which cuts over the shoulder of Sail Liath and drops down to Shenavall, near the head of Loch na Sealga.
Go left here, along the valley floor before turning left again to return to your start point over the high moors.
Along the way there are good views of the peaks of An Teallach and the rugged hills to the south of Strath na Sealga.
Recommended by Ross and Cromarty Tourist Board.
CIRCUIT OF LOCH AFFRIC
Glen Affric is considered to be one of the most beautiful glens in Scotland and there are plenty of excellent walks in the area.
This circuit of Lock Affric will give you wonderful views of the lochs, mountains and woodlands which characterise this glen.
The walk starts at the car park at the eastern end of Loch Affric from where you drop down the track to the bridge over the river flowing out of the loch.
After 100yds you will come to a path junction — take the right hand fork and follow the track through the ancient Caledonian pine forest.
The path continues for just over four miles to the cottage at Athnamulloch.
Here there are great views of the wild upper reaches of Glen Affric with the Kintail Mountains rising dramatically behind.
From Athnamulloch take the path to the right which crosses over the bridge.
After around 400yds a faint path doubles back heading past a low hill and Loch Coulavie.
The path then climbs the hillside a little and gives impressive views over Loch Affric.
After dropping down towards Affric Lodge a good track follows the loch shore back to the car park.
Recommended by Inverness, Loch Ness and Nairn Tourist Board.
LOCH TROOL FOREST TRAIL
The Loch Trool Forest Trail makes its way around Loch Trool in the Galloway Forest Park.
Much of it is through forest including oakwoods now designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
Good views can be had over the loch and over to the Merrick, at 2,770′ the highest peak in the Southern Uplands.
The trail starts from the shop in the middle of the campsite and follows a road to the east leading to a well-marked trail climbing into a plantation of larch trees.
The trail then wends its way through an old wood of Scots pine, silver fir and European larch.
The trail traverses the steep, rocky slopes of Mulldonoch and continues above the valley of the Buchan Burn to Benyellary.
The footbridge over the Glenhead Burn marks the eastern limit of the trail.
Here, the 212-mile Southern Uplands Way which has been following the same route since Caldons Wood, heads further eastwards.
You soon pass through oakwoods at Glenhead and Buchan — remnants of the original natural forest.
The trail follows the trail follows the road between the Gairland Burn and the Bruce's Stone around Buchan House.
Continue to the Bruce's Stone which commemorates the battle of 13–7 marking the turning point in Robert the Bruce's fortunes.
From the Bruce's Stone the public road is followed until Glen Trool Lodge.
Its grounds are private and to the west of the lodge the trail leaves the road to cross Kenmure Moss.
Between the loch and your start point at Caldons campsite you need to follow a short section of the Water of Trool.
Recommended by the Forestry Commission.
GREENLEIGHTON MOOR WALK
This walk takes you around moorland through a forest, by a reservoir and through a nature reserve all on the National Trusts' 13,00 acre Wallington Estate in Northumberland.
The walk should only be undertaken from June 1 until October 31 so that the vitally important calving and lambing seasons remain undisturbed.
Throughout the walk is waymarked with white arrows.
From the car park you turn right along the old track by the quarry and walk north with the quarry on your right.
Continue along the track and turn right before you reach a gate.
Go left through the trees and climb over a ladder stile.
Walk through the edge of the plantation ahead and follow the track north across the moor to reach the iron age enclosures just south of the Fallowlees Burn.
The walk follows the line of the Fallowlees Burn and the southern edge of the Fontburn Reservoir passing through the Fallowlees Nature Reserve.
The reserve covers three acres of the valley and is home to early purple orchids and broadleaved cotton grass.
If you are lucky you might also catch sight of an otter around the burn.
Near the western end of the reservoir you can see a bronze age burial mound and a cup and ring marked boulder which may also date from the same period.
Towards the eastern end of the Fontburn Reservoir, the path makes its way out of the woods and heads first south, and then you turn right along the line of the shake holes — natural craters formed by water — eroding limestone.
The path climbs to the top of Greenleighton Hill (983′).
After you have walked down, follow the track by the quarry back to the car park.
Recommended by The National Trust.
AROUND ALSTON MOOR
The walk starts from the Crown Inn at Overwater, a hamlet within Nenthead.
There's a car park between the main road and the pub.
From here walk away from the main road and go left onto Dene Terrace, crossing the stile into the wood at the end.
Continue into Dowgang Hush.
Walk up the steps on your right, over the stile and follow the wall up the steep field to the road.
Turn right and then left onto a track.
Turn right where you see a waymark arrow and bear left crossing the stile around 150yds further on.
Follow the wall and markers and cross over the causeway.
You'll come to a track where you turn right to bring you to the main road.
Turn left here and just before Welgill House take a path to the right.
Cross the river by the footbridge and turn left along the track by the river.
Continue along the river and cross over the footbridge just after Gudham Gill flows into the River Nent.
Follow Gudham Fill until you reach a road.
Turn right and continue until you reach the buildings of Dykeheads and then take the rough track to the left.
Where this track bends to the left cross a wallstile next to a gateway.
Bear right to cross the drainage ditch by the stone bridge.
Follow the ditch towards the wall which is crossed by a stile and then bear diagonally left up the field.
Continue past the derelict wall to the footbridge.
Cross the footbridge and wallstile before crossing another stile to bring you to High House.
Follow the path past the house, cross the next two fields and follow the sunken hollow to reach the road.
Go right and then turn right at the junction with the A689 to Weardale, follow the road down the hill and take the path through the gateway on the left.
When you come to the main track turn right towards Nenthead.
The track descends back to the start.
Recommended by East Cumbria Countryside Project.
WALK TO SUMMIT OF LORD'S SEAT
The forest around the Whinlatter Pass area in the north-western Lake District is the oldest Forestry Commission forest and the location for many varied walks.
To the west of the forest an hour long walk takes you to an impressive waterfall, Spout Force.
Elsewhere you can walk through the forest up to the summit of Grisedale Pike or Seat How.
This walk through goes through the main body of the forest to the north of the visitor centre and into open country, giving spectacular views over Bassenthwaite Lake and the surrounding countryside.
Route finding in the forest is made easier if you follow a series of numbered posts dotted around.
For this walk you start from the visitor centre and head first west and then north-east to post two.
Continue north to post three and follow the trail round until you hit open country and reach post number five and then post six.
Curve round west to post 23 and then head to the summit of Lord's Seat.
From here you can see right over the Solway Firth to the Scottish lowlands.
From Lord's Seat make your way north-east then east to the rocky Barf.
Descend and head back into the forest going south-west then south to post 21.
Follow the track to post eight and turn left at the track junction at post nine.
Follow the track to post 11.
Turn right at the next track junction to return to the visitor centre.
Recommended by The Forestry Commission.
THE CENTENARY WAY
A hundred years of county council government seems a strange reason to create a long distance path, but North Yorkshire County Council thought it a good enough excuse.
And they've come up with a splendid route, over 80 miles of miles of deep valley walks, riverside and forest walks ending with a cliff top section at Filey.
The route makes use of sections of the Foss Walk, the Ebor, Derwent and Wolds Ways.
From the south transept door of York Minster the Centenary Way goes through York to the western bank of the River Foss, following The Foss Walk.
From here to the village of Sherrif Hutton the Way follows the line of the river.
The next 12 miles from Sheriff Hutton to Coneysthorpe makes its way via the hamlet of Stittenham over to the village of Terrington.
The route then follows the Ebor Way for a stretch before veering off right just before Hollin Hill Plantation.
You cross the Slingsby-Castle Howard road to continue to the village of Coneysthorpe.
From Coneysthorpe the Way continues south to Kirkham Priory and then north-east to Low Hutton, following the River Derwent up to the town of Malton.
This section covers about 13 miles.
From Norton Road in Malton the next 12 miles of the route continues into Norton, down to the village of Settrington and south to North Grimston.
After going to the village of Birdsall the route heads to Thixendale.
From Thixendale to Sherburn the route travels around 17 miles, first north to Wintringham past the deserted medieval village of Wharram Percy.
It then goes east, just south of the line of the A64 to Sherburn.
The Wolds Way is followed for part of the route.
The last 16 miles of the Centenary Way run east to the town of Hunmanby and then north-east to Filey Brigg.
A booklet giving a detailed description of the Centenary Way is available by sending an sae to: The County Surveyor,.
It costs £1.
Recommended by Yorkshire and Humberside Tourist Board.
NANTLLE RIDGE WALK
This is a strenuous route along a fine ridge in Snowdonia giving impressive views over the surrounding mountains.
The walk starts from the Rhyd-Dhu car park off the A4085.
From here you cross the road and go through an iron gate following the path west to pass a cottage and over a bridge.
Walk north-west to reach the B4418 and take the path going south-west until you reach the rock painted with white arrows.
Follow the path west passing over a high stile and making a steep ascent to the summit of Y Garn.
From here there are good views of Snowdon to the north-east.
Walk south along the ridge and scramble to the top of Mynydd Drws-y-coed.
Still keeping to the ridge descend a little and then curve around west to reach Trum y Ddysgl and go south-west on grass and descend again to reach the summit of Mynydd Tal-y-mignedd.
Here you'll find a very tall obelisk.
From the top of Mynydd Tal-y-mignedd descend south on the grass until the path starts to get steep (534–509).
Then leave the path to descend steeply south-east, curving left at the bottom of the slope to reach the old mine (541 505).
Follow the wall and indistinct path south-east to reach the bridle path at Bwlch-y-ddwy-elor.
Go through the forest in a north-easterly direction and when the forest road turns east, carry on going north-east.
Cross the stream until you reach the path you used at the start and retrace your steps to the car park.
Recommended by HF Holidays.
Contact .
BEDD MORRIS
This walk climbs to almost 1,000′ on the moorland of Parc Mawr.
From the start point on the A487 opposite the drive to ‘Holmwys’ take the track nor for 200yds.
Turn left and head to Rhigian Cottage, then go right on the path through the wooded valley.
Cross the bridge by Aberrhigian Beach and walk along the coast path.
Follow the path, taking care on the unstable cliff tops.
Walk on to the unstable cliff tops.
Walk on to Aberforest Bay and before descending to Aberforest itself, cross a stile near the first white house you reach.
Turn left, following the fence and keep to the top of the field.
Cross another stile and join the track which turns left.
Follow this south to the A487.
A track leads south on the other side of the road, slightly to the right.
At the first farm turn left.
Go on to Trecadifor Farm and over a cattle grid.
Go through a metal gate.
Bear left to a wooded gate after 200 yds.
Continue up an old lane to a modern farm track.
Cross it and go onto the common.
Follow the left track across the common.
At the Newport/Pontfaen road turn right.
Walk up the road for 100yds to the Bedd Morris stone.
Go back down the road.
Turn sharp left 80yds before a conifer windbreak.
Follow the track down and go straight on to a modern farm track.
Turn right and go to the Newport/Pontfaen road junction.
Turn left past the junction and on to a path.
Follow this to a stile which you cross.
Follow the track to the field keeping to the right.
Turn right onto a track, past Hendre Farm and left onto the road back to the start.
Recommended by Pembrokeshire National Park.
WATERFALLS IN THE VALE OF NEATH
This walk takes in seven waterfalls on the rivers Hepste, Mellte and Nedd Fechan in the Vale of Neath.
And there's the possibility of a diversion to two more on the Pyrddin.
From the Angel Inn at Pont-Nedd-Fechan follow the west bank of the Nedd Fechan.
Continue over the iron bridge at the junction with the Pyrddin to reach the Horseshoe Falls and the Lower Ddwli and Upper Ddwli Falls.
(If you've time, don't cross the bridge over the Pyrddin, instead walk west to Sgwd Gwladys and Sgwd Einion Gam Falls.)
The Horseshoe Falls are aptly named as they are shaped in a series of semi-circular ledges.
Further on, the Lower Ddwli Falls are particularly impressive when the river is flowing fast.
Continue on to reach the road, turn right over it to cross the Nedd Fechan and go to the road junction.
Turn left along the road.
After around half a mile branch right to cross the Mellte above the Upper Clungwyn Falls.
Follow the west bank of the river downstream to pass the very impressive Upper Middle and Lower Clungwyn Falls.
Once past the lower falls go round to the left on the north side of the Hepste, to reach the falls of Sgwyd yr Eira.
You can easily walk behind this fall.
From Sgwyd yr Eira head south to Dinas Rock, staying on the east side of the Mellte and make your way back to Pont-Nedd-Fechan.
Recommended by Brecon Beacons National Park.
THE SUFFOLK COAST PATH
The path runs from Felixstowe to Lowestoft, mainly through the Suffolk Coast and Heaths Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the Suffolk Heritage Coast.
It isn't difficult to follow the path and where help is needed there are waymarks of a yellow arrow on a brown background.
The path starts at the south end of the coast, at the car park just before the golf club on Cliff Road in Felixstowe.
Follow the sea wall past the Martello Towers to the Felixstowe Ferry, which goes to Bawdsey.
The path follows the foreshore around RAF Bawdsey and carries on to Shingle Street for around one mile on the road.
Follow the river wall parallel to Orfordness.
The route cuts inland via Butley Low Corner and Chillesford, through Tunstall Forest and across farmland to the Alde estuary.
Follow this to Snape Maltings.
From here the path follows the River Alde to join Sailors Path to Aldeburgh.
You soon reach Aldeburgh/Thorpeness beach.
The path now follows the coast, going past Thorpeness to Sizewell.
From here the route goes to Minsmere Cliffs and cross Dunwich Common.
Go through woods to Dunwich.
The path then follows the edge of the forest to Dingle Hill, through the marshes of the Walberswick Nature Reserve to the ruins of the Westwood Marsh windpump.
Then follow the Dunwich River to Walberswick.
At the harbour you can take the foot ferry to Southwold, or walk by the River Blyth to the bridge, returning on the north bank.
Take the ferry path and follow the sea front to the pier.
From Southwold to Kessingland the path follows the foreshore.
Alternative routes at high tide leave the coast at Easton Bavents and Green Heath, Covehithe.
North of Kessingland the route follows the cliff path to Pakefield, then on the promenade to Lowestoft.
The path finishes by the South Pier.
Recommended by Suffolk County Council.
CERNE VALLEY AND CERNE GIANT
This walk is along part of the Ridgeway National Trail, its highlight the incredible Cerne Giant — an 180ft outline of a naked man carved out of the hillside.
The walk begins in Long Street in Cerne Abbas.
Walk towards the church and turn left into Abbey Street.
Go right into the churchyard, follow the path to the arched exit and on to the field.
Go north to the stile, then up the slope to the fence and National Trust sign.
Go north along the lower edge of the fence, around the hillside and up the main path north-east to the summit.
Cross the field, pass the barn and continue with the hedgerow on the left to an iron gate (673 029).
Turn left and head north-west to Minterne Parva Farm.
Detour around the farm to rejoin track.
At the cottages follow the lane south-west.
Turn left on the road to the junction at Port Knap. turn right to Up Cerne.
Go south-west on the lane, then right on a stony track up Seldon Hill.
Pass the trees and follow the main path west and then north-west.
Where the tracks turns right at the woods, walk ahead to the gap in the hedge where the path joins the Ridgeway (639 032).
Turn left along the Ridgeway and follow it to the TV mast.
Turn left with the hedgerow to your right and cross the field to the woods.
Turn right to gateway into the woods and descend grassy path to fence and stile.
Continue and cross the field to gate, keep the hedgerow on the right.
Join the road at 662 018.
Turn right to the Cerne Giant viewing point.
Legend has it that a real giant terrorised the locals.
When he lay down to sleep the peasants killed him and cut around his outline.
From here continue to the junction, ahead for 50yds then turn left to Kettle Bridge.
Turn right along the river, left over waterfall to the alley into Abbey St. and back into Long St.
Recommended by HF Holidays.
RIVER COVE AND ZENNOR QUOIT
West of St Ives is a lovely stretch of the South West Peninsula Coast Path.
This walk follows the coast path then cuts across country to the 250BC New Stone Age burial remains of Zennor Quoit.
Take the road behind Porthmeor Beach to the path past the bowling green.
Continue to Clodgy Point and Hor Point.
Descend steeply from Hor Point to a stile, then ascend to a squeeze gap.
Cross a boardwalk and go to the trig point (477 408).
Descend to a stone footbridge over a stream (473 405).
The path going right leads to River Cove — worth a detour as seals can often be seen here.
Cross the bridge and go uphill.
After 100yds go left through a wood to a road.
Go right to Treveal.
From Treveal turn left, follow a farm road to Boscubban, then turn right to Wicca.
Cross the stile signed to Zennor and cross fields to Tregerthen.
Turn left up a steep road past Higher Tregerthen to the B3306.
Go left for 200yds to a track (468 386).
Walk south along the track uphill to a building and a faint track going east between low stone walls.
After 400yds you see Zennor Quoit to the south.
Continue east to a vague track junction near a gate.
Pass through for another 100yds.
At the next junction turn left, descend the rocky slope and through a gate.
Go east to Beagle ton Farm.
Go right around building and cross stiles east to Towednack Church.
Follow rough road to tarmac road, turn right onto it for 400yds to Cold Harbour and turn left for about half a mile until you reach the B3311.
Go left along the road for 260 yds until you reach the footpath sign.
Turn right and cross the field towards Halsetown.
Go through gate at the bottom, cross the boggy ground to a stony lane.
Go east and take a similar lane north.
At the crossroads turn right to cross the Halsetown-Vorvas road by a former chapel (508 387).
Follow the tarmac road opposite for 70yds and at the right hand bend turn left into the fields.
The path leads into a green lane.
Turn right to a tarmac road, then left to St Ives and Porthmeor Beach.
Recommended by HF Holidays.
OUTDOOR PEOPLE
Mountain rescue doctor
David Allan is a mountain rescue team doctor and the medical officer of the Mountain Rescue Committee
‘As a mountain rescue doctor my first responsibility is to make sure the other members of the team are as well trained in first aid medicine as possible.
If I can get out onto the hill for rescues, then that's good — but that can't always be guaranteed with the work commitments you have as a doctor.
Sometimes you can give useful medical advice over the radio.
I try to get out on the hill for either a call-out or a practice at least once a month with my team — the Furness Mountain Rescue Team which deals with an area of the southern Lake District.
There are also plenty of indoor training sessions where I teach the team, so we see a lot of each other.
I've been involved in the mountain rescue world for 14 years.
I came to it through climbing, having been active in mountaineering for years.
My local mountain rescue team needed a doctor and things have just moved on from there.
Most of the call-outs we deal with tend to be at the weekend and at the end of the day when people are tired.
Lower limb injuries are behind about 60 per cent of our call-outs and tiredness and unfitness are the major causes.
Most of the lower limb fractures we see occur in casual hill users — perhaps their leg muscles aren't attuned to what they're doing.
The more serious incidents usually involve head or multiple injuries received in falls.
And medical conditions are becoming a serious problem too — people having heart attacks, asthmatic or epileptic attacks, or diabetic crises.
In fact the commonest cause of death on the hill in the last three years in the Lake District has been heart attacks.
That's created quite a problem because it's more difficult to teach the lads in the teams how to deal with things like that.
One of two of the busiest mountain rescue teams have started taking cardiac monitors out on the hill with them.
If we are pretty sure that someone has had a heart attack though, we'll whistle up the RAF helicopter to get the casualty straight to the hospital.
A lot of the casualties are taken to Furness General Hospital, which is where I work as a consultant surgeon.
I do try to give the rescue teams some feedback on the casualties, so that they know whether or not they did the right things.
We're alerted to all incidents by the police — mountain rescue is carried out on behalf of the police, though everyone in the mountain rescue organisation is a volunteer.
Once a call has come through from the police the team initiates a ‘cascade call’ system where say, one person is responsible for telephoning six other team members.
If the exact location of the incident is known the team members go directly to it.
If not they assemble at the team base and go from there.
If we know that someone is injured, I as the doctor will go out too.
Some of the incidents can be tricky.
It is very difficult dealing with fractures and dislocations which have happened on fairly hard rock climbs.
Putting someone's shoulder back into place standing on a six inch ledge is quite something.
Our task is made easier if people give us as much information as possible when there has been an incident.
The exact location is important, as are details of when the accident happened and how far someone has fallen.
We need to know the level of consciousness of the casualty and if this has changed.
A knowledge of the casualty's background medical history also helps.
My involvement with mountain rescue has led to my becoming the medical officer for the Mountain Rescue Committee dealing with England and Wales.
This body acts as a guide to all mountain rescue teams.
I've been doing this for around six years now.
At the moment we're trying to formulate some standard policies on treatment and are trying to resolve problems of obtaining equipment, drugs etc.
All mountain rescue medical equipment is paid for by government funding, but this represents only a small percentage of our total costs.
Money for everything else has to be raised.
So far though it has not been a problem raising money for the sharp end of mountain rescue — for new ropes or new vehicles and the like.
But what we are probably going to be short of is money to improve training and to oversee examinations — people are reluctant to put money into the administrative side.
The mountain rescue organisation is getting bigger and it needs to be sustained — there has been a very dramatic escalation in the number of incidents on the hill in the last ten years.
However, hillwalking is largely safe but there are risks and we have to educate people about these risks if we are going to improve safety.
Report by  
If you would like to make a donation to mountain rescue send cheques or postal orders made payable to Mountain Rescue Committee to:,.