

PREFACE
If aggression and violence are part and parcel of what it means to be human, then why is it that there exist societies where aggressive or violent behaviour is conspicuous by its absence?
It was with such questions in mind that, in 1985, we invited a group of social anthropologists who had fieldwork experience in societies which, for whatever reason, they described as ‘peaceful’ to attend an informal seminar to discuss the issues involved in interpreting such societies and how our ‘evidence’could be used to question established theories on human nature.
We also wished to explore the viability of holding a more formal conference devoted to the topic of peace as a mode of social behaviour.
It became evident that there was no shortage of topics, and we decided that a conference was indeed called for in which we could pursue our shared interest in peaceful societies and attempt to challenge what we all regarded as a biased approach which presented human behaviour in terms of how aggressive drives are handled.
Those giving papers were asked to emphasize humans as meaning-makers, rather than humans as biological primates, and to elucidate from their own ethnographic experience the indigenous meanings of concepts relevant for an understanding of human interpersonal and, wherever applicable, intersocietal relations.
The title of the Conference was ‘Peace, Action, and the Concept of Self’, the overall focus being explications on indigenous ideas of what it means to be a human being, how the associated attributes are conceptualized, and patterns of behaviour.
The following themes were suggested for consideration by the speakers:
indigenous concepts of human nature, noting possible differences in values and ideas with regard to different categories within the society, e.g. men and women, ‘commoners’ and ‘aristocrats’;
the whole range of concepts concerning inner states of all kinds and their elaborations and meanings;
techniques and mechanisms of childrearing;
techniques and mechanisms of social interaction and control;
attitudes to, and handling of, deviant social behaviour.
The Conference took place in June 1986 at the University of Edinburgh.
In addition to anthropologists, we were fortunate in hearing from two psychologists a report on their research into the development of communication and knowledge in human infants, and the theory of innate human co-operative awareness and the ‘need for culture’(Trevarthen and Logotheti).
Some of the anthropologists chose not to refer to their ethnographic experience but to address more general issues of methodology and definition (Carrithers, Campbell, Heelas), but the majority of the papers are embedded in the particularity of an ethnographic setting.
It is within ethnography that we feel anthropologists have a significant contribution to make to the vexed questions of human aggression and violence.
Anthropology is bound up with the understanding of lived circumstances rather than abstract thought, the basis of anthropological knowledge being first and always ethnography.
However, description is not a privileged area of objective study, and the presentation of socio-cultural conditions of other societies cannot be viewed as a final explanation of other institutions and values, but must be thought of as part of the observer's reconstruction of their own understanding of the institutions and values.
This is particularly so in the case of the topic of the papers in this volume — namely peace as a social value.
Western thinkers and the public are concerned — morally and intellectually — with understanding the part played by aggression and conflict in the construction and maintenance of social life.
While conflict is taken as given, it is also regarded as problematic.
It is, however, largely our problem, rather than that of many societies which we study.
Papers dealing with the issues of peace and violence are therefore especially influenced by Western preoccupations.
For this reason, it is important to examine those societies that appear to contradict much of scientific and commonsensical explanation.
We feel that anthropologists are uniquely positioned to introduce a few question  marks into the fundamental assumption of the discourse, and it is our hope that this book will provide some such.
We feel that the main contribution of this volume to existing debate lies in the actual ethnographic presentations of peaceful societies, with the overall interpretation being explications on indigenous conceptions of human nature and categories of emotions.
We have therefore decided to place that section first.
The general theoretical discussion on concepts and definitions is therefore — perhaps surprisingly — put at the end.
These parts are separated by two papers which present the key concepts of innate sociality and intersubjectivity.
The Conference received generous financial support from the Seminars Committee of the University of Edinburgh Faculty of Social Sciences and from the Munro Lectureship Fund, University of Edinburgh.
We wish to thank both these bodies for the support without which the Conference could not have taken place.
Oslo, June 1988 Signe Howell  
INTRODUCTION
SIGNE HOWELL AND ROY WILLIS
WHAT ANTHROPOLOGISTS CAN CONTRIBUTE
Debates about human aggression have been dominated by psychologists and ethologists.
Too many of them treat aggression as an innate drive in the individual of the species, so that society enters the picture merely as a modifying influence — if indeed it enters at all.
Although there are important differences between the various theories, the great majority of researchers assert that ‘aggression’(however defined; see below for a discussion on definitions) is an integral part of human nature; and that aggressive impulses and behaviour have somehow to be directed and controlled for human relations to be sustained over time in a social setting.
Scientists present their ideas to the general public, contributing directly or indirectly to debates in social, legal, and religious domains.
Their views on questions of human aggression and violence therefore assume major importance in the moral community of which they form a part.
The question of what explanatory status one is to accord ‘aggressive drives’ in violent (and undesirable) behaviour underlies many socio-legal debates.
If part of human nature, to what extent are they legitimate as explanation?
To what extent should one draw upon socio-economic factors to explain such behaviour?
To what extent must the individual be held responsible for him/herself?
These are vexed questions that involve the whole community in Western societies: scientists, professionals, and the general public.
The rather surprising introduction of a moral dimension to this apparently scientific debate does, however, render it ambiguous — an ambiguity which becomes even more manifest when scientists present their ideas to a wider audience.
It is therefore extremely  important that their findings should be presented as theories, not facts (see Kuhn 1962, and Feyerabend 1978 for discussion on the issues involved).
Despite the massive increase in the volume of research in psychology and ethology, little progress seems to have been made.
We wish to propose an alternative approach, challenging the assumption that aggression is an innate human drive.
It is undeniably the case that in Western society aggression is regarded as part of human nature.
But perhaps this tells us more about Western society than about human nature.
We wish to suggest that we cannot assume an a priori aggressive drive in humans.
The presence of innate sociality, on the other hand, has much evidence in its favour.
Humans are a priori sociable beings; it is their co-operativeness that has enabled them to survive, not their aggressive impulses.
Such an assumption underlies the ethnographic papers in this volume, and the argument will be further elaborated below.
Within social anthropology there has, in recent years, emerged a new interest in such questions, adopting a cross-cultural, comparative approach to the study of war, aggression, and violence.
Several edited volumes have been published that deal specifically with these issues.
However, their sole interest has, in almost every case, been to explain the violent aspects of societies (see e.g. Bramson and Goethals 1964; Bohannan 1967; Fried et al.1967; Vayda 1976; Ferguson 1984; Le Crone Foster et al.1986; Riches 1986).
The opposite of violent behaviour, namely peaceful cohabitation on a societal scale, has — with the notable exception of Montagu (1978)— been ignored.
As Klama has recently observed in a penetrating critique of the literature on ‘aggression’, there is a close correspondence between certain popular conceptions of human nature in our society and a number of influential scientific theories to do with the ‘biological basis of human behaviour’(Klama 1988: 52).
We believe that social anthropologists can contribute more to the debates, in both empirical and theoretical terms.
First, we can present descriptions and interpretations of societies that do not conform to the Western model of humans as essentially aggressive.
We can do this by presenting societies whose ideological construction of human nature and behaviour is such as to favour peaceful coexistence.
Second, we can offer an alternative way of understanding society, by setting human ideas and behaviour firmly within a sociocultural context, focusing explicitly on indigenous ideas and values  concerning human nature.
Most of the anthropologists represented in this volume have worked in societies in which the empirical evidence is such as to cast doubt on conventional wisdom.
The typical Western attitude is aptly expressed by David Hume, writing more than two centuries ago in his famous essay An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding of 1748.
Should a traveller, returning from a far country, bring us an account of men wholly different from any with whom we were ever acquainted; men who were entirely divested of vice, ambition, or revenge; who knew no pleasure but friendship, generosity, and public spirit; we should immediately, from these circumstances, detect the falsehood, and prove him a liar, with the same certainty as if he ha[d] stuffed his narration with stories of centaurs and dragons, miracles and prodigies (quoted in Freeman 1984: 95).
Such, however, seem to be the tales that the anthropologists in this volume have brought home with them.
Are we all to be ridiculed?
Have we simply not done our job as fieldworkers properly?
Or is there some way in which we can accept and make sense of what we found to be the case?
Grappling with this problem has led us to reject a sharp either/or dichotomy in terms of innate versus cultural, and instead to posit the existence in human beings of innate potentialities and capacities — as well as innate constraints — that may be turned to peaceful as much as to warlike ends, potentialities and capacities that are necessarily set within the particularity of a moral and semantic universe.
As Carrithers and Trevarthen and Logotheti argue in this volume, it is primarily with the construction of such moral and semantic universes (or ‘cultures’) that the innate potentialities, capacities, and constraints are concerned.
PROBLEMS OF DEFINITIONS
Biological, psychoanalytic, ethological, ecological, social learning, and cognitive theorists have all attempted to further our understanding of aggression.
Most would agree that we are far from any theoretical consensus.
Marsh and Campbell (1982) attribute the lack of progress to a number of factors, including the difficulty of studying aggression both in laboratory and naturalistic settings, and to the compartmentalization of the academic world which leads to lack of communication across disciplines.
While we agree with this, we  would add another major obstacle, namely problems of definition of the object of study.
Aggression or violence: emotion or behaviour?
The debate is bedevilled by the problem of definition; a problem which is exacerbated by a common failure to clarify whether aggression is an experiential state or a way of behaving.
The conflation of the two confuses the issue, and reinforces the tendency for the behaviour to be reduced to an inner state — and hence rendered less open to investigation.
Thus aggression is often taken as synonymous with violence; violent behaviour being taken as proof of the existence of an inner state called aggression.
A brief scanning of the literature reveals numerous unquestioned assumptions and a high degree of confusion and contradiction in what is being talked about.
Warfare, for example, is often taken as proof of human aggressive impulses; but as Montagu (1976) tellingly points out, we can assume no aggressive feeling in the pilot dropping powerful bombs from a great height.
War is a social, not a psychological, fact.
The problem amounts to isolating criteria according to which we can identify an aggressive act.
Is it correct to claim, as Marsh does, that aggression is ‘the inflicting of physical hurt’ with its associated aim of ‘subduing or achieving dominance over a rival’(1978: 33) or should one follow Eibl-Eibesfeldt's broader definition and classify behaviour as aggressive ‘if it leads to another party's being hurt; this includes not just physical hurt (injury or destruction) but any kind of hurt, including annoyance, taunts or insults’(1978: 29)?
Siann, in a recent study Accounting for Aggression which gives an excellent overview of existing theories and positions, does make a distinction between aggression and violence.
According to her, aggression ‘involves the intention to hurt or emerge superior to others, does not necessarily involve physical injury (violence) and may or may not be regarded as being underpinned by different kinds of motives’.
Violence ‘involves the use of great physical force or intensity and, while it is often impelled by aggressive motivation, may occasionally be used by individuals in a mutual violent interaction which is regarded by both parties as intrinsically rewarding’(Siann 1985: 12).
While she does have the merit, in contrast to the majority of researchers, of making the distinction between an inner state and an  outward act, her definitions do not emerge as analytic categories to be employed for comparative purposes — mainly because they do not avoid the problem of reification, raised below.
Heelas has also given a survey of the different attempts at defining aggression, and the main theories which account for it (Heelas 1982, 1983).
In this volume, he argues against ‘essentialism’, by which he means the application of a cross-culturally applicable definition based on some ‘essence’ of aggression which then can be ‘employed to ‘read off’the nature of acts’.
In a similar vein Gibson (this volume) argues, ‘The most basic issue is whether we are to define aggression without reference to native concepts.
Those who argue that a universal definition of aggression is possible and even desirable are often interested…in whether the members of one society can be said to be ‘more aggressive’ than another according to some quantitative scale’.
Both Heelas and Gibson, as well as the rest of the contributors to this volume, are extremely sceptical of the viability of such an enterprise.
In a discussion concerning the use and meaning of the Anglo-Saxon term ‘violence’, Riches makes the pertinent point,
the analysis could be damagingly influenced by the ‘folk’ theories about violence which obtain in the analyst's lay culture.
Stressing the apparent universality, intractability and unacceptability of the problem of violence, the theories prominent in Anglo-Saxon lay ideas focus strongly on the irrationality and bestiality of violence…the approach to violence advocated in the discipline of ethology — in which violence is seen at least partly as having genetic determinants — is rather close to Anglo-Saxon folk ideas.
(1986: 2)
Thus, research on humans, or research that has implications for explaining humans, is rarely, if ever, neutral.
This of course applies equally to those who make substantive universalistic claims for a fundamentally peaceful drive in humans.
Historically, in the West, the  idea that there is in human nature some intrinsic element or principle which drives human beings to commit damaging and destructive actions is of considerable antiquity and is deeply embedded in the Judaeo-Christian tradition of innate sinfulness.
The concept of aggression, however, is of relatively recent origin.
Although the Oxford English Dictionary cites several seventeenth-century literary uses of the word, its vogue in academic  and popular discourse derives from twentieth-century psychoanalysis and animal ethology.
Etymologically, as Fromm reminds us (1973: 189), the English word is based on two Latin words,ad and gradior , with the combined sense of ‘movement towards’.
It would appear to have been adopted in psychoanalysis because of its air of scientific detachment and objectivity, its freedom from the objectionable religious overtones of such terms as ‘sin’ and ‘evil’.
It is ironic, therefore, that Freud, the anti-religious father of psychoanalysis, should have chosen to use the term aggression as implicitly synonymous with evil and wickedness in his well-known and passionate indictment of his own species:
Men are not gentle, friendly creatures wishing for love, who simply defend themselves if they are attacked, but…a powerful measure of desire for aggression has to be reckoned as part of their instinctual endowment…
Homo homini lupus : who has the courage to dispute it in the face of all evidence in his own life and in history?
This aggressive cruelty usually lies in wait for some provocation.
(Freud 1939: 50, 51)
In the scientific and popular cultures of our civilization Freud's ideas have acquired the status of virtually self-evident truth.
In the widely read book Human Aggression , the psychoanalyst Anthony Storr draws our attention to the ‘sombre fact that we are the cruellest and most ruthless species that has ever walked the earth’(1968: i).
The above quotes demonstrate, above all, that there is a strong tradition in the West to regard human beings as innately aggressive in our psychic make-up and, resulting from this, violent in our behaviour.
Reification
Many writers, from different disciplines, treat aggression (or aggressive behaviour, if the distinction is made) as a discernible phenomenon, a discrete category which can be studied in isolation from a social and semantic context.
Regardless of their theoretical predilections, working definitions, and methods of obtaining data, all such approaches have the effect of hypostasizing something called ‘aggression’.
In our view all such definitions are generic, subject to the ‘fallacy of misplaced concreteness’(Whitehead 1925).
Aggression becomes a category or phenomenon whose presence or absence is a  matter for empirical investigation.
Such has been the assumption underlying much of previous anthropological literature also.
But it is precisely the sort of presupposition which anthropologists should challenge, allowing, as it does, so little place for a social construction of knowledge and values and so much for (unexplained)‘human nature’.
There is therefore a need to question this assumption that aggression is a given element which somehow has to be accounted for.
Campbell (this volume) argues that the search for absolute categories for comparative purposes in various societies is a fruitless enterprise.
Instead he proposes an approach that asks the question ‘How do these people deal with certain basic human predicaments?’ and makes the pertinent point that ‘the problem is not the quality we have isolated, e.g., aggression, but how far we can get with an adequate description of what we have found’.
If one persists in treating the phenomenon ‘aggression’ as just that: as a phenomenon or fixed category finding an expression in violent behaviour, rather than treating violent behaviour as the resultant of values acted out, one is forced into simplistic either/or terms, as in the nature versus nurture debates (see below).
In interpreting ideas and behaviour in societies which others might characterize as ‘peaceful’, we suggest abandoning the focus on the lack of something called ‘aggression’(or violence) and the construction of theories that attempt to account for this ‘anomalous’ absence.
Instead, we advocate an alternative approach that dispenses with universalistic definitions and the testing of these.
This came out strongly during the Conference, and there was general agreement between the participants that a more fruitful approach is to try to locate interpersonal, or intersocietal, behaviour within the wider discourse of ideology and practice of the society in question.
In particular, what is the indigenous theory concerning human nature?
What metaphysical constructs embellish the theory?
What social and interpersonal practices do they give rise to?
What are the mechanisms by which behaviour is directed and controlled?
Violent behaviour, in the most general sense, can only be understood in association with other behaviour within the same society.
Behaviour is never culturally neutral, but always embedded within a shared set of meanings.
Markedness in language
An accepted notion that aggression is a given characteristic in humans everywhere leads to a search for it in various social settings.
This, however, begs the question and determines the formulation of research, phrasing the questions in terms of how aggressive drives are handled.
The vocabulary of the debates reflects this, for the contrast is drawn between aggression and non-aggression, violence and non-violence; it is the absence of conflict, not the presence of something else that is noted.
The whole emphasis is placed on the terms being negated, thereby reflecting a profound bias towards aggression as the norm.
Such a usage of a negation is in conformity with all linguistic markedness and unmarkedness.
The marked term is usually short, learned early in life, resistant to acculturative replacement, morphologically simple, generic (as opposed to specific), commonly used, phonologically and orthographically simple; and the unmarked term displays all the reverse characteristics.
Hence our preference for the terms ‘peace’ and ‘peaceful’which embody all the advantages of markedness while at the same time better express our general position in this particular instance.
‘Peace’ and ‘peaceful’are not, however, intended as universalistic analytic terms, but their usage is intended to mark a fundamental shift in theoretical focus.
Of course these too can be criticized on the grounds that they lack precision, and carry with them built-in biases, impeding both our understanding of our own field experience as well as obstructing cross-cultural understanding.
It is our hope that the papers in this collection go some way towards rebutting such charges.
WHAT IS THE APPEAL OF THE INNATE AGGRESSIONIST APPROACH?
Introductory remarks
The view of human nature as fundamentally aggressive can be expected to prevail in those domains where it corresponds with social and cultural ideology.
Carrithers (this volume) makes a useful distinction between science and pop science.
By the latter he means theories that confirm, unreflectedly, our prejudices.
Man thought of as the aggressive animal confirms such Western prejudices.
The view that aggression is an integral part of human nature has  been strongly argued for a long time by exceptionally articulate and persuasive individuals.
Many of them have directed their writings to a popular audience, and as Ferguson says, ‘in doing so, have often sacrificed standards of logic and evidence in favor of the pithy illustration or memorable quote’; and he continues ‘Wilson [1978: 99]raises the favorite question of college seminars and cocktail party conversations which is, ‘are human beings innately aggressive?’
His answer is a flat yes.
It is this unqualified yes that will be remembered at the seminars and cocktail parties, when his pages of qualification or the tepid conclusions…are long forgotten’(1984: 11).
The better known propounders of innate human aggression are Lorenz (1966), Morris (1967), Ardrey (1966), Storr (1968), Konner (1984; see Carrithers, this volume), Tiger and Fox (1971), Tiger (1969), and Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1979): all of whom, to varying degrees, base their conclusions on animal behaviour and link these with a theory of the role of violence in hominid evolution.
A salutary cautionary note is sounded by Zillmann who concludes after a painstaking review of experimental evidence that ‘the amount of relevant data on animal aggression from both laboratory and field investigations is nearly overwhelming.
In sharp contrast, research findings concerning the specific differences between animals and man in the mechanics of aggression are almost nonexistent’(1979: 7).
While ethologists, like Zillmann, do not necessarily agree with the views of the innate aggressionists, their voices are not heard outside their own circle.
The arguments of those who confirm the pop notions have been readily incorporated into popular Western consciousness, finding rich and varied expression in the arts and media.
No doubt there are numerous and complex reasons for the strength of Western adherence to such views.
They are to be looked for in our Western indigenous psychological explanations as much as in the domains of scientific pursuit which, as Riches notes above, are not themselves free from such ontological conceptions.
To our mind, they can be usefully examined under the following four headings.
Man as animal
Members of most non-Western societies regard themselves as the most superior form of being, in possession of the most desirable qualities.
Westerners, on the other hand, attribute to themselves many characteristics they most dislike and, moreover, grant these a  powerful explanatory role.
The fact that, biologically speaking, we belong to the animal kingdom is frequently used as an explanation for violent behaviour, and the animal metaphor is frequently invoked.
William Golding's novel Lord of the Flies , read by many British school-children, is seen as an example of the innately brutal characteristics of humans.
Schoolboys reveal themselves as having only a thin veneer of ‘civilization’ which, once the constraints of authority are removed, disappears, laying bare their ‘true nature’which is violent, domineering, and competitive, resulting in the survival of the fittest in a most literal sense.
Similarly, the violence in many sections of our own society today is, in the media, taken as proof of ‘the animal nature of man’ which — an insult to many animals — is always understood to be destructively aggressive.
Similarly, ‘the law of the jungle’, meaning, in fact, the absence of any laws, metaphorically links humans and animals.
Such theories take the individual as the starting point; and the inherent sociality that we are arguing for — and which precludes any form of methodological individualism — is given little or no credence.
As becomes clear from most of the papers in this collection, this particular view of human nature is not one shared by many other societies.
They may attribute unattractive and negatively valued characteristics to their enemies or neighbours, but most certainly not to themselves.
Authoritarianism
Second, and related to the first point, the model of man as a violent animal — and hence self-seeking and violent in the pursuit of attaining his goals — is useful as a justification for authority and institutions of authority.
It is also found at the base of the neo-classical economic theory of capitalism, with its basic tenet of man as a maximizing individual with limitless needs and desires — a notion Sahlins deconstructed many years ago (1974), but one that still persists in Western economic and political thought, and which underlies much of the anthropology of conflict.
Such thinking is part of a long tradition, finding its most clear formulation in the political philosophy of Hobbes where human society is presented as being in a state of ‘warre’ in which every man fights every other man for control of resources and for the (presumed) pleasure of dominance.
Hobbes' extreme views are often juxtaposed with those of Rousseau, who viewed human nature as innately ‘good’ and attributes the manifest  defects in human behaviour to the corrupting effects of ‘society’or of ‘culture’.
Subsequent debates have tended to favour the Hobbesian view, arguing for institutions of authority, and dismissing Rousseau as a romantic utopianist who simply did not accept people for what they ‘really are’.
Robarchek (this volume) sets his discussion of the Semai within the frame of what he argues has become a ‘sterile dichotomy in Western thought’ as a direct result of the ideas of these two philosophers.
Sexism
Third, the views of the innate aggressionists and their followers reflect — and implicitly reinforce — sexism, since it is usually man who is presented in the Hobbesian mould, with a sleight-of-hand extension of man into Man.
Here the subject of enquiry purports to be an understanding of human nature, whereas the object of study is in fact the male half of society.
Woman is either ignored or presented as innately less aggressive than man.
The arguments for a biological difference in the sexes in this regard are far from conclusive, but in cases where such a difference is put forward, the general conclusions of humanity's aggressive nature are not revised.
Examples are too numerous to list, but a particularly telling one from members of our own profession, where one might expect some awareness, can serve.
In their book The Imperial Animal , Tiger and Fox state,
While possessing females is important to the young males, and is in some sense the whole point of the evolutionary process, it is not necessarily the basic motivating factor [in intra-male fighting].
The possession of a female or females can be viewed as one more validation of male status, which is an end in itself, because, once achieved, the women follow anyway.
Whatever the advocates of student power do want — and it is not always clear — one thing they plainly do not want is access to their professors' wives (1971: 111).
The ‘imperial animal’ of the title is exclusively male, whether he be the shaper of human evolution or the intellectual of today.
Similar underlying assumptions can be found in Chagnon's famous study of the Yanomamo.
He explains male Yanomamo violence as individual competition motivated less by considerations of material well-being than by ‘reproductive striving’(1983: 86), i.e., men compete over access to women and the subsequent offspring.
These assertions, that  men need to compete and that women are an important object of competition, are contradicted by evidence from at least four of the societies described in this volume (Overing, Robarchek, Howell, Willis).
Siann concludes that evidence from hormonal studies and ethology is extremely ambiguous and that no conclusions can be drawn with regard to male and female behaviour or emotions, and that psychoanalytic approaches cannot produce any firm answers on questions of sex and gender (Siann 1985: 33–9, 82–4, 123–8).
Again, the ethnographic examples of Semai, Chewong, and Piaroa demonstrate that indigenous views regarding emotional and behavioural differences in men and women need not necessarily be conceptualized.
Militarism
Fourth, the Western post-war build-up of defence is partially justified in the above terms.
The nuclear arms race, and East-West conflict, is seen as inevitable given that human nature is what it is (namely competitive, aggressive, and combative) and the consequent pessimism shared by a large proportion of Western Europe's population concerning the possibility of nuclear war is again expressed in such terms.
War is popularly perceived as part and parcel of what it means to be human, and, with ever increasing deadly weapons, the devastating impact of war is consequently accepted as inevitable.
Some critical comments
Culture, the pre-eminently human factor, has, in much ethology, socio-biology, psychology, and psychoanalysis, been either ignored totally, or at best relegated to a secondary position, a modifying role.
Yet Robin Fox, who works from within a socio-biological framework, concedes, rather surprisingly, that ‘symbol-making is as much a human attribute as sex and food’(1982: 13).
This important point is often ignored, and can in our view be taken further; to suggest that in human society there are no natural and neutral phenomena.
Acts like eating, sexual intercourse, and fighting are embedded in a socially shared set of associated symbols, and they cannot be isolated from this semantic setting.
This is true of human behaviour of all kinds, and of human emotions.
None is an objective phenomenon to be studied in isolation; they are all constructed from within the society in  question and can only be interpreted in conjunction with other social ideas, in particular indigenous ideas concerning human nature.
AGGRESSION AND VIOLENCE IN ANTHROPOLOGICAL THEORY
Social anthropologists have not, on the whole, been very interested in the general empirical study of aggression, violence, and peacefulness.
In British social anthropology, the implicit assumption has been that humans are violent, and that society in various ways controls and constrains.
Theories were developed that might be regarded as dealing with such issues only in the field of conflict.
Here two main theoretical strands can be isolated.
First, how conflict permeates and shapes human interaction and social organization, and second, how the idea of conflict helps elucidate the genesis, escalation, de-escalation, and consequences of combat, violent confrontation, wars, etc.
In British and American anthropology, such issues were rarely dealt with directly, but were linked to four main theoretical approaches: cultural relativism, legal and political anthropology, the study of ritual, and bio-ecological determinism.
We will allude briefly to the main points, as we see them, of these approaches.
(For a detailed presentation of anthropological theories concerning the study of war and conflict, see Ferguson's ‘Introduction’ to Warfare, Culture, and Environment (1984) which, while adhering to a ‘materialist’approach, nevertheless provides a useful overview of, other anthropological views.)
Cultural relativism
Most social anthropologists probably adhere to some form of ‘soft’ cultural relativism, whereby the thrust of explanation of human ideas and behaviour is placed within the framework of the particular sociocultural institutions of a society.
They thus decline to proffer a general, universal theory; while at the same time postulating an unexamined ‘psychic unity of mankind’.
A ‘harder’ version was expressed in the old ‘nurture versus nature’debate of the pre-war era, in which American anthropologists in particular, following the lead of Boas, engaged themselves.
The so-called Culture and Personality school of the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s held that human behaviour was the provenance of culture, not of race, and attempts were made to  relate traits of individual personality and symbolic aspects of culture to socialization variables (Lipsey 1985: 180).
The debate was recently brought to life again with Freeman's forceful attack on the work by Margaret Mead from Samoa (Freeman 1984).
Mead was one of the best-known anthropologists arguing for a nurture perspective on human behaviour.
As such, she was an adherent of the particular alliance between psychological behaviourism and cultural relativism which Boas favoured and — which won widespread acceptance in American anthropology.
Freeman was particularly out to demolish Mead's suggestion (1928) that Samoan society is characterized by values emphasizing uninhibited playfulness and peaceful co-existence, accusing her of having misunderstood Samoan society.
This is not the place to discuss the intricacies of the argument and those it gave rise to in the anthropological press (for a cross section of the arguments see, e.g., Strathern 1983; Brady 1983); the purpose in raising it is to note the continued appeal of the debate and to point out Freeman's confident rejection of the possibility of a peaceful society.
Much of the debate surrounding cultural relativism has been polarized into extreme — and ultimately simplistic — either/or terms, as in the nature versus nurture debates.
However, the excesses of ‘pop socio-biology’ should not, as Carrithers points out (in this volume), lead us to a wholesale rejection of the evidence for certain genetically transmitted predispositions in the human animal.
To assert that all normal human behaviour is culturally moulded does not necessarily prove that it is also culturally determined.
Such has been the assumption behind much work in socio-cultural anthropology.
Like pop socio-biology it bears the unmistakable imprint of a particular cultural view of the world, resulting in a projection of ethnographic ‘material’ onto inert ‘other cultures’.
Carrithers states, ‘My intention is not at all to replace the notion of culture, but to argue that sociality is a necessary precondition for the existence of culture.’
Even more importantly, there is every reason to believe, with Mary Midgley, that the basic assumption behind cultural relativism/behaviourism that human beings are totally plastic and devoid of innate structuration is false: ‘Sensible psychologists have tended more and more to admit that people do have some genetically fixed tendencies’ and she continues that ‘What makes this admission hard, is the very strong impression still prevalent that we have to choose between considering these tendencies and considering outside conditions’(1979: 20).
As anthropologists we stress context as a methodological necessity.
The danger in exclusively privileging the socio-cultural context in the interpretation of human institutions and behaviour is that every social phenomenon becomes so context-dependent that it cannot be translated across cultures.
While avoiding strict definitions of social categories, we can nevertheless examine manifestations of how humans in different social settings seek answers to the general existential questions.
By accepting an innate predilection to sociality and a fluid range of capacities and constraints, we can focus on indigenous conceptions concerning human nature and human inner states, while avoiding the particularistic errors of cultural relativism.
Political and legal anthropology
Many of the anthropologists dealing with political organization have chosen to approach this from a conflict perspective.
Bohannan in his introduction to the American Museum Sourcebooks in Anthropology entitled Law and Warfare states ‘We shall never banish conflict…
Rather conflict must be controlled and must be utilized profitably in order to create more and better cultural means of living and working together’(1967: xi).
And he continues, ‘We need a new ‘code of aggressions’…
Conflict is useful.
In fact, society is impossible without conflict.
But society is worse than impossible without control of conflict…
Total repression of conflict leads to anarchy just as surely as does total conflict' (ibid. xii).
Such a view echoes that of Freud.
The existence of this tendency to aggression…makes it necessary for culture to institute its high demands.
Culture…has to erect barriers against the aggressive instincts of men and hold their manifestations in check by reaction-formations in men's minds (1939: 51).
The job of the anthropologist from such a perspective becomes to demonstrate ethnographically how different societies handle conflict through the various political and legal institutions.
The 1940s and 1950s saw a great number of ethnographic studies in the British functionalist and structural — functionalist modes, whereby social institutions were analysed in terms of how they maintain the status quo of the particular society.
One of the most explicit political theories of that period is that of Gluckman.
In his famous essay ‘The Peace in the Feud’(1955) conflict is again the analytic starting-point for the  understanding of society, and the problem is most severe in the analysis of so-called acephalous societies.
‘Where do social order and cohesion lie in such societies?’ he asks.
Gluckman's thesis is that in these societies, the fundamental propensity in men to quarrel is held in check by cross-cutting allegiances.
Thus,
This is the central theme of my thesis — how men quarrel in terms of their customary allegiances, but are restrained from violence through other conflicting alliances which are also enjoined on them by custom.
The result is that conflicts in one set of relationships, over a wide range of society, or over a long period of time, lead to the re-establishment of social cohesion (1955: 2).
In other words, paradoxically, feuding has a place in society to maintain the status quo .
Similar studies were all analysed with an overall framework of interrelating forms of social organization with the frequency and manifestation of social conflict.
Ritual as catharsis
A different, though often related, approach can be found in one of the several ‘displacement of aggression’ theories.
Here, aggression is taken as a given which must find some outlet.
Dollard et al.(1969) are generally credited with the formulation of the ‘frustration-aggression hypothesis’ whereby it is held that the obstruction of goal-oriented behaviour leads necessarily to aggression.
This, like most of the purely psychological theories — including psychoanalytic ones — are strictly methodological-individualistic.
Thus they are based on the individual psyche and make a theoretical leap from this to the universal psyche.
There are, however, some anthropologists who have tried to translate Dollard's ideas into social terms.
Frustrations on a group scale may be explained in terms of the group finding release by going to war with its neighbours, or through a collective cathartic experience such as a ritual performance.
Internal tensions can be resolved through a creative channelling and thereby reinforce the group's own boundary.
But it is probably more at an implicit, unexamined, level that much anthropological writing adheres to the frustration-aggression hypothesis.
Ritual has been regarded by several anthropologists as a social  event in which pent-up emotions can find some form of release.
Malinowski (1964) argues that ritual served an important function in that it alleviated the anxiety of the participants in areas of uncertainty.
Radcliffe-Brown (1952) and Evans-Pritchard (1965) denied this, stating that there was no a priori reason for not assuming the opposite, namely that ritual creates anxiety, and that the task of the anthropologist was not to infer psychological states in others, but to focus on the sociological significance of social institutions: ritual being one such.
Nevertheless, the ‘pressure cooker’ metaphor, through which violent and potentially destructive emotions must find an outlet, has frequently been applied in the study of ritual and ecstatic religious behaviour.
Turner in his studies of Ndembu symbols and ritual (1957 and 1967) tried explicitly to bring together a sociological and a psychological explanatory framework for the understanding of ritual.
He suggested that one of the functions of ritual is the shedding of ‘bad’ feelings, being the final resort in conflict-solving in what he calls ‘social drama’.
Turner, however, also allowed for the possibility that rituals do in themselves provoke strong emotions; emotions which then have to be directed.
Such anthropological theories are linked to the catharsis theory, whereby it is held that through some dramatic experience the individual (or group) sheds itself of pent-up, potentially destructive, emotions to emerge cleansed and ready to deal with daily life in a harmonious manner.
Like the ‘pop’ version of innate aggression, there is in the West today a similar ‘pop’version of the necessity for catharsis.
Howell (this volume) takes up some of these issues in her paper where she argues against the interpretation of ritual as catharsis among the Chewong.
Much of Western psychotherapy draws, in various forms, on the catharsis model, whereby it is held as necessary for emotional health to come to terms with the repressed anger that is assumed to be inside the individual, and techniques are developed to make the individual confront these in a dramatic form.
The sociologist Scheff is probably the social scientist who has attempted the most thoroughgoing analysis of catharsis in social life.
In his book Catharsis in Healing, Ritual, and Drama much of previous psychological and anthropological thinking around the issue is incorporated.
His is an attempt to put emotions firmly back into studies of social behaviour and he concludes that catharsis is a potentially useful mechanism for psychic health, and that repression of emotions produces instability.
Although he allows for many areas of uncertainty in  the study of catharsis, Scheff nevertheless accepts the universality of the need to handle destructive emotions, and proposes that ritual, as a cathartic experience, be reinstated in the West as ‘a dramatic form for coping with universal distress’(1979: 114).
While we agree that emotions should become a legitimate study for anthropologists, we nevertheless feel that the degree of consensus is minimal in such matters and that, for the time being at least, we should abandon universalistic explanatory models, and instead locate such studies within the indigenous understanding.
Socio-biology and ecological materialism
Much of the systematic anthropological work on war and conflict in recent years has been made within an ecological or socio-biological analytical framework.
While there are major differences between the two, we have chosen to refer to them together.
Socio-biology drew much of its inspiration from the zoologist E. O. Wilson who proclaimed in 1975 the birth of a new synthetic super-discipline that would merge social science with biology, and which he named sociobiology.
This particular theoretical stance has found most of its adherents amongst American anthropologists.
Ferguson gives a historical outline of the various approaches which he terms ‘materialist’.
With regard to their treatment of the present topic, he says, ‘A materialist approach to war focuses on war's relations to the practical problems of maintaining life and living standards.
Since 1960, this usually has meant studying war in relation to local ecology’(1984: 23).
He distinguishes two main types of ecological studies: the origins and evolution of wars and the function of wars.
Much has been written by social anthropologists against the materialist approaches in ethnographic analysis.
In our view, we can do no better than quote from Sahlin's direct attack on sociobiology:
Consider the relation between warfare and human aggression what Wilson at one point calls ‘the true, biological joy of warfare’.
It is evident that the people engaged in fighting wars — or for that matter, any kind of fighting — are by no means necessarily aggressive, either in the course of action or beforehand.
Many are plainly terrified.
People engaged in wars may have any number of motivations to do so…ethnographically the energies that move  men to fight are practically coterminous with the range of human motivations (1977: 7).
And later,
For between the basic drives that may be attributed to human nature and the social structures of human culture there enters a critical indeterminacy.
The same human motives appear in different cultural forms, and different motives appear in the same forms (ibid.:
11).
AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH
The idea of human nature and sociality as innate capacity
We have on several occasions referred to the interpretative importance of indigenous constructions of human nature and human emotionality.
We know of no empirical examples of a society that does not, however implicitly, hold collective views on what it means to be a human being.
Indeed, ‘Every religion includes an image of personhood’(Harris 1978: 76).
Ideas concerning human nature can thus be said to constitute a human universal.
If this is so, then we feel that there is a way out of the various impasses discussed above.
By placing our theoretical focus in the interpretation of other societies on the social constructions of personhood, we lay the foundation for a legitimate comparative enterprise.
Moreover, by accepting the overwhelming evidence that there are innate human capacities, predilections, and constraints, we can take a step further in such an enterprise.
Thus human beings come prepackaged with a set of potential capacities and constraints, but these in themselves are not fixed or determined.
Rather, they are a set of directives for an imaginative negotiation which seek specific definition in the cultural setting.
Among these may be listed the capacity for co-operative behaviour and the capacity for uncooperative, competitive action (both conceptual and physical).
The important point to stress is that humans appear to possess an innate capacity for finding common cause in a great number of cultural activities, a capacity Carrithers in this volume calls ‘sociality’.
Such a capacity would not explain the specific instances of human sociocultural arrangements in their immense variety — that could only be done by reference to local histories, local circumstances, and local causes  but it could explain how such a range and history of variation was possible at all.
Such suggestions are borne out by Trevarthen and Logotheti (this volume).
They argue, from the evidence of infant behaviour, that Homo sapiens is born with the capacity to participate in the collective understanding; to learn the meanings of his/her particular culture.
On the basis of many years' detailed observation of infants, they argue for the existence of what they call ‘innate intersubjectivity’ as a universal motivation, present in the newborn and peculiar to our species, that leads the child to acquire symbolic understanding.
This means that we have an innate predisposition to experience and act inter-subjectively, beginning with an awareness of ourselves as social beings with emotions in relationship to other social beings who have the same emotions, interests, and intentions which we can perceive.
We regard such a theory as providing us, as anthropologists, with a concept of useful explanatory power.
Moreover, it allows us to talk more confidently of a psychic and cognitive unity of humanity without limiting us to absolute categories.
However, it is important to note that a theory of innate human sociality is not a reductionist theory.
Unlike pop socio-biology, which appeals to the gene as the ultimate and fundamental causal factor in human evolution and behaviour, innate sociality supposes a predisposition in human beings towards the continual absorption of existing meanings and the creation of new meanings in local universes of thought that are constantly being discovered, destroyed, and negotiated anew in the process of social interaction.
The relation between these inherent motives for culture and society is a matter that requires analysis of the epigenetic regulations of brain growth, about which little is yet known.
Thus sociality, together with indigenous theories of human nature, provide a framework for comparison between different societies and cultures, including the various ‘peaceful societies’ described in this volume.
As we (Carrithers, and Trevarthen and Logotheti) have already noted, sociality, as an innate, presumably genetically inscribed predisposition in all human beings, explains both the existence of the characteristic human ability to construct systems of cultural meaning and the enormous empirical variations observed to occur in such systems.
More, the fact that this being,Homo sapiens , is from the moment of birth aware of itself in relation to others, and experiences and defines itself in such a relational mode, suggests the universal, pre-cultural basis of a relational concept that appears to  occur in one form or another in all human cultural systems: the complementarity of Self and Other; Us and Them.
Innate ‘I-Thou’ appears, then, to be the origin of cultural ‘Us-Them’.
Always shifting, always situationally determined like the ever-changing systems of cultural meaning in which it is embedded, the Self-Other/Us–Them boundaries are also the emic ground of kinship and enmity, affiliative and ‘aggressive’ behaviour, peace and war (see also below).
It may perhaps have been valid in the past to dichotomize theoretical stances into endogenous (formulated in terms of what is natural to humans) and exogenous (formulated in terms of sociocultural factors)(Heelas 1983); but many biologists today think that there is a built-in capacity for change through learning capable of giving directive impulses for change.
Thus, while we may be born with a certain ‘equipment’ this does not necessarily determine behaviour; and, furthermore, behaviour can alter the equipment.
The view that co-operation, not competition, is more conducive for survival is also gaining ground among biologists and ethologists.
The ethologist P. Bateson abhors the way competition is used as an explanatory factor in evolutionary theory, and says,
The pattern generated by co-operative behaviour could distinguish one social group from another and could mean the difference between group survival and communal death…
It is a travesty of Darwinism to suggest that all that matters in social life is conflict.
One individual may be more likely to survive because it is better suited to making its way about its environment and not because it is fiercer than others.
Individuals may survive better when they join forces with others (1985: 3).
Similar ideas are expressed by Leakey and Lewin:
Throughout our recent evolutionary history, particularly since the rise of a hunting way of life, there must have been extreme selective pressures in favour of our ability to co-operate as a group: organized food gathering and hunts are successful only if each member of the band knows his task and joins in with the activity of his fellows; a good deal of restraint on natural impulses during the stalk and capture of the prey is likewise essential.
The degree of selective pressure towards co-operation group awareness, and  identification was so strong, and the period over which it operated was so extended (at least three million years, and probably even longer),that it can hardly fail to have become embedded to some measure in our genetic makeup (1977: 209, emphasis ours).
While we find this second passage of great interest, we feel that the concept of ‘natural impulses’ is problematic in two ways.
First, there would appear to be an assumption that these are in their essence unco-operative, something which we would question, and second, the restraint itself would have to be a natural impulse!
However, if the general points of our argument are right, it seems to us that the innate versus learnt debate loses most of its force; indeed, the papers in this volume corroborate such findings.
We are suggesting, then, that the term ‘human aggression’ as conventionally and commonly used is doubly skewed by ideological influences that are deep-rooted in our Western culture.
On the one hand aggression, though ‘natural’(particularly in males) is also condemned as ‘bad’.
On the other hand, its perceived opposite, peacefulness, carries with it the negatively valued connotations of being passive and inert (qualities which furthermore are associated with females).
THE ETHNOGRAPHIC PAPERS
The ethnographic papers do not provide the ‘answer’ to why human beings are aggressive (or peaceful).
We have argued throughout that such a formulation of the problem is inappropriate, for it leads to a reification of human qualities for the purposes of comparison.
Violent and peaceful social interaction is not to be understood through the search for a thing called ‘aggression’, but through the sensitive and detailed explication of the values and meanings that embody and shape behaviour in different social settings.
The aim of the ethnographic papers is to understand violent and peaceful behaviour in different societies.
We believe that the novelty of our approach lies in the focus adopted for interpretation.
We accept the fundamental premiss argued by Carrithers, and Trevarthen and Logotheti that sociality is an innate and necessary capacity in humans.
From this we put a major explanatory weight on the indigenous construction of human nature and emotions.
This approach is novel  insofar as the interpretation of behaviour is embedded in moral values directly associated with what is held to constitute a human person.
While we wish to avoid the pitfalls of many earlier studies on ‘peaceful’ or ‘violent’societies by pulling out one behavioural feature as overridingly important in the analysis, we feel nevertheless that several issues of general interest have emerged, all of which are suggestive for the further understanding of societal peaceful coexistence, and we turn now to a brief consideration of some major points that are raised in the ethnographic papers.
Us/Them
It is not uncommon among non-Western societies that humanity is denied to members of other societies.
We are the true human beings, they lack something or other, or they are witches, or cannibals (see Arens (1979) for a discussion of this theme).
A stark opposition is drawn between the desirable (and ‘good’) human qualities that we have, and the undesirable (and ‘bad’) qualities that they, the others, the outsiders have.
This is a juxtaposition found in many of the societies discussed in this volume.
Although they attribute violent characteristics to outsiders, they all see themselves as inherently peaceful.
For the Buid, the Chewong, the Semai, the Balinese, and the Piaroa it is always ‘Them’, the dangerous, non-human outsiders who are violent and warlike.
In contrast, the social domain of ‘Us’ is characterized by the absence of combative and destructive behaviour.
Buckley's peaceful Northern Ireland community also conforms to this pattern, seeing itself as an island of human values under perpetual ‘siege’ from dangerous, barely human outsiders.
On the other hand, the Fipa, and the Zapotec do not make such a distinction meaningful.
Indeed the Us/Them opposition itself, which Fipa perceive as one between Settlers and Strangers, is culturally ‘played down’ in favour of the continuing process, by which as a deliberate matter of social and State policy, outsiders are incorporated into the society.
A related point of significance in several instances is the deliberate preference for avoidance rather than confrontation in situations perceived as threatening.
This is often accompanied by a self-presentation as ‘fearful’.
These characteristics are most manifest among the Chewong, Semai, Zapotec, Piaroa, and Buid.
Egalitarian social organization
In several of the societies discussed, institutionalized authority is minimal, and personal autonomy appears to be highly valued.
It is possible that this form of political organization is more conducive to non-competitive peaceful behaviour but, as many instances from New Guinea and Amazonia show, it is certainly no guarantee of it.
But in a highly stratified, caste-like society like Bali with a complex division of labour it is understandably difficult to maintain the Chewong-like idea of peaceful interaction between individuals.
The ideal and the actual conceptualization of Balinese personhood, as Howe describes it, certainly is one that centres round peace and calm.
However, there is a lack of fit between social order and cosmological system, and what are seen by less fortunate Balinese as gross inequalities of wealth and power serve as grounds for occasional breaches of the ‘peaceful’ ethic.
In contrast with Bali, the Fipa as described by Willis provide an example of a hierarchical and centralized society that has successfully generalized a norm of peaceful interaction originating at the local community level.
Here a combination of favourable ecological and economic conditions, at a particular historical moment, appears to have made this achievement possible.
And here also gender differences are minimized.
Gender relations
When non-hierarchical, uncentralized societies — like the four hunter-gatherer examples here described — are divided internally on Us/Them lines, it is often the case that gender differences define and establish social distinctions.
Such appears to be the case among the unstratified, yam-cultivating peoples of Papua New Guinea (see Strathern, Godelier, etc.).
This is also the case among the Shavante, near-neighbours of the ‘peaceful’ Piaroa.
In contrast, Piaroa minimize gender differences and maintain the same normative code of non-violent behaviour for both males and females.
Indeed, an interesting correlation has emerged in the field studies presented between ‘peacefulness’ as a moral value and gender equality.
The Piaroa perception that male and female natures are essentially identical is shared by the Chewong, Semai, Buid, and Fipa.
This is an important point in the comparative study of ideology, and brings out the usefulness of focusing on ideas concerning human nature.
Most of the literature that deals with indigenous psychologies fails to take into account the possible variations in this respect between not only the sexes, but between other social categories such as chiefs and commoners.
Different characteristics and qualities may be attributed to different social categories of humans, accompanied perhaps by different moral demands, and proper account must be taken of these in the study of behaviour.
It is a perspective that Freeman in his criticism of Mead totally failed to appreciate, and one that might have reduced the savagery of his attack.
The gender perspective is one that could fruitfully be pursued further in anthropological studies on values in connection with social behaviour.
So far the information available is too small to draw any conclusions, but the correlations from the papers in this volume are suggestive and deserve further investigation on a comparative basis.
Cosmological charter
Many of the papers in this volume set the human agent within a cosmology, a total moral universe of meaning.
More particularly, there is a focus on indigenous ideas concerning human nature, and the psychological attributes associated with it, and behaviour is interpreted in terms of these ideas.
In many of the societies described it is found that the collective is emphasized rather than the individual.
This applies very clearly to the Zapotec, who, as O'Nell puts it, ask ‘not so much, ‘Who am I?’, but ‘How am I a part of something?’
‘. But this is not invariably the case; Robarchek, for example, sees a push for individual autonomy among the Semai and Overing similarly stresses the value of autonomy among the Piaroa.
What is common to all, however, is that an emphasis is placed on peaceful interaction among the members of the society, and this emphasis is cosmologically constructed and morally embedded in a cosmological universe of meaning.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Within the overall acceptance of innate sociality in humans we have tried to shift the debate on human aggression or peacefulness away from definitions and absolute categories, to an investigation of alternative moral orders in which the human person is perceived of as  radically different from that constructed through the Judaeo-Christian tradition.
Agreeing with Sahlins that ‘Culture is not ordered by the primitive emotions of the hypothalamus; it is the emotions which are organized by culture’(1977: 13), we have presented some different social orders where fighting, competition, and other violent behaviour are not part of the order, or part of the people's ideas of what a human being is.
We hope we have contributed to the debate surrounding human aggression in a constructive and novel way; and that we have raised some questions surrounding a number of basic notions that have remained unexamined by both the scientific and lay communities.
© 1989 Signe Howell and Roy Willis
REFERENCES
Part One
ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF SELF, EMOTIONS, AND BEHAVIOUR IN PEACEFUL SOCIETIES
1
Chapter One
HOBBESIAN AND ROUSSEAUAN IMAGES OF MAN: autonomy and individualism in a peaceful society
CLAYTON A. ROBARCHEK
Western social science theory seems to be perennially torn between two contradictory images of human sociability and of human nature: the Hobbesian war of each against all, and the idyllic existence of the Rousseauan noble savage.
The former image is particularly conspicuous in discussions of human aggression and violence, especially by ethologists, socio-biologists, and many psychoanalysts (Paul 1978; Wilson 1978; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979; Freeman 1983), while the latter image predominates in many accounts of peacefulness (Benedict 1934; Nance 1975; Turnbull 1961; Thomas 1958).
In keeping with the ethnographic focus of this book, my primary objective is to explore the psycho-cultural dynamics of non-violence in a specific society, the Semai Senoi of Malaysia.
Doing so, however, will challenge the modern counterparts of both the Hobbesian and Rousseauan views of human beings and human behaviour.
(The facts that Rousseau never used the phrase ‘noble savage’, and that Hobbes has been widely misinterpreted are irrelevant here, since my concern is not with the conceptions that two seminal thinkers actually articulated, but is rather with the stereotyped dichotomous conceptions of human nature and human society that have come to be associated with their names.)
These two images, however irreconcilable they may be on the surface, are, nonetheless, merely variants of a single conception of human beings and human behaviour, exemplars of a paradigm within which the character of human relations is seen not as growing out of human purposes and choices, but as determined by some natural state of human beings.
Both images ultimately deny the humanity of their subjects by maintaining the deterministic role of these predispositions, thereby reducing human beings to mechanically reactive  automata.
The most commonly seen current formulations of this model alternatively emphasize either a maximizing human nature determined by biology, or a tabula rasa wholly tractable to the collective will of society, either the ‘selfish gene’, or the selfless primitive communist at one with the collective consciousness of his group.
The Semai Senoi, the ethnographic subjects of this paper and victims of purveyors of both images, seem to have suffered particularly in this regard.
Senoi peoples have been portrayed on the one hand as the quintessential noble savages by perpetrators of ‘Senoi Dream Theory’(Stewart 1951, 1954; Garfield 1974) and on the other as raging bloodthirsty killers by proponents of instinctive human aggression (Paul 1978; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979; Wilson 1978).
(See Robarchek 1983; Dentan 1983; Domhoff 1985 for discussions of Senoi dream theory; see Robarchek 1986b; Robarchek and Dentan 1987 for a refutation of allegations of Semai bloodthirstiness.)
One objective of this paper will be to transcend these human nature-based caricatures by examining the psycho-social dynamics of individualism and autonomy in Semai society, a society which is, in fact, virtually free of violence.
The approach taken here exemplifies what emerged in our discussions during the conference as a major theoretical orientation: a view of human action — peacefulness or violence — as the outcome of choices made by people actively in pursuit of particular purposes and goals, choices made and enacted within particular psychologically and culturally constituted realities which they themselves are actively constructing (see Buckley, Howell, O'Nell, Overing, Gibson, Howe, Campbell, this volume).
Both in popular accounts and in much social science literature, the image of a peaceful society seems to carry with it a number of associated conceptions: co-operation, communalism, absence of self-interest, and so on.
In short, when we hear of a peaceful society, we are likely to envision a society that is somehow the antithesis of the self-absorbed individualism of the modern urban-industrial world.
This image seems to be as appealing to romantic capitalists as it is to millenarian marxists, both of whom see it as a sort of primitive grace from which the modern world has fallen (e.g. Diamond 1972; Wolf 1981; Durdin 1972; MacLeish 1972; Montagu 1976).
The implicit underlying assumption seems to be that non-violence and individualism are incompatible or, more likely, the converse: that individualism necessarily entails competitiveness, conflict, and, ultimately, violence.
While such logical consistency may be entailed in human nature-based conceptions of human relations, it is not, as we shall see, implied in a perspective that takes purposeful human actions in service of a variety of culturally defined (and often contradictory) goals as the primary fact of human relations.
The relative scarcity of ethnographic descriptions of peaceful societies has resulted in focusing a good deal of interest on those that do exist: Colin Turnbull's description of the Ituri Forest Pygmies (1961), Elizabeth Marshall Thomas' characterization of the ‘harmless people’, the Kalahari Bushmen (1958), Robert Dentan's description of the Semai as ‘non-violent people of Malaya’(1968), Robert Levy's ethnography of the Tahitians (1973), Jean Briggs' descriptions of the Inuit (1970, 1975), and Melford Spiro's accounts of life on Ifaluk (1950, 1952), being among the most notable.
While the primary ethnographic accounts of life and character in such peaceful societies usually present multi-dimensional pictures of complex human beings, these pictures tend to become more and more one-dimensional as the material is employed in secondary and tertiary works, where the original complexity is often reduced to little more than caricature.
That has certainly been the case with the Semai ethnographies.
The effects of observers' values and predispositions on their perceptions, descriptions, and analyses of ethnographic reality is, of course, an issue that has long been a matter of explicit concern to anthropologists.
The problem, in many cases, seems to lie less with the original ethnographic descriptions than with secondary and tertiary applications where these data are put into service in the construction of grand theoretical schemes.
In the tendency to portray non-violent peoples as lacking the egoism, selfishness, pettiness, and acquisitiveness so typical of the modern world, the issue is less one of distortion of the data, than of greater or lesser degrees of selectivity and emphasis in reporting and analysis.
I can see something of the sort as I look over my own published attempts to describe and account for the peaceful way of life followed by the Semai, and I think I can also see some of the reasons for it.
In these analyses, I have clearly stressed the affiliative, dependent, nurturant, accommodative, non-competitive aspects of Semai society, culture, and character over other aspects, because these seemed particularly relevant as factors in the complex psycho-cultural dynamic that contributes to the Semai abhorrence of overt conflict and violence.
I still feel that to be true.
Nonetheless, there is another side to Semai character, one involving  a large measure of social and emotional isolation and jealously guarded personal autonomy.
While I have noted these before (1977a), I have not previously stressed their importance in Semai daily life and their place in the dynamic of non-violence.
(It was my wife and ethnographic collaborator, Carole Robarchek, who, recognizing the importance of autonomy as a factor in her data on economic decision-making, suggested that it was perhaps time to address this imbalance.)
THE AFFILIATIVE/DEPENDENT SIDE OF SEMAI CHARACTER
This section briefly sketches some elements of a culturally constituted image of Semai reality, and the motivational context which it helps to define.
The discussion centres on two centrally important psychocultural themes — dependency and danger — as they interact in constituting the individual, social, and cultural contexts of action.
These themes infuse cultural beliefs and values, individual cognitive and affective orientations, and the institutional orders within which these are manifested.
As such, they comprise central components of the motivational context of Semai social relations — the behavioural environment within which choices are made and actions undertaken.
This is a context where, as we shall see, affiliation and dependence are major social and psychological goals and where violence is not perceived as a legitimate behavioural, option.
Since I have described this context in detail elsewhere (Robarchek 1977a, b; 1986a), I will only sketch it here.
The themes of dependence and danger are ubiquitous in Semai life and are intricately intertwined.
Dependence, together with its reciprocal nurturance, is an important structural and emotional dimension in nearly all social relationships, both between human beings and between humans and the ‘spirit’ helpers who have come to them in dreams to seek affiliation with the human world.
In the day-to-day world of human interactions, this is expressed most clearly in the symbolic equivalence of food and nurturance as manifested in the ethic and practice of food sharing.
The injunctions to share food and to avoid violence are the most important moral imperatives in Semai society and, as such, are constantly reiterated.
Nearly any public gathering, and certainly any meeting to resolve a dispute, will begin and end with statements by elders stressing the interdependence of  the group, recalling past aid given and received by individuals, emphasizing that each is dependent on the others for survival, asserting that the band is really a group of siblings, and so on(see Robarchek 1986a for discussion of additional cultural expressions of this complex).
Danger is likewise omnipresent; virtually every entity and activity entails the possibility of illness, injury, and death.
In the human world, potential dangers range from the non-kinsmen and non-band members whose intentions can never be known with certainty, to the homicidal mai kahnoh kuui —‘the cutting-off-head-strangers’— who are believed to lurk along forest paths to decapitate the unwary, selling the heads to lowland Malays for ritual purposes.
In the natural world, even the most objectively benign creatures, dragonflies and butterflies for example, can precipitate disaster, bringing thunderstorms with high winds, torrential rain, lightning, falling trees, and landslides.
The natural world is also populated with a vast array of mara ’—‘they that kill us’— the vast majority of which harbour malevolent intentions toward human beings.
These include tigers and other dangerous creatures that may or may not have material form at any given time, ghosts, as well as‘spirits’— the waterfall mara ’ that causes tuberculosis; the tree mara ’that kills a person's ‘soul’by breaking its neck, bringing sickness and death in a single day; the hilltop mara ’that twists and shrivels limbs, and so on .
Avoiding making these latent potentialities manifest is a constant concern, evidenced by the multitude of taboos that bracket even the most mundane activities in a (usually vain) attempt to forestall the dangers that lurk on all sides.
These two themes — danger and dependence — are inextricably interwoven in individual cognitive and affective orientations.
I have described the enculturation of these orientations elsewhere (Robarchek 1977a, 1979a).
Suffice it to say here that, during enculturation, individuals acquire, first, an image of themselves as helpless and dependent in a hostile and malevolent world that it is largely beyond their ability to control and, second, a set of habits and expectations that lead them to seek and expect aid and comfort from others in times of distress.
These orientations are subsequently given cultural expression and concrete content in beliefs, such as those described above, in a vast number of malevolent situations, forces and beings, nearly all of which are actively bent upon the destruction of human beings.
In toto , these constitute an image of a world filled  with dangers, human and non-human, known and unknown, which constantly menace from all sides, and against which the lone individual is helpless.
The only source of security, the sole refuge from this malevolent world, is in the kindred and the band, that tight little group of 100 or so other people with whom one's life is bound up from the cradle to the grave.
The subjective significance of this group is reflected in the paramount importance, noted above, of the values of nurturance and group affiliation.
This can also be seen in the responses to a series of sentence-completion test items directed toward eliciting cultural values.
Of 102 value-related statements elicited from nineteen individuals, only two were not clearly related to two core values of nurturance and affiliation.
‘Goodness’ was shown to be defined primarily in terms of nurturance (generosity, helping, etc), and ‘badness’in terms of behaviours inimical to affiliation, especially fighting and anger (see Robarchek 1986a).
Of major significance in the relationship of self-concept to non-violence is the fact that this value system and the ideals of self which it informs are shared by both men and women (I owe the recognition of this significance to Joanna Overing's paper in this volume).
The male/female distinction is not an important structural principle in Semai society: the sexual division of labour is clear, but not rigid; there are no counterparts to the Mehinaku bachelor described by Gregor (1985) who goes hungry and cold rather than undertake the women's tasks of preparing manioc and hauling firewood; to a Semai, such behaviour would simply be absurd.
Here, there are no strictly male or female tasks or roles (there are even a few female ‘headmen’); there are no purely male or female personality attributes; there is no gender difference in access to ritual knowledge, no ‘men's clubs’ or ‘men's houses’; and there are no puberty rites or other rites of passage defining differential ideals of manhood and womanhood.
In short, and unlike most societies, there is no separate cultural ideal of womanhood against which an aggressive ideal of manhood might be cast in structural opposition.
What all of this shows is an image of a world fraught with dangers that are beyond the control of any human being, a world where the only refuge is in the protection and nurturance of kin and community.
Without this, a person is completely at the mercy of the dangers that menace from without.
The perceived importance of this refuge can be seen in another of the sentence-completion test  responses.
To the item ‘More than anything else he/she is afraid of’, the model response, more frequent than ‘tigers’, ‘spirits’, or ‘death’ combined (all of which were cited), was ‘becoming embroiled in a dispute’.
Becoming so embroiled strains the relations with kin and co-villagers, threatening the only bulwark against the malevolence of the world outside.
In a world so construed, and a motivational context so defined, it is clear why violence is not perceived as an acceptable behavioural option in interpersonal relations.
(Howell, in this volume, describes a similarly non-violent orientation among the closely related Chewong, but one apparently built on a much less fearful world view.)
The ubiquitous expression of dependence and nurturance through the essentially mandatory giving and receiving of food does not, contrary to what might be expected, significantly constrain individual autonomy, at least in part because ‘balanced’ reciprocity (Sahlins 1972), involving the accounting of gifts and the expectation of equivalent return, is neither expected nor, in fact, permitted within the community.
The Semai ethic of sharing mandates that aid be given when it is needed (with the expectation, to be sure, that it will be reciprocated by someone at some later date when the giver is in need), but any accounting or direct reciprocation is unacceptable.
This was made very clear to me early in my fieldwork when I offended a neighbour by trying to make explicit return of food that had been given to my wife and me.
Accepting help thus does not entail an accumulation of debt nor does it imply subordination, and is not a route to subjugation.
Nor is sharing or giving help a route to dominance; it is merely what is expected, part of the minimal definition of what it is to be a member of a Semai community (see Robarchek 1986a; see Dentan 1968: 134 for a discussion of implications of the distinction between reciprocity and sharing).
ENCULTURATION OF AUTONOMY
From an early age, the autonomy of the will of the individual is culturally affirmed.
No child can be forced to do anything he or she does not wish to do.
The most respected elder in the community may order a child to fetch something, but if the child refuses, that is the end of the matter (see Dentan 1968: 59).
This even extends to forbidding children to do things that are positively dangerous: playing with sharp knives, climbing tall trees, and so on.
Parents may order  children not to do these things, but such orders have little effect and no punishment is forthcoming if they are disobeyed.
From infancy through early adolescence, Semai children are largely unconstrained and free of external domination.
This is somewhat less the case for girls, who are expected to help their mothers with child care and other household chores, than for boys, of whom very little is expected.
None the less, both sexes spend much of their time in pairs or small groups, doing largely as they please: playing, fishing, catching butterflies for sale to traders, and so on .
Although schools are becoming more accessible to more and more Semai communities, children often attend only sporadically, simply refusing when it suits them.
Similarly, medicine, and especially inoculations and hospitalization, cannot be forced on anyone.
If a small child rejects medicine dispensed by one of the medical posts scattered throughout the region, parents will not persist in the face of the child's refusal (see Robarchek 1980).
Children are taught to share, are encouraged to contribute to the household, and are praised when they do so, but little real social pressure is brought to bear until adolescence.
Even then, this is likely to be little more than an insistence that they begin to make some regular contribution to the household in the form of dried fish, tobacco, and so on.
Finally, sexual experimentation, which begins at an early age, is entirely free from adult concern or interference.
Only with marriage are young people expected to put aside the freedom of childhood and assume adult responsibilities, and it is often several years after marriage before young people (especially young men) finally settle into domesticity.
Long before this, however, the groundwork has been well laid for a sense of personal autonomy that is not in conflict with attitudes of dependency (since assistance is simply to be expected and does not, as we have seen, entail subordination) and that persists throughout life.
CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS OF AUTONOMY
Several concepts reinforce and give explicit cultural expression to this sense of individual autonomy; especially significant in this regard are the concepts of pehunan and segat .
pehunan refers to a state of extreme vulnerability to dangers of all sorts that results from the frustration of an individual's wishes (see Dentan 1968; Robarchek 1977b, 1986b).
While such a state most frequently results from the frustration of a person's expressed desire for  some material object, especially food or tobacco, Dentan (1968) notes that it can also be the result of forcing someone to do something against his or her will.
Thus attempting to coerce a person into doing something he or she does not want to do — i.e. infringing on the person's autonomy — places that individual in increased peril of illness, injury, attack by wild animals or malevolent ‘spirits’, or any of the other innumerable dangers that menace constantly.
Moreover, the person responsible for inducing this state is likely to be held at least partially liable if misfortune does occur.
Thus, while this concept and associated beliefs are central to Semai attitudes of dependency (by entailing the responsibility of the group to nurture the individual by satisfying his needs, see Robarchek 1986b), it also buttresses the sense of individuality by giving a privileged position to individuals' wishes and motives.
This privileged position of an individual's wishes over the wishes of others also finds its expression in the concept of segat .
The term is obviously cognate with the Malay ‘segan ’: ‘reluctant’ or ‘shy’(Dentan 1968); however, the Semai meaning is rather more complex.
It labels an attitude that can be roughly glossed as ‘don't feel like it’(see Dentan 1968).
The word is most often heard in response to an order to do something: fetch firewood, haul water, etc.
The response, ‘nye’, egng ng segat ’(‘no, I don't feel like it’) is its own justification, requires no further elaboration, and is generally final.
Segat is also frequently used to ‘explain’ why one has chosen not to do something, collect rattan for sale, for example, or attend a curing seance: ‘Egng ng segat ci'niib ’(‘I don't feel like walking [that far]’).
Once again, no further explanation is deemed necessary.
Too frequent reliance on segat to avoid one's responsibilities would, of course, eventually bring social pressure to bear: gossip, scolding, shaming, and so on .
On any given occasion, however, the contravention of one's own desires is sufficient justification for refusal to comply with the wishes of others.
The resistance to being coerced has a variety of more or less typical expressions, shaped by other values and ideals.
Dentan, for example, describes the Semai concept of persusah — to make difficulty or unhappiness for someone by meddling in his affairs — and notes that the prescribed response to such interference is withdrawal or passivity (1968: 63).
A typical instance can be seen when one person attempts to persuade another to do something that the latter doesn't want to do, or to tell him something that he doesn't want to hear.
The  paramount value which Semai place on avoidance of conflict or confrontation precludes a direct response, so a strategy of passive resistance is adopted: the person who is being importuned begins, without responding directly, to turn slowly, almost imperceptibly, around, until the one who is importuning him is speaking to his back.
(Briggs (1970: 59–60) describes a similar value on autonomy and resistance to its infringement among the Inuit.)
One of the consequences of this reluctance to surrender autonomy is an extreme difficulty in organizing any collective action unless everyone can be convinced that it is in his or her best interest.
In more than two years of living with one band of Semai, my wife and I witnessed only two instances of large-scale co-operative action, one of which I had to organize myself to mobilize a labour force to repair a dangerously deteriorated suspension bridge which nearly everyone in the band used every day, and which was literally on the verge of collapse.
The other involved the building of a fence to keep goats owned by members of one hamlet from ravaging the swiddens of another hamlet of the same band.
Both projects, but especially the latter, required numerous meetings and much cajoling.
In the case of the fence, those whose swiddens were being devoured argued that it was the responsibility of the goat owners to contain their animals; the goat owners held that the swidden owners should contribute to the protection of their own gardens.
Some semblance of co-operation was finally attained only on the grounds that it was everyone's responsibility to protect the band from the internal dissension and strife which the affair was creating.
On numerous other occasions I saw attempts to mobilize band-wide agreement or co-operation fail utterly when faced with the passive but intractable opposition of individuals to yielding their freedom of action to group consensus.
The other side of this culturally defined autonomy is a sense of separateness, of isolation, that has both psychological and sociocultural components and consequences.
I have described elsewhere the truncation of strong affective ties that occurs in childhood and the emotional estrangement this engenders (Robarchek 1977a).
Dentan cites an informant who asked rhetorically ‘what good does it do an unhappy person to have another person upset?’(1968: 64).
This attitude can, for example, be seen in a limited expression of empathy (teenage boys and girls laughing and joking together as they help relatives of a dead baby dig a grave, for example ).
None of this, however, should be interpreted as implying that Semai are callous or  indifferent to the welfare of their neighbours and kin, which is certainly not the case; it merely demonstrates that another person's problems and affairs are pre-eminently his own; ‘hal mai, hal mai; hal hii’, hal hii' ’ is the apposite aphorism: ‘their affairs are theirs; our affairs are ours.’
This non-identification with the feelings of others is linked to a perceived impossibility of knowing the thoughts of others as well.
I recall, while discussing with a neighbour the psychiatric disorder of a co-villager, asking ‘Is his thinking confused?’
Although, on reflection, that was an exceedingly dumb question, my neighbour's response was, none the less, informative.
He looked at me with a sense of utter incredulity and answered: ‘I don't know how he thinks.’
(Most Westerners would, I think, have little difficulty in assuming that they could infer confused thinking from the observation of confused speech and behaviour.)
This same attitude can also be seen in the exasperating, but typical, response that we received whenever we questioned a third party's motives for doing something: ‘Oh, sara’ li kaa' ’— roughly: ‘Oh, it's his business.’
Emotional isolation is also manifested in a rather high level of insecurity in the relationships between husbands and wives.
This insecurity, along with a felt need for some stable focus of emotional security, can be seen in responses to the sentence-completion test item ‘more than anything else he/she worries about…’
The modal response was ‘rejection by his/her spouse’.
The genuine vulnerability of the marriage relationship can be seen in, the high frequency of adultery and divorce that is typical of Semai communities.
This should not, however, be taken to imply that extra-marital affairs are taken lightly.
Quite the contrary; the emotions engendered by such rejection can overwhelm a person's coping resources, sometimes leading to suicide.
(See Levy (1973) who saw, in Tahiti, an association between a desire for a measure of interdependence and autonomy, a certain degree of emotional remoteness from others, and a resistance to dependence.)
The subjective threat perceived in rejection by a spouse or lawyer is given cultural expression and concrete content in the concept of sasoo, which refers to a malevolent mara ’ called a ‘sasoo woman’or ‘sasoo man’, that may attack the rejected party.
Assuming the form of the lost love, the spirit comes in a dream to sexually possess the abandoned one.
Persons so possessed lose their senses, periodically or permanently, withdraw from contact with others, and may wander  off into the forest, perhaps never to return.
The longer one is so possessed, the more difficult it is to exorcise the sasoo spirit, since, ‘like a real spouse’, it merges with the very flesh and bone of the victim.
Such possession is, in fact, the primary explanation for actual instances of psychiatric disorder in the community where my wife and I worked (see Robarchek 1977b).
In sum, alongside group orientation and dependence, individualism and autonomy are significant components in the psycho-cultural dynamics of life in a Semai community and are given explicit cultural expression in notions such as pehunan and segat .
Social implications include a resistance to co-operative activities growing out of a reluctance to surrender one's freedom of action or to subordinate one's wishes to the will of others.
Psychologically, the dark side of this individualism entails an emotional remoteness from others which can be seen in the limited expression of empathy and in the fragility and insecurity of many marriage relationships.
The intense threat of further isolation is given cultural formulation in the concept of sasoo possession, and individual expression in withdrawal and even suicide.
CONCLUSION
I have attempted, in this paper, to sketch the background of human interaction in a particular milieu, to describe some aspects of a behavioural environment within which people organize their lives in pursuit of particular goals.
More specifically, I have attempted to trace some of the interrelationships among several ‘orientations’ or ‘themes’in Semai life — dependence and nurturance, danger, individualism, and autonomy — that interact in constituting, socially, psychologically, and culturally, a reality where individuals are, on the one hand, at risk of being alone in an unremittingly hostile world and, on the other, tightly enclosed in a network of kin and co-villagers upon whom each is dependent for his very survival.
In such a situation, individualism and affiliation, autonomy and dependency, are not social or psychological opposite poles on a Hobbesian-Rousseauan dichotomy but, rather, mutually reinforce one another in defining a particular phenomenal reality.
Expressed in behaviour, the result is neither the self-obsessed maximizing of Adam Smith and E. O. Wilson, nor the self-abnegating communalism of Marx and Engels.
Rather, a context of action is defined where autonomy continues to be valued and guarded, but where the paramount  cultural values stress generosity and affiliation, and where kindred and community, protected by these values, remain the sole sources of nurturance and security.
In a world so defined, peacefulness does not require suppression of individuality and renunciation of autonomy; it is simply the only sensible way for people to behave, and it has, for Semai, become a crucial part of a definition of self and a positive goal in its own right.
© 1989 Clayton A. Robarchek
REFERENCES
2
Chapter Two
‘TO BE ANGRY IS NOT TO BE HUMAN, BUT TO BE FEARFUL IS’: Chewong concepts of human nature
SIGNE HOWELL
INTRODUCTION
In this paper I shall consider an alternative theory of human nature, that of the Chewong of Peninsular Malaysia which, I shall argue, is closely linked with the ‘peaceful way of life’.
My argument is that ideology is also a moral system, and that moral values must be directly related to ideas of human nature: what it is to be a person.
An integral part of any theory of personhood concerns inner states of all kinds, and I shall be centring my discussion on indigenous ideas relating to some inner states important to the Chewong, an understanding of which, I shall argue, is necessary in order to understand their interpersonal behaviour and associated values.
Such an approach is in keeping with the guidelines for the original conference, which stressed the interpretative importance of indigenous concepts of self.
To avoid becoming embroiled in psychological or philosophical debates concerning selfhood, most of which are individually oriented as well as universalistic in their conclusions, I prefer to use alternative expressions; either concept of personhood, or concept of human nature.
The Chewong are a hunter-gatherer, shifting cultivating group of people who live in the tropical rain forest of the Malay Peninsula.
Linguistically and culturally they are related to the Semai about whom Robarchek is writing in this volume.
The Malaysian aboriginals are usually classified as non-violent, non-aggressive, peaceful etc., as well as non-hierarchical (see Dentan 1976, 1978; Robarchek 1977, 1979; Robarchek and Dentan 1987; Howell 1981, 1984, 1988).
The problem lies in how to account for this, to the Western observer, astonishing phenomenon.
HUMAN NATURE ACCORDING TO CHEWONG PHILOSOPHY
By human nature, I here mean Chewong nature: what it means to be a Chewong human being.
As is commonly found in small-scale societies, the definition of humanity excludes all but the we-group.
The we-group of the Chewong, however, extends into the domains of non-human beings, that is, it includes all those things in the environment such as trees, stones, rivers, mountains, which are supposed to have consciousness — and thus in Chewong parlance are ‘people’(beri ), as well as the large number of beings who are said to exist, but who are invisible to the ordinary eye.
They are all ‘people’ with identical person attributes to the Chewong.
In order to understand the guiding ideas of the Chewong moral universe, it is necessary to examine the ordinary human beings in relationship with this large world of non-human or superhuman beings.
I have argued elsewhere (1984) that Chewong society is co-existent with their universe, and for this reason ideas concerning all categories of conscious beings must be taken into account when establishing indigenous person attributes.
A healthy, rational, and fully functioning person is one whose being is in balance.
This means that the body; the ‘soul’(ruwai )— the main indicator of consciousness and rationality; the liver — seat of inner states of all kinds and reference point for personality; the smell — an integral and unique part of the individual; and the eyes — the medium which allows one to perceive reality in conformity with those of one's own species, are all present and in the correct state.
In addition, certain specific characteristics associated with the liver (shy and fearful) are also required, while others (angry, quarrelsome, brave) are definitely not part of the Chewong person.
These will be discussed in detail below.
It is important to stress that the Chewong do not conceptualise specifically male characteristics as opposed to female ones.
Unlike many other societies, including our own, Chewong ideas about human nature are truly applicable to both sexes.
This is particularly clear in childrearing practices where boys and girls are treated identically, and are expected to develop similar person characteristics.
While the Chewong are fully aware of the physiological differences between the sexes, these are not valued relative to each other, nor do they constitute any base for symbolic ordering (see Howell 1983, 1988 for further discussion on Chewong gender).
Another aspect of humanness is an egalitarian social order.
Thus neither the Chewong nor any of the superhuman beings are organized in a hierarchical ranking system.
They are explicit on this point.
Social stratification with a chief at the top is part of the outside world, not theirs.
Ideas of health and disease are integrally linked to personhood ideas, and it is therefore important to consider these.
To the Chewong, disease is always explained in terms of one of the above-mentioned attributes being upset in some way, usually through the interference of a non-human being.
When an illness occurs, those who are knowledgeable in such matters proffer a diagnosis.
This means trying to identify which kind of being might be responsible, based on evidence from the patient's recent behaviour (this includes improper experiencing and/or expressing of emotionality; see Howell 1981, 1984 for a more detailed discussion).
Once this is done, healing is attempted.
This may be done by spells directed at the harmful being, hoping to negate its influence, or by the performance of a large-scale shamanistic seance in which those who have spirit guides send their ‘souls’(ruwai ) out into the worlds of the various non-human beings looking for the one responsible.
The most serious forms of illness are those where the patient's ruwai or smell has been taken by one of these beings.
In such cases, it is of utmost importance to retrieve it lest the patient dies.
To assist the healing process, humans need the co-operation of others.
Anything or anyone non-human may become the spirit guide of an individual human.
The relationship is initiated by an encounter when the object or being reveals itself as ‘people’(beri )— a person with consciousness — in a dream, trance, or during a waking state in the jungle.
During a seance, humans request their spirit guides to come and to help them.
Various preparations must be made to entice them.
Spirit guides, regardless of what kind, are always described as extremely timid.
The slightest disturbance makes them retreat in fear (I shall return to this point below).
The most common species of spirit guide, and those most loved by the Chewong, are the so-called ‘leaf-people’.
They are beings who live in plants, trees, and flowers.
There is a perceived identity in looks and dress between Chewong and the leaf-people — and, as I shall show, in their personalities.
The other main kind of beings with whom the Chewong claim close affinity is the ‘original people’ who live on Earth Six, above the human Earth Seven.
These beings used to live on Earth Seven a long  time ago, but they retreated to Earth Six because it was too hot and too dirty here.
They are immortal because of the cool temperature on Earth Six and because they eat nothing but fruit, a cooling food.
The Chewong are mortal because the reverse conditions prevail on their earth.
The jungle is hot, and they eat meat, a food which is hot and dirty because of the blood content.
The leaf-people are also cool, their food being the morning dew and the cool incense smoke offered them by the Chewong.
What about the rest of the superhuman beings in the Chewong universe?
There is a vast number of these, and they fall into several distinct kinds.
However, the broadest distinction being made, and one which is of most relevance in the present context, is that between the ‘good’(baig ) and the ‘bad’(yabud )— or, as I prefer, the helpful and the harmful, designations which have less of Western moral connotations and which in the particular context correspond more closely to Chewong associations.
Related attributes are beautiful and generous, and ugly and stingy respectively.
These are directly congruent with the beings' activities: whether they cause harm, in the form of disease and mishap, or whether they help to set things right following such a damaging occurrence.
There are many different beings in the Chewong universe who may inflict harm upon them.
With the possible exception of only two — Tanko, who causes the thunder and lightning, and a group of beings known collectively as keoi (or nlab ), beings who are transformed humans but who have lost their humanness completely — none of them is portrayed as evil, malicious, or in any way seeking to harm humans.
Rather, their intentions and activities are perceived as identical to those of humans: to feed themselves and to prevent or overcome mishaps.
One major distinguishing feature between all conscious beings is the eyes.
The actual constitution of the eyes is different in all species.
This means that they all perceive the world in slightly different ways.
All beings who live on Earth Seven — with the exception of the leaf-people — are carnivorous.
What constitutes their meat, however, differs and this is linked to their perceptions of the environment.
Thus the Chewong see a wild pig, or any other animal normally hunted, primarily as potential meat and they set about trying to catch it.
Similarly, the harmful beings see meat when they look upon the human body, the human ‘soul’(ruwai ), or human smell, and they will also set about trying to catch these.
Just like humans, they go hunting  with their blowpipes and they erect snares and traps in the jungle.
The Chewong do not perceive these activities as expressing any anger or aggressive feelings, however, even when they themselves are the victims.
Rather, they explain it in terms of each species behaving according to its ‘nature’.
In this regard they make no distinction between animals and superhumans.
Dangerous animals do not attack unless an individual has made this possible through his or her incorrect behaviour.
I shall return to this below.
INNER STATES AND THEIR RELATIVE VALUE
I now wish to look at some Chewong words that pertain to inner states and relate these to ideas of what it means to be human.
I have examined this vocabulary elsewhere (1981) and will here confine myself to noting that the range and elaboration of emotional and mental terms is relatively limited.
People are not concerned with discussing their emotional states; emotionality in most instances is negatively valued.
However, a few such are heavily elaborated culturally, and I propose that an examination of these is one means by which we might achieve an understanding of Chewong ‘peacefulness’.
I shall look at five indigenous concepts which I think throw some light on the particularity of Chewong social and individual behaviour.
Two are highly valued, namely lidya (shy, timid, ashamed) and höntugen (frightened, fearful), and can be said to be integral aspects of the Chewong person (Howell 1988).
The other three are subject to severe cultural condemnation and can be said to represent the non-Chewong person, by which I mean people outside the wider social universe of humans and superhumans, in effect Malays and Chinese.
These are chan (angry),oklahi (quarrelsome), and, of a somewhat different but related order,berani (brave, daring).
Shy and fearful
The Chewong learn to fear as very young children.
Adults take great delight in frightening them by invoking unexperienced horrors, such as being confronted by a Malay or a tiger.
Parents speak approvingly of their timid children, and adults are constantly at great pains to convince others of their own fearfulness.
Similarly, shyness is constantly invoked as a legitimate reason for failure to do something.
There is no ambiguity about the value of these characteristics.
They  are integral parts of the Chewong concept of human nature — and valued ones at that.
However, it is important to stress that the Chewong mainly fear the unknown, or the uncontrollable.
The jungle presents no terror to them.
They know how to behave properly in it, thereby avoiding danger (for a contrasted view of Malaysian aboriginals' attitude to their jungle environment, see Robarchek, this volume).
It is interesting to examine various superhuman beings and determine which of them are presented as inherently shy and fearful.
Whenever confronted with perceived danger the leaf-people and the original people flee.
This is of course the way the Chewong themselves react under similar circumstances.
To flee from danger is the explicit mechanism of Chewong defence.
There are numerous incidents to exemplify this.
They fled from the marauding Malays of earlier times; they flee from the approach of any stranger today; they flee from any imagined threatening event or confrontation.
Such immediate and terror-filled reaction is a constant topic of conversation, just as is the fearfulness of the leaf-people and the original people.
While sharing many similarities, the relationship between humans and the original people, and humans and the leaf-people, is not identical.
The original people are ancestors of the Chewong in so far as they represent the mythical past, but not in the sense that they are transformed dead of today.
The leaf-people are not linked to humans in such a direct way, but structurally the relationships are analogous.
These two categories of superhuman beings occupy a very special place in Chewong philosophy; they are both — in their different ways — the alter ego of humans.
It is interesting therefore to note that the chief emotional and behavioural characteristic of them both is timidity, fearfulness, and retreat in the face of perceived danger.
None of the other superhuman beings is described as inherently shy or fearful, a further indication of their being conceptually set apart from human beings.
However, we cannot posit an opposition in terms of fearful, helpful, and good beings versus brave, aggressive, harmful beings.
There is a set of rules which inform and direct human behaviour, and the transgression of any of these usually leads to some form of superhuman intervention in the form of illness and mishap.
None of the superhuman beings — with the exception of the two already mentioned — can thus interfere with a human being unless a rule has been broken.
So with regard to these beings, the Chewong know that  they are vulnerable to attack, but that if they take proper care in their day-to-day behaviour and avoid places where potentially harmful beings are known to live and set their traps, they have a fairly good chance of being healthy and fit.
The important point is that none of these beings is referred to as evil, nor their harmful acts as aggressive or violent.
They are just carrying out their life in accordance with the rules given them, as all ‘people’ including Chewong do.
The potentially harmful beings may be described by the adjective yabud (bad, harmful, ugly), but whenever thus designated, the speaker will invariably qualify this by saying that they are not ‘truly bad’ because they only cause harm if a person breaks a rule, or inadvertently falls into a trap.
Contrary to influential theories in primatology and ethology, hunting among the Chewong cannot be described as an aggressive or violent activity (see the Introduction, this volume, for discussion of problems in connection with the definition of these terms).
Hunters do not portray the hunt in ways that could be construed as aggressive, either in the hunter's emotional state or in his attitude to the prey.
The various non-human beings who hunt humans are not portrayed as violent or aggressive either.
Everyone, visible and invisible, has to eat according to Chewong notions of the world order.
Part of the diet is meat, and to many the human body, soul, and smell constitute meat.
If someone catches a human soul or throws their spear into a human body thereby causing illness to the victim, then this is either plain bad luck or the direct result of some transgression which permits the animal/being to attack.
Humans must diagnose who has done the deed and try to rectify it.
The point is that hunting, whether performed by humans, animals, or superhuman beings, is not an activity associated by the Chewong with any aroused inner state.
It is not a violent act; it is not conceptualized as an attack.
The words used make this clear.
There are numerous words for the hunting activity, mainly dependent upon the object of the hunt or the tools employed, but none corresponds to words denoting violent acts.
Of course there are several such words, for the Chewong are not ignorant of other modes of behaviour than those practised by themselves.
They have in their language, and frequently use, Malay imported words for attack, fight, war, to quarrel, and to be angry.
However, there appear to be no words for compete or coerce.
It is an interesting feature of Chewong social relations that no competitive games are played, either between adults or  children .
Hunting is not an occasion for male  striving after status.
On the contrary, the Chewong in hunting as in other matters tend to ignore or negate any demonstration of individual superior skill.
While to some extent the harmful and the helpful beings in the Chewong universe can be thought of as opposed, they do not fall into neatly discernible complementary categories.
A previously harmful being may change and become a helpful spirit guide to an individual, at which point it will also become circumspect, if not fearful, in its relationship with humans.
However, the leaf people and the original people alone are described automatically as shy and fearful.
Only these two kinds of helpful people are unequivocally desirable spirit guides.
The Chewong wish for their attendance and assistance.
Ideally, they do not wish for any interaction at all with the other kinds of superhuman beings.
The myths which describe encounters with superhuman beings of all kinds never describe the various harmful ones as shy or fearful, whereas they always do with respect to the helpful.
The two beings who unanimously are characterized as not fearful are Tanko and keoi .
Tanko is a very complex character (see Howell 1984), but in several of his aspects, Tanko is described as deceitful.
He is portrayed as having a voracious sexual appetite.
He tricks young girls into having sexual intercourse with him, and he steals children whom he gives as food to his dogs.
He is untrustworthy, pretending to be something pleasant when he has harmful designs.
This is also the case with the group of beings called keoi .
Keoi look like ordinary human individuals — men and women — and in fact they were this at some time, but they performed a forbidden act which transformed them into keoi .
As keoi their eyes are completely different, and they see other humans as potential meat and set about catching them.
But their hunting is qualitatively different to that of other species — animal or superhuman.
While living amongst their intended victims they brazenly plot to catch them, all the while lying and playing tricks.
In the myths both Tanko and keoi take the wildest risks to achieve their ends.
They are explicitly said not to be fearful.
As such, humans fear them, and as such, they are firmly set apart from the Chewong.
Interestingly,keoi are the only beings the Chewong may kill.
This can be explained, I think, in terms of the former Chewong status of these beings.
Through their wholly unacceptable behaviour,keoi mark themselves apart from humans, while reminding them of the possibility of such behaviour.
In conformity with their special  status,keoi cannot be killed with ordinary weapons, but only with fire.
Brave, angry, and quarrelsome
If we examine an inner state/behavioural model possibly opposed to that of shy and fearful, namely brave, we find that this is not a characteristic the Chewong associate with themselves.
The word they use for this (berani ) is Malay but, more commonly, they simply negate the word fearful.
An example of what it means to be brave (or not fearful) was provided by myself.
I had left my mother and father and husband to go alone to a place which was completely unknown to me in order to live with people who were equally unknown.
Every Chewong, man and woman, insisted that they would never be able to do such a thing, they would be much too frightened.
‘What if we had been bad people?’ they kept asking.
Their image of non-Chewong is that they are ‘bad’(yabud )— they cannot be trusted not to harm one.
This attitude explains the general terror that my arrival provoked.
Outsiders, in their experience mainly Malays and Chinese, are portrayed as thieves and cheaters who will not stop at physical violence.
The meaning of yabud in this instance is therefore qualitatively different from that used in the context of harmful superhumans.
Malays and Chinese are bad.
They are also fearless.
Of course they are not part of the Chewong wider social universe of humans and superhumans, and hence they, fall outside their moral universe.
There are no shared ‘rules’ governing their relationship which enable individuals to avoid dangers through correct behaviour.
Ideologically speaking, the Malays and Chinese are not human.
There were numerous adults, mainly women but also some men, who had never left the jungle to visit the nearby Malay villages or Chinese trading station.
They declared they were much too frightened.
Even those who went regularly, and who spoke Malay fairly fluently, were always tense and on the look-out for danger.
Stories of alleged atrocities performed by Malays or Chinese were frequently brought back.
When hearing such tales those in the jungle would become quite terrified, and I once met a group of Chewong on the move with all their worldly belongings, having abandoned their settlement in order to resettle much deeper in the jungle because they had heard rumours that the Malays wanted Chewong heads.
Fleeing has always been the Chewong response to violence.
To  remain and confront the aggressors is not a viable alternative.
‘No, no, we are not brave, we are very frightened’, was the inevitable response when I asked why they always fled.
This was not a matter of excuse, but a statement of fact.
To be brave is not desirable.
I suggest that if this were not so, the conceptual link between humans and the leaf and original peoples would be severed.
Another emotion which is somewhat elaborated upon by the Chewong is that expressed by the word chan which I translate as anger or angry.
What are the circumstances in which they use this word and what are their attitudes to a person thus described?
While it is recognized that anyone might experience anger at some time, and engage in a quarrel, most would not admit to having done so.
I never witnessed a serious quarrel or observed anyone I would describe as angry.
This, of course, does not mean that the Chewong think the same; their standards are very different from mine in this regard.
Very occasionally a small child would throw a tantrum when denied something, and it would be described as chan .
Adults ignored such outbursts as much as possible, occasionally shouting at the child to stop.
They offered no theory as to why the child behaved in such a way, no external event was allowed an explanatory status; rather the outburst was reflected back to the personality of the child, who was said to have a very angry liver (the liver being the seat of inner states).
When adults get upset about someone's  behaviour , they tend not to confront the protagonist, but withdraw into themselves.
A frequent cause is marital infidelity.
The injured parties say that their livers are ‘not good’(we would say we were feeling depressed), they ‘miss their spouse’.
It was my experience that they took an extremely passive line, waiting to see if the situation would change and the spouse return.
Alternatively, an illness may befall the injured party.
The adulterer is the cause of this in so far as his/her act has allowed a superhuman being to attack the spouse.
Illness is thus one way of coping with jealousy.
The sick person would not be described as chan in such instances, although the cause would be identified as directly related to the behaviour of the spouse.
Alternatively, it is possible to take a retaliatory line and attack the errant spouse, either verbally — the most common form — or by attacking his/her things; never their person.
For instance, one woman who was described by all as extremely jealous of her husband (he was said to be innocent) had an angry liver, and she was always quarrelling.
Thus she not only shouted at him, she once took his best blowpipe, broke it in two and  stamped on it.
This was a most amazing act; the Chewong continued to talk about it for weeks.
Everyone was extremely upset and disturbed by her.
Institutionally, there are no mechanisms for punishing someone for deviant behaviour of any kind.
This woman did behave antisocially.
Several families who lived in the same settlement decided to leave as a result of her behaviour, and others insisted that they would never go to live in the same place as her.
But such an occurrence of anger was extremely rare.
When I cited instances when I thought anger might have been appropriate, I was always told ‘this is not our way’.
So again, we find that Chewong reaction to perceived violence — which is how I would describe the abuse of the jealous woman — is to retreat from it.
Anger is ignored as much as possible, as with angry children, but when it becomes too manifest, people physically remove themselves, just as they flee from outsiders.
Those Chewong who behave in unacceptable ways cannot be confronted directly.
This is the case with all deviant social behaviour, such as incorrect marriages or theft.
In such instances the culprit would normally leave, but never at an explicit request.
More violent crimes than that performed by the jealous woman did not occur among the Chewong while I was with them, nor could anyone tell me of others in the past.
Their mythology has no instances of human physical violence.
I asked about murder.
They insisted it never happened.
When I pressed them to imagine the result of such an event, they replied the murderer would be so ashamed (lidya ) that she/he would leave the region altogether never to return; again withdrawal.
The host of different beings attributed with consciousness that exist within the Chewong universe have structurally similar qualities to humans.
With the possible exception of Tanko and keoi , none is perceived as hierarchical, aggressive, competitive, quarrelsome, angry, or domineering.
Neither are they brave.
Humans and the rest of the conscious non-humans are shy and fearful.
Of these, semantically and ideologically the leaf-people and the original people stand closest to the Chewong, while Tanko and keoi stand closest to the outsiders.
On the whole, the terms bad, brave, quarrelsome, and angry are associated with outsiders, not with the Chewong or the various superhuman beings who participate in the wider Chewong social universe.
The Malays and Chinese represent the prototypes of these characteristics.
They are therefore to be feared and avoided.
There is very little the Chewong can do to prevent the Chinese and Malays from  harming them, except to stay out of their way as much as possible.
Not being part of the Chewong social universe, they operate according to different rules but, interestingly, this does not mean that they can be treated in qualitatively different ways — such as be attacked.
There are thus no circumstances in which the Chewong may behave in contradiction to their ideologically constructed concept of human nature.
To them, the meaning of human is to be fearful, and this permeates their cosmology.
Conversely, to be angry, quarrelsome, or brave marks one off as not human.
Such characteristics, in effect, either prevent social relations from being established or, whenever manifested through behaviour, they cut them off.
CONCLUSION
In the Introduction to this volume we ask: can anthropologists contribute anything to questions concerning human aggression?
Have I done so in this paper?
I have tried to present a society where aggressive behaviour as we understand it — however loosely defined — is not much in evidence.
Robarchek (1979) has suggested that the Semai, from the earliest childhood, learn to fear arousal of all kinds, resulting in a general ethos of low-key emotionality.
I agree with much of his interpretation and find that my understanding of the Chewong coincides in many instances with his of the Semai.
But I would place a somewhat different emphasis, and suggest that in the Chewong case fear is a positive emotion and encouraged in children because to be fearful is to be human, while the arousal of other inner states is negatively valued and discouraged — as manifest in the various rules that forbid them (see Howell 1981).
They are not part of being human.
In an earlier paper (1977) Robarchek argues that Schachter's frustration — aggression theory can be found to hold among the Semai when we examine one of their rules,punan , whereby any kind of ‘frustration’(I call it ‘unfulfilled desire’ as found in the rule punen among the Chewong) must never be allowed to persist.
It is only by alleviating frustration immediately, or even before it becomes experienced, Robarchek argues, that the Semai are able to be so non-violent.
Thus he seems to be arguing from within a position which holds that aggression is an innate attribute of sufficient strength that it needs to be redirected in some way for it not to manifest itself in interhuman relations.
However, he argues strongly for the claim that successful  handling of aggressive impulses is culturally possible (see also his paper in this volume).
I have argued throughout this paper against the various theories that hold that human aggression is so formidable as to require special mechanisms for handling or redirection.
Thus, in the anthropological literature, ritual is often explained in terms of‘letting off steam’.
Various pent-up emotions can be released and an emotional equilibrium restored (Scheff 1979; Gluckman 1963; Heelas 1983; Briggs 1970).
Heelas (1982) has also discussed the usefulness of catharsis as a general explanation for shedding undesirable violent emotions, and argues that the catharsis view of aggression may be too simplistic.
Not only does the contradictory nature of the evidence preclude any generalization, but it is difficult to conduct any cross-cultural comparisons because there is no agreement as to what should be compared.
While admitting that the actor's definition of violence may differ from culture to culture, thereby making a universal definition impossible, Heelas nevertheless accepts a priori the presence of the ‘thing’ violence in all of us.
‘…[I]t cannot be argued that violence exists solely as a cultural phenomenon…violence is almost certainly embedded in the natural world’(1982: 54).
Explicitly or implicitly, the various theories treat aggression as an absolute discrete ‘thing’, which, when it appears to be absent in a particular society, has somehow to be accounted for.
It is this assumption which I have been questioning in this paper.
If one is still searching for ways to explain this absence, believing with most ethologists, socio-biologists, and even some social anthropologists that aggression is part of human nature, then the obvious place to look is for some form of ritual as catharsis, or try to identify some other culturally constructed behaviour pattern which allows the individual Chewong to shed negatively valued arousal states, like anger, which according to such theories would build up and erupt in uncontrolled violent behaviour.
Not only have I been unable to identify any such ritual — it would, for instance, be incorrect to interpret the shamanistic seance as practised by the Chewong in such terms — but other practices, analogous to eskimo dog beating as presented by Briggs (1970) are equally absent.
However, I would argue that it begs the question to phrase it in such a way.
I do not disregard the possibility that some rituals in some societies do indeed perform such a function, but this interpretation would be meaningful only if the members of those societies could be shown in their various ideas  and practices — in particular those concerning personhood — to endorse such an interpretation.
In other words, let us avoid a priori assertions about human nature and try instead to perform a systematic explication of indigenous ideas concerning human nature and social and cosmological relationships.
The question I think we should ask is not, ‘Is violence learnt or innate?’, but rather, ‘What are the ideological constructs that encourage violent or peaceful behaviour and make it meaningful and proper?’, and the closely related one, ‘What do the behaviour patterns mean to the participants?’
Do they perceive themselves as ‘aggressive’ or ‘peaceful’, and if so, ‘What are the semantic connotations of the words used?
’ In order to ascertain the indigenous meanings, I suggest that indigenous concepts be explored, and the vocabulary denoting inner states examined.
Which experiential and behavioural characteristics are valued by the members of a particular social group?
There are only a few societies where all members hold the same characteristics to be applicable to everyone.
Men and women, for instance, may in many cases be characterized as different in this regard — their human nature may not be identical — and proper interpretative emphasis must be given in such cases.
While such an approach may seem inconclusive, it is one that allows each cultural situation to be interpreted in internally appropriate ways, while at the same time giving full credence to the psychic and cognitive unity of humanity.
Empirical examples of peaceful societies, which do not need some release mechanism for assumed aggressive drives, should at least alert us to the possibly false linking of human aggression and human nature.
As Montagu (1976) has stated again and again, the social activity of war need have no relationship with the inner state of aggression.
To confuse the two confuses the issue in general.
As fearful, angry, brave, quarrelsome, competitive, kind, generous, cooperative etc. do not exist in the world as measurable qualities, but humans as social beings may develop all, or none, to varying extents, so social behaviour like war can only be explained with reference to complex social factors, not to some assumed universal inner state.
© 1989 Signe Howell 
REFERENCES
3
Chapter Three
SYMBOLIC REPRESENTATIONS OF TRANQUILLITY AND AGGRESSION AMONG THE BUID
THOMAS GIBSON
This chapter will describe the symbolic representations of uway ('tranquillity'),isug ('aggression'), and related moral concepts among the Buid, a group of shifting cultivators inhabiting the highlands of Mindoro, Philippines.l In my view, the Buid may be fairly described as a society ‘at peace’ because of the extremely low value they attach to ‘aggression’and the extremely high value they attach to ‘tranquillity’.
DEFINITIONS
At the conference in which this paper was first presented, there was a great deal of discussion about how one is to define concepts like ‘peace’ and ‘aggression’for comparative purposes, and, as always in such discussions, a fair amount of pessimism about the possibility of success.
Since some of the issues raised in these definitional discussions and addressed elsewhere in this volume have a bearing on the approach adopted in this paper, it is necessary to say something about them first.
The most basic issue is whether we are to define aggression without reference to native concepts.
Those who argue that a universal definition of aggression is possible and even desirable are often interested in determining whether a universal human proclivity toward aggression exists, or whether the members of one society can be said to be ‘more aggressive’ than another according to some quantitative scale.
For my part, I doubt the feasibility of such attempts to disengage the meaning of the word ‘aggression’ from local systems of meaning.
In this paper, I shall treat ‘aggression’ as a moral concept like that of ‘good’or ‘evil’.
My usage therefore represents a ‘translation’ of a native Buid concept, and is defined in opposition to other Buid  concepts.
The comparative implications of adopting this approach are that the meaning of what we are labelling ‘aggression’ will necessarily vary from case to case, depending on how the native concepts to which it is opposed vary from case to case.
It then becomes impossible to rank societies as more or less aggressive than one another, just as it is impossible to say that one society is more or less evil than another.
Evil and aggression, in this sense, exist in every society, as a means of defining the good and the peaceful (or cowardly)(see Campbell, this volume).
Of course, our decision to translate a particular concept as ‘aggression’ presupposes a very general similarity between the place of that concept in the native system of moral categories and its place in our own system.
My point is simply that once an ‘emic’ definition is attempted, we must go beyond looking for an ‘essential’definition of an isolated concept, and discuss the whole structure of moral categories.
It is these structures which must then be compared, not their elements.
In any one society, the meaning of ‘aggression’ will be determined by the presence or absence of related concepts such as‘bravery’, ‘cowardice’, ‘honour’, ‘peacemaker’, ‘bully’, and so on .
Once we turn to actual ethnographic cases, it is usually not very difficult to identify concepts which seem to overlap with our concept of ‘aggression’, at least in some of its usages.
For the purposes of this paper, only a portion of the total semantic field covered by the English term is relevant.
This is because the term is rather ambivalent in English, having both ‘good senses’ an, d ‘bad senses’.
The bad senses cluster around the notion of deliberately causing harm to another being or entity.
In the extreme case this is done without provocation and through pure malice.
These notions are also central to the Buid concept of isug .
In the English case, the positive usages, particularly of the adjectival form ‘aggressive’, cluster around the notions of being ‘self-assertive’, ‘driven to succeed’, and so on.
These may be more common in American than in British English.
They are absent in the Buid case.
But here a central ambiguity creeps in.
While the notion of ‘deliberately causing harm’ may be central to a culture's concept of aggression, actual instances of ‘aggressive conduct’are always open to interpretation and reinterpretation.
This is true of all conduct interpreted as having a moral relevance, as being a sign of virtue or vice.
Immoral or antisocial conduct demands an explanation in terms of inherently unobservable causes, be they ‘motives’, ‘intentions’, ‘desires’, ‘proclivities’, ‘spirit attack’, ‘witchcraft’, ‘disorders of the humoural system’, and so on.
What is more, the same conduct may be subjected to a series of different interpretations as subsequent events show it to be part of a pattern of conduct or as an isolated instance, as implicating a wider or narrower range of social relationships, and so on.
This notion is familiar from accounts of the diagnosis of disease in traditional societies.
What may in the first instance be attributed to physical causes and treated by an herbalist may, if it persists or grows more severe, be redefined as caused by mystical forces requiring treatment by a diviner (see Horton 1970: 142).
Indeed, in many societies disease may itself be viewed as a sign of moral failure, either of the victim or of some ‘witch’.
Among the Buid, momentary expressions of anger may be viewed in the first instance as indicative of a momentary desire to harm another, but if such conduct becomes persistent or habitual it is almost always reinterpreted as being caused by hostile mystical forces and thus as not being under the deliberate control of the individual.
Now, even if all instances of ‘aggressive conduct’ were ultimately reinterpreted as being caused by an external agency, the ideal model of aggression as ‘deliberately causing harm’would still exist as a model.
Indeed, the very necessity of reinterpreting an act as not deliberate presupposes the idea that it might have been.
What I would like to suggest here is that the Buid view aggressive conduct as a sort of moral infirmity requiring explanation in much the same manner as does a physical infirmity.
As the conduct in question enters the public arena of moral argumentation, what lies behind it, and so what kind of thing it ‘really is’, changes.
Given the inherent uncertainty of moral interpretation in social life, it would be foolish to believe that we could come up with a definition of aggression that would allow us to unambiguously classify, much less measure, instances of aggressive conduct in unfamiliar societies.
The fact that acts of violence, aggression, or even boastfulness (buagun ) are consistently condemned, and the lack of any positive evaluation of acts of ‘bravery’ or ‘courage’, may result in a lower rate of deliberate maiming and homicide among the Buid than among populations which attach positive evaluations to such acts (everything else being equal).
Homicide rates are interesting in themselves, but they can never be explained simply in terms of cultural definitions or psychological dispositions.
They represent the product of a number of other factors as well, including political, economic, and demographic ones  as they intersect at particular moments in history (see Howe, this volume).
They are not my primary concern in this paper.
While I question the possibility of ranking Buid society as more or less ‘peaceful’ according to some culture-free, quantitative standard, I think it can be placed in a category of relatively ‘peaceful’societies because of the complete absence of any social situation in which aggressive conduct is assigned a positive value.
This is not to say that acts which we, or the Buid, would interpret as aggressive never occur, but that such acts are viewed as deviations from the ideals of Buid political culture.
In the following sections, I begin by discussing Buid attitudes toward aggression and its opposite, tranquillity, in the daily life of the community.
In the next part, I describe Buid attitudes towards what they perceive as the intrinsic aggressiveness of their lowland Christian neighbours, before turning to the activity in which the symbolism of tranquillity and aggression receives its greatest elaboration: animal sacrifice.
The discussion thus begins with relations internal to the human community, proceeds to those between the community and its human neighbours, and ends with the relations between the human and non-human worlds.
RELATIONS WITHIN THE BUID PERSON
When treating the meanings of moral concepts such as aggression and tranquillity, it is necessary to say something, about the local theory of the moral agent, or person.
Among the Buid, an individual is made up of three components: a physical body (abilugan ), a soul or vital principle (falad ), and a mind (fangayufan ).
The soul is said to reside in the upper torso, and is the seat of the emotions.
It is vulnerable to attack by predatory spirits of various types, who are said to ‘bite’ the souls of their victims.
Death results when the soul becomes detached from the body.
At death, the soul is transformed into a ‘ghost’(labang taw ).
Ghosts represent the soul in a pure state, as it were, dissociated from both a body and a controlling mind.
Now, ghosts are regarded as being greedy for meat and as possessive of their former spouses, both forms of behaviour condemned as anti-social among the living.
They are also regarded as being capable of causing illness or even death to get their way.
In this sense, one of the components of the personality is regarded as being inherently ‘aggressive’, except that in life it is normally held in check by the mind.
The mind is less closely associated with the body than is the soul.
It is associated with perception, especially sight and hearing, but above all with speech and understanding.
Although it does not survive death, it is closely associated in life with a category of immortal spirits, the lai, which act as spirit familiars to mediums.
It is the mind of the medium, not the soul, which travels during a seance and which acts to defend the community in an altruistic manner.
Spirit mediums may not be paid for their services, and their power comes primarily from their collective efforts in large group seances.
Virtually every adult man, and a few older women, possess familiars.
Working in teams, groups of mediums and their familiars mount an almost continual watch on the predatory spirit world, protecting the souls of the living from attack.
The mind and spirit familiars are thus inherently social and associated with language and perception, while the soul and ghosts are inherently egocentric and associated with eating and desire.
I shall return to the opposition between speech and eating toward the end of this paper.
Persistent aggression is a deviation not only from social convention, but from the way people ‘naturally’ are, since the mind is thought to be properly in control of the soul (cf.
Strathern 1980; 198).
Persistent aggression requires an explanation in terms of exogenous, supernatural forces.
An aggressive person is open to accusations of being in league with or under the control of malign mystical powers.
Small children who engage in anti-social acts like tantrums and quarrelling are equally apt to be diagnosed as having been ‘bitten’ on their falad by one of a number of invisible beings:fangugyab , ‘that which causes crying’,fangarisugan , ‘that which causes quarrelling’,fansungun , ‘that which causes depression’, and so on.
The very old and the young have a weaker mind than those in their prime and are for this reason more vulnerable to spirit attack.
They are also more vulnerable to uncontrolled emotional states, such as anger or jealousy.
Buid describe these feelings in terms of the soul rising up from the chest into the neck and issuing forth in bitter words or even violence if not held in check by the mind.
The mental community formed by adult mediums in collective seances must then add its protection and control to the souls of the vulnerable old and young to maintain the peace and order within the community as a whole.
Peace and order on the empirical plane is established and maintained through a series of  tultulan  , ‘collective discussions’, in which the unruly emotions of those who have been involved in  quarrelling (garisugan , ‘mutually aggressive acts’) are brought back until order and peace,uway , is restored.
RELATIONS WITHIN THE BUID COMMUNITY
Elsewhere I have described Buid childrearing practices and I will merely summarize that account here (Gibson 1985).
Within Buid society, the only social relationships in which hierarchy and dependency are legitimate are those between children and adults, and these relationships are governed by an idiom of shared physical and spiritual substance I call ‘kinship’.
The aim of socialization is to bring children to a point at which they are no longer dependent on their senior relatives.
Instead, they should be able to participate in the community of autonomous adults as equal members engaged in the sharing of labour, food, and speech without ever becoming indebted to other specific individuals.
I employ the term ' sharing' in a technical sense to distinguish it from ‘reciprocity’ as a specific type of transaction.
Reciprocity implies dualism or symmetry: a give and take between two equivalent groups or individuals, in which the potentiality for debt is always present (Polanyi 1957).
Sharing implies an asymmetry: it is a transaction between an individual and a group.
The individual gives to the group as an undifferentiated whole, and receives only as a member of a larger group.
The potential for dyadic relations of indebtedness is thereby eliminated.
As an individual matures, the idiom of kinship is increasingly replaced by an idiom of companionship, in which social relationships are governed by an idiom of shared activity.
The point of the idiom of companionship is that it allows individuals to form and to dissolve ties with one another with greater ease and frequency than would the idiom of shared substance.
The gradual detachment of the child from dependency on specific adults is accomplished through three principal mechanisms: a high rate of divorce, peer-group learning, and a minimization of the authoritarian aspect of the parental role.
Children are likely to be brought into contact with, and dependence on, a large number of ‘step’ relatives because of the first mechanism.
Their subordination to adults in general is minimized by what might almost be called an avoidance of them: from the age of five or six, they return home only to eat and sleep, and spend the rest of their time in unsupervised gangs.
Finally, children are never punished for disobedience.
Indeed, it is more likely that a small child will attempt  to command an adult than the other way around.
I never witnessed an adult raise his or her hand, or even voice, to a child.
Among adults, the ideal is that everyone treats each other as an autonomous equal, and that everyone performs their material and ritual obligations to the community.
Conflict is dealt with through simple avoidance — Buid traditionally lived in isolated family homesteads — or through the submission of a dispute to a formal tultulan , ‘collective discussion’, in which a sum of compensation is mutually agreed and paid.
The most common type of dispute is divorce, since spouses cannot, by Buid cultural definition, avoid one another for long.
One or other spouse is generally recognized as the one being ‘abandoned’, and is entitled to damages for emotional upset.
No one has the authority to enforce a settlement, but through extended discussion and diffuse moral pressure, divorces are normally settled without undue disruption.
The emphasis throughout is on preserving communal harmony (uway ) through the separation or reconciliation of the disputants.
Individuals who are reluctant to go along with the sentiments expressed in a collective discussion may be castigated as unduly kaingli , ‘jealous’, or kongit , ‘possessive’, of their spouses, an infringement of the legitimate autonomy of the latter.
While individuals have certain rights in their spouses, rights recognized by the compensation they receive when they are ‘abandoned’, these rights are always subordinate to the rights of individuals to freely choose their consociates.
Worse than jealousy or possessiveness, however, is the attempt to establish superiority over others.
In a mild form this is simply boastfulness,buagun , a term whose root can also mean simply ‘lying’.
A boastful individual is apt to be deflated through ridicule, or simply ignored, an art at which the Buid are true masters.
If an individual attempts to assert superiority through force, the line is crossed into aggressive,maisug , behaviour.
As I noted above, simple withdrawal is the preferred solution to conflict.
The socially approved response to aggression is avoidance or even flight.
The Buid language is rich in words for fear, fleeing, and escape from danger, none of which carries negative moral overtones.
It is not uncommon for people when telling stories about themselves to stress how frightened they were by some experience.
Far from rendering them subject to ridicule, such a stress is one of the best ways to hold an audience and gain sympathy.
By contrast, the only Buid words which might be used to translate our concepts of ‘courage’ and ‘bravery’carry strongly negative moral overtones: words like isug denote not so much an indifference to personal danger as a tendency to fierceness or violence.
The emphasis is less on an individual's inner resources than on the danger he or she poses to others.
Withdrawal from conflict can be emotional as well as spatial.
Sulking is a common occurrence, but it may sometimes be carried to an anti-social extreme.
Extreme emotional withdrawal, or suicidal depression (sungun ), is viewed as a common affliction of those whose desires have been thwarted, especially in affairs of the heart.
Like aggression, it may be blamed on attack by a predatory spirit.
Suicide is carried out according to a culturally standardized formula: after two weeks of sulking, one finally withdraws into the deep forest away from all human habitation, and hangs oneself from a tree.
The body of a suicide is not buried, but left to hang until the rope breaks.
The ghost associated with it remains a permanent threat to the living, as it wanders the earth with a stretched neck looking for companions.
It is only after the death and complete dehumanization of the suicide that they threaten physical harm to those who offended them in life.
As I explain further below, aggressive behaviour is regarded as typical only of lowlanders and spirits.
But before turning to Buid relations with neighbouring lowlanders, I will bring out the specificity of Buid attitudes toward violence and aggression by comparing them with other Philippine groups who have a less negative attitude toward these phenomena.
COMPARISON WITH OTHER PHILIPPINE GROUPS
A sharp contrast to the Buid is provided by the Tausug, a Muslim group inhabiting the Sulu archipelago in the southern Philippines.
During the heyday of the Sulu sultanate from 1780- 1880 the Tausug conducted frequent slave raiding and plundering expeditions against the Spanish-dominated Philippines, especially Mindoro.
Among the Tausug today, one's social position must be continually revalidated, and this depends on one's ability to respond to assaults on one's honour with immediate violence.
Interestingly, they use the same term for aggression as the Buid, but give it precisely the opposite moral evaluation: ‘A maisug person is combative and not deterred by physical danger and risk, one who has strong feelings and is not afraid to express them…
Public cowardice or a refusal to respond to an insult or affront is shameful in the extreme’(Kiefer 1972: 53).
Having said this, however, Kiefer goes on to point out that the masculine ideal of violent pride is in tension with the religious ideal of revenge as being God's prerogative.
There is a similar tension inherent in the ambiguity of the Tagalog concept of tapang .
The Tagalog people traditionally inhabited central Luzon, and their language now serves as the basis for the Philippine national language.
While being called matapang is taken as a compliment among Tagalog-speaking lowlanders, it describes fierce or dangerous men, ready to fight without regard to personal danger, rather than those willing to risk themselves for others.
It is taken as a compliment because a man with a reputation as dangerous will be respected.
The contrast I am trying to draw between courage on the one hand, and isug or tapang on the other, is similar to that between guilt and shame.
The former stresses the individual's internal state, the latter his or her relations with others.
The Buid rejection of isug does not imply a readiness to submit to the will of others.
Their belief in individual autonomy is such that even children are not required to obey their elders.
What is rejected is the necessity or even possibility of maintaining or augmenting one's social position through violence.
One's social position as an autonomous, equal adult is ascribed: Buid youths do not have to achieve equality with or autonomy from adult men through acts of violence, as among so many headhunting societies in Southeast Asia.
Nor do adult men have to defend their position by recourse to force: there is no shame attached to fleeing from aggression.
And the devaluation of violence puts Buid women at an advantage relative to women in warlike societies.
Given women's lesser upper-body strength as compared with men's, a positive evaluation of violence helps to legitimate male domination.
The connotation of internal strength attached to the English concept of bravery is expressed in Buid with the phrase marigun fag fangayufan , literally ‘strong minded’.
The equivalent in Tagalog is lakas ng loob , or ‘internal strength’.
In these instances, the stress is on an individual's ability to bear misfortune stoically, to overcome hardship by drawing on one's internal resources.
The association between fortitude and capacity for violence is absent in the Buid concept of isug , present to a certain extent in the Tagalog concept of tapang , and quite clear in the English concept of bravery.
I would suggest that in each case the strength of the association is a measure of each culture's commitment to the overcoming of adversity through aggressive or violent acts.
For the Buid, this is always illegitimate.
For Tagalogs, it is a rather amoral possibility: violent individuals are respected, but there is a less than human quality about them and violent acts are often carried out under the cover of a real or assumed drunkenness.
RELATIONS WITH OUTSIDERS
Tagalog concepts are directly relevant to the present discussion because the Buid with whom I lived are in daily contact with Tagalog speaking immigrants from neighbouring islands.
As is the case with the Semai and the Chewong, the Buid define their values in opposition to those of their aggressive lowland neighbours (Dentan 1975; Howell, this volume).
Many other writers working in Southeast Asia have drawn attention to the fact that particular ethno-linguistic groups cannot be treated in isolation, but must be regarded as forming part of a larger social system.
The classic example is, of course, Leach's work on highland Burma.
Nearer to the Buid, Morris has described the Melanau of Borneo as living in a ‘highly diversified social environment in which many cultural and linguistic groups are interspersed with and closely related to one another’(1967: 216).
Morris goes on to argue that the Melanau image of the spirit world reproduces this social environment by representing the cosmos as ‘a kind of loose composite or ‘international’ society knit together by a commonly held ‘rule of law’' (1967: 214).
Now, while such a description can be applied to Buid relations with neighbouring highland groups and with certain types of spirits, it is not applicable to their relations with lowlanders.
The Buid do not regard themselves, and are not regarded by the Christians, as belonging to the same social system, and as sharing an underlying set of political values.
Between the Buid and the Christians there is a difference in outlook so profound that one might almost say that a state of permanent antagonism and hostility prevails between them.
In this conflict the society of the Christians is incalculably more powerful.
Lowland Philippine political culture is relevant to the Buid because lowlanders are continually trying to draw the Buid into it, and the Buid are continually trying to resist it.
It is a political culture in which the strong man dominates a series of lesser men through intimidation and debt.
Patrons attach clients to themselves by extending loans to the latter in times of crisis.
The fundamentally asymmetrical relationship between a landlord and his tenant is expressed as one of reciprocity, however: a landlord and his tenant are both called  kasama , ‘companions’ or ‘partners’, the former supplying the land and sometimes the capital and equipment for farming, and the latter the labour.
After the harvest, each is said to receive his ‘share’(bahagi ) of the product.
This dependency of the weak on the strong has a moral component.
Because the client or tenant is in a state of long-term indebtedness, he owes his patron a ‘debt of gratitude’ and should be ready to help the latter on a diffuse, non-contractual basis.
Patron-client ties often receive ritual sanction through the institution of godparenthood.
The parents of a sponsored child become the comadre or compadre of the patron.
Now, the term compadre , or its abbreviated form pare , is normally used in address to indicate intimacy and equality.
By converting a patron into a compadre , a client is again trying to represent a fundamentally hierarchical relationship as one of mutuality and reciprocity.
Compadrinazgo ties cannot be created between Buid and lowlanders because the Buid reject the Christian rituals on which they are based.
Instead, Christian traders attempt to implicate the Buid in the ancient Filipino institution of blood brotherhood.
Christians now use sandugo , ‘one blood’, as a universal term of address and reference for the Buid.
Like compadre it carries the same moral connotations of diffuse, enduring obligation and the same quality of masking a hierarchical relationship in the mutuality of kinship relations.
The Buid resent the use of the term and the attempt to place them in the moral as well as material debt of the lowlanders.
The lowlanders are sub-moral beings in Buid eyes, given their aggressive and domineering customs.
The poor Christian settlers in the mountains view the Buid as standing in the same relationship to them as they stand to their own patrons.
The Buid are sub-moral in Christian eyes because of their refusal to ‘properly’ acknowledge their debts.
Contemporary tensions between the Buid and Christian settlers from the lowlands must be placed in historical perspective.
When the Spanish arrived in Mindoro in 1570, they discovered coastal settlements paying tribute to the Sultan of Brunei.
The Spanish expelled the Muslims from the island, but were not able to bring it under their full control, or defend its inhabitants from Muslim raiders, until nearly the end of the nineteenth century.
The last recorded raids occurred in 1870 and 1874.
During this 300-year period, coastal settlements were repeatedly raided for captives to supply the slave markets of Sulu in the southern Philippines, and the once prosperous ports were reduced to impoverished and depopulated backwaters.
Mindoro served, in effect, as a battleground between the Spanish based in Manila and the Muslim traders based in Sulu.
While little direct evidence is available on the fate of the mountain populations during this period, there is little doubt they were too weak numerically and organizationally to put up any effective resistance to either power.
While the Muslims were after captives, the Spanish were after tribute-paying subjects and converts.
The Hispanized inhabitants of the lowlands viewed the unconverted pagans as little better than animals, whose lack of sophistication in dealing with a market economy allowed them to be exploited through debt bondage and coerced trade.
More recently, the primary threat has been to the highlanders' land, although coerced labour and unequal trade continue.
But however the goals of their lowland neighbours have shifted over time, they have remained essentially predatory.
The fluidity of Buid social groupings, and the ease with which the institution of sharing allows individuals to integrate into new groups, provide the best protections a weak society can have against predatory neighbours.
There are no internal bonds or hierarchies which the outside powers can use to control the behaviour of more than one individual at a time.
An enemy who will not stand and fight, and who has sufficient room to move and hide cannot be ‘defeated’ or absorbed.
This fact accounts for the continued autonomy not only of the Buid but of many other shifting cultivators and hunter-gatherers in Africa and Asia (Gibson, in press).
These peoples cannot allow themselves much investment in fixed assets they would need to defend, but just as importantly they cannot allow themselves much investment in social ties to specific others.
Hence the positive value attached to mobility and sharing in their societies.
Of more direct relevance to the thesis of this paper is the association of acts of violence and aggression, both material and mystical, with forces external to the society.
Unable to profit through such acts under any conditions, the Buid never associate aggression against humans with the generation of wealth or vitality.
But there is one form of aggression which is not only legitimate, but positively enjoined: the sacrifice of animals.
RELATIONS WITH THE ANIMAL AND SPIRIT WORLDS
I already introduced certain mystical categories above in my discussion of Buid personhood, particularly those relating to spirit  mediumship.
Here I wish to focus on the employment of carefully controlled acts of aggression against the animal world as a means of modifying their relations with the spirit world.
The Buid perform at least five different kinds of animal sacrifice, each intended for a different type of spirit.
But the Buid also view themselves as constituting a sort of animal ultimately destined to provide a feast for a class of spirits after death.
They say that ‘Taw an labang babuy ’: ‘People are the pigs of the predatory spirits.’
They also say that ‘Labang taw agkagat taw maskin kasamuk taguban ’: ‘Ghosts bite people because they are hungry for meat.
’ An examination of these five kinds of sacrifice, and of the system of belief underlying these two statements, reveals a symbolic world in which aggression and tranquillity are viewed as opposing principles held in uncertain balance by ritual action (see Gibson 1986 for a full account).
Animals are killed only to avert mystical dangers which cause illness and death.
The more animals a household is obliged to sacrifice, the greater has been its misfortune.
Because of this, a household obliged to sponsor many feasts gains no prestige, but becomes rather an object of pity.
Whenever a pig or chicken is killed, it must be shared out in exactly equal portions among all the members of the community, without regard to their age, sex, status as kinsman, or previous relationship with the sponsor of the sacrifice.
The size of the ‘community’ involved in these distributions varies depending on the nature of the occasion and the number of animals killed.
This variation is due to the amount of interest generated by a particular ritual among members of distant settlements.
It is not due to the exclusion of certain categories of people from attendance.
Most meat distributions involve a local group numbering between fifty and one hundred individuals.
On certain occasions, representatives from all the local communities in a region containing 700 individuals or more will attend.
One such occasion is the final ritual performed to terminate the funeral cycle three months after a death.
On the whole, an individual may expect to attend a sacrifice every one or two weeks, so that there is a constant circulation of meat throughout the community.
In fact, the sharing of meat is the most frequent form of material transaction between households, and a key means of integrating new members into the local community.
Thus while all domesticated animals belong to, and are closely identified with, particular households, they are all destined to be consumed by the community as a whole.
One might say that when a  particular household is confronted by a mystical threat, it dissolves its individual identity into that of a larger social unit whose size is determined by the severity of the threat.
It does this by sharing something closely identified with its members, the animals they have domesticated by hand, with the encompassing community in a commensal ritual.
Although carefully controlled, aggression is an inescapable aspect of Buid animal sacrifice.
In all of the rituals described above, animal vitality is deliberately concentrated and transferred to those members of the human community most in need of vital reinforcement, such as small children and nursing mothers.
The animals are always chopped into small pieces and further reduced by boiling.
The life-giving qualities of pork broth are brought out in a lisbay , or myth, concerning the culture hero Litaw:
During an extended period of wandering in the sky world, Litaw met Inabay, who gave him some dust from her eyes.
This dust gave Litaw magical powers.
When he returned to earth, he discovered that his father had died.
Litaw said: ‘Never mind.
Get me a big pig and we shall cook it.’
The pig made five pots of broth.
Litaw fetched his father's corpse, which was still rolled up in its burial mat and starting to decay.
Litaw poured the pots of broth over the body, one by one.
As he began pouring the fifth, the body stirred, and Litaw's father said: ‘That's enough, I'm being scalded.’
And so he came back to life.
Another method for concentrating animal vitality is the stew prepared for ghosts, in which elements of every part of the animal are cooked together with rice.
When a wild pig is caught, the meat of the head is set aside for small children, for the vital principle is associated with it.
The point is that violence is a necessary part of human interaction with the non-human world, but absolutely illegitimate within it.
Violence and aggression tend to be associated symbolically with eating, which is a one-way relationship of domination, and so is incompatible with mutuality which is symbolically associated with speech, a two-way relationship between equals.
The opposition between aggression and mutuality, eating and speaking, is underlined in Buid symbolism by the presence of a taboo against speaking to animals.
This taboo belongs to the same category,fayawan , as incest and other rules against mixing things which should be kept  separate.
The existence of an explicit prohibition on treating animals as social beings indicates that the Buid might in fact have ambivalent feelings on the subject.
Other evidence of this ambivalence concerns the way they treat young animals, raising them by hand inside the house to encourage their attachment to their owners.
When a particularly close rapport develops between a human and an animal, such that the animal will follow its owner through the forest, the animal is called a batiti , ‘pet’.
One must still not talk to the pet in human language, however.
In Mindoro, domesticated pigs and chickens often go wild, and wild pigs and chickens can be domesticated if captured young.
Every generation of pig and chicken must be deliberately domesticated or incorporated into human society lest it go wild.
One may employ uncontrolled violence only against wild animals which are totally independent of human society.
The Buid make an effort to reduce the suffering, or, at least, the struggling, of domesticated animals when they are slaughtered.
They are usually partially asphyxiated before being stabbed.
That is, they do this in every case except that of an exorcism ritual where the point is to make a deliberate display of violence and aggression, in the sense of ‘intentionally causing suffering to another being’, to frighten the predatory spirits.
Even then, the slaughter is carried out without malice toward the animal.
The predatory spirits, on the other hand, are described as if they bore actual malice toward humans.
Commensality provides the most powerful means by which both the Buid and the predatory spirits assert the internal solidarity of their respective collectivities.
From the perspective of humans, solidarity is expressed in opposition to a category of predatory beings which regard humans as their prey, on the one hand, and to a category of prey which regard humans as their predators, on the other.
The human community is, in fact, regarded as but one level in a cosmic system of stratification defined in terms of the inherently unequal relationship between the eater and the eaten.
The higher the stratum, the more aggressive and evil are the beings.
Pigs, for example, eat only plants.
The latter are essentially passive and do not suffer before they are consumed.
Humans eat pigs, but only after killing them, and cooking them, in a controlled and ‘humane’ manner.
They have, moreover, previously fed and cared for them, or in the case of wild pigs, they have paid their spirit ‘owners’ proper compensation.
In a sense, the pigs already ‘owe’ their masters their lives.
The predatory  spirits, finally, obtain human flesh by invading human territory and seizing, through force, what they have not produced.
What is more, they begin to consume their victims while they are still alive, or, alternatively, once they have begun to rot.
The most powerful and feared of all the predatory spirits are the fangablang , ‘those who are encountered’.
These are said to resemble giant Christian lowlanders, and are continually invading Buid settlements in search of human flesh.
Cannibalism is a subject of fascination and exquisite horror for the Buid, as it is for Europeans (see Arens 1979).
It condenses in a vivid image the most extreme form of violence and domination imaginable: the treatment of a social being as an animal, and the incorporation of its substance into one's own body.
Through their  transistor radios, the Buid are aware of various gira (Spanish guerra , ‘war’) being fought in different parts of the world.
Significantly, they are convinced that such extreme instances of violent behaviour can have only one purpose: killing and eating the enemy.
Standing in opposition to the predatory spirits are the spirits of the earth, who are closely associated with the spirit familiars discussed above under Buid personhood.
The Buid say that the growth and well-being of their crops and children derive from the spirits of the earth.
In general, the Buid place far more stress on the process of growth than on the acts of planting seed or of conceiving children.
This process is guaranteed by the spirits of the earth, who withdraw their protection from the human community when it is divided by quarrelling.
Thus persistent aggression (garisugan ) within the community places all its crops and children in mystical danger.
The need to restore tranquillity, particularly between husband and wife, in order to regain the protection of the spirits of the earth is a major incentive for resolving tultulan , ‘collective discussions’, quickly and smoothly.
Now, the spirits of the earth are the only spirits which can be addressed in ordinary human speech in the course of a ritual.
Speech and communal peace represent life and unity just as eating and individual desire represent death and division.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion it may be said that the structure of the spirit world constitutes both a model of and a model for the larger social system in which the Buid are embedded.
At one extreme are the relations of  permanent hostility between the Buid and Christians, paralleled on the mystical plane by the permanent struggle between the spirit familiars and the predatory spirits.
At the other extreme are the relations of mutual help and sharing within the Buid community paralleled on the mystical plane by the solidarity between the humans and the spirits of the earth.
Continued life and growth depend ultimately on the maintenance of tranquillity within the human community, which is a prerequisite for the continued assistance of the spirits of the earth.
But it is equally necessary that humans engage in a ceaseless and violent struggle with beings which attack from outside the bounds of society.
The rejection by the Buid of any form of legitimate hierarchy or aggression within their society must be set within the context of a larger cosmological system in which humans are under constant attack by both predatory spirits and lowlanders, and in which they must commit parallel acts of aggression against their animals.
Buid attitudes toward tranquillity and violence are the product of a long historical process, in which they were consistently the victims of outside forces.
During this period, acts of aggression and domination came to be identified symbolically with the agents of disease and death, while a state of internal tranquillity, equality and individual autonomy came to be identified with the agents of health and growth.
These identifications are part of the reason for their continued autonomy from the lowlands, in that they prevent the Buid from developing internal hierarchies which could be manipulated by more powerful state societies.
They are also partly the result of the Buid's occupation of a habitat marginal to the economy of the lowlands: unable to permanently occupy Buid territory, the lowland powers have been content until now with sporadic, predatory incursions.
An ideology of peace is thus both cause and effect of the Buid's situation in a larger regional system (Gibson, in press).
It should now be clear that Buid attitudes toward peace and violence cannot be understood in terms of innate psycho-biological dispositions, or in terms of their adaptation of the natural environment.
The Buid have as much of a capacity for violent behaviour as the members of any other society.
What is interesting is that this capacity is not developed, or its exercise rewarded in Buid society.
An instructive example of members of a peaceful society being suddenly propelled into a situation in which violence was rewarded is provided by the Semai of Malaysia.
Many people who knew the Semai insisted that such an unwarlike people could never make good soldiers.
Interestingly enough, they were wrong.
Communist terrorists had killed the kinsmen of some of the Semai counterinsurgency troops.
Taken out of their non-violent society and ordered to kill, they seem to have been swept up in a sort of insanity which they call ‘blood drunkenness’…
Talking about these experiences, the Semai seem bemused, not displeased that they were such good soldiers, but unable to account for their behaviour.
(Dentan 1968: 58–9)
In other words, the Semai had always been capable of violence, but this capability had never had any meaning .
Even after the fact, their violent behaviour just did not make sense.
The Buid and Semai examples should also serve as a caution against theories about violence and aggression which treat them as typically involving a contest between two balanced opponents competing for access to a scarce resource.
In most of human history, including the modern period, the most significant types of violence involve the institutionalized oppression of a weaker group (gender, class, ethnicity, nation) by a stronger one.
Warfare, preparations or war, and negotiations for ‘peace’ by the élites of opposing stratified social formations often distract attention from, and may be meant to distract attention from, the permanently installed violence perpetrated by dominant strata against subordinate strata within each formation (see Chomsky 1987: 105–6).
) 1989 Thomas Gibson
NOTES
1
The writing of this paper was made possible by a grant from the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation.
I should also like to thank Anthony Carter and Grace Harris for their careful commentaries on this paper.
Any remaining confusions are my own.
2
One of the problems with Heelas' excellent discussion (this volume) is that while he develops the ambiguities concerning intentionality in our own concept of ‘aggression’ very well, he does not seem to recognize that this may be a very general feature of related concepts in other cultures.
Another problem is that he does not deal with the fact that an ‘intent to harm’ may itself be ambiguous: in certain contexts, it may be seen as a good thing, in others as bad.
Indeed, I believe the Buid to be highly unusual in their condemnation of aggression in their dealings with all but the animal and spirit  worlds.
(There are signs that they are beginning to view it as legitimate, in theory, in their dealings with Christian lowlanders, although they still find it difficult to apply in practice.)
3
Notice that the determination of such rates presupposes an understanding of what counts in a culture as ‘deliberate’, and that a high rate need not necessarily be viewed as a bad thing by the culture concerned.
4
The Buid attitude toward ‘kinship’ is perhaps as unusual as their attitude toward ‘aggression’, but that is another paper (Gibson 1985).
5
Elsewhere I argue that transactions among the Buid are dominated by a principle not recognized by Polanyi, and that Sahlins' reduction of Polanyi's three categories to a single continuum is even more misleading.
Sharing is characteristic of a certain kind of non-competitive egalitarianism because it eliminates the possibility of debt (cf.
Sahlins 1972: 193–6; Gibson 1988).
REFERENCES
4
Chapter Four
STYLES OF MANHOOD: an Amazonian contrast in tranquillity and violence
JOANNA OVERING
INTRODUCTION: MORAL UNIVERSES AND THE BOUNDARIES FOR PEACEFUL AND VIOLENT ACTION
The Piaroa, a jungle people who dwell along tributaries of the Orinoco in Venezuela, equate the value judgement of ‘good’ with that of ‘the tranquil’: both carry the label of ‘adiwa ’.
For them, the person of good character has what is said to be the imagination to live tranquilly, or literally ‘the wizardry to live tranquilly’(mariya adiunaku ).
The good social life, the Piaroa insist, is the tranquil one where individuals are never coerced by or subjected to the violence of kinsmen and neighbours.
Social action among the Piaroa is congruent with their discourse on harmonious existence; for their evaluative rhetoric is coupled with a social state of extremely peaceful living.
Piaroaland is almost free of all forms of physical violence, a place where children, teenagers, and adults alike never express anger through physical means.
The Piaroa place immense value upon personal moderation in behaviour and are therefore appalled by most display of excess, especially if violent in intention.
This is not to say that the Piaroa have formed a totally peaceful society, and I have written elsewhere (1986a) on their discourse of predation, cannibalism, and revenge.
Through sorcery, the Piaroa shaman leader is highly violent on a daily basis toward the end of protecting his community from the dangers of disease and death, both being considered to be attacks by cannibalistic beings from both this and other worlds.
A state of violence or peace is always relative and depends somewhat upon the boundaries of the moral universe, but also upon the nature of the moral system at hand.
Violence belongs to the domain of foreign politics for the Piaroa, while for their  neighbours, the Yanomami, close kin can easily transform into dangerous ‘others’.
A Yanomami may assault, perhaps fatally, a wife, brother, or cousin (see Lizot 1985: 45, 68, 69ff.).
The Shavante leader of the Brazilian Amazon may kill a fellow villager whom he views as an intolerable competitor (Maybury-Lewis 1971: 186ff.).
In contrast, the moral universe within which the Piaroa cannot inflict violence is very wide, encompassing all of Piaroaland.
The Piaroa say that all their deaths are caused by outsiders, and their own powerful revenge rituals are aimed at villages outside of Piaroaland (Overing 1986a).
The moral dogma of the Piaroa disallows, then, violence toward anyone who is part of their this-worldly political and social universe, that is, anyone who is not a total stranger.
Most important, enemies are not seen.
Foreign sorcerers enter Piaroaland in the guise of butterflies; thus, even those who inflict violence upon Piaroa are unseen in human form.
In contrast, for the Yanomami and the Shavante the moral universe within which violence is not allowed slips and slides: today you are a friend, but perhaps tomorrow you are not.
Such variation in the conception of stable moral boundaries that delimit friend and extreme otherness reflects the considerable difference between the Piaroa and such groups as the Shavante and the Yanomami in their everyday display of hostilities.
Yanomami and Shavante violence occurs within both community and tribal boundaries.
The particular contrast between, peaceful and violent action in which I am interested falls outside any simple dichotomy which might distinguish between a state of war and peace.
While it is the hostility of ‘outsiders’ that often legitimates violence, the definition of who counts as ‘outsider’is a highly relative matter, as the cases cited above suggest.
Nor is the fashionable ‘mode of production’ argument a likely key to the matter.
Despite recent generalizations about the violence and aggression which supposedly typify societies of tropical forest in South America (see, for instance, Sanday 1981: 193), these peoples vary considerably in the degree and the kind of violence allowed in everyday life.
Yet most would fall into the category of ‘brideservice society’, a social formation that Collier and Rosaldo (1981: 280) have defined as radically different from that of the ‘bride-wealth society’.
These authors argue that in the ‘brideservice societies’, a category encompassing the relatively egalitarian hunting and gathering peoples and those that have a mixed economy of  hunting, gathering, small-scale horticulture, the association of sexuality and violence, which is but a particular type of sexual oppression, plays a central role in all political and much social action.
Collier and Rosaldo are linking a particular mode of production (‘brideservice economies’) with a specific type of politics (‘sexual politics’) and a particular theory of personhood ‘(Man the Hunter, Warrior, Life Taker and Giver’ vs.
‘Woman his Sexy Partner’)(see Collier and Rosaldo 1981: 275–6, 315).
While Collier and Rosaldo have relatively successfully characterized one type of ‘brideservice economy’, they are too sweeping in their wider generalization; for brideservice economies are not always associated with the cultural values these authors stipulate.
For many groups with such ‘economies’, community and even intercommunity relations are conceived as properly being harmonious ones (for example, see the following literature on South America: Santos 1986 on the Amuesha of Peru, Thomas 1982 on the Pemon of Venezuela, and Overing Kaplan 1975 on the contrast in ‘peaceful’ and ‘bellicose’peoples of the Orinoco Basin at the time of the Conquest).
The sample of groups used by Collier and Rosaldo, upon which they constructed their model, skewed the data; for they were all peoples who place immense value upon' Man the Hunter and Warrior', and who also elaborate ritually upon the violent, destructive, and fertile potential in men.
Such values work at the expense of a positive evaluation of females.
They also work against a high value being placed upon the creation of peaceful everyday relationships.
The remainder of my paper will deal with the extreme contrast between two South American groups, the Shavante and the Piaroa, in their respective valuation of male maturity.
The exploration will revolve around the systematic development in youngsters of the desired, and contrasting, characteristics the two valuations entail.
For the Shavante, the essence of manhood is what Maybury-Lewis (1971: 268–9) summarizes as ‘sexual bellicosity’, while for the Piaroa it is the ability to co-operate tranquilly with others in daily life.
The Piaroa view the arrogant and dominating character, which the Shavante would highly esteem in a mature male, as odious.
What is even more striking in these contrasting evaluations of maturity is their treatment of gender.
The Piaroa definition of ideal maturity for men is identical to that for women; but the Shavante define ideal manhood as the achievement of a state that is both opposed and superior to the feminine.
Gender antagonism is, therefore, to a certain extent built into the definition of manhood for the Shavante.
The flamboyant ritual celebration of male bellicosity and the male collectivity among the Shavante appears to carry with it a corresponding devaluation of women, and indeed to be built upon it.
A Piaroa man, on the other hand, must, ideally, co-operate equally well with men and women, and, as is true also for women, achieve harmony in these relationships.
Such a difference in conceptions of gender and gender roles has strong implications for the event of peace or friction in the play of daily life, and cannot be too much emphasized.
It is this issue, the interplay of ideas about gender and gender roles with the creation of discord or harmony in community relationships, about which I shall be concerned below.
The focus will be upon systems of morality that vary greatly in their images of manhood and styles of manhood.
Much anthropology has been written on the ways in which culture and social rules constrain women.
A modern variant of this view is the Marxian argument of Meillassoux, who sees the formation of the sexual division of labour, itself, as entailing the socio-political subjugation of women, making ‘the woman (or slave) a servant of men’(Meillassoux 1981: 21).
He argues that kinship institutions, such as marriage, conjugality, and paternal filiation, were then imposed upon women by men as the means through which men constrained women to gain control over both the means of reproduction and labour (ibid.: xxi-xxiii, 20).
My concern is to show that, on, the contrary, culture and social rules may well constrain males to fit a given society's ideas about virtuous male behaviour.
This is not a merely tongue-in-cheek reaction to such arguments as that of Meillassoux.
When the Shavante train boys to become warriors who can both take and give orders, they systematically constrain the youngsters in age-set seclusion for a period of five years during which time they are trained to endure suffering (see below).
In contrast to the position taken by Meillassoux above, when I speak of ‘constraint’ my interest is with the overt institutionalization and effects of intentional physical constraint.
In a paper on peace and violence this is probably a proper focus, for it is men who are usually in charge of techniques of attack against outsiders.
The treatment and definition of enemies are matters forthcoming from the domain of ‘the political’, which is to a large extent a male domain.
Also, it is more than likely the case, however, that how a society designs manners for close personal and  social relationships cannot be totally separated from its understanding of the ‘proper’ treatment of its enemies.
AN IMAGE OF MANHOOD: THE VIRILE SHAVANTE HUNTER AND WARRIOR
The Shavante are an Amerindian group of some 2,000 people who dwell in the Mato Grosso of Central Brazil.
In terms of dietary needs and actual consumption patterns, they have a gathering economy supplemented by both hunting and horticulture.
However, if one looks at Shavante rhetoric and desire, they have a hunting economy.
According to Maybury-Lewis (1971: 33–6), the Shavante, both men and women, have a passion for meat, and consider it the prime delicacy: in fact, however, they subsist primarily on wild roots, nuts, and fruits from the collecting trips of women.
Hunting, then, serves other needs in Shavante society than just dietary ones.
Its technicalities interest the men above all else, and it is the activity upon which they spend most of their energy and about which they talk endlessly (Maybury-Lewis 1971: 33).
Hunting also provides the men with a public stage for the stylized display of virility.
The unsuccessful hunter is met with marked coldness by the women, while the successful hunter flings down his kill for the women to prepare, and with studied indifference goes to lie down.
Such a conclusion to a hunting trip is evidence that the man is endowed with proper male virtue.
Endurance, fleetness, wakefulness, watchfulness, and bellicosity, all attributes that for the Shavante lead to good hunting, are also indicative of valour, the most esteemed characteristic of Shavante manhood.
Collier and Rosaldo (1981: 276) have noted that in societies where valour in men is associated with the role of hunter, there is often an ideological linking of hunting, killing, and male sexuality.
This is no less the case for the Shavante, as evidenced by their great Wai'a ceremony which, as Maybury-Lewis describes it (1971: 243ff.), is a ritual representation of the sexual aspect of male ferocity.
Shavante men in this ceremony act out the glorification of the essence of manhood, comprised for them of both the bellicose, destructive aspect of male power and its sexual/generative side (ibid.: 266).
Ferocity is demonstrated, and the force of it received, through:(a) the ritual killing of a mythical, fierce and excellent hunter,(b) the ceremonial (and actual) rape of women, where a woman from each clan is chosen  as object, and (c) a ceremonial pantomime of attack which opposes the moieties one to the other: one side in fierce, scowling stamping dance moves against a man of the opposite moiety who must not flinch, even if trampled (Maybury-Lewis 1971: 257).
As Maybury-Lewis remarks (ibid.: 66), ‘the combination of sexuality and aggression could hardly be more aptly expressed than in a ceremonial rape’.
The women are also warned by the men that if they, the women, should set eyes on the masks of the ceremony, the men would manhandle, rape, and disfigure them.
The ceremony is at its base one that celebrates opposition and division, the division between the genders, between the clans, between the moieties.
Through such opposition, men both act out their power and receive it.
The institutions of Shavante society are such that women are usually excluded, except as ‘objects’, from its public aspects.
In adulthood, spouses spend little leisure time together: men in leisure, if not at their parental home, spend most such time in the men's house.
Women are prohibited from approaching the mature men's council, which takes place daily in the men's house when most decisions about the affairs of the community are made.
Women are also excluded from most features of the highly elaborated age-set system.
Women have no say in their marriages: often they are married when still babies, or at least by the age of five in a group ceremonial marriage, for youths, held for them at the close of their bachelor hut initiation period.
Older men are usually polygynous; thus a youth rarely has available for marriage an age-mate female, and he must wait for a younger generation of females to mature before cohabitation with them.
Much of Shavante life, in Maybury-Lewis's words (1971: 104), ‘is a function of politics, and Shavante politics is based on competition between groups of males’.
Or, as Lopes da Silva observes (1986a), the Shavante conceive of society through the male model.
The characteristics of Shavante leaders are also telling of the value placed upon ferocity in the Shavante ideal of manhood.
As is true in general for lowland Amerindian leaders, the Shavante leader has no power of coercion for the organizing of daily economic activity.
He can make suggestions and harangue in the man's council meeting, but he cannot order people into action.
His qualities, nevertheless, are those of the successful hunter/warrior: he must demonstrate his ideal manliness through self-assertiveness, forceful oratorical skill, athletic prowess, and ceremonial expertise (Maybury-Lewis 1971: 198; also see Seeger 1981: 183 on the Suya leader whose temperamental  characteristic is that of ‘uncontrolled belligerence’).
As is also the case for other Amerindian leaders, he has the responsibility for peace-making.
However, if he is a particularly strong leader, the Shavante chief has no compunction in killing factional opponents within his own village.
Should he go too far, the only repercussion, so long as he remains powerful, is for some of the village members to leave the village.
Belligerence is systematically instilled in males as proper behaviour from a very young age (the information on the training for proper female maturity is unclear), and boys and girls at a very young age are separated from one another as playmates (also see Lizot 1985: 39 on the Yanomami, and Seeger 1981: 155ff. on the Suya).
Small children are encouraged to be small tyrants, to react violently if thwarted.
Yet the scolding and punishment of children are rare (see Lizot 1985: 73 on the Yanomami).
Tantrums by small children are frequent and condoned by parents: Shavante fathers encourage their children to displays of violence against the mother (Maybury-Lewis 1971: 71).
Children are taught to retaliate any hurt, a ‘blow for blow’ principle (see Lizot 1985: 74 on the Yanomami).
Shavante youths are trained not simply to be warriors, but also to learn co-operation with other men as a group in adversity against other groups of men (see Seeger 1981: 155ff. on the Suya).
To instil the characteristics of the co-operative warrior, the Shavante seclude boys as age-sets for at least five years, during which period they undergo continual harassment and daily haranguing by older men, suffering endurance tests, such as all night exposures and duels at dawn.
The boys during this period of seclusion learn athletic prowess and how to display belligerence.
Through the lengthy and arduous training during seclusion, they are:(a) to develop a lifetime corporate spirit within the group,(b) to learn to accept the dominance of older men, and to be prepared in general for (rather violent) dominance relationships among men, and (c) taught to act violently as a group.
This seclusion period is closed by an elaborate ceremony that emphasizes the spatial and emotional removal of young men from the world of women.
After this stage, the young men, who are the warriors par excellence , are relatively free of obligation until mature.
These young warriors are characterized by Maybury-Lewis (1971: 140–2; also see Seeger 1981: 162 on the Suya) as exceedingly vain, proud of their bellicosity and beauty.
The training for bellicose action nevertheless continues: the mature age grade of men imposes anger  and ferocity upon these young men, goading them continually into violent action.
In conclusion to this section, the factors internal to Shavante society that contribute to the formation of a particular type of hunter/ warrior complex, one similar to that described by Collier and Rosaldo (1981), and to the playing out of violence within the community on a more or less daily basis, and indeed which build such violence into everyday life, can be summarized as follows:
1.
the image of ideal manhood is that of the bellicose and handsome hunter/warrior;
2.
political leadership corresponds to this image;
3.
public leadership in general is associated with the principle of male dominance, of men over men, of men over women;
4.
political ideology is male-biased and associated with the values of male supremacy and ferocity;
5.
women are disallowed from participating in most public decision-making and from the political process in general; they are associated with the domain of the domestic;
6.
most public co-operation is between men, and not between men and women, or between women;
7.
the genders are systematically separated from an early age;
8.
children are trained into violent reaction;
9.
initiation is focused upon the lengthy constraint of boys, during which period the boys are separated off from female society, taught male solidarity, bellicosity, and endurance, and trained to accept the dominance of older groups of men;
10.
ceremonial displays of male virility, ferocity, and sexuality are highly elaborated, as too is ritual violence against women;
11.
the ritual celebration of fertility focuses upon male generative abilities, and not female ones;
12.
male economic activities and the products of male labour are prized over female economic activities and the products of female labour.
In short, the Shavante image of society can almost be equated with the social organization of men, and their notions of personhood with ‘manhood’.
Such an image fits well with the Collier and Rosaldo characterization of a ‘brideservice society’.
None of the above summary statements applies to the Piaroa.
AN IMAGE OF ADULTHOOD: PIAROA TRANQUILLITY AND THE MASTERY OF EMOTIONS
For the Piaroa, the ideal of man the hunter and sexy warrior is not culturally elaborated, nor is the value of male political supremacy.
They do not associate valour with the handsome and arrogant hunter, and young men are taught to pity such evidence of ‘lack of control’.
The Piaroa attitudes toward food reflect their devaluation of the status of the practical hunter.
They rely on four food sources, that from garden cultivation, from collecting, from hunting, and from fishing.
With respect to desire, they insist on the equal value of products of the hunt and products of the garden.
A proper meal, they say, should be comprised of both meat (the product of men's labour) and manioc bread (the product of women's labour).
For the Piaroa, the ideal of social maturity is the same for men and women; it is one of controlled tranquillity.
The individual, both male and female, is responsible for mastering emotions and the poisonous creative powers within the person which come from the crystal boxes of the Tianawa gods (see below).
Through such mastery, the individual can achieve the moderation in behaviour to allow him/her to lead a tranquil and therefore moral life within a community of relationships.
It is through this mastery that one achieves ideal manhood and womanhood in Piaroaland, and through it one can then creatively participate in the building of community.
The arrogant and handsome hunter is an image seen to be as disruptive to community relations as that of the ‘promiscuous woman’.
The image that a Piaroa wishes to present to the world is that of' dignified difference'.
The Piaroa judgement about the ‘handsome hunter’ is a complex one which can be understood through their theory of knowledge and personhood, a topic for below.
Today there are approximately 7,000 Piaroa living in the Amazon Territory of Venezuela.
Until about 1970, the population was highly dispersed with great distances separating both houses and territories.
In contrast, life within the multiple-family house was carried out within densely populated spaces.
If antagonisms or competition became overt within the house, it disbanded into separate units (Overing Kaplan 1975).
Since 1970, the Venezuelan government has encouraged the Piaroa to form larger communities in downriver positions closer to the administrative centre.
Thus, although I use the present tense, the physical organization of communities and the  economic organization that I discuss are more relevant to the pre-1970 period.
Each territory, comprising six to seven multiple-family houses, has its own ‘master of the territory’, who is the ruwang that holds the supreme position in a loose hierarchy of ruwatu (pl.) within it.
The ruwatu are politico-religious leaders who are basically ‘men of knowledge’ who deal with forces of destruction and regeneration from other worlds.
The politicking between the ruwatu is kept at a relatively low-key level, for they rarely meet as a group.
Competition among ruwatu between communities is usually expressed through the accusations of sorcery attack, often in the wake of marriages which shift the residential alignments within the territory, and thus respective follower size.
While the drama of such shamanic battles can be high, there are many mechanisms that allow for their peaceful resolution (Overing Kaplan 1975; Overing 1985).
Competitors are rarely accused of deliberately killing a kinsman, though they might well be accused of inadvertently doing so.
Despite the fact of achieved ruwang ship, the Piaroa are relatively speaking highly egalitarian, for they place great value upon personal autonomy.
The status labels of ‘ruwang ’ and ‘ruwahu ’are the only ones used in reference by the Piaroa outside of kinship terms to think about and to classify social relationships.
Typical of Amerindian groups of the Guianas (see Rivière 1984), Piaroa social life is very unformalized.
There are no age sets, no descent groups, no warrior societies, no formal council of mature men, no moiety organizations for the playing out of community life.
There exist no mechanisms for corporate group decision-making with regard to disputes or economic matters.
Rivière (1984: 4) has argued that such informality is a product of the emphasis by the Guianese Amerindian upon the value of individualism.
I wish to add, at least for the Piaroa, that their ‘informality’ is also a product of their high valuation of peaceful living.
Unlike the Shavante case, leadership pertains not to ‘manhood’, but to the role of ruwang .
In other words, an adult man does not automatically assume a political role on the basis of his gender, any more than does a woman.
If one wishes to speak of specifically ‘political’ roles, the divide is between the individual ruwatu and their wives (ruwahutu ), on the one hand, and everyone else, on the other (Overing 1985).
However, power in Piaroa social life, as for the universe in general, is highly dispersed and individualized.
The community does not hold land in perpetuity: no Piaroa can ‘own’ land, nor can the community.
No one, no leader, and no group can order the labour of another, or demand the products of it (Overing Kaplan 1983/4).
All products from the jungle are shared equally among members of the large house, while garden products and artifacts are privately owned by the individuals whose labour produces them (or literally creates them; see below).
Loosely organized work parties (all male, all female, male and female) within the community characterize economic life.
Each woman is mistress of her own fertility for which she alone is responsible: the community has no legal right to her progeny; nor does her husband if they should divorce.
The Piaroa are as allergic to a notion of social ‘rule’ as to the idea of ‘the right of command’.
While there are proper ways of doing things, it is up to the individual to choose or not to choose to do them.
The Piaroa emphatically told me that there was no residence ‘rule’.
Although there are kinsmen and in-laws with whom it is proper to live, the final choice is always left to the individual as a private decision.
The Piaroa daily express to one another their right to private choice and their right to be free from domination over a wide range of matters, such as residence, work, self development, and even marriage.
For the Piaroa, coercion has no place within the domain of the social, including any power a ‘collectivity’ might have.
The notion of giving up one's rights to a ‘whole community’ or of submitting to a decision forthcoming from the community or a portion of it would be a strange and abhorrent idea to them (Overing, in press).
Sovereignty is in large part in the hands of individuals.
Even the gods have no powers of coercion over individuals.
Despite the fact that any notion of ‘the will of the collectivity’ would be alien to the Piaroa, the ability to be social is considered to be the most important and valued characteristic of humans living on this earth.
According to Piaroa theory, the human condition is unique in that humans are the only beings that are today able to achieve a social life and to live in a community.
The Piaroa live on earth beneath ‘the sky of the domesticated’, and it is the sociality of living in communities beneath this sky that sets humans apart from all others.
Only humans can acquire the capacities for creating tranquil and moral (non-competitive) relationships of co-operation which allow for the forming of a moral community.
Both sociality and the powers to  transform the earth's resources for use, powers upon which sociality depends, are capabilities distinct to earthly humans.
Achieving the social , then, is the primary goal of the Piaroa community.
In great contrast to that type of political thought which equates ‘the social’ with the constraint of a collectivity and with relations of domination, the Piaroa insist upon the opposite where ‘the social’is viewed as the means through which humans could actively prevent the establishment of (immoral) relations of dominance (Overing, in press).
The work and the skills for building community are considered to be skills of wizardry (maripa ), and each individual acquires such skills, as appropriate to gender, through ‘lessons in wizardry’(maripa teau ).
Such skills, which fill one's ‘beads of knowledge’ within the person, are the poisonous creative powers for transformation that come from the crystal boxes of the Tianawa gods.
All powers for building community, for reproducing and producing, come, then, from another world, that of the gods.
This earthly world was depleted of all powers at the end of creation time history; after that time the community could only be achieved and continuously recreated through individuals carefully taking, with the help of the ruwatu ,limited amounts of transformational forces to do so from the gods.
In contrast to peoples who believe that their communities have existence through time through rules of corporation, the Piaroa do not understand ‘community’ and the relationships of which it is comprised as a political given that allows for continuity through time.
Rather it is for them a process of, existence that has to be daily achieved by individuals through work, that is through the individual mastery over emotions and the skills of wizardry.
The Piaroa, for instance, place emphasis upon marriage ties in the development of community rather than upon the ties of descent.
Through marriage and affinity the work of reproduction and production can be achieved.
For the Piaroa the social can only be created through the skills and the personal autonomy of individuals.
Humans can act as moral, social agents because unlike all other present day beings they acquire both a ‘life of the senses, or desires’(kaekwae ) and a full ‘life of thoughts’(ta'kwaru ) to be used on earth.
Moderation in behaviour, which allows for the ability to interact tranquilly, is achieved by attaining mastery over one's ‘life of senses’ and one's ‘life of thoughts’(Overing 1985).
Ta'kwanya and ta'kwakomenae are the two components, or forces, of  ta'kwaru , ‘the life of thoughts’, both of which come from the crystal boxes of the gods.
Ta'kwanya refers to all those particular cultural capabilities a specific type of people have that enable them to live as they do: it is their means of living and fulfilling their material needs; it is their way of doing things in the material sense.
It is a category that includes both reproductory capabilities and the knowledge and abilities to transform the earth's resources for use: for acquiring food, for making tools, for processing food, for being fertile, for doing ritual.
It also includes language and social norms.
There is a strong sense of violence attached to the notion of ta'kwanya ; for this category of creative, cultural capability is comprised of poisonous forces and carries with it the idea of predation (see Overing 1986a).
For the Piaroa, reproduction, production, and language are all placed on the same level as basically predatory capabilities, or the means for predation.
Thus, the transformational capabilities for fulfilling material needs are dangerous to the self if one takes too many of them, and they can be dangerous to others in contact with one.
For instance, the transformational forces of men are dangerous for women, and vice versa ; both are dangerous for children.
Each person is responsible for preventing his/her danger to others (Overing 1986b).
It is through the other aspect of one's ‘life of thoughts’, i.e. ta'kwakomenae (will, rationality, consciousness), that a Piaroa acquires the autonomy to ‘master’ within one's self both the dangerous ta'kwanya and one's ‘life of the senses’.
It is through this mastery that one achieves ideal manhood and womanhood in Piaroaland, and can then creatively participate in the building of community.
The Piaroa leaders, the ruwatu , take more skills of wizardry within themselves than normal people.
They therefore have greater responsibilities than the layman for the building of community.
They, for instance, display in self-deportment great tranquillity, or mastery of emotions; for one of their greatest duties is to create the tranquil relationships which would allow for the work of building community, and therefore for its wealth.
Because the ruwang takes more creative capabilities within himself, he is also the most productive member of the community, and the most dangerous.
It is he who brings into this world all the powers to be used in it; at the same time it is he who could become predator through sorcery of his own people (see Overing 1985).
A tranquil demeanour then is also required of the powerful ruwang by the members of his community as evidence of his  mastery over his powers and his emotions.
A display of too much arrogance or ‘excessive’ behaviour leaves a ruwang sitting alone, with no followers.
To sum up,Ta'kwaru , ‘the life of thoughts’, is a concept about human agency that conjoins within the person a specific culture and the autonomy to use this culture socially in a moral or immoral way.
Ta'kwakomenae (will, etc.) is that crucial aspect of ta'kwaru that allows for responsible or irresponsible behaviour.
It is one's motivation or intentionality in using one's customs (i.e. one's poisonous capabilities); it is one's comprehension of them, and one's responsibility or irresponsibility for their use, power, and force.
Virtue for the Piaroa demands the mastery through the will of both emotions and cultural capability toward the end of achieving social responsibility.
LESSONS IN WIZARDRY
The skills of wizardry to build community are acquired gradually through life.
A child's first lessons occur when she or he is 6 or 7 years old when the ruwang gathers a group of boys and girls together to teach them ta'kwakomena (consciousness, will, responsibility), or basically social morality.
They are taught what our moral philosophy calls ‘the other-regarding virtues’, those that enable one to take responsibility for one's actions towards others (see Overing 1985).
The Piaroa see the virtue of living peacefully with others as more important than ‘the self-regarding, virtues’(which in contrast the Shavante favour), such as personal courage, ambition, talent, and industry.
The ruwang also teaches the children what the Piaroa view as social deficiencies: such traits as ferocity, ill-nature, cruelty, malice, arrogance, jealousy, dishonesty, vanity.
The teaching ruwang , then, in these first ‘lessons in wizardry’ teaches the value of mastery over the emotions.
However,ta'kwakomena not only refers to responsibility, but to personal autonomy in general.
It is therefore the children's own decision which virtues they develop, as too it is a personal decision later which other aspects of knowledge, types of capabilities, one develops (Overing 1985, 1988).
Before the child is ‘tamed’ through its first ta'kwakomena lessons, it plays with a mixed-gender pack of free-roaming, small children.
Since the Piaroa totally disallow physical violence, and children are never physically punished, the children have no model of such action.
Their play, although robust, is accompanied by very little obvious  dissension.
Temper tantrums are discouraged, met by mocking and teasing, and strong anger is expressed by both adults and children through pointed silence (Overing Kaplan 1975; Overing 1988).
After the initial ‘lessons in wizardry’, the child is expected to take increasing responsibility for its actions and to co-operate with others in everyday activities.
As children begin to participate in daily tasks, they gradually leave the mixed gender pack of children to join the company of young people who are of their own gender.
Boys undergo no period of constraint, in contrast to their lot among the Shavante.
The Piaroa have no competitive sports, or ones that require endurance: there is no duelling, wrestling, or log races.
Shuttlecock is the only sport I saw teenagers playing.
The leisure time of teenage boys is spent wandering in the forest, from house to house, and in hammock gossip.
By working unsystematically with adults of their choice, they slowly learn the skills of their choice, those of hunting, fishing, or the making of artifacts.
Girls have less leeway than the boys.
A young daughter will help her father distribute game or follow her mother into the fields, but by the age of 9 or 10 girls are participating in the total range of tasks normal to female status.
Unmarried young people, male and female alike, provide a labour force upon which all adults of the communal house may draw, a preparation for the general co-operation upon which the Piaroa place such value among adults within the community.
It is particularly the case with men that they slowly over time increase their knowledge and mastery over self.
Many ceremonies for both males and females are privately conducted, often at the most in the company of a ruwang .
Marriage as a ritual is a private one between bride and groom, who are usually of approximate age.
That such stages in development go relatively unmarked in community ritual is significant as one of the factors contributing to the peacefulness of the Piaroa.
Both boys and girls continue their ‘lessons in wizardry’ at puberty.
For a woman, her most important acquisition of wizardry are her ‘beads of menstruation’.
The ruwang chants to fill her beads of knowledge with the knowledge of fertility.
Menstruation, and the fertility with which it is associated, form a woman's ‘thoughts’(her ta'kwanya ), as similarly hunting and fishing capabilities are the ‘thoughts’ of a man.
When a girl receives these ‘beads of knowledge’ from the gods, she then has the power to master her own fertility.
It is understood, in Piaroa thought, that women have control over their  own biological processes and must take responsibility for them.
All boys when about 12 undergo a great increase festival, the Sari , their second ‘lessons in wizardry’, which gives them the internal clothing of the hunter and fisherman.
Far from being distressed by the initiation of the boys, the women as a group ritually congratulate each boy at its close, and praise him.
The Sari , however, is not primarily an initiation ceremony; for it will be held by a great ruwang and his wife (the ruwahu ) regardless of whether there are boys of appropriate age for initiation.
It is at this ceremony that the sacred instruments, which the women must not see, are played.
The ruwang , who is with the men outside the house, chants with the ruwahu , who is inside it with the women.
In such chants the two leaders re-enact the roles of the creator god of the Piaroa and his sister.
Typically for the Piaroa, the women are not warned against seeing the instruments with a threat of rape; rather, it is said that if a woman should see the flutes, the entire village must commit mass suicide by joining hands and jumping off a cliff (and I must admit that their reasoning on this is not clear to me).
However, the Sari , as a great increase ceremony, is one of the most dangerous rituals the Piaroa perform, and, as such, only a great ruwang and his wife may present it.
Through his powers, he makes fertile the jungle and rivers: he travels to all the sacred homes of the ‘parents of the animals and fish’ beneath the earth, and transforms the inhabitants of these subterranean villages into the form of animal and fish.
He then transports them to earthly space for human use.
The ceremony is, then, a demonstration of the ‘fertility’ of the ruwang , and not of Piaroa men in general.
The great ‘secret’ of the rituals is that the Piaroa are cannibals; for the meat they eat each day is human in its origin.
After their first ‘lessons in wizardry’ for the hunt, men may undergo, if they wish, more powerful lessons to slowly increase their internal ‘beads of knowledge’, their source of power as hunter, fisherman, chanter.
The most powerful ‘lessons in wizardry’ are those taken for the learning of shamanic powers, and in the Piaroa theory of knowledge, men who do undergo them are the best hunters in Piaroaland, even if they rarely hunt (Overing 1988).
The excellent, practical hunter who has had no further lessons in hunting-wizardry than his introductory ones as a teenager is said to know little about hunting.
Thus, for the Piaroa, ‘hunting’ includes all capabilities for acquiring animal meat and for making it edible for human consumption.
The hunter who strikes down a wild peccary  with a blowgun dart is participating in only one aspect of this process, and the critical role is played by the ruwang .
It is the latter who has the transformational capabilities for the very creation of animal meat.
The Piaroa consider the most powerful creative capabilities to be those of the woman, who bears children, and those of the ruwang , who transforms humans to animals (Overing 1986b).
Thus, the ruwang , who transforms human to animal flesh, who transports it to earth, and then, after earthly kill, transforms the animal flesh into edible vegetable form (see Overing Kaplan 1975), is the greatest of all hunters.
It is through the power of his ‘thoughts’ that the Piaroa ruwang is their great warrior and hunter, while the physical prowess of the practical hunter is considered to be a minor capability, not one to place much value upon.
Danger, from the Piaroa point of view, is from the predatory activities of beings from other worlds, and the responsibility for protection from them is in the hands of the shamanic ruwatu .
Dealing with outsiders, with the enemy, is the duty of the ruwang , and not of men in general.
Therefore, Piaroa boys are not constrained into learning the aggressive stance of young warriors to fight men of this world; they do not learn to accept the dominance relationships of groups of men over other groups of men.
Males are not placed in age sets to mark their development and to rank their status as men: beyond certain learning, all maturity is both a relative and an individual matter.
Nor do Piaroa young men learn the self-regarding virtues of manhood that would set them as males against females, and, as such, superior to them.
The Shavante have no shamans, and the duty of protection, fighting, and hunting in Shavanteland is carried out through group debate by men and through their physical violence.
In Piaroaland, the ruwatu , individually, have the power that men as a group have in Shavanteland.
All protection is carried out through the power of the ‘thoughts’ of individuals, and not through the physical bellicosity of men in groups.
It might be added as an aside that it probably takes much more cultural energy to teach bellicosity and to produce warriors (with spears as arms), than to teach co-operation and to produce shamans (with ‘thoughts’ as arms).
PEACE AND THE DEMARCATION OF ‘THE OTHER’: A CONCLUSION
I began this essay by noting that the moral dogma of the Piaroa disallows violence toward anyone who is part of their this-worldly political and social universe.
Beings having the sufficient characteristic of ‘otherness’ to warrant an attack should only be those from other lands or worlds.
Indeed, an important aspect of the Piaroa ‘complex of peace’ is the erasure of most marked divisions among people in the playing out of the social life of the community.
Their ideal of endogamy, which treats the marriage exchange as if it were non-existent, is an example of such a mechanism for achieving peace.
The Piaroa recognize marriage exchange as an exceedingly dangerous principle to act upon, a lesson they receive from the events of the mythic past which was a time when each marriage alliance between strangers carried in its wake a deadly competition for the poisonous cultural capabilities of predation.
Through the endogamous marriage the very notion of marriage exchange, and especially its dangerous mixing of strangers, has been masked (see Overing Kaplan 1972, 1975, 1984).
There is very little idiom through which a Piaroa can demarcate another Piaroa as ‘other’ than self, and therefore as ‘outsider’.
Although all Piaroa are considered kinsmen, division does exist, of course: there is the factional politicking of the ruwatu ; each individual has dangerous affines, even if they are also kin; men have different roles to play from women, and because of their difference in cultural capabilities the genders are dangerous for one another , a difference somewhat marked in ritual.
However, unlike the Shavante, whose ritual and rhetoric sets into opposition groups and categories of people, and indeed celebrates separation and opposition, Piaroa institutions downplay, ignore, and mask the principles of separation and opposition, principles they associate with relations of dominance and tyranny (see Overing Kaplan 1981).
‘Difference’ for the Piaroa always signifies a danger: it can easily lead to violence between individuals and therefore be a deterrent to the possibility of creating the sociality necessary for the creation of community.
Much of the bread and butter of anthropology, the description of elaborate group organization, rites of initiation, networks of marriage exchanges, the hierarchy of groups, and the ranking of men over women are all mechanisms for stressing the ‘otherness’ among people  who daily interact, and, as such, they mark the boundaries within which, and outside of which, daily aggression and domination are played out.
Thus, in conclusion, I would like to remark that one reason that descriptions of exceedingly peaceful societies are relatively ‘thin on the ground’ is most likely because the institutions of such societies are not congruent with the Western (and anthropological) notions of ‘the social’.
On the other hand, the institutions of the Shavante are but grist for our mill.
Their rituals, their rhetoric, their values, and their group organization are familiar to us, while those of the Piaroa are not.
(3 1989 Joanna Overing
NOTES
1
An assumption in much of the recent literature on gender is that male obligations give men status, while female obligations constrain women.
For example, it is argued that boys in initiation receive esoteric privileged knowledge, but girls only suffer prohibitions and restrictions at puberty (see Bamberger 1974: 277; Ortner 1974: 69).
This is an example of what I have labelled a ‘Catch 22’ clause that is unfortunately very general to interpretations in gender studies.
2
It must be admitted that to a certain extent I am presenting a caricature of the Shavante, if for no other reason than I do not know them as well as the Piaroa.
The picture I give, however, is, according to a Bororo expert, Sylvia Caiuby Novaes (personal communication), one to which the Bororo, neighbours of the Shavante, also subscribe.
In other words, the image I present of the Shavante is the one they choose to present to the world.
However, Aracy Lopes da Silva, who has recently done research with Shavante females, tells me that:(a) Shavante females have considerable strength within the ‘domestic arena’, and (b) Shavante males are often gentle with women and children when interacting within the domestic field.
On the other hand, as Lopes da Silva herself comments (1986a), with the exception of the public bestowal of the ‘woman's name’ upon the female, women are tied to the domestic, the private, and the individual, while men are associated with the public, the ceremonial, and the political.
Also see Lopes da Silva (1986b).
REFERENCES