

DISASTER TO TRIUMPH!
A potentially embarrassing incident at last weekend's Steam Gala on the Llangollen Railway, turned into a triumph for the volunteer P-Way and operational staff who, by chance, were gathered at Glyndyfrdwy station writes COLIN JAMES.
The railway's team crane, which was part of a demonstration goods train at the time, turned from game-keeper to poacher as it became derailed and had to be rescued by another crane.
On Saturday, June 13, ‘Foxcote Manor’ was hauling the goods train into Glyndyfrdwy Station.
At the entrance to the platform area, the rear pony-truck carrier of the crane derailed and removed a full panel of track clips before it stopped.
It is believed that a foreign body was dislodged, fell on the track and derailed the bogie.
Fortune favoured the day as all the necessary men and equipment were already on site, or near by, and a real life exercise started.
A Coles diesel crane and a diesel loco were stable in the engineer's siding and they, together with the supply of skilled volunteers at the station, completed the re-railing in just 70 minutes.
During this time, only one scheduled train was disrupted; its journey being terminated at Deeside Loop.
Following the Permanent Way Engineer's inspection and his ‘all-clear’, the remaining services resumed to Glyndyfrdwy as timetabled.
The steam crane, built by Ransomes and Rapier in 1944 and weighing in at about 142 tons, was eased into the head-stunt after the incident.
The occurrence turned out to be a public demonstration of the skills and professionalism of the railway and a visitor remarked that it could not have been improved upon had it been stage-managed for the Gala.
Tribute indeed!
Llangollen Railway staff at work re-railing the breakdown crane and repairing the Permanent Way following the derailment at Glyndyfrdwy.
Truro moves on to the SDR
THE ever popular ‘City of Truro’ moved to the Buckfastleigh headquarters of the South Devon Railway on Monday, June 8, in the second leg of its three County tour of Cornwall, Devon and Somerset.
Arriving by road from Bodmin in an all day journey delayed by early morning loading difficulties and resultant time and route restrictions into Devon, the NRM loco finally arrived just before 8.00 pm.
However, with rapidly failing light, a quick unloading operation saw engine and tender safely off their separate low loaders and onto SDR metals within two hours.
Resembling the proverbial Cheshire Cat, SDR General Manager Richard Elliott commented: ‘I'm delighted to have ‘City of Truro’ on our railway for the first time.
It's a proud day for all of our workers and we're looking forward to a few interesting and busy weeks with the engine.
‘This historic loco is just the attraction and boost we need in a recession, and I'm confident it'll be just as popular with the public in Devon as it proved to be on the Bodmin & Wenford Railway in Cornwall.’
Not content with just one locomotive arrival however, the SDR also took delivery of J94 No. 68009 from Tyseley on Tuesday, June 9.
The 0-6-0ST joins other Birmingham Railway Museum stablemate hired to the SDR, former GWR 5700 Pannier No. 7752.
The J94 lookalike has been hired to provide additional loco support for the SDR after problems were encountered with Chatterly Whitfield Mining Museum visitor ‘Joseph’ which will be leaving the SDR during the 1992 season.
Facing Totnes, ‘City of Truro’ entered service on Saturday, June 13 after clearance trials on Tuesday in the week.
It featured strongly with Nos. 7752 and 68009 in the SDR's Summer Gala on Sunday the same weekend which drew massive crowds .
After spending most of June in Devon, including SDR Victorian photographic specials which will be held on Saturday, June 20, the next stop for ‘City of Truro’ is the West Somerset Railway.
National Railway Museum Curator of Operations Ray Towell, who has been with ‘City of Truro’ during most of the current tour, commented: ‘It's been a hectic and very pleasant few weeks to date but the welcome we've had everywhere has been magnificent.
This tour has taken the National Railway Museum to new places as well as new audiences, and should encourage people to take a trip to York and see the rest of our excellent national collection.’
As one of the biggest railway events ever seen in the West Country, Taunton 150 looks set to be the railway preservation event of the year in the South West and a fitting end to No. 3440's summer tour.
SOUTHPORT OFFERS HOLIDAY FUN DAYS
AS the school summer holidays approach, the Southport Railway Centre is playing its part to promote railway safety to the school children of the North West.
On June 17 and 24 the Centre will be hosting its ‘School Days’ special steam events.
These are both educational and fun days and all ages, from primary to junior and senior schools have already booked their places.
Usually, a guided tour of the centre starts the visit.
Locos, carriages and other vehicles are displayed in the town's former locomotive shed and with safe, easy access, and virtually no restricted areas, the youngsters are actively encouraged to climb aboard and explore the static exhibits.
A highlight of the visit is the steam train rides along the centre's short standard gauge track.
Publicity manager of the Southport Railway Centre, Chris Mills explained the third aspect of ‘School Days’.
‘In our small lecture room, two schools liaison officers from British Rail talk to the children and stress the dangers of playing anywhere near railway lines,’ said Chris.
‘They illustrate their talks using different video films depending upon the ages of their classes.
‘The older ones are shown the very sobering ‘Robbie’— a gory film about children playing chicken across a railway line.
‘The younger children are shown a Thomas type of video.
The officers are very good at putting over their safety messages to all age groups.’
The Railway Centre has circulated details to all schools in Lancashire, Cheshire, Greater Manchester and Merseyside.
The ‘School Days’ events are very popular but there are still some reservations available.
There is a small cover charge per pupil and any teachers looking for an interesting visit for their classes should book directly with the Southport Railway Centre .
The centre is also open to the public daily during June, July and August and the first week in September.
THE violent thunder storms which interrupted the recent fine weather, brought problems to the Welsh highland Railway on the night of Thursday May 28.
A nearby  lightning strike sent a surge through the local electricity supply system and this blew eight fuses and two diodes which control signals and points on the Welsh Highland.
The line's electrical department worked on the faults and the signals were back in use before the first train next day.
The repairs to the points' circuits took a little longer and the points were operated by hand for a short time.
THE ex-Cambrian/Great Western tickets office from Barmouth has found a new home on the Embsay Steam Railway at Skipton.
It is being restored at present— a task that will be completed over the next four months.
It will be used as the ticket office at Embsay Station.
Museum's new sponsorship
THE work of the East Anglian Railway Museum, based at Chappel & Wakes Colne Station, near Colchester, has been given a welcome boost by local company, Allan Chapman & James (Insurance Brokers) Ltd of Colchester.
As the Museum's train steamed past, an outsized cheque for £1,500 was officially handed over by Director, Mr Terry Austin, to Museum Chairman Mike Stanbury.
The Museum is a registered Charity with no public funding and Mick Miller, Finance Trustee, said: ‘This sponsorship is a very generous gesture and we are delighted that this has come from an enterprising local company which has pledged support for our activities for the next three years.’
Allan Chapman & James is a young company which is building itself an excellent reputation in the area as commercial insurance brokers.
Terry Austin said: ‘We have admired what the Museum has achieved entirely through voluntary effort and their philosophy of mixing education with having fun.
‘We felt that they deserved sponsorship from the local community and as our business grows, we would like to share our success with an organisation whose aims we fully support.
We look forward to a long and growing relationship.’
MIKE Stanbury, chairman of the East Anglian Railway Museum, receives a cheque from new museum sponsors Allan Chapman & James, director Terry Austin.
WORK has begun on a new, purpose-built shed at The Railway Age in Crewe, Cheshire's newest and most innovative tourist destination.
To mark the start of this latest project at The Railway Age, the Borough's Mayor, Councillor Dorothy Hassall was on hand to help Railway Age Chairman John Williams launch the project in traditional style with a wave of the green flag and a blow on the guardsman's whistle, with the Princess Elizabeth providing the appropriate background.
The shed will be able to accommodate two of the largest steam locomotives, together with workshop areas for fixed machinery and the centre's new 7½in gauge railway stock.
The Railway Age, which brings together more than a century and a half of railway tradition on a single site in the heart of Cheshire is set to become a major tourist attraction of national significance, and is located within the town's famous rail interchange, one of the largest in Europe.
Nearing the end of its two-year redevelopment, the centre was first opened by the Queen in 1987.
It will provide a fascinating insight into Crewe's development as a successful ‘railway’ town and celebrate its enormous contribution to the nation's railway heritage.
Visitors can enjoy refreshments from the ‘Brief Encounter’ station buffet in North Junction signal box or board the static advanced Passenger Train located alongside the main London to Glasgow rail line.
Restored steam and diesel locomotives are on view, together with historic rolling stock.
The North Junction signal box features hands-on displays illustrating the development, role and operation of rail signalling from 1840 to the present day.
North  Junction is one of three signal boxes at The Railway Age.
In addition to the ‘A’ signal box from Crewe Station which has been rebuilt on site, the centre has acquired the 131-level Exeter West box which has been rebuilt and is currently being refitted.
Also on view is an exhibition of railway photographs entitled ‘The Trained Eye’ which has been loaned to The Railway Age by the National Railway Museum.
Pictured during the official launch of the running shed project at The Railway Age in Crewe is the Mayor, Councillor Dorothy Hassall and John Williams, chairman.
YOUR MAIN LINE STEAM GUIDE
THE END OF STEAM?
A SPECIAL REPORT FOR SRN BY COLIN JAMES
THE spate of coal mine closures over the past 10 years or so, has brought increasing problems for the independent railways.
Dry steam coal is becoming a rare commodity and the Snowdon Mountain Railway is suffering more than most due to the special steam raising and burning qualities that its 800mm gauge rack locos demand.
In the early 70's, the railway's experiments to use fuel-oil in place of coal proved unsuccessful and in the mid 80's, trials to burn coal on the gas producer principle were abandoned.
Now, the coal crisis is so  acute that steam locos on the mountain could become just a memory unless the present oil firing experiments at Snowdon are a success.
As the mountain trains, now both steam and diesel, leave the station, at Llanberis, keen-eyed passengers may notice the test-bed boiler for the experiments in the works yard near to the coaling-stage.
The life expired boiler from No. 5, ‘Moel Siabod’ is set up to test equipment and techniques which could prove to be the saviour of steam.
In his office overlooking the yard, S.M.R. General Manager, Derek Rogerson explained the rationale behind the tests.
‘The Snowdon locomotive boilers are rated at 9.500 lbs per hour evaporation at 200 p.s.i.
with grate areas of less than 8.5 square feet,’ said Derek.
‘They operate with very high combustion zone temperatures, large amounts of primary air and smoke box draught regularly exceeding 12 ins of water gauge.
‘These combustion conditions limit the range of coals which are suitable.
The majority of British coals have ash fusion temperatures too low for use on the Snowdon locomotives.
‘Not only are serious problems encountered with clinker but on some occasions spectacular displays of ‘black glass’ have been produced, lining the firebox tube plates — a situation not conducive to free steaming!
‘The dry steam coals of South Wales were ideal.
At present there is only one small private mine still producing a coal of acceptable specification and as their coal preparation facilities are not very sophisticated, the coal supplied is almost ‘run of mine’ with a high percentage of fine coal.’
‘There are still supplies of Warwickshire hard coals available.
These are just adequate for steam raising without clinkering, but the pollution caused by the 36 per cent volatile content is intolerable.
‘The black smoke produced may be a delight to railway photographers on the mountain, but the residents of Llanberis and district and 99 per cent of the passengers are understandably less than enamoured.
‘With all seven steam locomotives in steam outside the engine shed at Llanberis on a sultry summer's morning, passengers have been known to have difficulty in finding the ticket office!
‘To reduce the problems of air pollution, the company has adopted the practice of layering the coal bunkers on the locomotives so that the limited supplies of dry steam coal are burnt at Llanberis and on the lower reaches of the line, and the Warwickshire coals are only fired above Hebron Station.
‘Supplies of suitable coal in the future cannot be guaranteed and unless the current experiments with oil firing are successful then it is likely that steam operation on S.M.R. may have to be abandoned in a few years time.
‘In the oil firing trials in the early 1970's, steam raising was satisfactory, but the design of the fireboxes and the expansion and contraction across the tubeplates reduced the life of a firebox to less than two years.
‘The railway has recently appointed Eric Cowley, formerly an engineer with East African Railways, as Project Manager to oversee the present trials of oil firing and the conversions.
‘A prototype ‘Mexican Trough’ type burner has been manufactured and operated in the test boiler using compressed air as the atomising media.
‘The trial was generally successful apart from some difficulty in controlling the burner in its small flame setting.
A modification has been done to correct this problem and further trials will shortly be carried out with the modified burner and using steam supplied  from another locomotive through a flexible steam hose to atomize the fuel.
‘Extensive running tests will then enable a proper assessment of the primary and secondary air balances to be made.’
Although the Project Manager's major role is the introduction of oil firing, he is also closely involved with S.M.R.'s dieselisation and new rolling stock programme.
The railway already had three Hunslet built diesel locomotives with a fourth due to be delivered shortly.
An exciting development (not necessarily for steam enthusiasts) is the plan to introduce a three unit railcar in approximately 18 months time.
This year the railway will be operating with five steam locos and four diesels.
General Manager Rogerson added: ‘We are running more trains than ever with a maximum of 26 per day in the height of our season.
‘This obviously reflects in the amount of track maintenance that is needed; it is like the painting of the Forth Bridge — we never stop!’
The Snowdon Mountain Railway is conscious of its historical importance in the development of tourism in the area but it is also a highly organised commercial business.
Preservation may have its place, but technical advancements must take precedence to maintain high standards of service and reliability in the harsh environment experienced on the mountain.
Many purists will mourn the introduction of diesels and some will regret the inevitable conversions to oil firing, but the railway remains ever popular to the ordinary visitors.
Over the next few years, the characteristic plumes of coal-generated smoke from the hard-working locos on the steep rack gradients will almost certainly disappear forever.
There is just time for enthusiasts to capture the evocative scenes on film and video from carriage and trackside before  it's too late.
Life expired boiler of No. 5 which is being used for the oil firing tests on the Snowdon Mountain Railway.
‘Wyddfa’ is pictured among the steam and smoke at Llanberis Station.
This sight may soon be a thing of the past on the Snowdon Mountain Railway.
MUD TO MAGNIFICENCE
Trust's museum and goods yard are opened
Words: DUNCAN YOUNG
Pictures: JOHN FAIRCLOUGH
ABOUT 10 years ago, a plain speaking Worth Valley Railway volunteer described Ingrow West station and its yard as a  carbuncle on the skin of a lovely railway.
The buildings had been demolished in the late 1960s, the goods shed was ‘adorned’ with a wooden lean to, the once extensive yard had been lifted and the solum was muddy, overgrown and derelict.
Some boiler restoration was taking place but there was no doubt that Ingrow West was run down and a problem to the KWVR.
However, in the mid eighties an amazing transformation began starting with an initiative  led by the Worth Valley Railway and developed by affiliated groups, namely the Vintage Carriages Trust and the Bahamas Locomotive Society.
It began with the rebuilding of the former Foulridge station building onto the site; the ‘new’ building subsequently won the Best Preserved Station Award from Ian Allan.
SUCCESSFUL
The next phases  were the Vintage Carriage Trust Museum and the Bahamas Railway Society.
The highly successful relocation of the BLS has been well documented elsewhere and construction of their new museum around the former goods shed is steadily proceeding with the steel framework erected and the concrete floor and pit being prepared.
There will be two or three years work before this phase is complete.
On Saturday, June 6, two highly significant milestones were reached with the formal opening of the Vintage Carriages Trust Museum and the finished goods yard by Cllr Barry Thorne, Mayor of Bradford.
Mr Graham Mitchell, Chairman of the KWVRPS, stated that Ingrow West was not only the co-operation between the KWVR, VCT and BLS but also many other bodies, especially Bradford District Council and the Department of the Environment Urban Aid Programme.
80 per cent of the £108,000 for the restoration of the yards came from Urban Grant Aid.
Bradford District Council provided much of the labour for the reconstruction of the ‘settled’ yards whilst the KWVR relaid sidings into the VCT Museum and up to the Bahamas Locomotive site.
OPENING
However, the day really belonged to the Vintage Carriages Trust with the formal opening of their museum at Ingrow, also performed by Cllr Thorne.
Originally intended as a shed to house their historic stock, substantial grants from the English Tourist Board and the Museums and Galleries Commission had enabled the concept to be developed into a museum.
VCT Chairman Chris Smyth paid tribute to the many members who had helped with the project with special thanks to Jackie and Mike Cope who were the prime movers behind the museum.
There are plans to extend the museum building to incorporate a dedicated workshop but the current result is really quite splendid containing carriages such as the MS & LR Tri-Composite or precious locomotives like ‘ Bellerophen ’ and ‘Lord Mayor’.
The flavour of the museum is particularly pertinent, while full of railway interest it is a family experience first and foremost rather than being aimed at a specialised section of the enthusiast market.
Ingrow West and its yard is a fascinating and ongoing development and one of the finest preserved railways in Europe.
It is an excellent example of foresight, liaison and co-operation by three remarkable railway preservation societies with local government and national bodies and is well worth a visit.
A more detailed report on the VCT will follow at a later date.
The Bahamas Loco Society  building at Ingrow
Councillor Barry Thorne, the Lord Mayor of Bradford, meets ‘Lord Mayor’ the 0-4-0ST which is kept at the Vintage Carriage Trusts Museum.
The grand opening of the Vintage Carriage Trusts Museum
After delays caused by  unforeseen difficulties with the foundations, the steelwork for the new workshop and museum has been erected.
Work will now concentrate on roofing the structure, the floor and digging the inspection pit prior to the installation of machine tools.
Best Wishes to everyone at EAST LANCS RAILWAY
It's all change at Bury
By EDDIE BELLASS
BURY where?
Do I mean Bury Interchange — the joint Metrolink tram and Greater Manchester bus station?
Well no, I'm actually writing about Bury Bolton Street station, headquarters of both the original East Lancashire Railway founded early in Queen Victoria's reign and the present reincarnation of that historic railway company which emerged during the 1980s.
The reason I have given it the temporary title referred to above is because I have witnessed at least two name exchanges at the station in recent months.
The first occasion was in October 1991, when I descended the station steps to find that the ELR's intentional BR(LMR) 1950s image of maroon and straw everywhere, supplemented by ‘double sausage’ signs, had been suppressed.
The whole place had been updated by some 25 years, with BR rectangular ‘modern image’ signs in white with black, mainly lower case lettering bearing the name ‘New Cross’.
At Platform Three stood a rake of blue and grey BR Mr. 1 coaches, headed by one of Vulcan Foundry's famous ‘Whistlers’, its 16 cylinders thumping gently and the turbocharger drilling away in the well-known manner which earned the class its nickname during 30 years and 250 Million train-miles of running over BR's main lines.
The Class 40, dressed in a never-never livery of rail blue with all yellow cabs, large BR logo and carrying a might-have-been number 40 445, was facing south — held stationary by the unblinking red eye of a four-aspect colour light signal, newly erected at the Manchester end of Platform Three.
Suddenly the signal light changed to green.
A guard's whistle blew and the 40 parped in response.
Then its rhythmic thump turned to thunder and the turbo's whistle soared up two octaves as it accelerated the rake of blue and grey Mk 1s along the platform.
Simultaneously, two overweight, breathless and slightly tipsy men who were descending the station steps saw the train moving out and broke into a run, during which they managed to overtake half of a 66ft. long Mk. 1 coach.
They scrambled aboard the vehicle in front, slammed the door behind them, and collapsed into the centre vestibule.
‘Cut’ shouted a voice, followed by ‘Thank you Fred, David and everybody.
Could we do it again, please?’
The voice was that of Granada TV director Philip Saville, addressing actors Alfred Molina and David Boyce (playing the tipsy travellers) and his own production team.
Yes, the station was a film set, all the off camera area festooned with cables, lights, and the hordes of props associated with making a feature film, in this instance for TV transmission on June 2 this year.
A narrow gauge track ran along the platform surface, its polished rails carrying the 16mm colour film camera and cameraman on a four wheeled dolly, pushed along by manpower and matching the pace of the train.
East Lancs Railway driver Graham Thornton piloted the Class 40, with Bury stationmaster Eric Allen as guard.
Hidden in a hole in the platform was Gary Sutcliffe, with a 12 volt car battery feeding a home-made switching panel, from which he changed the aspects of the ex-BR colour light signal at the request of the film crew.
This was for camera footage only, all train movements being subject to normal ELR operating rules.
Other scenes depicting the inside of the ‘moving train’ were actually shot inside Buckley Wells carriage sheds.
Revolving light carousels played on the compartment side of a Mk. 1 coach while wind and rain machines battered the corridor side from which David Boyce had to fall and, later Alfred Molina had to dive, to their ‘deaths’.
Unseen, at the buffers of the actually stationary and chocked vehicle, gangs of ELR volunteers rocked the coach from side to side on its springs, to simulate rapid motion.
Filming just the ELR train scenes took two and a half days, one shooting finishing at 04.00 hours, and all for about six minutes of the 90 minute drama Angels, which was a pilot for a possible TV series.
On June 2 this year, on the very day that Angels was transmitted by Granada TV, the same organisation was arranging for Bury Bolton Street to exchange its identity once more.
On that day it became ‘Thurmarsh (Midland)’, supposedly on a line from Bradford into the Yorkshire Dales.
Unfortunately, I am unable to reveal the plot since the film was in the early days of its shooting, for transmission next October.
However, I can tell you that the title is The Life & Times Of Henry Pratt and it is set during the years 1936 to 1953.
There are gas masks, ration books, lots of soldiers, sailors and airmen and hordes of pretty girls, plus some ladies dressed just as I remember my own mother and Auntie Ethel!
And, of course, the motive power is inevitably steam but not, alas, genuine West Riding motive power.
Unfortunately the tight filming schedule could not wait for just two weeks or so until a suitable engine (ie a 4F 0-6-0) arrived at Bury.
No less than 53 extras portrayed the wartime travelling public, not forgetting a crate of live chickens, one of which actually laid an egg on set!
However, by 18,00 hrs. that evening Bury Bolton Street was back to its own self and its late 1950s style, at least in its furniture, colour schemes and the two neat rakes of BR Mk. 1 coaches stabled on Platform Two — one in 1951 ‘Blood & Custard’ and the other in 1956 maroon.
The film crews, actors and extras had all departed, but not for long.
Four days later a different camera team were up at Ramsbottom to film a spectacular incident involving a car and a diesel locomotive, and all  this happened right in the middle of the ELR's ‘all diesel weekend’.
A case of yet another engine in ‘reel’ trouble?
ACTION…
Bury station becomes the setting for Granada TV's latest project.
ELR HAS A ROSY FUTURE!
By COLIN JAMES
THE conversion of the Bury to Manchester line to Metrolink operations has meant that it is no longer available for conventional locomotives and trains.
Therefore the East Lancashire Railway's connection to British Rail's metals has been effectively severed.
A rail link to the B.R. network is considered vital to the E.L.R.'s  longer term operations to allow excursion trains in and out and to permit ease of access to visiting locos and rolling stock.
An alternative had to be found and it was, in the shape of the former Bury to Heywood line.
The restoration of this four mile length of track now forms stage three of the East Lancashire Railway Project and it will provide a B.R. link at Castleton Junction.
Although the Bury to Heywood line has been disused since 1980, the majority of track remains in place thanks to the persuasive powers that Rochdale Council exerted on British Rail at the time.
When completed, steam trains will once again operate between Bolton Street and Heywood Station independent of British Rail.
In addition, the restoration of the track across Pilsworth Road Bridge to Heywood Business Park forms part of the proposals to establish a European Railfreight terminal at Heywood.
Phase three will extend the line for steam trains but as a spin-off, there could be a new aspect to operations on the E.L.R. ,that of freight transport serving lineside industries.
Considerable interest is being shown by local businesses but there are no firm proposals on the table at present.
The civil  engineering works on the Heywood line are being designed by the respective Engineering Departments of Bury and Rochdale Councils.
The Director of Engineering of Bury is the Project Manager  on behalf of the Trust a continuation of his role from Phases one and two.
BRIDGES
Spokesman, Mike Walmsley commented: ‘The major work on the line is associated with bridges.
A new bridge has just been completed to enable the railway to pass over the new Metrolink.
‘Due to the closeness and levels of an existing road bridge at Knowsley Street, a 1 in 25 gradient will be required for a short distance on the approach embankment to the bridge from Bury.
‘Midway along the line at Pilsworth Road, a new bridge is to be constructed.
The original structure was partially demolished prior to the line's closure with a Bailey bridge then placed to accommodate the limited traffic under B.R. ownership.
‘On final closure in 1980 the temporary bridge was removed and although the old foundations are in place, they cannot be used due to poor ground conditions.
‘Elsewhere in the Rochdale district, there are extensive works required at Moss Hall Bridge where the spandrel walls and parapets of this high masonry arch structure have shown signs of movement, and in Heywood the bridges spanning Manchester Street and Schofield Street are to be strengthened.
Another task was the parapet replacement at the M66 motorway bridge.
‘Contracts are let for the bridgeworks and clearance work, drainage, track laying and fencing will probably be undertaken by specialist teams.
As part of this project, it is hoped to provide a new station at Heywood.’
TARGET
It is understood that no specific target date has been identified for completion of the Heywood link, but a spokesperson for the borough planning department which was instrumental in obtaining funding for the project, pointed out that the grants negotiated are available for the next three years during which time the majority of restoration work must be completed.
When phase three is finished, the East Lancashire Railway will haul passengers over a full twelve mile line and its rails will be available for freight trains to the continent via the Heywood extension — an exciting future for the society!
JUST one minute into the journey from Bolton Street Station, passengers will notice restoration work progressing on a large boiler and locomotive chassis belonging to the Bolton Steam Locomotive Company.
Until recently, only the dedicated enthusiasts would identify the components as a B.R. Standard Class 5MT, but since the completion of volunteer Dave Clark's expert temporary lining and numbering on the exposed cab side, 73156 is now brought to the attention of all train-board visitors.
The loco was built in 1956 and was rescued from the scrap torch of Barry by a five-man group — the Bolton Steam Locomotive Company.
The company, which is just one of a number of specialist groups on the railway who are restoring specific locomotives, bought the 5MT on November 9, 1985.
It was transported to Bury a year later and has been worked upon continually since.
The volunteer work force comprises not only the five men of the company but also about a dozen regular helpers from the North West Loco Action Group.
Their input is sometimes supplemented by the Black Five Group — close working friends of the Bolton Company.
Neville Ward, who with his brother Duncan, has been deeply involved with the projects from the start, outlined the more recent work on the loco.
‘The tyres have been turned at Tyseley and the boxes stripped for inspection.
We have fully serviced the Timken bearings with support and assistance from both Timken and the Birmingham Railway Museum,’ he said.
‘The chassis was re-wheeled on May 21.
It was a major task but the skill of the steam crane operators together with our own workforce combined to complete the work in just three hours.
‘The next major chassis work will be the fitting of the springs and mounting of the front bogie.
This will take us about three months to complete after which we will concentrate on fitting brake and lubrication gear.
At present we have only one lubricator and we are trying to locate and purchase a large 12-feed unit.’
But the lubricator is not the largest missing item the company has to contend with — there is no tender!
A new one has to be built from scratch but fabrication can only start when plans are eventually acquired from York.
While purpose made wheels may be made available, a set from a Class 40 diesel are on standby for its use if necessary.
The general condition of the boiler is very good and there appears to be not a great deal of work to be done.
In 1963, in B.R. days, it received a full overhaul and it is believed that a new front tube plate was fitted.
Over last winter all the stud holes were drilled out and re-tapped and recently volunteers were busily repositioning support timbers to work on an area of rust on the front ring.
Financing of the restoration of 731566 is privately funded at present although the projects cannot necessarily rely solely on such means to maintain momentum in the longer term.
Therefore, the company are to seek sponsorships and would welcome any enquiries now or perhaps at a later date when the industrial climate improves.
Upon completion, the loco will run on the E.L.R. with brief visits perhaps to other steam railways.
But when that will be is not known; the Bolton Steam Locomotive Company has not set target dates.
As Neville Ward declares: ‘73156 will steam when it steams!’
The restored chassis of 73156 alongside the running line.
Pictured above is the newly constructed bridge over the new Metrolink line which means an exciting future for the East Lancashire Railway.
Employing the unemployed!
THERE is nothing more soul-destroying than being unemployed for a long period, as no doubt some SRN readers can readily confirm, writes EDDIE BELLASS.
However, a group of 50 or so Unemployment Benefit claimants are now busy dusting off their old skills and even learning some new ones on the East Lancashire Railway, thanks to Practical Skills Development plc.
PSD is funded by Bolton & Bury Technical College, acting as the regional office for TEED, the Training & Enterprise Education Department which has succeeded the erstwhile Manpower Services Commission.
It contracts the deliver training and employment opportunities for YT, ET and Employment Action schemes, the last of which covers PSD's current activities on the East Lancashire Railway.
To qualify for engagement on an Employment Action scheme applicants must be between the ages of 18 and 59 and have been registered as unemployed for at least six months.
On commencing work on a project they receive their normal, weekly Unemployment Benefit (according to status and dependants) plus the sum of £10.00 out of which they are expected to spend up to £4.00 on travel to work costs.
PSD itself will then provide up to an additional £8.50 per week towards excess travelling costs.
PSD also provides all protective clothing and footwear, all safety equipment, and the supervisory staff, while the sponsor of the work — in this case the East Lancashire Railway — devises the project and supplies all materials required.
At the present time the PSD team has already built a new mess room for ELR volunteer workers, erected carriage maintenance platforms within Buckley Wells shed and laid concrete paths all round the outside of the shed, together with concrete bases for its new workshop annexe.
Current projects in hand include coach restoration, track laying and points and crossings renovation and completely refurbishing the derelict and vandalised Bury South signal box.
This box will eventually control a revised Bolton Street station track layout and the new junction with the soon to be reinstated Heywood link line to the national BR network.
The Employment Action operations at Bury are managed by PSD's Bill Davies, assisted by his team of site co-ordinator Howard Cleary and four project supervisors.
One of these supervisors is no stranger to the railway, being the ELR's own Allan Schofield who is a skilled permanent way worker, fully qualified locomotive drive and owner of the line's Class 110 dmu.
Most of the PSD workers themselves have expressed their relief and willingness to be gainfully occupied for five full days per week, even for the basic financial reward of just their normal UB plus £10.00 per week.
ELR offers diesel too!
PRESERVATION railways have a backbone of steam locomotives and the East Lancashire Railway is no exception; the latest Bury Bulletin listing 16 of them.
Writes COLIN JAMES.
Despite that, the younger breed of enthusiasts are now demanding, and getting, preserved diesels.
the recent diesel weekend on the E.L.R. proved extremely popular and was well supported.
But over that weekend, diesels did not have it all to themselves as the unique two coach Battery Electric Multiple Unit was diagrammed for three return trips.
The B.E.M.U. was originally a Derby Lightweight DMU built in 1956, but was converted to battery power two years later at Cowlairs.
It then ran as a two car unit (No.
SC 79998 and 79999) between Aberdeen and Ballater, a distance of 43 miles each day.
At full charge, the 216 cells provided the B.E.M.U. with a range of about 100 miles and so it was restricted to one round trip per day over the branch line.
There is some speculation, or perhaps just wishful thinking, that royalty may have graced the vehicle as Ballater is the nearest station to Balmoral Castle.
Upon closure of the branch line in 1957, the B.E.M.U. went home to Derby where it became departmental test unit ‘Gemini’, before eventually being acquired by the West Yorkshire Transport Museum.
The owners have now placed the two car unit on a six year loan to the ELR and restoration to full working order commenced at Bury about 2½ years ago  led by Roy Sheffield of the Electrical Engineering Department.
A major task has been the removal of asbestos insulation.
This was undertaken by outside experts but generally, volunteer input has been the order of the day for most of the restoration works.
The fitting of water supply tanks and plumbing, new ceilings and lighting panels and the overhaul of the batteries have been just some of the volunteer projects.
For passenger comfort, seats are a must!
But getting suitable ones, to supplement the original first-class seats, has posed problems.
Eventually, a supply was obtained from a Longsight D.M.U. which was being scrapped.
JOHN GOSLING'S STEAM REPORTS
Cheddleton prepares for new season
THE North Staffordshire Railway at Cheddleton, near Leek on the Churnet Valley Railway, has recently opened its doors for the 1992 season of running dates.
A recent addition to the locomotive working stud is Derby built Fowler Class 4F, No. 4422.
This made its first public steaming debut at Cheddleton after major restoration work last September, during the successful ‘Derby Day’.
This also included Class 25 diesel/electric locomotive D7672 ‘Tamworth Castle’ recently purchased from British Rail at Leeds' Holbeck depot, and Class 08 shunter D3420, both engines in green livery, the former in two-tone colours.
Standard Class 4, 80136 is also resident on the line.
There is a good collection of passenger coaches, including Mark 1 type vehicles, being recently painted in to BR maroon livery, plus a good assortment of freight rolling stock.
The envy of many preservation sites is the newly erected locomotive shed built of brick, which houses the locomotives when not in use.
This also provides a valuable workshop for restoration of various projects, being a credit to all concerned.
Commercial Manager Richard Waterhouse and his father Rom, explained the long term aim, which is to purchase the remaining section of the former North Staffordshire Railway Churnet Valley line from Leekbrook Junction to Oakmoor Sand Sidings (Hepworth Minerals Moneystone Quarry).
The main objective is the creation of a tourist railway centre, which closed to BR freight traffic in 1988.
To achieve this goal, the NSR Company (1978) Limited, had promoted the formation of The Churnet Valley Railway plc, primarily to raise funds by a public ordinary share issue.
When negotiations with BR are complete and the Plc can be launched, it is basically intended to hopefully purchase land and trackwork etc.
Also with the mineral extractions now being carried by road transport, it is hoped that this can again be conveyed by rail along this beautiful line to the BR exchange sidings.
This will also bring in useful revenue to promote the railway.
The sand is incidentally forwarded to Pilkington's Glass Works in St. Helens in Merseyside.
On advertised steaming days, trains are operating every half hour between 11.00 and 17.30 with short rides in the station yard.
Adult fares are £1.50 with children and OAPs £1.00.
A family day ticket is priced at £5.00.
Cheddleton station in Basford Bridge Lane, opened for the 1992 season on June 7 and is also open on July 19 (Friends of Thomas the Tank Engine), 2/9/16/23/30/31 August (the last two days of August are another Friends of Thomas), September 20 (Transport Day), and December 6, 13 and 20 for Santa steamings specials.
Ample car parking space provides excellent provision not only to the station, but to the working signal box, refreshment room and souvenir shop, plus the locomotive shed.
The Fowler 4F is planned to visit the East Lancs Railway at Bury in the near future, which will also provide excellent running-in facilities.
In exchange, a steam locomotive from the ELR will be going to Cheddleton.
The ‘Knotty’ magazine issued free to members of the NSR, is priced at £1.00, and provides a wealth of information on the restoration of the railway in this lovely area of North Staffordshire.
Further details are available from Cheddleton Railway Centre  .
THE flagship of the Midland Railway Trust headquarters at Butterley, near Ripley in Derbyshire, No. 6203 ‘Princess Margaret Rose’, will be operating trains at the Centre during the weekend of June 27 and 28.
This is one of the largest exhibits at the Centre and special permission has been sought from the Department of Transport to allow operation over the Trust's lines.
This has been specifically granted for this weekend.
The locomotive will be operational throughout the two days from 11.15 to 4.15pm.
Alan Callandine, the Midland Railway Trust's Development Officer, has commented that this is a great opportunity to ride behind this wonderful locomotive which is normally only seen hauling main steam charters.
This is only the second time that 6203 has hauled passenger trains at the Centre, the first was in November 1991 when thick fog rather spoilt any photographic opportunities.
AS part of the Midland Railway Centre's development the Narrow Gauge Railway Project has been underway for a number of years with volunteers working to re-create a length of line to both carry passengers into the Country Park and demonstrate the uses of this track gauge.
As narrow gauge steam locomotives have proved impossible to find in this country, contact has been made with the authorities in Poland where extensive closures of their systems in recent times will provide examples.
After lengthy discussions and planning, a group of volunteers have now purchased two steam locomotives, a large bogie brake van and a bogie wagon.
These arrived on the MRT narrow gauge trackwork on Wednesday, June 10.
Both steam locomotives are from a once large class of 0-6-0 tanks, that were used for both industrial use and for passenger carrying purposes.
THE Midland Railway Trust Headquarters at Butterley, has recently gained another ex-British Rail locomotive, this time 20001.
At present, the locomotive is being used on the Channel Tunnel project, which is now nearing completion near Folkestone in Kent.
When the consortium has concluded with the use of the engine, 20001 will then make its appearance at the Trust in Derbyshire.
Another new addition to the preserved modern traction fleet is the planned preservation of pioneer Brush Type 4 (Class 47), 47401, presently named ‘Star of the East’.
This locomotive has reverted to its original two-tone green livery, which the class first appeared in back in the early 1960s.
At time of compiling, the locomotive is based at Immingham depot on Humberside, having been withdrawn from BR capital stock.
Fowler Class 4F No. 4422 at Cheddleton working on the short running line out of the station to the yard on the North Staffordshire Railway.
PARTS NEEDED FOR COACH
MUCH has been written about the Gwili's TVR No. 220 1891 vintage carriage which recently won second prize in the Scania competition and also appeared on BBC's Blue Peter.
The Gwili Vintage Carriage Group have also two further vintage bodies.
First, being ex-GWR No. 216  built in 1888 and ran until withdrawn in 1933.
From that date until 1960 it became a dwelling in Pentrcwrt.
The second, also ex-GWR, No. 793 was recovered from Crymych, South Wales and both are awaiting restoration at Bronydd Arms.
However, one of the most remarkable finds for the Gwili has just happened.
Recently a member heard of an 1870 five compartment EX-L & SWR coach incorporated in the garden of Mike Rule of Fyfield, Andover where it had been the home to a family of eight from 1920 to 1965.
Eddy Drinkwater rescued the coach at his own expense for full restoration and last month had it moved to covered accommodation in Hertford where restoration will commence from June 29.
The Gwili would be very interested to hear from anyone who may have parts suitable for the carriage such as door handles, windows etc and also a 30 foot underframe.
Although much work remains to be carried out on the coach, including repairs to windows and roof, restoration of interior compartments and finally repainting in L & SWR salmon pink and brown livery, it is hoped to complete the restoration within a year where the LSWR carriage will join the TVR coach and the two GWR coaches to form a very unique vintage train and to move the Gwili further up the valley.
The Gwili Vintage Carriage Group is interested in seeking assistance, especially sponsorship for the interior restoration of each of the five compartments in the coach.
Offers of help or requests for more information should be sent to  .
Members of the Gwili Vintage Carriage Group unload the LSWR coach body in Hertford.
FROM THE BOARDROOM
BY DAVID MORGAN
ONE of the problems which arises from chasing one's tail in a flurry of activity is that while there is much more to write about, there is less time to write it in.
In fact, I don't think that I've mentioned anything since March, but I am not sure that I did anything really productive during April.
True, I did attend the opening of the new NRM building in York by HRH Duke of Kent on Maundy Thursday.
I travelled the West Somerset from end to end on East Saturday and I attended the ARPS dinner on the Great Central Railway the following weekend, but these events were jollies — the value of which lay in the opportunity of meeting one's colleagues from other preserved railways and talking with the staff and volunteers of those that we visited.
I particularly enjoyed my visit to the Battlefield line at Shackerstone whose new extension we visited from our lunch train.
So why should enthusiasts living in Leicester choose to work as volunteers at Shackerstone rather than Loughborough — or vice versa.
I suppose it all boils down to individuality — of both the volunteer and the railway.
One business outing I did attend was that of the Association of Independent Railways (AIR) board.
Concern has been mounting recently at the potential for unnecessary duplication of its activities with those of the Association of Railway Preservation Societies (ARPS).
I suspect that this was largely due to the initiatives taken by the ARPS, such as in the organising of seminars, the involvement of European affairs, the lobbying in Parliament etc. which I think some AIR members felt they should be leading.
Of course, ARPS being the larger organisation has the personnel resources and by its very nature tends to be pro-active rather than reactive.
Both Ian Allan, chairman of AIR, and I have felt for some time that this division was not helpful to the railway movement and it was agreed at the ARPS Council meeting held on 25th April (which I missed due to the pleasure of attending my secretary's wedding) and the AIR Board meeting two days later that we adopt a proposal put forward by David Madden, a member of ARPS Council and director of operations on the North Norfolk Railway, to set up a joint committee to handle affairs of mutual interest, which we agreed should be called in good railway tradition: ‘The Railway Clearing House’.
After all, joint committees themselves enjoy a good railway pedigree.
Plate bids for charity
THE links between British Rail and Preston were further reinforced with the rededication of Inter-City electric locomotive 856212 at Preston Station on Saturday, May 16.
The locomotive was renamed Preston Guild 1328–1992 by the Mayor of Preston, Councillor Miss Mary Rawcliffe assisted by Ivor Warburton, Director, Inter City West Coast.
Ivor Warburton generously presented the Mayor with two duplicate nameplates.
One will take pride of place in the town's Harris Museum & Art Gallery with the other nameplate to be auctioned for  Mayor's charities.
The Mayor has decided that the nameplate will go to the highest bid received by post.
The bids will be opened at noon on August 24 and the highest bidder will receive the nameplate on September 2 during Guild week.
Bids should be in sealed envelopes, clearly marked ‘Nameplate Bid’ and addressed to the  Mayor's Secretary,.
After the naming ceremony on May 16, the Mayor and 460 passengers travelled on the Guild '92 Steam Special to Carlisle.
4472 Flying Scotsman was the steam locomotive hauling the train and she gave a superb performance over the Settle and Carlisle line.
On the return journey the headboard carried by Flying Scotsman was raffled and raised over £250 for charity.
The nameplate Preston Guild which can be yours for the highest bid.
Shakespeare's trip planned
THE William Shakespeare Express gives a splendid opportunity to travel in style to Stratford-upon-Avon, pulled by a restored Great Western Railway express steam locomotive.
It starts from Ealing Broadway in London's western suburbs, served by London Transport's Central and District lines and close to the North Circular Road, and also takes up passengers at Gerrards Cross, convenient for the M25.
There is plenty of time to look around Stratford-upon-Avon or leave the train at Warwick to visit the historic castle.
The train runs on Sunday, July 12 with locomotive No. 6024 ‘King Edward I’ and on Sunday, September 29 with No. 5029 ‘Nunney Castle’.
Both locomotives can normally be seen at the Didcot Railway Centre in Oxfordshire where they are often in action on Steamdays.
There are Standard, First and Premier fares, the latter including silver service at seat dining to make the day complete.
Bookings can be made by telephoning  on Mondays to Fridays or  on Monday to Thursday evenings .
Teddy Bears will be gathering at Didcot Railway Centre on Sunday, July 12 for the Teddy Bears Picnic.
All the children visiting the Centre on this day with their Teddy will receive a free Goodie Bag to join in the feast.
There is a competition to find the Teddy with the most personality and lots of other attractions for the children during the day including a Punch & Judy Show, Wonky Wizard, story reading and of course the Great Western steam trains will be giving rides.
Everyone is asked to bring their Teddy; an attempt is being made to create a new record for the largest gathering of Teddy Bears and 1,075 are needed.
Didcot Railway Centre is open from 11am to 5pm.
The entrance is at Didcot Parkway British Rail station, served by Inter-City and Network South-East.
By road it is on the A4130 signed from the A34 and M4 (junction 13).
The admission price includes rides on the steam trains and the other attractions.
FOR the first time in more than 20 years the Drummond Locomotive Society's Class M7 locomotive No. 30053 hauled a passenger train at the East Anglian Railway Museum where it has been undergoing major restoration work.
In an unbecoming shade of battleship grey undercoat it took over the Museum's service train for the last two runs on Sunday, May 24 and again on the afternoon of the 25th.
The 0-4-4T loco has had a chequered restoration history since arriving back from a stay in the United States of more than 20 years.
It arrived at the Chappel in November, 1990 after becoming a victim of the developers.
As is the norm in such projects, every job turned out twice as extensive and  umpteen times as expensive as the most pessimistic estimates.
But dogged determination by the owners saw the restoration of this fine engine, built in 1905 for the LSWER and which also served the Southern Railway and BR(S), through to completion.
Mick Miller, Marketing Director of the Museum, said: ‘We have been privileged to have provided facilities for this prestigious project following on from the successful completion of our own N7.
‘We look forward to making it a hat-trick and are happy to offer our engineering facilities to any group with a similar project in mind.’
No. 30053 which hauled a passenger train for the first time in 20 years.
MEETING POINT
Lytham's 21st model show
THE weekend of July 4 and 5 sees the 21st Annual Model Railway Exhibition to be staged by the Lytham-St.
Annes Railway Society.
This  year's venue is again the Lowther Gardens at Lytham and the show promises to be better than ever.
The exhibition features 23 displays of which 14 are working layouts.
Most of the popular model railway scales are represented, so there should be something for all enthusiasts.
Exhibitors are drawn from many parts of the North of England, some from as far away as Macclesfield, as well as the more local places such as Blackpool, Thornton, Blackburn, Bolton and Liverpool.
One of the host clubs layouts will be on display together with a range of layouts entered by members of the Lytham-St.
Annes club.
The Big Trams are back with a layout by Bob Hill of Altrincham, trams have been a regular feature of this show and always prove a popular attraction.
Of special interest is a ‘Ride-On’ layout for the children, this layout which comes from Thornton, is more than 120 feet long and will be built outside the hall.
This display features 3½″ and 5″ gauge live steam locos operated by members of the Fylde Society of Model Engineers.
This  year's show will be visited by the Mayor of Fylde, as guest of honour, around mid-day on the Saturday.
In addition there will be films of railway and tramway interest showing throughout the exhibition, which promises to be a great day for parents and children alike.
The show opens Saturday 10.00–8.00 and Sunday 10.00–6.00.
Admission is just £1.50 for adults and 80p for children and senior citizens.
TAUNTON CELEBRATES
By DICK WOOD
A 10-day rousing railway salute to Somerset will take place from Friday, June 26 to Sunday July 5 when InterCity and the West Somerset Railway join forces to celebrate the 150th anniversary of railways arriving in Taunton.
A range of special events, climaxing in a series of Grand Locomotive Cavalcades on the West Somerset Railway, have been organised by both railways to mark the 150 year connection of Taunton the national railway network.
Rail traction both ancient and modern will feature in the events, including the naming of a 125 mph InterCity Power Car ‘County of Somerset’ and star-turn appearances by an even older record breaker ‘City of Truro’, the world's first 100 mph steam loco.
The extended week of events starts on Friday, June 26, with the publication of an eight-page historical railway newspaper supplement in the Somerset County Gazette.
This charts a number of railway related events during the past 150 years.
On Saturday, June 27, Taunton station will become home to former GWR Collett 2251 Class engine No. 3205 and railway exhibition coaches until Friday, July 3.
This popular WSR engine will be stabled in the former Minehead bay platform as a static exhibit — the same platform it left from in 1965 hauling the final stage of the ‘Exmoor Ranger’ railtour to Exeter 27 years earlier!
Also on Saturday, June 27, shareholders of the West Somerset Railway will join in the festivities with a ride over the Quantocks in a special train from Bishops Lydeard to Minehead.
The train is booked to be hauled by visiting former GWR 2-8-0 heavy freight engine No. 3822 so that shareholders can attend the company annual general meeting.
On July 1, the anniversary date of the first train arriving in Taunton, an InterCity HST Power Car will be named ‘County of Somerset’ in the morning, followed by the first VIP run over the WSR by National Railway Museum loco No. 3440 ‘City of Truro’in the afternoon.
A specially commissioned painting by railway artist Simon Bowditch will be unveiled for the first time during the day, and limited edition copies given to local dignitaries.
Local schools, who have been involved in a railway poster competition to design images reflecting 150 years of local rail travel, will receive their first class family rail travel prizes from InterCity and the WSR at the same time at Taunton.
A hardback book, entitled ‘The West Somerset Railway’ will also be published by Ian Allan in the Steam Portfolio series during the week.
Priced at £7.95, the glossy publication features the 21 year history of the WSR and will be available initially only from WSR bookshops.
The Bishops Lydeard visitor centre will also be open during the week showing various old railway films; as well as displaying a range of interesting railway artefacts, paperwork, working displays and photographic displays on the history of Taunton and its railways.
The West Somerset Railway is keen to hear from anyone who may be able to donate or loan railway memorabilia from the Minehead line for display in the visitor centre.
On Friday, July 3, the West Somerset Railway Association is holding an anniversary slide show and talk in Taunton to celebrate the anniversary.
It will be held in the British Rail Staff Association Club Annex adjacent to Taunton BR station, commencing at 19.45, and all are welcome to attend.
The climax of the celebrations marking Taunton 150, however, will be a series of Grand Locomotive Cavalcades on the West Somerset Railway over the weekend of July 4 and 5.
Featuring ancient and more modern forms of railway traction, many of the working exhibits were once common around the Taunton railway scene.
Stockton and Darlington Railway engine ‘Locomotion’, a working replica from Beamish Museum of the 1825 original, will be one of the major historic attractions at the two-day event to be held at Bishops Lydeard.
The star of this anniversary show, however, will be the National Railway Museum 4-4-0 ‘City of Truro’ No. 3440 which made world history in 1904 as the first steam locomotive to attain 100 miles per hour while descending nearby Wellington Bank!
Over 20 other locomotives — steam, diesel and even hand powered — will star in an impressive  line-up of former West Country motive power for the Cavalcades.
Tiered grandstand seating for up to 800 people will be available at Bishops Lydeard for each  of the two Cavalcades held each day in between normal WSR service trains.
Loco entries confirmed to date include: GWR locos Nos. 3440 ‘City of Truro’, heavy freight 3822, Collett 3205, Small Prairie 4561 and Pannier 6412; I.K. Brunel and the Great West Society pump trolley; ‘Locomotion’ and coal chauldron; former Radstock colliery 0–4–0 ST ‘Kilmersdon’; Diesel Sentinel No. 57; Diesel Hydraulic Locos Class 14 No. 9551, Class 35 Hymek No. 7018 and Class 52 No. 1035 ‘Western Yeoman’.
Negotiations are still continuing for other locomotives or unite to attend the event.
Entry to the site, including one grandstand seat per day, is £2.50 for adults and £1.50 for children.
Please note that West Somerset Railway Association  members' concessions do not apply for this event, and tickets do not give free travel.
In addition, a special photographer's area (including the whole of the former Down platform) has been set aside for the serious cameraman who wishes to record the event for posterity.
Only 50 places are available per Cavalcade with an additional charge of £2.50 per person.
Advance booking is essential.
A special ‘Victorian Belle’ period costume evening train will also be run over the line on Saturday July 4 headed by ‘City of Truro’.
Dining accommodation for this train is already fully booked, but ordinary seating is still available for this 40-mile special run, price £6.00 per head.
A commemorative headboard will be carried featuring the Taunton 150 logo and the train leaves Bishops Lydeard at 19.15.
Trade stands, ephemera stalls and a real ale/cider bar tent, including a limited anniversary beverage, will also add to the carnival atmosphere of this event.
An exhibition of railway art by Simon Bowditch will be on display in the Visitor Centre over the weekend, as well as live steam working scale models from the Taunton Model Engineers group.
An award winning model railway layout from the Taunton Model Railway Club will be operating at Bishops Lydeard, and it will be possible to view the restoration of a GWR First Class sleeping coach built in the Victorian era.
Gates open at Bishops Lydeard at 09.30 closing at dusk over the Cavalcade weekend of July 4 and 5.
West Somerset Railway timetable A is in operation with Bishops Lydeard steam departures at 12.10 and 16.10 for Minehead.
In addition, there will be main-line diesel haulage on the 10.30 and 14.45 trains from the station.
Trains from Minehead leave at 10.15 (steam); 12.15 (diesel); 14.30 (steam), but the 16.55 (diesel) will be re-timed until after 17.30 to allow Bishops Lydeard passengers the chance of a full round trip.
Steam haulage will be by ex-Somerset and Dorset 7F No. 53808 and diesel by Class 35 Hymek No. 7017.
The Grand Locomotive Cavalcades are timetabled for 12.20 and 14.50 on both days, so it will be possible to travel the whole line and see one Cavalcade by a mixture of steam and diesel haulage.
Frequent shuttle buses to and from Taunton BR and InterCity will be operating on both days.
It was hoped that special through fares from Bristol and Exeter would also be available but this has proved impossible.
A range of special Taunton 150 souvenirs, featuring the attractive logo, are in the process of being produced and will be available for sale during the anniversary week or afterwards by mail order.
Coloured posters, postcards, brass plaques and tankards will be the main souvenir items.
Dates for train operation by ‘City of Truro’ have now been confirmed by the WSR which coincide with the introduction of their daily enhanced ‘B’timetable.
This gives five steam departures from either end of the 20-mile line.
As a result, No. 3440 will enter traffic on Saturday July 18 for a 10-day intensive period of running until Monday July 27 inclusive and the promise of some spectacular runs by the former GWR flier.
City of Truro which will be one of the stars of the Taunton 150 celebrations.