

WELSH FIRE ALARM
by JOHN HUXLEY
STEAM specials along the North Wales Coast mainline were cancelled last week because of the increased risk of  line-side fires.
And the ban will stay in place as long as the coastal strip is starved of much needed rain.
The first signs of trouble came when the Ynys Mon Express of Sunday, July 19 had to be diesel  piloted from Rhyl after it was ruled that Black Five 5305 was a particular risk.
And last Wednesday's planned North Wales Coast Express was diverted from the coastal mainline to the Settle and Carlisle.
But that was not much consolation because that too is subject to a steam restriction for the same reason and diesel haulage was again in place.
‘There have been problems with fires and because of the summer conditions the embankments are tinder dry,’ a spokesperson said.
‘Regional Railways are responsible for the line and, although the steam specials are run privately, our prime consideration is safety.
‘As soon as weather conditions change then the programme of steam trains can be resumed.
The situation is being constantly  monitored .’
A British Rail spokesperson in York confirmed that there had been problems with the Settle and Carlisle.
‘Four weeks ago there was a lineside fire problem with a steam locomotive and our operations people agreed with the promoters that this would have to be  monitored carefully.
‘There has been some rain recently and each train is being considered on a separate basis.’
John Leech of Flying Scotsman Services said: ‘There is no question of steam being banned permanently from the North Wales Coast mainline.
It is simply a temporary situation caused by the fire hazard.’
Pathfinders Tours, who should have had a steam run along the North Wales Coast last Sunday behind Princess Margaret Rose, told us that they have agreed a provision new date with British Rail of August 23rd, featuring the same locomotive.
THE NATIONAL Railway Museum is offering a last chance to visitors to see the locomotive Green Arrow ‘in steam’ before her certificate expires.
On Saturday September 5 and Sunday September 6, Green Arrow will be steaming in the Museum yard and visitors will able to view the locomotive at close quarters and have footplate access to the  locomotive .
Rocket will also be ‘in steam’ giving free rides.
Waterloo sunrise
BULLIED Pacific No. 34027 TAW Valley is set to become the first steam locomotive to depart from London's Waterloo with a passenger train in 25 years.
On September 11, only a couple of months after the 25th anniversary of the last steam from this famous terminus, Taw Valley will go yet again into preservation history with ‘The Bournemouth Ltd’ which she will haul from Waterloo to Bournemouth throughout.
As part of No. 34027's movement south from the Severn Valley Railway to attend the Bournemouth Open Days on September 12 & 13, she will work this special charter which will also be the first steam-hauled passenger train south of Eastleigh since the end of steam on the SR.
The special is timed for an 8.00pm departure from Waterloo to comply with the ban on daylight running over the  third rail and to ensure that there is no diesel pilot.
Tickets for this historic run are priced at £35.00 for the round trip, with the return trip to London by NSE Premier Charter 8TC Set.
Tickets will also be valid for travel by normal service train from Bournemouth, Southampton and Basingstoke up to London for the special, and the return working will stop at Southampton & Basingstoke to set down.
Bookings by cheque or credit card are available from:
All proceeds from this charter, which the locomotive owners are running themselves by courtesy of NSE, will go to ensure the continued main line career of Taw Valley.
The Ffestiniog Railway introduced its latest Double Fairlie articulate locomotive ‘David Lloyd George’ to the world at Porthmadog Harbour station last Wednesday.
Vintage weekend at the West Somerset Railway
FANS of vintage road and rail transport over the ages will be descending on Somerset this weekend when the West Somerset Railway stages its sixth annual Steam Fayre and Vintage Vehicle Rally at Bishops Lydeard station.
A host of historic steam diesel and petrol engined vehicles, plus other interesting family attractions, will be on display over the weekend of August 1 and 2.
Organised by volunteers of the West Somerset Railway association, more than 300 different exhibits will be ons how for the two day show, including the former GWR 100 mph record-breaking engine ‘City of Truro’ and a working replica of the 1825 Stockton & Darlington Railway's ‘Locomotion’.
More than 30 traction and showmen's engines, plus road rollers; historic commercial vehicles; stationary engines; fire engines; vintage cars and motor bikes; sales and ephemera stands; old tractors and farm machinery and a real ale beer tent, are some of the many attractions on offer.
Extensive free car parking is included in the value for money admission charge of £2.50 for adults, £1.50 for children and £6 for families.
A number of the West Somerset Railway's steam and diesel fleet will be on display at Bishops Lydeard station, featuring trips onto locomotive footplates.
Children's entertainment hasn't been forgotten and  a child's fair, including mechanical rides, swings and a roundabout will also be operating on the site.
As part of the weekend's festivities, a special steam hauled train to Minehead the ‘Severn Coast Express’ will depart from Bishops Lydeard at 7.25 pm on Saturday evening, returning there at 11.00pm.
Hauled by GWR 280 heavy freight locomotive No 3822, this 10 coach train promises to be a popular attraction.
Tickets are priced at £6.00 for adults, £4.00 for children and available from     
No. 3822 which will be having a special train on the West Somerset Railway as part of their Steam Fayre and Vintage Vehicle Rally weekend.
YOUR MAIN LINE STEAM GUIDE
Seven Stars For L & B Festival
SEVEN visiting steam locomotives are now confirmed for the Leighton Buzzard Steam Festival which starts on Sunday August 2nd.
Two of the original line up, Elouise from Old Kiln Railway and new resident Hunslet Alice are not available due to delays in their restoration projects.
Instead Katy (1931 built Jung) from Bredgar, Kent and Montalban (1913 built O&K) from West Lancs.
Light Railway will attend.
The visiting locomotives will progressively arrive during the Steam Festival and after a test run will be used on weekend passenger services.
The Steam Festival is a major celebration of twenty five years of preservation at the narrow gauge Leighton Buzzard Railway in Bedfordshire.
Most Steam Festival weekends have a theme, such as vintage locomotives and wartime railways, supported by display trains and locomotive displays.
The Industry Trains Display has been strengthened with forestry and brickworks train sets for the Steam Festival and a special photographic exhibition has been assembled for visitors to view.
This looks back over twenty five years of preservation, narrow gauge railways in overseas and UK industry and railways at war.
Some unique photographs are featured and visiting displays from museum, tourism and other private groups will enable a regularly changing exhibition throughout the Steam Festival.
Full details including visiting locomotive operations are included in the Steam Festival souvenir brochure.
Orenstein & Koppel 0-4-OWT P.C. Allen hauled her inaugural passenger train for invited guests on June 20.
The train was dedicated to the late Dick Martino, Leighton Buzzard, Steam Engineer.
P.C. Allen will join five other Leighton Buzzard-based steam locomotives and the seven visitors as part of the record 25 locomotive  line-up on September 12th and 13th.
‘PC Allen’ is  steamed up at Page's Park shed in readiness for its return to passenger service on June 20.
DOLL, the 0-6-0 Barclay, waits for her duty call as 0-6-0WT and ELF takes a train out of Page's Park Station on 25th Birthday Steam Gala.
The other side of a Devon story
•The following letter was received from the Dart Valley Light Railway plc.
ON YOUR front page of the May issue, no 198, you attacked the Dart Valley Light Railway with figures which were incorrect.
In fact and in substance.
The comments were mischievous at best.
In the 1991 Chairman's report it made clear the fact that the Buckfastleigh Branch having been leased in 1991 to the South Devon Railway Trust, showed only the fare income for the Paignton branch, hence a fall in turnover from the 1990 season, which included the fare income from the Buckfastleigh branch.
The trust being in receipt of the 1991 Buckfastleigh branch income explains the percentage anomaly.
The article implied that the Company embarked on capital works in the hope that future profits will pay for such projects.
The fact is that the Company accumulated profits in reserves before embarking on the building of Churston maintenance shed of which the article makes mention.
In fact the fall in passengers on the Torbay line was from 307,472 to 294,003 which, considering the results for other business enterprises in the leisure industry locally, was a good result.
I hope that you will give this reply as prominent a place in your paper as you did the original article and we trust that in future you will ring this Company for comment before publishing incorrect material which is misleading and biased.
The declared policy of this Company is as a commercial operation.
We conserve our steam locomotives: We are not a preservation society, this is left to others.
The reason we leased the Buckfastleigh Branch to the S.R.D.T. was made clear in the press release at the time, of which we enclose a copy.
 The position has not altered and we will continue to pursue our present  policies .
WHEN THE originators of the Dart Valley Light Railway plc formed it in 1965 they always intended that it should be a commercially operated line rather than a ‘preserved’ railway, for having looked at the then contemporary scene they felt that there were enough preservationists at work already and that their nice for survival in an essentially holiday area should be  revenue-earning profitability.
At the same time it was essential to maintain the goodwill of enthusiasts  whose voluntary support they intended to use.
Later on the Paignton to Kingswear branch was closed by BR and was bought up by Dart Valley who obviously did not wish to find another competing railway only 10 miles away.
Rising costs, a more sophisticated travelling public and much greater competition from numerous holiday attractions, which have developed within the last 10 years, have made it virtually impossible to run two commercial railways in such close proximity.
The Dart Valley Light Railway plc have, therefore, decided on a new policy for the future which it feels will keep faith with the Volunteer Association Members who are keen to develop and maintain the Buckfast-Totnes line as a typical GWR branch line operating as a non-profit making charitable trust and at the same time to satisfy its shareholders who have patiently waited for a dividend for many years.
The Buckfastleigh section, now known as the Primrose Line, has been leased to the South Devon Railway Trust who are supported by the Dart Valley Railway Association and will operate it very much as before but adding various events to attract railway enthusiasts: in this the Trust will have the fullest support and cooperation from the Company line.
The Paignton & Dartmouth Steam Railway will be run on fully commercial lines and will be improved in all departments.
A new engineering base is being established at Churston where rolling stock will be maintained and serviced.
It is intended that more trains will be run and the season extended in order to increase business revenue from all possible sources.
A special new Wine and Dine train is being assembled, as an addition to our stock in order to provide luxury dinners on the spectacular coastal line from Paignton to Kingswear.
The very popular Christmas ‘Santa Specials’ will be boosted by extra trains, the successful ‘Round Robin’rail and river trips will be extended in the summer and more through services to and from BR will be encouraged.
The Company is intent on maximising its potential and feels it is now set to further sales from 1991 which with revenue from other sources, point to a good year for the Company as a whole.
Museum celebrates the Midland glory
ONE OF LONDON'S most splendid Victorian Gothic buildings is the subject of a small exhibition at the Museum of London from August 11–21.
The Midland Grand Hotel at St Pancras, designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott and opened in 1873, is to have its exterior restored to its former glory over the next two years, at a cost of £7 million.
The work, being undertaken by the King's Cross Projects Group of the British Railways Board, will safeguard the structure of the building although its future use is unknown.
A series of graphic panels will illustrate details of internal and external decoration, as well as elaborate features and fittings.
Mosaic floors, stencilled walls, ornamental cast-iron balustrades and even examples of original carpets have been photographed.
The hotel boasted passenger lifts, electric bells, revolving doors and even a ladies' smoking room, which were very advanced for the period and reflected the Midland Railway's innovative character.
As the hotel closed its doors to the public in 1935 these records will provide a first glimpse of the interior of this remarkable Grade-One Listed building for most visitors to the museum.
Also on display will be an architectural model (1.25m × 0.9m) of St Pancras, Kings Cross and the new proposed Sir Norman Foster passenger concourse.
This will show St Pancras in the context of its surroundings.
YUGOSLAVIAN LOCO COMES ALIVE AGAIN AT SWANAGE
As always patience is rewarded.
In December 1990 a collection of locomotive parts arrived in the old goods yard at Swanage.
In comments at the time they were described as a kit of parts.
Over the ensuring months each item has been carefully checked over and repaired and painted as necessary.
In almost the first 12 months the locomotive is back together again in one piece although some parts had been re-engineered and considerably altered so that the whole locomotive would take on the appearance of its British counterparts.
MACHINE
0-6-0T locomotives in the Class USA had been an interesting addition to the British Railway scene at the end of World War Two and for some years during the steam era of British Railways.
In fact four have been taken into preservation in centres around the country.
While visiting Yugoslavia in those more happy days of some two years ago a member of the Swanage Railway noted the existence of a similar machine and reckoned that conversion would not be too difficult.
The locomotive was in working order at the time and negotiations proceeded which resulted in transportation to Swanage as described above.
Now, after quite a shore period, the locomotive has been steamed for the first time and is almost in working order.
The date to remember is Friday, July 17, when I was honoured to be present at its rebirth, so to speak.
Furthermore, I was most grateful to those working on the locomotive for their patience and understanding.
Their generosity was appreciated being so willing to give some time explaining to a fellow enthusiast the intricacies of steaming a locomotive for the first time and the difficulties which had been experienced in the rebuilding process.
The conversion to resemble one of the USA tanks which were found on the Southern Railway after the Second World War has been pretty successful.
No doubt there will be an extensive scrutiny from those who expect everything to be perfect but it passes pretty well from my point of view.
SERVICE
There will be some debate about the livery.
The locomotive has been given the identity of the next in the series, the Number 30075.
It is wearing malachite green lined livery and carrying British Railways identity.
As though to counteract any criticism I have been shown a colour photograph of the prototype from which this livery was created.
It served at Ashford Works as a shunter for some years.
Although the steaming was successful the locomotive still has work to be undertaken on the brake gear.
This should be completed soon and also the necessary insurance certificates obtained so that the locomotive can go into service.
There is no doubt that the Swanage Railway has another very interesting locomotive.
Those who have worked so diligently on this exotic machine should be congratulated for bringing such a  magnificent spectacle to the preservation world.
In this close up shot it is possible to admire some of the piping and detailed work which has been undertaken on number 30075.
Number 30075 stands in the coaling stage wearing malachite green lined livery.
Take a look at the piping detail above the buffer beam.
WELSHPOOL & LLANFAIR LIGHT RAILWAY PRESERVATION COMPANY LTD.
EXPANSION JOINT
Llanfair gets a face lift
By RALPH CARTWRIGHT
WITH IMPRESSIVE improvements complete at Welshpool, attention has recently turned to Llanfair station.
Here, the railway developed its  headquarters when there was little money to spare and the buildings inherited in 1960 have been adapted and added to in piecemeal fashion.
Nearly 30 years of use by the present regime have taken their toll, too.
The aim now is to improve and expand both facilities for passengers and the accommodation the railway provides for volunteers.
Heritage aspects have been carefully considered and attention is being given to preserving the station's traditional appearance as much as possible.
The first objective is the provision of a new souvenir shop, refreshment room and booking office.
It is planned to achieve this by renovating the original (1903) corrugated iron goods shed and extending it on the sou east side where the dilapidated lean-to addition will be removed.
On this side, the main entrance (adjoining a replica goods bay canopy) will be part of an attractive facade, masonry built, incorporating windows which will overlook the river.
The conversion will necessitate the complete rebuilding of the interior.
A novel part of the plan is to link an access on the northern side of the old cattle dock and platform with a walkway over the line sheltered by overhead canopies (and protected by demountable buffer stops).
The original corrugated iron booking office (and present shop) is to be preserved but as soon as possible it will be rebuilt, using identical, sound materials and the interior will be adapted as offices.
On the other hand, the modern, temporary buildings on the platforms will be removed.
Another major objective of the plan is a volunteers' block, providing messing and hostel accommodation.
Sited in the car park, south of the station, the design is for a new two storey building, brick built and externally reminiscent of traditional nineteenth century railwaymen's lodging houses.
Ultimately, it is expected to provide overnight accommodation for up to 30 volunteers.
Facilities for all volunteers including those not in need of sleeping quarters will be provided on the first floor.
Here (at track level) will be ladies' and  gentlemen's toilets and showers, a changing room, a messroom for those in working clothes and a kitchen and lounge.
The ground floor will be fitted out as dormitories.
This scheme is estimated to cost about £250,000 and the W & L is looking for financial assistance from grant giving bodies, from members and other sympathetic supporters.
Looking to the longer term, the Company has outline plans for a later phase of developments which will include platform improvements and a visitors' viewing gallery in the workshops but at the moment all efforts are focused on phase 1.
Meanwhile, planning permission has been sought and obtained so that work can go ahead as soon as funds permit.
The target is to make a start during the coming winter.
A restored Austrian carriage
The Countess…time served
W & L fact file
The railway is solely operated by volunteers, except for a full time manager, and deputy manager and two seasonal shop assistants.
It is a single guarantee company owning all the locomotives and stock.
There is a membership of 2,000 with 200 members actively participating over the course of a year.
Traffic has grown steadily rather than spectacularly during the twenty-nine years the preservation company has been operating.
There are exciting possibilities for the purchase of additional locomotives from abroad.
The company have retained the leisurely atmosphere of the  turn-of-the-century light railway being situated off the major tourist circuits.
Working members enjoy the social life at Llanfair Caereinion the headquarters of the railway, there are numerous hostelries and eating places within the village, a walking distance from the B R sleeping coach which offers an overnight rate of £1 per person.
HOW RAVEN SQUARE GOT ITS STATION
By RALPH CARTWRIGHT
THE RE-OPENING of the line to Welshpool in 1981 was an achievement which had been awaited ever since the line was taken over in 1960.
Formidable difficulties had to be overcome in view of the loss of the original terminus in the town and the fearsome mile-long incline of Golfa bank.
Plans for the new terminus at Raven Square on the outskirts of Welshpool included station buildings…but the rebuilding of the Sylfaen-Welshpool section and the reclamation of land for the station where the Sylfaen brook had meandered soaked up all available funds.
The idea of providing proper station buildings was not forgotten, however, in 1988, planning began in the hope of attracting grant aid and alternative designs were put forward for a new building.
As the debate continued, it was decided to hold a competition to find a suitable and generally agreed plan.
Dissension diminished with the announcement of the winning design and then, in autumn 1990, events took a dramatic turn with the broaching of the idea of rescuing a nineteenth century Marcher station for the purpose.
This scheme was widely welcomed and easily settled the debate over what style would be most appropriate for a rural Light Railway though it was not without some apprehension that the W & L Board gave the go ahead.
A genuine station building of great character — but of wooden construction and older than the railway itself!
Eardisley was once a station on the largely single-track line along the Wye valley westwards across the border into the rugged country around Brecon.
The Hereford, Hay and Brecon Railway was completed by Welsh contractor Thomas Savin — who had just finished building the main line through Welshpool — and opened in stages between 1863 and 1864.
Eventually the H.H. & B.R. passed into the hands of the Midland Railway though Eardisley station also served a branch northwards which was G.W.R. territory.
The station closed to passengers as from December 31, 1962 although freight services continued for some months more from Hereford to Eardisley.
Then, for a quarter of a century, the Eardisley station building was to linger disturbed no more by the rumble of trains passing between Hereford and Mid Wales or arriving along the former Great Western branch from Kington.
Following the closure of the line in 1964, the building became private property while the track and platform disappeared.
Reduced to serving as a mere garden hut, a lucky chance brought it to the notice of a vigilant W & L member fresh from success in W & L's competition to design a (new) building for Raven Square.
With the building deteriorating and with other plans for the site, the owner kindly offered it to the W & l, a move backed by the local authority's conservation officer.
Eardisley would have been provided with its station building for the opening of the first part of the line in 1863.
The Up platform boasted a simple, wooden shelter behind which was a substantial stone-built goods shed with rail access.
The main station building was supplied (apparently, ‘off-the-pet’) by a Gloucester timber contractor whose staple products were wooden huts of standard design for military and colonial use.
The Eardisley building's tall windows with four horizontal glazing bars and the plain barge boards on the end of the roof gable were characteristic of the contractor's wooden buildings.
Inside, it was originally lined with hessian covered with wallpaper though later this was replaced with matchboarding.
Dismantling revealed traces of Victorian wallpaper and a Midland Railway poster advertising excursions in 1875.
Situated on the Down platform, the accommodation consisted of four rooms including two waiting rooms with corner fireplaces and a booking office with an iron stove and pipe chimney while a wall clock, outside the booking office, faced the platform.
At Welshpool, first efforts were concentrated on getting plans agreed with the local building control and the Welsh Office.
Exacting specifications were then provided for firms who offered to tender for the work of dismantling and rebuilding.
The design for a separate building housing toilers — block built but externally clad with matchboarding — successfully achieved complete harmony with the H.H. & B.R. construction.
The new block incorporated doors and roof slates from Horninglow on the North Staffordshire Railway's Uttoxeter-Burton line.
Piece by piece — all carefully labelled to facilitate re-erection — the building was transported to Welshpool.
Inside, two small waiting rooms were combined to provide enough space for the shop while outside the ornate chimneys, attractive paving, traditional wooden fencing and new pathways provide pleasing finishing touches.
Handsomely painted in chocolate and cream, the buildings are ready to serve for another 130 years!
The full story of the Hereford, Hay and Brecon Railway and the G.W.R. branch from Eardisley can be found in the Llanfair Railway Journal nos. 123 and 124.
Striking the right note, M'lud
WELSHPOOL town crier Clive Emberton read a specially prepared proclamation to mark the opening of Raven Square Station.
The text was:
‘LADIES and gentlemen, citizens of Welshpool and visitors from far and near.
Hear ye, hear ye.
I bring you notice that today a grand ceremony will be held at three o'clock in the forenoon at Raven Square in the ancient borough of Welshpool.
The President of the Welshpool and Llanfair Light Railway Preservation Company Limited, my noble lord the Earl of Powis, accompanied by his gracious and noble lady the Countess of Powis in the presence of the Honourable Member of Parliament Alex Carlisle and notable ladies and gentlemen will declare open the new station building.
Be it known that this unique building was erected in the reign of our good Queen Victoria and in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and sixty three at Eardisley in the county of Hereford.
And take note that this station building served the illustrious Midland Railway Company and the Great Western Railway, also known as God's Wonderful Railway.
And be advised that at the end of its days at Eardisley, it was rescued by Welshpool's famous narrow gauge railway company and transported piece by piece to Raven Square station.
And then the Company brought craftsmen who laboured mightily and restored this historic building to its original splendour for the delight and wonderment of people not only from the district of Montgomeryshire but from diverse parts.
And, finally, take heed that all worthy citizens are invited to visit the company's magnificent station at Raven Square and to ride on the mighty little steam trains which operate very day until the sixth day of September.’
Town crier Clive Emberton (left, with bell) and the Earl of Powis prepare to board the special train after the opening ceremony.
A former Finnish railway loco awaiting restoration.
The Spirit of Wales
Sir Drefoldwyn drifts down from Llanfair with a train for Welshpool in Spring.
THE POWIS CONNECTION
KEN FENTON Chairman of W & LLR
THE EARLS OF POWIS have always shown a keen interest in the provision of rail transportation in the Welshpool area, commencing in 1817 with the building of the line between the Montgomeryshire canal and the Standard quarry through the centre of Welshpool.
In the following years many proposals were made for the construction of a railway between Welshpool and Llanfair Caereinion but it was not until 1898 that a company was formed to build the present line and the then Earl of Powis became its Chairman, an office which he held until the grouping in 1922.
CEREMONIES
A major landowner in the district, the Earl donated the land required for the line from the Standard quarry to a point near the summit of the line by Sylfaen.
This stretch of approximately three miles includes the whole of the famous 1:29 Golfa incline.
Following the construction of the line the two steam locomotives were named ‘The Earl’ and ‘The Countess’in honour of the Powis family.
When the Welshpool & Llanfair Light Railway Preservation Company Ltd. opened its passenger service to the public in April 1963 the Earl of Powis took part in the ceremonies and became President of the Company.
This tradition happily has been continued by his successors whose duties have included presiding at the Annual General Meeting, an unpredictable, lively affair where it has been known for election to the Board to be determined by the toss of a coin!
The connection was of particular significance when the site for the new Welshpool station was under consideration because the Company owned only the trackbed at Raven Square and is indebted to Powis Estates for providing the site for the station and car park.
JOHN GOSLING'S STEAM REPORTS
73129 NEEDS HELP
Midland Trust's appeal for funds and volunteers
THE latest steam locomotive to receive attention from the Midland Railway Centre's Locomotive Restoration Workshops is 73129, which was one of the last engines to be constructed by the Derby Locomotive Works in 1956.
It was rescued from Woodham Brothers scrap yard in South Wales and has been stored at Swanwick Junction pending attention.
Being one of British Rail's Standard Class 5's, it is unusual in being fitted with Caprotti Rotary Valve Gear.
The only other preserved locomotive in this country fitted with this type of valve gear is 71000 ‘Duke of Gloucester’.
The restoration of this machine is likely to be a long term task, but one which is well within the capabilities of the centre's restoration team.
So far only a preliminary amount of work has been carried out in order to assess the restoration work required.
The Midland Railway Trust is now appealing for both funds and volunteers to come forward to assist with this unique locomotive.
Alan Calladine, the Midland Railway Trust's Development officer, commented: ‘There is no doubt that this machine is one of the more important items in our collection, as it represents the last stages of steam locomotive production from the Derby Locomotive Works.
‘The machine has a great potential for use at the centre and its restoration has been a project that we have all been working towards for some while.’
UNDER the title of special interest breaks, a ‘Steam Railway Week’ for steam enthusiasts took place between July 18 and 25, staying at Lindors Country House at St Briavels, Lydney, Gloucestershire.
Organised by Methodist Guild Holidays, the seven days included travelling and visiting preserved railways within the area each day by coach, with evenings given over to special interests in railway preservation.
Being invited to commence the proceedings on the first day, an insight into modern journalism, techniques and railway photography in both colour slide form and black and white mediums proved most interesting.
In fact, 95 per cent of the ladies also attended the lecture, with a full and standing house.
During question time, it was gratifying to note that the weekly publication of Steam Railway News proved of great news-worth value, with more than 50 per cent of the guests taking the paper on a regular basis.
Visits during the week included the West Somerset Railway at Minehead, Brecon Mountain Railway or the National Garden Festival at Ebbw Vale where a narrow gauge line is situated, a full day excursion to the East Somerset Railway, to a local visit to the Dean Forest Railway at Norchard.
Friday was taken with a full day at the Severn Valley Railway at Kidderminster.
The 1993 ‘Steam Railway Week’ has been arranged for July 17 to 24 at The Links, Eastbourne, Sussex, where again an itinerary of local railway interests and preserved lines will be visited.
Further details can be obtained from   The holidays are designated for all  Christians of all denominations alike.
A PRESTIGIOUS new exhibition detailing the development of the tramway system in this country, was formally opened at the National Tramway at Crich, Derbyshire, on Saturday, July 18.
Kathy Taylor, television presenter with ‘TV am’, and the popular BBC TV ‘Holiday’ programme officiated at the opening ceremony.
The honoured guest sampled Victorian travel beforehand by travelling to the exhibition along the museum's authentic tramway period street in a vintage horse-drawn  four-wheeled tram that saw service in nearby Chesterfield.
Costing about £150,000, the exhibition traces the development of trams in towns and cities throughout Britain from the Victorian era.
It includes exciting inter-active visitor displays and is housed in the museum's purpose-built exhibition hall, which was opened to the public last year.
Called ‘Tracks in Time — The story of the Tram’— the display commences with the era of the horse-tram with a visit to tramway stables and a ‘commentary’ from a stable-lad on what life was like looking after the horses.
A vintage horse-drawn tram from Sheffield, complete with horse, is shown in a dramatic Victorian Street setting of 1885, together with a steam tram dating from the same year, and a steam tram trailer — representing the next stage in the development of this form of transport.
To complete the story of the various types of traction is one of the world's first electric trams from Blackpool, also dating from 1885.
Visitors are able to experience the inside of a giant ‘walk-in’ electric motor, seen in a dramatic light and sound setting, along with displays showing how its development had far reaching effects on trams and tramways, spelling the death knell of both horse and steam traction.
A unique ‘Glasgow night scene’ with a 1930's vintage electric tramcar is seen alongside pictorial displays showing the rise and fall of tramway systems of the years, resulting in their virtual demise in the 1950's.
Also shown are photographs of some of the more notable news happenings that occurred during the first half of the present century.
Visitors are also transported back to 1905 and the ‘International Tramway and Light Railway’ trade show which was held in that year to show the range of equipment on offer to operators and would-be operators at a time when the electric tramcar was looked upon as the wonder of the age.
The opening ceremony at the new exhibition of tramcar development at Crich Museum with TV personality Kathy Taylor (third left) beside a Chesterfield horse-drawn tram.
The party also includes the Mayor of Amber Valley, Councillor Marlene Bennett (far left).
A Blackpool toastrack at the Crich Museum.
MEETING POINT
Diesel delight
THE Midland Railway Centre based at Butterley has just celebrated a sixth successful annual =Diesel Spectacular’.
Alan Calladine, PRO for the line said: ‘We did have some slight operating difficulties on the Sunday but overall we were pleased with the way the event ran.
‘Between 2½ and 3,000 passengers were attracted over the weekend showing that preserved diesel traction has a great following and a place in railway history.’
The three and a half mile line running between Hammersmith and Riddings Junction with intermediate stations at Butterley and Swanwick Junction was originally opened in 1875 and  acquired by the Midland at a later date.
It ran between Ambergate and Pye Bridge Junction being closed by BR in 1968 when most of the track was lifted.
The station at Butterley was demolished but the building today was moved stone by stone from Whitwell in North Derbyshire and rebuilt by the Midland Railway Centre.
Over the ‘Diesel Weekend’ the centre played host to Class 08 shunter D2138 which was operating its first public passenger train since being obtained by the line.
It ran as the first service of the day with one brake coach and was full to capacity on both operating days.
Other traction included ex-Haymarket and Eastfield Class 20, 20227 which was running in BR Railfreight livery, Class 25, D7671 in BR green, 45133 belonging to the Class 45/1 Loco Society and former ECML flyer Deltic 55015 Tulyar which was in the capable hands of driver Bill Foster who is also Operations Supervisor on the line.
The Midland Railway Centre are not averse to diesel traction and 10 years ago in 1982 when the railway was first re-opened former Totton favourite Class 4 ‘Peak’ Great Gable owned by the Peak Loco Society became the first preserved diesel to be acquired.
Alan Calladine added: ‘We class ourselves as a working railway museum and are prepared to develop any aspect of the railway scene.
‘Presently we are involved in promoting a modern diesel depot and have started a ‘Modern Traction Museum’ fund which has already raised £10,000.
‘The ultimate aim is to raise £40,000 and when the shed is built it will be able to hold 4 locos which we hope to eventually extend to  accommodate 6 diesels.
‘This will mean we can carry out maintenance and restoration of diesels under cover’.
The Midland Railway Centre run a combined diesel and steam weekend once every month but the next purely diesel running date for your diaries is the weekend of October 17 and 18 1992.
Former East Coast flyer, Deltic 55015 Tulyar prepared to leave Hammersmith with the 13.40 to Riddings Junction.
Swanwick Junction signal box, the former Kettering box, is the scene for the tablet change over between the signalman and the driver of 55015.
LETTING OFF STEAM
Keep your self well posted
I WAS interested to read in Issue No. 205 of the combined telephone kiosk and letter box at Cranmore.
At the last count (1990) the Letter Box Study Group listed 11 survivors of this rare type K4 kiosk of which four were in service and eleven preserved.
A well-known example can be found at Bawdley, Severn Valley Railway.
The Letter Box Study Group has details of almost four hundred different types of letter box including a number of which are now represented by only single survivors.
Geographically these range from the North of Scotland to the Sussex coast and from the outer reaches of North Wales to the coast of Suffolk.
Many rare and interesting letter boxes can be found at railway stations, both BR and preserved.
For further details of membership write, preferably with SAE, to the Letter Box Study Group secretary at 
IN ISSUE no. 24 mention is made of ‘Lilla’ at Bala Lake .
Lilla was not in fact made for Penrhyn Quarry but for Cilgwyn Quarry.
It was sold to Penrhyn in the late 1920s.
Lilla made a very interesting trip from Quarry to Quarry.
First down the Welsh Highland Railway Rly to Dinas Junction then by wagon along the Standard gauge line to Bangor.
Then she went down the branch line to Port  Penrhyn .
At the Port Lilla was placed back on narrow gauge track for the journey up to the Quarry.
It was a trip which can never be repeated as nearly all lines are gone.
As ‘Lilla’ has been kept in the South of England for many years its trip to Bala gives Northern fans of these locos a chance to see this one of two in British preservation.
RE: WELSH WOE front page of SRN July 17, 1992.
The fares for the trains are too expensive.
Cut out the frills, go back to the days of TIZER and tomato and cheese sandwiches!
At £20 per head a profit would still be made and there should be no free rides for support crews, stewards and other hangers on.
K & WVR calendar swaps
THE KEIGHLEY & Worth Valley Railway announces three alterations to its programme of special events that will be of interest to all steam railway enthusiasts.
On Sunday and Bank Holiday Monday August 30 and 31 the vintage transport weekend — modelled on the highly popular Enthusiasts' Weekend in April this year.
The event attracted a record number of passengers who enjoyed an intensive steam train service and additional vintage train service.
The Ingrow Railway Centre was the centre of activity as over 1,000 each day enjoyed the heavy horses, vintage motor vehicles and free bus service to the Yorkshire Car Collection.
The August event will take a similar format to the spring event with the addition of an LMS Dray with horse, Hansom Carriage with horse and a Scammel Scarrib Mechanical Horse all of which will be at the Ingrow Railway Centre.
On Saturday and Sunday October 17 and 18 the Railway will stage another of its popular Enthusiasts' Weekends.
The weekend will be the first major event that BR Standard Class ‘2MT’ 2-6-0 78022 will have been in service.
The Railway's annual spring Enthusiasts' Weekend — normally held two weeks before Easter — has been moved for the first time in its 20-year history.
It now takes place over the weekend of April 24 and 25.
The move will take the weekend into British Summer Time — giving passengers more daylight trains, photographers better lighting conditions 
Treasure trove
JAMES SCANNELL in Ireland
IRELAND'S South Donegal Railway Restoration Society received a major boost in its efforts to reopen part of the County Donegal Railways Joint Committee's narrow gauge system when it took possession of two of the railway's few surviving passenger vehicles.
The first vehicle is Brake third No 28, built by the Carriage and Wagon Company, Oldbury in 1893 which remained in service with the CDRJC until closure in 1959.
In 1961 No 28 was sold for use as a holiday home and was in seasonal use until 1991.
When Society members inspected the guard's compartment, they discovered that the original vacuum gauge was still in place and that, apart from a few alterations to the window arrangements, the coach is essentially as built.
Restoration work on the chassis and coach body will commence soon and replacement bogies are now being sought.
The other vehicle acquired by the Society from the same caravan site is railcar No 14, built in 1934.
This articulated railcar was scrapped in 1959 but the passenger trailer was towed, on road wheels fitted in place of the bogie to Dunfanaghy where it commenced its 30 year career as a holiday home.
While the chassis, frame and window arrangements are the original and are in good condition, the greatest challenge facing the Society will be the provision of a power bogie, engine and cab.
Under way at the moment is an investigation to determine the suitability of the Hunslet ‘Wagonmaster’ industrial locomotives used by Board na Mona The Irish Turf Board for conversion to a replica power bogie.
As with all restoration projects carried out by any society, cash is the key issue and a share issue has been launched to finance the restoration of both vehicles with £1 shared available in blocks of 10 to adults and singly to children.
Further information from   Telephone number during normal office hours from the UK is  
Former County Donegal coach No. 28 leaves the caravan site that has been its home for 30 years to return to the railway.
RAVEN SQUARE OPENED
WELSHPOOL Raven Square Station was officially opened by the Earl of Powis last Saturday.
He unveiled a plaque to commemorate the occasion and told the assembled company: ‘This is a dream come true for so many people on the Welshpool and Llanfair Light Railway.’
His grace together with his wife Lady Powis and the Member of Parliament for Montgomeryshire Alex Carlisle were among a large group of guests who gathered in Welshpool to see the official opening of the ‘new’ Raven Square station buildings.
After the unveiling ceremony a special train hauled by No 2 The Countess went as far as Castle Caereinion before returning to Raven Square.
One of the line's original steam locomotives Countess joined in the fun by nudging a specially produced banner at Raven Square before leaving on its journey.
Prior to the ceremony the railway's  guests were entertained to lunch at the Raven Inn where W & L chairman Ken Fenton told the guests of the station's history and paid tribute to the people and organisations who had helped bring the former Eardisley station building up from its former site.
You can find a four-page feature about the Welshpool and Llanfair and its new station inside pages 5–8.
No 2 Countess waits patiently while the specially produced banner is displayed to the guest and press.
Earl and Lady Powis admire the commemorative plaque at Welshpool Raven Square station.
Words and pictures:
The Earl and the Countesses…the Earl of Powis (right) introduces his wife, Countess Powis (left) to the Welshpool and Llanfair's locomotive aristocracy, No 2 ‘The Countess’
Great Central bucks the economic trend
AT A TIME when many private railways are suffering stagnant growth  or even a decline, the Great Central Railway is enjoying a steady rise in income from the second year running.
In the financial period from February 1 to the end of June fares are up by over 30 per cent on the same period in 1991.
June itself shows a rise of 60 per cent.
This it has to be said, reflects a rather poor month last year but bearing in mind that the 1991 figures showed a 48 per cent rise in income, the current situation is viewed with satisfaction by all concerned.
Obviously costs have also risen but the current success is seen as a justification of the GCR's policy of using large main line engines and a heavy investment in marketing and public relations.
To consolidate this success the railway is currently carrying out an extensive  passenger survey to find out where its  existing customers come from and what they think of the railway.
Also it is hoped to monitor the current advertising campaign and to assess the reaction to diesel power.
Results are expected in mid August.
The re-launch of the share issue is expected in the next few weeks.
The main aims are funding of a two story terminus building at Leicester as well as developing the double track project partly funded by enthusiast David Clark.
GREEN ARROW one of the finest operational express locomotives, retires from the main line on Saturday.
It will haul a special train over the S & C Settle and Carlisle and then retire to the National Railway Museum in York.
Deputy Curator Rob Shorland Ball stated that while there were no immediate plans for her future operation outside the museum there is still a further three years life left on her ‘normal’ boiler certificate.
He also stated that the sole surviving Gresley V2 will be in steam in the museum grounds on September 5 and 6 since she is a very popular exhibit with the public.
While it is sad that Green  Arrow is departing from the main line scene it is appropriate that this beautiful locomotive's final run will be on the Settle and Carlisle line: in 1978 she hauled the ‘pilot’ steam specials over line which proved so successful that the route was released as an approved ‘steam line’.
The National Railway Museum is settling down well in its new and much improved format .
Probably the largest railway museum in the world — and certainly the most comprehensive — it is experiencing a healthy increase in the number of visitors, especially from York itself.
INTENDING passengers and holidays visitors to Doniford Beach Halt, near Watchet, on the West Somerset Railway, can now hail themselves a train once again after the public reopening of the station in mid-July, writes DICK WOOD.
WSR Company Chairman Dennis Taylor flagged off the first passenger train to call at the halt since 1990 on Tuesday, July 14, accompanied by a grateful family of holidaymakers from the nearby holiday park who were spared the longer walk to Watchet.
The situation, rebuilt from a disused platform at Martock on the closed Taunton to Yeovil line, first opened in 1989 but closed again soon after following problems with access from the nearby road.
Bringing the WSR's total number of stations back to ten, Britain's longest preserved railway can now boast as many operating stations in Somerset as British Rail once again!