

Book One — Death of a Baronet
The bodies were discovered at eight forty-five on the morning of Wednesday 18 September by Miss Emily Wharton, a 65-year-old spinster of the parish of St Matthew's in Paddington, London, and Darren Wilkes, aged 10, of no particular parish as far as he knew or cared.
This unlikely pair of companions had left Miss Wharton's flat in Crowhurst Gardens just before half past eight to walk the half-mile stretch of the Grand Union Canal to St Matthew's church.
Here Miss Wharton, as was her custom each Wednesday and Friday, would weed out the dead flowers from the vase in front of the statue of the Virgin, scrape the wax and candle stubs from the brass holders, dust the two rows of chairs in the Lady Chapel, which would be adequate for the small congregation expected at that morning's early Mass, and make everything ready for the arrival at nine twenty of Father Barnes.
It was on a similar mission seven months earlier that she had first met Darren.
He had been playing alone on the towpath, if anything as purposeless as hurling old beer cans into the canal could be described as playing, and she had paused to say good morning to him.
Perhaps he had been surprised to be greeted by an adult who didn't either admonish or cross-examine him.
For whatever reason, after his initial expressionless stare, he had attached himself to her, at first dawdling behind, then circling round her, as might a stray dog, and finally trotting at her side.
When they had reached St Matthew's church he had followed her inside as naturally as if they had set out together that morning.
It was apparent to Miss Wharton, on that first day, that he had never been inside a church before, but neither then nor on any subsequent visit did he evince the least curiosity about its purpose.
He had prowled contentedly in and out of the vestry and bellroom while she got on with her chores, had watched critically while she had arranged her six daffodils eked out with foliage in the vase  at the foot of the Virgin, and had viewed with the bland indifference of childhood Miss Wharton's frequent genuflections, obviously taking these sudden bobbings to be one more manifestation of the peculiar antics of adults.
But she had met him on the towpath the next week and the one following.
After the third visit he had, without invitation, walked home with her and had shared her tin of tomato soup and her fish fingers.
The meal, like a ritual communion, had confirmed the curious, unspoken, mutual dependence which bound them.
But by then she had known, with a mixture of gratitude and anxiety, that he had become necessary to her.
On their visits to St Matthew's he always left the church, mysteriously present one moment and the next gone, when the first members of the congregation began to trickle in.
After the service, she would find him loitering on the towpath, and he would join her as if they hadn't parted.
Miss Wharton had never mentioned his name to Father Barnes or to anyone else at St Matthew's and, as far as she knew, he had never, in his secretive world of childhood, mentioned hers.
She knew as little about him now, his parents, his life, as she had at their first meeting.
But that had been seven months ago, a chill morning in mid-February, when the bushes which screened the canal walk from the neighbouring council estate had been tangled thickets of lifeless thorn; when the branches of the ash trees had been black with buds so tight that it seemed impossible they could ever crack into greenness; and the thin denuded wands of willow, drooping over the canal, had cut delicate feathers on the quickening stream.
Now high summer was browning and mellowing into autumn.
Miss Wharton, briefly closing her eyes as she trudged through the mush of fallen leaves, thought that she could still scent, above the smell of sluggish water and damp earth, a trace of the heady elderberry flowers of June.
It was that smell that on summer mornings most clearly brought back to her the lanes of her Shropshire childhood.
She dreaded the onset of winter, and on waking this morning she had thought that she could smell its breath in  the air.
Although it hadn't rained for a week, the path was slippery with mud, deadening sound.
They walked under the leaves in an ominous quietness.
Even the tinny clatter of the sparrows was stilled.
But to their right the ditch which bordered the canal was still lush with its summer greenness, its grasses thick over the split tyres, discarded mattresses and scraps of clothing rotting in its depths, and the torn and laden boughs of the willows dropped their thin leaves on to a surface which seemed too oily and stagnant to suck them in.
It was eight forty-five and they were nearing the church, passing now into one of the low tunnels that spanned the canal.
Darren, who liked best this part of the walk, gave a whoop and rushed into the tunnel, hollering for an echo and running his hands, like pale starfish, along the brick walls.
She followed his leaping figure, half-dreading the moment when she would pass through the arch into that claustrophobic, dank, river-smelling darkness and would hear, unnaturally loud, the suck of the canal against the paving stones and the slow drip of water from the low roof.
She quickened her pace and within minutes the half moon of brightness at the end of the tunnel had widened to receive them again into the daylight and he was back, shivering at her side;
She said:
‘It's very cold, Darren.
Oughtn't you to be wearing your parka?’
He hunched his thin shoulders and shook his head.
She was amazed at how little he wore and how impervious he was to the cold.
Sometimes it seemed to her that he preferred to live in a perpetual shiver.
Surely wrapping up well on an autumn chill morning wasn't considered unmanly?
And he looked so nice in his parka.
She had been relieved when he first appeared in it; it was bright blue striped with red, expensive, obviously new, a reassuring sign that the mother she had never met and of whom he never spoke, tried to take good care of him.
Wednesday was her day for replacing the flowers, and this morning she was carrying a small tissue-wrapped bunch of pink roses and one of small white chrysanthemums.
The stems were wet and she felt the dampness seeping through her woollen gloves.
The flowers were tight budded but one was beginning to open and a transitory evocation of summer came to her, bringing with it an old anxiety.
Darren often arrived on their church morning with a gift of flowers.
These, he had told her, were from Uncle Frank's stall at Brixton.
But could that really be true?
And then, there was the smoked salmon, last Friday's gift, brought to her flat just before suppertime.
He told her he had been given it by Uncle Joe who kept a café up Kilburn way.
But the slivers, so moist, so delicious, had been interleaved with greaseproof paper, and the white tray in which they lay had looked so very like the ones she had looked at with hopeless longing in Marks and Spencer, except that someone had torn off the label.
He had sat opposite her, watching her while she ate, making an extravagant moue of distaste when she suggested that he share it, but staring at her with a concentrated, almost angry, satisfaction; rather, she thought, as a mother might watch a convalescent child taking her first mouthful.
But she had eaten it, and with the delicious taste still lingering on her palate it had seemed ungrateful to cross-question him.
But the presents were getting more frequent.
If he brought her any more, then they would have to have a little talk.
Suddenly, he gave a yell, raced furiously ahead and leapt up at an overhanging bough.
There he swung, thin legs jerking, the white, thick-soled running shoes looking incongruously heavy for the bony legs.
He was given to these sudden spurts of activity, running ahead to hide among the bushes and jump out at her, leaping across puddles, rummaging for broken bottles and cans in the ditch and hurling them with a desperate intensity into the water.
She would pretend to be frightened when he jumped out, would call out to him to be careful when he crept along an overhanging branch and hung, skimming the water.
But on the whole, she rejoiced in his liveliness.
It was less worry than the lethargy which so often seemed to overcome him.
Now, watching his grinning monkey face as he swung, arm over arm, the frantic twisting of his body, the silver of the delicate ribcage under the pale flesh where the jacket had parted from his jeans, she felt a surge of love so painful that it was like a thrust to the heart.
And with the pain came again the old anxiety.
As he dropped beside her she said:
‘Darren, are you sure your mother doesn't mind your helping me with St Matthew's?’
‘Naw, that's OK, I told ya.’
‘You come to the flat so often.
It's lovely for me but are you quite sure she doesn't mind?’
‘Look, I told ya.
It's OK.’
‘But wouldn't it be better if I came to see her, just to meet her, so that she knows who you're with?’
‘She knows.
Anyway, she ain't at home.
She's off visiting me Uncle Ron at Romford.’
Another uncle.
How could she possibly keep track of them?
But a fresh anxiety surfaced.
‘Then who is looking after you, Darren?
Who is at home?’
‘No one.
I'm sleepin' with a neighbour till she comes back.
I'm OK.’
‘And what about school today?’
‘I told ya.
I don't have to go.
It's a holiday, see, it's a holiday!
I told ya!’
His voice had become high, almost hysterical.
Then, as she didn't speak, he fell in beside her and said more calmly:
‘They got Andrex at forty-eight pee a double roll up at Notting Hill.
That new supermarket.
I could get ya a couple of rolls if you're interested.’
He must, she thought, spend a lot of time in supermarkets, shopping for his mother, perhaps, on his way home from school.
He was clever at finding bargains, reporting back to her about the special offers, the cheaper lines.
She said:
‘I'll try to get up there myself, Darren.
That's a very good price.’
‘Yeah, that's what I thought.
It's a good price.
First time I seen 'em under fifty pee.’
For almost the whole of their walk their objective had been in sight: the green copper cupola of the soaring campanile of Arthur Blomfield's extraordinary Romanesque basilica, built in 1870 on the bank of this sluggish urban waterway with as much confidence as if he had erected it on the Venetian Grand Canal.
Miss Wharton, on her first visit to St Matthew's, nine years previously, had decided that it was expedient to admire it since it was her parish church and offered what she described as Catholic privileges.
She had then put its architecture firmly out of her mind, together with her yearnings for Norman arches, carved reredos and familiar Early English spires.
She supposed that she had now got used to it.
But she was still slightly surprised when she found Father Barnes showing round groups of visitors, experts interested in Victorian architecture, who enthused over the baldachin, admired the Pre-Raphaelite paintings on the eight panels of the pulpit, or set up their tripods to photograph the apse, and who compared it, in confident, un-ecclesiastical tones (surely even experts ought to lower their voices in church) with the Cathedral of Torcello near Venice or with Blomfield's similar basilica at Jericho in Oxford.
And now, as always, with dramatic suddenness, it loomed before them.
They passed through the turnstile in the canal railings and took the gravel path to the porch of the south door, the one to which Miss Wharton had a key.
This led to the Little Vestry where she would hang up her coat and to the kitchen where she would wash out the vases and arrange the fresh flowers.
As they reached the door she glanced down at the small flower bed which gardeners in the congregation were trying to cultivate with more optimism than success in the unrewarding soil at the side of the path.
‘Oh look, Darren, how pretty.
The first dahlias.
I never thought they'd flower.
No, don't pick them.
They look so nice there.’
He had bent down, his hand among the grasses but as she spoke he straightened up and thrust a grubby fist into his pocket.
‘Don't you want 'em for the BVM?’
‘We've got your uncle's roses for Our Lady.’
If only they were his uncle's!
I shall have to ask him, she thought.
I can't go on like this, offering Our Lady stolen flowers, if they were stolen.
But suppose they weren't and I accuse him?
I shall destroy everything there is between us.
I can't lose him now.
And it might put the idea of theft into his head.
The half-remembered phrases fell into her mind; corrupting innocence, an occasion of sin.
She thought, I shall have to think about it.
But not now, not yet.
She rummaged in her handbag for the key on its wooden key ring and tried to fit it into the lock.
But she couldn't get it in.
Puzzled, but not yet worried, she tried the doorknob and the heavy iron bound door swung open.
It was already unlocked, a key in place on the other side.
The passage was quiet, unlit, the oak door to the Little Vestry on the left tightly closed.
So Father Barnes must already be here.
But how strange that he should arrive before her.
And why hadn't he left on the passage light?
As her gloved hand found the switch, Darren scampered past her, up to the wrought iron grille which separated the passage from the nave of the church.
He liked to light a candle when they arrived, thrusting thin arms through the grille to reach the candleholder and the coin box.
Early in their walk she had handed him the usual tenpenny piece, and now she heard a faint tinkle and watched while he stuck his candle in the socket, and reached for the matches in their brass holder.
And it was then, in that moment, that she felt the first twitch of anxiety.
Some premonition alerted her subconscious; earlier disquiets and a vague sense of unease came together and focused into fear.
A faint smell, alien yet horribly familiar; the sense of a recent presence; the possible significance of that unlocked outer door; the dark passageway.
Suddenly she knew that something was dreadfully wrong.
Instinctively she called out:
‘Darren!’
He turned and looked at her face.
And then, immediately, he was back at her side.
Gently at first, and then with one sharp movement, she opened the door.
Her eyes dazzled with light.
The long fluorescent tube which disfigured the ceiling was on, its brightness eclipsing the gentle glow from the passageway.
And she saw horror itself.
There were two of them and she knew instantly, and with absolute certainty, that they were dead.
The room was a shambles.
Their throats had been cut and they lay like butchered animals in a waste of blood.
Instinctively she thrust Darren behind her.
But she was too late.
He, too, had seen.
He didn't scream but she felt him tremble and he made a small, pathetic groan, like an angry puppy.
She pushed him back into the passage, closed the door, and leaned against it.
She was aware of a desperate coldness, of the tumultuous thudding of her heart.
It seemed to have swollen in her chest, huge and hot, and its painful drumming shook her frail body as if to burst it apart.
And the smell, which at first had been tentative, elusive, no more than an alien tincture on the air, now seemed to seep into the passage with the strong effluvium of death.
She pressed her back against the door, grateful for the support of its solid carved oak.
But neither its strength nor her tightly closed eyes could shut out horror.
Brightly lit as on a stage, she saw the bodies still, more garish, more brightly lit than when they had first met her horrified eyes.
One corpse had slipped from the low single bed to the right of the door and lay staring up at her, the mouth open, the head almost cleft from the body.
She saw again the severed vessels, sticking like corrugated pipes through the clotted blood.
The second was propped, ungainly as a rag doll, against the far wall.
His head had dropped forward and over his chest a great mat of blood had spread like a bib.
A brown and blue woollen cap was still on his head but askew.
His right eye was hidden but the left leered at her with a dreadful knowingness.
Thus mutilated, it seemed to her everything human had drained away from them with their blood; life, identity, dignity.
They no longer looked like men.
And the blood was everywhere.
It  seemed to her that she herself was drowning in blood.
Blood drummed in her ears, blood gurgled like vomit in her throat, blood splashed in bright globules against the retinas of her closed eyes.
The images of death she was powerless to shut out swam before her in a swirl of blood, dissolved, reformed, and then dissolved again, but always in blood.
And then she heard Darren's voice, felt the tug of his hand on her sleeve.
‘We gotta get outer here before the filth arrive.
Come on.
We ain't seen nothin', nothin'.
We ain't been 'ere.’
His voice squeaked with fear.
He clutched at her arm.
Through the thin tweed, his grubby fingers bit, sharp as teeth.
Gently she prised them loose.
When she spoke, she was surprised at the calmness of her voice.
‘That's nonsense, Darren.
Of course they won't suspect us.
Running away…now that would look suspicious.’
She hustled him along the passage.
‘I'll stay here.
You go for help.
We must lock the door.
No one must come in.
I'll wait here and you fetch Father Barnes.
You know the Vicarage?
It's the corner flat in that block on Harrow Road.
He'll know what to do.
He'll call the police.’
‘But you can't stay 'ere on your own.
Suppose 'e's still here?
In the church, waitin' and watchin'?
We gotta keep together.
OK?’
The authority in his childish voice disconcerted her.
‘But it doesn't seem right, Darren, to leave them.
Not both of us.
It seems, well, callous, wrong.
I ought to stay.’
‘That's daft.
You can't do nothin'.
They're dead, stiff.
You saw 'em.’
He made a swift gesture of drawing a knife across his throat, rolled up his eyes and gagged.
The sound was horribly realistic, a gush of blood in the throat.
She cried out:
‘Oh don't, Darren, please don't!’
Immediately he was conciliatory, his voice calmer.
He put his hand in hers.
‘Better come along with me to Father Barnes.’
She looked down at him, piteously, as if she were the child.
‘If you think so, Darren.’
He had regained his mastery now.
The small body almost swaggered.
‘Yeah, that's what I think.
Come along with me.’
He was excited.
She heard it in the raised treble, saw it in the bright eyes.
He was no longer shocked and he wasn't really upset.
It had been silly to think that she needed to protect him from the horror.
That spurt of fear at the thought of the police had passed.
Brought up on those bright flickering images of violence, could he distinguish between them and reality, she wondered.
Perhaps it was more merciful that, protected by his innocence, he shouldn't be able to.
He put a thin arm around her shoulders, helping her to the door and she leaned against him, feeling the sharp bones under her arm.
‘How kind he is,’ she thought, ‘how sweet, this dear, dear child.’
She would have to talk to him about the flowers and the salmon.
But she needn't think about that now, not now.
They were outside.
The air, fresh and cold, smelled to her as sweet as a sea breeze.
But when, together, they had pulled shut the heavy door with its iron decorated bands, she found she couldn't fit the key into the lock.
Her fingers were jumping rhythmically, as if in spasm.
He took the key from her and, stretching high, thrust it into the lock.
And then her legs gently folded and she subsided slowly on the step, ungainly as a marionette.
He looked at her.
‘You all right?’
‘I'm afraid I can't walk, Darren.
I'll be better soon.
But I have to stay here.
You fetch Father Barnes.
But hurry!’
As he still hesitated, she said:
‘The murderer, he can't still be inside.
The door was unlocked when we arrived.
He must have left after he'd — he wouldn't hang about inside waiting to be caught, would he?’
How odd, she thought, that my mind can reason that out while my body seems to have given up.
But it was true.
He couldn't still be there, hiding in the church, knife in hand.
Not unless they had died very recently.
But the blood hadn't looked fresh…
Or had it?
Her bowels suddenly churned.
Oh God, she prayed, don't  let that happen, not now.
I'll never get to the lavatory.
I can't make it past that door.
She thought of the humiliation, of Father Barnes coming, the police.
It was bad enough to be slumped here like a heap of old clothes.
‘Hurry,’ she said.
‘I'll be all right.
But hurry!’
He made off, running very fast.
When he had gone, she still lay there, fighting the terrible loosening of her bowels, the need to vomit.
She tried to pray but, strangely, the words seemed to have got muddled up.
‘May the souls of the righteous, in the mercy of Christ, rest in peace.’
But perhaps they hadn't been the righteous.
There ought to be a prayer that would do for all men, all the murdered bodies all over the world.
Perhaps there was.
She would have to ask Father Barnes.
He would be sure to know.
And then came a new and different terror.
What had she done with her key?
She looked down at the one clutched in her hand.
This was weighted with a large wooden tag charred at the end where Father Barnes had put it down too close to a gas flame.
So this was his spare key, the one he kept at the Vicarage.
It must be the one they had found in the lock and she had handed it to Darren to relock the door.
So what had she done with hers?
She rummaged frantically in her handbag as if the key were a vital clue, its loss disastrous, seeing in imagination a phalanx of accusing eyes, the police demanding she account for it, Father Barnes's tired and dispirited face.
But her scrabbling fingers found it safe between her purse and the bag lining, and she drew it out with a moan of relief.
She must have automatically put it away when she found the door already open.
But how odd that she couldn't remember!
Everything was a blank between their arrival and the moment in which she had thrust open the Little Vestry door.
She was aware of a dark shadow looming beside her.
She looked up and saw Father Barnes.
Relief flooded her heart.
She said:
‘You've rung the police, Father?’
‘Not yet.
I thought it was better to see for myself, in case the boy was playing tricks.’
So they must have stepped past her, into the church, into that dreadful room.
How odd that, huddled in the corner, she hadn't even noticed.
Impatience rose like vomit in her throat.
She wanted to cry out, ‘Well now you've seen!’
She had thought that when he arrived everything would be all right.
No, not all right but better, made sense of.
Somewhere there were the right words and he would speak them.
But looking at him, she knew that he brought no comfort.
She looked up at his face, unattractively blotched by the morning chill, at the grubby stubble, at the two brittle hairs at the corners of his mouth, at the trace of blackened blood in the left nostril, as if he had had a nose bleed, at the eyes, still gummy with sleep.
How silly to think that he would bring his strength, would somehow make the horror bearable.
He didn't even know what to do.
It had been the same over the Christmas decorations.
Mrs Noakes had always done the pulpit, ever since Father Collins's time.
And then Lily Moore had suggested that it wasn't fair, that they ought to take turns at the pulpit and the font.
He should have made up his mind and stood firm.
It was always the same.
But what a time to be thinking of Christmas decorations, her mind a tangle of hollyberries and gaudy poinsettias, red as blood.
But it hadn't been so very red, more a reddish brown.
Poor Father Barnes, she thought, irritation dissolving into sentimentality.
He's a failure like me, both failures.
She was aware of Darren shivering beside her.
Someone ought to take him home.
Oh God, she thought, what will this do to him, to both of us?
Father Barnes was still standing beside her, twisting the doorkey in his ungloved hands.
She said, gently:
‘Father, we have to get the police.’
‘The police.
Of course.
Yes, we must call the police.
I'll phone from the Vicarage.’
But still he hesitated.
On an impulse she asked:
‘Do you know them, Father?’
‘Oh yes, yes.
The tramp.
That's Harry Mack.
Poor Harry.
He sleeps in the porch sometimes.’
He didn't need to tell her that.
She knew that Harry  liked to doss down in the porch.
She had taken her turn at clearing up after him, the crumbs, the paper bags, the discarded bottles, sometimes even worse things.
She ought to have recognized Harry, that woollen hat, the jacket.
She tried not to dwell on why it was that she hadn't.
She asked, with the same gentleness:
‘And the other, Father.
Did you recognize him?’
He looked down at her.
She saw his fear, his bewilderment, and above all, a kind of astonishment at the enormity of the complications that lay ahead.
He said slowly, not looking at her:
‘The other is Paul Berowne, Sir Paul Berowne.
He is — he was — a Minister of the Crown.’
As soon as he had left the Commissioner's office and was back in his own room Commander Adam Dalgliesh rang Chief Inspector John Massingham.
The receiver was snatched at the first ring and Massingham's disciplined impatience came across as strongly as his voice.
Dalgliesh said:
‘The Commissioner has had a word with the Home Office.
We're to take this one, John.
The new squad will officially be in existence on Monday anyway, so we're only jumping the gun by six days.
And Paul Berowne may still technically be the Member for Hertfordshire North East.
He wrote to the Chancellor of the Exchequer to apply for the Chiltern Hundreds on Saturday, apparently, and no one seems quite sure whether the resignation dates from the day the letter was received or the date the warrant is signed by the Chancellor.
Anyway all that is academic.
We take the case.’
But Massingham was uninterested in the procedural details for the resignation of a parliamentary seat.
He said:
‘Division are sure, sir, that the body is Sir Paul Berowne?’
‘One of the bodies.
Don't forget the tramp.
Yes, it's Berowne.
There's evidence of identity at the scene, and the parish priest knew him, apparently.
It wasn't the first time Berowne had spent the night in St Matthew's church vestry.’
‘An odd place to choose to sleep.’
‘Or to die.
Have you spoken to Inspector Miskin?’
Once they had begun working together they would both be calling her Kate, but now Dalgliesh gave her her rank.
Massingham said:
‘She's off today, sir, but I managed to get her at her flat.
I've asked Robins to collect her gear and she'll meet us at the scene.
I've alerted the rest of the team.’
‘Right, John.
Get the Rover, will you.
I'll meet you outside.
Four minutes.’
It crossed his mind that Massingham might not have been too displeased had Kate Miskin already left her flat and been impossible to contact.
The new squad had been set up in C1 to investigate serious crimes that, for political or other reasons, needed particularly sensitive handling.
It had been so self-evident to Dalgliesh that the squad would need a senior woman detective that he had devoted his energy to choosing the right one, rather than to speculating how well she would fit into the team.
He had selected the 27-year-old Kate Miskin on her record and her performance at interview, satisfied that she had the qualities for which he was looking.
They were also the ones he most admired in a detective: intelligence, courage, discretion and common sense.
What else she might have to contribute remained to be seen.
He knew that she and Massingham had worked together before when he had been a newly promoted divisional detective inspector and she a sergeant.
It was rumoured that the relationship had at times been stormy.
But Massingham had learned to discipline some of his prejudices since then, as he had the notorious Massingham temper.
And a fresh, even an iconoclastic, influence, even a little healthy rivalry, could be more  effective operationally than the collusive and macho freemasonry which frequently bound together a team of all male officers.
Dalgliesh began rapidly but methodically to clear his desk, then checked his murder bag.
He had told Massingham four minutes, and he would be there.
Already he had moved, as if by a conscious act of will, into a world in which time was precisely measured, details obsessively noticed, the senses preternaturally alert to sounds, smell, sight, the flick of an eyelid, the timbre of a voice.
He had been called from this office to so many bodies, in such different settings, such different states of dissolution, old, young, pathetic, horrifying, having in common only the one fact, that they were violently dead and by another's hand.
But this body was different.
For the first time in his career, he had known and liked the victim.
He told himself that it was pointless to speculate what difference, if any, this would make to the investigation.
Already he knew that the difference was there.
The Commissioner had said:
‘His throat is cut, possibly by his own hand.
But there's a second body, a tramp.
This case is likely to be messy in more ways than one.’
His reaction to the news had been partly predictable and partly complex and more disturbing.
There had been the natural initial shock of disbelief at hearing of the unexpected death of any person even casually known.
He would have felt no less if he'd been told that Berowne was dead of a coronary or killed in a car smash.
But this had been followed by a sense of personal outrage, an emptiness and then a surge of melancholy, not strong enough to be called grief but keener than mere regret, which had surprised him by its intensity.
But it hadn't been strong enough to make him say:
‘I can't take this case.
I'm too involved, too committed.’
Waiting briefly for the lift he told himself that he was no more involved than he would be in any other case.
Berowne was dead.
It was his business to find out how and  why.
Commitment was to the job, to the living, not to the dead.
He had hardly passed through the swing doors when Massingham drove up the ramp with the Rover.
Getting in beside him Dalgliesh asked:
‘Fingerprints and photography, they're on their way?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘And the lab?’
‘They're sending a senior biologist.
She'll meet us there.’
‘Did you manage to get Doctor Kynaston?’
‘No, sir, only the housekeeper.
He's been in New England visiting his daughter.
He always goes there in the autumn.
He was due back at Heathrow on BA flight 214 arriving at seven twenty-five.
It's landed, but he's probably stuck on the Westway.’
‘Keep on trying his home until he arrives.’
‘Doc Greeley is available, sir.
Kynaston will be jet-lagged.’
‘I want Kynaston, jet-lagged or not.’
Massingham said:
‘Only the best for this cadaver.’
Something in his voice, a tinge of amusement, even contempt, irritated Dalgliesh.
He thought, my God, am I getting over-sensitive about this death even before I've seen the body?
He fastened his seat belt without speaking and the Rover slid gently into Broadway, the road he had crossed less than a fortnight earlier on his way to see Sir Paul Berowne.
Gazing straight ahead, only half-aware of a world outside the claustrophobic comfort of the car, of Massingham's hands stroking the wheel, the almost soundless changing of the gears, the pattern of traffic lights, he deliberately let his mind slip free of the present and of all the conjecture about what lay ahead, and remembered, by an exercise of mental recall, as if something important depended on his getting it right, every moment of that last meeting with the dead man.
It was Thursday 5 September and he was about to leave his office to drive to Bramshill Police College to begin a series of lectures to the Senior Command Course when the call came through from the private office.
Berowne's private secretary spoke after the manner of his kind.
Sir Paul would be grateful if Commander Dalgliesh could spare a few minutes to see him.
It would be convenient if he could come at once.
Sir Paul would be leaving his office to join a party of his constituents at the House in about an hour.
Dalgliesh liked Berowne, but the summons was inconvenient.
He was not expected at Bramshill until after luncheon and had planned to take his time over the journey to north Hampshire, visiting churches at Sherborne St John and Winchfield and lunching at a pub near Stratfield Saye before arriving at Bramshill in time for the usual courtesies with the Commandant before his two-thirty lecture.
It occurred to him that he had reached the age when a man looks forward to his pleasures less keenly than in youth but is disproportionately aggrieved when his plans are upset.
There had been the usual time-consuming, wearying and slightly acrimonious preliminaries to the setting up of the new squad in C1 and already his mind was reaching out with relief to the solitary contemplation of alabaster effigies, sixteenth-century glass and the awesome decorations of Winchfield.
But it looked as if Paul Berowne wasn't proposing to take much time over their meeting.
His plans might still be possible.
He left his grip in the office, put on his tweed coat against a blustery autumnal morning and cut through St James's Park station to the Department.
As he pushed his way through the swing doors he thought again how much he had preferred the Gothic splendour of the old building in Whitehall.
It must, he recognized, have been infuriating and inconvenient to work in.
It had, after all, been built at a time when the rooms were heated by coal fires tended by an army of  minions and when a score of carefully composed hand-written minutes by the Department's legendary eccentrics were adequate to control events which now required three divisions and a couple of under secretaries.
This new building was no doubt excellent of its kind, but if the intention had been to express confident authority tempered by humanity he wasn't sure that the architect had succeeded.
It looked more suitable for a multinational corporation than for a great Department of State.
He particularly missed the huge oil portraits which had dignified that impressive Whitehall staircase, intrigued always by the techniques by which artists of varying talents had coped with the challenge of dignifying the ordinary and occasionally unprepossessing features of their sitters by the visual exploitation of magnificent robes and by imposing on their pudgy faces the stern consciousness of imperial power.
But at least they had removed the studio photograph of a royal princess which until recently had graced the entrance hall.
It had looked more suitable for a West End hairdressing salon.
He was smilingly recognized at the reception desk, but his credentials were still carefully scrutinized and he was required to await the escorting messenger, even though he had attended enough meetings in the building to be reasonably familiar with these particular corridors of power.
Few of the elderly male messengers now remained, and for some years the Department had recruited women.
They shepherded their charges with a cheerful, maternal competence as if to reassure them that the place might look like a prison but was as gently beneficent as a nursing home and that they were only there for their own good.
He was finally shown into the outer office.
The House was still in recess for the summer and the room was unnaturally quiet.
One of the typewriters was shrouded and a single clerk was collating papers with none of the urgency which normally powered a minister's private office.
It would have been a very different scene a few weeks earlier.
He thought, not for the first time, that a system which required ministers to run their departments, fulfil their  parliamentary responsibilities, and spend the weekend listening to the grievances of their constituents, might have been designed to ensure that major decisions were made by men and women tired to the point of exhaustion.
It certainly ensured that they were heavily dependent on their permanent officials.
Strong ministers were still their own men; the weaker degenerated into marionettes.
Not that this would necessarily worry them.
Departmental heads were adept at concealing from their puppets even the gentlest jerk of strings and wire.
But Dalgliesh hadn't needed his private source of department gossip to know that there was nothing of this limp subservience about Paul Berowne.
He came forward from behind his desk and held out his hand as if this were a first meeting.
His was a face, stern, even a little melancholy in repose, which was transfigured when he smiled.
He smiled now.
He said:
‘I'm sorry to bring you here at short notice.
I'm glad we managed to catch you.
It isn't particularly important but I think it may become so.’
Dalgliesh could never see him without being reminded of the portrait of his ancestor, Sir Hugo Berowne, in the National Portrait Gallery.
Sir Hugo had been undistinguished except for a passionate, if ineffective, allegiance to his king.
His only notable recorded act had been to commission Van Dyck to paint his portrait.
But it had been enough to ensure him, at least pictorially, a vicarious immortality.
The manor house in Hampshire had long since passed from the family, the fortune was diminished; but Sir Hugo's long and melancholy face framed by a collar of exquisite lace still stared with arrogant condescension at the passing crowd, the definitive seventeenth-century Royalist gentleman.
The present baronet's likeness to him was almost uncanny.
Here was the same long-boned face, the high cheekbones tapering to a pointed chin, the same widely spaced eyes with the droop of the left eyelid, the same long-fingered pale hands, the same steady but slightly ironic gaze.
Dalgliesh saw that his desk top was almost clear.
It was  a necessary ploy for an overworked man who wanted to stay sane.
You dealt with one thing at a time, gave it your whole attention, decided it, then put it aside.
At this moment he managed to convey that the one thing requiring attention was comparatively unimportant, a short communication on a sheet of quarto-sized white writing paper.
He handed it over.
Dalgliesh read:
‘The member for Hertfordshire North East, despite his fascist tendencies, is a notable liberal when it comes to women's rights.
But perhaps women should beware; proximity to this elegant baronet can be lethal.
His first wife was killed in a car accident; he was driving.
Theresa Nolan, who nursed his mother and slept in his house, killed herself after an abortion.
It was he who knew where to find the body.
The naked body of Diana Travers, his domestic servant, was found drowned at his wife's Thames-side birthday party, a party at which he was expected to be present.
Once is a private tragedy, twice is bad luck, three times looks like carelessness.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘Typed with an electric golfball machine.
They're not the easiest to identify.
And the paper is from a pad of ordinary commercial bond sold in thousands.
Not much help there.
Have you any idea who could have sent it?’
‘None.
One gets used to the usual abusive or pornographic letters.
They're part of the job.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘But this is close to an accusation of murder.
If the sender is traced I imagine your lawyer would advise that it's actionable.’
‘Actionable, yes, I imagine so.’
Dalgliesh thought that whoever had composed the message hadn't been uneducated.
The punctuation was careful, the prose had a certain rhythm.
He or she had taken trouble over the arrangement of the facts and in getting in as much relevant information as possible.
It was certainly a cut above the usual filth and drivel which dropped unsigned into a minister's postbag, and it was the more dangerous for that.
He handed it back and said:
‘This isn't the original, of course.
It's been photocopied.
Are you the only person to receive it, Minister, or don't you know?’
‘It was sent to the press, at least to one paper, the Paternoster Review .
This is in today's edition, I've only just seen it.’
He opened his desk drawer, took out the journal and handed it to Dalgliesh.
There was a folded marker at page eight.
Dalgliesh let his eyes slide down the page.
The paper had been running a series of articles on junior members of the Government and it was Berowne's turn.
The first part of the article was innocuous, factual, hardly original.
It briefly reviewed Berowne's previous career as a barrister, his first unsuccessful attempt to enter Parliament, his success at the 1979 election, his phenomenal rise to junior ministerial rank, his probable standing with the Prime Minister.
It mentioned that he lived with his mother, Lady Ursula Berowne, and his second wife in one of the few extant houses built by Sir John Soane and that he had one child by his first marriage, 24-year-old Sarah Berowne, who was active in left-wing politics and who was thought to be estranged from her father.
It was unpleasantly snide about the circumstances of his second marriage.
His elder brother, Major Sir Hugo Berowne, had been killed in Northern Ireland and Paul Berowne had married his brother's fiancee within five months of the car accident which had killed his wife.
‘It was, perhaps, appropriate that the bereaved fiancee and husband should find mutual consolation although no one who has seen the beautiful Barbara Berowne could suppose that the marriage was merely a matter of fraternal duty.’
It went on to prognosticate with some insight but little charity about his political future.
But much of that was little more than Lobby gossip.
The sting lay in the final paragraph and its origin was unmistakable.
‘He is a man who is known to like women; certainly most find him attractive.
But those women closest to him have been singularly unlucky.
His first wife died in  a car smash while he was driving.
A young nurse, Theresa Nolan, who nursed his mother, Lady Ursula Berowne, killed herself after an abortion, and it was Berowne who found the body.
Four weeks ago a girl who worked for him, Diana Travers, was found drowned following a party given for his wife on her birthday, a party at which he was expected to be present.
Bad luck is as lethal for a politician as halitosis.
It could yet follow him into his political career.
It could be the sour smell of misfortune rather than the suspicion that he doesn't know what he really wants which could mock the prediction that here is the next Conservative Prime Minister but one.’
Berowne said:
‘The Paternoster Review isn't circulated in the Department.
Perhaps it should be.
Judging from this we might be missing entertainment if not instruction.
I read it occasionally at the club, mainly for the literary reviews.
Do you know anything about the paper?’
He could, thought Dalgliesh, have asked the Department's own public relations people.
It was interesting that apparently he hadn't chosen to.
He said:
‘I've known Conrad Ackroyd for some years.
He owns and edits the Paternoster .
His father and grandfather had it before him.
In those days it was printed in Paternoster Place in the City.
Ackroyd doesn't make money out of it.
Papa left him reasonably well provided for through more orthodox investments, but I imagine it just about breaks even.
He likes to print gossip occasionally, but the paper isn't a second Private Eye .
Ackroyd hasn't the guts for one thing.
I don't think he has ever risked being sued in the history of the paper.
It makes it less audacious and less entertaining than the Eye , of course, except for the literary and dramatic reviews.
They have an enjoyable perversity.’
Only the Paternoster , he recalled, would have described a revival of Priestley's An Inspector Calls as a play about a very tiresome girl who caused a great deal of trouble to a respectable family.
He added: ‘The facts will be accurate as far as they go.
This will have been checked.
But it's surprisingly vicious for the Paternoster .’
Berowne said:
‘Oh yes, the facts are accurate.’
He made the statement calmly, almost sadly, without explanation and apparently without the intention of offering any.
Dalgliesh wanted to say ‘Which facts?
The facts in this journal or the facts in the original communication?’
But he decided against the question.
This wasn't yet a case for the police, least of all for him.
For the present, anyway, the initiative must lie with Berowne.
He said:
‘I remember the Theresa Nolan inquest.
This Diana Travers drowning is new to me.’
Berowne said:
‘It didn't make the national press.
There was a line or two in the local paper reporting the inquest.
It made no mention of my wife.
Diana Travers wasn't a member of her birthday party but they did dine at the same restaurant, the Black Swan on the river at Cookham.
The authorities seem to have adopted that slogan of the insurance company.
Why make a drama out of a crisis?’
So there had been a cover up, of sorts anyway, and Berowne had known it.
The death by drowning of a girl who worked for a Minister of the Crown and who died after dining at the restaurant where the Minister's wife was also dining, whether or not he himself was present, would normally have justified at least a brief paragraph in one of the national papers.
Dalgliesh asked:
‘What do you want me to do, Minister?’
Berowne smiled.
‘Do you know, I'm not exactly sure.
Keep a watching brief, I suppose.
I'm not expecting you to take this on personally.
That would obviously be ridiculous.
But if it does develop into open scandal I suppose someone eventually will have to deal with it.
At this stage I wanted to put you in the picture.’
But that was precisely what he hadn't done.
With any other man Dalgliesh would have pointed this out and with some asperity.
The fact that he felt no temptation to do so with Berowne interested him.
He thought, there'll be reports on both the inquests.
I can get most of the facts  from official sources.
For the rest, if it does blow up into an open accusation, he'll have to come clean.
And if that happened, whether it became a matter for him personally and for the proposed new squad would depend on how great the scandal, how real the suspicion and of what precisely.
He wondered what Berowne was expecting him to do; find a potential blackmailer or investigate him for double murder?
But it seemed likely that a scandal of some sort would eventually break.
If the communication had been sent to the Paternoster Review , it had almost certainly been sent to other papers or journals, possibly to some of the nationals.
They might at present be choosing to hold their fire, but that didn't mean they'd have thrown the communication into their wastepaper baskets.
They had probably spiked it while they checked with their lawyers.
In the meantime, to wait and watch was probably the wisest option.
But there would be no harm in having a word with Conrad Ackroyd.
Ackroyd was one of the greatest gossips in London.
Half an hour spent in his wife's elegant and comfortable drawing room was usually more productive and a great deal more entertaining than hours spent beavering through official files.
Berowne said:
‘I'm meeting a party of constituents at the House.
They want to be shown round.
Perhaps if you've time you could walk over with me.’
Again the request was a command.
But when they left the building he turned without explanation to the left and down the steps to Birdcage Walk.
So they were to walk to the House the longest way, along the fringe of St James's Park.
Dalgliesh wondered if there were things his companion wished to confide which could more easily be said out of the office.
The ninety acres of entrancing if formalized beauty of the park, crossed by paths so convenient that they might have been purposefully designed to lead from one centre of power to another, must, he thought, have heard more secrets than any other part of London.
But if that were Berowne's intention, it was destined to be thwarted.
They had hardly crossed Birdcage Walk  when they were hailed by a cheerful shout and Jerome Mapleton trotted up beside them, rubicund, sweaty-faced, a little out of breath.
He was the member for a South London constituency, a safe seat which he nevertheless hardly ever left, as if fearing that even a week's absence might put it in jeopardy.
Twenty years in the House still hadn't dampened his extraordinary enthusiasm for the job and his not unappealing surprise that he should actually be there.
Talkative, gregarious and insensitive, he attached himself as if by magnetic force to any group larger or more important than the one he was actually in.
Law and order was his chief interest, a concern popular with his prosperous middle-class constituents cowering behind their security locks and decorative window bars.
Adapting his subject to his captive audience, he plunged at once into parliamentary small talk about the newly appointed committee, bobbing up and down between Berowne and Dalgliesh like a small craft on bumpy water.
‘This committee, ‘Policing a Free Society: The Next Decade’, isn't that what it's called?
Or is it ‘Policing in a Free Society: The Next Decade’?
Didn't you spend the first session deciding whether to include that little pre-position?
So typical.
You're looking at policy as well as technical resources aren't you?
Isn't that a tall order?
It's made the committee larger than is usually thought effective hasn't it?
Wasn't the original idea to look again at the application of science and technology to policing?
The committee seems to have enlarged its terms of reference.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘The difficulty is that technical resources and policy aren't easily separated, not when you get to practical policing.’
‘Oh I know, I know.
I quite appreciate that, my dear Commander.
This proposal to monitor vehicle movements on the motorways, for example.
You can do it, of course.
The question is, should you do it?
Similarly with surveillance.
Can you imagine advanced scientific methods divorced from the policy and ethics of their actual use?
That's the question, my dear Commander.
You know it, we all know it.
And, come to that, can we any longer rely on the received doctrine that it's for the Chief Constable to decide on the allocation of resources?’
Berowne said:
‘You aren't, of course, about to utter heresy — that we ought to have a national force?’
He spoke without apparent interest, his eyes fixed ahead.
It was as if he were thinking: Since we're lumbered with this bore, let's throw him a predictable subject and hear his predictable views.
‘No.
But it might be better to have one by will and intention than by default.
De jure, Minister, not de facto .
Well, you'll have plenty to keep you busy, Commander, and given the membership of the working party it won't be dull.’
He spoke wistfully.
Dalgliesh suspected that he had hoped to be a member.
He heard him add: ‘I suppose that's the attraction of the job for the sort of man you are.’
What sort of man, thought Dalgliesh.
The poet who no longer writes poetry.
The lover who substitutes technique for commitment.
The policeman disillusioned with policing.
He doubted whether Mapleton intended his words to be offensive.
The man was as insensitive to language as he was to people.
He said:
‘I've never been quite sure what the attraction is except that the job isn't boring and it gives me a private life.’
Berowne spoke with sudden bitterness:
‘It's a job with less hypocrisy than most.
A politician is required to listen to humbug, talk humbug, condone humbug.
The most we can hope for is that we don't actually believe it.’
The voice rather than the words disconcerted Mapleton.
Then he decided to treat it as a joke and giggled.
He turned to Dalgliesh.
‘So what now for you personally, Commander?
Apart from the working party, of course?’
‘A week of lectures to the Senior Command Course at Bramshill.
Then back here to set up the new squad.’
‘Well, that should keep you busy.
What happens if I murder the member for Chesterfield West when the  working party is actually sitting?’
He giggled again at his own audacity.
‘I hope you'll resist the temptation, sir.’
‘Yes, I must try.
The committee is too important to have the senior police detective interest represented on a part-time basis.
And by the way, talking of murder, there's a very odd paragraph about you, Berowne, in today's Paternoster Review .
Not altogether friendly, I thought.’
‘Yes,’ said Berowne shortly.
‘I've seen it.’
He increased his pace so that Mapleton, already out of breath, had to choose between talking or using his energy to keep up.
When they reached the Treasury, he obviously decided that the reward was no longer worth the effort and with a valedictory wave disappeared up Parliament Street.
But if Berowne had been seeking a moment for further confidences it had disappeared.
The pedestrian signal had turned to green.
No pedestrian, seeing the lights in his favour at Parliament Square, hesitates.
Berowne gave him a rueful glance as if to say: ‘See how even the lights conspire against me,’ and walked briskly across.
Dalgliesh watched as he crossed Bridge Street, acknowledged the salute of the policeman on duty and disappeared into New Palace Yard.
It had been a brief and unsatisfactory encounter.
He had the feeling that Berowne was in some trouble deeper and more subtly disturbing than poison pen messages.
He turned back to the Yard telling himself that if Berowne wanted to confide he would do it in his own good time.
But that time had never come.
And it had been on his drive back from Bramshill a week later that he had turned on his radio and heard the news of Berowne's resignation of his ministerial post.
The details had been sparse.
Berowne's only explanation had been that he felt it was time for his life to take a new direction.
The Prime Minister's letter, printed in the next day's Times had been conventionally appreciative but brief.
The great British public, most of whom would have been hard pressed to name three members of the Cabinet of this or any administration, were pre-occupied with chasing the sun in one of the  rainiest summers in recent years and took the loss of a junior minister with equanimity.
Those parliamentary gossips still in London enduring the boredom of the silly season waited in happy expectation for the scandal to break.
Dalgliesh waited with them.
But there was, apparently, to be no scandal.
Berowne's resignation remained mysterious.
Dalgliesh had already sent while at Bramshill for the reports of the inquests on Theresa Nolan and Diana Travers.
On the face of it there was no cause for concern.
Theresa Nolan, after having a medical termination on psychiatric grounds, had left a suicide note for her grandparents which they had confirmed was in her handwriting and which made her intention to kill herself plain beyond any doubt.
And Diana Travers, after drinking and eating unwisely, had apparently herself dived into the Thames to swim out to her companions who were messing about in a punt.
Dalgliesh had been left with an uneasy feeling that neither case was as straightforward as the reports made it appear, but certainly there was no prima facie evidence of foul play in connection with either of the two deaths.
He was uncertain how much further he was expected to probe or whether, in the light of Berowne's resignation, there was any point in his probing.
He had decided to do nothing further for the present and leave it to Berowne to make the first move.
And now Berowne, the harbinger of death, was himself dead, by his hand or another's.
Whatever secret he had been hoping to confide on that short walk to the House would remain for ever unspoken.
But if he had, indeed, been murdered then the secrets would be told; through his dead body, through the intimate detritus of his life, through the mouths, truthful, treacherous, faltering, reluctant of his family, his enemies, his friends.
Murder was the first destroyer of privacy as it was of so much else.
And it seemed to Dalgliesh an ironic twist of fate that it should be he, whom Berowne had shown a disposition to trust, who should now be travelling to begin that inexorable process of violation.
They were almost at the church before he wrenched his mind back to the present.
Massingham had driven in, for him, an unusual silence as if sensing that his chief was grateful for this small hiatus between knowledge and discovery.
And he had no need to inquire the way.
As always, he had mapped his route before setting out.
They were driving up the Harrow Road and had just passed the complex of St Mary's Hospital when the campanile of St Matthew's came suddenly into view on their left.
With its crossed bands of stone, its high arched windows and copper cupola it reminded Dalgliesh of the brick towers he had laboriously erected as a child, brick on precarious brick, until they toppled in noisy disorder on the nursery floor.
It held for him some of the same hubristic impermanence and, even as he gazed, he half expected it to bend and sway.
Without speaking, Massingham took the next turning to the left and drove toward– it down a narrow road bordered on each side by a terrace of small houses.
They were identical with their small upper windows, narrow porches and square bays, but it was obvious that the road was coming up in the world.
Some few still showed the tell-tale signs of multiple occupation, dishevelled lawns, peeling paint and drawn secretive curtains.
But these were succeeded by bright little bandboxes of social aspiration; newly painted doors, carriage lamps, an occasional hanging basket, the front garden paved to provide standing for the car.
At the end of the road the huge bulk of the church with its soaring walls of smoke-blackened brick looked as much out of keeping as it was out of scale with this small domestic self-sufficiency.
The huge north door, large enough for a cathedral, was closed.
Beside it a grime encrusted board gave the name and address of the parish priest and the time of services, but there was nothing else to suggest that the door was ever opened.
They drove slowly down a narrow asphalt  drive between the southern wall of the church and the railing bordering the canal, but still there was no sign of life.
It was obvious that the news of a murder hadn't yet spread.
There were only two cars parked outside the south porch.
One, he guessed, belonged to Detective Sergeant Robins and the red Metro to Kate Miskin.
He wasn't surprised that she was there before them.
She opened the door before Massingham had time to ring, her handsome shield-shaped face composed under the light brown fringe, and looking in her shirt, slacks and leather jerkin as elegantly informal as if she had just come in from a country walk.
She said:
‘The DI's compliments, sir, but he had to get back to the station.
They've got a homicide at Royal Oak.
He left as soon as Sergeant Robins and I arrived.
He'll be available from midday if you need him.
The bodies are here, sir.
They call it the Little Vestry.’
It was typical of Glyn Morgan not to have disturbed the scene.
Dalgliesh had a respect for Morgan as a man and a detective but was grateful that either duty, tact or a mixture of both had taken him away.
It was a relief not to have to soothe and propitiate an experienced detective who could hardly be expected to welcome a commander from the new C1 squad intruding on his patch.
Kate Miskin pushed open the first door on the left and stood aside for Dalgliesh and Massingham to enter.
The Little Vestry was garishly lit like a film set.
Under the glare of the fluorescent light the whole bizarre scene, Berowne's sprawled body and severed throat, the clotted blood, the tramp propped like a stringless marionette against the wall, looking for a moment unreal, a Grand Guignol tableau too overdone and too contrived to be convincing.
Hardly glancing at Berowne's body Dalgliesh picked his way across the carpet to Harry Mack and squatted beside him.
Without turning his head he asked:
‘Were the lights on when Miss Wharton found the bodies?’
‘Not in the passage, sir.
But she says this light was on.
The boy confirms it.’
‘Where are they now?’
‘In the church, sir.
Father Barnes is with them.’
‘Have a word with them will you, John?
Tell them I'll speak to them as soon as I'm free.
And try to contact the boy's mother.
We ought to get him away from here as soon as possible.
Then I want you here.’
Harry looked as derelict in death as he must have done in life.
If it hadn't been for the breastplate of blood, he could have been asleep, legs stuck out, head slumped forward, his woollen cap slipped over his right eye.
Dalgliesh put his hand under the chin and gently lifted the head.
He had the sensation that it would come apart from the body and roll over into his hands.
He saw what he had expected to find, the single slash across the throat, apparently from left to right, cutting through the trachea to the vertebrae.
Rigor mortis was already well established and the skin was ice cold and goosefleshed as the erector muscles of the hairs contracted with the onset of rigor.
Whatever concatenation of chance or desire had brought Harry Mack to this place, there was no mystery about the cause of death.
He was wearing old plaid trousers, over-large and loose as pantaloons, and tied at the ankles with string.
Above them, as far as it was possible to see for the blood, he wore a striped knitted pullover over a navy jumper.
A malodorous checked jacket, stiff with grime, was unbuttoned, the left flap lying open.
Dalgliesh raised it with careful fingers touching only the extreme edge of the cloth and saw underneath a smudge of blood on the carpet about two centimetres long and thicker at the right end than at the left.
Peering closer he thought he could see a smear roughly the same length on the jacket pocket, but the cloth was too dirty for him to be sure.
But the implication of the smear on the carpet was plain enough.
One or more drops of blood must have fallen or been spilt from the weapon before Harry fell and had then been smeared along the carpet as the body was dragged against the wall.
But whose blood?
If it proved to be Harry's, the discovery was of small significance.
But suppose it were Berowne's?
Dalgliesh  felt impatient for the arrival of the forensic biologist, although he knew he couldn't hope for the answer, not yet.
Samples of both victims' blood would be taken from the bodies at the post-mortem, but it would be three days at least before he could expect to get the result of the analysis.
He wasn't sure what impulse had made him go first to Harry Mack's body.
But now he trod carefully across the carpet to the bed and stood silently looking down at the body of Berowne.
Even as a 15-year-old boy, standing at the side of the bed of his dead mother, he hadn't felt the need to think, far less to utter, the word goodbye.
You couldn't speak to someone who was no longer there.
He thought: we can vulgarize everything but not this.
The body in its stiff ungainliness, beginning already, or so it seemed to his over-sensitive nose, to emit the first sour-sweet stink of decay, yet had an inalienable dignity because it once had been a man.
But he knew, none better, how quickly this spurious humanity would drain away.
Even before the pathologist had finished at the scene and the head was wrapped, the hands mittened in their plastic bags, even before Doc Kynaston got to work with his scalpels, the corpse would be an exhibit, more important, more cumbersome and more difficult to preserve than other exhibits in the case, but still an exhibit, tagged, documented, dehumanized, invoking only interest, curiosity or disgust.
But not yet.
He thought: I knew this man, not well but I knew him.
I liked him.
Surely he deserves better of me than to gaze at him with my policeman's eyes.
He lay head towards the door and at an angle of forty-five degrees from the bed, his shoes touching the end.
The left hand was flung out, the right lay closer to the body.
The bed had been covered with a blanket of hand-knitted squares of bright wool.
It looked as if Berowne had clutched it as he fell, half-pulling it from the bed, so that it lay partly bunched at his right side.
An open razor, the blade thick with clotted blood lay on top of it, a few inches from his right hand.
It was extraordinary how many details simultaneously impressed themselves on Dalgliesh's  mind.
A thin wedge of what looked like mud caked between the heel and the sole of the left shoe; the pattern of blood stiffening the fine fawn cashmere of the sweater; the half-open mouth fixed in a rictus between a smile and a sneer; the dead eyes seeming as he watched to shrink into their sockets; the left hand with its long pale fingers, curved and delicate as a girl's; the palm of the right hand thick with blood.
But the whole picture struck him as wrong, and he knew why.
Berowne couldn't both have held the razor in his right hand and clutched at the blanket as he fell.
But if he had first dropped the razor, why should it be lying on top of the blanket and so conveniently close to his hand as if it had slipped from the opening fingers?
And why should the palm be so thickly clotted, almost as if another's hand had lifted it and smeared it into the blood at the throat?
If Berowne himself had wielded the razor, surely the palm which had clutched it would have been less bloodied.
He was aware of a small noise at his side and looked round to see Detective Inspector Kate Miskin looking, not at the corpse, but at him.
She quickly turned her eyes away but not before he had detected, to his discomfort, a look of grave, almost maternal solicitude.
He said roughly:
‘Well, Inspector?’
‘It looks obvious, sir, murder followed by suicide.
The classical pattern of self-inflicted wounds — three cuts, two tentative, the third cutting through the trachea.’
She added:
‘It could be used as an illustration in a textbook of forensic medicine.’
He said:
‘There's no difficulty in recognizing the obvious.
One should be slower to believe it.
I want you to break the news to his family.
The address is 62 Campden Hill Square.
There is a wife and an elderly mother, Lady Ursula Berowne, and a housekeeper of sorts.
Use your discretion about which is best able to take it.
And take a DC.
When the news breaks they may be pestered and need protection.’
‘Yes, sir.’
She showed no resentment at being ordered from the scene.
She knew that the job of breaking the news wasn't a routine chore, that she hadn't been chosen merely because she was the only woman in his team and he saw this as a woman's job.
She would break the news with tact, discretion, even with compassion.
God knew she had had enough practice in ten years of policing.
But she would still be a traitor to grief, watching and listening, even as she spoke the formal words of condolence, for the flicker of an eyelid, the tensing of hands and face muscles, for the unwise word, for any sign that for someone in that waiting house in Campden Hill Square this might not be news at all.
Before he concentrated on the actual scene of the crime, Dalgliesh always liked to make a cursory survey of the surroundings to orientate himself, and, as it were, to set the scene of murder.
The exercise had its practical value, but he recognized that, in some obscure way, it fulfilled a psychological need, just as in boyhood he would explore a country church by first walking slowly round it before, with a frisson of awe and excitement, pushing open the door and beginning his planned progress of discovery to the central mystery.
And now, in these few remaining minutes, before the photographer, the fingerprint officers, the forensic biologists arrived at the scene, he had the place almost to himself.
Moving into the passage he wondered whether this quiet air tinctured with the scent of incense, candles, and the more solidly Anglican smell of musty prayer books, metal polish and flowers, had held for Berowne also the promise of discovery, of a scene already set, a task inevitable and inescapable.
The brightly lit passage with its floor of encaustic tiles and its white painted walls ran the whole west end of the church.
The Little Vestry was the first room on the left.
Next to it and with a connecting door, was a small kitchen about ten feet by eight.
Then came a narrow lavatory with an old-fashioned bowl of decorated porcelain and a mahogany seat with, above it, a hanging chain set under a single high window.
Lastly an open door showed him a high square room, almost certainly set under the campanile, which was obviously both the vestry proper and the bell room.
Opposite it the passage was separated from the body of the church by a ten foot long grille in delicate wrought iron which gave a view up the nave to the cavernous glitter of the apse and the Lady Chapel on the right.
A central door in the grille topped with figures of two trumpeting angels gave entry to the church for the processing priest and choir.
To the right a padlocked wooden box was fixed to the grille.
Behind it, but within reach of stretching hands, stood a branching candlestand, also in wrought iron, with a box of matches in a brass holder attached to it with a chains and a tray containing a few small candles.
Presumably this was to enable people who had business in the vestry to light a candle when the grille door to the church was locked.
Judging from the cleanness of the candleholders it was a facility of which they seldom, if ever, took advantage.
There was only one candle in place, stuck upright like a pale wax finger, and this had never been lit.
Two of the brass chandeliers suspended above the nave gave a gentle diffused light but the church looked dimly mysterious compared with the glare of the passage and the figures of Massingham and the detective sergeant quietly conferring, of Miss Wharton and the boy patiently sitting like hump-backed dwarfs on low chairs in what must be the children's corner, seemed as distanced and insubstantial as if they moved in a different dimension of time.
As he stood watching Massingham looked up, caught his eye, and moved down the nave towards him.
He returned to the Little Vestry and, standing in the doorway, drew on his latex gloves.
It always surprised him  a little that it was possible to fix the attention on the room itself, its furniture and objects, even before the bodies had been packaged and taken away, as if in their fixed and silent decrepitude they had for a moment become part of the room's artefacts, as significant as any other physical clue, no more and no less.
As he moved into the room he was aware of Massingham behind him, alert, already drawing on his gloves but, for him, unnaturally subservient, pacing quietly behind his chief like a recently qualified houseman deferentially attendant on the consultant.
Dalgliesh thought: Why is he behaving as if I need tactful handling, as if I'm suffering from a private grief?
This is a job like any other.
It promises to be difficult enough without John and Kate treating me as if I'm a sensitive convalescent.
Henry James, he remembered, had said of his approaching death, ‘So here it is at last, the distinguished thing!’
If Berowne had thought in these terms, then this was an incongruous place in which to receive so honoured a visitation.
The room was about twelve foot square and lit by a fluorescent tube running almost the full length of the ceiling.
The only natural light came from two high curved windows.
They were covered outside by a protective mesh which looked like chicken wire on which the dirt of decades had accumulated, so that the panes were honeycombs of greenish grime.
The furniture, too, looked as if it had been gradually acquired over the years; gifts, rejects, the unregarded remnants of long-forgotten jumble sales.
Opposite the door and set under the windows was an ancient oak desk with three right-hand drawers, one without handles.
On its top was a simple oak cross, a much used blotter in a leather pad, and an old fashioned black telephone, the receiver off the rest and lying on its side.
Massingham said:
‘Looks as if he took it off.
Who wants the telephone to ring just when he's concentrating on slitting his jugular?’
‘Or his killer was taking no chances on the bodies being discovered too soon.
If Father Barnes took it into his head to ring and got no reply he'd probably come round to see  if Berowne was all right.
If he continued to get the engaged sound he'd probably assume that Berowne was having an evening of telephoning and let it go.’
‘We might get a palm print, sir.’
‘Unlikely, John.
If this is murder, we're not dealing with a fool.’
He continued his exploration.
With his gloved hands, he pulled open the top drawer and found a stack of white writing paper, of cheap quality, headed with the name of the church, and a box of envelopes.
Apart from these, the desk held nothing of interest.
Against the left-hand wall was an assortment of canvas and metal chairs neatly stacked, presumably for the occasional use of the parochial church council.
Beside them was a five-drawer metal filing cabinet, and next to it a small glass-fronted bookcase.
He slipped the catch and saw that it contained an assortment of old prayer books, missals, devotional pamphlets, and a pile of booklets about the history of the church.
There were only two easy chairs, one set on each side of the fireplace; a compact brown chair in torn leather with a patchwork cushion, and a grubby, more modern chair with fitted pads.
One of the stacked chairs had been uprighted.
A white towel hung over its back and on the seat rested a brown canvas bag, its zip open.
Massingham rummaged gently inside and said:
‘A pair of pyjamas, a spare pair of socks, and a table napkin wrapped round half a sliced loaf, wholemeal, and a piece of cheese.
Roquefort by the look of it.
And there's an apple.
A Cox if that's relevant.’
‘Hardly.
Is that all, John?’
‘Yes, sir.
No wine.
Whatever he thought he was doing here, it doesn't look like an assignation, not with a woman anyway.
And why choose this place with the whole of London open to him?
Bed too narrow.
No comfort.’
‘Whatever he was looking for, I don't think it was comfort.’
Dalgliesh had moved over to the fireplace, a plain wooden overmantel with an iron surround patterned with grapes and convolvulus set in the middle of the right-hand  wall.
It must, he thought, have been decades since a fire was lit in it for warmth.
In front of the grate was a tall electric fire with artificial coals, a high curved back and a triple set of burners.
He moved it gently forward and saw that the grate had, in fact, been recently used; someone had tried to burn a diary.
It lay open in the firebasket, its leaves curled and blackened.
Some pages had apparently been torn out and separately burnt; the brittle fragments of black ash had floated down to lie on top of the debris under the grate, old twisted matchends, coal dust, carpet fluff, the accumulated grit of years.
The blue cover of the diary with the year clearly printed had been more resistant to the flames; one corner only was slightly scorched.
Whoever had burnt it had evidently been in a hurry, unless, of course, he had been concerned only to destroy certain pages.
Dalgliesh made no attempt to touch it.
This was a job for Ferris, the scene of crime officer, already hovering impatiently in the passage.
The Ferret was never happy when anyone other than himself was examining a scene of crime and it seemed to Dalgliesh that his impatience to get on with the job came through the wall as a palpable force.
He crouched low and peered into the debris under the grate.
Among the fragments of blackened paper he saw a used safety match, the unburnt half of the stem clean and white as if it had only recently been struck.
He said:
‘He could have used this to burn the diary.
But, if so, where is the box?
Have a look in the jacket pockets will you, John.’
Massingham walked over to Berowne's jacket hanging on a hook at the back of the door and felt in the two outer and one inner pockets.
He said:
‘A wallet, sir, a Parker fountain pen and a set of keys.
No lighter and no matches.’
And there were none, either, visible in the room.
With mounting excitement which neither betrayed they moved over to the desk and peered intently at the blotter.
It, too, must have been there for years.
The pink blotting paper tattered at the edges was marked with a criss-cross  of different inks blodged with faded blots.
It wasn't, thought Dalgliesh, surprising; most people now used ballpoints rather than ink.
But peering more closely he could see that someone had recently been writing with a fountain pen.
Superimposed on the older markings were more recent blottings, a pattern of broken lines and half curves in black ink extending over some six inches of the blotter.
Their newness was obvious.
He went over to Berowne's jacket, and brought out the fountain pen.
It was elegantly slim, one of the newest models, and filled, he saw, with black ink.
It should be possible for the lab to match the ink even if the letters couldn't be deciphered.
But if Berowne had been writing and had blotted the paper at the desk, where was it now?
Had he himself disposed of it, torn it up, flushed it down the lavatory, burnt it among the debris of the diary pages?
Or had someone else found it, perhaps even come specifically to find it, and either destroyed it or taken it away?
Lastly, he and Massingham passed through the open door to the right of the fireplace, careful not to brush against Harry's body, and explored the kitchen.
There was a gas boiler, comparatively modern, mounted above a deep square porcelain sink much stained and with a clean but crumpled tea towel hanging on a hook beside it.
Dalgliesh peeled off his gloves and felt the towel.
It was slightly damp not in patches but all over as if it had been soaked in water then wrung out and left to dry through the night.
He handed it to Massingham who took off his own gloves and ran it through his hand.
He said:
‘Even if the murderer were naked, or half-naked he would have needed to wash his hands and arms.
He could have used this.
Berowne's towel is presumably the one hanging on the chair and that looked dry enough.’
He went out to check while Dalgliesh continued his exploration.
On the right was a cupboard with a Formica top, brown with tea stains, on which stood one large kettle, one smaller more modern kettle and two teapots.
There was also a chipped enamel mug stained almost black inside and smelling of spirits.
Opening the cupboard he saw that  it contained a collection of unmatched crockery and two folded clean tea towels, both dry, and on the bottom shelf an assortment of flower vases and a battered cane basket containing folded dusters, and tins of metal and furniture polish.
Here presumably Miss Wharton and her fellow helpers would arrange the flowers, wash out their dusters, refresh themselves with tea.
Attached to the pipe of the gas boiler by a brass chain was a box of safety matches in a brass holder, similar to the one chained to the candlestand; hinged at the top to allow the insertion of a fresh box.
There had been a similar holder and brass chain in the parish room of his father's Norfolk church but he couldn't remember seeing one since.
They were clumsy to use, the striking surface barely adequate.
It was difficult to believe that the boxes had been removed, then replaced and even more difficult to credit that a match from either of the chained boxes had been struck, then carried lit and precariously flickering into the Little Vestry and used to burn the diary.
Massingham was back beside him.
He said:
‘The towel next door is perfectly dry and only slightly dirtied.
It looks as if Berowne could have washed his hands when he arrived and that's all.
It's odd that he didn't leave it in here, except that there's nowhere convenient to hang it.
Odder, though, that the killer, assuming there is a killer, didn't use it to dry himself rather than the smaller tea towel.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘If he remembered to take it out with him to the kitchen.
If he didn't, he'd hardly want to go back for it.
Too much blood, too much risk of leaving a clue.
Better to use what he found to hand.’
It was apparent that the kitchen was the only room with water and a sink; hand washing as well as washing up must be done here, if at all.
Above the sink was a mirror composed of glass tiles stuck to the wall, and under it a simple glass shelf.
Upon this was a sponge bag, its zip open, containing a toothbrush and a tube of paste, a dry face flannel and a used bar of soap.
Beside this was a more  interesting find, a narrow leather case with the initials PSB stamped on it in faded gold.
With his gloved hands Dalgliesh lifted the lid and found what he had expected to see, the twin to the cut throat razor lying so incriminatingly close to Berowne's right hand.
On the satin lining of the lid was a sticker with the maker's name in old-fashioned twirls, P. J. Bellingham, and the Jermyn Street address.
Bellingham, the most expensive and prestigious barber in London and supplier still of razors to those clients who had never adjusted to the shaving habits of the twentieth century.
There was nothing of apparent interest in the lavatory and they made their way into the robing vestry.
It was obvious that this was where Harry Mack had settled himself for the night.
What looked like an old army blanket, frayed at the edges and stiff with dirt, had been loosely spread in a corner, its fumy stink mingling with the smell of incense to produce an incongruous amalgam of piety and squalor.
Beside it was an overturned bottle, a length of grubby cord and a sheet of newspaper on which lay a crust of brown loaf, the core of an apple and some crumbs of cheese.
Massingham picked them up and rubbed them between his palms and thumbs and sniffed.
He said:
‘Roquefort, sir.
Hardly a cheese which Harry would have provided for himself.’
There was no evidence that Berowne had started his own meal — that in itself might be of some help in deciding on the approximate time of death — but he had apparently either cajoled Harry into the church with the promise of a meal or, more likely, had supplied an obvious and immediate need before he was ready for his own share of the supper.
The vestry itself was so familiar from childhood memories that Dalgliesh could have taken one quick glance, shut his eyes and spoken aloud an inventory of high church piety: the packets of incense on top of the cupboard; the incense holder and censer; the crucifix and, behind the faded red serge curtain, the lace-trimmed vestments and the short starched surplices of the choir.
But now his mind was on Harry Mack.
What had roused him from his half-drunken sleep; a scream, the sound of a quarrel, a falling body?
But could he have heard it from this room?
as if echoing his thoughts, Massingham said:
‘He could have been roused by thirst, gone to the kitchen for a drink of water and stumbled into the crime.
That enamel mug looked as if it might be his.
Father Barnes will know whether it belongs to the church and with luck there may be prints.
Or he could have gone to the lavatory, but I doubt whether he would have heard anything from there.’
And, thought Dalgliesh, he was unlikely to have gone afterwards into the kitchen to wash.
Massingham was probably right.
Harry had settled himself for the night and then felt the need for a drink of water.
But for that fatal thirst, he might still be quietly sleeping.
Outside in the passage Ferris was prancing gently on his toes like a runner limbering for a race.
Massingham said:
‘The blotter, the enamel mug, the tea towel and the diary are all important and there's what looks like a recently struck match in the grate; we need that.
But we shall want all the debris in the fireplace and the S-bends in the pipes.
The probability is that the murderer washed himself in the kitchen.’
None of it really needed saying, least of all to Charlie Ferris.
He was the most expert of the Met's scene of crime officers and the one Dalgliesh always hoped would be available when he began a new case.
It was inevitable that he should be nicknamed ‘the Ferret’, although seldom in his hearing.
He was very small, sandy-haired, sharp-featured and with his sense of smell so well developed that it was rumoured that he had sniffed out a suicide in Epping Forest even before the animal predators got to it.
In his spare time he sang in one of the most famous of London's amateur choirs.
Dalgliesh, who had heard him at a police concert, never ceased to be surprised that so narrow a chest and so slight a frame could produce such a powerful organ-toned bass.
He was  fanatical about his job and had even designed the most appropriate clothes for searching: white shorts and a sweat shirt, a plastic swimming cap, tight fitting to prevent the spilling of hairs, latex gloves as fine as a surgeon's and rubber bathing shoes over his bare feet.
His creed was that no murderer ever left the scene of a crime without leaving some physical evidence of his crime behind him.
If it were there, Ferris would find it.
There were voices in the passage.
The photographer and fingerprint officers had arrived.
Dalgliesh could hear George Matthews's booming voice cursing the traffic in Harrow Road and Sergeant Robins's quieter answer.
Someone laughed.
They were neither callous nor particularly insensitive, but neither were they undertakers, required to assume a professional reverence in the face of death.
The forensic biologist hadn't yet arrived.
Some of the most distinguished scientists at the Metropolitan Laboratory were women and Dalgliesh, recognizing in himself an old-fashioned sensitivity which he certainly wouldn't have confessed to them, was always glad when it was possible to remove the more horrific bodies before they arrived to track and photograph the bloodstains and supervise the collection of samples.
He left Massingham to greet and brief the new arrivals.
It was time to talk to Father Barnes.
But first he wanted a word with Darren before the boy was driven home.
Sergeant Robins said:
‘He'd have been gone by now, sir, but the little devil's been playing us up.
We couldn't get an address out of him, and when he did come up with one it was wrong, a non-existent road.
Could have been a bloody waste of time.
I think he's telling the truth now but I had to threaten him with the Juvenile Bureau, the Welfare and God knows  what before he did.
And then he tried to give us the slip and run off.
I was lucky to grab him.’
Miss Wharton had already been driven back to Crowhurst Gardens by a WPC, there to be solaced no doubt with tea and sympathy.
She had made gallant efforts to pull herself together but had still been confused about the precise sequence of events between arriving at the church and the moment when she had pushed open the door of the Little Vestry.
The important fact for the police to ascertain was whether she or Darren had actually entered the room with the risk that the scene had been contaminated.
Both were adamant that they had not.
Beyond this there was little of importance which she could tell and Dalgliesh had briefly heard her story and let her go.
But it was irritating that Darren was still with them.
If he needed to be questioned again it was right that it should be at home and with his parents present.
Dalgliesh knew that his present insouciance in the face of death was no guarantee that the horror hadn't touched him.
It wasn't always an obvious trauma which disturbed a child the most.
And it was odd that the boy was so resistant to being driven home.
Normally, a ride in a car, even a police car, would be something of a treat for a child particularly now that a gratifying crowd was beginning to collect to witness his notoriety, drawn by the yards of white tape which sealed off the whole of the south part of the church and by the police cars and the unmistakable black and sinister mortuary van parked between the church wall and the canal.
Dalgliesh went up to the car and opened the door.
He said:
‘I'm Commander Dalgliesh.
It's time we got you home, Darren.
Your mother will be worried.’
And surely the boy should be at school.
The term must have started.
But that, thank God, was hardly his concern.
Darren, looking small and extremely disgruntled, was slumped in the front left-hand seat.
He was an odd-looking child with an engaging monkey-like face, pale under the rash of freckles, snub-nosed and bright-eyed beneath the spiked almost colourless lashes.
He and Sergeant Robins had obviously tried each other 's patience to the limits, but  he cheered up at the sight of Dalgliesh and enquired with childish belligerence:
‘You the boss man round here?’
A little disconcerted, Dalgliesh replied cautiously:
‘You could say that.’
Darren looked round with bright suspicious eyes, then said:
‘She never did it, Miss Wharton.
She's innercent.’
Dalgliesh said, seriously:
‘No, we didn't think she did.
You see, it needed more strength than an elderly lady or a boy could have.
You're both in the clear.’
‘Yeah, that's all right then.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘You're fond of her?’
‘She's all right.
She wants lookin' after, mind you.
She's daft.
She hasn't got the sense she was born with.
I keep an eye on her, like.’
‘I think she relies on you.
It was lucky you were together when you found the bodies.
It must have been horrible for her.’
‘Turned her up proper.
She don't like blood, you see.
That's why she won't have a coloured TV.
She makes out she can't afford it.
That's daft.
She's always buying flowers for that BVM.’
‘BVM?’ said Dalgliesh, his mind scurrying after some unrecognized make of car.
‘That statue in the church.
The lady in blue with the candles in front of her.
They're called BVMs.
She's always puttin' flowers there and lightin' candles.
Ten pee, they are.
Five pee for the small ones.’
His eyes shifted as if he had been lured on to dangerous ground.
He added quickly:
‘I reckon she won't have a coloured TV 'cause she don't like the colour of blood.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘I think you're probably right.
You've been very helpful to us, Darren.
And you're quite sure that you didn't go into that room, either of you?’
‘Naw, I told yer.
I was behind 'er all the time.’
But the question had been unwelcome and for the first time some of his cockiness seemed to have drained from him.
He slumped back in his seat and stared resentfully through the windscreen.
Dalgliesh went back into the church and found Massingham.
‘I want you to go home with Darren.
I've a feeling there's something he's keeping back.
It might not be important but it would be helpful to have you there when he talks to his parents.
You've got brothers, you know about small boys.’
Massingham said, ‘You want me to go now, sir?’
‘Obviously.’
Dalgliesh knew that the order was unwelcome.
Massingham hated to leave a scene of crime even temporarily while the body was still there, and he would go the more unwillingly because Kate Miskin, back now from Campden Hill Square, was to stay.
But if he had to go he would go alone.
He ordered the police driver out of the car.
with unusual curtness and drove off at a speed which suggested that Darren was about to enjoy a gratifyingly exciting ride.
Dalgliesh passed through the grille door into the body of the church, turning to close it gently behind him.
But even so the soft clang rang sharply in the silence and echoed around him as he made his way down the nave.
Behind him out of sight, but always present to the mind, was the apparatus of his trade; lights, cameras, equipment, a busy silence broken only by voices unhushed and confident in the presence of death.
But here, guarded by the elegant whorls and bars of wrought iron, was another world as yet uncontaminated.
The smell of incense strengthened and he saw ahead a haze of gold where the gleaming mosaics of the apse stained the air and the great figure of Christ in glory, his wounded hands stretched out, glared down the nave with cavernous eyes.
Two more of the nave lights had been switched on but the church was still dim compared with the harsh glare of the arc lights trained on the scene and it took him a minute to locate Father Barnes, a dark shape at the end of the first row of chairs under the pulpit.
He walked up to him, aware of the ring of his feet on the tiled floor, wondering whether they sounded as portentous to the priest as they did to him.
Father Barnes was sitting bolt upright on his chair, his eyes staring ahead at the gleaming curve of the apse, his body taut and contracted, like that of a patient expecting pain, willing himself to endure.
He didn't turn his head as Dalgliesh approached.
He had obviously been summoned in a hurry.
His face was unshaved and the hands, rigidly clamped together in his lap, were grubby, as if he had gone to bed unwashed.
The cassock, whose long black lines etiolated still further his lean body, was old and stained with what looked like gravy.
One spot he had tried ineffectively to rub away.
His black shoes were unpolished, the leather cracked at the sides, the toes scruffed into greyness.
There came from him a smell, half-musty, half disagreeably sweet, of old clothes and incense, overlaid with stale sweat, a smell which was a pitiable amalgam of failure and fear.
As Dalgliesh eased his long limbs in the adjoining chair and rested his arm along its back, it seemed to him that his body encompassed and, by its own calm presence, gently eased a core of fear and tension in his companion, so strong that it was almost palpable.
He felt a sudden compunction.
The man would, of course, have come fasting to the first Mass of the day.
He would be craving hot coffee and food.
Normally someone at or near the scene would be brewing tea but Dalgliesh had-no intention of using the washroom even to boil a kettle until the scene of crime officer had done his work.
He said:
‘I won't keep you long, Father.
There are just a few questions and we'll let you go back to the Vicarage.
This must have been a horrible shock to you.’
Father Barnes still didn't look at him.
He said in a low voice:
‘A shock.
Yes, it was a shock.
I shouldn't have let him have the key.
I don't know really why I did.
It isn't easy to explain.’
The voice was unexpected.
It was low with an agreeable trace of huskiness and with a hint of more power  than the frail body would suggest; not an educated voice but one on which education had imposed a discipline which hadn't quite obliterated the provincial, probably East Anglian, accent of childhood.
He turned now to Dalgliesh and said again:
‘They'll say I'm responsible.
I shouldn't have let him have the key.
I'm to blame.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘You aren't responsible.
You know that perfectly well and so will they.’
The ubiquitous, frightening, judgemental ‘they’.
He thought, but did not say, that murder provided its own dreadful excitement for those who neither mourned nor were directly concerned and that people were commonly indulgent to those who helped provide the entertainment.
Father Barnes would be surprised — agreeable or otherwise — by the size of next Sunday's congregation.
He said:
‘Could we start at the beginning?
When did you first meet Sir Paul Berowne?’
‘Last Monday, just over a week ago.
He called at the Vicarage at about half past two and asked if he could see the church.
He'd come here first and found he couldn't get in.
We'd like to keep the church open all the time but you know how it is today.
Vandals, people trying to break open the offertory box, stealing the candles.
There's a note in the north porch saying that the key is at the Vicarage.’
‘I suppose he didn't say what he was doing in Paddington?’
‘Yes, he did, actually.
He said that an old friend was in St Mary's Hospital and he'd been to see him.
But the patient was having treatment and couldn't see visitors so he had an hour to spare.
He said he'd always wanted to see St Matthew's.’
So that was how it had started.
Berowne's life, like that of all busy men, was dominated by the clock.
He had set aside an hour to visit an old friend.
The hour had become unexpectedly available for a private indulgence.
He was known to be interested in Victorian architecture.
However fantastic the labyrinth into which that impulse had  led him, his first visit to St Matthew's at least had had the comforting stamp of normality and reason.
Dalgliesh said:
‘Did you offer to accompany him?’
‘Yes, I offered but he said not to trouble.
I didn't press it.
I thought he might want to be alone.’
So, Father Barnes was not without sensitivity.
Dalgliesh said:
‘So you gave him the key.
Which key?’
‘The spare one.
There are only three to the south porch.
Miss Wharton has one and I keep the other two at the Vicarage.
There are two keys on each ring, one to the south door and a smaller key which opens the door in the grille.
If Mr Capstick or Mr Pool want a key — they're our two churchwardens — they come to the Vicarage.
It's quite close, you see.
There's only one key to the main north door.
I always keep that in my study.
I never lend it out in case it gets lost.
It's too heavy, anyway, for general use.
I told Sir Paul that he would find a booklet describing the church in the bookstand.
It was written by Father Collins and we've always meant to revise it.
It's over there on the table by the north porch.
We only charge three pence.’
He turned his head painfully, like an arthritic patient, as if inviting Dalgliesh to buy a copy.
The gesture was pathetic and rather appealing.
He went on:
‘I think he must have taken one because two days later I found a five pound note in the box.
Most people just put in three pence.’
‘Did he tell you who he was?’
‘He said his name was Paul Berowne.
I'm afraid it didn't mean anything to me at the time.
He didn't say he was an MP or a baronet, nothing like that.
Of course, after he'd resigned I knew who he was.
It was in the papers and on the television.’
Again there was a pause.
Dalgliesh waited.
After a few seconds the voice began again, stronger now and more resolute.
‘I suppose he was away about an hour, perhaps less.
Then he returned the key.
He said he would like to sleep that night in the Little Vestry.
Of course he didn't know it  was called that.
He said in the small room with the bed.
The bed has been there since Father Collins's time, in the war.
He used to sleep in the church during air raids so that he could put out the fire bombs.
We've never taken it away.
It's useful if people feel ill during services or if I want to rest before midnight Mass.
It doesn't take up much room.
It's only a narrow collapsible bed.
Well, you've seen it.
‘Yes.
Did he give any reason?’
‘No.
He made it sound quite an ordinary request and I didn't like to ask why.
He wasn't a man you could cross-question.
I did ask what about sheets, a pillowcase.
He said he'd bring anything he needed.’
He had brought one double sheet and had slept between it, doubled over.
Otherwise he had used the existing old army blanket folded beneath him and on top the blanket of multicoloured woollen squares.
The pillowcase on what was obviously a chair cushion was also presumably his.
Dalgliesh asked:
‘Did he take the key away with him then or call back for it that night?’
‘He called back for it.
That must have been about eight o'clock or a little earlier.
He was standing at the door of the Vicarage carrying a grip.
I don't think he came by car.
I didn't see one.
I gave him the key.
I didn't see him again until next morning.’
‘Tell me about the next morning.’
‘I used the south door as usual.
It was locked.
The door to the Little Vestry was open and I could see that he wasn't there.
The bed was made up very tidily.
Everything was tidy.
There was a sheet and a pillowcase folded on top.
I looked through the grille into the church.
The lights weren't on but I could just see him.
He was sitting in this row, a little further along.
I went into the vestry and robed for the Mass, then through the grille door into the church.
When he saw that Mass was to be in the Lady Chapel he moved across and sat in the back row.
He didn't speak.
No one else was there.
It wasn't Miss Wharton's morning and Mr Capstick, who likes to come to the nine thirty  Mass, had influenza.
There were just the two of us.
When I'd finished the first prayer and turned to face him, I saw that he was kneeling.
He took Communion.
Afterwards, we walked together to the Little Vestry.
He handed me back the key, thanked me, picked up his grip and left.’
‘And that was all on that first occasion?’
Father Barnes turned and looked at him.
In the dimness of the church his face looked lifeless.
Dalgliesh saw in his eyes a mixture of entreaty, resolution, and pain.
There was something he feared to say yet needed to confide.
Dalgliesh waited.
He was used to waiting.
At last Father Barnes spoke.
‘No, there is something.
When he lifted his hands and I placed the wafer in his palms — I thought I saw —’ he paused then went on, ‘there were marks, wounds.
I thought I saw stigmata.’
Dalgliesh fixed his eyes on the pulpit.
The painted figure of a Pre-Raphaelite angel carrying a single lily, its yellow hair crimped under the wide halo, looked back at him with its bland, uncurious gaze.
He asked:
‘On his palms?’
‘No.
On his wrists.
He was wearing a shirt and a pull-over.
The cuffs were a little loose.
They slipped back.
That's when I saw.’
‘Have you told anyone else about this?’
‘No, only you.’
For a full minute neither of them spoke.
In all his career as a detective Dalgliesh couldn't remember a piece of information from a witness more unwelcome and — there was no other word — more shocking.
His mind busied itself with images of what this news could do to his investigation if it ever became public; the newspaper headlines; the half-amused speculation of the cynics; the crowds of sightseers, the superstitious, the credulous, the genuine believers, thronging the church in search of…what?
A thrill, a new cult, hope, certainty?
But his distaste went deeper than irritation at an unwelcome complication to his inquiry, at the bizarre intrusion of irrationality into a job so firmly rooted in the search for evidence which would stand  up in court, documented, demonstrable, real.
He was shaken, almost physically, by an emotion far stronger than distaste and one of which he was half-ashamed; it seemed to him both ignoble and in itself hardly more rational than the event itself What he was feeling was a revulsion amounting almost to outrage.
He said:
‘I think you should continue to say nothing.
It isn't relevant to Sir Paul's death.
It isn't even necessary to include it in your statement.
If you do feel the need to confide in anyone, tell your bishop.’
Father Barnes said simply:
‘I shan't tell anyone else.
I think I did have a need to speak about it, to share it.
I've told you.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘The church was dimly lit.
You aid the lights weren't on.
You were fasting.
You could have imagined it.
Or it could have been a trick of the light.
And you saw the marks only for a couple of seconds when he lifted his palms to receive the Host.
You could have been mistaken.’
He thought: Who am I trying to reassure, him or me?
And then came the question which against reason he had to ask:
‘How did he look?
Different?
Changed?’
The priest shook his head then said, with great sadness:
‘You don't understand.
I wouldn't have recognized it, the difference, even if it had been there.’
Then he seemed to recover himself.
He went on resolutely:
‘Whatever it was I saw, if it was there, it didn't last long.
And it's not so very unusual.
It has been known before.
The mind works on the body in strange ways; an intense experience, a powerful dream.
And as you say the light was very dim.’
So Father Barnes didn't want to believe it either.
He was arguing it away.
Well that, thought Dalgliesh wryly, was better than a note in the parish magazine, a telephone call to the daily papers or a sermon next Sunday on the phenomenon of stigmata and the inscrutable wisdom of providence.
He was interested to find that they shared the  same distrust, perhaps the same revulsion.
Later there would be a time and a place to consider why this was so.
But now there were more immediate concerns.
Whatever had brought Berowne again to that vestry it had been a human hand, his or another's, which had wielded that razor.
He said:
‘What about yesterday night?
When did he ask you if he could come back?’
‘In the morning.
He rang shortly after nine.
I said I'd be in any time after six that evening and he came for the key precisely on the hour.’
‘Are you sure of the time, Father?’
‘Oh yes, I was watching the six o'clock news.
It had only just started when he rang the bell.’
‘And again, no explanation?’
‘No.
He was carrying the same grip.
I think he came by bus or underground or walked.
I didn't see a car.
I handed him the key at the door, the same key.
He thanked me and left.
I didn't come to the church that night, I had no reason to.
The next I knew was when the boy came for me and told me that there were two dead bodies in the Little Vestry.
You know the rest.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘Tell me about Harry Mack.’
The change of subject was obviously welcome and Father Barnes was voluble on the subject of Harry.
Poor Harry was a problem for St Matthew's.
For some reason, no one knew why, he had for the last four months taken to sleeping in the south porch.
He usually bedded down on newspapers and covered himself with an old blanket which he sometimes left in the porch, ready for the next night, and sometimes took away, rolled into a long wad and tied around his stomach with string.
Father Barnes, when he found the blanket, hadn't liked to remove it.
After all, it was Harry's only covering.
But it wasn't really convenient to have the porch used as a shelter or as a storage for Harry's odd and rather smelly belongings.
The Parochial Church Council had actually discussed whether they ought to install railings and a gate, but that had seemed uncharitable  and there were more important things to spend their money on.
They had difficulty in meeting their diocesan quota as it was.
They had all tried to help Harry, but he wasn't easy.
He was known at the Wayfarers' Refuge in Cosway Street in St Marylebone, an excellent place, where he usually got a midday meal and medical attention for minor ailments when he needed it.
He was a little too fond of drink and would occasionally get into fights.
St Matthew's had liaised with the Refuge about Harry but they hadn't known what to suggest.
They had tried to persuade Harry to have a bed in their dormitory but he wouldn't agree.
He couldn't bear the intimate contact with other people.
He wouldn't even eat his dinner at the refuge.
He'd put it between slabs of bread then take it away to eat in the streets.
The porch was his place, snug, south-facing, out of public view.
Dalgliesh said:
‘So he's not likely to have knocked on the door yesterday evening and asked Sir Paul to let him in.’
‘Oh no, Harry wouldn't have done that.’
But somehow he had got in.
Perhaps he'd already settled down under his blanket when Berowne arrived.
Berowne had asked him in out of the cold to share his meal.
But how had he persuaded Harry?
He asked Father Barnes what he thought.
‘It must have happened that way, I suppose.
Harry could already have been here in the porch.
He usually dosses down fairly early.
And it was unexpectedly cold last night for September.
But it's very odd.
There must have been something about Sir Paul that gave him confidence.
He wouldn't have done it for most people.
Even the warden at the Refuge, so experienced with the city's derelicts, couldn't persuade Harry to spend the night there.
But they only have the dormitory, of course.
It was sleeping or eating with other people Harry couldn't stand.’
And here, thought Dalgliesh, he had had the larger vestry to himself.
It could have been the assurance of that  privacy and, perhaps, the promise of food which had persuaded him in from the cold.
He asked:
‘When were you last here in the church, Father?
I'm talking about yesterday.’
‘From four thirty till about quarter past five, when I read Evensong in the Lady Chapel.’
‘And when you locked up after you, how certain could you be that there was no one here, perhaps hidden?
Obviously you didn't search the church.
Why should you?
But if someone were hiding here, would you have been likely to have seen him?’
‘I think so.
You see how it is.
We've no high pews, only the chairs.
There's nowhere he could have hidden.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘Perhaps under the altar, the high altar or in the Lady Chapel?
Or in the pulpit?’
‘Under the altar?
It's a horrible thought, sacrilege.
But how could he have got in?
I found the church locked when I arrived at four thirty.’
‘And no one had collected the keys during the day, not even the churchwardens?’
‘No one.’
And Miss Wharton had assured the police that her key hadn't left her handbag.
He said:
‘Could anyone have got in during Evensong?
Perhaps while you were praying?
Were you alone in the Lady Chapel?’
‘Yes.
I came in by the south door as usual and locked both it and the door in the grille after me.
Then I unlocked the main door.
That would be the natural way in for any stranger wanting to attend a service.
My people know that I always unlock the main door for Evensong and it's very heavy.
It squeaks dreadfully.
We're always meaning to oil it.
I don't think anyone could have entered without my hearing.’
‘Did you tell any other person that Sir Paul was spending the night here yesterday?’
‘Oh no.
There wasn't anyone to tell.
And I wouldn't have said anything.
He didn't ask for secrecy; he didn't  ask for anything.
But I don't think he would have liked another person to know.
No one else knew anything about him, not until this morning.’
Dalgliesh went on to question him about the blotter and the spent match.
Father Barnes said that the Little Vestry had last been used two days ago on Monday the sixteenth when the Parochial Church Council had met as usual at five thirty, immediately after Evensong.
He had presided, sitting at the desk, but hadn't used the blotter.
He always wrote with a biro.
He hadn't been aware of any recent marks but, then, he wasn't very clever at noticing that kind of detail.
He was sure that the match couldn't have been left there by anyone in the PCC.
Only George Capstick smoked and he used a pipe which he lit with a lighter.
But he hadn't been at the PCC because of recovering, still, from the flu.
People had remarked how pleasant it was not to be enveloped in smoke.
Dalgliesh said:
‘These are small details and probably of no importance.
But I would be grateful if you would keep them to yourself And I'd like you to have a look at the blotter and see whether you can remember what it looked like on Monday.
And we've found a rather dirty enamel mug.
It would be helpful to know if that belonged to Harry.’
Seeing Father Barnes's face, he added:
‘You won't need to go back into the Little Vestry.
When the photographer has finished we'll bring out the items to you.
And then I expect you'll be glad to get back to the Vicarage.
We shall need a statement later, but that can wait.’
They sat for a minute in silence as if what had passed between them needed to be assimilated in peace.
So here, thought Dalgliesh, lay the secret of Berowne's quixotic decision to give up his job.
It had been something more profound, less explicable, than disillusionment, mid-life restlessness, the fear of a threatened scandal.
Whatever had happened to him on that first night in St Matthew's vestry had led him, the next day, to change the whole direction of his life.
Had it also led him to his death?
As they both got up they heard the clang of the grille  door.
Inspector Miskin was walking down the aisle.
When she came up to them she said:
‘The pathologist has arrived, sir.’
Lady Ursula Berowne sat immobile in her sitting room on the fourth floor of 62 Campden Hill Square and gazed out over the top boughs of the plane trees as if at some far distant unseeable vista.
It seemed to her that her mind was like an overfilled glass which only she could hold steady.
One jerk, one shudder, one small loss of control and it would spill over into a chaos so terrible that it could only end in death.
It was strange, she thought, that her physical response to shock should be the same now as it had been after Hugo was killed, so that to her present grief was added a grief for him as keen, as new as when she had first heard that he was dead.
And the physical symptoms had been the same; a raging thirst, her body parched and shrivelled, her mouth dry and sour as if infected with her own breath.
Mattie had brewed her pot after pot of strong coffee which she had gulped down scalding hot, black, unaware of its oversweetness.
Afterwards she had said:
‘I would like something to eat, something salty.
Anchovy toast.’
She had thought: I'm like a woman pregnant with grief, subject to odd fancies.
But that was over now.
Mattie had wanted to put a shawl over her shoulders, but she had shrugged it off and demanded to be left alone.
She thought: There is a world outside this body, this pain.
I shall take hold of it again.
I shall survive.
I must survive.
Seven years, ten at the most, that's all I need.
Now she waited, husbanding strength for the first of many visitors.
But this was someone she herself had summoned.
There were things which had to be said to him and there might not be much time.
Shortly after eleven she heard the doorbell ring, then  he groaning of the lift and a soft clatter as the grille door closed.
The door of her sitting room opened and Stephen Lampart came quietly in.
It seemed to her important that she should meet him standing.
But she couldn't restrain the grimace of pain as her arthritic hip took the weight and she knew that the hand grasping the knob of her cane was trembling.
Immediately he was at her side.
He said:
‘Oh no.
Please, you mustn't.’
With one firm hand on her arm he solicitously helped her back into the chair.
She disliked casual touching, the assumption of acquaintances or strangers that her disablement entitled them to handle her, as if her body were a despised encumbrance which it was proper gently to push and pull into place.
She wanted to shrug off his firm, proprietorial grasp but managed to resist.
But she couldn't prevent the tightening of her muscles at his touch and she knew that he hadn't missed this instinctive revulsion.
When he had settled her, gently and with professional competence, he seated himself in the chair opposite.
They were separated by a low table.
A circle of polished rosewood established his dominance; strength against weakness, youth against age, doctor and subservient patient.
Except that she wasn't his patient.
He said:
‘I believe you're waiting for a hip replacement.’
It was Barbara, of course, who had told him, but he wouldn't be the first one to mention her name.
‘Yes, I'm on the list of the orthopaedic hospital.’
‘Forgive me, but why not go private?
Aren't you suffering unnecessarily?’
It was, she thought, an almost indecently incongruous remark with which to begin a visit of condolence; or was this his way of confronting her grief and stoicism by taking refuge on professional ground, the only one on which he felt confident and could speak with authority?
She said:
‘I prefer to be treated as a National Health patient.
I enjoy my privileges but that is one I don't happen to want.’
He smiled gently, humouring a child.
‘It seems a little masochistic.’
‘Possibly.
But I haven't called you here for a professional opinion.’
‘Which as an obstetrician I wouldn't, in any case, be competent to give.
Lady Ursula, this news about Paul is horrifying, unbelievable.
Shouldn't you have sent for your own doctor?
Or a friend?
You should have someone with you.
It's wrong for you to be alone at a time like this.’
She said:
‘I have Mattie if I need the usual palliatives, coffee, alcohol, warmth.
At 82, the few people one might wish to see are all dead.
I have outlived both my sons.
That is the worst thing that can happen to a human being.
I have to endure it.
But I don't have to talk about it.’
She could have added: ‘least of all with you’ and it seemed to her that the words, unspoken, hung on the air between them.
He was for a moment silent as if considering them, accepting their justice.
Then he said:
‘I would, of course, have called on you later even if you hadn't telephoned.
But I wasn't sure that you'd want to see anyone so soon.
You got my letter?’
He must have written it as soon as Barbara had telephoned the news and had sent it round by one of his nurses who, in a hurry to get home after night duty, hadn't even stopped to hand it in but had slipped it through the letter box.
He had used all the obvious adjectives.
He hadn't needed a thesaurus to decide on the appropriate response.
Murder, after all, was appalling, terrible, horrific, unbelievable, an outrage.
But the letter, a social obligation too promptly performed, had lacked conviction.
And he should have known better than to have his secretary type it.
But that, she thought, was typical.
Scrape away the carefully acquired patina of professional success, prestige, orthodox good manners, and the real man was there; ambitious, a little vulgar, sensitive only when sensitivity paid.
But much of this, she knew, was prejudice and prejudice was dangerous.
She must be careful to betray it as little as possible if the interview were to go the way she wanted.
And it was hardly fair to criticize the letter.
Dictating condolences to the mother of a murdered husband whom you've been cuckolding for the last three years would take more than his limited social vocabulary.
She hadn't seen him for nearly three months and she was struck anew by his good looks.
He had been an attractive youth, tall, rather ungainly, with a thatch of black hair.
But now the gangling figure had been smoothed and tailored by success, he carried his height with easy assurance and the grey eyes — which he knew so well how to use — held a basic wariness.
His hair, frosted now with grey, was still thick with an unruliness that expensive cutting still hadn't completely disciplined.
It added to his attractiveness, hinting at an untamed individuality which was far removed from the tedium of conventional male good looks.
He leaned forward and looked across at her intently, his grey eyes softened with sympathy.
She found herself resenting his easy assumption of professional concern.
But he did it very well.
She almost expected him to say, ‘We did all we could, all that was humanly possible.’
When she told herself that the concern could be genuine.
She had to resist the temptation to underrate him, to stereotype him as the handsome, experienced seducer of cheap fiction.
Whatever he was, he wasn't as uncomplicated as that.
No human being could be.
And he was, after all, acknowledged as a fine gynaecologist.
He worked hard, he knew his job.
When Hugo was at Balliol, Stephen Lampart had been his closest friend.
She had liked him in those days and some of that liking still remained, resented, only half-acknowledged, but bound up with memories of sunlit walks in Port Meadow, luncheon and laughter in Hugo's rooms, with the years of hope and promise.
He had been the clever, handsome, ambitious boy from a lower-middle-class home, likeable, amusing, buying himself into the company he wanted by looks and wit, clever at concealing the itch of ambition.
Hugo had been the privileged one, his mother an earl's daughter, his father a baronet and a distinguished soldier, possessor of the Berowne name, inheritor of what remained of the Berowne money.
For the first time she  found herself wondering whether he had resented not only Hugo but all the family, and whether that subsequent betrayal could have had long roots in the soil of an old envy.
She said:
‘There are two things we have to discuss and there may not be much time or another opportunity.
Perhaps I ought to say first that I didn't ask you here to criticize my daughter-in-law for infidelity.
I'm not in a position to criticize anyone's sexual life.’
The grey eyes grew cautious.
He said:
‘How wise of you.
Few of us are.’
‘But my son was murdered.
The police will know that soon if they don't already.
And I know it now.’
He said:
‘Forgive me, but can you be sure?
All Barbara could tell me when she rang this morning was that the police had found Paul's body and that of a tramp,’ he paused, ‘with injuries to their throats.’
‘Their throats were cut.
Both their throats.
And from the careful tact with which the news was broken, I imagine that the weapon was one of Paul's razors.
I suppose Paul could have been capable of killing himself.
Most of us are, given sufficient pain.
But what he wasn't capable of was killing that tramp.
My son was murdered, and that means that there are certain facts the police will make it their business to discover.’
He asked, calmly:
‘What facts, Lady Ursula?’
‘That you and Barbara are lovers.’
The hands clasped loosely in his lap tightened then relaxed.
But he was still able to meet her eyes.
‘I see.
Was it Paul or Barbara who told you that?’
‘Neither.
But I've lived in the same house with my daughter-in-law for four years.
I'm a woman.
I may be crippled but I have the use of my eyes and my intelligence.’
‘How is she, Lady Ursula?’
‘I don't know.
But before you leave I suggest that you make it your business to find out.
I've only seen my  daughter-in-law for three minutes since I got the news.
She is, apparently, too distressed to talk to visitors.
It seems that I count as a visitor.’
‘Is that quite fair?
Sometimes other people's grief is harder to bear, to face, than one's own.’
‘Particularly if one's own isn't acute?’
He leaned forward and said quietly:
‘I don't think we have any right to assume that.
Barbara's feelings may not be intense but Paul was her husband.
She cared for him, probably more than either of us understand.
This is a horrible business for her, for all of us.
Look, do we have to talk now?
We're both in shock.’
‘We have to talk and there isn't much time.
Commander Adam Dalgliesh is coming to see me as soon as they've finished with whatever it is they're doing at the church.
Presumably he'll want to interview Barbara, too.
In time, probably sooner than later, they'll get round to you.
I have to know what you propose to tell them.’
‘This Adam Dalgliesh, isn't he some kind of poet?
An odd hobby for a policeman.’
‘If he's as good a detective as he is a poet, he's a dangerous man.
Don't underestimate the police because of what you read in the upmarket papers.’
He said:
‘I don't underestimate the police, but I've no reason to fear them.
I know that they combine a macho enthusiasm for selective violence with a rigid adherence to middle-class morality, but you aren't seriously suggesting that they'll suspect me of cutting Paul's throat because I go to bed with his wife?
They may be out of touch with social reality but, surely, not that much out of touch.’
She thought: This is more like it, this is the real man.
She said calmly:
‘I'm not saying they'll suspect you.
I've no doubt you'll be able to provide a satisfactory alibi for last evening.
But it will cause less trouble if neither of you lies about your relationship.
I'd prefer not to have to lie about it myself Naturally, I shan't volunteer the information.
But it is possible that they will ask.’
‘And why should they, Lady Ursula?’
‘Because Commander Dalgliesh will liaise with Special Branch.
My son was a Minister of the Crown, however briefly.
Do you suppose there's anything about a minister's private life, particularly a minister in that Department, which isn't known to those people whose business it is to discover and document this kind of potential scandal?
What sort of world do you think we're living in?’
He got up and began slowly pacing in front of her.
He said:
‘I suppose I ought to have thought of that.
I would have thought of it given time.
Paul's death has been such an appalling shock.
I don't think my mind is working properly yet.’
‘Then I suggest that it begins working.
You and Barbara have to agree on your story.
Better still, agree to tell the truth.
I take it that Barbara was your mistress when you first introduced her to Hugo and that she remained your mistress after Hugo was killed and she married Paul.’
He stopped and turned to her.
‘Believe me, Lady Ursula, it wasn't intended, it wasn't like that.’
‘You mean that she and you graciously decided to abstain from your sexual liaison, at least until the honeymoon was over?’
He came and stood in front of her and looked down.
‘I think there's something I ought to say but I'm afraid it isn't, well, gentlemanly.’
She thought but did not speak: That word is meaningless now.
With you it probably always was.
Before 1914, one could talk like that without sounding false or ridiculous, but not now.
That word and the world it represented have gone for ever, trodden into the mud of Flanders.
She said:
‘My son's throat was cut.
In the light of that brutality I don't think we need concern ourselves about gentility, spurious or otherwise.
It's about Barbara, of course.’
‘Yes.
There's something you ought to understand if you don't already.
I may be her lover but she doesn't love me.
She certainly doesn't want to marry me.
She's as satisfied  with me as she can be with any man.
That's because I understand her needs and I don't make demands.
Not many demands.
We all make some.
And, of course, I'm in love with her as far as I'm capable of loving anyone.
That's necessary to her.
And she feels safe with me.
But she wouldn't get rid of a perfectly good husband and a title to marry me.
Not by divorce.
Certainly not by conniving at murder.
You have to believe that if you and she are going to go on living together.’
She said:
‘That at least was frank.
You seem well suited to each other.’
He accepted the subtle insult behind the irony.
‘Oh yes,’ he said sadly, ‘we suit each other.’
He added, ‘I suspect she doesn't even feel particularly guilty.
Less so than I do, oddly enough.
It's difficult to take adultery seriously if you're not getting much pleasure out of it.’
‘Your role must be exhausting and hardly satisfying.
I admire your self-sacrifice.’
His smile was reminiscent, secretive.
‘She's so beautiful.
It's absolute, isn't it?
It doesn't even depend on whether she's well or happy or not tired or on what she wears.
It's always there.
You can't blame me for trying.’
‘Oh yes,’ she said, ‘I can, and I do.’
But she knew that she was being less than honest.
All her life she had been beguiled by physical beauty in men and in women.
It was what she had lived by.
When, in 1918, with her brother and fiance both killed, she, an earl's daughter, had gone on the stage in defiance of tradition, what else had she to offer?
Not, she thought with wry honesty, any great dramatic talent.
She had, almost casually and instinctively, demanded physical beauty in her lovers and had been unjealous and over-indulgent of it in her women friends.
They had been the more surprised when, at the age of 32, she had married Sir Henry Berowne, apparently for less obvious qualities, and had given him two sons.
She thought now of her daughter-in-law as she had watched her many times, standing motionless  in front of the glass in the hall.
Barbara was incapable of passing a mirror without that moment of narcissistic stillness, that calm reflective gaze.
What had she been watching for?
That first droop from the corner of the eyes, the fading blue, the dry fold of skin, the first crêping of the neck which would show how transitory it was, this over-prized perfection.
He was still restlessly pacing, still talking.
‘Barbara likes to feel that attention is being paid to her.
You have to admit that about the sexual act.
Attention, specific and intense, is certainly being paid.
She needs men to desire her.
She doesn't much want them actually to touch her.
If she thought I had a hand in killing Paul she wouldn't thank me.
I don't think she'd forgive me.
And she certainly wouldn't protect me.
I'm sorry.
I've been too frank.
But I think it had to be said.’
‘Yes, it had to be said.
Who would she protect?’
‘Her brother, possibly, but not, I should have thought for long and certainly not at any risk to herself.
They've never been particularly close.’
She said dryly:
‘No sibling loyalty will be demanded of her.
Dominic Swayne was here in this house with Mattie for the whole of yesterday evening.’
‘Is that his story or hers?’
‘Are you accusing him of having a hand in my son's death?’
‘Of course not.
The idea is ridiculous.
And if Mattie says he was with her, I've no doubt he was.
We all know that Mattie is a model of rectitude.
You asked me if there was anyone Barbara would protect, I can think of no one else.’
He had stopped his pacing now and sat down again opposite to her.
He said:
‘Your reasons for telephoning me.
You said there were two things we needed to discuss.’
‘Yes.
I should like to be sure that the child Barbara is carrying is my grandchild, not your bastard.’
His shoulders stiffened.
For a moment, it could have been a second only, he sat rigidly gazing down at his clasped hands.
In the silence she heard the ticking of the carriage clock.
Then he looked up.
He was still calm but she thought that his face was paler.
‘Oh, there's no doubt about that.
No possible doubt.
I had a vasectomy three years ago.
I'm not suited to fatherhood and I hadn't any wish to be made ridiculous by paternity suits.
I can give you the name of my surgeon if you want proof.
That's probably simpler than relying on blood tests once he's born.’
‘He?’
‘Oh yes, it's a boy.
Barbara had an amniocentesis.
Your son wanted an heir and he's going to get an heir.
Didn't you know?’
She sat for a moment in silence.
Then she said:
‘Isn't that a risky procedure for the foetus, particularly so early in the pregnancy?’
‘Not with the new techniques and in expert hands.
And I saw that she was in expert hands.
No, not mine.
I'm not that kind of fool.’
She asked:
‘Did Paul know about the child before he died?’
‘Barbara hasn't said.
I imagine not.
After all, she's only just heard of it herself.’
‘The pregnancy?
Surely not.’
‘No, the sex of the child.
I rang and told her first thing yesterday morning.
But Paul may have suspected that there was a child on the way.
After all, he did go back to that church, presumably to ask his God for further and better instructions.’
She was seized by an anger so intense that, for a moment, she couldn't speak.
And when her voice did come it quavered like the voice of an old, impotent woman.
But at least her words could sting.
She said:
‘You never could resist it, even as a boy, the temptation to combine vulgarity with what you imagined was wit.
Whatever happened to my son in that church, and I don't pretend to understand it, in the end he died because of it.
When next you're tempted to indulge in a cheap witticism you might remember that.’
His own voice was low and as cold as steel.
‘I'm sorry.
I thought from the beginning that this conversation was a mistake.
We're both too shocked to be rational.
And now, if you'll excuse me, I'll go down to see Barbara before the police descend on her.
She's alone I take it?’
‘As far as I know she is.
Anthony Farrell should be arriving soon.
I sent for him to his private address as soon as I got the news but he has to get up from Winchester.’
‘The family lawyer?
Having him here when the police arrive — won't that look suspicious?
Too like a necessary precaution?’
‘He's a family friend as well as a lawyer.
It's natural for both of us to want him here.
But I'm glad you're seeing her before he arrives.
Tell her to answer Dalgliesh's questions but not to volunteer information, any information.
I've no reason to suppose the police will take an unnecessarily dramatic view of what, after all, was common adultery.
But it isn't something they'll expect her to confide even if they know about it.
Too much candour looks as suspicious as too little.’
He asked:
‘Were you with her when the police broke the news?’
‘The police didn't break the news.
I did.
It seemed to me advisable in all the circumstances.
A competent woman officer told me first, then I went down alone to see Barbara.
She behaved very prettily.
Barbara has always known what emotion it is appropriate for her to feel.
And she's a good actress.
She should be.
She's had plenty of practice.
Oh, and another thing.
Tell her to say nothing about the child.
That's important.’
‘If it's what you want, what you think is wise.
But it could be helpful to mention the pregnancy.
They'd be particularly gentle with her.’
‘They'll be gentle.
They won't be sending a fool.’
They were speaking like confederates, precariously allied  in a conspiracy which neither would acknowledge.
She felt a cold disgust as physical as nausea and with it there swept over her a weakness which shrivelled her in her chair.
Immediately, she was aware of him at her side, of his fingers, gentle, firm, pressing her wrist.
She knew that she should have resented his touch, but now it comforted her.
She lay back, her eyes closed, and her pulse strengthened under his fingers.
He said:
‘Lady Ursula, you really should see your doctor.
Malcolm Hancock, isn't it?
Let me ring him.’
She shook her head.
‘I'm all right.
I can't cope with another person yet.
Until the police arrive I need to be alone.’
It was a confession of weakness which she hadn't expected to make, not to him and not at such a moment.
He walked to the door.
When his hand was on the knob she said:
‘There's one more thing.
What do you know about Theresa Nolan?’
‘No more than you, I imagine, probably less.
She only worked at Pembroke Lodge for four weeks and I hardly set eyes on her.
She nursed you, lived in this house, for over six.
And when she came to me she was already pregnant.’
‘And Diana Travers?’
‘Nothing, except that she was unwise enough to overeat, drink too much and then dive into the Thames.
As you must know, Barbara and I had left the Black Swan before she drowned.’
He was silent for a moment and then said, gravely:
‘I know what you're thinking about, that ludicrous article in the Paternoster Review .
Lady Ursula, may I give you some advice?
Paul's murder, if it is murder, is perfectly simple.
He let someone into that church, a thief, another derelict, a psychopath, and that person killed him.
Don't complicate his death which, God knows, is horrible enough, with old, irrelevant tragedies.
The police will have enough to get their teeth into without that.’
‘Are they both irrelevant?’
He didn't answer.
Instead he said:
‘Has Sarah been told?’
‘Not yet.
I tried to telephone her this morning at the flat but there was no reply.
She was probably out getting a paper.
I'll try again as soon as you leave.’
‘Would you like me to go round?
She is Paul's daughter, after all.
This will be a terrible shock to her.
She oughtn't to learn it from the police or the television news.’
‘She won't.
If necessary, I'll go round myself.’
‘But who will drive you?
Isn't Wednesday Halliwell's day off?’
‘There are taxis.’
She resented the way in which he seemed to be taking over, insinuating himself into the family as cunningly as he once had in Oxford.
And then, again, she reproached herself for unfairness.
He had never lacked his measure of kindness.
He said:
‘She ought to have time for preparation before the police burst in on her.’
Time for what? she wondered.
To make a decent pretence that she cared?
She didn't reply.
Suddenly she wanted him gone so urgently that it was all she could do not to order him to get out.
Instead she held out her hand.
Bending, he took it in his and then raised it to his lips.
The gesture, theatrical and ludicrously inappropriate disconcerted but did not disgust her.
After he had left, she found herself looking down at her thin, ring-encrusted fingers, at the age-mottled knuckles against which, briefly, his lips had rested.
Was the gesture a tribute to an old woman facing with dignity and courage a last tragedy?
Or had it been something more subtle, a pledge that, despite everything, they were allies, that he understood her priorities and would make them his?
Dalgliesh remembered a surgeon once telling him that Miles Kynaston had shown promise of becoming a brilliant diagnostician, but had given up general medicine for pathology at registrar level because he could no longer bear to watch human suffering.
The surgeon had sounded a note of amused condescension as though he were betraying a colleague's unfortunate weakness, wryly observed, which a more prudent man would have detected before beginning his medical training, or at least would have come to terms with before his second year.
It could, Dalgliesh thought, have been true.
Kynaston had fulfilled his promise, but now he applied his diagnostic skills to the unrepining dead, whose eyes couldn't implore him to offer hope, whose mouths could no longer cry out.
Certainly he had a taste for death.
Nothing about it disconcerted him; its messiness, its smell, the most bizarre of its trappings.
Unlike most doctors, he saw it, not as the final enemy, but as a fascinating enigma, each cadaver, which he would gaze at with the same intent look as he must once have fixed on his living patients, a new piece of evidence which might, if rightly interpreted, bring him closer to its central mystery.
Dalgliesh respected him more than any other pathologist with whom he had worked.
He came promptly when called, and was equally prompt reporting on a post-mortem.
He didn't indulge in the crude autopsy humour which some of his colleagues found necessary to bolster their social self-esteem; dinner guests could know themselves safe from distasteful anecdotes about carving knives or missing kidneys.
Above all he was good in the witness box, too good for some people.
Dalgliesh remembered the sour comment of a defending counsel after a verdict of guilty: ‘Kynaston's getting dangerously infallible with juries.
We don't want another Spilsbury.’
He never wasted time.
Even as he greeted Dalgliesh he was taking off his jacket and was drawing his fine latex  gloves over stubby-fingered hands which looked unnaturally white, almost bloodless.
He was tall and stolidly built, giving an impression of shambling clumsiness until one saw him working in a confined space when he would seem physically to contract and become compact, even graceful, moving about the body with the lightness and precision of a cat.
His face was fleshy, the dark hair receding from a high speckled forehead, the long upper lip as precisely curved as an arrowhead, and the full, heavily lidded eyes dark and very bright, giving his face a look of sardonic, humorous intelligence.
Now he squatted, toad-like, by Berowne's body, his hands hanging loosely in front of him, palely disembodied.
He gazed at the throat wounds with extraordinary concentration, but made no move to touch the body except to run his hand lightly over the back of the head, like a caress.
Then he said:
‘Who are they?’
‘Sir Paul Berowne, late MP and junior minister, and a tramp, Harry Mack.’
‘On the face of it, murder followed by suicide.
The cuts are textbook; two fairly superficial from left to right, then one above, swift, deep, severing the artery.
And the razor neatly to hand.
As I say, on the face of it obvious.
A little too obvious?’
Dalgliesh said:
‘I thought so.’
Kynaston stepped gingerly over the carpet to Harry, prancing on tiptoe like an inexpert dancer.
‘One cut.
Enough.
Again from left to right.
Which means that Berowne, if it were Berowne, stood behind him.‘
‘So why isn't Berowne's right shirt-sleeve soaked with blood?
All right, it's heavily bloodstained, his own or Harry's blood or both.
But if he killed Harry, wouldn't you expect a greater amount of soaking?’
‘Not if he turned up his shirt-sleeve first and took him from behind.’
‘And turned it down again before slitting his own throat?
Unlikely, surely.’
Kynaston said:
‘Forensic should be able to identify Harry's blood, or what could be Harry's blood, on the shirt-sleeve as well as Berowne's own.
There seem to be no visible stains between the bodies.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘Forensic have been over the carpet with the fibre-optic lamp.
They may get something.
And there is one discernible smudge under Harry's jacket and a trace of what looks like blood on the jacket lining immediately above it.’
He lifted the corner.
Both of them looked at the stain on the carpet in silence.
Dalgliesh said:
‘It was under the jacket when we found it.
That means it was there before Harry fell.
And if it proves to be Berowne's blood, then he died first, unless, of course, he staggered across to Harry after making one or more of the superficial cuts in his own throat.
As a theory, it strikes me as ludicrous.
If he were in the very act of cutting his own throat, how could Harry have stopped him?
So why bother to kill him?
But is it possible, medically possible?’
Kynaston looked at him.
Both knew the importance of the question.
He said:
‘After the first superficial cut, I'd say that it was.’
‘But would he still have had the strength to kill Harry?’
‘With his own throat partly cut?
Again, after that first superficial cut, I don't think one can rule it out.
He'd be in a state of high excitement, remember.
It's amazing what strength people do find.
After all, we're supposing that he was interrupted in the act of suicide.
Hardly the moment when a man is at his most rational.
But I can't be certain.
No one can.
You're asking the impossible, Adam.’
‘I was afraid so.
But it's too neat.’
‘Or you want to believe it's too neat.
How do you see it?’
‘From the position of the body I think he could have been sitting on the edge of the bed.
Assuming he was murdered, assuming that the murderer went first into the kitchen, then he could have crept back silently and attacked Berowne from behind.
A blow, a cord round the throat.
Or he grabs him by the hair, drags back the head, makes the first deep cut.
The others, the ones designed to look tentative, could have come afterwards.
So we look for any mark under the cuts, or for a bump on the back of the head.‘
Kynaston said:
‘There is a bump but it's small.
It could have been caused by the body falling.
But we'll know more at the PM.’
‘An alternative theory is that the killer knocked him out first, then went into the washroom to strip and came back for the final throat-cutting before Berowne had a chance to come round.
But that raises obvious objections.
He'd have to judge the force of the blow very carefully and you'd expect it to leave more than a slight bump.’
Kynaston said:
‘But it raises fewer objections than the first theory, that he came in half-naked and armed with a razor and yet there are no obvious signs that Berowne put up any resistance.’
‘He could have been taken by surprise.
He would expect his visitor to come back through the door to the kitchen.
It's possible that he tiptoed down the passage and came in by the main door.
That's the most likely theory, given the position of the body.’
Kynaston said:
‘You're assuming premeditation then?
That the killer knew he'd find a razor to hand?’
‘Oh yes.
If Berowne were murdered then the killing was premeditated.
But I'm theorizing in advance of the facts, the unforgivable sin.
All the same, there's something contrived about it, Miles.
It's too obvious, too neat.’
Kynaston said:
‘I'll finish the preliminary examination and then you can take them away.
I would normally do the PM first thing tomorrow but they aren't expecting me back at the hospital until Monday and the PM room is tied up until the afternoon.
Three thirty is the earliest.
Is that all right for your people?’
‘I don't know about the lab.
The sooner the better for us.’
Something in his voice alerted Kynaston.
He said:
‘Did you know him?’
Dalgliesh thought: this is going to come up again and again.
You knew him.
You're emotionally involved.
You don't want to see him as mad, a suicide, a killer.
He said:
‘Yes, I knew him slightly, mostly across a committee table.’
The words seemed to him grudging, almost a small treachery.
He said again:
‘Yes, I knew him.’
‘What was he doing here?’
‘He had some kind of religious quasi-mystical experience here in this room.
He may have been hoping to recapture it.
He'd arranged with the parish priest to stay the night here.
He gave no explanation.’
‘And Harry?’
‘It looks as if Berowne let him in.
He may have found him sleeping in the porch.
Apparently Harry couldn't tolerate being with other people.
There's evidence that he was proposing to sleep further along the passage in the larger vestry.’
Kynaston nodded and got down to his familiar routine.
Dalgliesh left him to it and went out into the passage.
Watching this violation of the body's orifices, preliminaries to the scientific brutality to follow, had always made him feel uncomfortably like a voyeur.
He had often wondered why he found it more offensive and ghoulish than the autopsy itself.
Was it, perhaps, because the body was so recently dead, sometimes hardly cold.
A superstitious man might fear that the spirit, so recently released, hovered around to be outraged at this insult to the discarded, still vulnerable, flesh.
There was nothing for him to do now until Kynaston had finished.
He was surprised to find himself tired.
He expected to be exhausted later in an investigation when he would be working a sixteen-hour day, but this early heaviness, the feeling that he was already spent in mind and body was new to him.
He wondered whether it was the beginning of age, or one more sign that this case was going to be different.
He went back into the church, sat down in a chair in front of a statue of the Virgin.
The huge nave was empty now.
Father Barnes had gone, escorted home by a police constable.
He had been readily helpful about the mug, identifying it as one Harry had often had with him when he was found sleeping in the porch.
And he had tried to be helpful about the blotter, staring at it with almost painful intensity before saying that he thought that the black markings hadn't been there when he had last seen the blotter on Monday evening.
But he couldn't be sure.
He had taken a sheet of writing paper from the desk and used it to make notes during the meeting.
This had covered the blotter so that he had really only seen it for a short time.
But, as far as his memory went, the black markings were new.
Dalgliesh was grateful for these minutes of quiet contemplation.
The scent of incense seemed to have intensified, but it smelled to him overlaid with a sickly, more sinister smell, and the silence wasn't absolute.
At his back he could hear the ring of footsteps, an occasional raised voice, calm, confident and unhurried, as the unseen professionals went about their work behind the grille.
The sounds seemed very far off and yet distinct and he had the sensation of a secret, sinister busy-ness, like the scrabbling of mice behind the wainscot.
Soon, he knew, the two bodies would be neatly parcelled in plastic sheeting.
The rug would be carefully folded to preserve bloodstains, and in particular, that one significant stain of dried blood.
The scene of crime exhibits, packed and tagged, would be carried to the police car; the razor, the crumbs of bread and cheese from the larger room, the fibres from Harry's clothing, that single burnt matchhead.
For the moment he would keep possession of the diary.
He needed to have it with him when he went to Campden Hill Square.
At the foot of the statue of the Virgin and Child stood a wrought-iron candleholder bearing its triple row of clotted sockets, the tips of burnt wick deep in their rims of wax.
On impulse he felt in his pocket for a tenpenny piece and dropped it in the box.
The clatter was unnaturally loud.
He half-expected to hear Kate or Massingham moving up beside him to watch, unspeaking but with interested eyes, his untypical act of sentimental folly.
There was a box of matches in a brass holder chained to the candlerack, similar to the one at the back of the church.
He took one of the smaller candles and, striking a match, held it to the wick.
It seemed to take an unduly long time before it took hold.
Then the flame burnt steadily, a limpid, unflickering glow.
He stuck the candle upright in a socket then sat and gazed at the flame, letting it mesmerize him into memory.
It was over a year ago but it seemed even longer.
They had both been attending a seminar on judicial sentencing at a northern university, Berowne to open it formally with a brief speech, Dalgliesh to represent the police interest; and they had travelled by rail in the same first class compartment.
For the first hour Berowne, with his private secretary, had dealt with official papers while Dalgliesh, after a final perusal of the agenda, had settled down to re-read Trollope's The Way We Live Now .
When the last file had been placed in the briefcase, Berowne had looked across at him and had seemed to want to talk.
The young Principal, with a tact that would help ensure he remained a ‘high flyer’, had suggested that he should take first luncheon if that were agreeable to the Minister, and had disappeared.
And for a couple of hours they had talked.
Looking back on it, Dalgliesh was still amazed that Berowne should have been so frank.
It was as if the train journey itself, the old-fashioned intimate compartment in which they had found themselves, the freedom from interruptions and the tyranny of the telephone, the sense of time visibly flying, annihilated under the pounding wheels, not to be accounted for, had released both of them from a carefulness which had become so much a part of  living that they were no longer aware of its weight until they let it slip from their shoulders.
Both were very private men.
Neither needed the masculine camaraderie of club or golf course, pub or grouse moor which so many of their colleagues found necessary to solace or sustain their over-busy lives.
Berowne had spoken at first spasmodically, then easily, and finally intimately.
From the ordinary subjects of casual conversation — books, recent plays, acquaintances they had in common— he had gone on to talk about himself.
Both had leaned forward, hands loosely clasped.
To a casual passenger, glancing in as he lurched down the corridor, they must, thought Dalgliesh, have looked like two penitents in a private confessional absolving each other.
Berowne had seemed not to expect a reciprocal confidence, indiscretion traded for indiscretion.
He spoke; Dalgliesh listened.
Dalgliesh knew that no politician would have talked with such freedom unless he had had absolute confidence in his listener's discretion.
It was impossible not to feel flattered.
He had always respected Berowne; now he warmed to him and was honest enough about his own reactions to know why Berowne had spoken of his family:
‘We're not a distinguished family, merely an old one.
My great grandfather lost a fortune because he was fascinated by a subject for which he had absolutely no talent — finance.
Someone told him that the way to make money was to buy when the shares were low and sell when they were high.
A simple enough rule which struck his rather undeveloped mind with the force of divine inspiration.
He had absolutely no difficulty in following the first precept.
The problem was that he never had the opportunity to follow the second.
He had a positive genius for picking losers.
So had his father.
In his case the losers were on four legs.
But I feel grateful to great grandfather nevertheless.
Before he lost his money he had the good sense to commission John Soane to design the Campden Hill Square house.
You're interested in architecture, aren't you?
I'd like you to see it when you can spare a couple of hours.
It needs at least that.
In my view it's even more interesting  than the Soane museum in Lincoln's Inn Fields; a perverse neo-classicism I suppose you'd call it.
I find it satisfying, architecturally anyway.
But I'm not sure that it isn't a house to admire rather than to live in.’
Dalgliesh had wondered how Berowne knew about his fondness for architecture.
It could only have been because he read his poetry.
A poet may heartily dislike having to talk about his verse but the knowledge that someone has actually read it is never unwelcome.
And now, sitting legs stretched, on a chair too low comfortably to accommodate his six feet two inches, eyes fixed on that single taper, unflickering in the incense-heavy stillness, he could hear again the tone, taut with self-disgust, in which Berowne had explained why he had given up the law:
‘Such odd things determine why and when one makes that kind of decision.
I suppose I had persuaded myself that sending men to prison wasn't something I cared to do for the rest of my life.
And appearing only for the defence has always seemed too easy an option.
I was never really good at pretending that I could assume my client to be innocent because I or my instructing solicitor had been careful to ensure that he didn't actually confess.
By the time you've seen your third rapist walk free because you've been cleverer than the prosecuting counsel, you lose the taste for that particular victory.
But that's just the easy explanation.
I suspect it wouldn't have happened if I hadn't lost an important case, important to me anyway.
You won't remember it — Percy Matlock.
He killed his wife's lover.
It wasn't a particularly difficult case and we were confident we'd get it reduced to manslaughter.
Even with that lesser verdict there was plenty of mitigation.
But I didn't prepare carefully enough.
I suppose I thought I didn't need to.
I was pretty arrogant in those days.
But it wasn't only that.
At the time I was very much in love, one of those adventures which seem of overwhelming importance at the time but, afterwards, leave one wondering if it wasn't a kind of sickness.
But I just wasn't giving the case what  it needed.
Matlock was convicted of murder and died in prison.
He had one child, a daughter.
Her father's conviction unhinged what precarious stability she'd managed to maintain and after she came out of the psychiatric hospital she got in touch with me and I gave her a job.
She still keeps house for my mother.
I don't think she's otherwise employable, poor girl.
So I live with a constant and uncomely reminder of folly and failure, and no doubt it does me good.
The fact that she's actually grateful to me, devoted is the word people use, doesn't make it easier.’
He had gone on to talk of his brother, killed five years earlier in Northern Ireland:
‘The title came to me through his death.
Most of the things I expected to value in life have come to me through death.’
Not, Dalgliesh remembered, the ‘things I value’.
The ‘things I expected to value’.
He could smell above the all-pervading redolence of incense, the faint acrid smoke of the candle.
Getting up from his chair, he left it burning, the pale flame staining the air, and moved down the nave through the grille and into the back of the church.
In the bell room Ferris had set up his metal exhibits table and had neatly laid out his spoils, each tagged and shrouded in its plastic envelope.
Now he was standing back regarding them with the faintly anxious proprietorial air of a stallholder at a church bazaar wondering whether he has set out his wares to best advantage.
And indeed, thus dignified and labelled, these diverse and ordinary objects had assumed an almost ritualistic significance; the shoes, one with its wedge of mud behind the heel, the stained beaker, the blotter with its criss-cross of dead marks made by dead hands, the diary, the remains of Harry Mack's last meal, the closed razor case and, occupying the centre of the table, the prize exhibit, the open cut-throat razor, its blade and bone handle gummy with blood.
Dalgliesh asked:
‘Anything interesting?’
‘The diary, sir.’
He made a move as if to take it out of its packet.
Dalgliesh said:
‘Leave it.
Just tell me.’
‘It's the last page.
It looks as if he tore out the entries for the last two months and burned those pages separately, then chucked the book open on the flames.
The cover is only singed.
The last page is the one which sets out the summary of the calendars for last year and next.
There's no sign even of singeing, but the top half is missing.
Someone has torn the page in two.’
He added:
‘I suppose he could have folded it and used it as a spill to get a light from the pilot on the gas water heater.’
Dalgliesh picked up the bag containing the shoes.
He said:
‘It's possible.’
But it struck him as unlikely.
For a murderer in a hurry, and this murderer had been in a hurry, it would have been a tedious and uncertain way to get a light.
If he'd come without a lighter or matches, surely the obvious thing would have been to remove the box from the chained brass holder attached to the heater.
He turned the shoes over in his hands and said:
‘Handmade.
There are some extravagances it's difficult to forego.
The toes are still polished, the sides and heels dull and slightly smeared.
It looks as if they've been washed.
And there are still traces of mud at the sides as well as under the left heel.
The lab will probably find scrape marks.’
They were hardly, he thought, the shoes you'd expect to find on a man who had spent the day in London unless he had walked in the parks or along the towpath of the canal.
But he could hardly have walked to St Matthew's that way; there were no signs that he had cleaned his shoes anywhere in the church.
But this, again, was theorizing in advance of the facts.
They could hope to learn later where Berowne had spent his last day on earth.
Kate Miskin appeared in the doorway.
She said:
‘Doc Kynaston has finished, sir.
They're ready to remove the bodies.’
Massingham had expected that Darren would live in one of the high rise local authority housing estates in Paddington.
Instead the address which he had at last been persuaded to give was in a short and narrow street off the Edgware Road, an enclave of cheap, unsmart cafés chiefly Goan and Greek.
As they turned into it Massingham realized that it wasn't strange to him, he had been here before.
It was surely in this street that he and old George Percival had picked up two excellent vegetarian take-aways when they were both detective-sergeants on Division.
Even the names, exotic, until now almost forgotten, came back to him: Alu Ghobi, Sag Bhajee.
It had changed little since then, a street where people minded their own business, principally that of supplying their own kind with meals remarkable for value and cheapness.
Although it was morning and the quietest time of the day the air was already pungent with the smell of curry and spices, reminding Massingham that it was some hours since breakfast and that there was no certainty when he would get his lunch.
There was only one pub, a high narrow Victorian building squeezed between a Chinese take-away and a Tandoori café, darkly uninviting, with a painted scrawl on the window advertising with defiant Englishness: ‘Bangers and mash’, ‘Bangers and bubble-and-squeak’ and ‘Toad-in-the-hole’.
Between the pub and the café was a small door with a single bell and a card with the one name ‘Arlene’.
Darren stooped, took a key from the side of his canvas trainer shoes, then tiptoeing, inserted it in the lock.
Massingham followed him up the narrow uncarpeted stairs.
At the top he said:
‘Where's your ma?’
Still without speaking, the boy pointed to the door on the left.
Massingham knocked gently, then, getting no reply, pushed it open.
The curtains were drawn but they were thin and unlined and even in the subdued light he could see that the room was spectacularly untidy.
There was a woman lying on the bed.
He moved over and putting out his hand found the switch of the bedside light.
As it clicked on she gave a small grunt but didn't move.
She was lying on her back, naked except for a short wrapover dressing gown from which one blue-veined breast had escaped and lay like a quivering jellyfish against the pink satin.
A thin line of lipstick outlined the moistly open mouth from which a bleb of mucus ballooned and fell.
She was snorting gently, small guttural sounds as if there were phlegm in her throat.
Her eyebrows had been plucked in the manner of the thirties, thin arches high above the natural line of the brow.
They gave the face, even in sleep, a look of clownish surprise, enhanced by the circles of rouge on both cheeks.
On a chair beside the bed was a large jar of Vaseline, the lid open, a single fly gummed to the rim.
The back of the chair and the floor were strewn with clothes and the top of a chest of drawers which served as a dressing table under an oval mirror was crowded with bottles, dirty glasses, jars of make-up and packets of tissues.
Set incongruously among the mess was a jam jar with a bunch of freesias still bound with a rubber band, whose delicate sweetness was lost in the stink of sex, scent and whisky.
He said:
‘Is this your ma?’
He wanted to ask ‘Is she often like this?’, but instead, he drew the boy out and closed the door.
He had never liked questioning a child about its parents and he didn't propose to do it now.
It was a common enough tragedy, but it was a job for the Juvenile Bureau not for him and the sooner one of their officers arrived the better.
He was fretted by the thought of Kate, back at the scene of crime by now, and he felt a spurt of resentment against Dalgliesh who had involved him in this irrelevant mess.
He asked:
‘Where do you sleep, Darren?’
The boy pointed to a back bedroom and Massingham pushed him gently before him.
It was very small, hardly more than a box room, with a single high window.
Under it was a narrow bed covered with a brown army blanket and beside it a chair with a collection of objects neatly arranged.
There was a model of a fire engine; a glass dome which shaken would produce a miniature  snow storm; two models of racing cars; three large veined marbles; and another jam jar, this one holding a bunch of roses, whose heads were already bending on their high thornless stems.
An old chest of drawers, the only other furniture, was piled with an incongruous collection of objects, shirts still in their transparent packets, women's underwear, silk scarves, tins of salmon, baked beans, soup, a packet of ham and one of tongue, three model kits for making boats, a couple of lipsticks, a box of model soldiers, three packets of cheap scent.
Massingham had been a policeman too long to be easily moved.
Some offences, cruelty to children or animals, violent crime against the vulnerable old, could still produce a flare of the spectacular Massingham temper which had resulted in more than one of his forebears facing a duel or a court martial.
But even this he had learned to discipline.
But now, viewing with angry eyes this childish room with its pathetic neatness, its evidence of small self-sufficiency, the single jar of flowers which he guessed the boy himself had arranged, he was seized with an impotent anger against the drunken slut next door.
He said:
‘Did you steal these things, Darren?’
Darren didn't reply, then he nodded.
‘Matey, you're in trouble.’
The boy sat on the edge of the bed.
Two tears rolled down his cheeks, followed by sniffs and heaves of the narrow chest.
Suddenly he shouted:
‘I ain't going to one of them council homes, I ain't!
I ain't!’
‘Stop crying,’ said Massingham urgently, hating the tears, wanting to get away.
Christ, why had AD let him in for this?
What was he supposed to be, a childminder?
Torn between pity, anger and his impatience to be back on his proper job, he said more roughly:
‘Stop crying!’
There must have been something urgent in his voice.
Darren's gulps were immediately checked although the tears flowed on.
Massingham said more gently:
‘Who said anything about a home?
Look, I'm going to ring the Juvenile Bureau.
Someone will come to look after you.
It will probably be a WPC, you'll like her.’
Darren's  face expressed an immediate and lively scepticism which in other circumstances, Massingham would have found amusing.
The boy looked up and asked:
‘Why can't I go ‘ome with Miss Wharton?’
Why not, indeed, thought Massingham.
The poor little bugger seemed to be attached to her.
Two waifs supporting each other.
He said:
‘I don't really think that's on.
Wait here, I'll be back.’
He looked at his watch.
He would have to stay, of course, until the WPC arrived but she shouldn't be too long and at least AD would have an answer to his question.
He knew now what had been worrying Darren, what he had been concealing.
One small mystery, at least, was solved.
AD could relax and get on with the inquiry.
And so, with luck, could he.
Even Father Barnes's predecessor, Father Kendrick, hadn't been able to do much with St Matthew's Vicarage.
It occupied the corner of St Matthew's Court, an undistinguished three-storey, red brick block of flats bordering the Harrow Road.
After the war, the Church Commissioners had finally decided that the existing huge Victorian house was unmanageable and uneconomic, and had sold the site to a developer on the understanding that a maisonette on the ground and first floor should be made over, in perpetuity, to house the parish priest.
It was the only maisonette in the block but was otherwise indistinguishable from the flats, with their mean windows and small, badly proportioned rooms.
At first the flats had been let to carefully chosen tenants and an attempt made to preserve the modest amenities; the square of lawn bordering the road, the two rose beds, the hanging windowboxes on each of the balconies.
But the block, like most of its kind, had had a chequered history.
The first property company  had gone into liquidation and it had been sold to a second and then a third.
The rents were raised, to general dissatisfaction, but were still inadequate to cover the maintenance costs of a poorly constructed building and there were the usual acrimonious disputes between the tenants and the landlords.
Only the church maisonette was well maintained, its two storeys of white windows an incongruous badge of respectability among the peeling paint and disintegrating windowboxes.
The original tenants had been replaced by the transients of the city, the peripatetic young, sharing three to a room, unmarried mothers on social security, foreign students; a racial mix which, like some human kaleidoscope, was continually being shaken into new and brighter colours.
Those few who did attend church found a congenial home with Father Donovan at St Anthony's with its steel bands, carnival processions, and general interracial bonhomie.
None of them ever knocked on Father Barnes's door.
They saw, with watchful and expressionless eyes, his almost furtive comings and goings.
But he was as much an.anachronism at St Matthew's Court as was the church he represented.
He had been escorted back to the Vicarage by a plainclothes officer, not the one who had been working most closely with Commander Dalgliesh, but an older man, broad-shouldered, stolid, reassuringly calm, who had spoken to him in a soft country accent which he couldn't recognize but was most certainly not local.
He said he was from the Harrow Road Station but had only recently been transferred there from West End Central.
He waited while Father Barnes unlocked the front door, then followed him in and offered to make a cup of tea, the British specific against disaster, grief and shock.
If he was surprised by the grubbiness of the ill-equipped Vicarage kitchen he concealed it.
He had made tea in worse places.
When Father Barnes reiterated that he was perfectly all right and that Mrs McBride who did for him was due at ten thirty, he didn't persist.
Before he left he handed Father Barnes a card with a number on it.
‘That's the number Commander Dalgliesh said you  were to ring if you need anything.
If you're worried like.
Or if anything new occurs to you.
Just give a ring.
It'll be no trouble.
And when the press come bothering, just tell them as little as you need.
No speculating.
No use in speculating, is there?
Just tell it how it was.
A lady from your congregation and a boy found the bodies and the boy fetched you.
Better not give any names unless you have to.
You saw that they were dead and rang for the police.
No need to say more.
That's all there is to it.’
The statement, stupendous in its over-simplification, opened a new abyss before Father Barnes's horrified eyes.
He had forgotten about the press.
How soon would they arrive?
Would they want to take photographs?
Ought he to call an emergency meeting of the PCC?
What would the Bishop say?
Ought he to ring the Archdeacon at once and leave it to him?
Yes, that would be the best plan.
The Archdeacon would know what ought to be done.
The Archdeacon was capable of coping with the press, the Bishop, the police and the Parochial Church Council.
Even so, he feared that St Matthew's was fated to be the centre of a dreadful attention.
He always went to Mass fasting and, for the first time that morning, he was aware of feeling weak, even paradoxically a little sick.
He sank down on to one.
of the two wooden chairs at the kitchen table and looked rather helplessly at the card with its seven clearly written digits, then glanced round as if seeking inspiration where to put it for safe keeping.
Finally, he dug in his cassock pocket for his wallet and slipped it in with his bank card and single credit card.
He let his eyes roam round the kitchen, seeing it as that pleasant policeman must have seen it, in all its sad decrepitude.
The plate from which he had eaten his hamburgers and frozen green beans, which had been last night's supper, still unrinsed in the sink; the splatter of grease marks above the ancient gas stove; the viscous mess of grime gumming the narrow gap between stove and cupboard; the soiled and smelly teacloth hanging from its hook at the side of the sink; last year's calendar askew on its nail; the two open shelves jammed  with a conglomeration of half-used cereal packets, jars of stale jam, cracked mugs, packets of detergent; the cheap, unstable table with its two chairs, their backs grubby from numerous clutching hands; the linoleum curving at the wall where it had become unstuck; the general air of discomfort, uncaring, negligence, dirt.
And the rest of the flat wasn't much better.
Mrs McBride took no pride in it because there was nothing to take a pride in.
She didn't care because he didn't.
Like him, she had probably ceased to notice the slow accretion of dirt over their lives.
After thirty years of marriage to Tom McBride, Beryl McBride sounded more Irish than did her husband.
Sometimes, indeed, Father Barnes suspected that the brogue was less acquired than assumed, a music hall stereotype of Irishness adopted either out of marital togetherness or from some less recognizable need.
He had noticed that in rare moments of stress she was apt to revert to her original Cockney.
She was employed by the parish for twelve hours a week and her nominal duties were to come in on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, clean the flat, wash and spin dry any linen or articles in the soiled linen basket, and prepare and leave for him a simple lunch on a tray.
On the other weekdays and at weekends, Father Barnes was expected to look after himself There had never been a job description.
Mrs McBride and the current incumbent were expected to work out a mutually agreed arrangement of hours and duties.
Twelve hours a week had been an adequate, even generous allocation of time when young Father Kendrick had been priest-in-charge.
He was married to the prototype of an ideal parson's wife, a capable and buxom physiotherapist, well able to run her part-time hospital job and the parish simultaneously and to pound Mrs McBride into shape as vigorously as, no doubt, she did her patients.
No one, of course , had expected Father Kendrick to stay.
He had only been a stop-gap, to fill in after Father Collins's long, thirty-five-year ministry and the appointment of a permanent successor, if there were to be a  successor.
St Matthew's, as the Archdeacon was never tired of pointing out, was surplus to the Church's pastoral ministry in inner London.
With two other Anglican churches within a three-mile-radius, both with vigorous young clergy and enough parochial organizations to provide serious competition for the social services department, St Matthew's, with its small and ageing population, was an uncomfortable reminder of the declining authority of the established church in the inner cities.
But as the Archdeacon said, ‘Your people are remarkably loyal.
It's a pity they aren't also rich.
The parish is a drain on resources, no doubt about it.
But we can hardly sell it.
The building is supposed to be of some importance, architecturally.
I can never see it myself.
That extraordinary campanile.
Hardly English, is it?
One isn't, after all, on the Venetian Lido, whatever the architect thought.’
For the Archdeacon, who had, in fact, never seen the Venetian Lido, had been reared in the Close at Salisbury and, making some allowance for scale, had known from childhood exactly what a church should look like.
Before Father Kendrick had set off for his new city parish — racial mix, boys' club, mothers' union, young people's fellowship; the proper challenge for a mildly high-church, ambitious young priest with one eye on a mitre — he had had a brief word about Beryl McBride.
‘Frankly, she terrifies me.
I keep well out of her way.
But Susan seems able to manage her.
Better have a word with her about the domestic arrangements.
I wish Mrs McBride had taken her husband's religion instead of his accent.
That way St Anthony's would have had the benefit of her cooking.
I did hint to Father Donovan that here was a brand ready for plucking, but Michael knows when to leave well alone.
Now, if you can seduce his housekeeper Mrs Kelly into Anglicanism, you'll be in clover.’
Susan Kendrick, expertly wrapping china in newspaper and ankle-deep in shavings from her packing cases, had been briskly informative but hardly more reassuring.
‘She needs watching.
Her plain cooking is quite good although the repertoire is a bit limited.
But she isn't so  dependable when it comes to housework.
You need to begin as you mean to go on.
If you set the right standards and she knows that she can't fool you, you'll be all right.
She's been here a long time, of course, from Father Collins's days.
She wouldn't be easy to dislodge.
And she's a very loyal member of the congregation.
St Matthew's seems to suit her for some reason.
As I said, just begin as you mean to go on.
Oh, and watch the sherry.
There's no real dishonesty.
You can leave anything out, money, your watch, food.
It's just that she likes the odd nip.
Better offer her one occasionally.
That way there's less temptation.
You can hardly lock the stuff up.’
‘No, of course not,’ he had said.
‘No, I quite see that.’
But it had been Mrs McBride who had started as she meant to go on.
It had been hopeless from the start.
He still recalled, with a flush of shame, that first, all-important interview.
He had sat in front of her, in the square little room which was used as a study, as if he were the suppliant, and had seen her sharp little eyes, black as currants, move round the room, noting the gaps in the shelves where Father Kendrick's leatherbound volumes had been stacked, the meagre rug in front of the gas fire, his few prints stacked against the wall.
And that wasn't all she had taken in.
She had had him summed up, all right.
She had seen his timidity, his ignorance of housekeeping, his lack of authority as a man or a priest.
And he suspected that she had known more intimate secrets.
His virginity, his half-shameful fear of her close, warm-smelling, overwhelming femaleness, his social insecurity, born in that small, terraced house near the river at Ely, where he had lived with his widowed mother, nurtured by the desperate contrivings, the small deceptions of respectable poverty, the deprivation that was so much more humiliating than the real poverty of the inner cities.
He could imagine the words in which she would later report to her husband.
‘He's not really a gentleman, not like Father Kendrick.
You can see that.
Father Kendrick's father was a bishop, after all, and Mrs Kendrick is the niece of Lady Nichols, when all's said and done.
There's no knowing where this  one comes from.’
Sometimes he suspected that she had even known how diminished was his remaining store of faith, that it was this essential lack and not his general inadequacy which was at the core of her disdain.
His most recent library book had been a Barbara Pym.
He had read with envious disbelief the gentle and ironic story of a village parish where the curates were entertained, fed, and generally spoilt by the female members of the congregation.
Mrs McBride, he thought, would soon put a stop to anything like that at St Matthew's.
Indeed, she had put a stop to it.
During his first week, Mrs Jordan had visited him with a homemade fruitcake.
She had seen it on the table on her Wednesday visit and had said:
‘One of Ethel Jordan's, is it?
You want to watch her, Father, an unmarried priest like you.’
The words had hung on the air, heavy with innuendo, and an act of simple kindness had been spoiled.
Eating the cake, he had felt it like tasteless dough in his mouth, every mouthful an act of shared indecency.
She arrived on time.
Whatever her other negligences, Mrs McBride was a stickler for punctuality.
He heard her key in the door and a minute later she was in the kitchen.
She didn't seem surprised to see him sitting there still in his cloak and obviously only just returned from Mass, and he knew at once that she had been told about the murders.
He watched while she carefully removed her headscarf to reveal the upswept waves of unnaturally dark hair, hung up her coat in the hall cupboard, donned her overall from its hook behind the kitchen door, took off her outdoor shoes and eased her feet into her house slippers.
It wasn't until she had put on the kettle for their morning coffee that she spoke.
‘Well, here's a nice thing for the parish, Father.
Two of 'em dead, so Billy Crawford was saying in the newsagent's.
And one of 'em old Harry Mack.’
‘I'm afraid so, Mrs McBride.
One of them was Harry.’
‘And who would the other be?
Or aren't the police knowing yet?’
‘I think we'll have to wait until they notify the next of kin before they release that information.’
‘But you saw him, Father.
Wasn't it with your own eyes now?
And were you not recognizing him?’
‘You really mustn't ask me that, Mrs McBride.
We must wait for the police.’
‘And who'd be wantin' to kill Harry?
Sure, he wouldn't be killed for anything he had on him, the poor soul.
It wasn't suicide, was it, Father?
One of those suicide pacts?
Or do the police think Harry did it?’
‘They don't know what happened yet.
We really ought not to speculate.’
‘Well, I don't believe it.
Harry Mack's no murderer.
As well believe that the other chap, the one you're keeping so quiet about, the one you're not telling about, did in Harry.
Harry was a nasty, thieving, foul-mouthed old devil, God rest him, but he was harmless enough.
The police have no call to be pinning it on Harry.’
‘I'm sure they won't try to.
It could have been anyone, someone who broke in to steal.
Or someone Sir Paul Berowne himself let in.
Anyone.
The door of the vestry was open when Miss Wharton arrived this morning.’
He turned towards the stove so that she shouldn't see the flush of shame and dismay that he had let slip Berowne's name.
And she hadn't missed it, not she.
And why had he told her about that unlocked door?
Was he trying to reassure her, or himself?
But what did it matter?
The details would be out soon enough and it would look odd if he were too reticent, odd and suspicious.
But why suspicious?
Surely no one, not even Mrs McBride, was going to suspect him.
He recognized, with a familiar confusion of self-disgust and hopelessness, that he was telling more than he ought in his usual attempt to propitiate her, to get her on his side.
It had never worked and it wouldn't now.
She didn't pick up the name Berowne although he knew that it was safely stowed in her mind.
Sitting across from her, he saw the triumph in her cunning little eyes, heard in her voice the note of ghoulish relish.
‘Bloody murder, is it then?
That's a nice thing for the  parish.
You'll be needing to get the church fumigated, Father.’
‘Fumigated?’
‘Well, sprinkled with holy water, that sort of thing.
Maybe my Tom had better speak to Father Donovan.
He could let us have some from St Anthony's.’
‘We have our own holy water, Mrs McBride.’
‘In a case like this, you can't take chances.
Better get some from Father Donovan.
Be on the safe side.
My Tom can bring it along after Mass on Sunday.
Here's your coffee, Father.
I've made it extra strong.
You've had a nasty shock and that's the truth of it.’
The coffee, as always, was the cheapest kind of bottled grains.
It was even less palatable now that its strength made the taste discernible.
On the brown surface a few globules of half-sour milk swam and coalesced.
There was a smear of what looked like lipstick on the brim of the cup and he turned it away from him slowly, so that she shouldn't notice.
He knew that he could have carried the coffee into the comparative serenity of his study but he hadn't the courage to get to his feet.
And to leave before both cups had been drained would only offend her.
She had said, on her first morning with him, ‘Mrs Kendrick and me always had a cup of coffee together before I got started, nice and friendly like.’
He had had no way of knowing whether this was the truth, but the pattern of spurious intimacy had been established.
‘That Paul Berowne, he was an MP wasn't he?
Resigned or something.
I remember reading about him in the Standard .’
‘Yes, he was an MP.’
‘And a Sir, too, didn't you say?’
‘A baronet, Mrs McBride.’
‘What was he doing in the Little Vestry, then?
I never knew we had any baronets attending St Matthew's.’
It was too late now to take refuge in discretion.
‘He didn't.
He was just someone I knew.
I gave him the key.
He wanted to spend some time quietly in the church,’ he added in a vain hope that a confidence so dangerously  close to intimacy, to his job as priest, might flatter her, might even silence curiosity.
‘He wanted somewhere quiet to think, to pray.’
‘In the Little Vestry?
A funny place to choose.
Why wasn't he on his knees in a pew?
Why wasn't he in the Lady Chapel in front of the Blessed Sacrament?
That's the proper place to be praying for them who can't wait till Sunday.’
Her voice with its note of aggrieved disapproval suggested that both the place and the praying were equally reprehensible.
‘He could hardly sleep in the church, Mrs McBride.’
‘And why should he want to be sleeping?
Hadn't he his own bed to be going home to?’
Father Barnes's hands had begun to shake again.
The coffee cup lurched in his fingers and he felt two scalding drops on his hand.
Carefully, he replaced the cup in its saucer, willing the dreadful shaking to stop.
He almost lost her next words.
‘Well, if he did kill himself, he died dean, I'll say that for him.’
‘Died clean, Mrs McBride?’
‘Wasn't he washing himself when Tom and I passed by last night just after eight o'clock?
Him or Harry Mack?
And you can't be telling me that Harry went near running water if he could help it.
Fairly gushing out of the drainpipe it was.
‘Course we thought you were there.
‘Father Barnes is having a stripwash in the vestry washroom.’
That's what I said to Tom.
‘Perhaps he's saving on the gas bill back at the Vicarage.’
We had a laugh about it.’
‘When exactly was this, Mrs McBride?’
‘I told you, Father, just after eight.
We were on our way to the Three Feathers.
We wouldn't have been passing the church except that we called in to collect Maggie Sullivan and it's a shortcut from her place to the Feathers.’
‘But the police ought to know.
This could be important information.
They'll be interested in anyone who was near St Matthew's last night.’
‘Interested?
Is that what they'll be?
And what are you getting at then, Father?
You're saying that Tom and old Maggie Sullivan and I cut his throat for him?’
‘Of course not, Mrs McBride.
That's ridiculous.
But you could be important witnesses.
That gushing water.
It means that Sir Paul was alive at eight o'clock.’
‘Someone was alive in there at eight and that's for sure.
And a fine rush of water he was using.’
Father Barnes was struck with a terrible possibility and, without thinking, gave it voice:
‘Did you notice what colour it was?’
‘And what would I be doing peering down drains?
Of course I didn't notice what colour it was.
What colour would it be?
But it was running away, fast and furious, that's for sure.’
Suddenly, she pushed her face over the table towards him.
Her huge breasts, so much at odds with the thin face and the bony arms, were pushed into great half moons by the table edge.
Her coffee cup clattered in the saucer.
The sharp little eyes widened.
She whispered with alliterative relish:
‘Father, are you saying that it would be running red?’
He said, weakly:
‘I suppose it's possible.’
‘You think he was in there do you, Father, washing his bloody hands?
Oh my God!
Suppose he had come out and seen us.
We could have been murdered on the spot, Tom and Maggie and me.
He could have slit our throats for us then and there and thrown us in the canal, likely as not.
Holy Mother of God!’
The conversation had become bizarre, unreal, totally uncontrollable.
He had been told by the police to say as little as possible to anyone.
He had meant to say nothing.
But now she knew the names of the victims, she knew who had found them, she knew that the door had been unlocked, she knew how they had died, although surely he hadn't mentioned the slitting of throats.
But that could have been guesswork.
A knife was, after all, a more likely weapon in London than a gun.
She knew all that and, more, she had actually been passing at the time.
He gazed back at her across the stained table with appalled eyes, linked to her by that bloodstained gurgle of water which was gushing through both their minds, sharing the same dreadful imagining of that silently emerging figure, the raised and bloody knife.
And he was aware of something else.
Horrible as was the deed that bound them in a fascinated confederacy of blood they were, for the first time, having a conversation.
The eyes which met his across the table top were bright with horror and with an excitement which was too close to relish to be comfortable.
But the familiar glance of insolence and contempt had gone.
He could almost deceive himself that she was confiding in him.
The relief was so great that he found that his hand was creeping across the table towards hers.
in some gesture of mutual comfort.
Ashamed, he quickly drew it back.
She said:
‘Father, what shall we do?’
It was.
the first time she had ever asked him that question.
He was surprised at the confidence in his voice.
‘The police have given me a special telephone number.
I think we ought to ring now, at once.
They'll send someone round, either here or to your house.
After all, you and Tom and Maggie are very important witnesses.
And then when we've done that, I shall need to be undisturbed in the study.
I wasn't able to say Mass.
I shall read Morning Prayer.’
‘Yes, Father,’ she said, her voice almost meek.
And there was something else he ought to do.
Strange that thought hadn't occurred to him before.
Surely it must be his duty to call in the next day or so on Paul Berowne's wife and his family.
Now that he knew what had to be done, it was remarkable how different he felt.
A biblical phrase dropped into his mind, ‘Doing evil that good may come’.
But he quickly put it away from him.
It was too close to blasphemy to be comfortable.
Book Two — Next of Kin
After leaving the church Dalgliesh went briefly back to the Yard to pick up his files on Theresa Nolan and Diana Travers and it was after midday before he arrived at 62 Campden Hill Square.
He had brought Kate with him, leaving Massingham to supervise what remained to be done at the church.
Kate had told him that at present there were only women in the house and it seemed sensible that he should have a woman with him, particularly as it was Kate who had first broken the news.
It was not a decision he had expected Massingham to welcome, and nor had he.
These first interviews with the next of kin were crucial and Massingham wanted to be there.
He would work with Kate Miskin loyally and conscientiously because he respected her as a detective and that was what he was required to do.
But Dalgliesh knew that Massingham still half-regretted the days when women police officers were content to find lost children, search female prisoners, reform prostitutes, comfort the bereaved and, if they hankered for the excitement of criminal investigation, were suitably occupied coping with the peccadilloes of juvenile delinquents.
And, as Dalgliesh had heard him argue, for all their demands for equality of status and opportunity, putting them in the front line behind the riot shields, taking the petrol bombs, the hurled stones and now the bullets, only made the job of their male colleagues even more onerous.
In Massingham's view the instinct to protect a woman in moments of high danger was deep-seated and ineradicable, and the world would be a worse place if it wasn't.
He had, as Dalgliesh knew, grudgingly respected Kate's ability to look down at the butchered bodies in St Matthew's vestry and not be sick, but he hadn't liked her the better for it.
He knew that he would find no police officer at the house.
Lady Ursula had gently but firmly rejected the suggestion that someone should stay.
Kate had reported her words:
‘You are not, presumably, expecting this murderer, if he exists, to turn his attention to the rest of the family.
That being so, I hardly see the need for police protection.
You, I am sure, have a better use for your manpower and I would prefer not to have an officer sitting in the hall like a bailiff.’
She had, too, insisted on herself breaking the news to her daughter-in-law and the housekeeper.
Kate was given no opportunity to observe the reaction of anyone other than Lady Ursula to Paul Berowne's death.
Campden Hill Square lay in its midday calm, an urban oasis of greenery and Georgian elegance rising from the ceaseless grind and roar of Holland Park Avenue.
An early morning mist had cleared and a fugitive sun glinted on leaves which were only now beginning to yellow and which hung in heavy swathes, almost motionless in the still air.
Dalgliesh couldn't remember when he had last seen the Berowne house.
Living as he did high above the Thames on the fringe of the city, this wasn't his part of London.
But the house, one of the rare examples of Sir John Soane's domestic architecture, was pictured in so many books on the capital's buildings that its elegant eccentricity was as familiar to him as if he commonly walked these streets and squares.
The conventional Georgian houses each side of it were as high, but its neo-classical facade in Portland stone and brick dominated the terrace and the whole square, inalienably a part of them, yet looking almost arrogantly unique.
He stood for a minute looking up at it, Kate unspeaking at his side.
On the second floor rose three very high, curved windows, originally, he suspected, an open loggia but now glazed and fronted with a low stone balustrade.
Between the windows, mounted on incongruous corbels which looked more Gothic than neo-classical, were stone caryatids, whose flowing lines, reinforced by the typically Soanian pilasters at the corners of the house, drew the eye upwards, past the square windows of the third storey to a fourth storey faced in brick and, finally, to the stone balustrade with its row of curved shells echoing the curve of the  lower windows.
As he stood contemplating it, as if hesitating to violate its calm, there was a moment of extraordinary silence in which even the muted roar of the traffic in the avenue was stilled and in which it seemed to him that two images, the shining façade of the house and that dusty blood-boltered room in Paddington, were held suspended out of time, then fused so that the stones were blood splattered, the caryatids dripped red.
And then the traffic lights released the stream of cars, time moved on, the house lay uncontaminated in its pale pristine silence.
But he had no sense that they were being watched, that somewhere between these walls and the windows glinting in the transitory sun there were people waiting for him in anxiety, grief, perhaps in fear.
Even when he rang the doorbell it was a full two minutes before the door was opened and he faced a woman who he knew must be Evelyn Matlock.
She was, he guessed, in her late thirties, and was uncompromisingly plain in a way it struck him few women nowadays were.
A small sharp nose was imbedded between pudgy cheeks on which the threads of broken veins were emphasized rather than disguised by a thin crust of make-up.
She had a primly censorious mouth above a slightly receding chin already showing the first slackness of a dewlap.
Her hair, which looked as if it had been inexpertly permed, was pulled back at the sides but frizzed over the high forehead in the poodle-like fashion of an Edwardian.
But as she stood aside to let them enter he saw that her wrists and ankles were slim and delicate, curiously at odds with the sturdy body, heavy-busted, almost voluptuous under the high-necked blouse.
He remembered what Paul Berowne had said of her.
Here was the women whose father he had unsuccessfully defended, to whom he had given a home and a job, who was supposed to be devoted to him.
If that were true, she was concealing her grief at his death with remarkable stoicism.
A police officer, he thought, is like a visiting doctor.
One is greeted with no ordinary emotions.
He was used to seeing relief, apprehension, dislike, even hatred; but now, for a moment, he saw in her eyes naked fear.
It passed almost at once and gave place to what seemed to him an assumed and slightly truculent indifference, but it had been there.
She turned her back on them, saying:
‘Lady Ursula is expecting you, Commander.
Will you please follow me.’
The words, spoken in a high, rather forced voice, had the repressive authority of a nurse-receptionist greeting a patient from whom she expects nothing but trouble.
They passed through the outer vestibule then under the fluted dome of the inner hall.
To their left, the finely wrought balustrade of a stone cantilevered staircase rose like a border of black lace.
Miss Matlock opened the double door to the right and stood back to let them enter.
She said:
‘If you will wait in here I will let Lady Ursula know that you have arrived.’
The room in which they found themselves ran the whole length of the house and was obviously both the formal dining-room and library.
It was full of light.
At the front, two high curved windows gave a view of the square garden while at the rear one huge expanse of glass looked out over a stone wall with three niches, each containing a marble statue; Venus, naked, one hand delicately shielding the mons Veneris, one pointing at her left nipple, a second female figure, half robed and wearing a wreath of flowers and, between them, Apollo with his lyre, laurel-crowned.
The two sections of the room were divided by projecting piers formed of mahogany glass-fronted bookcases from which sprang a canopy of three semi-circular arches decorated and painted in green and gold.
High bookcases lined the library walls and stood between the windows, each topped with a marble bust.
The volumes, bound in green leather and tooled in gold, were identical in size and fitted the bookshelves so precisely that the effect was more of an artist's trompe-l'oeil than of a working library.
Between the shelves and in the recesses over them were mirrors so that the rich splendour of the room seemed to be endlessly reflected, a vista of painted ceilings, leather books, of marble, gleaming mahogany and glass.
It was difficult to  imagine the room being used for dining, or indeed, for any purpose other than the admiring contemplation of the architect's romantic obsession with spatial surprise.
The oval dining table stood before the rear window, but it held in the middle a model of the house on a low plinth as if it were a museum exhibit, and the eight high-backed dining chairs had been set back against the walls.
Over the marble fireplace was a portrait, presumably of the baronet who had commissioned the house.
Here the delicate fastidiousness of the painting in the National Portrait Gallery was metamorphosed into a sturdier nineteenth-century elegance, but with the unmistakable Berowne features still arrogantly confident above the faultlessly tied cravat.
Looking up at it, Dalgliesh said:
‘Lady Ursula Berowne, remind me of what she said, Kate.’
‘She said: ‘After the first death there is no other.’
It sounded like a quotation.’
‘It is a quotation.’
He added without explanation, ‘Her elder son was killed in Northern Ireland.
Do you like this room?’
‘If I wanted to settle down for a quiet read I'd prefer the Kensington public library.
It's for show rather than use, isn't it?
Odd idea, having a library and dining room in one.’
She added: ‘But I suppose it's splendid in its way.
Not exactly cosy, though.
I wonder if anyone has ever been murdered for a house.’
It was a long speech for Kate.
Dalgliesh said:
‘I can't say that I remember a case.
It might be a more rational motive than murdering for a person; less risk of subsequent disenchantment.’
‘Less chance of betrayal, too, sir.’
Miss Matlock appeared in the doorway; she said with cold formality:
‘Lady Ursula is ready to see you now.
Her sitting room is on the fourth floor, but there is a lift.
Would you please follow me.’
They could have been a couple of unpromising  applicants for a minor domestic job.
The lift was an elegant gilded birdcage in which they were borne slowly upwards in a repressive silence.
When it jerked to a stop they were led out into a narrow carpeted passage.
Miss Matlock opened a door immediately opposite and announced:
‘Commander Dalgliesh and Miss Miskin are here, Lady Ursula.’
Then without waiting for them to step into the room, she turned and left.
And now, as he entered Lady Ursula Berowne's sitting room, Dalgliesh felt for the first time that he was in a private house, that this was a room which the owner had made peculiarly her own.
The two high beautifully proportioned windows with their twelve panes gave a view of sky delicately laced with the top boughs of the trees and the long narrow room was full of light.
Lady Ursula was sitting very upright to the right of the fireplace, her back to the window.
There was an ebony cane with a gold knob leaning against her chair.
She did not rise when they came in but held out her hand as Kate introduced Dalgliesh.
Her clasp, quickly released, was surprisingly strong but it was still like holding briefly a disconnected set of bones loosely enclosed in dry suede.
She gave Kate a quick appraising glance and a nod which could have been acknowledgement or approval and said:
‘Please sit down.
If Inspector Miskin is required to make notes, then she may find that chair by the window convenient.
Perhaps you will sit opposite me, Commander.’
The voice, with its timbre of upper-class arrogance, an arrogance of which its owner so often seems unaware, was exactly as he would have expected.
It seemed artificially produced, as if in an attempt to control any quavering she had had to gather both breath and energy to produce the measured cadences.
But it was still a beautiful voice.
As she sat facing him, rigidly upright, he saw that her chair was one designed for the disabled with a button in the armrest to raise the seat when she wanted help in rising.
Its functional modernity struck a discordant note in a room which was otherwise cluttered with eighteenth-century furniture; two chairs with embroidered seats, a Pembroke table, a  bureau, each a fine example of its period, were strategically placed to provide an island of support if she needed to make her painful progress to the door, so that the room looked rather like an antique shop with its treasures ineptly displayed.
It was an old woman's room, and above the smell of beeswax and the faint summer scent from a bowl of pot-pourri on the Pembroke table, his sensitive nose could detect a whiff of the sour smell of old age.
Their eyes met and held.
Hers were still remarkable, immense, well-spaced and heavily lidded.
They must once have been the focus of her beauty, and although they were sunken now, he could still see the glint of intelligence behind them.
Her skin was cleft with deep lines running from the jaw to the high jutting cheekbones.
It was as if two palms had been placed against the frail skin and forced it upwards so that he saw with a shock of premonitory recognition the shine of the skull beneath the skin.
The scrolls of the ears flat against the side of the skull were so large that they looked like abnormal excrescences.
In youth she would have dressed her hair to cover them.
Her face was devoid of make-up and with the hair drawn back tightly and twisted into a high roll it looked naked, a face stripped for action.
She was wearing black trousers topped with a belted tunic in thin grey wool, high-buttoned almost to the chin, and deep-cuffed.
Her feet were lodged in wide black-barred shoes and in their immobility gave the impression of being clamped to the carpet.
There was a paperback on the round table to the right of her chair.
Dalgliesh saw that it was Philip Larkin's Required Writing .
She put out her hand and laid it on the book, then said:
‘Mr Larkin writes here that it is always true that the idea for a poem and a snatch or line of it come simultaneously.
Do you agree, Commander?’
‘Yes, Lady Ursula, I think I do.
A poem begins with poetry, not with an idea for poetry.’
He betrayed no surprise at the question.
He knew that shock, grief, trauma took people in different ways, and if this bizarre opening was helping her, he could conceal his impatience.
She said:
‘To be a poet and a librarian, even if unusual, has a certain appropriateness, but to be a poet and a policeman seems to me eccentric, even perverse.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘Do you see the poetry as inimical to the detection,.
Ir the detection to the poetry?’
‘Oh, the latter, surely.
What happens if the muse strikes — no, that is hardly the appropriate word — if the muse visits you in the middle of a case?
Although if I remember, Commander, your muse in recent years has been somewhat fugitive.’
She added with a note of delicate irony: ‘to our great loss.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘It hasn't so far happened.
Perhaps the human mind can deal with only one intense experience at a time.’
‘And poetry is, of course, an intense experience.’
‘One of the most intense there is.’
Suddenly she smiled at him.
It lit up her face with the intimacy of a shared confidence, as if they were old sparring partners.
‘You must excuse me.
Being interrogated by a detective is a new experience for me.
If there is an appropriate dialogue for this occasion, I haven't yet found it.
Thank you, anyway, for not burdening me with your condolences.
I have received too many official condolences in my time.
They have always seemed to me either embarrassing or insincere.’
Dalgliesh wondered what she would reply if he had said: ‘I knew your son.
Not well, but I did know him.
I accept that you don't want my condolences, but if I had been able to speak the right words, they would not have been insincere.’
She said:
‘Inspector Miskin broke the news to me with tact and consideration.
I am grateful.
But she was, of course, unable or unwilling to tell me much more than that my son was dead, and that there were certain wounds.
How did he die, Commander?’
‘His throat was cut, Lady Ursula.’
There was no way of softening that brutal reality.
He added:
‘The tramp with him, Harry Mack, died the same way.’
He wondered why he had felt it important to speak Harry's name.
Poor Harry, so incongruously yoked in the forced democracy of death, whose stiffening body would receive far more attention in its dissolution than it had ever received in life.
She said:
‘And the weapon?’
‘A bloodstained razor, his apparently, was close to your son's right hand.
There are a number of forensic tests to be carried out but I expect to find that the razor was the weapon.’
‘And the door to the church — the vestry, or wherever he was — that was open?’
‘Miss Wharton, who with a young boy discovered the bodies, says that she found it unlocked.’
‘Are you treating this as suicide?’
‘The tramp, Harry Mack, didn't kill himself My preliminary view is that neither did your son.
It's too early to say more until we get the results of the post-mortem examination and the forensic tests.
Meantime I am treating it as a double murder.’
‘I see.
Thank you for being so frank.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘There are questions I need to ask.
If you would rather wait I could come back later, but it is, of course, important to lose as little time as possible.’
‘I would prefer to lose none, Commander.
And two of your questions I can anticipate.
I have no reason to believe that my son was contemplating ending his life and he had to my knowledge no enemies.’
‘As a politician that makes him unusual, surely.’
‘He had political enemies, obviously.
Some few from his own party, no doubt.
But none as far as I know is a homicidal maniac.
And terrorists, surely, use bombs and guns not their victim's razor.
Forgive me, Commander, if I'm stating the obvious, but isn't it most likely that  someone unknown to him, a tramp, a psychopath, a casual thief, killed both him and this Harry Mack?’
‘It is one of the theories we have to consider, Lady Ursula.’
He asked: ‘When did you last see your son?’
‘At eight o'clock yesterday morning when he carried up my breakfast tray.
That was his usual practice.
He wished to reassure himself, no doubt, that I had survived the night.’
‘Did he tell you then or at any time that he intended returning to St Matthew's?’
‘No.
We didn't discuss his plans for the day, only mine, and those I presume are hardly of interest to you.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘It could be important to know who was here in the house during the day and at what time.
Your own time-table could help us to that.’
He gave no further explanation and she asked for none.
‘My chiropodist, Mrs Beamish, arrived at ten thirty.
She always comes to the house.
I was with her for about an hour.
Then I was driven to a luncheon engagement with Mrs Charles Blaney at her club, the University Women's.
After luncheon we went to look at some watercolours in which she is interested at Agnew's, in Bond Street.
We had tea at the Savoy together and I dropped Mrs Blaney at her Chelsea house before returning here at about half past five.
I asked Miss Matlock to bring me up a thermos of soup and a plate of smoked salmon sandwiches at six o'clock.
She did so and I told her I preferred not to be disturbed again that evening.
The luncheon and exhibition had been more tiring than I had expected.
I spent the evening reading, and rang for Miss Matlock to help me to bed shortly before eleven.’
‘Did you see any other member of the household during the day apart from your son, Miss Matlock and the chauffeur?’
‘I saw my daughter-in-law briefly when I had occasion to go into the library.
That was some time during the early part of the morning.
I presume that this is relevant, Commander?’
‘Until we know how your son died it is difficult to be sure what is or is not relevant.
Did any other member of the household know that Sir Paul intended revisiting St Matthew's yesterday evening?’
‘I have had no opportunity to ask them.
I can't believe it likely that they did.
No doubt you will inquire.
We have only a small staff.
Evelyn Matlock, whom you have met, is the housekeeper.
Then there is Gordon Halliwell.
He is an ex-sergeant in the Guards, who served with my elder son.
He, I suppose, would describe himself as a chauffeur-handyman.
He came here just over five years ago, before Hugo was killed, and has stayed on.’
‘He drove your son?’
‘Rarely.
Paul, of course, had the use of his ministerial car before he resigned; otherwise he drove himself.
Halliwell drives me almost daily, and occasionally my daughter-in-law.
He has a flat over the garage.
You will have to wait, Commander, to hear anything he may disclose.
Today is his day off.’
‘When did he leave, Lady Ursula?’
‘Either very late last night or early this morning.
That is his usual practice.
I have no idea where he is.
I don't question my servants about their private lives.
If the news of my son's death is broadcast this evening, as I expect it will be, no doubt he will return early.
In any case he is normally back before eleven.
Incidentally, I spoke to him by house telephone yesterday evening shortly after eight o'clock and, again, at about nine fifteen.
Apart from Halliwell, there is now only one other member of the staff, Mrs Iris Minns, who comes here four days a week to do general housework.
Miss Matlock can give you her address.‘
Dalgliesh asked:
‘This experience of your son's in the vestry of St Matthew's, did he talk to you about it?’
‘No.
It was not a subject with which he would expect me to sympathize.
I have not since 1918 been a religious woman.
I doubt if I ever was in any real sense.
Mysticism, in particular, is as meaningless to me as music must be to  the tone deaf.
I accept, of course, that people do have these experiences.
I would expect the causes to be physical and psychological; overwork, the ennui of middle age, or a need to find some meaning to existence.
That to me has always been a fruitless quest.’
‘Did your son find it fruitless?’
‘Until this happened, I would have described him as a conventional Anglican.
I suspect that he used the offices of his religion as a reminder of fundamental decencies, an affirmation of identity, a brief breathing space when he could think without fear of interruption.
Like most upper-class Anglicans he would have found the incarnation more understandable if God had chosen to visit His creation as an eighteenth-century English gentleman.
But like most of his class, he got over that little difficulty by more or less refashioning Him in the guise of an eighteenth-century English gentleman.
His experience — his alleged experience — in that church is inexplicable, and to do him justice, he didn't attempt to explain it, at least not to me.
I hope you.won't expect me to discuss it.
The subject is unwelcome, and it can surely have had nothing to do with his death.’
It was a long speech and he could see that it had tired her.
And she could not, thought Dalgliesh, be as naive as that; he was surprised that she could expect him to believe that she was.
He said:
‘When a man changes the whole direction of his life and is dead — possibly murdered — within a week of that decision, it must be relevant, at least to our investigation.’
‘Oh yes, it's relevant to that I've no doubt.
There will be very few privacies in this family which won't be relevant to your investigation, Commander.’
He saw that in the last few seconds, she had been overcome with exhaustion.
Her body looked diminished, almost shrivelled, in the huge chair, and the gnarled hands on the arms began very gently to shake.
But he controlled his compassion as she was controlling her grief.
There were questions he still needed to ask and it wouldn't be the first time that he had taken advantage of tiredness or grief.
He  bent and took from his case the half-burnt diary still in its protective transparent wrapping.
He said:
‘It's been examined for fingerprints.
We shall need in time to check which belong to people who had a right to handle the diary; Sir Paul, yourself, members of the household.
I wanted you to confirm that it is in fact his.
It would be helpful if you could do that without unwrapping it.’
She took the package and it lay for a moment in her lap while she stared down at it.
He had a sense that she was unwilling to meet his eyes.
She sat with extraordinary stillness, then she said:
‘Yes, this is his.
But it's unimportant surely.
A mere record of engagements.
He wasn't a diarist.’
‘It's odd, in that case, that he should wish to burn it — if he did burn it.
And there's another oddity; the top half of the last page has been torn away.
It's the page setting out last year's calendar and the calendar for 1986.
Can you recall what else, if anything, was on that page, Lady Ursula?’
‘I can't remember that I ever saw that page.’
‘Can you recall when and where you last saw the diary?’
‘I'm afraid that's the kind of detail it's impossible for me to remember.
Is there anything else, Commander?
If there is, and it isn't urgent, perhaps it could wait until you are sure that you are, in fact, investigating murder.’
Dalgliesh said:
‘We know that already, Lady Ursula.
Harry Mack was murdered.’
She didn't reply, and for about a minute they sat in silence, facing each other.
Then she lifted her great eyes to his and he thought he detected a mixture of fleeting emotions: resolution, appeal, defiance.
He said:
‘I am afraid I've kept you too long and tired you.
There is really only one more matter.
Is there anything you can tell me about the two young women who died after they had been working in this house, Theresa Nolan and Diana Travers?’
The production of the half-burnt diary had shocked her deeply, but this question she took in her stride.
She said calmly:
‘Very little, I'm afraid.
I've no doubt you know most of it already.
Theresa Nolan was a gentle, considerate nurse and a competent, but not, I think, very intelligent, young woman.
She came as night-nurse on the second of May when I had a bad attack of sciatica and left on the fourteenth of June.
She had a room in this house but was on duty only at night.
She went, as I expect you know, to a maternity nursing home in Hampstead.
I accept that she probably became pregnant while she was working here, but I can assure you that no one in this house was responsible.
Pregnancy is not an occupational hazard of nursing an 82-year-old arthritic woman.
I know even less of Diana Travers.
She was, apparently, an unemployed actress who was doing domestic work while she was ‘resting’— I think that's the euphemism they use.
She came to the house in response to a card Miss Matlock had placed in a local newsagent's window and Miss Matlock took her on to replace a cleaning woman who had recently left.’
‘After consulting you, Lady Ursula?’
‘It was hardly a matter on which she needed to consult me and, in fact, she did not.
I know, of course, why you are inquiring about both women.
One or two of my friends made it their business to send me the cutting from the Paternoster Review .
I'm surprised that the police should trouble themselves with what is surely no more than cheap journalistic spite.
It can hardly be relevant to my son's murder.
If that is all, Commander, perhaps you would like to see my daughter-in-law now.
No, don't bother to ring.
I prefer to take you down myself.
And I can manage perfectly well without your help.’
She pressed the knob in the arm of her chair and the seat slowly rose.
It took her a moment to establish her balance.
Then she said:
‘Before you meet my daughter-in-law there is something I should, perhaps, say.
You may find her less apparently distressed than you expect.
That is because she has no  imagination.
Had she found my son's body she would have been disconsolate, certainly too shocked and distressed to talk to you now.
But what her eyes don't actually see she finds it difficult to imagine.
I say this only in justice to both of you.’
Dalgliesh nodded but didn't reply.
It was, he thought, the first mistake she had made.
The implication of her words was obvious, but it would have been wiser of her to have left them unspoken.