

Haiti's illiterates tell their stories to the world
As the US government admits that its trade embargo against Haiti's military regime has failed to reintroduce democratic reforms, communication groups in the country are gaining both local and international respect for their efforts to support Haiti's democratic movement by providing up to date information and analysis of events.
One such group is the Haitian Information Bureau, which was set up recently as a news and information service designed to provide an accurate picture of the current situation in Haiti.
Since the military coup in September 1991, international efforts to support the struggle for human rights and democracy in Haiti have been hampered by lack of reliable information and well-balanced analysis.
The Director of the Information Bureau, the Haitian Robert Duval, has had first-hand experience of the value of international assistance.
On a recent visit to WACC in London, he explained how his release from 17 months of brutal imprisonment under the dictator Duvalier in the mid-1970s had led him to devote his life to the struggle for justice and democracy in Haiti.
‘My father had brought me up to combine business activities with social concern,’ he said.
‘My penalty for asking simple questions was to be squeezed into a cell measuring three by four metres, along with 40 other prisoners.’
‘During 17 months I watched 180 people die of starvation and disease,’ he added.
Mr Duval then realised the power of international persuasion when he found himself among a group of prisoners who were finally released in 1976 as the result of pressure from Amnesty International and Jimmy Carter's new US government.
Mr Duval now works with US journalist  Jane Regan and one other full-time colleague from an office in the capital, Port-au-Prince.
The main vehicle for the information they publish is a bi-weekly bulletin, Haiti Info, which will initially be distributed in English and Spanish to some 500 organisations and media throughout the world.
It will be dispatched by mail, fax and via electronic mail, through networks such as the Association for Progressive Communications, which reaches 15,000 people in 92 countries.
Information for Haiti Info will be furnished by ‘verbal stringers’(or reporters) representing church and community groups and popular organisations throughout Haiti.
WACC is supporting a training programme for a team of 15 ‘verbal stringers’(or reporters), at least half of whom will be women.
They will be reporting the concerns of a vast sector of the population (some 85%) which has long been isolated by differences in language, colour and by high rates of illiteracy.
This is the first project of its kind in Haiti, and probably in the region.
It is also the first project to be supported by WACC in Haiti.
The ‘verbal stringers’ will be trained to use a simple tape recorder and cassette tapes to gather material for news and feature stories.
Training will focus on news reporting and interview techniques.
The stringers will dispatch their recorded cassettes via ‘tap tap’— the lorries which carry goods throughout the country.
Their stories will cover issues which they feel are crucial to the democratic movement in Haiti and to the daily lives of the population.
Topics will include land problems, development projects, health and education, women's groups, peasant cooperatives and democratic congresses.
Haiti Info is published every two weeks by the Haitian Information Bureau and is available by mail, fax and also electronically via computer.
Subscription rates range from US$18 to $100.
Contact the Haitian Information Bureau c/o Lynx Air, Box 407139, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 33340, USA, or BP 15533, Pétion-ville, Haiti.
Fax (509) 573560 (temporary).
E-mail: hib@igc.org.
For North American/European subscriptions contact newsLINK,,.
The exploitation of cane cutters in Haiti is notorious.
The young boy pictured above is 13 years old and works a minimum of 12 hours a day.
In the past, he had little hope of talking about his life to anyone beyond his immediate, equally oppressed, community.
Now, this boy, and thousands of others like him, can describe their lives, using their own words, through the international publications of the Haiti Information Bureau.
(Photo: Philip Wolmuth).
Courses & Concerences
WACC hosts first-ever meeting of international media groups
WACC has helped to convene an unprecedented meeting of 11 international Christian communication organisations in Geneva, Switzerland, 11–12 December.
For the first time, representatives from ecumenical, Roman Catholic, mainline Protestant and Evangelical associations will sit down together to share their concerns and visions and to work towards common understanding and joint action for the future.
Their two-day agenda will focus on: the role of the churches in the media world of tomorrow; inter-religious dialogue; different approaches to media education; introducing communication studies in theological education; needs and priorities in communication research; methods of information sharing, and possibilities of future cooperation.
WACC will be represented by Rev Carlos A Valle, General Secretary, Dr Michael Traber, Director of Studies and Publications, and Rev Randy Naylor, WACC's President, who will act as moderator.
The other organisations taking part are: Catholic Media Council (CAMECO, Aachen, Germany), Centre for the Study of Communication and Culture (CSCC, London), Media Section of Protestant Mission Agency (EMW, Hamburg), International Christian Media Commission (ICMC, Seattle, USA), Intermedia (USA), Lutheran World Federation (LWF, Geneva), International Catholic Organisation for Film and Audio-visuals (OCIC, Brussels), International Catholic Organisation for Radio and TV (UNDA, Brussels), International Catholic Union of the Press (UCIP, Geneva), Pontifical Council for Social Communication (Vatican), and the World Council of Churches (WCC, Geneva).
For further information, contact WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
Fax (71) 735 0340.
NABS-WACC looks at media from a multicultural perspective
Media in diverse cultures is the theme of the 1992 conference of WACC's North American Broadcast Section (NABS-WACC) to be held 30 November-4 December in Florida, USA.
Fr Patrick Anthony, a Roman Catholic priest from St Lucia, will give the WACC International address.
Fr Anthony, who will speak from the multi-cultural perspective of the Caribbean, is currently involved in postgraduate work on St Lucia's Nobel Prize winner for Literature, Derek Walcott.
WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, and Ole van Luyn, Coordinator of WACC's activities in North America, will represent the General Secretariat.
Also attending the conference, which attracts over 240 people from Canada and the USA, will be Rev Randy L Naylor of Canada, WACC's President; Murri Selle of Germany, Secretary of WACC and of the European Regional Association, and Rev Kevin Engel of Australia, who is WACC's Treasurer.
The conference will combine plenary addresses with specialist seminars and workshops.
The titles of the addresses include: ‘News in a Multicultural World’, ‘Multicultural Realities’, ‘The Invisible Culture’, ‘The Impact of Media on Culture’ and ‘Producing for Diverse Cultures’.
During the meeting, this year's NABS-WACC Pioneer Award will be presented to Charles Brackbill, President of the American Values Institute.
NABS-WACC, 1300 Mutual Building, Detroit, MI 48226, USA.
Tel (313) 962 0340.
1994 project deadline
The new deadline for submitting project applications to WACC's General Secretariat is 15 February 1993.
The applications will be reviewed by the regional associations in February and March 1993 and submitted to the Central Committee at its next meeting from 25 June to 2 July 1993.
WACC partner in Zaire recovers
Siteke Ubial Susey is recovering rapidly from the bullet wound he received during an attack outside his house in Kinshasa in July (see Action number 162, page 1).
In a recent telephone conversation, Mr Ubial Susey told WACC staff that he has resumed his regular responsibilities as Director of Communication with the Church of Christ in Zaire.
The political situation in Zaire, however, continues to be oppressive, and the country's churches are battling against enormous odds in their attempts to keep the population informed about what is happening in their country.
All radio broadcasts and church publications continue to be closely monitored by the government.
Initiatives such as the seminar on communication and democracy, which is reported in an article on this page, assume increasing importance as the future of democracy in Zaire remains in the balance.
African films give new perspective
Black African film was one of the focuses of a recent film festival held in Augsburg, southern Germany.
The 30 films from 15 countries shown during the eight-day festival gave a very different view of the African scene from the widespread, one-sided opinion of Africa as a continent of hunger, poverty, AIDS, political unrest and ecological disasters.
Most of the films dealt with the aftermath of the continent's colonialisation and the struggle for independence, and the conflict between tradition and modernity.
Many of the films took radical political positions as they told their stories.
‘Ta Dona’(Something's Burning) was one such film.
Produced by Adam Drabo from Mali, ‘Ta Dona’ has won widespread critical acclaim.
It tells the story of a young forestry engineer and his struggle against ecological devastation caused by bushfires.
The fire is used as a symbol of the country's political turmoil.
Just twelve days after the film's first private viewing in Mali, Mali erupted into revolution.
Adam Drabo has since become a folk hero, for the inspiration he has given to his country's people to rid themselves of corrupt government.
Until recently, WACC has mainly been involved in publishing and media education in Africa.
Now, following a recommendation from Central Committee, film will play a more important part in WACC's activities.
From an article in Evangelische Information.
Church in Zaire puts media in the service of democracy
Zaire's fledgling democracy continues to flounder as oppression and censorship are openly employed by President Mobutu Sese-Seko's government to silence opponents and critics.
The churches, however, are doing all they can to encourage as much dialogue as possible and to ensure that effective communication plays a key role in the democratic process.
Despite the recent assault on its Director of Communication, the Church of Christ (Eglise du Christ) in Zaire is refusing to take a back seat in the process.
Before Christmas, it plans to invite 40 pastors and community leaders from throughout Zaire to take part in a seven day seminar entitled ‘Communication and the Democratic Process’.
The seminar, which will be organised with WACC support, aims to help participants to be aware of the vital role of communication in the transition to democracy, and to encourage them to do all they can in their country's struggle for peace and justice.
Participants will focus on the most effective ways to disseminate news and information, including placing news and feature articles in the local and national press.
The organisers will urge participants, who will represent the 11 provinces of Zaire, to arrange similar seminars in their respective areas over a period of time.
The long-term aim is to develop a network of groups and individuals who are prepared to speak out for democratic rights.
The seminars will include an element of skills training, particularly writing and broadcasting, and it is hoped that these skills will also be used to promote awareness in the areas of culture and education, health, and the concerns of women and young people.
Another important part of the seminar will be a session on how to counter government propaganda.
The present regime of President Mobutu Sese-Seko has one of the worst track records in Africa.
It has been characterised by dictatorship, lack of respect for human rights and corruption.
Despite agreements in 1990 to abandon its one-party political ideology and to move towards multi-party democracy, the government has closed ranks and, since September 1991, the situation has worsened.
Violent censorship has become common place and journalists in Zaire who attempt to convey the truth are in constant fear for their lives.
Meanwhile, state propaganda grows increasingly powerful.
Initiatives such as the Church of Christ seminar, however, are gaining momentum.
‘We are using all means at our disposal to help people to work towards genuine democracy,’ the organisers said.
Service de Communication (Communication Department), Eglise du Christ au Zaire,
B P 4938, Kinshasa-Gombe, Zaire.
Tel (12) 33077, 34960.
Fax (12) 34961.
Bolivian centre wins national award
The Radio Production Centre (CEPRA) in Cochabamba, Bolivia, has received the 1992 Silver Condor award from the Communication Commission of the Bolivian Episcopal Conference and the Bolivian Radio Education organisation in recognition of its outstanding work in the service of the Bolivian people.
CEPRA's work is unique in Bolivia.
Formed in 1981 to produce educational radio drama programmes with participation from local communities, the centre has since developed training schemes for the Quechua-speaking population (see Action April/May 1992, page 3).
WACC has supported its radio training workshops for the past two years.
CEPRA (Centro de Producción Radiofónica), Calle Hamiraya No 249, Casilla 1986, Cochambamba , Bolivia.
Asian women launch media desk in Delhi
Women in Asia will play an increasingly important part in WACC's activities during the coming year, starting with the launch, in January 1993, of the Asian Network of Women in Communication (ANWIC).
ANWIC will not, however, be starting from scratch.
It will build on and continue the work carried out over the past three years by the WACC-Asia Region's Women's Desk, which was based in Manila, Philippines.
Run in cooperation with the Philippine communication group, People in Communication, the AR-WACC Women's Desk has organised seven workshops on Women and Media in various Asian countries.
It has encouraged the formation of several women's media groups and has established a regional information network through its journal We Can.
The AR-WACC Women's Desk was closed this year because it was time to turn it over to an existing women's group which would take the programme to a new phase in its development as well as broadening the network.
The new group, ANWIC, will be guided by a regional steering committee and will be based in Delhi in association with the Joint Women's Programme.
ANWIC's steering committee is composed of women who have been active in the WACC women's programme and the Asia Region workshops covering some 13 countries.
These include Midori Suzuki of Japan, Sharada Schaffter and Jyotsna Chatterji of India and Hetty Siregar of Indonesia.
New programmes for the next three years include a research study on women in the media in some Asian countries, workshops in South Asia for women's alternative media, and a wider concern for advocacy in women's media issues.
For further information, contact Midori Suzuki, Forum for Citizens' Television, Nagae 1601–27, Hayama-Machi, Kanagawa-Ken, Japan.
Tel (468) 758243.
Fax (468) 758243.
Modern technology changes the face of publishing in Australia
Modern communication technology is changing the face of book publishing and selling in Australia, according to leading retailer Len Woodley.
Mr Woodley, who is General Secretary of the Australian Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge (a corporate member of WACC), outlined the changes during a seminar which formed part of the Christian Booksellers Convention in Adelaide in August.
He highlighted the advances achieved in visual data available on home computers, which make reading skills redundant.
He also pointed to the emergence of the ‘electronic highway’, where books can be ordered through computerised electronic mail.
It is too early to form a a clear picture of the implications of these developments, but Mr Woodley urged booksellers to consider the challenges ahead.
‘Who will be the real readers in the future?
Will we see the demise of bound paper books?’ he asked.
Despite an uncertain future scenario, Mr Woodley was able to identify a number of pressing current needs.
He urged booksellers to cooperate to form a nationwide chain of ecumenical book outlets that would be well-funded and professionally run.
He also highlighted the need for Christian booksellers to become involved in secular franchises and to promote Australian writers.
During the convention, the Australian Christian Literature Society (ACLS), a corporate member of WACC, presented its 12th annual Australian Christian Book of the Year Award to Tall Grow the Tallow-Woods by Geoffrey Bingham, published by Historical Consultants Pty Ltd, South Australia.
The purpose of the award is to encourage the pursuit of excellence in Christian literature written by Australian authors and produced by Australian publishers.
In addition to presenting the award, the ACLS offers consultancy services in publishing and bookselling throughout Asia and South America.
It also assists individuals and organisations to develop their resources and expertise in publishing.
Australian Christian Literature Society, 160 The Avenue, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 3052.
Tel (3) 387 1449.
Fax (3) 387 5099.
From information supplied by Margaret Tembo, Honorary Secretary of ACLS.
In Europe
Churches stress media ethics
For the first time in its history, the Conference of European Churches (CEC) has decided to give priority to  communication issues, placing particular emphasis on media ethics.
Delegates to CEC's 10th Assembly adopted recommendations to increase communication activities and to develop joint programmes with organisations such as WACC, the World Council of Churches and the Lutheran World Federation.
The Assembly, which met in Prague, Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, 1–11 September, also recommended that CEC set up a committee on communication to consider the communication needs of the churches.
The Assembly declared its concern for communication in all its aspects, including the ethical, social, political and economic implications of the use of the mass media.
Members of WACC's European Regional Association (ERA-WACC) played a major role in helping to place communication high on CEC's working agenda.
Among them were Renato Maiocchi, General Secretary of Italy's Federation of Protestant Churches, Hans-Wolfgang Hessler, Chairperson of ERA-WACC and Director of the Protestant Association for Media Communication in Germany, and Bernard van Baalen of Grand Lancy, Switzerland.
The ERA-WACC delegates also took part in drafting the report of the  Assembly's working group on ‘The Role of Mass Communication’.
The group expressed concern at the distorted presentation of issues by the mass media, and urged churches to develop closer dialogue with the media and press for fair reporting and a greater sense of social responsibility.
The working group report also called on churches to respect different cultures and opinions.
‘It is important for the churches to realise that in a pluralistic, secularised society they cannot exert influence by moral or dogmatic dictates’, the report stressed.
While recognising the communication task of all European churches, the working group called for special consideration for the minority churches in all countries, and for Christians in eastern Europe.:
‘The churches in eastern Europe now face the great task of contributing to the struggle for stability and for a just social and economic order in their countries,’ the report said.
It stressed the need to work ecumenically to help the churches to overcome their lack of funds and professional expertise.
Conference of European Churches,,.
Media ethics and broadcasting training go hand in hand in the Communications Unit of the Church of England, which is a corporate member of WACC.
The Director of the Unit, Rev Eric Shegog, is Vice-Chairperson of WACC's European Regional Association, and has played a considerable role in ensuring that the subject of media ethics remains high on WACC-Europe's agenda.
Japanese TV forum publishes charter of viewers' rights
The Japanese Forum for Citizens' Television (FCT) has issued a Charter of Television Viewers' Rights, which is the first of its kind in Japan.
For several years, the FCT has been at the forefront of media awareness campaigns in Japan, many of which have been coordinated by Midori Suzuki, a specialist on media education and member of WACC's Central Committee.
Following is the text of the Charter, which will be announced publicly during FCT's 15th Anniversary International Forum on 7 November:
Article 1.
Viewers' Rights
Freedom of speech and expression is not limited to broadcasters and television producers, but is a basic right guaranteed to all viewers.
Article 2.
The Right to Freedom from Discrimination
According to the basic principle of human rights, viewers shall not be discriminated against because of their nationality, race, age, sex, religion, occupation and social status.
We urge citizens to participate in the creation and establishment of broadcasting legislation which affirms the right of all viewers to be free from discrimination.
Article 3.
The Right to Know
Broadcasting stations, by right, shall be open to the public.
Therefore, all viewers have the right to ask and receive explanations about a station's programming, contents of programmes and advertising.
Article 4.
The Right to Reply
The right of viewers to reply to the violation of human rights and privacy is guaranteed.
Article 5.
The Right to Choose
As television consumers, viewers have the right to select information from a variety of choices.
As far as feasible, sources of information, as well as formats, contents and programming should be diversified.
Article 6.
The Right to Receive Media Education
People have the right to receive media education which will enable them to become critical viewers of the medium.
Curricula for media education should be promoted, and, as far as possible, they should be included in school and social education systems.
Article 7.
Rights and Responsibilities as Partners
In the case of both the Japan Broadcasting Corporation (NHK) and the commercial broadcasting corporations, viewers are partners and have both rights and responsibilities.
Administrative control of the airwaves should be transferred to an independent non-governmental organ.
Also, a citizens' programme review committee should be established.
Midori Suzuki, Forum for Citizens' Television, Nagae 1601–27, Hayama-Machi, Kanagawa-Ken, Japan.
Tel. & Fax (75) 8243.
WACC and IAMCR share vision for democratic communication
The two-yearly conference of the International Association for Mass Communication Research has become a focus for critical communication researchers from around the world, according to Pradip Thomas, Coordinator of WACC's Asian Programme.
‘Both WACC and IAMCR share a vision of a communications future grounded in democratic alternatives to the present structures,’ Mr Thomas said.
‘WACC's Forum priorities address concerns that go beyond the scope of conventional communication research towards the realm of philosophical concerns that are normally neglected in mainstream research agendas.
‘As such, WACC's Forum function fits into a niche and is recognised by global bodies such as IAMCR for its role in bringing the concepts of community, universal rights and ethics into the centre of communication research initiatives around the world.
‘WACC's lead in championing and highlighting such concerns was alluded to by the President of IAMCR, Prof Cees Hamelink, as well as by other researchers from both the North and the South,’ Mr Thomas added.
WACC was directly involved in two activities at IAMCR's recent conference: the MacBride Round Table and a consultation on Communication Ethics.
The MacBride Round Table aimed to place the late Seán MacBride's vision of a truly democratic world communication order within the rapidly changing political and social circumstances throughout the globe.
Over 40 researchers and practitioners attending the Round Table agreed on the need for a follow-up session in Dublin, Eire, in 1993, and a further Round Table in Hawaii in late 1993 or 1994.
The consultation on communication ethics, which was organised by WACC, was approached from a Latin American perspective.
Antonio Pasquali of
Venezuela presented a paper on the ‘Protonorms of Communication Ethics’, which looked at the need for a new ethics of communication animated by fundamental universal principles.
The meeting was part of an ongoing international programme, sponsored by WACC, designed to explore protonorms (fundamental principles) of communication from a multi-cultural perspective.
Another participant at the consultation, Pedro Gilberto Gomes of Brazil, spoke on ‘Communication, Hope and Ethics’.
He made a distinction between ‘established social morality’(the accumulation of moral norms in a particular society) and ‘community ethics’(a universal authority that governs social moral philosophy).
He claimed that communication professionals should not just be guided by codes of conduct but, more fundamentally, by universal principles of justice, solidarity and reciprocity.
He pointed out that community ethics must take the side of the poor, who have no public voice nor space in society.
He stressed that community ethics must question a system that marginalises people by monopolising information and communication systems and insist on radical changes in society's communication structures.
International Association for Mass Communication Research, Baden Powellweg 109–111, 1069 LD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Tel (20) 6101581.
Fax (20) 6104821.
Latin-speaking research group formed
An Association of Latin-Speaking Communications and Telecommunications Researchers was formed during the IAMCR conference in Brazil.
More than 40 researchers, including several WACC members, decided that the ease of communication between Latin speakers and the relatively similar theoretical and practical approaches to communication research made the creation of a Latin-speaking association worthwhile.
Countries and regions represented in the new organisation include Argentina, Brazil, Catalunia, Colombia, France, Iran, Italy, Mexico, Peru, Portuguese-speaking Africa, Spain, Quebec, Uruguay, the USA and Venezuela.
A temporary coordinating group was appointed to gather suggestions from different researchers before drawing up a legal framework and establishing guidelines for the aims and activities of the Association.
The first meeting of the Association will probably take place in Barcelona, Spain, in June 1993 at the meeting of the organisation of Ibero-american researchers.
Those who are interested in this project may contact the following coordinators:
Antonio Pasquali (Venezuela): fax (2) 2619093.
José Marques de Melo (Brazil): fax (11) 8144764.
Rafael Roncagliolo (Peru): fax (14) 617949.
Enric Marin (Spain-Barcelona): fax (3) 5812005.
François Xavier Hutin (France): fax (33) 99326025.
Giuseppe Richieri (Italy): fax (2) 86933534.
Ingrid Schulze Schnieder (Spain-Madrid): fax (1) 3442131.
Resource
L Am journal looks at theological education
Medios & Comunicaciones (Media and Communication) is a recent publication in the series Cuadernos de Teología (Notes on Theology), produced by the Institute for Higher Theological Education (ISEDET) in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The issue brings together the main papers presented at the first Latin American consultation of representatives of theological seminaries who met together in July 1990 to discuss the role of communication and theology in their institutions.
The publication also includes the final document drawn up by participants outlining their conclusions and 11 recommendations for future activities.
The consultation was supported by WACC as part of a global programme.
The results were followed up at a second Latin American consultation which was held in São Leopoldo, Brazil, in July 1992.
WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, took part in both consultations.
His paper ‘The Challenges of Communication in Theological Education’ is published in Medios & Comunicaciones.
Medios & Comunicaciones: Posibilidad e Incidencia en la Educación Teológica y las Iglesias Evangélicas is available in Spanish only from ISEDET (Instituto Superior Evangélico de Estudios Teológicos),.
WACC has become an associate member of the International Association for Mass Communication Research (IAMCR), which is the only worldwide organisation of professional communications researchers.
‘This decision is merely the formal recognition of an existing relationship that we hope to extend and strengthen further in the years ahead,’ said IAMCR's President, Cees J Hamelink.
IAMCR is already an associate member of WACC.
Books & Resources
‘Culturelink’ supports development network
A profile of WACC features alongside 12 other organisations concerned with cultural development in the latest issue of Culturelink, which is published by the Institute for Development and International Relations in Zagreb, Croatia.
Culturelink, which is published quarterly, profiles different organisations in each issue under its ‘Networking in Progress’ section.
Its section on ‘Research and Programmes’ gives details of a selection of worldwide activities concerning cultural development.
There are also substantial sections on ‘International Meetings and Conferences’, ‘Documentation’, ‘Publications’ and ‘News and Information’.
A heading entitled ‘New Actions’ includes information on the first European Conference on Peacemaking and Conflict Resolution.
The Culturelink network was formed in June 1989 and embraces research, information and documentation institutions and centres concerned with cultural development and international cooperation.
Culturelink is available from the Institute for Development and International Relations (IRMO), Ul Lj Farkasa Vukotinovica 2,
P O Box 303, 41000 Zagreb, Croatia.
Tel (41) 454522.
Fax (41) 444059.
Journal highlights women in ministry in Melanesia
Women in ministry in Melanesia is the subject of a special issue of Catalyst, the journal of The Melanesian Institute for Pastoral and Socio-Economic Service, which is a corporate member of WACC and based in Papua New Guinea.
The issue compiles papers that were presented by women from the United Lutheran and Roman Catholic churches at a seminar on women in ministry which was organised by the Institute in April 1991.
A major objective of the seminar was ‘to give the participants a means through which their ministries could be analysed in view of their identity and their role in the Church today’, according to an editorial in Catalyst.
‘The ecumenical spirit and composition of the group was a key element in the success of the participants coming to grips with the topic.
The seminar came at a time when the contribution of women in the Church promised to become an increasingly important part of the decision-making process in the life of the Church’, the editorial continued.
In addition to a ‘Vision Statement’ drawn up by participants, the journal contains 19 articles.
Titles include: ‘Equal in the Kingdom’, ‘Silence of Women: Societal Influences’, ‘Women in World Religions’, ‘Women and Law’ and ‘The Role of Women in the Church’.
Women in Ministry is a special issue of the quarterly magazine Catalyst, published by The Melanesian Institute for Pastoral and Socio-Economic Service, p o box 571, Goroka, EHP, Papua New Guinea.
Tel 1777.
Fax 1214.
Guide to social message video in Africa
A guide to the production and use of social message video in sub-Saharan Africa has been published by National Video Resources (NVR), based in New York, USA.
The guide, which is entitled Social Message Video Production and Distribution in Sub-Saharan Africa — A Suggested Approach, focuses on issues of production, promotion and distribution, and looks at questions such as language and dubbing problems, the use of indigenous casts and production crews, and transportation of video and film to the region.
The 16-page booklet ‘is not designed to provide all the answers, but to be an overview’, says NVR.
The appendices provide additional information about African film festivals and contacts in Africa, Europe and the USA.
National Video Resources aims to help increase public access to high quality, independent film and video.
Over the past few years, WACC has supported several projects involving the use of video in Africa, and the number is likely to increase in the future.
Social Message Video Production and Distribution in Sub-Saharan Africa by Steven C Smith is available free of charge from National Video Resources, 73 Spring Street, Suite 606, New York, NY 10012, USA.
Tel (212) 274 8080.
Fax (212) 274 8081.
Global communication and justice report published
The final report of the Consultation on Global Communication and Justice, held in the Philippines in January, has been published by Intermedia of the National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA.
The consultation, which was sponsored by Intermedia and WACC's Asia Region, brought together 25 communicators from North America and Asia to discuss issues of communication and justice and to draw up plans for action for the future (see reports on pages 1 and 4 of Action number 159).
The report spans 74 pages and contains the statements of the North American and Asian participants and the press releases issued after the consultation.
The report also includes seven articles by leading communicators on the following topics: ‘Theological and Ethical Perspectives on Global Communication’ by Kim Yong Bock of Korea; ‘Trends in Global  Communication Policy Making’co-authored by Stewart Hoover of the USA, with Shalini Venturelli and Doug Wagner; ‘The Social Impact of New Communication Technologies in Asia and Their Policy Implications’by Anura Goonasekera of Sri Lanka; ‘Trends in Global Communication’by Colleen Roach of the USA; ‘Capturing Communication — Indigenous Communication’by Jyotsna Chatterji of India; ‘Women in Media in the Asian Context’by Elizabeth Reyes-Martinez of the Philippines, and ‘The Role of the Church’by Beverly Chain of the USA.
Global Communication and Justice, Inter-Regional Consultation Report costs US$8 per copy, including postage, and is available from Rev David Briddell, Co-Chairperson of the Consultation Planning Committee, Intermedia, CWSW/NCCC Room 670, 475 Riverside Drive, New York, NY 10115, USA.
Tel (212) 870 2376.
Fax (212) 870 2055.
WACC hails Guatemalan Nobel Peace Prize winner
WACC's President, Rev Randy L Naylor, and General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, sent a congratulatory telegram to Rigoberta Menchu Tum following the announcement on 16 October that she has been awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace.
Ms Menchu, a Mayan Indian from Guatemala, is just 33 years old.
She received the award in recognition of her courageous human rights work following the assassination of her parents and several brothers and sisters by the Guatemalan authorities over ten years ago.
The telegram read: ‘In the name of the World Association for Christian Communication, which comprises over 700 communication professionals and organisations and in almost 100 countries, we would like to share with you our joy at such a distinguished achievement’.
The message added: ‘Through your award of the Nobel Peace Prize, the suffering and the struggles of all indigenous peoples is honoured.
This recognition strengthens our mutual commitment for life and justice with our Lord who declares: ‘Blessed are the peace makers’’.
The rejoicing was shared particularly by WACC's members and colleagues in Central America, although news has since come through that the Guatemalan government is responding to Ms Menchu's Peace Prize with a renewed crackdown against the popular democratic movement.
People
Professor Annabelle Sreberny-Mohammadi succeeded Professor James D Halloran as Director of the Centre for Mass Communication Research at the University of Leicester on 1 September.
She previously directed the graduate programme in Media Studies at Queens College, City University of New York, USA.
She taught Sociology and Communications at National University and Damavand College, Tehran, Iran, through the revolutionary period of 1976–80.
Several WACC scholars have studied at the Centre.
Rev Stanley M Nyahwa is the new Training Consultant with the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation in Windhoek.
Mr Nyahwa, a personal member of WACC, was formerly Africa Regional Director for Inter Press Service news agency, based in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Rev Stan McKay is the first Native Canadian to be appointed Moderator of The United Church of Canada.
Born in an isolated area of Manitoba, Mr McKay, from the Cree tribe, was elected six years after the United Church formally apologised to native people for years of injustice on the part of the Church.
Last year, Mr McKay addressed WACC's pre-CentCom seminar on the theme ‘500 Years of Evangelisation in the Americas’.
Dr Alwyn Marriage is the new Director of the United Society for Christian Literature/Feed the Minds, which is based in Guildford, UK.
Dr Marriage, who was previously the editor of Christian magazine, succeeds Rev Alec Gilmore, who has reached retirement age.
Feed the Minds has been supporting WACC projects for many years.
Chris Ambrose is the new President of the Australian Religious Press Association.
He succeeds Peter Philp who stood down this year after serving six years as President.
Mr Ambrose is the managing editor of the Churches of Christ publication, the Australian Christian.
World Association for Christian Communication requires an EVALUATION OFFICER
To coordinate the evaluation of projects and programmes.
To assist in the development of a plan for a systematic evaluation of different areas of WACC's programme and activities.
With:
Background in social sciences.
Ability to analyse systematically and capability to plan.
Experience in project work in Third World countries.
and a STUDIES COORDINATOR
To administer the Studies Programme.
To plan and coordinate seminars/workshops at different levels.
To liaise with the network of communication academics and university departments in different parts of the world.
To provide lectures and articles on communication issues.
With:
Qualification(s) in mass communication or a related field.
A good theological knowledge.
Professional involvement in church and non-church international organisations.
Both posts require fluency in English and another language, preferably French, Spanish or German.
Location: London
Terms and conditions: To be negotiated.
Apply in writing with curriculum vitae before 31 January 1993 to:
General Secretary, WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, England.
Professor Annabelle Sreberny-Mohammadi succeeded Professor James D Halloran as Director of the Centre for Mass Communication Research at the University of Leicester on 1 September.
She previously directed the graduate programme in Media Studies at Queens College, City University of New York, USA.
She taught Sociology and Communications at National University and Damavand College, Tehran, Iran, through the revolutionary period of 1976–80.
Several WACC scholars have studied at the Centre.
Rev Stanley M Nyahwa is the new Training Consultant with the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation in Windhoek.
Mr Nyahwa, a personal member of WACC, was formerly Africa Regional Director for Inter Press Service news agency, based in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Rev Stan McKay is the first Native Canadian to be appointed Moderator of The United Church of Canada.
Born in an isolated area of Manitoba, Mr McKay, from the Cree tribe, was elected six years after the United Church formally apologised to native people for years of injustice on the part of the Church.
Last year, Mr McKay addressed WACC's pre-CentCom seminar on the theme ‘500 Years of Evangelisation in the Americas’.
Dr Alwyn Marriage is the new Director of the United Society for Christian Literature/Feed the Minds, which is based in Guildford, UK.
Dr Marriage, who was previously the editor of Christian magazine, succeeds Rev Alec Gilmore, who has reached retirement age.
Feed the Minds has been supporting WACC projects for many years.
Chris Ambrose is the new President of the Australian Religious Press Association.
He succeeds Peter Philp who stood down this year after serving six years as President.
Mr Ambrose is the managing editor of the Churches of Christ publication, the Australian Christian.