

HOLDING OUT HOPE
Amnesty International is a worldwide human rights movement which works impartially for the release of prisoners of conscience: men, women and children detained anywhere for their beliefs, colour, ethnic origin, sex, religion or language, provided they have neither used nor advocated the use of violence.
Amnesty International opposes torture and the death penalty in all cases without reservation and advocates fair and prompt trials for all political prisoners.
Amnesty International is independent of all governments, political factions, ideologies, economic interests and religious creeds.
It has formal relations with the United Nations (ECOSOC), UNESCO, the Council of Europe, the Organisation of American States, and the Organisation of African Unity.
Amnesty International was the recipient of the 1977 Nobel Prize for Peace.
NEWS
AFRICA
South Africa
In October 1991 Amnesty International called for the release of 11 members of the South African human rights organization Black Sash, detained in the nominally independent ‘homeland’ of Bophuthatswana.
They were arrested on 5 October while staging a peaceful protest to highlight repression in Bophuthatswana.
After three days' imprisonment they were convicted of attending an illegal gathering under the terms of Bophuthatswana's Internal Security Act, fined, and released from custody.
The police action against the members of Black Sash, which, although legal elsewhere in South Africa, remains banned in Bophutatswana, underscored the extremely restrictive conditions confronting human rights as well as political activists in Bophutatswana.
Angola
Several hundred prisoners have been released in Angola, following a peace agreement in May 1991 between the government and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)(trans: Uniáo Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola).
However the fate of hundreds of others remains unknown.
The first releases occurred in mid-July when the government commuted all death sentences and proclaimed an amnesty for all political and some criminal prisoners.
The releases were temporarily suspended in late July when each side accused the other of failing to respect the terms of their agreement.
UNITA complained that the government amnesty fell outside the legal framework of the agreement and some released prisoners who had been held by UNITA alleged that other prisoners had been forced to remain in Jamba, UNITA's headquarters in southeastern Angola.
AI welcomed the releases and the commutation of death sentences but is concerned that many thousands of prisoners, arrested or captured in the context of the civil war which began in 1975, remain unaccounted for.
The Angolan Government and UNITA admit to holding a total of less than 2,000 prisoners.
The government has also failed to account for many hundreds who ‘disappeared’ in custody after an unsuccessful coup attempt in 1977.
Zaire
The Zairian security forces have killed more than 50 unarmed opposition party supporters since April 1991, despite the end in 1990 of a 25-year ban on opposition parties and official recognition of several dozen political parties.
Most of the killings have occurred during demonstrations, but individuals have also been  targeted .
On 2 September, troops opened fire when barricades were erected by a group protesting against a sharp increase in the cost of living and the government's failure to convene a national conference to discuss the country's political future.
Two days later, at least three people were killed when members of the paramilitary Civil Guard and supporters of the ruling party attacked the offices of two opposition parties.
AI has called for an independent inquiry into the killings and repeatedly called for a curb on the use of firearms by the security forces.
Burundi
About 100 members of the majority Hutu ethnic group were arrested between July and November 1991 by members of the Burundi security forces in various parts of the country.
Virtually all those arrested were accused of being supporters of the opposition Parti pour la libération du peuple hutu (PALIPEHUTU), Hutu People's Liberation Party, which the government accuses of seeking political change through violence against the minority but dominant Tutsi ethnic group.
These were the first large-scale arrests of government opponents since a program of political reforms started in 1989.
Arrests were particularly numerous in September, when members of the Burundi refugee community in Tanzania, which had previously provided support for PALIPEHUTU, returned to Burundi as part of a voluntary repatriation scheme.
Returnees were among 40 people detained in Muyinga province, in the northeast.
Some detainees were subjected to severe beatings while in police custody, for example at the Brigade spéciale de recherche (BSR), Special Investigation Brigade, in Bujumbura.
By October most had been transferred to ordinary prisons but had not been tried.
They were accused variously of circulating tracts, receiving foreign assistance to endanger the security of the state and engaging in activities which might disturb the peace.
Five of those arrested in July were apparently meeting to plan a commemoration of the anniversary of the death of the PALIPEHUTU leader, Remy Gahutu, in prison in Tanzania in August 1990.
The arrests coincide with the publication in August of the recommendations of a Constitutional Commission.
This called for the establishment of a multi-party political system in place of the present one-party state, with a ban on parties based on just one ethnic group.
Chad
Four people, three of them soldiers, were publicly executed by firing squad on 7 October 1991 in the capital, N'Djamena.
They were convicted of criminal offences and sentenced to death in recent months, with no right of appeal, by a military court set up in April 1991.
These were the first court-ordered executions in Chad for many years.
AMERICAS
Haiti
On Monday 30 September 1991 troops overthrew the elected government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who had taken office on 7 February 1991.
In the aftermath of the coup d'état, AI learned of widespread human rights violations by the security forces.
In the days following the coup soldiers opened fire on hundreds of civilians in different sectors of Port-au-Prince, including Cité Soleil and Lamentin 54, and in other parts of the country, leaving hundreds head and wounded.
Among those extrajudicially executed was Jacky Caraïbe, director of Radio Caraïbe, who was seized on 30 September by soldiers, beaten in front of his family and taken away.
His severely tortured body was found shortly afterwards.
Several supporters of President Aristide were arrested and beaten, including Port-au-Prince Mayor Evans Paul, the administrator of a day care centre, a businessman and a well-known singer.
At the time of writing, AI was investigating their legal situation.
Members of President Aristide's cabinet, who went into hiding when the coup started, said that soldiers searched and damaged their homes.
Radio stations were attacked and damaged by soldiers, and most of them stopped broadcasting.
Grassroots organizations reported harassment of their members, and priests close to President Aristide went into hiding, in fear for their safety.
Guatemala
The head of the Homicide Section of the Guatemalan National Police Department of Criminal Investigation was killed in August 1991 while walking with his wife and child 70 metres from the National Police headquarters in Guatemala City.
A former member of the élite corps of the National Police was reportedly arrested the following day in connection with the murder.
José Miguel Mérida Escobar led the investigation into the stabbing death, in September 1990, of anthropologist Myrna Mack Chang and wrote the police report which named an officer of the intelligence branch of the army as one of those responsible for the killing.
In July 1991 a warrant was issued for the officer's arrest but to date he has not been apprehended.
A few days before he was killed, José Miguel Mérida Escobar had reported to the Office of the Human Rights Procurator that, since the findings of his report became publicly known, he had been followed by unidentified armed men.
Foreign and Guatemalan journalists later reported receiving warnings from anonymous sources not to publish any information on Myrna Mack Chang's killing.
At the time of his murder, José Miguel Mérida Escobar was reportedly preparing to testify about the killing of Myrna Mack Chang before the Inter-American Human Rights Commission of the Organization of American States meeting in the United States of America.
Brazil
On 27 August 1991 a proposal by Congressman Amaral Netto to reintroduce the death penalty in Brazil was returned to the Constitution and Justice Commission for further study following serious questions by parliamentarians regarding its constitutionality.
The parliamentary debate has been deferred.
Peruvian wives in formation for Civil defence patrol.
See pages 10–11.
Colombia
Dr Eduardo Umaña Mendoza, law professor and human rights lawyer, has been repeatedly threatened with death over a number of months, apparently as a result of his activities in defence of human rights.
Anonymous callers have warned him to stop his human rights work or face death.
Although no specific motive was given, the threats may be connected to Dr Umaña's role in representing the surviving members of a peasant family whose relatives were allegedly killed by members of the Colombian army in August 1991.
On 18 August 1991 Antonio Palacios Urrea, three of his children and his son-in-law were shot dead by soldiers in their home on the outskirts of Fusagasugá, Cundinamarca department.
A statement issued by the army alleged that those killed were members of a guerilla group who had died during an armed confrontation with soldiers.
This version of events was contradicted by eye-witness reports and the findings of police and journalists who visited the scene shortly afterwards and who reportedly found no evidence that the people inside the house had fired on their attackers.
The only adult survivor of the attack testified to the military court investigating the killings that her relatives were shot through the back of the head after being made to lie face down on the floor.
At the end of September 1991, arrest warrants against army officers were issued in connection with the killings.
On learning of the threats against Dr Umaña, the Colombian authorities took steps to safeguard his immediate physical integrity.
However, Amnesty remains concerned about the long-term safety of Dr Umaña and other human rights lawyers and workers in Colombia.
HUMAN RIGHTS DAY
Westminster Abbey
A SERVICE OF OBSERVANCE TO MARK THE 40TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UN CONVENTION RELATING TO THE STATUS OF REFUGEES
TUESDAY 10 DECEMBER 1991 AT 6.30 P.M.
Sponsored by: Amnesty International (British Section) United Nations Association
All Welcome
ASIA
Macao
Macao, the Portuguese territory on the southern coast of China, will revert to Chinese sovereignty in 1999.
The draft of the Basic Law, which will govern the Macao Special Administrative Region (MSAR) after 1999, was published in July.
In a memorandum submitted to the Macao Basic Law Drafting Committee in November, Amnesty International said the draft Basic Law did not adequately protect fundamental human rights.
It failed in particular to include safeguards against the reinstatement of the death penalty, which was abolished in Macao in the 19th century.
Amnesty International also expressed concern that the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, currently in force in Macao by virtue of Portugal's ratification, should continue to apply to the MSAR beyond 1999.
Pakistan
Policies pursued by the government of President Zia (1977 to 1988) and the present government of Nawaz Sharif, in office since November 1990, have violated the right to freedom of religion, particularly for the Ahmadis of Pakistan.
The Ahmadiyya community, numbering over three million members in Pakistan, considers itself Muslim but is regarded as heretical by orthodox Muslims.
Changes in the Pakistan Penal Code introduced in recent years make it a criminal offence for Ahmadis to profess, practice and propagate their faith.
In the most recent such amendment the death penalty has become the mandatory punishment for the offence of defiling the name of the Prophet Mohammad.
Orthodox Muslims consider that an Ahmadi defiles the Prophet's name by speaking or writing it.
AI is concerned that Ahmadis continue to be charged, convicted and given prison terms solely for the peaceful exercise of their religious beliefs.
For instance, in November 1990 two brothers in Abbotabad were each sentenced to six years' imprisonment and given a heavy fine for having preached about their faith.
Several Ahmadis are known currently to be serving prison sentences for using Muslim phrases of greeting.
AI published a document in September 1991 describing human rights violations and abuses reportedly suffered by Ahmadis in 1990/91.
It urged the Pakistan Government to release all Ahmadi prisoners of conscience unconditionally and immediately, and to bring the country's legislation in line with international human rights standards.
Bangladesh
An Amnesty International report published in August 1991 describes torture and extrajudicial executions of non-combatant tribal inhabitants of the Chittagong Hill Tracts by security forces during 1989 and 1990.
These violations have occurred in the context of a continuing conflict since the mid-1970s between the security forces and armed tribal groups seeking regional autonomy.
Reports of rape of tribal women by security force members continue to be received by AI, and non-combatant tribal members were also subjected to other forms of torture during 1989 and 1990.
AI submitted its report to the new Government of Bangladesh, urging it to end these human rights violations but to date has received no response.
Hong Kong
AI continues to be concerned at the long-term detention in Hong Kong of thousands of Vietnamese asylum-seekers.
The organization has called for a review of Hong Kong's detention policy for asylum-seekers.
Over 50,000 Vietnamese asylum-seekers are stranded in detention in Hong Kong, most of them awaiting ‘screening’ to determine whether they are considered refugees.
The rest have been ‘screened out’— denied refugee status — and if they choose not to return to Viet Nam under a ‘voluntary repatriation program’ they may face indefinite detention in Hong Kong, or an increasing threat of forcible return to Viet Nam.
In a report in January 1990 AI expressed concern that the screening process in Hong Kong was critically flawed and that asylum-seekers at risk of human rights violations might be denied refugee status and returned to Viet Nam.
Some of the report's recommendations have since been implemented by the Hong Kong authorities but AI continues to call for each asylum-seeker to receive legal advice at all stages of the process and to receive an oral hearing when appealing against refusal of refugee status.
Also, asylum-seekers who were ‘screened out’ prior to recent changes in the screening process should have their cases fully reviewed.
The screening procedures currently in effect in Hong Kong are part of the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA), an international agreement covering the treatment of Vietnamese asylum-seekers in the countries of ‘first asylum’ in southeast Asia.
These include Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand.
In August 1991 a meeting of non-governmental organizations, including AI, and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, was held in Singapore.
It noted discrepancies in screening procedures and the treatment of asylum-seekers among CPA countries and proposed concrete improvements.
AI continues to monitor the procedures and regional developments.
Vietnamese asylum seekers arrive in Hong Kong, April 1989.
EUROPE
USSR
Amnesty International is concerned about numerous reports of ill-treatment of ethnic Armenians during an operation by Soviet troops and Azerbaydzhani special police units (OMON) in April and May 1991 in areas of the Republic of Azerbaydzhan which have been the scene of ethnic violence.
Many men detained, both briefly by the OMON and in Azerbaydzhani prisons, claim they were beaten and otherwise ill-treated; allegations refer to regular daily beatings with truncheons, often to the point of unconsciousness; rape and insertion of bottles into the anus; and deprivation of food and water.
At least two men reportedly died in prison from injuries inflicted.
One, a police officer, is said to have been tortured and his cries relayed by radio to other ethnic-Armenian officers as a warning.
The other reportedly had his skull fractured in 15 places, broken fingers and numerous stab wounds.
The official cause of death was given as suicide by hanging and internal haemorrhaging respectively.
Amnesty International is also concerned that in other instances, during the operation some unarmed civilians were reportedly killed deliberately by Soviet and Azerbaydzhani law enforcement officials without warning or attempts to apprehend them, and that some people are said to have been detained for short periods solely on grounds of their ethnic origin.
Yugoslavia
Hundreds of people have been killed in the violence following the republic of Croatia's declaration of independence on 25 June 1991.
There have been reports of extrajudicial executions, killings and mutilations of civilians or captured members of armed forces and of the torture or ill-treatment of people detained by the various parties to the conflict.
In an incident in Cetekovac in eastern Croatia, more than 20 are said to have been killed, including unarmed civilians, by Serbian insurgents who attacked the village on 4 September 1991; an old man described to a visiting journalist how the insurgents had forced him and others to stand in line and shot dead one villager who tried to flee.
Twenty-one Serbian villagers were reported to have been killed on 22 August by Croatian security forces carrying out house-to-house searches in the villages of Kinjacka, Cakle and Trnjani for insurgents believed to have fired mortars at the town of Sisak.
A local police chief later denied that the Croatian forces had killed civilians.
In another incident up to 80 Croatian police officers and at least 35 civilians were reported to have died on 1 August in the village of Dalj in Slavonia.
According to villagers, Serbian insurgents killed those left wounded after Dalj was occupied by units of the Yugoslav National Army.
Autopsies carried out by forensic experts reportedly concluded that some victims had been killed by a bullet in the head after having been wounded.
Civilians and members of security and paramilitary forces are also reported to have been physically ill-treated after being captured or detained.
Cedomir Biga, a Serbian who died on 2 September while detained by Croatian police in Dreznik, was said by police to have died from a heart attack.
However, a hospital autopsy reportedly found that his back was severely bruised, his ribs were broken and that his death was the result of injuries caused by blows.
United Kingdom
Karen Reilly, 18, and Martin Peake, 17, were shot dead in Northern Ireland in September 1990 while driving a stolen car.
They were killed by soldiers from the Parachute Regiment.
Soldiers initially alleged that they fired at the car after it had driven through an army checkpoint and hit a soldier.
However, eyewitnesses stated that they saw soldiers simulating a leg injury in order to corroborate the above statement.
In July 1991 six soldiers were charged in connection with the deaths of Karen Reilly and Martin Peake: one with murder, two with attempted murder, and all six with attempting to pervert the course of justice and obstructing the police investigation.
For many years AI has been calling for an independent judicial inquiry to investigate the pattern of disputed killings by security forces in Northern Ireland in order to help prevent unlawful killings.
A mock-up of the Astra car in which the army shot and killed the two is displayed in an army canteen.
The text to the left says: ‘Vauxhall Astra, Built by Robots, Driven by Joyriders, Stopped by A COY!’
(Meaning A Company of the Parachute Regiment).
Leg cuffs banned
Following the article ‘Iron Trade’ in the August/September Amnesty by Brian Wood concerning the overseas promotion of leg cuffs, and the many letters written by Amnesty readers to MPs expressing their concern, the Minister of State for Trade and Industry, Tim Sainsbury, launched an official inquiry.
On 17 October, Mr Sainsbury announced —‘in the light of publicity’— that ‘oversized’ cuffs and certain linking chains, which could be used for the same purpose as leg irons, had been evading export control.
From now on, these items will be included in the existing export ban of leg irons, shackles and gang chains.
The maximum length permitted for two cuffs and a linking chain will now be 240mm.
‘I have sought advice from the police scientific development branch of the Home Office about the definition of ‘handcuff’’, he said.
(See Letters, page 23.)
MIDDLE EAST
Jordan/Saudi Arabia
On 2 October 1991 Jordanian security forces arrested Muhammad al-Fasi, a Saudi Arabian businessman, and reportedly handed him to Saudi Arabian authorities at the al-Haditha crossing point on the Saudi/Jordanian frontier.
Sheik Mohammed al-Fasi
Muhammad al-Fasi had been publicly critical of the Saudi Arabian Government during the Gulf crisis and its aftermath.
He is allegedly being held in a secret location in Riyadh where it is feared he is at risk of torture and execution.
Amnesty International issued urgent appeals calling on the Saudi Arabian authorities to clarify his fate and whereabouts, and to provide assurances that he will not be ill-treated or executed.
AI also sought clarifications from the Jordanian authorities as to their reason for expelling Muhammad al-Fasi, and any assurances they may have sought or obtained from the Saudi Arabian Government that his human rights would not be violated.
Egypt
Political detainees in Egypt are beaten, suspended in contorted positions, burned with cigarettes and tortured with electric shocks, AI said in a report published in October 1991.
Torture of political detainees became widespread and systematic after the assassination of President Sadat in October 1981.
Ten years later a state of emergency is still in force, renewed in May 1991 for a further three years, and political detainees held incommunicado under emergency provisions continue to be denied basic protection against torture.
Many victims have sought and been awarded compensation by the courts.
AI has repeatedly brought its evidence of a consistent pattern of torture of political detainees to the attention of the Egyptian Government.
Iraq
In July 1991 AI took the unprecedented step of urging the United Nations (UN) to establish an international on-site human rights monitoring operation in Iraq to prevent torture, killings and other abuses by government forces.
AI simultaneously published the findings of its delegates' visits to Iran and Turkey in May to interview Kurds, Arab Shi'a Muslims and others about human rights violations following the uprising in Iraq in March and April this year.
The report detailed widespread arrests, torture and mass extrajudicial killings of people suspected of participating in the uprising in northern and southern Iraq.
Hundreds of civilians were shot dead in the streets by Iraqi forces or executed by firing squads.
Countless unarmed civilians fleeing to the borders were killed by helicopter gunships.
AI's report confirmed that the human rights violations committed by government forces were brutal in the extreme, and underscored the need for the UN to ensure the long term protection of all those at risk in Iraq.
Morocco
The secret detention centre of Tazmamert in south-eastern Morocco is said to have been demolished in mid-September 1991 and its inmates moved to an undisclosed location.
Ten prisoners have reportedly been released and two others, whose sentences have not expired, have been transferred to an undisclosed place of detention.
Among these was Hamid Bendourou, who is reported to have died subsequently.
Of the 61 former military personnel moved from Kenitra Military Prison to Tazmamert in 1973, 29 are said to have since died, almost certainly due to the harsh conditions of detention.
These detainees, convicted of taking part in attempted coups against King Hassan II in 1971 and 1972, were held incommunicado, completely cut off from the outside world for 19 years; the only news from them was in rare letters smuggled out.
The sentences of many of them had expired 17 years ago.
Amnesty is concerned that those who remain detained may not be receiving adequate medical treatment for the seriousness of their conditions and some may be close to death.
Tunisia
Five men were executed on 9 October 1991 in Tunisia, despite President Ben Ali's repeatedly stated personal opposition to the death penalty.
In November 1990, a man convicted of multiple rape and murder became the first person in Tunisia to be executed since the President came to power in 1987.
At the time the Tunisian Government stated that this execution was an exception, carried out because of the particularly heinous nature of the crime.
AI has written to President Ben Ali expressing its regret at this resumption of executions.
HOME NEWS
Quiz Quest News and Results
On Saturday 28 September, some of the hardiest souls in London and the surrounding environs took to the footpaths of Battersea Park, got cold(s), wet, mentally tested and later drunk as they contested the 1991 Amnesty Sponsored Quiz Quest.
30–40 teams comprising between 130–150 people braved the elements and leapt boating lakes, scaled Peace Pagodas and sipped warm tea in their desperate (and sometimes pathetic!) attempts to become winners of the coveted 1991 Quiz Quest title.
The first teams started the course at 10.30am and there followed a steady stream of contestants wandering around Battersea, struggling to remember long-forgotten pieces of general knowledge until the last team set off at 1.45.
The average course time was around one hour 40 mins, but the winning team, ‘The E Team’, completed the course in a staggering one hour and five minutes and answered 20 out of 21 questions correctly — making their course time an amazing 45 mins.
After much deliberation by the judges, the winners of the best-named team was ‘Teenagers Under Stress’(if any of you teenagers are reading this can you please ring in with your address so that we can send you your prizes) and the winners of the best-dressed team were ‘Five Prunes Named Joe’.
The organizers would like to thank all those who took part in what turned out to be a really enjoyable and exciting event and would like to congratulate the winners in each of the categories.
A huge smothering hug as well to all the  marshals who got battered by wind and rain whilst staffing the check points all day.
All in all the Quiz Quest turned out to be a really good day out and, provided you all send in your sponsorship money, Amnesty will benefit greatly from the proceeds.
Remember that you can still win a fabulous prize for the most sponsorship money collected per team and per person — so collect your money and send it in!
Spitting Image puppets feature in The Big Three-O.
Amnesty Needs Your Face on TV
As a magnificent climax to Amnesty's 30th anniversary year, the Fundraising Department, in conjunction with various other people too numerous to mention, is organizing a fantastic TV event for the end of the year.
The Big Three-O will be a spectacular variety show and will be broadcast on the network on 28 December.
We are, as ever, delighted with the responses we've had from artists so far and we are currently working with a superb international line-up which includes Alexei Sayle, Spinal Tap (reforming specially for the show),Spitting Image, Julian Clary, Dave Stewart (performing a specially composed number), Jason Donovan ( duetting with Kim Wilde), Tom Jones, Roger Daltrey (with The Chieftains), Lisa Stansfield, EMF, Seal, Beverley Craven, Midge Ure, Mica Paris, and, as they say, many many, many more.
In order to create the Party atmosphere we want for the show, the event will be recorded in front of studio audiences at Central TV's studios in Nottingham on 13 and 15 December.
There is a wonderful opportunity for a limited number of (loud and enthusiastic) Amnesty members and supporters to be part of the audiences for The Big Three-O and there is only one catch — you have to wear a fancy dress costume reflecting the fashions of either the 60s, 70s or 80s.
There is also a wonderful opportunity for groups to organize Amnesty events around the 28th, as The Big Three-O is already creating enormous media interest, and is bound to be a very high profile event for Amnesty.
If you would like to be part of the audience for The Big Three-O please write to the Fundraising Department stating which recording you can take part in and how many seats you would like.
A Naga Benefit Concert took place at Wellingborough Prison in September 1991: drama, display and song described the circumstances of the Naga people, who are victims of severe repression.
Amnesty published some recent findings in a report in October 1990.
The event was conceived and devised by a group of inmates, and was intended to be essentially an education project informing people in Britain about the circumstances relating to the Naga people.
Yvonne Terlingen, AI's India Researcher, assisted with narration.
CORPORATE SUPPORT
Amnesty has a lot to offer potential sponsors — and their valuable help assists in  combating human rights abuse.
For some years Amnesty International has gazed with envy at those charities and voluntary organizations that have found it relatively easy to attract donations and sponsorship of events from companies.
Amnesty has hitherto been perceived by companies — if perceived at all!— as an organization that is politically biased, dealing with complex intellectual issues in distant countries — some of which were downright obscure.
Despite all this, Amnesty has attracted support from the more discerning companies.
They have been attracted as much by the intellectual image as by the high level of celebrity support from artists like John Cleese, Peter Gabriel and Sting.
In the past our comedy shows have gained support from the Independent and the Guardian , both of which have sponsored the infamous Secret Policeman's Balls.
Time Out has repeatedly pledged its support for the Famous Compere's Policedog (alternative cabaret event) through sponsorship and advertising.
Other companies have donated gifts in kind for our raffles, including Zanussi, Nissan UK, and the Hoover Foundation.
In the past five years public perception of Amnesty has been transformed by the high level of media coverage gained from AI reports, campaigns and fundraising activities.
World interest in human rights issues has gained momentum with the British Section Office communicating AI's purpose more skilfully by means of direct mail, advertising, campaigning and media coverage.
The number of unsolicited companies approaching the office with offers of help in the past twelve months has been impressive.
The Body Shop's support was undoubtedly the most high-profile in 1991, which was offered as a direct result of one of our advertisements in the press.
The Body Shop undertook a high street promotion to raise awareness for Amnesty and human rights.
Such campaigns are essential to the British Section, not only as a means of raising awareness, funds and members, but also because they project Amnesty onto the high street — one step closer to ensuring human rights is foremost in people's minds.
The Body Shop brings Amnesty to the high street.
Naturally, Amnesty International has its own image, reputation and integrity to protect, and sponsorship can have its negative side.
Consequently, at this year's International Council Meeting, it was decided that the quest for sponsorship should follow the same guidelines as fundraising in its pursuit of funds.
As part of these guidelines Amnesty ‘must remain a broadly based and self-supporting organization’.
This means no donations or sponsorship can be accepted that would compromise Amnesty's overall independence or impartiality.
In addition, Amnesty may not accept funds from companies that may diminish or narrow its volunteer or popular support.
In essence, sponsorship will be sought selectively and, where relevant, products or companies will be consistent with Amnesty's profile and aims and appropriate to the event or activity.
In the coming year we are launching a comprehensive sponsorship programme to attract corporate donations and specific sponsorship.
We are seeking this, chiefly to finance fundraising activities such as trading, promotion in shops, comedy/music events, raffles and advertising.
We are already attracting sponsorship for the Famous Compere's Policedog in January 1992 and a great deal of interest has been shown in the celebrations to mark the end of Amnesty's thirtieth year.
As a professional organization we have a lot to offer any potential sponsor.
Our sponsored walks/treasure hunts can generate mainstream publicity with celebrity support and a sum like £5,000 can be very little to spend for a thorough branding exercise.
The advantage for Amnesty is, of course, that we can cover the cost of the event, leaving maximum funds to help stop human rights abuses.
If you or your company would like more information about events Amnesty has to offer for sponsorship, or if you are able to offer corporate sponsorship, please contact Karen Sherlock at Amnesty International British Section.
CLIMATE OF TERROR
In his inaugural speech President Fujimori of Peru promised to respect human rights fully.
An AI Report examines the shadow between the promise and the reality.
Gross and widespread human rights violations have afflicted Peru for almost a decade.
Since 1983 large areas of Peru have been progressively designated emergency zones and placed under military control as part of counter-insurgency operations against the armed opposition groups, principally Sendero Luminoso which has been responsible for widespread atrocities.
Thousands of people have ‘disappeared’ or been extrajudicially executed after being abducted by members of the security forces.
Most of those who were killed had been brutally tortured, as were the few who survived abduction or ‘disappearance’.
Most of the victims have come from towns and isolated peasant communities in remote rural areas.
Often they were targeted simply because they lived in zones of armed conflict between government forces and opposition groups.
In recent years, ‘disappearances’ have increased in urban areas.
Human rights defenders, often the only hope for victims seeking help for themselves or their relatives, have been threatened, tortured, killed and ‘disappeared’.
By July 1990 nearly half the country was under emergency regulations — a legacy inherited by the new government of President Alberto Fujimori which took office in Peru on 28 July.
The promise
In his inaugural speech on 28 July, President Fujimori promised to fully respect human rights: ‘The terrorist violence our fledgling democracy currently faces cannot justify the occasional or systematic violation of human rights.’
The ‘central element’ of the new government's policy was to be the creation of a national human rights commission.
During the government's first year in office further measures to reinforce these pledges were promised.
In February 1991, for example, the government stated that it was adopting measures to ‘make available registers of detention…and promptly and objectively establish the fate of those whose ‘disappearance’ is claimed as certain.’
In May 1991 the government outlined a new set of proposals on human rights and referred to the need ‘to eliminate every form of excess by the security forces in fulfilment of their duties, and to punish those responsible.’
The reality
Despite these promises there was no significant improvement in Peru's human rights record in the first year of the new government.
The pattern of endemic human rights violations arising from Sendero Luminoso's armed actions against government forces and the civilian population continued.
On 13 September the government announced that President Fujimori had ordered all members of the armed forces to respect human rights.
He stated that those who disobeyed this order ‘will be severely punished’.
Amnesty has however received no evidence that the armed forces are fully complying with the order to give unrestricted access to Public Ministry officials or representatives of the Red Cross.
‘They didn't want to just kill me…
They wanted to kill me in a horrific way, to frighten those who work in defence of human rights.
That is why they attacked me with a bomb.
They wanted to kill me and to terrify the others.’
DR AUGUSTO ZUÑIGA PAZ
President Fujimori has furthermore made two public speeches, in September and October, which were strongly critical of human rights organizations in Peru: he charged human rights defenders with being ‘useful sops’ and of collaborating with subversion.
The armed opposition
Sendero Luminoso is the main armed opposition group in Peru.
Since 1980 it has repeatedly engaged in operations which have included the torture and execution-like killing of captive civilians, local authorities and members of the security forces.
Among the civilian victims have been members of peasant communities and rural cooperatives who refused to join or support Sendero Luminoso .
Often they have been killed or tortured following mock trials.
In the run-up to the 1990 presidential elections Sendero Luminoso reportedly assassinated several parliamentary candidates and bombs were planted in public places, causing several casualties.
Sendero Luminoso has been accused of murdering some 90 majors in the emergency zones since 1982.
Its attacks have left some areas without any civilian authorities: the latter have either fled or been killed.
Massacre
In mid-October 1990 villagers from Huamanga province discovered three mass graves — the gruesome evidence of a recent massacre.
One witness described the scene as they uncovered 18 bodies: ‘Everyone starts digging frantically, some with spades, others with pick-axes, and others with their bare hands.
Nearly all of them are crying and the stench is increasing.
The weeping aloud of the relatives turns to melancholic songs in the local Quechua dialect, Zacarías Ceonocc Huayhua…sings words of grief to his wife whom he has just recognized.’
A few weeks earlier, on 21 and 22 September, nearly 40 people from peasant communities were detained by a military patrol from the Castropampa military base in Huanta, in a joint operation with civil defence patrol members (montoneros).
The patrol released several prisoners but tool 18 of them to a ravine named Chilcahuaycco and apparently beat and then shot them.
In February 1991 the Public Ministry's Special Attorney for Human Rights announced that an army sergeant was to be charged with homicide.
At least three other massacres by the security forces have taken place since the new government took office.
Impunity
The central issue which underlies the continuing pattern of human rights violations is that members of the armed forces are rarely brought to justice for the crimes they commit and therefore act with impunity.
Although thousands of civilians have been reported extrajudicially executed or ‘disappeared’ in the emergency zones during the past decade, no members of the armed forces are known to have been convicted for their part in these violations.
Opposite:(main photo); Army tank patrolling Lima 1990; Dr Augustus Zuñiga Paz, with his son, in hospital after he was injured by a letter bomb; Ernesto Castillo Paez' parents with a picture of their son.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: KILLING ITS YOUTH
The Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders
SENDING CHILDREN TO THE CHAIR
Childhood is a time when full responsibility and citizenship have yet to be established.
That's one reason children in the United States can't vote, they can't buy alcohol and can't stand for election.
Young offenders can, however, be sentenced to death.
With the exception of Iran and Iraq, the USA has executed more juvenile offenders than any other country in the last decade.
Four have been killed since 1985.
By July 1991, 31 juvenile offenders were on death row in 12 US states.
Two-thirds of those states that retain the death penalty allow children to face execution.
Many states impose no limit at all.
Others allow death sentences for children aged between 12 and 17.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL BELIEVES THE DEATH PENALTY VIOLATES THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHT: THE RIGHT TO LIFE ITSELF.
US METHODS OF EXECUTION — ELECTROCUTION, GASSING OR POISON INJECTION — AMOUNT TO TORTURE.
CONDITIONS ON DEATH ROW ARE OFTEN CRUEL AND INHUMAN.
THE EXECUTION OF JUVENILE OFFENDERS AND MOVES TO RESTRICT APPEALS AND EXTEND SCOPE OF THE DEATH PENALTY IS A SERIOUS RETREAT BY THE UNITED STATES FROM INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS.
THE DELIBERATE COLD-BLOODED KILLING OF JUVENILE OFFENDERS SHOULD BE BROUGHT TO AN IMMEDIATE END.
REINTRODUCING THE DEATH PENALTY
The death penalty is a major political issue in the USA and politicians support executions to prove that they are ‘tough’ on crime, in order to win votes.
Since 1976, 36 states have reintroduced the death penalty.
In 1989, the Supreme Court ruled that it was ‘constitutional’ to execute juvenile offenders and the mentally retarded.
GROWING DEMAND FOR DEATH
A federal bill currently before the US Congress to extend the death penalty to cover more than 50 crimes — including non-homicide offences — and would allow 17-year olds to be executed.
In 1988 an Alabama jury convicted 15-year-old Clayton Flowers of capital murder and recommended a sentence of life in prison without parole.
The judge rejected the recommendation and sentenced Flowers to the electric chair.
In July 1991 his conviction and sentence were overturned.
The 1991 Crime Bill would virtually end the federal courts' power to hear appeals by death row prisoners and cancel their right to legal representation at these appeals.
Forty per cent of death sentences have been overturned at federal appeal in recent years.
There are fears that the effect of this legislation will be to quicken the pace of executions in the USA, including those of juveniles.
Jay Kelly Pinkerton was sentenced to death in Texas for a murder committed when he was 17 years old.
In 1985 the Supreme Court granted a stay of execution 20 minutes before the execution was due to be carried out; a second reprieve came four months later.
In May 1986 the Supreme Court rejected his final appeals and Pinkerton was executed by lethal injection.
James Terry Roach, electrocuted in South Carolina in 1986, had been sentenced to death for a crime committed when he was 17 years old.
Roach had no previous record of violence and was mentally retarded.
THE DEATH PENALTY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Moves to extend the death penalty to new offences and to execute juvenile offenders are contrary to international human rights standards, including the American Convention on Human Rights, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
The execution of juvenile offenders is extremely rare and at least 72 countries set 18 as the minimum age for the death penalty.
Twelve others have in effect set this limit by ratifying the International Covenant or the American Convention.
In 1990 the state of Louisiana electrocuted Dalton Prejean, despite a recommendation by the Pardons and Parole Board that his sentence be commuted to life imprisonment.
He had spent nearly 13 years on death row.
Prejean, who had once been diagnosed as brain damaged and mentally retarded, said shortly before his execution: ‘I don't ask to get out of prison.
I just ask to live with my mistake…
I've changed.
There's a whole difference between being 17 and 30.’
‘I was 17 years old when I committed the offence for which I was sentenced to die, and I didn't even start thinking and caring about my life until I was at least 20.’
CHARLES RUMBAUGH, EXECUTED 1985, THE FIRST JUVENILE OFFENDER IN 21 YEARS TO BE EXECUTED IN THE USA.
‘When I leave, my client begs me not to go.
As the guards take him back to his cell, he often starts to cry.
My client is 15 years old.’
DEATH ROW ATTORNEY, ALABAMA, 1989.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
1
Write to President George Bush.
Say that you have read about the execution of juveniles in the USA, in contravention of international human rights standards.
Say that you are worried that the Crime Bill's effect will be to make it easier to execute those sentenced to death, including juveniles.
Ask that the USA brings its legislation into line with internationally recognized human rights standards, abolishing the death penalty for juvenile offenders:.
2
Find out more about Amnesty's campaign on the Death Penalty and Juvenile Offenders by sending for our report:USA — The Death Penalty & Juvenile Offenders.£4.50 inc P&P.
PRISONER LETTER WRITING CAMPAIGN
Each of the people whose story follows is a prisoner of conscience.
Each has been arrested because of his or her religious or political beliefs, colour, sex, ethnic origin or language.
None has used or advocated violence.
Their continuing detention is a violation of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
International appeals can help to secure the release of these prisoners or to improve their detention conditions.
In the prisoners' case, letters to the authorities should be worded carefully and courteously.
You should stress that your concern for human rights is not in any way politically partisan.
In no circumstances should communication be sent to the prisoner.
UNITED KINGDOM
Vic Williams: a 28-year-old soldier in the British Army's Royal Artillery, he has been sentenced to 14 months' imprisonment for desertion and ‘conduct prejudicial to good order and military discipline
On 11 September 1991 a court martial found Vic Williams guilty on three charges relating to deserting his regiment and speaking out against the Gulf War.
He went absent without leave from his regiment in December 1990, the day before he was due to be sent to Saudi Arabia.
He left because he had decided that his conscience could not allow him to take part in military action arising from the Gulf crisis.
Vic Williams has said that he left his regiment only after concluding that he had no other option remaining (at no time prior to his decision to leave was he made aware of his rights as a soldier to register a conscientious objection to military service).
The regulations setting out the procedure whereby a soldier in the British Army can apply for conscientious objector status are classified as a ‘restricted’ document — to which only army officers have access.
Evidence given by officers at the court martial and the statement made by the judge advocate at the close of the proceedings supported by Amnesty International's concern that Vic Williams was not guaranteed reasonable access to information about procedures for registering his conscientious objection to military service in the Gulf War.
In accordance with Amnesty International's ‘own country’ rule, members of the British Section may not campaign on behalf of a UK prisoner of conscience.
PLEASE DO  NOT WRITE LETTERS ON BEHALF OF VIC WILLIAMS.
This case is for information only.
RELEASED.
Orlando Azcué Rodríguez (AI Prisoners Letter Writing Campaign June/July 1991) was conditionally released from prison in Cuba on 19 July 1991 after serving only 16 months of his three-year sentence for ‘enemy propaganda.’
LAOS
Thongsouk Saysangkhi: former Deputy Minister of Science and Technology, he was arrested on 8 October 1990 in the capital, Vientiane, following the circulation of a letter he wrote to the then Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihan, asking to resign from his government post and from the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Part.
Thongsouk Saysangkhi wrote in his letter that was opposed to ‘putrid old regimes that restrict popular liberties and democracy’ and ‘the dictatorial power of personal cliques’.
He called for ‘the holding of free elections, the putting into practice of popular liberties and democracy, and the existence of democratic institutions opposed to the maintenance of a system of communist feudalism and Politburo dynasticism.’
He added, ‘the history of humankind has now confirmed that a single-party system relying exclusively on coercion and deception is incapable of ever bringing prosperity and happiness to our people.’
Thongsouk Saysangkhi also reportedly tried to establish a ‘social democrat club’ to promote the idea of multi-party democracy and, with other dissenters, wrote an article supporting such a political system.
On 3 November 1990 the official news media announced that Thongsouk Saysangkhi has ‘committed propaganda against the policies of the Party and State’ and had ‘conducted activities aimed at overthrowing the regime and creating political disturbances in Vientiane capital.’
Although it said that he would be ‘interrogated and tried according to the country's law’, to AI's knowledge no formal charges have been brought against him in court.
He is reportedly held in ‘temporary confinement’ under administrative detention procedures, probably in Xam Khe prison in Vientiane.
Please send courteous appeals for his immediate and unconditional release to:
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (TIBET).
Jampa Ngodrup: a 46-year-old medical doctor in Lhasa, capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region of China, he was sentenced on 24 December 1990 to 13 years' imprisonment on charges of spying.
A doctor at Lhasa's City Barkor Clinic, Jampa Ngodrup was apparently detained on 20 October 1989 and formally charged on 13 August 1990.
He was accused of having, ‘with counter-revolutionary aims, collected lists of people detained in the disturbances and passed them on to others, thus undermining the law and violating the (laws of) secrecy.’
The ‘disturbances’ refer to activities by supporters of Tibetan independence in Lhasa in 1988.
The court's verdict on Jampa Ngodrup's case said he had asked a young monk working at the Barkor Clinic to compile a list of people detained as a result of violent clashes between police forces and demonstrators on 5 March 1988.
Jampa Ngodrup is said to have passed the list on to a foreign resident who in turn gave Jampa Ngodrup a list of people injured and detained in a pro-independence demonstration on 10 December 1988.
Jampa Ngodrup apparently confessed to all charges.
The court ruled that Jampa Ngodrup be deprived of his political rights for a further four years after he has served his 13-year sentence.
Amnesty International considers Jampa Ngodrup to be a prisoner of conscience, detained and sentenced solely for the peaceful exercise of his right freely to receive and impart information.
Please send courteous letters appealing for the immediate release of Jampa Ngodrup to:
For a full account of this case and others, see:PRC: Recent Reports of Political Prisoners and Prisoners of Conscience in Tibet October 1991.
ISRAELI OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
Abie Nathan: an Israeli peace campaigner aged 64, he began an 18-month prison sentence on 10 October 1991.
He was convicted of breaking a 1986 law forbidding unauthorized contacts between Israeli citizens and groups designated as ‘terrorist’ by the Israeli authorities.
Abie Nathan was charged with having met Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chairman Yasser Arafat in Tunis on 10 and 16 March 1990.
During these meetings they reportedly discussed the development of the Middle East peace process, direct talks between the PLO and Israel, the Palestinian intifada (uprising) and the fate of Israeli soldiers missing in Lebanon.
‘It's a said day for democracy, for human rights and for peace,’ Abie Nathan reportedly said after he was sentenced.
He has decided not to appeal against his conviction and sentence and has pledged to renew his contacts with the PLO immediately upon his release from prison.
Abie Nathan spent four months in prison in 1989 and 1990 for having met Chairman Arafat and other senior PLO leaders in September 1988.
AI at that time called for his release.
Abie Nathan also served a 40-day prison sentence in 1966 for flying a plane to Egypt carrying a petition for peace in the Middle East signed by 100,000 Israelis.
Amnesty International believes that Abie Nathan is once again a prisoner of conscience.
The Israeli Government maintains that Abie Nathan was prosecuted…not because of his political views or his expression of them, but as a consequence of his actions’.
However, the internationally recognized rights to freedom of expression and to peaceful association fully encompass peaceful actions such as those carried out by Abie Nathan.
AI believes that the 1986 law should be reviewed to ensure that it does not lead to the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience.
Please send courteous letters appealing for the immediate and unconditional release of Abie Nathan to:
UGANDA
Daniel Omara Atubu: aged 44, a member of the Democratic Party (DP) and Minister of State for Foreign and Regional Affairs, he and 17 other prominent citizens from northern Uganda were charged with treason on 7 May 1991.
He is awaiting trial in Luzira Prison, near the capital, Kampala.
Daniel Omara Atubu was arrested in Kampala on 15 April 1991, at the time of a major counter-insurgency operation by the Ugandan army against rebels who have been active in the northern districts of Gulu, Kitgum, Lira and Apac since 1986.
Hundreds of people were arrested on the grounds that they were suspected of rebel activity.
Daniel Omara Atubu and other elected representatives apparently protested at these mass arrests.
After three weeks' detention in military barracks Daniel Omara Atubu and the 17 others — including three other DP members who hold government posts — were accused of treason.
The government issued statements, before and after the April arrests, criticizing the activities of DP members in northern Uganda and suggesting that they were helping to perpetuate the insurgency, although no evidence of this was presented.
The treason charges against the 18 did not specify the dates, location or nature of the treasonable acts they are alleged to have committed.
Under Ugandan law, those charged with treason are not permitted to be granted bail for at least 480 days.
AI is concerned that treason charges have been brought against Daniel Omara Atubu in the absence of evidence against him, on account of his non-violent criticisms of the government.
Daniel Omara Atubu was reportedly badly beaten after his arrest and showed physical signs of ill-treatment when he appeared in court.
The government has launched an official inquiry into his alleged ill-treatment but no findings have been made public.
Please send courteous letters appealing for his immediate and unconditional release to:
IRAN
Mohammadreza Nezameddin Mohaved: a 74-year-old retired civil servant' he is serving a three-year sentence for ‘criticizing the president.’
Mohammadreza Nezameddin Mohaved and at least 20 others were arrested on 22 June 1990 after signing a critical open letter of President Hashemi Rafsanjani.
The letter called for implementation of constitutional guarantees, freedom and justice, and criticized the government's handling of the economy.
Many of the signatories were associates of Mehdi Bazargan, the first Prime Minister of the Islamic Republic or, like Mohammadreza Nezameddin Mohaved, members of the Association for the Defence of Freedom and Sovereignty of the Iranian Nation, which was reportedly dissolved on 14 June 1990.
After their arrest, Mohammadreza Nezameddin Mohaved and the others were detained in Evin Prison, Tehran, where they were reportedly put under pressure to sign statements condemning their actions.
Those who did so were released; the remaining nine were tried and received sentences of up to three years.
Mohammadreza Nezameddin Mohaved's trial before an Islamic Revolutionary Court was held in June 1991, almost a year after this arrest.
He was not allowed legal representation and the proceedings, held in camera, reportedly lasted only a few minutes.
Mohammadreza Nezameddin Mohaved's health is believed to be deteriorating.
He has apparently lost movement in one leg and needs crutches to walk.
He also suffers from heart disease.
Please send appeals requesting his immediate and unconditional release to:.
THE LIGHT OF LIFE
Abraham Serfaty, one of the longest-serving prisoners of conscience in the Arab world, is free at last.
Dan Jones spoke with him.
Abraham Serfaty is 65.
He looks older.
Of Jewish descent, he is a big man in every sense, powerfully built, with deep dark eyes set in a craggy, lined face and an Albert Schweitzer moustache.
He moves on crutches, painfully, but with immense dignity.
He suffers from Reynault's disease, his feet crippled from torture.
A distinguished and internationally-known writer and thinker, Serfaty was a mining engineer by profession.
He speaks a hesitant but colourful English, moving back into French to express his more complex and profound thoughts.
He says that he learned most of his Arabic in prison.
Serfaty's unexpected release from Kenitra Jail on 13 September 1991 ended 17 years of imprisonment, and was one of the high points of Amnesty's very successful Morocco campaign.
In the early 1970s Serfaty was involved in a Marxist political movement called Ila el-Amam — Forward.
The group supported the idea of a socialist republic in Morocco, and backed the right of the people of the Western Sahara to self-determination.
In the eyes of the King of Morocco and the Moroccan authorities such ideas were treasonable.
Early one morning in 1974 Serfaty was arrested in his Rabat apartment and taken to the notorious Derb Moulay Cherif prison in Casablanca.
His torturers included senior police officers from Rabat and prison guards.
They began what he described as ‘a concerted symphony of torture’.
Serfaty suffered terrible injuries: they broke his body until he almost died, but they could not break his spirit.
He describes an extraordinary incident when, after top police officers had left, other men involved in the torture spoke to him, wanting to know how he had resisted.
He managed to establish a strange kind of relationship with them.
One of them was later to intervene to save his life.
Abraham Serfaty speaking at Amnesty's Service of Rededication to human rights on 21 October.
Torture leaves deep scars.
It was more than 10 years before Serfaty could bring himself to speak and write about the terrible things that had happened to him and his colleagues.
When he did, he found that to acknowledge these events in writing became a sort of therapy for him.
His essay about his experience of torture was published in a French journal and an anthology of prison writings in 1986.
In February 1977 Serfaty was finally put on trial in Kenitra, which Amnesty considered grossly unfair.
The defendants were found guilty of plotting to overthrow the monarchy and threatening the security of the state.
Serfaty was sentenced to life imprisonment.
In the darkest hours of his captivity Serfaty considered suicide.
‘I had lost the will to live, but did not have the means to end it.’
Then, out of the blue, a letter arrived in his cell.
It was from an elderly woman in Austria.
He described it as ‘the light of life’.
It was a letter about her daily life, her family, her children and grandchildren, ‘a precious human exchange’ delicately penned by someone whom he had never met, from a country that he had hardly heard of, ‘that became part of my flesh…a symbiosis developing between the correspondent and the prisoner’.
Serfaty, who used to dismiss the human rights movement as bourgeois liberalism, then heard from his family that Amnesty International had adopted him as a prisoner of conscience, jailed for the peaceful expression of his political ideas.
They said that an AI group from Austria had been in touch with them with help and support, and that people from all over the world were pressing for his release.
He urges Amnesty members never to underestimate the importance of their efforts, the impact of the letters and appeals that they send, the lifelines offered to prisoners, the effectiveness of the organization's detailed, impartial, accurate research,(‘you know more about us than we know ourselves’) and the impact of its exposure of government repression.
He speaks with delight of the recent pardons and releases of many hundreds of political prisoners in Morocco, giving the credit for the releases to Amnesty's ‘magnificent Morocco campaign’.
Serfaty's release came as a complete surprise.
He had been planning a hunger strike for the right of his French wife Christine to visit him: Serfaty was taken from prison and bundled into a plane bound for France and exile.
One of his first trips was to see the Amnesty group in Austria which had first campaigned for his long-awaited freedom.
TEACHER TORTURE
THOUGHT CRIMES
When social debate moves out of the classroom and on to the street, teachers can find themselves  targeted .
By Michael Crowley.
Wednesday 28 February 1989, Antioquia Department, Colombia.
Walking through the streets of Cristales to the school where she taught, Sister Teresa de Jesus Ramirez Vanegas may not have seen the recent threats scrawled on the village walls: ‘Soon Cristales will be in mourning’…
‘Cristales will be full of tears.’
She had, however, seen others like them, and had come to fear them.
Like other nuns in the community, Sister Teresa taught literacy to the peasants and had become involved in the peasant marches of the early 1980s organized to protest against poverty and violence in the region.
When the security forces had tortured these peasants, she had stood by them and denounced the crimes.
She feared there would be more reprisals.
Later that Wednesday, as she was teaching a class of children, two men came into the classroom asking for some paper and pencils.
As Sister Teresa turned to get some the men took out their guns and shot her eight times in from of the children.
Sister Teresa was taken to hospital in San Roque but was dead on arrival.
In Colombia hundreds of teachers like Sister Teresa have been murdered by the death squads and thousands have received death threats (often in the form of sufragios — invitations to their own funeral).
Harassment, detention and torture by the security forces are not uncommon.
the government appears to have done nothing.
Leaders of the Colombian Federation of Teachers (FECODE), believe this is because of a shift in policy in the early 1980s, when union members started to challenge educational policy instead of confining themselves to labour demands.
‘Teachers began to extend their role  as educators to the entire community, instead of keeping it closed up in the classroom,’ says Rafael Cuello of FECODE.
‘Along with students and parents, teachers began to investigate, question, analyse reality as a means of changing it.
In (Colombia) critical thinking, and this type of teaching, are considered subversive.’
To be considered subversive in Colombia is to be one step away from the grave.
According to FECODE, the situation is not improving: 47 teachers have been killed since the beginning of 1991 and more than 400 have received death threats.
Such brutal repression of ‘academic subversives’ working with the poor is seen in many parts of the world.
In Haiti in the early hours of 2 July 1990 Mariano Delaunay, founder of a night school for the poor of Port-au-Prince, was standing on a pavement outside the house where he was attending a friend's wake.
A red truck drew up beside him, a man got out walked over to Mariano and shot him in the head and chest.
Eye witnesses identified the gunman as an army sergeant.
Teachers and other academics have been persecuted because of their chosen area of research.
If what they discuss and teach is considered to be a danger to the state, they may be deemed guilty of ‘thought crimes’.
On 27 July 1991, in South Korea, six academics belonging to the Seoul Social Science Institute were arrested because of articles and books they had published which allegedly discussed and advocated a socialist revolution.
In Indonesia, in October 1990, post-graduate researcher Bonar Tigor Naipospos was sentenced to eight and a half years' imprisonment because he ‘attempted to undermine Indonesian state ideology’ through participation in a university study group and distributing banned literature.
In both cases students and colleagues of those detained have campaigned vigorously for their release and called for a removal of the intellectual straightjacket, but without success.
Dr Farouk Mohamed Ibrahim, a 62-year-old biology lecturer at the University of Khartoum, was arrested on 20 November 1989, apparently because the Sudanese military authorities suspected him of opposing their policies.
He was questioned by senior security officials about his teaching of the Darwinist theory of evolution which they considered to contradict their interpretation of the principles of Islam.
He was tortured before his release in early 1990.
In Guatemala the pursuit of knowledge can bring death.
At 7.00pm on 11 September 1990 the internationally respected sociologist and anthropologist Myrna Mack was attacked, stabbed and killed outside her office in Guatemala City.
Colleagues fear her killing was an extrajudicial execution carried out by the security forces.
They fear she was assassinated because of her studies with indigenous and displaced peoples.
The fear that teachers and the ideas that the hold can inspire in totalitarian governments is most graphically demonstrated when the debate of classrooms and lecture halls hits the streets.
In many countries teachers and academics have been at the forefront of the fight for justice, democracy, trade union and human rights — the Pro-Democracy movements in China, South Korea and Myanmar have all been led by students and  academics — and they have suffered for their non-violent dissent.
Where national and international pressure has been effectively mobilized in defence of such victims of state-sanctioned abuse victories are often won.
In Afghanistan, University lecturer Hasan Kaker was arrested in March 1982 because he confided in students and staff his concern at the increasing number of Russian teachers on campus and earlier widespread arrests of students.
AI groups campaigned for his release which finally came in 1987.
In thanking the groups, Hasan Kaker said: ‘The continuous pressure which you and other human rights organizations brought to bear on the Kabul government ultimately resulted in my release…
Without such pressure even my execution at the hands of the Khad was a possibility…your efforts and support greatly encouraged me and my family, for when I came to know of them I was indeed strengthened by them.’
AMNESTY TEACHERS AND ACADEMICS NETWORK
A Teachers and Academics Network is being established in the British Section of Amnesty International.
The Network, already involving over 300 teachers, researchers, lecturers and others involved in education, has two main functions:
1
CAMPAIGNING
To inform teachers, lecturers and other academics of the work of AI and to encourage them to campaign on behalf of their colleagues around the world who have become the victims of human rights abuse.
2
HUMAN RIGHTS EDUCATION
To help and advise Amnesty International in the development, testing and promotion of its human rights education materials and methods at all levels of the education system.
If you are a teacher or an academic and would like to join this network please contact:
Please give your home address/phone number, your school/college address, subject/interest or area of expertise in human rights education.
HOW THE UK MAKES TORTURE AND DEATH ITS BUSINESS Amnesty International's new book on repression, trade and government policy.
Information on UK exports of military, security, and police equipment, training and personnel to countries that violate human rights, and Amnesty's campaign against the commerce in torture.
EARTHQUAKES AND EXTENDING THE MANDATE
An on-the-spot report from the 20th International Council Meeting, Yokohama — the conference that never sleeps…
By Norma Johnson.
Question: What do you get if you travel half way around the world and spend seven 19-hour days debating Amnesty's future?
Answer: Very tired.
We had been warned.
Old ICM hands had nodded sagely and told us how difficult it would be to keep up the pace of attending the plenary, the working parties, the fringe meetings and the delegation briefings…and did we believe them?
Not for a moment!
Those members of the British Section delegation who had survived previous ICMs said nothing and waited for the strain to show.
A rousing opening ceremony courtesy of the Kodo drummers of Japan was followed by speeches of welcome from the Japanese Section, the Chair of the IEC and the Secretary General.
AI Japan had spent several years planning the ICM, and Asia, s hosting of the event was appropriate in view of the organisation's commitment to developing AI in that region.
And we weren't the only delegates to be suffering from jet lag: AI members from 70-plus countries were represented from Moscow and Kuwait, who spoke with their colleagues from the new sections: Philippines, Mauritius, Sierra Leone and Argentina.
Then there were the new country groups which truly span the globe: Jordan, Algeria, Poland, Hungary, Czech and Slovak Federal Republics, Yugoslavia, Macao, Malaysia and Taiwan.
And what a sight it was to see them day after day, night after night, huddled in corners, crowded around drinks machines, arguing and agreeing, debating and disclaiming.
For those critics who still see AI as a white Western organisation, such sights would have stunned their criticisms.
A resumé by Secretary General Ian Martin of the momentous world events that have occurred during the past five years set the work of AI in context and also set the scene for the working parties, which between them would report back to the plenary with recommendations that would change the AI mandate dramatically.
For the next four days working parties A, B, C and D dealt with more than 150 resolutions sub-divided into groupings of Strategy, Action, Organisation and Finance.
And on top of all that were the meetings of groupings from around the globe, with early morning delegation meetings to talk tactics (and more of same late each evening).
And the late-night sessions at  wordprocessors, battling out new texts for the debate at the next day's session: and the culturally diverse evenings in the bar…ah, tiring stuff!
Of course, after all the hard work and extensive consultations carried out by the Mandate Review Committee, it was matters of the mandate that aroused most interest.
Over lunch, over dinner, overheard in corridors it was a case of: ‘Will there be consensus on homosexuals as POCs?’
Obviously a subject close to many hearts, particularly of those gay lobbyists who turned up with placards and leaflets for distribution to the 400 AI delegates at the opening plenary.
And the news from London?
A similar demonstration was being staged outside the offices of the International Secretariat.
Support for the organisation's super-priorities of multilingualism and multiculturalism was reiterated and this was particularly reflected in the approval of the setting up of an Asian Language Program — and, equally important, according it the appropriate budgetary priority.
Another major area of discussion was that dealing with Participlan and the proposals for increased democratic participation with AI.
In this area it was agreed that the new four-year planning cycle necessitates sections meeting between ICM.
The IEC is now to have sub-committees to support its work, and utilize experienced section members; the new Mandate Committee is one such sub-committee.
Another ICM and another International Executive Committee, this time headed by Annette Fischer of Denmark.
She is supported by: International Treasurer Liz Jenkins (UK), Marie Staunton (UK), our former Director; Ross Daniels (Australia), Ligia Bolivar (Venezuela), Sophia Macher (Peru), Gerry O'Connell (Italy) and Ahmed Othmani (Tunisia).
So what had the old ICM hands not forewarned us of?
Well, the earthquakes for a start!
Two minor ‘quakes shook Yokohama during our conference — as if there were not enough earth-moving activity going on in the plenary sessions!
THE NEW MANDATE:
The next few issues of Amnesty will cover the changes that were voted in by the ICM in detail, however, a summary of the major changes is useful:
Non-governmental entities (nges):
Guidelines are being produced by the IEC to enable AI to express its concerns on the taking of hostages by nges, and deliberate or arbitrary killings by nges.
This means that AI will condemn and oppose such actions by nges.
Violence:
AI's interpretation of ‘violence’ in the context of adoption of POCs has been altered.
Limited use of violence in self defence will not necessarily prevent an individual being adopted as a POC.
House demolition:
AI now opposes house demolition as a governmental punishment of political opponents.
Administrative detention:
AI now opposes administrative detention, without a fair trial within a reasonable time, of any political prisoners.
Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment:
Individual cases of CID are to be taken up, for the purposes of setting standards.
CID is also being extended to cover those persons forcibly confined to psychiatric hospitals.
Adoption of homosexuals as prisoners
AI now adopts as POC those ‘persons who are imprisoned solely because of their homosexuality, including the practice of homosexual acts in private between consenting adults.’
Guidelines are being drawn up by the IEC.
THE AI BRITISH SECTION DELEGATION
GROUPS
Battersea Crawl
About 30 members from half a dozen London Amnesty Groups gather with Anita Pollock, South-West London MP on the steps of St Martin-in-the-Fields at the start of the Embassy Crawl
The Battersea group have just successfully organised their fourth ‘Embassy crawl’ or sponsored walk on Saturday 19 October.
This year South West London MEP Anita Pollock cut the tape at the beginning of the walk which visited 15 London Embassies.
Ms Pollock joined the walk as far as the first embassy (South Africa) and delivered a copy of their letter to the embassy.
The theme was the 30th anniversary of Amnesty.
The walkers delivered copies of letters which had already been mailed to the embassy giving details of the concern raised by Amnesty in appeals featured in the 30th Anniversary campaign.
Balloons were tied to the railings at each embassy and leaflets handed out to interested  passers-by en route.
The whole event passed by smoothly finally visiting the Israeli Embassy which being up a private road caused the only slight temporary hold up.
But as the police had been helpful all day a group of four walkers were allowed to deliver the letter.
Battersea group were helped by the neighbouring Lambeth group who ran a stall and the walkers were joined by members from other London groups including Imperial College, Newham and Bayswater.
The day was a resounding success and achieved some local press coverage if not as much as hoped for and of course there is the sponsorship money which the groups has raised for Amnesty.
If you would like details of your nearest local group so as to be able to help them in activities such as this or to write letters on the cases that they are campaigning on behalf please contact:
Bristol Amnesty Film Week 1991
What takes eight months to organise, lasts eight days and takes Bristol and the South West by storm?
Answer: the Bristol Amnesty Film Week!
Four years ago local group member Norma Johnston (now Head of Communications at the British Section) had the great idea of organising a Film Week in Bristol to ‘raise the awareness of human rights issues and highlight the work of Amnesty International’.
In that first year posters were designed and painted by members of the publicity sub-group and sponsorship was nonexistent.
This year an advert in the local ‘What's On’ magazine Venue brought forward a flood of graphic designers volunteering to design a leaflet and posters for the Film Week.
It was difficult to chose between them, partly because they were all so good but also because, unlike those first Film Week entrepreneurs, none of us had much artistic flair and hadn't a clue what would work best.
As it turned out, Kurt Stengel who designed it worked day and night to get the image just right.
Thanks to the generosity of local travel company Regent Holidays UK Ltd we were able to advertise in Venue magazine and to have AA signs erected around the city to direct traffic to the Watershed Media Centre were the whole event took place.
The first night, ‘Media and Human Rights’, was almost a complete disaster; two of the four speakers were taken ill, as was the chair.
In the end it was a very cosy chat between Norma Johnston and John Simpson (BBC Foreign Affairs Editor) chaired by local radio personality Jenny Lacey.
The screening of Brazilian film Pixote sold out and Ilors la Vie , a film about a photographer kidnapped in Beirut, caused someone to phone our Secretary the very next day and ask to join Amnesty.
The week ended on an upbeat note with the exciting combination of black dub poet Benjamin Zephanian and Dillie Keane (ex Fascinating Aida), at Amnesty's Big Night Out.
LETTERS
Iron Trade
The article ‘Iron Trade’(Aug/Sept Amnesty ) is littered with half truths and, in some cases, glaring factual errors.
I am astonished that the author did not consult ourselves as to the allegations made prior to publication.
Hiatts ceased manufacture of leg-cuffs in 1983.
Hiatts have never been ‘the only firm in the world still making leg irons’.
Leg cuffs are manufactured by a number of companies, primarily in the USA and the Far East.
In the USA they are used extensively for restraining and transporting extremely violent and dangerous criminals.
One of the largest US manufacturers is Smith and Wesson who enjoy a substantial export trade, including Central and South America and the Middle East.
Smith and Wesson is owned by F H Tomkins PLC, a highly regarded British conglomerate quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
When I bought the business in 1984, my first task was to make 8 employees redundant due to the cessation of manufacture of leg-cuffs.
Hiatt is now regarded by many experts as the premier handcuff company in the world.
There is a growing demand for larger handcuffs which we now manufacture with considerable success.
Turning to the specific allegations, Hiatt-Thompson of Chicago is our exclusive distributor for the whole of North America and is free to use our name on its brochures even though the brochures may be promoting equipment totally unrelated to ourselves.
The brochure distributed in February 1991 contains 55 product numbers of which only 12 are manufactured and supplied by us.
Hiatt-Thompson is also a manufacturer in its own right, including of leg-cuffs.
Hiatts, in conjunction with Hiatts-Thompson, exhibited in Miami in February mainly to promote Hiatt's handcuffs in Central and South America.
Two brochures were thus distributed.
The Hiatt-Thompson brochure was available to those visitors whose only interest was in obtaining products for North America.
The Hiatt's brochure contains no reference to leg cuffs.
Mr Cross does not deny the main charge in my article that a Hiatts-Thompson brochure was given out to two British human rights workers at the Miami exhibition which indicated that the leg-cuffs for sale were manufactured in Birmingham.
Presumably this was a mistake.
The official reference guide for the exhibition lists Hiatts of Birmingham as the exhibitors, and it does not mention Hiatts-Thompson.
Mr Cross has not told us what he did with Hiatt's stock of leg irons when their export was banned in 1984, nor has he told us about Hiatt's attempts to export ‘extended’ cuffs which the government has now included in the ban.
Given these omissions and the history of Amnesty's concern with this issue, how successful would a prior approach to Hiatt's have been?
I do agree, however, that the 1984 claim in a national newspaper that Hiatts were the only firm making leg irons is untrue, even if that claim was made by the then General Manager of Hiatts.
Hopefully, Hiatts will reassure us that he will strive to abide by Rule 33 of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Brian Wood
Right Reply
In response to the letters of Derek Edwards and Maurice Vassie in the Aug/Sept issue of Amnesty , I would like to make the following points:
The 30th Anniversary advertisement explained how public opinion can bring about changes.
In the case of the Kurds we were referring not to the Gulf War but to the aid Western governments were ‘forced’ to send after the War by public pressure.
Secondly, we have never run an advertisement on human rights violations in Iraqi Occupied Kuwait.
We ran one ad on human rights abuses in Iraq over the last decade and one ad on human rights abuses in the countries involved in the Gulf War on both sides of the conflict.
Positive stand
In the name of the International Lesbian and Gay Association (IGLA), I would like to congratulate you on the positive stand that Amnesty International has taken at its recent International Council Meeting regarding people imprisoned solely for their homosexuality.
This decision is both a success for your organisation and for the international lesbian and gay movement.
We are aware of the campaigning work your section has undertaken in this regard and would like to express to you our genuine appreciation for your efforts.
We look forward to close co-operation and offer our assistance.
Joining forces for death row prisoners
This letter is directed chiefly at those who responded to my two previous appeals in these columns, and who are already writing to one or more of the nearly 500 prisoners on death rows in the Caribbean with whom we are now in contact.
Several correspondents have written to me at different times expressing the wish that we join forces in order to become more effective.
Now that the main task of supplying those prisoners with a correspondent has been achieved, I am again appealing for help, this time in forming an organisation for the purpose of helping both prisoners and ourselves.
There is an urgent need for getting out a newsletter — and finding ways of financing it — so that we have an organ of communication with each other.
If you have practical experience of forming  organisations and/or are able to offer concrete assistance in any form, I'd be very pleased and grateful to hear from you, with a view to a group of us meeting.