

His weapon against the rusty binding of the bolt was a fifty kopeck coin.
For more than an hour he had crouched on the floor, bracing himself as the speed changes of the train and the unevenness of the track destroyed the momentum of his painstaking work.
With the milled edge of the coin he chipped at the red-brown crust that had formed between the lower lip of the cap of the bolt and the metal sheet plate of the carriage flooring.
He had something to show for his effort.
A tiny pile of dust debris was collected beside his knee, and some had stained the material of his grey trousers.
Those who had known Michael Holly at his home in the south-east of England, or had shared office and canteen space with him at the factory on the Kent fringes of London, might not now have recognized their man.
A year in the gaols had left its mark.
The full flesh of his cheeks and chin had been scalped back to the bone.
A bright confidence at his eyes had been replaced by something harsher.
Clothes that had hung well now fell shapelessly like charity hand-outs.
A ruddiness in his face had given way to a pallor that was unmistakably the work of the cells.
His full dark hair had been cropped in the barber's chair of the holding prison to a brush without lustre.
This was an old carriage, but still well capable of performing the task set for it when it had first joined the rolling-stock in the year that Holly had been born.
It had carried many on this journey.
It had brought them in their hundreds, in their thousands, in their tens of thousands along this track.
It was a carriage of the prison train that ran twice weekly from the capital city to the interior depths of the Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic of Mordovia.
On the floor, in the filth and the watery amber half-light, he scraped at the bolt that had felt the boots and slippers and sandals of the prisoners who had encompassed his life time.
Not easy to prise at the rim of the bolt, because this was a purpose-built carriage.
No ordinary carriage, not subject to any hasty conversion to ensure its usefulness, but out of the railway factory yards of Leningrad and designed only for transporting the prisoners.
A walkway for the guards, and compartments to separate the convicts into manageable groups, each fitted with small hatches for the dropping of their black bread rations, and unmoveable benches and shelves for a few to sleep on.
The carriages had their name.
The Stolypin carriage carried the name of the Tsarist minister struck down by an assassin seventy years before.
The new men of the Kremlin were not above the simplicity of taking a former idea and adapting it to their needs.
The walls, the bars, the bolts and the locks remained; only the prisoners of the regime had changed.
They had brought Holly by car from the Lefortovo gaol to the train while Muscovites still slept.
He had barely slept after the meeting with the Consul from the Embassy and the escort of men in the khaki uniforms of the Komitet Gosudarstvennoi Bezopasnosti had taken him still drowsy from the back seat to the train at a far platform.
The one who wore on his blue shoulder flash the insignia of major's rank had shaken his hand and grinned a supercilious smile.
Into the carriage, the door slammed, the bolt across, the key turned.
Two other men for company.
Perhaps they had been  loaded on the train many hours before Holly, because they seemed to him to be sleeping when he had first seen them in the darkened carriage.
He had not spoken then, they had not spoken since.
A barrier existed between them.
But they watched him.
All through the morning, as they sat on the makeshift bunks, they stared without comment at the kneeling figure who ground away at the rust around the bolt.
The work at the bolt, mindless and persistent, allowed the thoughts of Michael Holly to flow unfettered.
The week before had stretched the distance of a lifetime.
And the lifetime had ended in a death, and death was the carriage that rolled, shaking and relentless, towards the East.
Where to go back to, where to find the birth?
Months, weeks, days — how far to go back?
The coin had found the central stem of the bolt, the rust shell was dispersed.
The bolt was not strong, arthritic with age and corrosion.
How far to go back?
Not the childhood, not the parentage, that was a different story, that was not the work of the last crowded hours.
Forget the origins of the man.
What of Millet?
Complacent, plausible Millet.
But neither was Millet a part of these last days, nor was the journey to Moscow, nor the rendezvous that was aborted, nor the arrest and the trial.
Millet had a place in the history of the affair, but that place was not in its present, not in its future.
Where did the present begin?
Michael Holly, now on his knees on a Stolypin carriage floor, and unshaven because they would not permit him a razor, and with the hunger lapping at his belly, had been a model prisoner in the Vladimir gaol 200 kilometres east of the capital.
A foreigner, and housed on the second floor of the hospital block in the cell that it was said had held the pilot Gary Powers and the businessman Greville Wynne.
Down for espionage, given fifteen years by the courts.
Everyone from the governor to the humblest creeping ‘trustie’ knew that Michael Holly would serve only a minimal  proportion of those fifteen years.
There was a man in England, there would be an exchange.
So they gave him milk, they gave him books to read, they allowed food parcels from the Embassy.
They waited, and Michael Holly waited, for the arrangements to be made.
The Political Officer at Vladimir said that it would not be too long, and the interrogations had been courteous, and the warders had been correct.
When they had taken him from the hospital block with his possessions and spare clothes in a cloth sack he had smiled and shaken hands and believed that the flight was close, Berlin he had thought it would be.
In Lefortovo holding prison he had learned the truth across a bare scrubbed table from the Consul sent by the Embassy.
An obsequious little man the Consul had been, crushed by the message that he brought.
The Consul had stumbled through his speech and Holly had listened.
‘…
It's not that it's anyone's fault, Mr Holly, you mustn't think that.
It's just terribly bad luck, it's the worst luck I've heard of since I've been here, that's eight years.
It was all set up — well, you know that.
People had worked very hard on this matter, you really have to believe that…
Well, we can't deliver.
That's what it's all about now.
A swap is a swap, one man to be exchanged for another.
It was you and this fellow, and we can't deliver….
I'm dreadfully sorry, Mr Holly, it's the most extraordinary thing but the chap's dead, snuffed it.
He had the best medical treatment — well, you'll not be interested in that…’
The bolt shifted.
Holly strained with his fingers to twist the coin under the lip of the bolt.
The bolt had moved a millimetre, perhaps two.
‘…
But I can assure you that people back in London were really most upset at this development…
I'm afraid the Soviets are going to take rather a hard line with you now, Mr Holly.
There's no point in my not being frank…
The Foreign Ministry informs us now that, since your parents were both born Soviet citizens, under Soviet law you are a Soviet citizen also.
I know, Mr Holly…you were born in  the United Kingdom, you were.brought up there, you were in possession of a valid British passport when you travelled to Moscow.
The Soviets are going to disregard all that.
We've had a hell of a job getting this degree of consular access.
I want you to know that.
We said they couldn't have the corpse if we didn't get it — that's by the by— but it's understood by both sides that this is the last of such meetings.
You're being transferred to the Correctional Labour Colonies, but you won't be classified as a foreigner, you won't be in the foreigners' camp.
They're going to take you beyond our reach…
Mr Holly, you've always proclaimed your innocence of the charges and accusations made against you.
From our side, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office have been very firm too.
You are innocent as far as Her Majesty's Government is concerned.
We're not wavering from that position.
You understand that, Mr Holly?
We deny absolutely that you were involved in any nonsensical espionage adventure.
It's very important that we continue to take that line, you can see that, I'm sure.
Mr Holly, the British government knows that you have supported your parents most generously during their retirement.
Your parents will not be abandoned by us, Mr Holly, just as we will not abandon the stance that you were completely innocent of trumped-up charges.
You do understand me, Mr Holly…?’
The bolt rose a centimetre.
There was a dribble of sweat at Holly's forehead.
Too much space now for the coin to be useful, his finger could slide under the lip.
The rough metal edge cut into his finger tip.
An eddy of chill air swirled into the carriage, fastening on his knuckles.
He heard, louder than before, the dripping clatter of the wheels on the rails beneath him.
‘…
Look, Mr Holly, I've painted the picture black, because that's the only honest thing to do.
We'll keep trying, of course, that goes without saying, but in the present climate of relations there's little chance of your situation altering dramatically.
You'll be going to the camps and you  have to come to terms with that.
What I'm saying is — well, you have to learn to live in those places, Mr Holly.
Try and survive, try and live with the system.
Don't kick it, don't fight it.
You can't beat them.
I've lived here long enough to know.
In a few years things may change, I can't promise that, but they may.
And you have my word that you won't be forgotten, not by Whitehall, not by Foreign and Commonwealth.
It's going to boil down to keeping your pecker up, looking on the best side of things.
You'll do that, won't you, old chap…
There's not really anything more for me to say.
Only I suppose, Good Luck…’
That was what the present had on offer to Michael Holly.
A furtive junior diplomat bowing and scraping his way out of the interview section of the Lefortovo, ogling the KGB man and thanking him for a fifteen-minute access to a prisoner for whom the key was now thrown far away.
Forget the present, Holly, reckon on the future.
The future is a plate of steel floor covering that creaks and whistles as it is dragged clear of the supports to which it was bolted down thirty years before.
That's the future, Holly.
A steel plate above the stone chippings and wood sleepers that mark the track from Moscow to the East through Kolomna and Ryazan and Spassk-Ryazanski.
The chippings are coated in fine snow, and the cold blusters into the carriage through the draught gap.
Behind him the men swore softly, breaking their silence.
The train was not running fast.
He could sense the strain of the engine far to the front.
There was a dawdle in its pace, and there had been times when it had halted completely, other times when it had slowed to a crawl.
The daylight was fleeing from the wilderness that he could not see but whose emptiness beyond the shuttered windows he understood.
Barely audible above the new-found noise of the wheels, he heard the sharp step of feet in the corridor and close to the door of their compartment.
There was the flap of the food hatch swinging on its hinge one door away from his.
Holly  pushed the steel plate down, eased the bolt back into its socket with his toe.
The flap of the door flipped jauntily upward.
A sneering face gazed at the caged men.
Three brown paper bags were pushed through the hatch to tumble to the carriage floor.
The flap fell back.
The two men moved at stoat's speed past Holly.
One bag into the hand of the man who was gross and white-skinned, a second for the man with the beard.
For a fleeting moment he braced himself for confrontation, suspecting that they would want all three bags, but they left him his.
They darted back to their bunk and behind him was the sound of ripping paper.
Animals…poor bastards, pitiful creatures.
But then at Vladimir, Holly had been segregated from the mass of the zeks , the convicts who formed the greatest part of the prison population.
At Vladimir, Holly had been categorized as a foreigner, he had been on the second floor of the hospital block and allowed special food and privileges.
There was nothing special for these men.
These were the zeks — they might be killers or thieves or rapists or parasites or hooligans.
At Vladimir, Holly had been different from these men.
But not any longer.
The stammered words of the Consul flooded back to him.
He was to be classified as a Soviet citizen, he was being sent to the Correctional Labour Colonies…
Try and live with the system, don't kick it and don't fight it, you can't beat them.
You'll hear of me, you bastard, you'll hear of Michael Holly.
He reached out across the floor, snatched the last paper bag.
A slice of black bread, supple as cardboard.
A mouthful of sugar held in a torn square of newspaper.
A fillet of dry smoked herring.
It might have been better at Vladimir for Holly than for the zeks herded into the communal cell blocks, but he had learned to eat what food was provided.
He had been taught the hard lesson that you eat where there is food, because food is sustenance and without it there is failure and collapse.
Always he felt sick when he ate, but he had been taught and he had learned, and his eyes squinted  shut and he swallowed.
The last meal for how long?
Holly grimaced.
Not much to eat in the snow beside the tracks, nor in the forests that would skirt the railway line.
They'll come with dogs, Holly, dogs and guns and helicopters.
The compartment of the carriage is the small camp, everything out there is the big camp.
The big camp is vast, colossal, but even beyond the hugest encampment there is still the wire and the watch-tower and the searchlight.
Live with the system, the Consul had said.
You'll hear of me, Mister bloody Consul, you'll hear of Michael Holly.
He munched hard at the bread, biting deeply.
He turned towards the two men, smiled at them for the first time.
They looked away.
It was ridiculous that he should think of lowering himself through the floor of the carriage, that he should contemplate hanging for moments or minutes beneath the train, that he should consider allowing himself to fall on to the frozen stones between the wheels.
Lunatic to reckon that it would work for him…but only as stupid as the acceptance of the alternative which was fourteen years in the camps.
His clothes were wrong.
They had dressed him in the shoes and suit and overcoat that he had worn when arrested.
Not the clothes for cross-country, and he would stand out like a beacon on the fringes of the villages and collectives that he must circle like a fox coming to the dustbins for food.
The distance was impossible.
Nine hundred miles to the Turkish border, seven hundred to Finland.
Lunatic.
He wouldn't get a mile clear of the track.
But there would never be another chance, not in fourteen years.
Never again a time with such opportunity as from the train that plodded across the flat wilderness lands on the way to the East.
He twisted away from the two men.
They whispered to each other.
Back to his knees.
Fingers again under the bolt.
His body straightened as he took the strain and pulled the bolt  upwards.
Scratches of bright metal showed in its grime as the stem of the bolt edged clear.
His fingers began to scrabble at the coarse edge of the steel plate.
Should have worn gloves because they would have protected his hands, but they would have denied him the freedom of movement that he now needed.
Even the numbed fingers could feel pain from the sharpness of the metal.
And the plate screamed as he wrenched it upwards.
There's no plan, Holly.
The blueprint of the plan is to run.
The plan is to fill the lungs and run faster, run further.
To run, and anywhere.
There is nowhere to go, no haven, no safety.
Better to run and be caught than the other, because the other is fourteen years of failure.
Anything better than the prison cage.
Holly smiled to himself, chuckled softly, because he saw in his mind the face of the man who had brought the food to the hatch, and he thought of the retribution that would fall on the cretin's shoulders.
That alone was worth it…
No, no, out of your bloody mind, Holly, and he laughed again.
Why not, Holly, why not be bloody mad?
He heaved again at the floor plate and there was room for his feet to slide down towards the blurred stones between the sleepers.
Are you going, Holly?
Night's coming, you can see the black shadow on the stones that rush past and between your feet.
The train's idling, not running fast.
Are you going, Holly?
Your decision, Holly, yours and no one else's.
He took a great gulp of the fresh air, enough to sustain him.
He looked once more behind him.
The two men sat on the bunk shelf very still, and their saucer eyes never left Holly's face.
Holly pushed his feet beneath the steel plate and the wind caught at his socks and trousers and drove a channelled wind against his legs and he cursed the awkwardness of his overcoat, and his feet kicked in the space like the feet of a hanging man.
He searched for a resting place for them and they lashed in a helplessness before finding a firm ledge out  in the grey darkness beyond his vision.
Holly wriggled, squirmed, manoeuvred his body down into the hole.
The stench of the floor was close to him, the smell of vomit and of urine.
The floor edge tore at his buttocks, the cloth of his trousers ripped.
The rim of the steel plate scraped his upper thighs.
Go on, Holly…
Don't hesitate, don't look down, not at the stones, not at the wheels, not at the rushing sleepers.
The train's crawling.
Never again the same chance, Holly, not for fourteen bastard years.
Don't look down…
When you fall, fall limp.
When you hit, clutch your body with your arms, don't bounce with your legs.
Remember the wheels.
When you've fallen, stay still, don't move.
Is there a guard box at the end of the train?
Hadn't looked, had he?
Is there a machine-gunner at the end of the train?
But he'll be high, and looking forward, the windows and the carriages will be his watch.
Just remember the wheels.
The train's running slow.
It can be done at this speed.
Leave it, and perhaps the gradient'll even out, the speed'll pick up.
Go now or you're lost, Holly.
Go.
The last effort.
The last pushing pressure on the steel plate to create the space for his stomach and chest.
Past his eyes exploded the boots and ankles and shins of the big man sweeping towards the doorway of the compartment.
And the smaller man was at Holly's back, his knee at Holly's shoulder blades and his fingers deep in the spare folds of Holly's overcoat, and he pulled and wrenched to drag Holly from the hole, and Holly knew his stale breath as he hissed and heaved to prise Holly clear.
The big man beat on the door and shouted in the high nasal tone of the Caucasus, slammed his fist into the woodwork, demanded attention.
The guard was running in the corridor.
The big man turned and came fast towards Holly and caught his  throat.
Holly could not resist, and they squeezed him out from the hole and when his feet were clear the two men stamped together on the steel plate to flatten it back, and between his knees he could no longer see the whiteness of snow on the stones and the zebra flash of the sleepers.
The bolt scraped in the door.
The doorway gaped around the guard.
The guard stood uncertain.
His right hand was half hidden by the cover flap of the holster that he wore at his belt.
‘Comrade…’ wheedled the big man with the pleading of a comic.
‘We need water.
Please, Comrade, we have had no water…’
The guard stiffened in anger.
He had been made to run, and they wanted water.
‘Piss yourself for water.’
‘How long till we can have water, Comrade?’
The guard was young, a conscript.
Command did not come easily to him, He dropped his eyes.
‘In two hours we are at Pot'ma Transit.
There will be water there.’
The door swung shut, the bolt ran home.
Beneath Holly the wheels quickened over the rails.
He felt weak and drew his knees up to his chest to contain his body warmth.
The men had gone back to the bunk shelf and their feet swung, threatening and powerful, beside his face.
Holly looked up at them, into their mouths, into their eyes.
The tiredness had stripped his fury.
‘Why?’
The big man picked his nose.
‘You have to tell me why.’
The big man spoke slowly and without passion.
‘Because of what would have happened to us.
Because of what they would have done to us.’
‘You could have said something…’
Holly's voice tailed away, beaten by the new apathy that overwhelmed him.
The small man speared Holly with his gaze.
‘For me it is myself first.
Then it is myself second.
After that it is myself third.’
‘If you had gone we would have been taken again before  the courts.
They would say that we were your accomplices, they would say that we helped you.
You are a foreigner, we owe you nothing.’
‘A new charge, a new trial, a new sentence…
For what?
For nothing.’
The small man battered his fist into the palm of his hand.
‘Your escape is not worth to us one single day more in the camps.
How then can it be worth five more years?’
‘I understand,’ Holly said, little more than a whisper.
He rose stiffly to his feet, then bent and found the bolt where it had rolled against the compartment wall underneath the shuttered window.
He placed it carefully into its entry, then stamped it down.
He walked to the wall of the compartment and dropped his weight against it and closed his eyes.
He thought of the forest beyond the carriage walls, and the lights in small homes, and the unmarked snow.
The darkness of the long winter night had settled when the train came to an untidy halt at Pot'ma station.
Holly joined the lines of men and women who formed files of fives beside the carriages and waited to be counted.
The area was gaudily lit and the dogs on their short leashes yelped and strained the arms of their handlers.
The dogs and the guards who cradled sub-machine-guns formed a ring around their prisoners.
Captors and captives stood in dumb impatience for the roll-call to be finished.
That night they would be held in the Pot'ma Transit prison.
Away to the north, curving smoothly, stretched a branch line that Holly could see illuminated by the arc lights.
The two men with whom he had shared the compartment from Moscow stood away from him, as if by choice.
Holly started to murmur a tune, something cheerful.
Close to him was a girl who rocked a sleeping baby and, when she caught his glance, she smiled sadly and held the baby tighter to save it from the snow flurries.
A tiny girl, but her eyes were bright and large and caring, full of the compassion that should have been a stranger in the Pot'ma railway yards.
Even here, she seemed to tell him in her silence, there could be some small love for another sufferer, for a baby.
When the order came she reached down to help an older woman to her feet and passed her the well-wrapped bundle, then she turned her back on the men and was swallowed by the mass of female prisoners.
…
It's just terribly bad luck, the Consul had said, it's the worst luck I've heard of since I've been here…
In ragged columns they were marched between a corridor of armed men to the lorries.
The western part of Mordovia is scattered with the Correctional Labour Colonies that are administered by the Ministry of the Interior in the distant capital.
Mordovia is the cesspit into which are flushed the malcontents and malefactors of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Flat, desolate countryside, unbroken by hills, the plain of Mordovia knows the stinking heat of a windless summer and the cruel gales of frozen winter.
A place without vistas, without the opportunity or charity of hope.
To the south of the camps is the main road from Moscow to Kuibyshev and ultimately to Tashkent.
Bedfellow of the road is the railway line that runs from European Russia to the desert lands of Kazakhstan.
Pot'ma is a hesitation on that journey, none would stop there without business with the camps.
The driver of the long-distance lorry would tighten his hands on the wheel and urge his machine faster past the bleak terrain that marks fear and anxiety across the breadth of the Motherland.
The passenger in the railway carriage would drop his head into his newspaper and avert his eyes from the window.
The camps of Mordovia are known of by all citizens.
To the north are the wild acres of the Mordovia state reservation.
To the west is the Vad river.
To the east flows the Alatyn.
Inside the box of the rivers and the railway and the reservation, the territory is barren, swamp-infested, poorly  inhabited.
The planners chose well.
And having made their decision they set out with a will to forge a network of rough roads through this wilderness that would link the stockades of wire.
The camps are historic, as much a part of history as Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili who was to take the name of Stalin.
Iosif's tomb in The Kremlin Wall may be hard to find, but the camps remain as a headstone in perpetuity to his memory.
Iosif may have been erased from the history books, but his camps still linger, refined and modernized, as a hallowed memorial to a life's work of elimination and retribution.
They possessed a faint whiff of humour, those men who sat at the ankles of Iosif.
Perhaps with the taint of a half-smile they named the camps of Mordovia after the pretty, sun-dappled forests around Moscow where they took their family picnics and holidays.
Dubrovlag , that was the name they offered to the pestilence of fences and huts in Mordovia.
The Oak Leaf camps.
And after Iosif came Malenkov.
And after Malenkov came Krushchev.
And after Krushchev came Brezhnev.
Each in his time has painted over the inheritance of his predecessor, but the Oak Leaf camps have remained because they have been necessary for each new Czar's survival.
Where the planners and architects of Iosif first planted their stakes and hung their wire, there remain posts and fences and watch-towers with searchlights and traversing machine-guns.
If it is hard to remember you, Iosif, we can come to the Dubrovlag and watch the slow march of the men who have replaced your prisoners in the Oak Leaf camps.
For thirty miles the branch line from Pot'ma winds north across the desolation of the prisonscape.
Past Camp 18 and Camp 6.
The hamlet of Lesnoy.
Camp 19 and Camp 7 and Camp 1.
The village of Sosnovka.
The station at Sal'khoz, across the road from Vindrey to Promzina.
Over the bridge that spans the turgid flowing stream  at Lepley and past Camp 5, and sub-Camp 5 where the foreigners are held incommunicado from the domestic fodder of the Colonies.
Past the farm where the short-term prisoners work under the guard of rifles and dogs, past the fields where beet and potato sprout from the long-used soil.
Past the twins of Camp 4 and Camp 10, one to the left and one to the right of the single track line.
Through the township of Yavas, over the bridge of rusted steel that crosses the river, and past Camp 11 and Camp 2 where the Central Investigation Prison has been built with concrete to house those who face interrogation for misdemeanours committed within the barbed wire and free-fire corridors.
Past more fields where the work is back-breaking and by hand, past the station at Lesozavad and to the hamlet of Barashevo.
Here is Camp 3, here is the Central Administration complex.
Here at Barashevo are buffers on the siding track because few of the trains that run north from Pot'ma have need to travel further.
The camps are rooted in the history of the state, but dedicated also to the present, and will be a part too of the future.
They have their permanence, they have their place.
They are indestructible.
They are all criminals, of course, who ride in the Stolypin carriages from Pot'ma on the way to Barashevo.
All have been convicted by legally constituted courts.
There are some who have stolen from banks, there are some who have read poetry in Pushkin Square in Moscow.
There are some who have raped virgin teenage girls in the darkness of an alley way, there are some who have taught their children the liturgy and practices of the church of the Seventh Day Adventists.
There are some who have corruptly manipulated the production of state factories for their own personal gain, there are some who have covertly passed on the writings of Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
And there are some who are traitors.
They are all criminals, those who live in the  barracks huts of the camps, and those who will join them when the train reaches the platforms of Barashevo.
It had been a luxury, the journey from Moscow to Pot'ma.
Only three to share a compartment.
And a luxury, too, had been the cell on the second floor of the hospital block at Vladimir.
And luxuries are temporary.
There were fifteen of them in the compartment, crammed and squashed for three hours since their loading from the Transit gaol.
Difficult to move, hideous to breathe in the shuttered carriage.
The tight smell of men who have not washed their bodies or known clean clothes.
All together, elbows in ribs, knees in calves, packed tight and swaying with the motion of the train as it struggled north.
When he had woken from a faint sleep on the ice cold floor of the cell, Holly had known that the lice had found him.
Creeping little bastards in the hair of his head and his stomach, and he had gouged with his fingernails at the flesh under his clothes.
The men who sat or lay near to him on the floor had watched with a curiosity that a man who was held in the Transit gaol at Pot'ma should concern himself with such a small matter as the pin-sharp biting of the louse.
Only an old man with his white hair cropped short and worn as a Jew's cap had spoken to Holly with the wry grin of experience at his mouth.
They were nothing, the lice at Pot'ma, the old man said.
At the Transit at Afma-Ata there were bugs that saturated the walls of the holding cells, red and fast with their crawl, with a bite like scissors.
And at the Transit at Novosibirsk there were rats, great grey pigs, a tail as thick as your little finger, and the men in the holding cells slept in a laager in the centre of the floor and changed the watch in the dark hours so that always some men guarded the edge of their perimeter.
So, what were a few lice?
Holly had talked with the old man and realized only later that when he spoke all those who were within earshot had listened and tried to learn about him from his words.
He was the outsider, he came from beyond the corrals of the big camp, from beyond  the wire of the little camp.
Though he spoke in Russian, the language that his parents had given him, he was from without the walls that bounded their experience.
They examined him with their eyes and ears.
They might have wished to touch him.
They were without hostility and without friendship.
They were interested in an object to which they had not before been exposed.
There had been eighty men in the cell trying to sleep away the cold of the night.
There had been fifteen men in the compartment of the train trying to endure the rattling movement on the rails.
And the train had stopped.
They heard the barking of the dogs, the shouting of orders, and they waited because that is the lot of prisoners.
For how long, Holly?
For fourteen years.
In the cell at Pot'ma Transit the old man had kissed him, the door was opened, the guards were calling names.
Holly and the majority were to travel, the old man waited for another transport to another destination.
He had kissed Holly, wetly on each cheek, and he had not cared who had seen him, and he had whispered in Holly's ear.
In the Dubrovlag , he had said, pity for others is always possible, but self-pity is never possible.
He had pulled Holly's ear then and crackled a laugh, and Holly had slapped his shoulder in a kind of gratitude.
The wind swept aside the foetid air of the compartment as the door was unbolted.
The guards who waited below them stamped their feet, beat down the snow beneath their boots.
Some from the carriage could jump down and then slither into the lines they must form.
Some must be helped.
Beyond the platform stood the camp.
An outer gate was open, an inner gate was closed.
They stood in three rows of five, to be counted and then marched forward.
On the ice one man fell and was scooped back to his feet by those who were behind him.
Not really a march, not even a brisk tramp, but a shuffling movement forward towards the opened gate: Holly saw the high wooden fence of vertical  overlapping boards and above it the rise of steep angled roofs and in the corners were watch-towers built up on stilts with the platform reached by open ladder.
They kept the dogs close to the prisoners.
Put on a show, Holly…
He walked with his back straight and his shoulders firm.
And the other men saw him, and some would have sniggered at the fall that would follow such arrogance, and a few would have suffered in the knowledge that defiance brings only pain and punishment, and for one or two or three the young man who ambled erect in the first rank was a donor of comfort.
It was not the proper way of things that one man should walk as if with indifference towards the opened gates of Camp 3 at Barashevo, and the guards watched him, and the dogs eyed him.
Self-pity is never possible; do not forget that, Holly.
Self-pity is unacceptable.
The gates were pushed shut behind them.
A beam cracked down into its sockets.
More shouting, more orders.
To Holly's right, lights glowed from the warmth of the Administration block where the windows were misted and the scent of coal smoke billowed from a brick chimney.
The inner gates opened.
In front of him Holly could see the expanse of the snow-draped camp.
He had reached the Correctional Labour Colony in the Dubrovlag with the designated administrative title of ZhKh 385/3/I.
He had arrived at Camp 3, Zone 1 (Strict Regime).
He thought it was a Sunday, the eighth day after the death of a man in the Coronary Care unit of the Hammersmith Hospital.
The inner gate closed behind the new intake of prisoners.
From the window of the Administration block overlooking the open ground of the camp close to the inner gates, the Major watched as the prisoners were again lined in fives and counted, a necessary formality because this marked their passing from the charge of the MVD transport guard into the hands of the MVD Correctional Labour Detachment.
He was a short man, barrel-built, and his physique was suited to the paratroop unit he had been a part of before his transfer from the active service troops of the Red Army, to the mind-twisting boredom of Ministry of the Interior camp supervision.
Paratroops were the elite while those seconded to MVD work were the latrine cleaners of the armed forces.
But a duty was a duty, a posting could not be evaded by a Major who had been turned down for promotion to Colonel.
He would serve out his uniformed days as Commandant of Camp 3, Zone I.
The paratroop regiment that he had left eighteen months before was now bivouacked in a concrete and brick school house on the outskirts of Jalalabad and dominated the low ground of an Afghan valley.
This was where his heart lay, where the helicopters waited to lift men into mountain combat, and the radio chattered the co-ordinates for Ilyushin strikes.
He was an activist, with bluff red cheeks under his stunted pig eyes to prove his love of the outdoor life.
Zone I was in its way as much of a prison for the Commandant as for the eight hundred men to whom he played a vague mutation of God and Commissar.
Far from his paratroops, far from their mortars and machine-guns and rocket-launchers, far from their special camaraderie, he worried like a dog with freshly stolen meat over the incessant and aching problems of the camp's discipline and routine.
The little parade that he witnessed through the steamed window of the Administration block was a wound to him.
The conscript troops of the MVD could not entirely be blamed for the ill fit of their uniforms, for their slouched shoulders, for their callow and chilled faces.
They were not the cream or they would not have found their way to this worthless place.
Scum in uniform…he yearned for a parade ground of his former troops, for the whip crack of their rifle drill, the unison stamping of their marching boots.
And the prisoners were worse, the worst.
No feet picked up, just a slovenly shuffle in the snow…as if they knew  that their scraping passage festered in the mind of the Major.
But he tried.
He strove through all his waking hours to impose a smartness and snap on Camp 3, Zone I, that he knew had never been present before, and that during the night hours when he was alone he doubted he would ever achieve.
He was Major Vasily Kypov, thirty-three years of service behind him, and three more to endure before the blessed release of retirement.
A young man stood a pace behind him, young enough to have been his son, and his breath played the sweet stale smell of the cigarette smoker's mouth across the Major's nostrils.
The same uniform, but without the silver wings and blue tabs instead of red.
A Captain in KGB he might be, the power in the kingdom of Zone I, feared by the superior in rank and the inferior in fortune, but the Major had demanded that inside the Administration block in the mornings he should wear his uniform.
Such were the victories available to the Commandant in his skirmishes with his Political Officer.
The Captain smoked imported Marlboro cigarettes.
They were sent to him in packages of ten cartons from Moscow.
That was a display of influence, not that the Major needed information on the long arm of KGB.
And Major Vasily Kypov knew well that he commanded Captain Yuri Rudakov in name only.
They shared their responsibilities for the smooth running of Zone I with the enthusiasm of those bound by a loveless marriage.
Where possible they went their own ways.
Where contact was unavoidable their relations were frosted, and formal.
If asked, Captain Rudakov would not have been able to recall an occasion when he had given ground, important or trivial, to Major Kypov.
With his pocket handkerchief the Major wiped the window pane.
There was one amongst the dross people in their three ranks of fives who stood out.
A tall man who gazed about him as if not yet intimidated by what he saw.
Interest stirred in the Major.
There were few enough who came to the camps with their heads erect, who stood their ground in the  snow and fielded the threat of the gun barrels and dogs' mouths.
The Major's sensibilities were divided between admiration for a man with self-pride and hostility to a man who by defiance might provide a threat to the peaceful and submissive nature of the Zone.
‘What do we have today, the same shit as always?’
The Major's breath blurred the glass, and he reached again for his handkerchief.
‘The usual medley, Comrade Major…
Criminals mostly.‘
‘Scum, parasites, hooligans…’
‘And pliable and quiet, Comrade Major…if you want the busier life you can apply for Perm…’
‘I don't want the politicals, I don't want Perm.
I want a camp that is efficient and productive.’
‘Then you must have the scum, the parasites and the hooligans.
From the criminals you have no argument…
I have the files…thieves, one who took a knife to a postmaster's throat, one who buggered a Pioneer intake class, one who caught his wife screwing the rent official and took off half her head with a hammer-he should work well.
There is only one…’
‘The one in the front rank,’ mused the Major.
‘Of course you are right.
They cannot send us a box that is filled only with good apples, there has to be one that is bruised.’
‘Tell me.’
‘A peculiar case.
His name is Holovich.
Mikhail Holovich.
That is the bruised apple.’
The Captain walked back from the window towards the Major's desk and tipped onto its ordered surface a bundle of buff card files.
‘In Moscow they have given Holovich the Red Stripe category.’
The Major swung away from the window.
The red stripe on the file was attached only if there was believed to be a risk of escape.
The red stripe demanded a special vigilance.
The blue stripe was its brother and indicated that a prisoner had shown tendencies towards organization and confrontation.
‘Blue I can handle, blue you can see, blue is self-destructive  and the posture of an idiot.
The red stripe I detest.
The prevention of escape is inexact…’
‘You haven't lost a man, not in your time.’
‘Not in my time…
Who is Holovich?’
‘Quite a star, actually,’ the Captain drawled.
‘Something far from the ordinary.
His parents lived before the Great Patriotic War in the Ukraine, they were married there just prior to the Fascist invasion.
The Germans took them, man and wife, back to their war factories.
After the surrender they refused to be repatriated, and they settled in Great Britain.
It is certain that they became participants within the traitor ranks of NTS…you know of that, Comrade Major?
Narodno-Trudovoi Soyuz, an émigré organization, of course you know that…
They have one son, born Mikhail Holovich and now thirty years old.
In the eyes of the British the boy had their citizenship, but we see the matter differently.
To us he will always be a Soviet citizen.
Mikhail Holovich became Michael Holly, but the change of a name does not discard nationality.
He is Soviet.
Holovich is an engineer, small-scale turbines.
He worked for a firm in the area of London, and that company began to negotiate with one of our Ministries for the sale of their products to the Soviet Union.
During his childhood, Holovich had been taught Russian by his mother and it was ostensibly for that reason that his company asked him to visit Moscow — a quite spurious reason because we supply most adequate and experienced interpreters for commercial negotiations with foreign concerns.
Before arriving in the Soviet Union, Holovich was recruited by the British espionage service and was given instructions for a contact — I don't have to go into detail, these are matters available to me.
He was caught and he was sentenced.
In the interests of détente, because of our belief in the value of friendly relations where possible, our government agreed to return this criminal to the British in exchange for a Soviet citizen falsely accused in London.
We were giving them gold, they were handing us tin.
We made this offer on humanitarian grounds.
The gaolers of Holovich  reneged on the agreement, the exchange will not take place.
In Moscow, the Ministry of the Interior after consultation with the Ministry of Justice has determined that the full rigour of the law shall now be turned on Holovich.
One year ago he was sentenced to a term of fifteen years imprisonment.
Up to now he has known the soft ride of the foreigners’ block at Vladimir…
From now he will be treated as a Soviet offender, that is why he is not at Camp 5…
He is a spy, he is a traitor, perhaps he is fortunate not to have faced the extreme penalty provided for in the Criminal Code.‘
The Major strode back towards the window and his boots sounded drum rattle over the hollow spacing under the bare boards of his office.
A spartan, soldierly room.
‘This Holovich, he is a self-confessed spy?’
The Captain laughed quietly.
‘They were dilatory in Moscow.
He is not self-confessed.
That is to come…’
Always when the snow had recently fallen there was a damp fog over the camp, a link between the low grey cloud and the whitened ground.
It was hard for the Major to see the little procession that moved away from the Administration block towards the heart of the camp, but he fancied he could still make out one dark head amongst the hazing image of the retreating column.
There were faces at the glass of the windows watching their approach.
A timbered hut, a hundred feet long and balanced on stilts of brickwork, with smoke flowing from a central chimney.
There were other huts visible as outlines in the mist of early afternoon, but it was to the hut with the figure ‘2’ painted in yellow on the doorway that they were led.
The snow had drifted at one end, at the beck of the wind, so that it reached almost to the eaves of the roof.
And the old man at Pot'ma had said that self-pity was not acceptable.
Holly kicked the snow from his shoes against the jamb of the door and climbed the few steps into Hut 2.
There was a smell from Hut 2 that was unlike anything Holly had known before.
Stronger than the smells of Lefortovo or Vladimir, more pervasive than the smells of the Lubyanka interrogation cells or the train.
It was the smell of a hundred bodies that had not been bathed for a week, of a hundred sets of clothes that had been lived and slept in for a week, of excreta and vomit trapped by the windows that had not been opened for a week.
It floated in the dull light of the hut, a wall that hung from the wooden rafters to the boards of the flooring.
The smell would catch its victims as a spider's web ensnares a fly.
Holly and two others were delivered to Hut 2, the rest would be further dispersed.
The door closed on his back.
He thought he would choke, he thought he would be sick.
The bile ran in a bitter taste to his mouth.
The door split the centre of one wall of the hut, a long wall.
Holly turned slowly from left to right, gazed and absorbed.
A poster, white lettering on red background, blared from the gloom of the opposite wall.
UNDER THE CONDITIONS OF SOCIALISM EVERY MAN WHO LEAVES THE PATH OF LABOUR IS ABLE TO RETURN TO USEFUL ACTIVITY.
In the centre of the hut stood a tall coke stove, blackened  from use, deep in dust, and its chimney stack climbed to the ceiling and through its open hatch there was the glow of fuel working out a second day's burning.
There were windows without curtains.
What else, Holly?
What else is there to see in Hut 2?
Only the bunks, nothing else.
The bunks are round the walls, the bunks fill the central aisle of the hut.
Wooden framed and two tiered, half a yard between them.
Hut 2 is a dumping-ground for bunk beds, it offers no space to any other furniture.
There are no tables, chairs, cupboards.
This is the place where they dump you, Holly, you and the bunk-beds.
This is where they leave you while your existence is hacked from the memory of the former life.
This is home for the forgotten.
Of course, you'd read of these places and screwed up your nose in disgust and said such things shouldn't be permitted, and why didn't someone else do something about it.
But now, Holly, you're in Hut 2 of ZhKh 385/3/I, and nobody did do anything and the hut is reality.
The hut breathes and lives and survives.
The hut is your home, Holly.
‘What is your name?’
A voice beside him, Holly spun to his right.
There were faces peering at him.
Tired faces all of them, some old and some young.
The men lay on the bunks, all but one.
He was a small man with a puffed chest and a jutting chin.
Holly saw the bright red band that was sewn to the upper arm of his tunic, the red diamond on his chest.
‘What is your name…you, the one in the front?’
Holly knew the standing of the man.
There had been similar men at Vladimir.
The trustie of the Internal Order System.
The toadie, the crawler, the compromiser, the one who worked for favours.
The man came closer, manoeuvring with the confidence of authority between the bunks.
‘Holly, Michael Holly…’
‘We are Soviets here, we are not foreigners.’
‘My name is Holly.’
‘If you are in Camp 3 you are a Soviet.
If you are in this camp you have a Soviet name.
What is your name?’
‘My name is Michael Holly…
I was charged in that name, I was sentenced in that name.’
And the faces stirred above the grey blue pillows, and the bodies shifted beneath the dark blankets.
A newcomer disputed with the trustie in his first moments inside the hut.
That was entertainment.
Like cats' eyes on a night road the pale faces beamed at Holly and his adversary through the greyness of the room.
‘Smart arse, clever prick…
What is your name in Russian?’
Anger flared in the man who was not accustomed to the answer back.
Holly smiled.
‘When I was born my parents called me Mikhail Holovich.
My name now is Holly…’
Their eyes held, Holly's and the trustie's.
The trustie looked away, far down to the recesses of the hut.
‘At the end of the line you will find a bunk…
And Holovich, be careful, you clever shit.
Learn what is the arm band, learn what is the diamond, remember them and be careful.’
The faces watched him as he walked half the length of the hut, searchlights following him, and Holly went briskly as if by the speed of his step fourteen years might somehow trickle faster through the future's fingers.
The two men who had stood behind him gave their names quickly, eagerly, anxious to avoid association.
Holly went to the end of the hut.
He had not given his name in Russian and the bunk that was allocated to him was against the wall at the furthest stretch from the narrow band of heat that the boiler might service.
The two tiers of the end bunk were unoccupied.
He chose the upper bunk.
There was sagging wire beneath the frame, a drip of water plunged sporadically into the space where his feet would rest.
This is home, Holly…
He had no possessions to swing onto the bunk, he wore them all.
Two pairs of underpants, two pairs of socks, two vests, his gloves, his scarf.
He shivered, wrapping his arms tight around his body.
‘You are a foreigner?’
The voice was sharp, beside Holly's knee.
He was little more than a boy.
Vivid red hair cut back to his scalp, a sheen of stubble across his cheeks.
‘My home was in England.’
‘Why are you not in Camp 5?’
‘Long and complicated…
I've fourteen years to find the answer for you.’
‘I am Anatoly Feldstein.’
‘Michael Holly…’
‘I think we know that now.’
The boy murmured his laughter.
‘You are political?’
‘I didn't rob a bank.’
‘I am Article 70.
Disseminating for the purpose of undermining or weakening the Soviet regime slanderous fabrications which defame the Soviet state and social system.
I am a prisoner of conscience, I am named by Amnesty.’
‘That must help you to sleep sweetly,’ Holly said.
Above the Jewish boy lay a larger, heavier man with rougher hands and a jowled chin where the white ribbon of a healed scar ran twisting across the folds.
Something dominating about the mouth, something cruel about the eyes.
His head was motionless on the pillow as he spoke.
‘You have tobacco, Holovich?’
‘My name is Holly…’
‘I said — you have tobacco, Holovich?’
‘Get the name right, and you have my answer.’
The man jack-knifed to a sitting position, the blanket fell from his chest.
‘In this hut when I ask something, it is answered,’ he hissed.
‘Whatever I ask, it is answered…
Do you have tobacco, Holovich?’
‘The name is Holly.’
‘This is my hut…’
A fleck of spittle rested on the blood blue lips of the man.
‘Learn that this is my hut…’
‘And learn my name.’
Holly saw the streak of the blade exposed by a fold of the blanket.
What's in the bloody name Holly?
How does a name matter?
What matters when home is Hut 2 in Zone I in Camp 3 of the Dubrovlag ?…
He had told himself that his name was Michael Holly, he had set himself that challenge.
Surrender was failure, failure is collapse, collapse is disaster.
Where is the better ground to fight?
In the hut, in the open snow, in the Factory, the Administration block, in the punishment cells, is any one of them a better ground to fight on?
If once the cheek is turned then you will never fight again.
His name was Michael Holly.
He saw the fingers tighten above the snatch of blade, he saw the legs ripple beneath the blanket as if in preparation for sudden attack.
Holly's hand moved, the lightning strike of the cobra.
His fingers found the wrist.
They gripped and savagely twisted.
The knife sprang into the air, arced up a few inches as if powered by a small spring.
It fell between the bunks and clattered dully in its landing.
He held the man's wrist hard against the clean edge of the frame of the bunk.
‘Don't threaten me, not ever again.
My name is Michael Holly…’ he paused, then grinned quickly.
‘I have no tobacco…what is your name?’
Holly bent to the floor, picked up the knife, admired the workmanship of the weapon, reversed it so that the string whipped handle was towards the man, passed it back to him.
‘Adimov…this is my hut.’
‘You can have all of it, but not me.
No one has me.’
A nervous, hesitant gust of laughter blew the length of the hut.
‘Remember that you sleep beside me…
Holly…’
‘I am a light sleeper, Adimov.’
Before dusk Holly and those who had arrived that day were taken to the Bath house to stand for a few moments beneath  the trickle of lukewarm water.
When they had dried perfunctorily on the threadbare towels that were issued they were marched across the stamped snow of a path to the Store for the clothing issue.
Black cotton trousers, a black tunic, a black quilted coat, a balaclava that was padded.
Boots of army style that fitted loosely over his socks.
There was a mattress to be carried away, calico cloth and filled with straw.
A blanket and a shallow pillow.
He dressed, he signed for the garments, he saw his old clothes parcelled into a plastic bag that was labelled and tossed to the floor.
He was in the uniform of the camp, he was a part of its essence.
The camp had drawn him with whirlpool force into its mouth.
He belonged in the camp, he belonged nowhere else.
He shouldered the mattress and carried it back to Hut 2, and slung it up onto his bunk, and threw the pillow and blanket after it.
Adimov was sleeping.
Feldstein told Holly at what time they went over to the Kitchen for the evening's food and he spoke of the compulsory attendance afterwards at the Political Education Unit.
Holly sensed the loneliness of Feldstein in the hut, the dissident among the zeks .
That was a bitter punishment, the placing of this boy amongst the criminals.
The boy would have no defence against these people.
‘Adimov is the ‘baron’ of this hut.
Nobody has spoken to him in the way that you have, not for more than a year…
‘He broke a man's arm a year ago, snapped it like a dried twig behind his back.
There are two men that you should fear here.
Adimov in the Hut, and Rudakov in the Administration.
Adimov you have seen, Rudakov you will find.
In the punishment cells last week, Rudakov, who is the Political Officer, kicked over a man's slop bucket and the water ran all over the floor.
There is no bedding in the punishment cells and no heating.
The man slept on the floor, and the water that had been spilt froze on the floor.
The man slept on ice.
They are the two men who are feared here, they  survive in their authority because we are afraid of them.’
A private smile murmured on Holly's face…
He thanked the boy, then went out into the gathering darkness and across to the trodden path on the inner perimeter of the camp.
Ahead of him, spaced at compact intervals, other men walked the path.
This was the place of aloneness, this was where a man went to talk only with himself.
Out into the freezing, bitter wind.
Holly stepped into the slow-moving queue, took his pace from those who went before and after him, did not close and did not widen the gaps.
He walked against the clock.
Away from Hut 2.
Past Hut 3, turn to the left, past the gate and Administration which was now a darkened hulk, past where the roof of the camp's prison peeped over the fences, turn to the left, past Hut 4, past the old Kitchen which was now a sleeping hut, past the Bath house and then Hut 6, past the Store, turn to the left, past the Guard Room, turn to the left, past Hut 1…three hundred and eighty-five paces…
Away from Hut 2.
They were the margins for Holly, those were the limits.
And Camp 3 is one of the old ones, Holly, there have been thousands here before you, tens of thousands of booted and bandaged feet dragging round this path.
Not the first to step onto that path and wonder in rage at four left turns adding to three hundred and eighty-five paces.
The path was packed snow or worn earth before you were born, Holly.
The path will see you out, see you dead and forgotten.
Beside the path to his right there was a low wooden fence, a yard high he reckoned it to be, and in some places the snow had driven against it and reached its top.
A fence of sawn-off, creosoted planks.
Beyond the low innocence of the fence the snow was smooth, untrampled.
Over the wooden fence is the death-strip, Holly.
He thought of a bullet, and he thought of the chill lead set in the brass cartridge cases of the rifles or machine-guns that watched him.
And after the low wooden fence and the dean snow was the barbed wire fence that  stretched up on poles to the height of Holly's head.
And after the barbed wire was another fence that was higher and again the floodlights played and caught on the cutting edges…and after the high barbed wire was a wooden fence that was three yards high.
Two wooden fences, two wire fences, and all lit as day, all covered by the watch-towers standing in each corner of the compound, and over the highest of the wooden fences he could see only the roof of the prison.
A terrible silence without beauty.
The silence of those without hope.
A man in front of him had stopped.
He stared at the low wooden fence and the pure sward of snow yellowed by the lights, and at the low wire fence and at the high wire fence and at the high wooden fence.
Holly saw his face as he passed behind him on the perimeter path, a face that was scraped with despair.
Holly walked on and the man behind him was an abandoned nothing.
It can't be real, Holly.
It can only be canvas.
Put a knife to it and the canvas will rip.
There must be another picture behind the paint.
Crap, Holly, it's real.
And the bullets in the gun in the watch-tower above, they're real…and the cold, and the sentence of the court which has fourteen years to run, and the worst luck that the Consul had ever heard of…they're real.
He had completed another revolution of the prescribed path, and the man still stood and stared at the fences, and his shoulders were not hunched as if the cold no longer concerned him.
Where did it begin?
Where was the start of the story that brought Mikhail Holovich, who was to become Michael Holly, to this place of wire and snow, of dogs and guns?
The town called Bazar in the heart of the-Ukraine was found on the fringes of thick forestland to the north of the Kiev to Zhitomir railway.
In its way the town possessed a certain  prosperity that was based on the quality of the nearby timber, the richness of the black soil, and the failure of central government's collectivization policy to reach with any great thoroughness into the self-sufficiency of the few thousands who lived there.
The Ukraine is not Russia.
The Ukraine had struggled to preserve its identity of language, heritage, and literature.
Moscow was a distant capital, a foreign overlord handing out its satraps and commissars.
In spite of, and because of , the Stalinist purges of the Thirties, the uniqueness of the Ukraine had not been dislodged.
And where better to remember that individuality than in the town of Bazar.
On the lips of every child of that town was the story of the day-long battle fought there on November 21st 1921, between the men loyal to George Tiutiunnyk and the fledgling Red Army.
A gunfight that stretched from dawn until night as the group who believed themselves to be Ukrainian patriots held out, without hope of rescue or reinforcement, against the encircling advance of Moscow's soldiers.
It was an epic fight.
Old rifles against mortars and machine-guns and howitzers.
It was followed, after the ammunition pouches of the defenders had been emptied, by total slaughter as the last line on the summit of an open hill was breached.
The sacrifice of Tiutiunnyk and his men, because sacrifice was how it was seen in Bazar, lingered for twenty years as a whispered obsession in the minds of the townspeople.
From the time they could read and write and understand, Stepan Holovich and Ilya, who was to become his wife, had known of the battle.
And then in November 1941 the unimaginable happened.
The Militia were gone from Bazar.
The Party offices were closed and its workers speeding East in open lorries.
Straggling, beaten columns of troops marched without equipment into the town and out along the main road to Kiev.
And a day after them the Panzer convoys took the same road, and some of the girls and women of Bazar with great  daring threw flowers onto the mud-spattered armour of the Panther heavy tanks, and some of the men cheered and the headmaster of the secondary school said that evening in the café on Lenin Street that this was a moment of deliverance.
The people of Bazar could not differentiate between the front line forces of the Wehrmacht and the garrison troops of the SS divisions.
Nor could those people know that after the combat generals had moved further East into Russia that their authority over the civilian population would fall to the hands of Erich Koch, drafted to Kiev to head the Reichskommissariat.
On the afternoon of November 21st the townspeople flocked to the hill site of Tiutiunnyk's battle.
They came in their best clothes as if it were a Sunday from the days before the church was closed.
The headmaster made the first speech, flags flew, the town band played a medley of the tunes of the old Ukraine, a hymn was sung.
In the evening the SS troops came to the homes of those who had organized such a happy day.
In the morning the SS firing squads shot dead twenty-four of Bazar's most prominent citizens.
The following week the train took all the young men and women of Bazar to the war factories of the Ruhr.
Stepan and Ilya Holovich were amongst those transported in the sealed wagons through Lvov and Krakow and Prague to Essen.
They were the Ostarbeiters , intelligent and educated, and set to work as labourers, made to wear a badge.
Three and a half years later, the Panthers that had stormed through Bazar and the Ukraine came home in defeat.
Emaciated, servile, exhausted, Stepan and Ilya Holovich found themselves herded with a hundred thousand others into the Displacement Camps.
The majority, the huge majority, were to be shipped back in the same closed trains to the Motherland of Russia.
The minority, the tiny minority, succeeded in persuading the American authorities that they should not be returned.
In 1947 Stepan and Ilya Holovich arrived with no money and no luggage at London's Tilbury docks on a freighter from Bremen.
Stepan Holovich had sunk to his knees to kiss the rain-soaked paving of the quayside.
From a single room in Kingston-upon-Thames which he rented and where he lived with llya, he repaired watches and clocks.
When the local doctor, confounded by the sparrow size of his patients, informed the couple that they were to become parents, llya Holovich had dropped her lined and weary face to her chest and wept, and Stepan Holovich had jumped up from his chair and then scratched between his thin grey hair and laughed.
A fortnight later the buff OHMS envelope had been delivered which announced the granting of the naturalization papers.
They were British citizens by the time that Ilya Holovich entered Kingston General Hospital for a difficult confinement.
That it was difficult was of no surprise to the duty obstetrician.
A woman of that physique had no business producing 8 lb 7 oz babies.
They called the boy Mikhail.
In the year that the child first went to a nursery school his father anglicized the family name.
It was his hope that whereas an essentially Ukrainian background would rule behind the front door of their home, his son could become assimilated into the society that had adopted his flotsam parents.
Michael Holly was an unremarkable boy growing up in the suburbs of south-west London.
That is perhaps the start of the road to the perimeter path of ZhKh 38S/3/I.
A man stood, rakish and upright, and stared at the fences.
The night pressed down on the flood of the arc lights, the line of lamp clusters rested on the outer knee of wood planks.
The snow gathered in a thin cloak on his tunic's shoulders and he made no attempt to scatter the fall.
Those who walked the perimeter path went behind him, and no one spoke to the man who gazed at the wall that held him.
He  communed in a solitude, and much of his face was hidden by the quilted balaclava, and his mind was blocked to those who passed him.
When the bell sounded and the ghost figures pitched from the huts to form the lines at the Kitchen, he remained, his attention held all the time by the upper strands of wire and the topmost line of the wooden knee.
From the corner of the compound the raised machine-gun and its minder watched and bided their time.
In the dining area of the bare brick Kitchen there was a stirring in the pool of lethargy.
This was Sunday evening, the end of the one day of the week when the Factory was idle.
The zeks had rested, they had reinforced their strength by spending the daylight hours on their bunks.
They had written the letters that would be read during the week by the camp censors, that would be passed or slashed or shredded.
They had read from the paltry choice of books in the Library.
They had dreamed of somewhere that was beyond the fence.
They have been revived.
Sunday is a hypodermic dose to the zeks .
There was a spatter of life and talks in the queue that Holly joined and that stretched twice around the inside walls of the Kitchen.
For the first time in the day he heard men laugh freely.
At the far end from the door was a hatch at waist height, the level at which a man will naturally hold his steel tray.
The man who ladles the food into the steel bowl on the tray cannot see the face of the man to whom he gives the food.
He is blind to him and cannot therefore offer the favour of increased rations to a friend, reduced rations to an enemy.
Except that Adimov and his fellow barons will speak their names, and the cook will respond, which is the way of survival.
Their bowls will be brimming, they will head the queue for the sprat of meat or fish that floats in the soup gruel.
There is a rule, there will be a path around it.
That is the way of Camp 3, it is the way of all camps in the Dubrovlag .
Adimov had not looked at Holly, he was far to the front of the slow-moving line with his cronies, the iron men of the huts.
Feldstein stood half a wall's length ahead of Holly, beyond conversation.
The soup was a mash of wheatmeal flour and groats.
There was a skim of grease that shone in the fluorescent light of the Kitchen.
A square of grey fish floated like a hostile iceberg, all but submerged.
A tight chopped stalk of a cabbage plant.
Different to Lefortovo, back in the dark ages from the second floor of the hospital block at Vladimir.
Hot water to drink and rye bread to chew.
Holly found a place at the end of a table, extra room was made for him.
He sat down, he smiled.
‘You are the Englishman…the one who insists on his English name…
I am Poshekhonov, from Hut 2.
I sleep close to the stove.’
Holly looked across the table at the stubby, round-faced little fellow who breathed a cheerfulness that was alien here.
He could have been a bank manager from the High Street of Twickenham, he could have sold insurance policies or slashed-price holidays to Benidorm.
‘Pleased to meet you — I'd rather it were elsewhere.’
‘The way you look at your food you are new to the camps.
You have to close your eyes, close your nose, close your guts, you swallow it down.
You throw the bread on top of it, the bread is the cork.
The bread holds it below till you're ready to shit.
You don't eat like this in London?’
‘Not everyday…’
Holly lifted the steel bowl to his mouth, tipped and tilted it, swallowed and felt the lukewarm drip in his throat and then the rising sickness, and he clamped his mouth shut, and swallowed again.
More from the bowl.
‘You have to feed, you must feed,’ said Poshekhonov sombrely, and then his laughter broke again.
‘There is some goodness in the food.
They even say there is protein, but that may be propaganda.’
Holly thought he would choke.
He bit at his lip and swallowed again.
‘Is this the worst?’
‘Not the worst and not the best, this is everyday.’
Poshekhonov leaned across the table and slapped at Holly's shoulder.
‘You will get used to it.
How long do you have to learn to love our food?
I once had two weeks to learn to love everything, two weeks until I was to be shot.
The two men sentenced with me, they killed them, they spared me.
Since that day I love to eat, I love all the food.
Life here is very beautiful, to me any life is preferable to death.
You understand me, Englishman?’
‘Holly…yes, I understand you.’
Only the grease lay at the bottom of the bowl.
Holly took the bread and tugged it between his fingers and wolfed it to his mouth.
Tasteless and dry, it suffocated the revulsion.
The man next to him winked in a fast act of conspiracy, a runner bean of a man who then extended his hand to Holly and their fists gripped in a distant greeting, but there were no words.
The camp was not a place of easy friendships.
It was a place where men weighed and evaluated before they extended kindliness.
They have learned to co-exist, they have learned to live without a colleague.
He wiped the scattered crumbs on his tray to a neat heap and then pinched them between his fingers and gobbled them.
The meal had done little to staunch the hunger pains in his stomach.
Hunger would be the battle.
But they survived, all of these men in the Kitchen hut had found a track of survival.
And so, too, would Holly…
‘Englishman, you have not asked me why I am here…’
The disappointment was flushed on Poshekhonov's face.
Holly stood up.
Around him the benches emptied.
When the food was finished, the tables cleared.
‘Because it is not my business.
Nor your business why I am here.’
‘Easy, Englishman, you cannot be an island, not in this  place.
The man who can live here is the one who reaches out to his fellows.’
Poshekhonov had gripped Holly's arm.
‘They have the guns and the dogs and the wire, they have their norms of output in the Factory, they have their regulations and their camp regime.
They seem to have everything.
We have only our strength to laugh at them.’
‘And does your laughter wound them?’
‘From laughter we can have small victories.’
‘Small victories win nothing.’
‘That is the answer of a man who hurries.
There is nobody in this camp who runs.
There is nowhere to run to…it is your first night, Englishman, you have to learn of a new world, you have to be patient if it is to give up to you its secrets.
I tell you now — the big victory is not possible.’
‘If you say so,’ Holly said over his shoulder.
He joined the slow column heading out of the double doors of the Kitchen.
Poshekhonov was still beside him.
‘You have yet to sleep here one night.
The man from Internal Order is already your enemy…
Adimov, who is a killer, is your enemy.
A man cannot be an island here if he is ever to turn his back on this place.’
‘Thank you,’ said Holly quietly.
Beyond the door the snow was falling more heavily and the men who crowded there braced themselves to run or shamble back to their huts.
Holly stepped out into the bitter wind.
You give yourself to no man, Holly.
Myself first, myself second, myself third.
Dancing shadows passed by him.
No talk now, because the business was serious, crossing the open metres from the Kitchen to the huts.
The shots ripped aside the murmur sound of sliding feet.
The shots dipped and gouged into Holly's consciousness.
And Holly knew where to look.
The instant of clarity.
God, Holly, you had forgotten him.
You had been swilling food into your guts and making the small talk of camp survival, and you had lost him from your memory…
The columns of men that splintered from the Kitchen to their  huts were first frozen still, then drawn in concert to where the lights were brilliant, where the knees hung between the blackness and the snow.
One more shot.
You could have spoken to him, you could have offered something of yourself, but you left him there in the stinking bloody cold.
You went to your fucking soup and your fucking swill and left him in the night.
Holly ran.
He barged aside those who were in front of him.
He cannoned against grey-quilted bodies, his breath came in sobs and the chill caught at that breath and sucked out little gauze puffs of air.
He ran, and came with the front rank to the perimeter path and the low wooden fence.
Only his arms had reached to the top strands.
He hung from his arms and his body was quivering and his boots kicked at the snow.
Not dead.
Around Holly there was a wail of anger that seethed across the illuminated strip and reached up to the watchtower from where the searchlight dazzled them.
And there was the roaring of the dogs and shouting from across the compound and the Guard Room.
Afterwards Holly could not explain to himself his action.
He could offer no reason as to why he had stepped deliberately over the low wooden fence and onto the clean snow beside this one man's spaced footsteps.
Instinct took control of him and the noise of the men behind him died to a whisper.
With clean, sharp steps Holly walked to the wire.
He did not look up towards the guard in the watch-tower.
He did not see the guard revise his aim, away from the gathered crowd.
Two shots into the snow a metre to the right of his legs, tiny puffs in the snow.
Holly saw only the man on the wire.
He reached up, took the weight of the body and lifted it higher and then wrenched the material of the tunic from the barbs of the wire.
A tall and awkward body and yet light as a child's.
Holly  carried him cradled in his arms, retraced his steps, stretched over the low wooden fence and was back, swallowed again among the zeks .
Other arms took on the burden, and blood stained richly on the sleeves of Holly's tunic.
Two guards on skis had infiltrated themselves between the high wire and the high wooden fence and covered the growing mass of prisoners with their rifles.
From the interior of the camp, warders pitched through the crowd with the aid of weighted staves and forced back the crush around the prone body.
Amongst the warders was one man who wore no uniform, but instead a warm quilted anorak.
This man spared one short glance at the crippled zek , then looked away, folded his gloved hands across his stomach and set himself to wait patiently.
This one man set himself above the bloody incident in the snow and the yelping sound of the siren.
Holly watched him.
Life was ebbing fast.
It was ten minutes before the stretcher came, and then the prisoners parted and allowed this one from their number to be taken to the opened gates.
When the gates were shut again the crowd broke, drifted again towards the huts.
Poshekhonov was beside Holly.
‘You should not have intervened, Englishman.’
Holly felt a slow wave of exhaustion.
‘It was bloody murder.’
‘He is now outside the camp, that is why he climbed the wire.
He has found his freedom…
Who were you to stop him?
Who were you in your arrogance to try to save him from his wish?
That was his freedom, against the wire.’
‘I couldn't watch him, not like that.’
‘It is the way of the camp.
Any man is free to go to the wire.
It is an intrusion to prevent it.
You saw the man who came in his padded coat; that was Rudakov.
It was from Rudakov that our friend sought his freedom.
Rudakov made an ice rink of the floor of his punishment cell.
A man who has slept on ice, whose clothes have been ice, should not be prevented by a stranger from making his journey to  what freedom he can find.
You will learn that, Englishman.’
On that Sunday night there should have been a film show for the camp, but the projector was broken and the prisoner who knew the trade of projectionist and might have repaired it was serving his second consecutive fifteen day spell in a SHIzo isolation cell.
A concert had been organized in place of the cancelled film.
A group of Militia from Yavas, who formed a choir that was well known throughout the Dubrovlag , sang for an hour and a quarter.
With special enthusiasm they gave their pressed and numbed audience ‘The Party is our Helmsman’, and ‘Lenin is always with You’.
Holly knew the man who had climbed the wire would be dead before the concert was finished.
The old zeks , the long-term men, they say that the first months in the camps are the hardest.
And harder than the first months are the first weeks.
And harder than the first weeks are the first days.
And worst and most horrible is the first morning.
The regime of the darkness and the arc lights still rules when the loudspeakers erupt and relay the national anthem of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
A crackling and worn tape plays the music of the nation from the Guard House, and it is six-thirty.
It is never late, never earlier.
The volume is high and the sounds of the military band with their brass and their drums rampage into the slumber of the men in the huts.
No sleep will survive that wakening call.
The old ones say that the first morning, the first experience of dawn in the camps, is the greatest test.
The old zeks say that if a man has a nightmare then he should not be disturbed because the awakened life of the camps is more awful than the pain of any dream.
The old zeks say that a man is weakest when he comes to the camps for the first time, when the desire for life is first squeezed from him.
They have all slept in their clothes under the one permitted blanket.
They sleep in their socks and their trousers and  their tunics, and still the cold bites them.
They are fast out of their bunks and the hut shakes from the futile cursing.
The warders and the trusties from Internal Order are at the doors of the huts, and the zeks are pitched out into the night darkness and spill to the perimeter path, and like an ant trail they wind around the compound for what is classified as Exercise.
Above them hovers the white wool vapour of their breath, beneath them the fresh overnight snow is beaten to another layer of ice.
They hear the stamping of the guard in his watch-tower, they hear the swish of the skis of the guards who are between the high wire fence and the high wooden fence, they hear the snap bark of the dogs.
When they exercise, the zeks see nothing but their feet dropping forward on the path.
Head down, balaclava tight on the face, scarf wrapped close, tunic collar raised.
There is no talk at morning Exercise because no man is concerned with his neighbour.
The young go fast on the perimeter path, and the old take the way more slowly, but each man is struggling for speed, because speed is warmth.
Exercise is for every morning.
If the tunics and trousers are wet then that is hard for the prisoners and they will be damper and colder for the length of the day that follows.
The old cannot run, and they want the latrine, but only after Exercise are the men permitted to queue for the privilege of the latrines.
The latrines are better in winter because the droppings under the board seats are frozen and the ice quickly binds the smell of men's waste.
After the latrines, a wash of hands and face, but no shave because shaving is done by the barber and that is once a week with the bath.
After the cold wash, it is breakfast of gruel swill and a cup of hot water.
After breakfast it is parade and the men stand in the lines while the warders, who are backed by the fire power of the guards, come with their lists to count and recount.
Seven-thirty.
The start of the working day.
Each morning there is a faint stirring of excitement when the zeks march to work.
They must walk out through the camp gate and cross the road and the railway line and then the file will enter the  compound of the Factory.
It is a brief walk, no more than a hundred metres, but it is a sliver of freedom.
The men march with their warders and when they are clear of the confines of the fences for those few steps they are hemmed in by the soldiers and the dogs.
The road serves the village of Barashevo and sometimes the civilians have to stand behind the lines of the guards and wait for the columns of criminals to go by before they can proceed on their way.
They are as much prisoners as the zeks .
Their gaols are the villages of Barashevo and Yavas and Lepley and Sosnovka and Lesnoy.
They live between the islands of wire and wooden walls, they exist within sight of the watch-towers and beside the garrison barracks.
Meagre villages that are blighted by the camps and their factories.
And because they, too, are prisoners they detest the convicts, and their children ape their elders and shout ‘Fascists!’ as the zeks walk in their guarded column between the Zone and the Factory.
The villagers' employment is the Camp.
They are the warders, the drivers, the technicians, the Factory supervisors.
A manacle secures them to the Dubrovlag .
While the camps remain, the villagers are themselves captive.
Against the shuffling columns, they have only the weapons of abuse and loathing.
There is a break of one hour for lunch.
During that hour the zeks recross the railway line and the road and return to the Zone, once more to be counted and to be searched.
In the afternoon they return to the Factory.
In the evening they return again to the Zone.
The searches are painstaking, the roll-calls are long.
The men must stand in the wind and the stamped snow.
Always they must wait.
The rhythm of the camp is constant, a ticking metronome.
Former Major of paratroops, now seconded to MVD, Vasily Kypov had in his short time at ZhKh 38S/3/I received two commendations from the Ministry for the smooth running of the Zone.
The commendations are framed and hang on the wall of the Commandant's office.
The hunger comes quickly, the exhaustion is slower.
But they are twins, these two, and their approach is inevitable.
Ten hours work each day in the Factory, three meals of hidden meat without fresh vegetables and fruit.
Exhaustion and hunger will run together.
They will sap his will.
When he is spent by the work load, sagging from the diet, then he will be pliable and no longer make trouble.
When he is beaten then he will be a zek, and that is the way of them all, all eight hundred in the compound.
Holly learned the code of behaviour by watching others.
When the mob of Hut 2 fell from their bed bunks and went out into the blackness for Exercise, Holly was with them.
When the name of Holovich was called at the parades and counts, he shouted back ‘Holly…here’ and the trifle of the gesture was ignored.
When the columns went to the Factory he was in their ranks.
When he was given work at a lathe that rounded and spiralled chairs' legs he took no advice from the foreman, and instead watched the man next to him to study the working of the machine.
He ate the food that was provided with the avidness of those who sat around him.
He lay on his bunk with his eyes open and staring at the rafter ceiling for all the hours that were common for the men of Hut 2.
He blended.
Not first in the line and not last.
Not highest in the production line of the Factory, not lowest.
He joined the ghost ranks, became common and unremarkable.
There was interest in the Englishman, of course, in Hut 2.
Something rare this one, they thought, something rare and original.
They gazed with a covetousness at the scarf around his throat, the socks under his boots, the pants he stripped off in the Bath house, wanted to hold and feel the texture of the garments of a stranger.
They talked to him of their lives as if by that they smeared some ointment on their existence.
They sought confidences from him.
They were unrewarded.
Holly built a castle, a castle on an island, a castle on an island that is a prison camp.
A killer who slept at night half a metre from Holly came with his story to the Englishman's side.
Adimov shuffled aside the moment of their first meeting.
The dissident who had been the first to speak to Holly talked the hesitant monologue of revolution.
Feldstein came to Holly as if in hope of finding a kindred mind.
The fraud whose bunk was beside the stove and whose fall had been the hardest and cruellest of any sought out Holly on the perimeter path.
Poshekhonov ladled out the lore of the Correctional Labour Colonies.
And there was Chernayev who was a thief, and Byrkin who had been a naval Petty Officer, and Mamarev who they said was an informer.
All reached for Holly's ear and all were turned aside.
He seemed indifferent.
Not curt in his rejection of their stories, not rude.
Indifferent and disinterested.
Adimov boasted of the planning of a robbery in Moscow
The State Bank on Kutuzovsky Prospekt was to be Adimov's target.
Himself and two colleagues, and even a car found for the escape run, and a homemade pistol that would be sufficient to unnerve the cashier clerks.
Two hundred thousand roubles in the hold-all and out into the street and into the car where the engine ticked snugly and into the traffic…and the stupid bitch had been on the pedestrian crossing, and her bags filled both hands, and she had frozen, not stepped back, and the car had hit her, swerved, crashed.
Stupid bitch.
Well, they weren't going to bloody stop because the foot sign was lit, not with the hold-all full.
Can't put the handbrake on and sit on your hands with the alarm bells ringing because a babuska's on her way home with her son-in-law's dinner.
Swerved and crashed into a lamp post.
Three men in the car, all dazed, all half-concussed when the Militia pulled them out, and the bank's door not fifty metres away.
Twelve years to think on it, twelve years and not five gone.
And Adimov seemed to look for admiration from Holly when he told his story.
Each new man into the hut had clucked sympathy for Adimov's mishap, each  had thought that wise.
All except the new stranger, the Englishman.
In Holly's ear Feldstein whispered of the circulation of the samizdat writings.
Typescripts photocopied and distributed that carried the rivulet of dissent from eye to eye for the few who trusted in a future of change and the ultimate destruction of the monolith that controlled their lives.
He was a part, he said, of the illegal and dangerous dissemination of information, dangerous because those who were arrested risked being parcelled off to the Sebsky Institute for Forensic Psychiatry or thrown to the mercy of the zeks in the camps.
Two years served and four to go because one in the chain had not owned the strength to withstand the interrogation of the KGB questioners in Lubyanka.
And he was proud in his puny and isolated fight, and believed in a vague victory in the future, and a present of martyrdom.
He spoke of the nobility of the struggle, not of the failure of achievement.
He was known in the West, he said, he was supported in his agony by many thousands, he was comforted by their distant communion.
Holly had listened with a chilled politeness and shrugged and turned away on his side for sleep.
At the tables in the Kitchen, Poshekhonov found Holly.
The joint history of the camps and of his life bubbled clear as a hill stream.
A spring of guarded hope and a source of amusement.
Poshekhonov said that he had found the way to laugh, he had picked up the spear of ridicule.
‘Not too often, you understand, but enough to prick them…’
His fall had been fast and far, but it had been almost worthwhile, almost, and one day, one distant day, there was the dream of a flight beyond the borders of the Motherland.
It waited for him in Zürich, Poshekhonov would say, the pay-off.
Had Holly ever been to Switzerland, because there was a bank there?
He told of the Black Sea fishing collective where the catch was counted not in kilos of fish flesh but in the grams of the salted roe of the sturgeon.
A co-operative company for the canning of caviar, and the plan had been brilliant in  its sauce and complexity.
A Dutch businessman had proposed the idea, a wonderful invention…
A tin of caviar but the label declared the produce to be herring, and as herring it was sold to Amsterdam before the transfer of the labels in Holland and entry to the shops of the European capitals.
And the rip-off was well divided and a segment found its way to a bank account that was anonymous in all but its number.
Couldn't have lasted.
Brilliant but temporary, and Poshekhonov was lucky not to have been shot with his two principal collaborators.
Poshekhonov could summon a short clear smile from Holly, a smile that was chained and brief.
Each in his way — Adimov, Feldstein, Poshekhonov — reached out towards Holly and waved a flag of interest or concern or friendship.
All failed.
Holly was alone.
He waited, bandaged in his own thoughts, for the summons to the Administration block.
A full week after Holly had been delivered to Camp 3, Captain Yuri Rudakov issued the instruction that the new prisoner was to be brought to his office.
It was not that he had been dilatory in his duty of interviewing all those sent to the camp who were in any way, minor or major, special.
His own inclination would have led him towards this first interview three or four days earlier.
But in the wake of the personal file of Mikhail Holovich had come further instructions and briefings over the teleprinter in his office.
More material from Dzerszhinsky Street that he must assess.
By the time that he felt ready to bring Holly before him, he had spent three clear days shut in that office with the door closed to all inquiries.
The Captain was a young man, not yet past his twenty-eighth birthday.
There were those in the dim corridors of Headquarters who said that his rise had been too fast.
Rudakov knew the pitfalls, knew of the knives that waited for him.
The KGB  officer responsible for the security, both physical and spiritual, of the camp was a man on trial.
It was his strength that he recognized the testing-ground.
He had been on trial before.
Aged only twenty-four he had held down the post of KGB officer attached to the 502nd Guards Armoured Division stationed at Magdeburg in the German Democratic Republic.
He had learned there how a full colonel could wince and supplicate in his presence.
He had felt the power of his position when he had taken a bottle to the room of any major and propositioned for information on the talk in the mess when he, the KGB's ears, was not present.
He had seen the tremble jelly of a captain's chin and known it was his uniform and the blue unit tabs that won it.
He was roller-coasting towards a high-rise career and now they had sent him to this stinking backwater to test further his resolve and capability.
If he won here too, if he came back from Barashevo without a stain of the shit and slime of this place on his tailored khaki uniform then the road upwards and onwards was clear to him.
The Captain was an egocentric man, one who believed in the great blueprints of life.
He reckoned in a destiny that was mapped for his career.
Fate had thrown the dice.
Twin sixes had fallen, rocked, rolled for him to see them.
Mikhail Holovich had been sent to Camp 3, Zone I.
The files told him their story — a tale of rare incompetence and of opportunity for him.
An agent of the British espionage services had been captured in Moscow.
A strong creature and determined in his denials, but that should have been short-lived.
Of course there had been interrogation sessions in the Lubyanka, but they had been flimsy affairs, for hanging over their progress had been the sword of a man's release.
From the very start the question of exchange had reared.
All the superiors, all the gold-braided ranking officers, had been short in their duty when it came to the breaking of this Englishman.
Where the Colonel Generals, where the Colonels, where the Majors of Headquarters had failed, idiot buggers, there was  the opportunity for an ambitious Captain to succeed.
Since the first file had arrived off the train from Pot'ma, Yuri Rudakov had dreamed of little else than his triumph of interrogation over Mikhail Holovich.
He sat now at his desk, a manicured little man with a strength on his face, and a power about his sparse body, and a whiplash edge to his movements.
A decisive and active young man.
One who was going up.
One on whom the sun played even through the bed of snow cloud over the roofs of the Administration block.
His desk was clear of the papers that were memorized and locked in his personal safe.
He had told his wife that morning over breakfast in their bungalow on the edge of Barashevo and within faint sight of the outer wooden fence of Zone I, that he stood to gain a great prize…not tomorrow, not next week, but he had time, he had months of time to break this bastard.
As he waited he realized that he had not felt such keen anticipation and happiness since he had served in the front line at Magdeburg.
The knock at the door was respectful.
Rudakov drummed his fingers on the table to count out five slow seconds, then called quietly for the prisoner to be brought into his presence.
Holly looked around him.
An office that might have been occupied by the Personnel Manager of the factory in Dartford.
A tidy desk and behind it a man who might have come in on the Saturday afternoon for extra work.
The collar of a checked shirt peeped from the neck of a thick blue sweater.
A smaller table was beside the desk with a high-backed typewriter, the sign of a junior executive who has not been allocated a personal secretary and must write his own memoranda.
A safe, a filing cabinet, a window that was curtained against the dusk of the camp and the reef of arc lights that surrounded it.
A calendar with a colour photograph of a snow scene was set between the  framed painting of Lenin and the portrait of Andropov of the Politburo.
But a desolate room, without carpet, without furniture of quality, without personal decoration.
Yellow painted walls that were cheerless and ran with dribbles of condensation.
The warmth from the hot pipe that skirted a side wall billowed across Holly's face, rubbed at the cold that had settled under his tunic and shirt as he had walked from the compound with the trustie from Internal Order.
One week and the changes had fastened on Holly, winter leaves sticking to lawn grass.
Unthinking, he had placed himself not in front of the desk but at an angle to it so that he was closer to the pipes, and he wondered how long the interview would last because it was short of thirty minutes until the call to the Kitchen for dinner and the hunger pain pinched at his stomach.
The man behind the desk would have been a little younger than himself.
The man lounged easily in his chair and Holly stood.
The man wore fitting and casual clothes and those of Holly were thin.
The man was close-shaved, wore the scent of deodorant, and Holly was stubble-bearded and stank so that he himself could know the foulness.
The man was relaxed and rested and Holly felt the tiredness brush through his mind and for nine and a half hours he had worked in the Factory at the lathe that fashioned chairs' legs.
The man possessed power and pressures and Holly knew no stare he could offer in competition.
And if they were together in Hampton Wick, if they were sitting in the front room of his home in south-west London, then Holly's company Fiesta would be in the road outside, and the clothes would be smart on his back, and the whisky and water in his hand, and the confidence in his talk.
But this was not his ground.
He stood in the damp boots that leaked the snow wet to his socks, and he hated the man who sat at the desk.
‘Would you like to sit, Holovich?’
Holly straightened himself, shrugged at his shoulders to  try to rid himself of the weariness, gazed back at the man's face.
‘I believe it is quite hard, the work that you do as a Strict Regime prisoner.
You would be better to sit, Holovich.’
The air was filled with cigarette smoke.
Different to Holly's nose from the dry dust filth of the tobacco used in Hut 2.
Something from a former world, a part of a deep memory.
His nostrils flicked, the smoke spiral played before his eyes.
‘Forgive me, I didn't think, would you like a cigarette, Holovich?’
‘I don't smoke…my name is Michael Holly.’
‘My name is Rudakov,’ the mouth of the Captain sagged in amusement.
‘My papers tell me you are named Holovich, that is what the file calls you.’
‘Holly…
Michael Holly.’
‘And it is important to you to keep an identity?
You find that significant?’
Holly stared down at him.
‘If your name is Holovich or Holly, that is important to you?
That is my question.’
His hands were clasped behind his back.
Holly dug a thumbnail into the flesh of his hand.
Trying to beat the tiredness and the sapping warmth of the room, and his eyes blinked when he wished them clear.
‘If you want me to call you Holly, then I shall call you that.
To me it is immaterial, to you it should be irrelevant.
You shall be Holly, you can be Michael Holly.
I will start again…would you like to sit down, Holly?
Would you like a cigarette, Holly?’
‘I will stand…
I don't smoke.’
He recognized the churlishness, saw Rudakov open his hands in the gesture of refused reasonableness.
‘Then it is your choice that you don't sit, your choice that you don't smoke, am I right?’
‘It is my choice.’
‘Your choice whether you smoke a cigarette, my choice  on the name I give you.
Whether I call you Holovich, or Holly, or Mister Holly, or Michael, that is my choice.
Whether I call you by your number, that is my choice.
I have every choice, and unless I wish it otherwise, you have no choice.
That is the reality of your position.
Know this.
It is not important to me what your name should be.
I don't give a shit, Mister Holly, what you are called.
It is not something I would dispute with you; your insistence on a name amuses me.
Understand this, though — if I were to dispute the matter with you, I would win.
I spoke of the reality of your position, and I would like now to expand on that reality.’
The muscles ached in his thighs and calves.
The sweetness of the cigarette drugged his mind.
Remember that you hate him, Holly…
‘You have been here a week, Holly, I have been here one hundred times longer.
I know a little of the camp life.
I tell you something, I tell you this as a friend, because I have a sympathy for you…
Holly, you have to forget the past, that is what anyone who has spent time in the camps will say to you, you have to forget the past life.
The name of Holly is behind you, it does nothing to help you.
That you wish to be defiant and stand when you can sit, that is the attitude of your past life.’
He leaned across his desk, and his chin rested comfortably in the palms of his hands, and there was a gentleness that belied the cut in his words.
‘There is no exchange to look towards, that is in the past, just as your name is in the past.
You must point towards your future, you must wonder if your future is to be fourteen years in the Dubrovlag .
I think you are a young man now, what will you be in fourteen years, and will it matter then whether you are Holovich or Holly?
Will it matter?’
Holly swayed on his feet.
He looked past Rudakov's head to the curtain.
He focused on the place where the draught blew a small bulge in the cotton.
‘Those who sent you here, those who sent you on your mission against the people of the Soviet Union, they are from your past.
Is that a lie?
You are not at your home, you  have not crossed a bridge in Berlin…you are in Mordovia, in a Strict Regime camp.
Their arm is not long enough, not strong enough, they cannot lift you out from here…’
The bell rang, metallic and screeching.
The call for the camp to hurry to the Kitchen.
For the first in line the soup is warm, only for the first.
‘Can I go now?’
‘The pig swill they feed you, that is the future.
You are learning well and quickly.
The past has nothing for you, nothing, the past has abandoned you.
Those that sent you here have forgotten you, buried you, stamped down the earth on your memory.
I speak the truth, yes?
If they had not abandoned you then you would not be here, you would not be wanting to run the width of the compound to drink the shit you wouldn't give your dog at home.
Think on that…’
‘Can I go now?’
‘Enjoy your dinner, enjoy your future,’ Rudakov leaned back in his chair and his face was happy with a smile, then he snapped to his feet.
‘I will take you back to the cage…and in the morning I will give the order that you are to be called by any name you want.’
They went together into the night and, when the inner gate was opened, Rudakov called at Holly's back, ‘Good night, Michael Holly, good night.
Think of those who sent you here, think of how they are spending their evening.
Think of it when you are in the Kitchen line, when you are eating, when you have gone to your bunk.
Piss on them, Michael Holly.’
Holly walked steadily along a stamped snow path, and the laughter from behind gusted to his ears.
‘We are going to meet often, Michael Holly.
You will learn that I can be a better friend to you than those who sent you here.’
The inner gates of the Zone scraped shut, and Holly strode on towards the doors of the Kitchen where the end of the queue spilt out from the light.
The sunburn prickled at the Deputy Under Secretary's neck.
First day back from the winter holiday, the first morning that he had worn again his white shirt and knotted his tie and refound the quiet striped suit that was his favourite.
Two weeks on the beach at Mombasa, not in a hotel of course, but in the bungalow of an old friend who had survived freedom and independence in Kenya and still made a living out of East Africa's import and export trade.
It was many years since the Deputy Under Secretary had taken such a holiday; his previous inclination would have been — towards fishing the west country salmon rivers or stalking the Scottish moors.
But his wife had said that it was time for an opportunity to wear something other than thick tweeds.
And the sunshine would do him good, she had said, would help with the arthritis that nagged at his left hip joint.
Sunshine with a vengeance.
Ninety degrees fahrenheit while the Century staffers were shivering in London.
The Deputy Under Secretary had known heat before, but that was in the dim and dark ages when he had been young and ambitious, working the Counter Insurgency ticket in faraway Malaya and Kenya.
Twenty years before he had known the draughtless heat of temporary offices in Kuala Lumpur and Nairobi, but God, you lost the habit of it.
At the direction of his wife  he had taken fourteen full days in the sun that beat back from the Indian Ocean's azure.
He had greased himself in oil and he had cooked and broiled and yearned for the magic hours of noon and six when he could down a life-saving tumbler of gin and lime.
The company had been good, the talk relaxing and buoyant, but limited for all that.
The Deputy Under Secretary could talk of his host's prospects and disappointments, he could learn of the problems of digging out foreign exchange and hard currency in the Third World, the tribulations over the renewal of Residence Permits, the difficulties of keeping reliable servants, but of his own world he must remain silent.
The Deputy Under Secretary headed the Secret Intelligence Service of the United Kingdom, and that was not a subject matter for gossip and conversation on a bougainvillaea-fringed veranda as the lights of the fishermen's dug-outs floated inside the coral reef…
No bloody way.
He was a man who could be honest with himself, and in honesty he could say that he was both pleased and relieved to be back at his desk on a grey Monday morning in London.
And at the same time ashamed of the affliction that he had brought down on himself.
Self Inflicted Wound, that was how they had referred to sunburn back in the old days of Counter Insurgency.
In CI days you thought twice about taking your bloody shirt off.
The Deputy Under Secretary had no one but himself to blame for the irritation that his starched collar created just below the line of his neatly cut hair.
Silly and stupid, the sort of thing he might have done as a child, pathetic for a man of his age.
He snapped shut a file on his desk, reached for his briefcase and extracted the small tin of vaseline.
He heard the chatter of Maude Frobisher's typewriter in the outer office, the pattern beat that indicated that she had steam up, and with a slight secretiveness he loosened his collar and pulled down his tie and wiped a smear of the vaseline across the offending skin.
If word of the DUS's discomfort reached beyond his office then there would be a  titter around Century House, from Library in the basement to Administration on the Tenth.
The Deputy Under Secretary was a recent arrival at Century.
It was less than a year since he had marched into this office, having forsaken the job of Director General of the Security Service for what he regarded as a promotion, while the men of Century recoiled at what they saw as a political insult.
Security and Intelligence were distant half-brothers.
Little fraternal love existed between these two clandestine arms of government.
The move from Leconfield House to Century House crossed a chasm of prejudice and suspicion.
Different animals and different beings, from separate heritages and upbringing.
The movement of the Deputy Under Secretary had been ordered by the Prime Minister as a punishment to Intelligence, the senior service.
A rare grimace could form at the Deputy Under Secretary's lips.
It had been Intelligence's own Self Inflicted Wound that had lifted him from the status of a policeman to that of a ranking diplomat.
Excessive secrecy, unwillingness to consult with senior politicians, reluctance to uncover the hands of cards on the table of missions and operations, and for all that covertness there had been no great efficiency and success.
‘I'll not be treated as a damned security risk,’ the Prime Minister had said to the Deputy Under Secretary.
‘I'll not tolerate activities that can blow up in our faces which I haven't known about.’
The Deputy Under Secretary's brief was clear and concise.
The Service was to be cleansed.
Intelligence was to be scrubbed free of the impurities of independent action.
It would win him few friends in the offices of Century, few cosy evenings with his subordinates in the clubland of Mayfair.
But with the Prime Minister at his shoulder and access to the seat of government a telephone call away, the new master in Century found such small irritations as insignificant as the raw blistered skin below his collar.
Tomorrow he would tell his wife to put out a shirt of softer cotton.
As the new man at Century wielding the new broom, he expected that decisions and policies would come to his desk.
When his reorganization plan was completed then he could anticipate greater delegation, but not yet, not while he was imposing his will on the Service.
The In Tray memoranda soared in a hillock on his desk.
Busily he scribbled in a scratchy copperplate hand that had been taught him by a schoolmistress from the hills of Brecon his thoughts and directives in the margins of the typed sheets.
He worked briskly and with a stolid aptitude.
Everything in front of him he read, down to the last words.
That was the way to retain control of the job.
Amongst the papers was a brown folder stamped ‘SECRET’.
A reference number had been typed on white paper and glued to the folder.
With an ink nib had been added the name of Michael Holly.
Of course the Deputy Under Secretary had not been beyond the reach of Century House while in Mombasa.
Twice a week a Second Secretary accompanied by a High Commission security officer had driven down from Nairobi with a gutted digest of the Service's affairs telexed from London.
He had known of the death of Oleg Demyonov, he had been told of the Soviet retaliation, he had been informed of the visit by the Consul to Lefortovo gaol.
Before opening the file he added his initials to the readership list gummed to the top right corner.
There had not been many there before him, reading the file on Michael Holly.
But then he, himself, had never concerned himself greatly with the case of Michael Holly.
The man had been recruited before the start of the Deputy Under Secretary's reign at Century, recruited and arrested and tried.
The transfer arrangements for Holly and Demyonov had been basically a Foreign and Commonwealth matter, and rightly so.
It had never been admitted that Michael Holly, small-time engineer, was anything other than a falsely-accused business representative on lawful business in the Soviet capital.
The wrinkle of annoyance creased the Deputy Under Secretary's mouth.
Idiotic and dangerous to send an untrained man to Moscow…inadequate preparation on East Europe desk…incompetence…and now the turned bloody ankle of embarrassment.
The sort of affair that would not be tolerated now that he held the stewardship of the Service.
And yet the matter had so nearly been blessed in a strange and unforeseen way, the Service had almost wriggled off the hook through no credit to itself…
Incredible, bloody incredible, that the Service should have found itself within a whisker of escape, within a few heartbeats…
Extraordinary that the Soviets had not already grilled and broken this man, unbelievable that they had permitted a trial for espionage to go ahead without the evidence of a confession.
There was a reason why they had foregone the privilege of having a singing canary in the dock.
They, along with their British colleagues and brothers across the Curtain, had thought only in terms of a swap.
They had wanted Demyonov back.
Perhaps it had been a decision taken by a General of KGB in the Lubyanka, perhaps the papers had gone to the Politburo or even to the President, but the matter had not been pushed.
There was an unspoken and unrecorded understanding between the two teams of far-divided intelligence men…anything was possible of those buggers he'd inherited.
The minimum of diplomatic finger-pointing over Holly in return for the homecoming of the major operative that was Demyonov.
But Demyonov was dead.
Demyonov had gone home last week in an elaborate casket dark inside the cargo hold of a Tupolev airliner.
Holly's easy ride was over.
They'd want a damned confession, they'd want exposure, they'd want to milk the man.
The Deputy Under Secretary rubbed his nose, watched a flake of skin pirouette down to  the opened pages of the file.
Damn…what a fool he'd look if his face peeled.
He anointed himself again with vaseline, bruised the jelly into his nose.
He reached for his telephone.
‘Maude, I'd like Mr Millet, East Europe desk, to come up.
Soonest, please…’
Whenever he spoke to the woman he regretted that he had not stamped his authority and demanded that Gwen should be released from Leconfield and transferred with him, but they had said in Century's personnel that he must have a secretary who knew the ropes of the Service, and he had acquiesced.
A tepid little frog of a woman, that was his view of Maude Frobisher, and probably harbouring a latent spinster love for his sacked predecessor.
Because she disliked it so, he found a fleeting pleasure in calling her by her first name.
The Deputy Under Secretary thought that he liked the look of Alan Millet.
A young man without the priggishness that the Deputy Under Secretary believed he could identify in all Public School pupils, without the conceit of a Cambridge College.
‘Sit down, Millet.’
‘Thank you, sir.’
The Deputy Under Secretary warmed to respect, detested condescension.
The former years in the Colonies with the regimen of rank had left their imprint.
‘Michael Holly…’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Where is he now?’
‘Mordovian ASSR, in the Dubrovlag complex, Camp 3 we think…’
‘That's Barashevo, right?’
‘Correct, sir.’
It pleased the Deputy Under Secretary to display his knowledge.
If the chief hasn't mastered minutiae then his subordinates can hide behind the drape of his ignorance, that was a favourite theme of the Deputy Under Secretary.
‘They're going to try to break him…you agree?’
‘I agree he's a tough time ahead of him, yes.’
‘Bloody tough, Millet…and what's he going to do when the going's hard and bad, what's his break point?’
‘Everyone has a break point, sir.’
Millet shifted in his chair.
It was the first time he had been alone and across the desk from the Deputy Under Secretary.
‘That's a cliché, Millet.
This man wasn't prepared for deep interrogation.
You might just as well have sent him out naked round the privates.
I want information, Millet, I want to know how he's going to cope.
We've never admitted involvement, neither has he, I want to know if it's going to stay that way.
I want to know whether we're going to be blushing when they put him up in the Foreign Ministry at a press conference and he spills.’
‘That's difficult to say, sir.’
‘Of course it's difficult to say.
It's impossible, impossible because you don't know, Millet, the homework hasn't been done.
When you've done that homework, then you'll come back and give me your answer.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘I don't like to be in ignorance, Millet, I detest it.
The Prime Minister doesn't like it either.
There will be a bright little man at Camp 3, very clever and on the up, and your Michael Holly is going to be his pride and joy, and when he can wheel your man into that press conference he's going to be very smug.
And I'll tell you what we'll be, we'll be on the floor, and it hurts down there.
You understand me?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘When you netted this young man, unproven, untrained, did you tell him of the risks?’
‘Not exactly, sir.
Well, it wasn't really discussed.’
‘Should those risks have been discussed, Mr Millet?’
‘I didn't want to go into any more detail than absolutely necessary.
But perhaps, perhaps they should have been discussed.
Yes, sir.’
‘And if they had been discussed then he might not have gone.
That's surely worth brooding on, Mr Millet.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘On your way then, lad, and I'll offer you one thought to tide you over.
Michael Holly didn't come to you, you recruited him.
You put him where he is now.
Camp 3 at Barashevo won't be fun, not in summer, not in winter.
It'll be bloody awful there.
You won't forget that, Millet?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Millet was rising from his chair.
‘No…
I mean, no I won't forget that, sir.’
The roof of the porch was shallow.
It offered Alan Millet little protection from the rain that drove across the street and battered against his body.
He had rung the bell twice, listened to its chime and heard a distant door open and the call of voices.
He was pressed against the wood face, his hips hard onto the letter box, and he cursed the slow reaction.
Below his raincoat his trousers showed the damp, and his shoes were lustreless from their soaking.
The door opened, a few inches only, the limit of a security chain.
‘My apologies for coming without warning…it's Mr Holly, isn't it?’
‘I am Holly, Stephen Holly.’
An old man, the grey face of age, a dulled unhappiness in the eyes.
A striped shirt without a collar, and trousers that were held at a slender stomach by braces, and carpet slippers in checked shades of brown, and a smell of pipe tobacco.
He spoke English with the gravel accent of the Central European, and there was a tremor in his words.
‘Who are you?
What do you want?’
‘My name is Alan Millet.
I'm Foreign Office, I'd like to talk to you about Michael.’
He'd rehearsed that as he walked from the station, but it was still blurted.
He felt a fraud.
‘There is a Mr Carpenter at the Foreign Office, we deal with him…’
‘It's a different department, a different matter.’
The rain dribbled down Millet's socks.
‘Mr Carpenter had not told us anyone else was coming.’
‘I'm half drowned out here, Mr Holly…
I'd like to come inside.’
Millet mouthed what he hoped was a winning smile.
And he was admitted.
He shook his coat outside and it was carried before him by Stephen Holly along the corridor that led into the backroom where a windowed coke boiler blazed and the coat was draped across a fender.
A woman with a brush of close-cut grey hair sat with her sewing close to the fire and a cat rested on her lap, and she looked at Millet with fear and seemed to warn her husband that this was an intruder.
It was a tidy, precious little room, from the polished linoleum floor to the filled bookcase of works in English and Russian, from the glass-shined pictures of distant landscapes to the square table covered by plastic cloth and laid for a meal.
‘It's Mr Carpenter who comes from the Foreign Office to see us.
No one else has ever come.’
The woman echoed her husband.
‘It's a pretty big place, Mrs Holly.
We have a lot of sections there…’
‘What do you want from us?’
For a man of such broken physique, Stephen Holly's voice carried a curious brusqueness.
What did he want?
Well, you don't tell two old people that a year and a bit too late you're out to find what the sticking power of their son will be when it comes to the choicer interrogation techniques of KGB.
If they use the noise machine, if he doesn't sleep for a week, if it's the rubber truncheons, if it's the electrodes, if it's a pardon in return for goodies…well, you don't tell two old people that.
Slowly, he told himself, slowly and gently, because the flow won't come easily, and they're frightened and foreign, and alone without a breakwater to shelter behind.
What did he want?
‘We're very concerned about Michael, both of you must  understand that.
We worked very hard to get him out of the Soviet Union — well, you know all that, Mr Carpenter will have told you, and he will have told you what went wrong…’
‘Mr Carpenter told us why they would not release Michael.’
Stephen Holly spoke sharply as if now he regretted his decision to admit the stranger.
‘I'm one of the team of people at the Foreign Office that will be constantly working on Michael's case.
I thought that it was right that I should talk to you, try and build a better picture of Michael.’
‘You want to know whether he can survive his sentence?’
‘I wouldn't put it as bluntly…we're very concerned, though, about Michael, Mr Holly.’
‘Do you know anything of the Dubrovlag ?’
‘I know a little of it.’
‘You want to know whether he can live through fourteen years in the camps, whether for our son that is possible?’
‘We feel that the more we know about Michael, then the more we can help him.’
The cat yawned and stretched and its teeth and claws flashed, then it turned its back on Millet and settled again on the lap of Michael Holly's mother.
The old woman stared at him and her eyes were bright and piercing and the silver thimble had fallen to the lap of her dress, and her fists were clenched now as if she searched for a memory, and her husband watched her anxiously as if he witnessed that she was at war within herself.
Alan Millet stood with his back to the fire, feeling his inadequacy and waited for the woman to settle herself.
‘You said your name was Millet…you said that you had come here to find out more about our son.’
‘Alan Millet, Mrs Holly.
Yes, I said…’
She dismissed him to silence with a wave of a narrow, fleshless arm.
The arm hovered before the bookcase and then darted at a book end and retrieved a bound diary.
The  fingers scooped at the pages as if there was a reference that was familiar.
‘If you are Mr Alan Millet then you come to us in deceit.’
The world was caving around him, and he did not know yet from which quarter the disaster would fall, only that its arrival was certain.
‘I don't know what you mean, Mrs Holly.’
‘My son kept a diary…three weeks before he flew to Moscow he recorded that he met an Alan Millet…four days before he left he met again with Alan Millet…why now does this Alan Millet speak of our son as if he were not known to him?
Why…?’
Just a frail little thing, wasn't she, the wind could have picked her up and tossed her away, yet she had demolished him as surely as if she had wielded a pick-axe handle to his belly.
‘I can't answer.
You know that…you understand that…
I'm sorry.’
The silence gathered in the room around Millet.
He saw the shadows that reached from the furniture, that slipped from a man and the woman of his life.
When they had met at the pub, and boasted of the ease of the despatch of the packet that Michael Holly would carry, he had never thought of a moment such as this.
He wanted only to be gone, to break out of the circle of reproach and injury around him.
‘My son will survive, Mr Millet.
That is what you want to hear from me?
Michael will survive.
If he serves every day of the sentence passed on him…even if you desert him…he will survive.
He would never bow to them.
I know my son, Mr Millet.’
The tears dribbled on her face and made bright lines across the greyness of her cheeks and then her head was lost in her hands.
‘You should go now, Mr Millet,’ Stephen Holly said.
‘You should not come to us again.’
Alan Millet plucked his coat from the fender and saw that  the drips had made a pool on the linoleum floor.
He let himself out of the front door and when he was beyond the shelter of the porch he felt the sting of rain on his cheeks.
He walked on glistening pavements, across streets where the rain spat back from the tarmac.
He shivered in shop doorways as he waited for the traffic lights to give him green.
He traversed this suburb of south-west London with its roads of London brick terraces and Snowcem semi-detached homes.
A strange quest for him, an eccentric Grail that he sought.
This was a place where the Soviet world was a thing of books and newspapers and television shows and magazines — not tangible.
And Alan Millet traced a path to discover how well a man might withstand the sophistication of modern interrogation at the hands of the masters of that art.
There should have been a better backcloth, something that smacked more of the dramatic and less of the bare ordinariness of these humble homes.
He met a schoolmaster, now retired.
Alan Millet sat in a front room filled with books of modern English history and photographs of small boys lined in the formations of the posed soccer team.
He watched a man scratch back the memory of many years.
He heard of a boy who was a loner-but not lonely, you know — satisfied to be with himself, happy with his own company.
‘I don't think he needed the rest of the class, I don't think he even needed us, his teachers.
A very self-contained child, if you know what I mean.
Very strong in his own way, not swaggering or throwing his weight about, but a great inner strength.
You'll appreciate that it's years back, that boys come and go for a schoolmaster, they're a bit phantom.
But I remember this one…
No real brilliance, nothing outstanding in class or sports, but there was an individuality there.
I suppose you want an example from me…?
Well, I'll tell you this, he wasn't exceptionally strong, but none of the other lads ever fought with him.
That's a pretty poor  example, but none of them ever dared to rag him.
There was this sort of aura round him.
The other boys shied away from him, and he didn't seem to notice an absence of their friendship…
I'm afraid I haven't been of much help to you, Mr Millet.’
There was a lecturer in Mechanical Engineering at the Kingston Technical College across the river from Hampton Wick.
Millet took the bus to the pre-war inelegance of the College close to the Thames towpath and blessed the warmth that he found on the upper deck.
The lecturer was at first impatient at being called from a tutorial session, before his vanity was fed the magical words of ‘Foreign and Commonwealth Office’.
He wore a bow tie, a corduroy jacket, and suede shoes and appeared to Millet to be well-distanced from any workshop floor.
He sat his guest down in a cubbyhole office, mixed instant coffee with the help of a whistling electric kettle, and rambled into a monologue of his thoughts on Michael Holly.
‘Academically there wasn't anything to shout from the ceilings, in fact I don't think that he found the work easy, but there was a dedication there that some of his contemporaries of the same ability could have used.
If he didn't understand something, he was reluctant to stand up and ask, instead he'd worry it out himself, sometimes I reckoned he'd been at it all night.
If I asked a question of him then he'd answer seriously, but if I floated a question and waited to see which of the students would pick it up I could guarantee that it would never be Holly.
He had no thought of impressing me or anyone else for that matter.
I don't think he had many friends here, certainly none that would have lasted after he took his diploma.
He was never on for ‘A's, not in written work or practical, but the ‘B's were consistent enough.
You know in a funny sort of way he was really rather prim.
There was once some heroin floating round the college and there were two students who were the pushers  that's the phrase for them I think — and they were both beaten up.
I don't mean they were just knocked about a bit…they were smashed, stitches and a fractured jaw for one, severe abdominal bruising for the other.
You could see the scratches on Holly's knuckles for days afterwards, and no one ever said anything about it.
It was just not referred to…
I read about the poor devil, that those buggers trumped up an espionage charge against him and he's years to serve in Russia.
I hope I'm not being facetious, but they'll have a hell of a time with him…
I'll put it another way to you, Mr Millet.
He was a little bit frightening.
He could make the rest of us, adults and kids, seem rather frivolous.
Nobody likes that, do they?’
On to the parish priest of St Mary's and St Peter's.
Tea and a plain biscuit in a brick-built vicarage's front room.
‘I'm not going to be able to help you, Mr Millet.
Yes, I was aware of him, but I never managed to lassoo him.
He never attended worship, he never came to the Youth Hall.
I thought he might have had a place at the Youth, it seemed to me that he might have been a leader if he'd had the encouragement.
I tried and I failed, Mr Millet.
It was a disappointment to me.
Well, you're always sorry if you let slip someone you think might be a leader.
How did I know he was leadership stuff?
You can tell, Mr Millet, it's not something that can be hidden.
All I can say is that I failed, and in this particular case I regret that failure.’
He took a train back to London, and a taxi over to Charing Cross.
Then another train towards the Kent commuter belt, and Dartford.
Off the train before its route reached the suburbs.
At the station he asked for directions to the industrial estate, and walked it in a quarter of an hour.
Letterworth Engineering and Manufacturing Company, the sign said.
Mark Letterworth was a tall man with the weight of the recession hanging heavy on his face and shoulders.
‘I tell you this, Mr Millet, two or three years ago I  wouldn't have had the time to sit down and chatter about a chap I haven't seen for more than a year.
That I've got the time is a bloody disaster.
I've the bank breathing at me, and forty-two wage packets to fill on Friday morning, and the phone isn't ringing with customers.
I'll tell you this so that you know I've problems too.
Not problems like young Michael's, but I've enough to be going on with.
I'll tell you this too, and this is for nothing, somebody dumped that boy right in the shit, somebody dropped him in the shit from a great old height.
You see I never believe in smoke without fire, and when our man is nicked on a spying charge then I say to myself that somebody got at him, somebody asked a favour of him, somebody got round him.
I don't know whether you've ever been to Russia, Mr Millet, I have.
I was regular there.
Right?
It's not the easiest of places, but business works there, and business is money, and money is wages, and wages are what keeps my work-force happy.
Understand me, Mr Millet?
What I know of Moscow is that you keep your nose clean and do the work you've set out to achieve, and that way there's no hassle.
I'll tell you this…three times before he went, Michael asked me for time to go up to London and said he was having problems with his visa.
Three trips up to London.
I've never had to have more than one trip to the Consulate for any visa of mine.
Somebody lined him up, and that somebody is no friend of mine, Mr Millet.
I don't know what productivity you have to show in your job, in mine it's the order book.
I needed that custom out of the Soviet Union, I needed it bloody badly.
We've been frozen out there, and that order was worth a couple of million sterling, and that adds up to a hefty pile of wage packets.
You asked me what he was like, Mr Millet…
I was going to make him a director, bloody good young man, tough and fair and straight.
Nobody walked over him, not me, not the customer, not the work-force.
It's a bloody tragedy he's where he is, and that's the truth.
The place is the poorer without him…that what you want to know, Mr Millet?
The only thing that didn't work for him was his  marriage, perhaps his wife will give you a different side…don't tell me that you didn't know he was married and separated, Mr Millet…bit bloody thin on the groundwork, aren't you?’
Before he reached the small block of a dozen bed-sitter flats, Alan Millet knew this would be his last call.
Still the rain, all week it had rained, and his coat was barely dried out from the previous evening and his shoes were still wet and had rejected the polish he had attempted over his breakfast.
This would be the last call, and after that the heat of the office at Century that he shared with two others.
One more visit and the picture of the man who had taken the package to Moscow would be fuller and acceptable as a memorandum to the Deputy Under Secretary.
There had been no difficulty in finding her.
A marriage certificate in London and the telephone book had done the work for him.
He hadn't rung to make an appointment, better to turn up at the door and press the bell like any other cheapskate private detective.
Well, he wasn't much more, was he?
Padding the streets and prying into the window of a man's life, and the trail turned him towards the second-floor flat of Mrs Angela Holly (née Wells), two miles from the home of her former husband and parents-in-law.
Eight o'clock in the morning, and if she went to work then he hoped still to be in time to catch her before she locked the front door and shut out the intrusion of a man from the Service.
A radio played inside the flat, the bell tinkled under his finger.
She was very pretty.
Straight blonde hair, slender-faced and with a wide mouth of expectancy as if everything that happened that was a surprise was excitement and welcomed.
A green sweater that flattered and a knitted skirt that matched.
A pretty girl and one that should be with a man, not a girl who should have sat beside a solicitor in a High Street divorce court.
Millet had played the images game on the pavement outside, had anticipated a tousled woman who wore badges of failure.
And the girl was lovely, lovely and fresh and anticipating.
‘Yes…?’
‘I'm Alan Millet, Foreign and Commonwealth…’
‘Yes…’
‘Can I come in, please?’
‘'Course you can, but you'll be sitting on your own all day — I'm on my way out.’
‘Where do you go?’
‘Town…off the Strand.
Boring old Building Society.’
‘I'd like to come with you.’
‘Please yourself…bring the milk in, can you?…
I'm hell's late and that's usual.’
He picked up from beside his feet two cartons of milk and a plastic box of half a dozen eggs.
At the end of the corridor leading from the front door was the kitchen, where he found the fridge.
He heard her whistling to the radio beyond the half-closed door of what he presumed was her bedroom, and there was another door that could have led to the living-room.
A dwelling unit, nothing more, something that was right for a girl that was alone, right for a girl who lived without a man.
She blustered out of the bedroom, and swept up a coat from a chair in the corridor.
Millet grinned and stepped out onto the landing and behind him the door slammed cheerfully.
He took his cue from her and they half ran and half walked the couple of hundred yards to the station, and she led and he followed.
He had no ticket and she had a Season, and while he stood in line at the window they missed one train and she rolled her head and her eyes and seemed to think it a joke and when the train came there was one thought only in Millet's mind.
How in God's name did this go wrong?
A commuter train, a stop at each station, all seats taken by the grey-suited men who hid from each other behind their newspapers and the film of cigarette and pipe smoke.
So they stood and their hands clasped at the baggage rack  above their heads, and Millet saw the eyes of a fellow traveller flit to the girl's features as if they were staring at those magazines on the high shelf behind the newsagent's counter.
How could Michael Holly and this girl have broken?
‘I want to talk to you about Michael.’
A frown creased her forehead.
‘It's three years since I've seen him, long before all this business.
Did you say Foreign Office?…
I've not seen him since the split.’
‘It's confidential really — but we were hoping to get him back.
It hasn't worked out.’
‘I didn't know.’
Lunatic.
A train swaying between Kingston and Norbiton and New Malden, and a member of the permanent staff of the Service talking with a stranger about a freelance recruit who had been snaffled.
They'd have his balls at Century for it.
‘The Soviets have now transferred him to a Labour Camp.’
‘They're ghastly?’
‘Pretty dreadful.’
‘I don't know how I can help you.
I told you, it's been a long time…’
He felt a pig, a bore.
He was ashamed of himself, and he leant towards her, and the scent she had dabbed at her neck in the bedroom played at his nostrils.
‘What broke it, Mrs Holly?’
‘Foreign Office, you said?
That's the business of the Foreign Office?’
For the first time he saw a nervousness from her, the hesitation of the little girl lost.
He was playing the bastard because that way the inner door opened.
‘I said Foreign Office, Mrs Holly.
Why did it break?’
Her laugh showed a stain of fear, and the man whose elbow was lodged in Alan Millet's rib turned to the girl.
She smiled and looked bravely into Alan Millet's face.
‘I'll talk to you for all the time we're on this train.
You don't come to the office, you don't come again to my home…’
‘Agreed,’ Millet said quietly.
‘You have my word, Mrs Holly.’
‘I think I love him still, I think I'll love him all my life.
I've never fallen out of love with him, not when he went home, not when we were in the courts, not now after three years.
He's a man that a woman wants to love.
You feel very proud when you're with him.
He's perfect, you see, Mr Millet.
What's the silly bitch saying, that's what you're asking, isn't it?
He's punctual, I'm late.
He's tidy, I drop everything anywhere.
He speaks when he has something to say, I'll talk about anything with anyone.
He has a patience and a calmness, I lose my temper and shout and scream.
I never had a chance to bitch at him…do you know what that means?
Can you imagine what that's like…
I can't express it properly.
He was like a kind of martyr, it was as if all my failings were stones that were thrown at him and which he never complained of.
If he'd yelled at me then I'd have been delirious, then I could have lived with him…
He didn't need a wife, can you believe that?
He didn't need me, or anyone else.
He's an entity on his own…’
‘I said it would be pretty dreadful where he is now, how will he cope there?’
She giggled shrilly and swayed against him as the train lurched on the points on the approach to Waterloo.
‘I don't have to answer that, do I?
I mean, well, it's pretty obvious from what I've said…
I told you that I loved him, that's God's truth, I love him and I tell you they might have made such a place just for him.’
The train had stopped.
‘I said you shouldn't come back to me, Mr Millet, and you agreed.’
‘I gave my word, Mrs Holly, thank you.’
Millet and the girl were pushed towards the door, disgorged from the carriage.
The smile swept her face and she patted his hand, and then she had spun on her heel and the swing was in her hips as she walked away into the hurrying crowds.
Holly worked on alone at the lathe that fashioned the chairs' legs.
Around him the other machines were silent, closed down.
The saws and planes and chisels and hammers were abandoned.
The benches were deserted.
Only Holly was at his place.
His back was to the window and he did not turn to spare a glance at the crush of the zeks who squirmed against the grime of the windows.
There was no expression on his face, just the blank skin facade of hunger and tiredness.
At first the civilian foremen who came to the Factory each morning from Barashevo village had shouted that the men should stay at their work, but their protests had made a battle that he could not win.
The trusties of Internal Order had added their voices and they, too, were ignored.
The two wings of authority had accepted defeat and then joined the workforce at the windows.
Beyond the glass there was a sporadically placed ring of guards and dogs who seemed uncertain as to whether to stare back at the distorted press of faces at the glass panes, or whether to watch instead the spiral column of smoke and the flames that played at its heels.
Only the roof of the Commandant's hut was visible over the high wooden fence that was the boundary of the Factory compound, but the fire was high and the smoke  higher.
There was much for everyone to see.
Like children the prisoners revelled in the spectacle, and their enjoyment was spurred by the noise of sirens and shouting and the crackle of old wood in the fire.
Holly heard above the drone of his lathe motor the scenario of sound that the fire carried, and heard too the happiness of the men who had left their benches.
‘All the files, all the bastard case files, all there to burn, all gone.’
‘They'll only have the sand buckets, they won't have a water supply.
I saw the hoses last week, they hadn't been drained, they're frozen solid in their coils.’
‘Did you see the pig Kypov?
He came in running like a fat sow, his uniform's half burned off his fucking back.’
‘How could a fire start there?’
‘The speed it spread, that's not electrical, it spread like tart's clap.’
‘Shit how it started, it did.
Bugger how it started.’
Holly knew.
Holly could have answered the babble over his shoulder.
He picked at another piece of raw wood that had been crudely cut in the workshop across the compound in preparation for the finishing work of the lathes.
The wood shavings and dust reached up in an awkward mess from the floor beside his legs.
A great mound close to him, but the daily norm that was so precious to the administration of the camp would be found wanting that day.
Bloody dangerous, this lathe, Holly thought.
Wouldn't have wormed through any Factory Safety Act passed in Britain in the last fifty years, open and unshielded parts, and half of the men who used them wore the scars on their hands to prove the danger.
There should have been gloves and protective goggles and face masks to field the resin and varnish dust.
And the men worked without these essentials because work was food, and food was life.
Holly knew how the fire had started in the office of Major Vasily Kypov.
In his mind that was guarded by grey, disinterested eyes and his sallow tight-drawn forehead, Holly could picture the process of how a match lit in innocence had tumbled upon an incendiary device.
He had looked for a loophole in their guard, he had found that crevice at the first time of asking.
Smug, weren't they?
Believing in their authority so totally that they could.
not envisage a mere prisoner, a mere item of scum, daring to kick back.
Kick back with interest.
And the interest was prime rate high, and the flames were falling now because little was left for them to feed from.
The foremen called again for the men to return to their work.
They came when the fire had dipped below the level of the high fence.
There was a rumble across the workshop floor as the motors of the machinery sluggishly-coughed back to life.
The old thief, Chernayev, from Hut 2 was beside Holly.
A grizzled gnome of a man with a face as white as office paper and a pepper speckle of beard growth across his jowls and chin.
‘You weren't interested?
You've been here three weeks — I tell you, when it is three years you will run to the window with the rest of us.’
Holly did not look away from his work.
‘How long have you been here?’
‘This camp five years, before that twelve years in Perm.
They call me Chernayev the thief.
I have not been a thief for seventeen years, chance would be a thing.
I did twelve years in Perm, and I was stupid…
I had a tattoo done…imbecile…
Brezhnev is a parasite, that was the tattoo on my arm.
You know they could have shot me for that.
Self-defacement, inciting anti-Soviet attitudes, it's all in the penal code.
Four words and they could have shot me, that's in the book.
I have four more to go…
See this…’
He held out his arm and pushed back the sleeve of his overall and there was a rectangle of puckered ruddy skin.
‘They had to get rid of the offensive literature, they couldn't burn it, so they scraped it off and grafted back some skin from my arse …
You understand why I laugh when Kypov's hut goes down?’
Holly seemed to look at him as if the matter of a fire that destroyed the office of the Commandant was neither of occasion nor note.
‘I understand why you laugh.’
The foreman was behind them peering between their shoulders, and there was a sniff of impatience.
‘It's not a wives’ meeting, it's a workshop…and you're behind, Chernayev…’
It had been very simple once he had absorbed the mechanics of the attack.
A juvenile could have done it.
They were so flabby.
They believed so completely in the strength of their discipline and the spider net of submission that it secreted.
The screws that they used in the workshop came in plastic bags a few inches square.
Holly had picked a discarded one from the floor.
The lathes were serviced with a light oil film, draped in it as if to give them an overcoat protection that would ensure their survival against age and wear.
Holly had filled the plastic bag with oil and twisted the neck tight and fastened it with a snip of wire.
The bag and the oil had nestled behind his testicles, held in place by his underpants, as he had walked from the Factory to Hut 2, evaded the evening search.
Feldstein had given Holly a magazine and said he wanted it no longer.
In his iron mug, on the privacy of his bunk, Holly had manufactured the pulp of papier-mâché as he had been taught to by his mother when he was a small boy.
He made a rough shape that was neither a cube nor a sphere, but a wet and hollow lump.
In the night when the hut was quiet apart from the coughing and the bed creaks and the whimpering of men in despair, he had gone to the stove and heated his shape until it was dried and firm.
The bag that was filled with oil sat inside its carton.
He had smeared the shape with coal dust.
Each morning there was a rota of men designated to fill  the coal containers for the day — buckets for the Administration offices and the Guard Room and the barracks, sacks for the huts — from the central heap of fuel beside the compound gate.
The perimeter path was beside the coal mountain.
On Exercise that morning he had tossed his offering the few inches from his pocket to a waiting bucket.
From the far side of the perimeter path he had watched the detail at their work as they scraped the overnight snow from the coal mountain, then shovelled the buckets and sacks full.
He did not know which building he would raze…but one would go.
One was doomed when a bucket of coal was tipped on to a blazing fire and the flames eroded the dust covering, ate at the brittle papier-mâché, flickered at the softness of the plastic bag.
Really it had been very simple.
Simple and anonymous.
The covert attack of the unseen guerilla.
And no one for them to strike back against.
Simple and anonymous and safe.
And a beginning, Holly, only a beginning.
The first shot of war.
And war, once started, has a long road to run.
At mid-day they were marshalled and marched back from the work compound to the living compound to take their places in the queue for the Kitchen.
Holly saw the confusion of the guards' officers and NCOs, the way that instructions were given in a frantic pitch and confronted by the sullen amusement of the zeks .
The dogs were allowed to drag their handlers closer to the ranks of men as the roll-call was made.
And those in charge strutted along the lines and there was an anger at their faces that Holly had not seen before.
Anger at humiliation, at pride lost.
It was a bright day with thin sunshine burnishing up from the snow and men blinked and rubbed their eyes as they crossed the open space between the two compounds, tramping over the road running down to the village and the railway line that stretched far the other way to Pot'ma.
The guards who sealed the zeks into their corridor were restive, in poor temper.
Another group of prisoners, themselves surrounded by guns and  dogs, waited for the slow column to clear the road so that they themselves could pass on.
Holly grimaced.
A log jam at Barashevo, as if this forgotten end of the world was a metropolis of movement and then he looked again at the huddle of prisoners separated from him by two lines of uniformed guards.
Women.
And Holly had not gazed on a woman for thirteen months.
Women who wore black.
Black tunics and black skirts and black boots.
Dissent and crime are not the prerogative of the male.
A chorus of shouting began around Holly.
Fun for the zeks , diversion from the tedium of the parade line and the parade march and the parade search and the parade lunch.
And the women matched the men in earth and coarseness and the laughter pealed between the two groups.
Perhaps because he was not yet bowed with the burden of imprisonment, Holly was a man to be noticed.
Taller than those around him.
A girl had seen Holly.
A tiny creature who was muffled in a tunic with the collar upturned and with a scarf across her mouth and a forage cap whose peak was pulled down over her eyes.
An elf and an urchin, she had seen Holly.
He stared back at her.
Two people on opposite platforms and when the trains come they will go their different ways and not meet again.
And the railway track that divided them was lines of men in uniform who cradled machine-pistols, who held tight to dragging dogs.
He saw a name printed across the right side of her tunic.
He knew her only as Morozova.
Why one girl in a crowd?
Why one girl who possessed only a hidden face and a printed name?
Poshekhonov was at Holly's side, chuckling from the side of his mouth.
‘Hard for you young bastards…old buggers like me, we've forgotten what it's like.
Not that thinking about it helps.
Tie a knot, boy, that's the best.’
He remembered her.
Standing beside the rails at the junction at Pot'ma she had held the baby of an exhausted mother, and she had smiled at him.
He could not see if she smiled now that her mouth was hidden by her scarf.
‘Don't look at those beasts,’ Poshekhonov said.
‘That's the slime at the bottom of the can.
They'd eat a man…
You don't believe me?
I tell you, I'd rather go without than have that lot screw me.
They're shit, in Zone 4 they're not women as we'd know them, just shit.’
The column moved on.
Holly surprised himself, he turned his head to watch the women cross the path.
He thought he saw the girl again, but he could not be sure.
The gate stood in front of them.
The girl was gone from his mind, swept aside by the burned-out office at the end of the Administration block.
They had done quite a good job, Holly could see that, in containing the fire.
Only the Commandant's room was wrecked, gutted.
He told himself that the office would have been an addition, built onto the end of what had before been an exterior wall of brick and therefore powerful enough to hold back the spread of the flames.
‘You know, Holly, there was a man here once who told me an extraordinary thing about women…’
Poshekhonov babbled as a stream runs over rocks.
‘…he said that a girl he knew once used to do it while in a handstand position.
Can you believe that, Holly?
I never quite knew whether to believe him.
Standing on her hands with her back against the wall, and she wanted him to run at her.
I could never believe that…
Shit, I've wanted to…’
Holly saw the blackened uniforms of the guards as they moved amongst the debris of the office that they had retrieved.
Some still threw buckets of snow into the small flames that lived.
There was the rich stench of charred wood, and the python hiss of water on embers.
Dark on the snow, beneath the windows, were items of furniture and crumpled photograph frames and scattered wisps of paper.
He wondered whether he were pleased, excited, whether he was proud.
Poshekhonov tugged at Holly's arm, demanded further attention.
‘I never knew whether I should believe that man…but, you know, he gave me great pleasure.
He implanted the thought in me, the thought of this woman with her handstand.
She changes for me each day — she is blonde and she is dark, young and mature, fat and thin — it doesn't matter.
Extraordinary pleasure.’
‘Does the sight of the Commandant's hut flattened, busted, does that give you pleasure?’
Holly asked.
They stood waiting their turn to go through the gate.
Ranks of five and the counting again, and the calling of names, and across the compound the beckoning presence of the low-built Kitchen.
‘Why should that give me pleasure?’
‘Because at worst they are hurt, at best they are inconvenienced.’
‘And if they are hurt, does that help me?
Does that shorten my sentence?
Does it soften my mattress…’
‘I don't know.’
Holly was withdrawn, private.
He felt no call to share the small purseful of glory.
To his left three guards had taken the strain on a rope that ran tight and stretched to the building.
He heard the command, he heard the men's feet slither in the snow as they pulled.
With a shriek the last beams of the roof collapsed and pitched down.
‘Kypov's office is nothing.
Now the handstand, that's different.
I could kiss the man who told me that, two years of happiness he's given me.
All I wish is that I could find out whether it's possible.’
Holly smiled drily.
‘Anything is possible if you have the will.’
‘I have the will, I'm short of the bloody woman…’
Poshekhonov turned to Holly to have the satisfaction of seeing his joke shared.
Holly no longer looked at him, he stared back at the stunted ruin that had been the office of the Commandant.
That morning Captain Yuri Rudakov had taken his wife to the shops at Pot'ma.
By the standards of the Dubrovlag she had a nice home, a two-bedroomed bungalow on the outer edge of the village.
With no children, two bedrooms was a privilege.
Two bedrooms and the best furniture that could be made in the Factory.
But she hated this place.
Hated it for its bleak isolation and petty preoccupation with the work of fences and confinement.
She admitted to no friends amongst the small clutch of camp officers' wives at Barashevo.
She had no companion in this snow wilderness with its circles of wire.
She had been brought up in the sophistication of inner Moscow, and she had travelled to European Germany.
She was an outsider and feared by the wives of the other officers of Camp 3 because her husband was KGB and because his reports could break and crush the career of any man, however senior.
She urged on the days until the chance o f their transfer away, she wrote waspy letters to her mother three times a week, and whenever possible she badgered her Yuri to take her to the shops at Pot'ma.
They were little enough, those shops.
But to be in Pot'ma, to walk along Leninsky Prospekt, that was bliss.
And when she went to Pot'ma she had the whole and unchipped attention of her man, and when he drove their car and walked with her in front of the shops he had no files, no papers.
It was a victory for her each time that she wrested him away from his desk and his teleprinter and his uniform.
The life of the camp consumed their married life, oppressed her from her hour of waking until the time she fell asleep.
And each third Sunday of the month was the evening that she detested, when she must take the political studies lecture for Camp 3, Zone I. It was her duty, Yuri had said.
She had trained as a teacher, and was the daughter of a Colonel of KGB and a probationer member of the Party, it was her duty to participate in the re-education of prisoners.
And they stank, stank like cattle carcases outside an abattoir.
And they had eyes, bright and pricking eyes that shredded  her clothes and burrowed to the soft underwear she had purchased in the Centrum store on Magdeburg's Karl-Marx-Strasse.
There were some who were clever, some who were stupid, and none who cared for the lecture that would take her forty-five minutes to read and three evenings to prepare.
Yuri had said it was her duty.
At times she believed she could make her hard man into a piece of putty, but not when he spoke of duty.
Duty was his life.
Duty was the bastard world of the Dubrovlag .
Elena Rudakov sat beside her husband, and on the back seat of the car, in plastic bags, was a new nightdress of flannelette and two shirts for Yuri to wear at home and two kilos of turnips from the open market and a small rug to go in front of the stove in their living-room.
He had even been attentive, Yuri, and that was rare.
He had talked of a new prisoner — too much to hope that he would speak of anything other than the camp — a prisoner who was an Englishman.
Guarded talk, because she was never fully in his confidence, but he had spoken of a prisoner who was special and different.
He drove slow! y because the rough road was always treacherous in winter and insufficiently sanded, but the inside of the car was warm and the sky alive in blue beyond the windows.
She was almost happy, almost at peace, until they saw, together, the high column of the black smoke.
She was left to take the car home.
The spell was broken, the pool was rippled from its serenity by the way he snapped instructions to her and then ran to the Administration block.
She could have kicked a dog.
He had not kissed her or looked back, just sprinted across the snow.
The sight was a hammer blow to Yuri Rudakov.
The end of the Administration block was a grotesque mess.
Only the smoke now, because the flames had been suffocated.
Smoke that rippled and soared.
He saw Kypov, a comedy clown with a soot-smeared face  and the back of his uniform singed and brown from collar to knee-boot.
There were no thoughts in his mind, no preconceptions, only the demand for information.
Empty words.
‘What happened?’
‘Where the hell have you been?’
Kypov shouted at him across the few metres that separated them, and the breath spouted white from the Major's mouth.
‘Why were you not here?’
‘I asked what happened.’
Rudakov said.
He despised these army men, in particular those who had lost their units in exchange for secondment to MVD camp detachments.
‘You should have been here.’
‘Will you tell me what happened or not…
Major Kypov?’
They were all the same, all noise and sparrow shit, and if the man only knew the idiot scene he cut…
‘My fire exploded.’
The fight had fled the Major.
His hands hung simply by his trouser pockets, ungloved, and Rudakov could see that they trembled.
‘More.’
‘The fire had been lit before I came to the office.
My orderly put more coal on for me.
After he had gone I was standing in front of the fire, my back to it.
There was a sort of an explosion, not very loud, the flames took my back.
I was alight.
My orderly had to roll me on the floor.
He pulled me out, he saved my life.’
‘What have you lost?’
‘I could have lost my life…’ and the indignation was rich again in the Major's voice.
‘What have you lost in the fire?’
‘The administration files that I kept, some of the convicts’ files.’
‘They were not in the safe?’
‘You have seen my safe.
It could not hold half the papers that were in my cupboard.’
The men who worked around the building acknowledged  a secret circle that surrounded their camp Commandant and their camp KGB officer.
None broke into the circle.
They threaded a wide path round them.
‘Then you will have to inform Moscow.’
‘And what are you going to do?’
‘Try to find out why, to find how, to find who.
That is what I am going to do, Comrade Commandant.
And you, you should get to your quarters, and get out of those clothes.
The Commandant should not be an object of ridicule to his prisoners.’
There was a fleck of amusement at the corner of Captain Rudakov's mouth.
He considered whether Major Kypovis commendations, so preciously framed, had perished.
He walked to his own office.
An accident or an attack, he wondered, and stamped the snow from his walking shoes on the steps of the main Administration doorway.
The line edged forward towards the food hatch.
Holly heard only occasional talk about the burned office because the job of the men around him was to get the food inside their guts, get the warmth into their throats.
A line creeping forward, and a rabble of men leaving the hatch and hurrying for the first bench place they could find.
And hungry men are pliable men, hunger wins submission, hunger is the tool of Major Vasily Kypov, hunger is the whip of the Commandant of Camp 3, Zone I.
But Holly and eight hundred with him had a roof over their Kitchen, and there would be a roof over Hut 2 when the freezing night came.
Kypov had no roof, and the thought carried a first-found peace for Holly, lifted him from the line of men who straggled across the dirt-smeared floor boards.
You did it well, Holly, bloody well.
Byrkin had been a Petty Officer in the Navy.
In the evenings in Hut 2 he had twice pulled Holly to a corner to tell him of his innocence.
Now he staggered towards Holly, making a path between the tables and benches and the backs of sitting men that  flanked him on one side, and the waiting line on the other.
Byrkin would have been tall when he was in the Navy, but the camp had bent his back and plucked his hair from a smoothed scalp.
His hands shake ant his balance is cruelly uncertain, a fly wheel that has lost its rhythm.
Byrkin had twice found out Holly to tell him of the sailing of the frigate Storozhevoy from the naval harbour at Riga.
Mutiny by the men, and what could a Petty Officer do if the Ministry in Moscow determined that the sailors of the Storozhevoy should not be freed from their conscripted service after four years at sea, that they should serve another year, what could a Petty Officer to?
Not Byrkin's fault that the mutiny disease had swept the cramped quarters of the lower decks.
He had been locked in a cabin, a prisoner with the officers when the bombers came on a low-clouded November afternoon.
Seven years before, and the memory still with him, bleeding him.
A memory of imprisonment below the water line as the high explosive had silenced the engines of a fighting frigate, marooned its escape to Swedish waters.
Fifty men dead before the turbines of a Krivak class frigate with a displacement of 3800 tons were halted.
And more to die before the firing squad, and few who did not wear the gold rings of the officers to escape the penalty of imprisonment.
One unguarded remark by Byrkin, one remark that had been carried back by a man with innocence on his face to those who would judge Byrkin.
What did the Ministry expect, how did they think the men would react?
What insensitivity from the Ministry!
Ten years in the Dubrovlag for the private expression of a Petty Officer who was a captive in a cabin while the high explosive bombs rained on to the armour plate of the Storozhevoy.
They said in Hut 2 that he was mad.
The zeks did not know of the bitter trial of the breakdown.
Byrkin's balance was lost, and each step that he took was an agony of effort and fear.
Holly saw him, heard his shrieking wail as a shoulder lifted from the bench and caught square on the underneath  of Byrkin's enamel soup bowl.
The opaque yellow liquid floated high beside Byrkin's face then splashed on his tunic, onto the shoulder of the man who had nudged him, onto the boards of the floor.
It was Byrkin who shouted.
A howl of protest, of despair.
The man who rose from the bench seemed to offer a grudging apology, but Byrkin would not have seen the gesture as he scrabbled on the floor for his slice of black bread.
Holly looked into Byrkin's eyes witnessing the suffering.
What price against that suffering was the pleasure that the Commandant had no roof to cover his office?
Holly had felt pleasure, allowed it to cocoon him.
Where did that pleasure stand on the scale against the misery of a man in the Kitchen whose soup was spilled, whose bread was soggy from the floor's snow water?
Poshekhonov was beside Holly.
Always Poshekhonov seemed to be close to him.
‘Only happens to someone like Byrkin.
He's doomed, damned.
Mark me, Englishman, he'll go to the wire.’
‘He's sick,’ said Holly.
The tranquillity had gone from his face.
He moved forward to close the gap again with the tunic back in front of him and his lips were dented white where the teeth had bitten at them.
‘Sick?
Of course he's sick.
Sick like everybody.
What do you expect, a nice neat psychiatric ward?
He's better here, better with us than at the Sebsky…’
‘I don't know of the Sebsky.’
‘For one who intends to stay a long time with us, Englishman, you know little of us.
In Moscow is Kropotkin Lane.
At Number 23 is the Sebsky Institute for Forensic Psychiatry.
Ask Feldstein, our little revolutionary.
He shits himself each day that they will send him there.
Friend Byrkin would get robust treatment at the Sebsky.
Even this place is better than some, Englishman.’
They were at the hatch.
Soup in a bowl, hot water in a mug, bread on the tray.
‘Will you sit with me, Englishman?’
There was a wintry smile on Holly's face.
‘Find a place for two of us, I'll come to you.’
Holly took his tray and walked briskly back along the line of men who waited for their food.
He saw ahead of him the bowed back of Byrkin, hunched head in hands with an empty bowl in front of him on the table.
Holly's movement was very quick, sudden, and few would have seen the gesture.
His soup bowl snaked from his tray, tipped, tilted, the liquid ran steaming to the bowl in front of Byrkin.
And Holly was gone, moving to where a space waited for him beside Poshekhonov.
Adimov had seen.
One of the few, but he had seen.
He sat with a frown of puzzlement on his forehead, then turned back to join again the talk around him.
‘Where's your soup?’
Poshekhonov asked Holly as he sat down, squeezing himself over the bench.
‘I had it on the way here — little enough of it.’
‘You shouldn't do that.
You get more goodness if you take it slowly.
There was a man here once, he could take half an hour to drink a bowl of soup, big as an ox.
Didn't matter if it was stone cold, still took it sip by sip…’
Poshekhonov liked to talk.
That was his happiness, to talk to a captured ear was for him the thrill of seeing the Commandant's office roofless and destroyed.
Holly did not interrupt him, and broke his bread into small pieces and husbanded the crumbs.
The report that the office of Major Vasily Kypov, Commandant of ZhKh 385/3/I in the Mordovian ASSR, had been burned to destruction in as yet unexplained circumstances was a matter of sufficient significance to be seen by a senior official at the Ministry of the Interior.
The official was a member of the staff of the Procurator General who had responsibility for the smooth running of the Correctional Labour Colonies scattered across the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Before giving up this half-filled sheet of paper to his file system, the official had noted well its contents.
Anything  extraordinary that happened in Camp 3, Zone I, was out of place.
Such a well-administered camp, so little difficulty springing from it, a Commandant in whom great confidence was justly placed.
In the weeks that followed, the teleprinter messages from Barashevo were to become familiar reading to the official who now hobbled on the built-up shoe that supported his club foot towards his filing cabinets.
A building has been destroyed and can be rebuilt.
A roof has fallen and can be replaced.
The Captain of KGB begins an investigation.
The Major in command is at first flustered, then morose.
There is labour in Zone I, and to spare.
In a few days there will be a new office for Major Kypov at the end of the Administration block.
For nearly half a century the camp has survived the storms.
More than fire is required to break the regimen of ZhKh 38S/3/I.
Later, those who were to piece together the events at the camp of the early months of that year, from the time of snow till the approach of spring, were to wonder what was the ambition of Michael Holly, prisoner of Hut 2 in Zone I of Camp 3 in the Dubrovlag complex.
For a few days there was a swirl of conversation in the camp about the fire and its likely cause, and then the talk slipped.
The zeks had more to concern them.
Interest in food, in warmth, in punishment, soon outstripped a matter as trivial as a fire.
The fire was a dream, the fire was as nothing as the new bricks were slapped into cold cement and the air rang with the rasp of the carpenters' saws as they fashioned the ceiling framework.
Only for Holly did the fire live on.
If he had chosen to confide in anyone then he could not have said clearly what was the summit of his aspiration.
He would have fumbled for explanations.
But the point was irrelevant because he had no confidant.
He offered his friendship to no one.
Feldstein the dissident, Chernayev the thief, Poshekhonov the fraud, all reached for the Englishman as if to draw out some spark of friendship.
All were resisted.
When he walked the perimeter fence, when he worked at the bench with the wood that would become a chair's leg, when he ate in the Kitchen, when he lay on the top tier of the bunk, he was alive and alert.
Always watching.
Holly searched for the next opportunity to strike again at the administration of the camp that held him.
Darkness outside the hut, and beyond that darkness the ring of light from the arc lamps over the fence and the wire.
The hut windows were misted as if a concerted bluster of hot air had steamed them.
The lights were on inside the hut.
A few men read magazines, Feldstein was as always with a book.
Another hour until lights out.
Some tried already to sleep.
At the end of the hut a boy waited, sitting hunched on an upper bunk, for darkness to come to the living quarters because then he could go to the mattress of the man who loved him…
A low drone of talk hummed in the hut, and Holly lay on his back on his bunk and gazed at the roof rafters and counted the time between each fall of a water drop to his feet.
Near to Holly, Adimov was stretched on his bunk stomach down.
For a long time he had held the envelope in his chubby fingers and close to his face.
He had seemed to sniff at the opened envelope as though it carried some scent, but the letter inside only peeped from the teat and was not taken out.
A man seeming to fight some inner struggle.
Lying still, with the fingers clenched on the envelope and the eyes saucer wide.
‘Holly…’
A hissed whisper from Adimov.
The knife had never been spoken of again.
Holly did not interfere with the baron's' running of the hut.
‘Adimov…’
No move of Holly's head.
‘Come here, Holly.’
An instruction, a command.
‘I'm very comfortable, Adimov.’
‘Come…now.’
‘Listen when I speak to you…
I said I'm comfortable.’
Holly heard him shift on his bunk and the mattress seemed to belch at the movement.
‘Please come, Holly…please…’
Holly jack-knifed his legs over the side of the bunk, swung himself down to the floor, dropped his feet beside Adimov's bunk.
His head was close to Adimov, close enough to smell the force of the man's breath, to see the white anger of the scar on his face.
‘What is it, Adimov?’ spoken gently.
The toughness caved, the face of a child who is frightened.
‘I had a letter this morning, a letter from my wife's mother.
It is the first letter that I have had here in a year…’
‘Yes.’
‘I can't read, Holly.’
The voice grated in Adimov's throat.
Holly's ear was beside Adimov's mouth.
‘You want me to read it for you?’
‘They read it for me in Administration.’
‘You want me to read it again?’
‘You don't know whether those pigs lie to you…’
‘Give it to me, Adimov…no one here will know.’
Only when Holly's hand was on the envelope did Adimov release his fingers' grip.
He had held the paper as tightly as an old woman holds a rosary.
Holly looked over the single sheet of paper that was covered in the large hand of one for whom writing was slow and difficult.
He read the few lines through, then closed his eyes for a moment before reading aloud.
Terminal cancer, cancer of the bowel.
Perhaps a month.
‘Is that what they told you?’
‘That is what they told me that the letter said.’
Adimov sagged down onto his mattress and his head was half-buried in his pillow and there was a redness in his eyes.
‘Will they let you go to her?’
There was a choking laugh from Adimov, derisive.
‘Will they bring her to you?’
‘Would you bring a woman to this place?
Would you give to a dying woman as a last memory the sight of our camp?
‘Would you, Holly…?’
‘What can I do, Adimov?’
‘I saw you with Byrkin's soup.’
Holly started back and something of the kindness was lost from his face.
‘I saw you, it means nothing that I saw you…
I thought you would help me, too.
If you helped Byrkin, that you would help me.’
‘What can I do?’
‘I can't read, I can't write…’
The man who dominated the hut, who controlled the tobacco racket, who took an undisputed place at the front of the food queue in the Kitchen.
‘You want me to write a letter to your wife?’
‘And none of these people shall know.’
Because in the life of the camp, if the wife of the strongman has terminal bowel cancer and will be dead within a month, then that is weakness, and from weakness there cannot be spawned authority, and without authority the man who breeds fear throughout the hut will disintegrate.
‘I will write the letter tomorrow.
I'll get the paper and you will tell me what to write.’
‘Thank you, Holly.
I am generous to my friends.’
Holly turned away, climbed again on to his bunk.
On his back he began again to count the interval between the water drops.
He wrapped the blanket round him, a sparse level of protection against the cold.
He thought of Alan Millet…didn't know why, couldn't place the trigger that led him to Alan Millet and a pub in the Elephant and  Castle south of the Thames.
It would be more than a week since he had thought of Millet.
More than a year since they had last spoken, and more than a week since he had last examined his memory of those meetings.
It had been a very typical contract that Mark Letterworth had contrived in outline for the sale of the turbine engines to a Moscow factory.
And Letterworth had said that the deal was bogging down in that bloody stupid Olympic fracas and the Afghan mess, and that he didn't give a shit for politics, only for selling engines.
Holly spoke the language, so he'd better jump on an Aeroflot and get over there and chase it up with the Ministry.
All simple, all sweet.
And the day after Holly had been up to London to apply from the Consulate for a visa there had been the telephone call at Letterworth Engineering.
A call with a bad script…
‘You don't know me, Mr Holly, but there's something I'd like to meet you about when you're next in London.
Hopefully that'll be in the next week…’
They met near Waterloo station because that was good for a train from Dartford.
He knew about Holly, this man who called himself Alan Millet.
He had read a file on Stepan and Ilya Holovich that would have come with a dust coat out of a Home Office basement reserved for the histories of Aliens (Naturalized).
He knew of attendance by Stepan Holovich at NTS meetings in Paddington, and had the date that a father had taken his son to a house off the Cromwell Road to celebrate the National Day of the Ukrainian exiles with supermarket Italian wine and kitchen table cheese.
And Alan Millet had spoken soft words…
‘It's not really anything very important, Michael, it's rather a small thing we're asking of you.
It helps us and it doesn't help them, if you know what I mean.’
There must have been a point of no return, but Holly could not remember passing it.
It had not occurred to him that he could stand up in the pub, leave the beer half-drunk, the sandwich half-eaten, walk out into the London early evening.
When he thought back over it, as he lay on the  bunk and water drips splattered every eleven seconds between his ankles, he could remember only a film of excitement that had wrapped him.
At their next meeting instructions had been given for a rendezvous.
That had been a long meeting.
Long and fulfilling because Alan Millet offered the chance to bite at an old enemy whose presence pervaded the rooms of the terraced home in Hampton Wick.
Michael Holly had trusted Alan Millet implicitly.
On his back, on his bunk, he doubted if he would ever trust another man again.
If Yuri Rudakov, undressing in the front bedroom of their bungalow, had not been so tired, he would have taken the time to admire the new nightdress that his wife wore as she sat against the pillows and turned the pages of a picture magazine.
If he had not been halfway to sleep he would have noticed that far from washing the make-up from her face she had taken the trouble to apply the eye shadow and lip-stick that her mother sent her from Moscow.
She read him.
Elena Rudakov knew the signs.
‘The fire…still the fire…’
‘Still the fire.’
Yuri Rudakov settled in the bed beside her, he made no effort to close the gap between them.
‘You've let the cold in.’
‘I'm sorry…’
‘How did the fire start?’
‘I don't know.’
‘It takes you two days and half of two nights to find out that you don't know?’
‘You want to hear?’
‘I've sat here two days waiting for you to come home, waiting to have a conversation with you.
Yes, perhaps I want to hear.’
He wanted only for the light to be put out, he waited only for darkness and sleep.
He would get nothing before he had fulfilled the chore of explanation.
‘Something that was inflammable was in the coal bucket.
I don't know what it was, perhaps just paper with oil on it, I don't know.
The room had draughts, you needed a great-coat to stand in it.
Kypov never complained, never did anything about it, seemed to think that the chiller his office the more masculine and vigorous he was.
Would have made him think he was with the poor bloody paras in a tent in Afghanistan…
I don't know.
There were draughts through the window frame, under the door.
He's a fat little bugger and he'd stood his backside in front of the fire.
That's all I know.
There wasn't a bomb, nothing like that.
Just something that ignited enough to get a flame onto his seat.
After that, panic…
He was shouting, the door is opened, somebody puts a rifle barrel through the window.
Draughts all over.
I know how it spread, you see.
I don't know what started it.’
‘What are you going to do?’
‘Put a couple in the SHIzo block for fifteen days, the ones who filled the buckets.
That's all.’
‘Then you don't have to go early tomorrow?’
Her arms reached towards his head, pulled him towards her.
‘I've a bastard day tomorrow.
Really…
They've given me a major interrogation — I'd told you about the Englishman — that's what I should have been working on, not an idiot fire.
The interrogation is a challenge to me.
It's a compliment in itself that they've given me the chance…’
He felt her body surge away from him.
His head fell against the pillow.
He saw her back clothed in the flannelette nightdress.
He wanted to touch her, but he did not know how.
He reached up for the light switch.
Sleep would be hard to find.
Before his eyes would cavort the typed words in the file of Michael Holly.
A fire must have a spark, a flash of ignition.
So, too, must an idea of action.
There is a moment when an idea is born, the clash of a flint.
Holly was on the perimeter path.
He walked alone, deep-wrapped in his own thoughts, and the morning was colder than any of those of the week before.
The cold cut through him, summoned by the winds that had begun their journey on the far plains of Siberia and the Ural mountains and the great Kirgiz steppe.
He felt it at his face and his fingers and his back and his arms, felt it at his buttocks and privates and thighs.
No snow in the air that morning, only the wind that gusted and trapped the men on the perimeter path.
And the cold was worst at the feet, he thought.
Michael Holly had been a prisoner of the camp for less than one month, and already he believed that he could walk this path with his eyes closed.
Four turns to the left on each lap of the compound, and he fancied that he knew at which moment he must drop his shoulder, cut his stride and turn.
If he knew the path blindfold after one month, how well would he know it after fourteen years?
In front of him was Chernayev who had not practised his trade of thieving for seventeen years.
Twice that morning Holly had passed Chernayev on the path.
Now the old man walked in the centre of the path and the way was blocked and Holly had to check his stride.
Chernayev turned his head as if he felt the breathy impatience of the man behind him.
‘Holly…the Englishman…?’
‘Yes.’
‘And in a hurry?
Is it different to you if you make four times round the path and not three?’
Holly faltered for an answer.
‘If I go faster then I am warmer…’
‘If you go faster then you are hungrier.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘I know…
I used to go fast when I was first at Perm, and my gut punished me.
Slow yourself, Michael Holly, walk with me.’
‘There are many you can walk with.’
He could have bitten at his tongue.
Crudeness and arrogance, enough to shame himself.
Chernayev turned towards him, little of his face showing.
The old zek, the one who took care of himself and who would walk out of Camp 3, Zone I, when his time came.
‘Easy, Michael Holly…you should not forget who you are.
You are not one of us, you are from outside us.
In the hut we all talk of you, you know that?
If a man drinks only an alcohol made from paint or varnish or polish or acetone then he will dream of vodka.
If a man talks only with the prisoners of his own world then he will seek out a stranger…
You are important to us.
You make a window for us.’
‘I will walk with you, Chernayev.’
Holly fell into step with the old thief, dipped his pace.
Holly's shoulder was high above Chernayev's.
There was a distant whistle from behind Chernayev's teeth as if he tried to blow away the wind that settled on him.
‘The dirt is the hardest, you find that, the filth is the hardest…’
‘I suppose you learn to live with it,’ Holly said distantly.
‘I've never learned to.
I hate the scum on my body…
And this week there will be no showers…’
‘Why not?’
‘Look with your own eyes.’
Chernayev waved his arm towards the centre of the compound.
The snow was dirtied there, earth spattered, and a dark mound was set beside a hole.
‘We dug a new water pipe, two summers back, across the middle of the camp.
The old pipes were cracked, leaked.
Some bastard cheated, they say there was not enough binding put around the joins, again the pipe leaks.
It's the main water supply for the whole camp, for us and for the barracks.
They won't keep the barracks short, so we lose the water,we do without.’
‘Yes.’
‘Where they have dug the hole is a main junction, they say it is the worst place for the leak, where the water is  separated.
Some goes to us from the junction, the rest goes to the barracks.
The men who work in the hole say it is a pig to work there.’
Holly's eyes flickered.
‘Where the hole is, that is the junction between their water and ours?’
‘Yes…
Imagine working in a pit with the water frozen round you, and you cannot wear gloves.
If you wear gloves then the water will freeze on them, freeze them hard, and you cannot work.
The supervisor says that they cannot wear gloves.’
‘After the place where they have dug the hole, after that all the water flows to the barracks and the administration?’
‘Yes…they always cheat on materials for the camp.
We earn our wages here.
We work in the Factory, good work is done here, and they deduct for our food and our keep.
If they used the money that they take from us for the maintenance of the camp we would live like kings.
It's exploitation, you agree with me?’
‘I agree with you, Chernayev.’
The old thief rambled on and together they completed another circuit of the perimeter path.
Holly barely listened.
He thought only of a water pipe, a narrow metal pipe that carried water away from the compound and under the wire and the high wooden fence and on towards the two-storey barracks and the kitchens and dormitories of the guards.
A slow smile played at Holly's mouth, and there was a bright happiness in his narrowed eyes.
‘And the water is cut off while the men work?’
‘What do you say?…
The water…?
The mains water…?
Of course it is cut off.
But the bastards in the barracks have the water tower to supply them.
Once a day they flush the water through the pipe so that the water tower is topped, that's why the hole is water filled each morning when the men start work.
We have only a water tanker this week, so no showers.
They're right bastards who cheated on the materials…’
‘If they have the water then they should enjoy it.’
Holly's head was doubled on his chest, and his words were spoken without sound, and Chernayev talked on from the side of his mouth, oblivious to the loss of his audience.
An old man talking and a younger man who no longer listened.
No man lingered in the latrine wing of the Bath house.
Fear of the rats hurried even those with the fluid stomach of embryonic dysentery or gastroenteritis.
Some said they had seen the quizzical, grey-whiskered faces staring up at them as they crouched on the two boards above the refuse pit, peering at the nervous men from beside the walls of the cubicles and showing no apprehension.
The poison was insufficient to destroy the rat colony.
Beneath the boards on which the men squatted the matter froze hard and solid.
Before he cleaned himself with old newspaper, Holly knew the germ of his idea.
The prisoners shambled in an untidy mess towards the open space between Hut 3 and Hut 4.
Soon the Commandant would come through the gates and into the compound and the orders would be shouted for them to form their ranks for roll-call and check before the march to the Factory for work.
Holly stood beside a poorly dug hole and he looked down at a T-shaped junction of pipes and saw that the screw-fastened aperture that gave access to the pipe join and its subsidiary were swathed in doth and knotted around in plastic sheeting.
The screw would be adequately protected against the night frost.
He believed he would be able to unfasten the screw turn.
His eyes roved to the perimeter fences where the lights still shone as if in defiance of the coming day.
The lights were far away, and at their nearest points the bulk of Hut 3 and Hut 4 would shelter the hole in shadow.
A clean ice sheet at the pit of the hole was evidence that  the work was not close to completion.
At the pace the zeks worked, the hole would not be filled by that evening.
There was a barked shout.
Without emotion the prisoners took their places in the appointed line.
He had dressed that morning in his civilian clothes, reckoning that military uniform was unsuitable for the work of the day.
He would not attend parade, he would avoid his Commandant.
A pleasant enough looking young man was Yuri Rudakov in his slacks and open check shirt and loose grey jacket.
His hair was combed and carefully parted, he had shaved with a new blade.
On his way to the office he had asked for a thermos of coffee to be sent to him and two mugs and a bowl of sugar and some milk.
When they had been brought he ordered that Michael Holly should be escorted to the Administration building from the Factory's furniture production shop.
From beyond his rooms and from outside his seldom-washed windows he heard the persistent hammer blows of the carpenters astride the new roof of the Commandant's office.
‘Sit down, Holly.’
‘Thank you, Captain Rudakov.’
‘Some coffee?’
‘Thank you.’
‘A cigarette?’
‘No, thank you.’
‘You are well, you are not ill?’
‘I am not ill, not by the standards that exist here.’
‘You would like sugar with your coffee?’
‘No.’
‘All the prisoners take sugar.’
‘Then I am different.’
‘You have settled here?’
‘As well as I will ever settle here.’
‘The other men in your hut, how do they treat you?’
‘I have no problems in the hut.’
Rudakov leaned forward across his table, extracted a cigarette from a Marlboro carton, reached with his fingers for his lighter.
‘But it's ridiculous, Holly, ridiculous and stupid.’
‘What is ridiculous and stupid, Captain Rudakov?’
‘You are an idiot to be here, you know that, Holly.
It is unnecessary, it is a waste.
You face fourteen years here…’
‘I know the sentence of the court.’
‘A man like you should not be here, you have no necessity to waste your life away here.
The camp will destroy you, it destroys every man.
You will be an animal when you leave here.’
‘I am grateful for your concern, Captain Rudakov.’
‘Are we to work together, Holly, or are we to fight?’
‘I don't imagine us as colleagues.’
Rudakov drew deeply on his cigarette, let the smoke waft towards the chipboard ceiling.
‘You like to be facetious, Holly.
You are fond of playing with sarcasm.
It is not a game that I like, it does not amuse me…
I asked whether we should work together or whether we should fight…it will be your decision, Holly.
If we work together then, perhaps, you will be here for a few months, if we fight then you are here for fourteen years’
‘The coffee, Captain, it's foul.’
‘If we work together then doors will open, the road will be clear to the airport.
The flight to London, everything into place, co-operation will take you home, Michael — you don't mind if I call you by your name, and I am Yuri — it would never be known in London that you have helped us, you would go home with honour…’
‘Don't they give a man in your position better coffee than this, Captain Rudakov?’
‘In England you were a talented man.
You have a good job, a good salary.
You have no need to turn your back on that.
You can return to your work, to your home, to your friends.
In a few months you can be back.
You do not belong here, Holly, not amongst these scum that you sleep with, not  in those rags, not in a place like this camp.
You understand me?’
‘A child could understand you, Captain Rudakov.’
‘You owe them nothing, those that trapped you, sent you here.
You owe them no loyalty…you owe my country no enmity.
My country has not harmed you.
We do not deserve your hatred.
Do you want to stay here or do you want to go home?’
Holly held the mug between his two hands, and his palms were warmed, and he looked into the murk of the liquid.
He yearned to gulp down the coffee that remained, he craved to ask for more.
He looked back at his interrogator.
‘I'm sorry, I wasn't listening…you'll have to say that again…’
Rudakov's body surged up over the table, his arm snatched at the collar of Holly's tunic, pulled him up from his chair.
The fingers were clamped solid as if sewn into the material.
Holly felt the spatter of Rudakov's breath.
‘Don't play with me, Holly…’
Two heads a few inches apart.
Two pairs of eyes caught in the action of battle.
Holly saw the red glow at Rudakov's cheeks.
‘Don't do that to me again, Captain Rudakov,’ Holly said.
‘A prisoner does not talk in that way to a camp officer…
I do what I like with any zek.
You are just another zek.’
‘Don't do it to me again.’
‘You are forbidden to speak to an officer in that fashion.’
But Rudakov was subsiding back into his chair and his hand had loosened the grip at Holly's collar and he panted as if the slight movement had winded him.
‘What would you do if I did that to you again?’
‘When you are on the floor in the corner you will know what I have done, Captain Rudakov.’
Holly saw the anger rise, saw the clench of Rudakov's fists, saw his chair back away on its castors.
‘Article 77 Section I: striking or assaulting a member of  camp administration, fifteen years to death.
Remember that, Holly.’
The smoke hung in the air between them.
Rudakov poured more coffee into Holly's mug.
The game of persuasion did not come easily to the interrogator.
He spoke like a man who uses an alien language.
But the chair was sliding back towards the table, back to the closeness of conspiracy and friendship.
‘Holly, it is stupid that we fight…we have everything to offer each other.
You should not be here, Holly, this is a place for filth, for criminals.
Within days of helping me you would be transferred back to the hospital wing of Vladimir, within a few months you would be home…think on it.
You do not have to survive the Dubrovlag , you do not have to survive anything.
You can go home, if you co-operate…’
‘Thank you for the coffee,’ Holly said.
‘Holly, listen to me, believe in me…you need me, you need my friendship…you do not have to be here.
Help me, Michael Holly, help me and I can help you.
Help me and you have the transfer.
Help me and you have the flight home…’
The voice across the table tapped at Holly's mind.
There was nothing for him to say.
He thought of the latrine and the T-junction of a water-main pipe, and a hole that had been carved from the snow and frozen earth, and a screw top cover that was lagged at night, and a place that was in shadow from the arc lamps of the perimeter fences.
He thought of a fighting field that was again simple, again anonymous.
‘When you came to Moscow you carried a packet, a coded packet, that you were to pass to someone.
Who gave you the packet, Holly?
What was the agency in London, what was the name of the man who gave you that packet?
They were not very efficient, the people who prepared you in London.
You can't say they were efficient, can you?
Thepick-up was not met.
You placed the packet, you returned an hour later and because the packet had not been taken you  retrieved it.
Who instructed you?
What were your fall-back orders?
Was there another collection point, Holly…?’
Holly sweating, Holly who was not trained and who had laid the envelope given him by Alan Millet on the top of the wire rubbish basket beside the bench on the Lenin hills.
Holly coming back to the bench after an hour's walk that had taken him to the ski jump where the young people gathered to watch the first of the winter's athletes propel themselves into the dizzy air flows.
Holly finding that his packet had not been taken, retrieving it, hurrying away, and frightened to look over his shoulder and check whether he was under surveillance.
The first fear, the first knowledge that involvement was real and personal and far distanced from a glass of beer and a sandwich in a pub across the Thames.
‘You had to know that you would be caught.
Did they not tell you that you might be held?
Do they think we are stupid?
They misled you, for a year you have known that.
It is a kindness to them to say that they misled you, Holly, you were their plaything.
Was it a senior man who briefed you?
I don't think so, I think it was a boy.
Did your desk officer tell you who would collect the package…?’
Holly alone on the Underground, with an uncollected package.
Surrounded by Muscovites, strap-hanging on a fast train that slid to its halts and was away again.
Returning to the Rossiya and not daring to look at the men and women who stood and swayed beside him.
‘It wouldn't even have been an important mission.
They may have told you that it was, but it couldn't have been.
Would they have asked you, without training, without experience, to carry an important package?
Hardly, Holly…’
All so fast, so dreamlike and simple, the arrest of Michael Holly.
Standing at Reception at the Rossiya, asking if there had been any messages because the Ministry might.have telephoned to give timings for his meeting.
One moment standing at Reception and then wafted, as if he were a  feather fluttering, to the car on the kerb.
Through the swing doors, and he had not registered what was happening to him until he was out into the late afternoon cold and the open doorway at the back of the car was yawning for him.
God, he'd been frightened.
Terrified.
A locked car, a short journey of screaming tyres, a side entrance to the Lubyanka.
Nothing they could do now would be worse than the fear as the high gate fell like a guillotine behind him.
‘You owe it to yourself to help us to help you.
It is not betrayal, it is you who have been betrayed.
You owe them nothing.
I think that you know I speak the truth.
What do you say, my friend?’
Holly saw Rudakov leaning easily back in his chair, saw the smugness on his face.
‘I think, Comrade Captain, I think you should shove yourself right up your arse…’
Rudakov laughed, richly and loudly.
‘Right up your arse till you choke in your own stink.’
Rudakov still laughing, and the shimmer of cracked ice across his face, and his gaze unwavering.
‘Think on it, Holly.
Think on it tonight, think on a transfer to Vladimir, think on a flight to London.’
Holly laughed too, and their laughter mingled.
There was something of pride in Holly's eyes, and there was an inkling of combat in Rudakov's eyes.
But in an instant the laughter was gone from the Political Officer's mouth.
‘Be careful for yourself, Holly.
Believe me you should be careful.
In a few days I will send for you again.
In the meantime you consider.’
‘Thank you for the coffee, Captain Rudakov.’
Coming from the latrine, the figure hugged the shadow of the building before jogging across open ground to the cover of Hut 5.
Wrapped in newspaper were the frozen lumps he had fashioned by stone to the width of the water pipe.
From Hut 5 he had thirty yards of snow space to cross.
He caught his breath, prepared himself, then ran for the hole.
His  shape joined the dark heap of earth and he landed without noise in the pit.
A searchlight beam curved above him.
A dog barked.
He heard the voices, miserable and low-pitched, of patrolling warders.
He realized with a vicious clarity that he had never considered the possibility of discovery.
The light swung away, no sign or sound of the dogs, the voices faded.
He trembled.
His fingers groped for the junction of the pipes.
It was the work of a few minutes.
Michael Holly was back inside Hut 2 a clear hour before the trustie slammed shut the hut's door, switched off the lights.
In the morning the water would run, run fast and sweet along a mains pipe until it met with an obstruction and the water would eat away at the mass that blocked it.
Chisel it, and then carry that mass in diminishing particles to the taps and basins and sinks and cooking saucepans of the barracks.