

Forgeot, Weeks
Thinking of changing?
And Ready to act?
Like many other executives who have reached the higher echelons, you may well find that the career evolution methods you used earlier can no longer produce the results you seek today.
Alain Forgeot and Willet Weeks in Paris, Louis Dubois in Geneva and their consultants have helped, for the past 15 years, more than 5,000 top executives such as yourself enhance their career and, when appropriate, think, mount and conduct a sophisticated search of the hidden side of the international market.
Telephone for a confidential exploratory meeting.
We will review your situation and explain if and how we can be helpful to you in achieving your particular goals.
New address Forgeot, Weeks Personal Career Consultants
Cornell University
Director
Cornell International Institute of Food and Agricultural Development (CIFAD)
Cornell University invites applications for the position of Director for a new institute within its College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
The Cornell International Institute of Food and Agricultural Development (CIFAD) serves to focus and utilise more effectively Cornell's academic resources and international expertise toward the solution of critical policy-related problems of food and agricultural development.
These problems include those associated with rural poverty, malnutrition, population changes and environmental degradation in developing nations.
The Director of CIFAD must have outstanding academic credentials in the agricultural sciences (social or biological); management experience; a sound knowledge of and direct experience with developing nations; and the vision and leadership required to catalyse interdisciplinary research, teaching and outreach activities.
A competitive salary with fringe benefits will be offered.
Applications and requests for further information will be confidential and should be directed (before 1 July 1990) to: Professor Danial G. Slater International Agriculture Box 16 Roberts Hall Cornell University Ithaca, New York 14853 USA
Cornell is an equal opportunity, affirmative action employer.
Cornell University
GHN
Keep your top people and keep them on top form
Both these challenges are vital to your business.
GHN can help you meet them by creating a personal development programme tailored to suit each individual executive.
Each programme is one-to-one, confidential and highly cost-effective.
Why not consider it for your top people now?
Call 01–  to arrange an exploratory discussion.
GHN The Personal Development Consultants
Landell Mills Associates
provides consultancy and project management services for agricultural and related services worldwide financed by the international aid agencies.
We are now seeking experts for long and short term assignments in  Francophone West Africa in the following disciplines:
Project Management
Preferred Economist with financial management skills, 10 years experience of team management (expatriate and national) in multi-sector programmes.
Economist/Financial Analysts
Investment appraisal/project planning, monitoring and evaluation.
Agriculturalists
Experience in solid and water conservation.
Extension and training with a focus upon animal traction.
Smallholder scheme management.
Agricultural Engineers
Extension experience of rainfed crops in Sahelian areas with a focus on farm mechanisation, irrigation and animal traction.
Forestry Management
Planning, extension and training skills, with experience in reafforestation, agro- and community forestry, fodder crops.
Fisheries Aquaculture
Fisheries or Aquaculture Technologist, Economist or Managers.
Salaries are internationally competitive.
Applicants should be fluent in French with a minimum of five years professional experience.
Please send Curriculum Vitae in confidence to: Bill Denne, Director, Africa Division, Columbus House, Trossachs Drive, Bath, Avon BA  RR, UK.
HUMBERSIDE COUNTY COUNCIL
Humberside County Council's new Economic Development Strategy is now to be implemented.
A record year in 1989 for new investment in the County shows no sign of slowing down.
The priorities for the early 1990's include support for local companies, winning investment into the County, enhancing Humberside's European and international connections, promoting training for those in-work and out-of-work, and providing a comprehensive policy and research service.
The County Council is offering three posts and applications are welcomed from highly committed and enthusiastic professionals who are keen to work in an action-orientated team.
All three posts involve travel within the UK and overseas and carry an Essential Car User Allowance.
Foreign language skills would also be an asset.
Each post carries a relocation assistance package.
For further details and an application form please telephone  /884979 or write to Humberside County Council, Economic Development Services, County Hall, Beverley, North Humberside, HU  BA.
Please quote the post reference number.
The Economic Development Services are situated in Beverley described as one of the most gracious market towns in the Country.
If you would like to combine gracious living with an exciting job then your application to Humberside would be most welcome.
Closing date for applications is 6 April 1990.
‘The Authority positively welcomes applicants from all sections of the community, and particularly from people with disabilities and people from Black and Asian Communities who are currently under-represented in the workforce.
Applications to job-share will be considered sympathetically.’
HUMBERSIDE COUNTY COUNCIL Working towards equal opportunities
ASSISTANT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICER
A deputy for the County Economic Development Officer is required to assist in the management of the full range of work in the department and be responsible for the direct management of the Policy and Research Service.
A broad range of experience in economic policy development, analysis and monitoring coupled with the ability to manage information services and technology are essential.
An education background in economics, planning or geographical/environmental studies would be appropriate.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OFFICER
The management of an efficient and responsive service to local companies and new clients is a key task in this department.
This post demands a high level of commitment in dealing with individual companies seeking sites and premises on a confidential basis.
Duties also include a contribution to the planning and implementation of promotional events within the UK and overseas.
Experience and knowledge of the business world would be an advantage together with an appreciation of strategic and local planning considerations.
Excellent public relations must be maintained and good marketing skills are essential.
INDUSTRIAL LIAISON OFFICER
You will be supporting the Industrial Development Officer in providing advice and information to clients on financial assistance and location of site and premises.
This job also involves assisting in the organisation of promotional events in the UK and overseas.
The post would be appropriate for someone with a background in the private or public sectors.
The ability to work under pressure and present a good image are important.
City University Business School
Senior Lectureship and Readership in Accounting
With the launch of a new degree programme in Management and Accounting, City University Business School wishes to make two senior appointments in accounting this academic year.
Participation across the full range of accounting and financial management interests of the Business School will be encouraged — these encompass both MBA and undergraduate teaching, including the new degree programme, research and research supervision.
The School places particular emphasis on its research activities in accounting and finance.
You should have a first or higher degree, be able to demonstrate significant achievement in research and the potential to contribute further in this area.
A professional qualification in accountancy would be an advantage.
The School is particularly interested in someone with a quantitative or computer orientation, though applications from those with alternative specialisms are equally welcome.
This is a continuing appointment, not fixed term.
Salary will be in the range £25,256 to £26,052 including London Allowance.
Please quote ref:E/3.
Benefits include generous holiday entitlement, interest free season ticket loan and excellent sports and social facilities.
The Post Office
ECONOMISTS
Economic Advisory Section London Based
Today's Post Office is an energetic group of market led businesses serving the community.
The Corporate Headquarters provides strategic support to these businesses through the central provision of finance and planning, training, health, public relations and legal services.
The Economic Advisory Section in the Corporate Planning Department works for all the Post Office Businesses, analysing commercial issues.
Now we have two openings for economist/statisticians to join a small dedicated team.
Although these are specialised positions, each team member needs to be flexible enough to work in a number of projects in different areas.
Senior Economist
Principally taking responsibility for the broad area of labour economics including trends in the labour market, pay and problems of wastage and recruitment.
You must be prepared to deal with these problems in a practical way and become familiar with the management information systems of The Post Office, as well as giving strategic advice.
Economist
You will largely be concerned with market analysis in the area of the demand for communications, by analysing trends in the demand for postal services and its competitors.
The work will vary in terms of sophistication and includes the possibility of complex econometric modelling.
Candidates for both posts must have a good degree in economics, econometrics, statistics or related subjects.
Experience in the use of computer modelling is highly desirable and a high degree of numeracy is essential.
Also, for the post of Senior Economist, the ideal applicant will have worked in the field of labour economics.
Candidates from government, commerce or academic backgrounds are invited to apply.
An attractive rewards package includes a highly competitive salary (including Inner London Weighting) and generous benefits.
Applications to Mr F H Lewis, Room 530, 33 Grosvenor Place, LONDON, SW1X 1PX.
Tel. 01– .
Closing date for receipt of applications is 6 April 1990.
The Post Office is an equal opportunities employer.
The Post Office
The Prince's Trust
Director Young Volunteers
The Prince's Trust is soon to launch a pioneering initiative which will eventually involve large numbers of Britain's young people in voluntary work.
The Trust will harness the combined resources of business, the voluntary sector and central and local government to provide an exciting experience for young people, based upon service in the community.
The programmes will focus upon team building and the development needs of the individual.
Probably aged 35 to 55, the first Director of the new initiative will co-ordinate, manage and inspire the establishment of the new venture.
Whether embarking upon a second career, or a period of mid-career development, he or she will demonstrate an outstanding track record to date in business or in the voluntary or public sectors.
Some knowledge of the UK's major voluntary organisations, which will form the leading players in the project, would be advantageous.
Excellent management ability, infectious enthusiasm and the personal skills necessary to motivate people and organisations to work together will be matched by a sharp intellect and strong commitment to meeting the needs of young people and of the community.
The terms of employment are negotiable and could include secondment for a period of not less than three years.
Please send full personal and career details in strict confidence, by 3 April to Paula Hanratty, Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte Executive Resourcing, PO Box 198, 26 Old Bailey, London EC4M 7PL, quoting reference 5378/E on both envelope and letter.
Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte 
Executive Resourcing
UNIVERSITY OF STRATHCLYDE
PRINCIPAL AND VICE-CHANCELLOR
The University of Strathclyde is seeking to appoint a successor to Professor Sir Graham Hills, who retires from the office of Principal and Vice-Chancellor in 30 September 1991.
Persons wishing to be considered for appointment, or to suggest names for consideration, are invited to write to Dr. Stephen P. Newall DL, Chairman of Court, c/o The Acting Registrar, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, G  XQ (Fax: 041– ) by 20 April 1990.
Further particulars of the appointment may be obtained directly from the acting Registrar at the above address.
UNIVERSITY OF STRATHCLYDE
ODA OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS
Development Projects Officer
The BVI economy is based primarily on tourism and has been subject to significant expansion.
Further expansion through the development of tourism, financial and other services is dependent on the implementation of new projects.
Your role will involve the appraisal, planning, evaluation and monitoring of projects as well as liaison with the agencies involved in providing the financial support.
Qualifications
Candidates should be British Citizens with a degree in Economics or other relevant subject, preferably with postgraduate experience or qualification in economic and development planning.
A knowledge of development economics and the challenges faced by a small, developing country would be an advantage.
You will also need a high level of self-motivation.
Terms of appointment
You will be on contract to the British Government for 2 years, on loan to the Government of the British Virgin Islands.
Salary will be in the range £17,250 p.a. to £21,125 p.a.
(UK taxable).
Additional benefits will normally include tax-free overseas allowances, currently of £4,710 p.a. (single) and up to £6,835 p.a. (married), children's education allowances, free accommodation and passages and annual fare-paid leave.
Closing date for return of completed application forms is 14 April 1990.
ODA OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT BRITAIN HELPING NATIONS TO HELP THEMSELVES
Macquarie University Australia
SCHOOL OF ECONOMIC, AND FINANCIAL STUDIES
NOMURA
Professor/Associate Professor/Senior Lecturer
Japanese Economic Studies
Applications are invited from suitably qualified persons for a senior appointment in Japanese Economic Studies in the School of Economic and Financial Studies, a position that is being established with assistance from Nomura Securities Co Ltd.
Applicants should hold high academic qualifications in economics as their major academic discipline, and might have specialist interests in economic policy, trade, finance, development, or other areas, with particular reference to the contemporary Japanese economy.
Preference will be given to applicants who have some proficiency in the Japanese language.
The position is expected to be filled at the professorial level, but in the event that there is no candidate with sufficient experience for appointment to the Chair, the position will be offered at Associate Professor/Senior Lecturer level.
All persons interested in such a senior position are encouraged to apply.
Preference will be given to applicants with some experience in consulting for industry, government or international organisations, and the successful applicant will be expected to maintain an active interest in consulting in these areas.
Support and facilities will be available for research, and the appointee will be encouraged to pursue his or her own research interests in the Japanese economy.
It is proposed that the successful applicant will serve as foundation Director of a Centre for Japanese Economic Studies within the School of Economic and Financial Studies.
He or she will be expected to provide leadership in all aspects of the Centre's work, comprising the teaching of undergraduate and postgraduate courses in Japanese Economic Studies, co-operating with related disciplines, the development of research projects especially in Australia-Japan Economic Relations, and the co-ordination of the Centre's programs of seminars and courses on Japan for the business community and the general public.
The position is offered for an initial period of five years, with a possibility of renewal or permanency.
Details of the organisation and the activities of the Centre and the School are included in the additional information available to applicants.
Initial enquiries may be directed to Professor Victor Argy, or Associate Professor David Collins,.
Salary: Professor $A65,837 per annum Associate Professor $A55,818 per annum Senior Lecturer $A49,529 per annum.
The position is tenable not before July 1990.
The University reserves the right to fill any position by invitation, not to make an appointment or to make enquiries of any persons regarding any candidate's suitability for appointment.
Further information about the University, conditions of appointment and the method of application should be obtained from the Academic Staff Office, Macquarie University, NSW 2109 Australia, telephone  7390, facsimile .
Applications close 30 April, 1990.
Equality of Employment Opportunity is University Policy
DRI/McGraw-Hill
SALES and SUPPORT CONSULTANT
DRI/McGraw-Hill is looking for an individual to join its sales and support team in its London office.
As well as a sound background in Economics and Statistics, the candidate must demonstrate an ability to communicate effectively to potential and existing clients.
The capacity to understand the business and information needs of clients and to structure appropriate solutions is essential.
Good computing/PC knowledge is also essential.
Salary £12,000–£16,000 depending on experience.
Please apply in writing with full CV to:
DAI
ECONOMISTS
Development Alternatives Inc., an international consulting firm with over 20 years experience, is expanding its services in economic policy analysis.
The firm seeks economists at all career levels for consulting and full time, Washington based positions.
A PhD in economics, multiple language capability and experience in analysis and advisory work in the following fields desired:
•Macroeconomics
•Agricultural sector and policy studies
•Natural resource economics
•Economic planning and budget reform
Send curriculum vitae to Elliot Berg 
ENGINEERING MANAGER — EASTERN EUROPE
Construction Engineer electrical, mechanical or civil background, European base, to open offices in Prague, Berlin, Moscow, Budapest for international construction company.
Must speak English, multi-lingual: German, Russian, Polish helpful.
Top pay, full benefits.
Will spend 20% time in united States/80% Eastern Europe.
Fax résumé to Atlanta, Georgia  –4838.
Telephone (404) 875–8366.
Coastal Properties, a division of IIG.
LECTURESHIP IN ECONOMICS
Applications are invited from suitably qualified persons for two permanent lectureships in the Division of Economics from September 1990.
Applications with interests in any aspects of Economics will be considered.
One of these posts will be made under the New Academics Appointments Scheme which seeks to create career opportunities for new, young, academic staff.
Whilst there is no formal age limit for this post, in accordance with the initiative to bring young staff into the profession, it is likely that preference will generally be given to staff at an early stage in their career.
Salary will be on the Lecturer Grade A (£10,458 to £15,372 pa) or Grade B (£16,014 to £20,469 pa), dependent on age, qualifications and experience.
It is likely that the NAAS appointment will be made on Grade A, but, exceptionally, will be made on Grade B.
Applications in the form of a CV, to include the names of three referees, should be sent to the Staff Office, University of Stirling, Stirling FK  LA.
Tel:, ext 2314, from where further particulars are available.
The closing date for receipt of applications is 6 April 1990.
EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE
The Department of Political and Social Sciences wishes to appoint a (m/f) SOCIAL or POLITICAL SCIENTIST with interests covering both Eastern and Western Europe.
His/her specific interests may lie in the political, social, cultural, strategic or economic dimensions of the subject.
The appointment will be made at the A7/A8 level (Lecturer).
Contracts are made for an initial 4 years, renewable up to an additional 4-year period.
The position should be taken up in September 1990.
Applicants are asked to send: an up-to-date c.v., a sample of major and recent publications, a statement of the research the candidate proposes to carry out at the EUI (not more than 5–10 pages), names and addresses of two referees, an indication of his/her knowledge of languages.
Applications should be received by 30 April 1990 in one of the two main working languages of the Institute (English and French), and should be addressed to: The Adviser for Academic Affairs, European University Institute, C.P.2330, 1–50100 FIRENZE Ferrovia (Italy), from whom further particulars may be requested.
EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE
Economic Consultants
We are looking for young economists to join this rapidly expanding company which specialises in regional and industrial forecasting and analysis, as well as undertaking a wide range of consultancy activities.
You should have up to three years experience after your degree in economics or related subjects, preferably as a business economist.
In our busy, informal company, you would help to run our existing Regional Planning Services and assist our expansion into new areas.
You would take on some responsibility immediately for particular areas and additional responsibilities are available to those with the ability and enthusiasm to take them on.
A strong background in quantitative analysis, careful attention to detail and an ability to work to tight deadlines are essential skills.
Please write, enclosing a CV to: Mrs Bridget Rosewell, Joint Managing Director, Business Strategies Ltd, 10 Kendrick Mews, London SW  HG.
University College London Department of Economics
LECTURESHIP IN ENVIRONMENTAL ECONOMICS
UCL Economics wishes to appoint a lectureship in environmental economics with effect from Autumn 1990.
The appointment, which will be for two years in the first instance, has been made possible by the University of London's Academic Initiative Scheme.
The successful candidate will join a rapidly expanding team of internationally renowned economists working on problems of UK, European, developing country and global environmental issues.
Candidates must have a high motivation to publish and be prepared for exciting teamwork.
A commitment to teach on UCL's new and unique MSc in Environmental Economics will be expected.
Prior experience of environmental economics is desirable but not required.
Applications should be sent to Professor D. W. Pearce, Department of Economics, University College London.
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT.
Salary will be in the range £9,816–£15,372 plus London Weighting £1,767.
Further particulars about UCL's environmental economics programme are available on request.
Equal Opportunities Employer.
LONDON BUSINESS SCHOOL
Salomon Brothers International
Doctoral Fellowship
Leading to PhD in Financial Economics
The Institute of Finance and Accounting at LBS is Europe's leading centre for financial research and maintains research interests in most areas of financial economics.
The Institute invites applications from candidates working in:
•Mergers and Acquisitions
•International Finance
•Regulation of Capital Markets
•Options, Futures and Swaps
•Market Microstructure
Through the continuing sponsorship of Salomon Brothers International, generous fellowships (including payment of fees and living expenses) are available to outstanding candidates for PhD research in Financial Economics.
Recent PhD graduates of the Institute have been appointed to faculty positions at leading universities, such as MIT and LSE, and positions in financial institutions such as Salomon Brothers, CSFB and the Bank of Italy.
Applicants should send their cv's and the names of three referees to Dr Evi Kaplanis at the address below.
Closing date for applications: Friday 22 June 1990.
Dr Evi Kaplanis, Institute of Finance and Accounting, London Business School, Sussex Place, Regent's Park, London NW  SA.
EDITOR
BUSINESS STRATEGY/ STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT
£27,000 plus
Applications are invited to fill the position of Editor for a growing group of specialist business strategy periodicals and book series targeted to director-level executives.
Circulation is international with subscribers in 80-plus countries.
While journalistic skills would be useful, most important is:
•Exceptional expertise and a passionate interest in business strategy/strategic management.
•To provide strong pro-active editorial direction for an existing network of field editors.
•To enjoy and be adept at networking with authors/contributors.
•To have a mind-set that will strive for continual improvement in editorial quality.
Consultancy or academic experience and/or MBA useful.
Application including CV, to: SDP Ltd, IPS House, 5 Bridge Avenue, Maidenhead, Berks SL  RR, UK
BILINGUAL FINANCIAL ECONOMISTS
The Inter-American Development Bank, an international financial organisation, seeks bilingual economists for assignment at Washington DC headquarters.
The selected candidates will conduct appraisals of credit and financial sector adjustment loan operations in the context of overall macro and financial sector policies, and will be responsible for making recommendations for the design of the proposed loan operation.
Emphasis will be placed on: a) evaluating the relationship among fiscal, exchange rate and monetary policies, and the resulting impact of these policies on the financial sector; b) evaluating the effect of financial policies on savings mobilization, resource allocation and the viability of financial institutions.
Requirements:
•Master's Degree or equivalent academic qualification in Economics or related fields (PhD is preferable)
•At least five years of experience as an economist specialising in the financial sector.
Knowledge of economic policy, quantitative methods and hands-on experience dealing with issues and applying analytical appraisal techniques in the sector.
•Fluency in English and Spanish essential; knowledge of French and Portuguese desirable.
We offer an excellent salary and benefits package, including relocation costs.
Only finalists will be contacted for interviews.
Interested applicants who meet all the above requirements should send a covering letter and curriculum vitae to the following address in order to be received no later than June 27, 1990.
Employment Section-CC, Inter-American Development Bank, 1300 New York Avenue, Washington DC 20577 USA.
FAX  –3096.
ICARDA
announces an international staff position for:
RUMINANT NUTRITIONIST
Organisation
ICARDA, one of 13 international centres supported by the Consultative Group in International Agricultural Research, cooperates with national programs in West Asia and North Africa (WANA) to develop sustainable improvements in dryland cereals, food legumes, farm resources management, pasture, forage, and livestock production.
ICARDA's multidisciplinary staff of over 60 senior scientists and 600 technical and support personnel has an international mandate for barley, faba bean and lentil production improvement and — with other centres — a joint regional mandate for wheat and chickpea production improvement.
Position
The Ruminant Nutritionist will join a team of scientists conducting research on feed and pasture legumes, native pastures and livestock systems.
Specific responsibilities include:
•Conduct research on the nutritional value of cereal and legume crop residues, in close cooperation with crop improvement scientists;
•Develop feeding strategies involving both traditional and new feed resources that maximise productivity of local and improved small ruminant genotypes;
•Assume full responsibility for a Feed Quality Laboratory;
•Participate in training, both on and off station.
Qualification
Earned PhD in animal nutrition, or related field; established international reputation or at least five years' postdoctoral experience; ability to work collaboratively with scientists of different disciplines and nationalities; demonstrated ability to conduct research, communicate and publish results.
Post
The position, within the Pasture, Forage and Livestock Program, is based at ICARDA's main research station located in a rural setting 35km from Aleppo, Syria; the position involves moderate international travel.
Fluency in English, ICARDA's working language, required.
Arabic and/or French capability an advantage.
Benefits
Salary paid in US dollars based on experience and qualifications.
Benefits include housing allowance, paid home leave travel, a retirement and health package, provided auto, free enrolment for dependents at the ICARDA-administered school (K-12)), and other internationally competitive conditions of service.
Application
Qualified applicants are invited to send:
1.
a curriculum vitae with recent salary history; 2. names, addresses and telex numbers for three professional referees; 3. photocopies (non-returnable) of other relevant supporting documents, to Dr Aart van Schoonhoven, Deputy Director General/Research ICARDA, PO Box 5466, Aleppo, Syria
Reference
please quote position no DG/07/90 on application.
Position closing
Open until suitably qualified applicants apply.
Announcement date
6 May 1990.
ICARDA is an Equal Opportunity Employer.
N 2 -FIXATION SPECIALIST/SOIL MICROBIOLOGIST
Position
The N 2 -Fixation Specialist/Soil Microbiologist is part of a multidisciplinary team seeking to improve sustainability of regional dryland farming systems with specific application to legume biological nitrogen fixation and nitrogen cycling.
Main responsibilities include:
•Develop and implement a research program involving role and maximisation of fixed nitrogen in crop rotation involving forage and food legumes;
•Strengthen relationship with national programs and assist in developing research capability through training and cooperative projects;
•Produce technical reports and training material;
•Establish effective collaboration with other centres of excellence to augment regional efforts.
Qualifications
Earned PhD in agronomy, soil science, or soil microbiology; at least five years' research experience in legume N 2 fixation, N cycling and 15N technique; practical experience in developing countries and/or dryland farming systems desirable.
Fluency in written and spoken English is essential.
Post
The position reports to the leader, Food Legume Improvement Program, and is based at ICARDA's modern headquarters and main research station located in a rural setting 35km from Aleppo, Syria.
Arabic and/or French capability would be advantageous.
LEGUME PATHOLOGIST
Position
The Legume Pathologist works within a multidisciplinary team seeking ways to stabilise and increase production of cool season food and forage legumes through improved pest resistance and alternative controls for common diseases, with major emphasis on basic and applied research related to Ascochyta blight, root-rot, rust and wilt in lentil and chickpea.
Main responsibilities include:
•Develop and implement collaborative research programs with breeders in host-plant resistance and appropriate alternative control measures;
•Produce technical reports and training material;
•Strengthen relationships with national programs and assist in developing research capability through training and cooperative projects;'
•Establish effective collaboration with other centres of excellence for research on mechanisms of resistance and application of biotechnology to plant disease management.
Qualifications
Earned PhD in plant pathology, with at least five years' research experience in host-plant resistance and alternative control measures.
Fluency in written and spoken English is essential.
Experience with cool season legumes in developing countries is desirable.
REGIONAL RESEARCH PROGRAM COORDINATOR
Position
The Regional Research Program Coordinator will work closely with national agricultural research programs of Iraq, Jordan and Syria — the Mashreq countries — to implement the Mashreq Project, an effort jointly funded by the United Nations Development Program and the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, involving research, training and technology transfer to increase productivity of barley, pastures and livestock production in low rainfall areas.
Position has overall responsibility for execution of the Mashreq Program including:
•Liaison between, and close collaboration with, Mashreq country national programs in carrying out all aspects of the Program;•Assist national program coordinators in developing working plans and monitoring performance; prepare a variety of documents and reports;
•Assist with identifying training needs and organising training events.
•In consultation with ICARDA headquarters, be responsible for program administrative, financial and logistics management, including administrative control of outposted staff in the region.
Qualification
Earned PhD in agricultural science, preferably in plant breeding or agronomy; minimum of 10 years' experience in agricultural research and training; three years' experience working in a multidisciplinary team in a developing country, international organisation, or bilateral program; management experience; ability to work collaboratively with scientists of different disciplines and nationalities.
Must be fluent in spoken and written Arabic and English.
Post
The position reports to ICARDA's Assistant Director General for International Cooperation, and is based at ICARDA's Amman, Jordan, regional office; frequent international travel.
Benefits
Salary paid in US dollars based on experience and qualifications.
Benefits include housing allowance, paid home leave travel, a retirement and health package, provided auto, education allowance and other internationally competitive conditions of service.
The Open University
The Open Business School requires Part time Tutorial and Counselling Staff for Management Courses
The OBS offers a three-tier qualification structure of management courses to suit managers at all stages in their career development.
Central to its distance learning approach is its range of services to students, mainly carried out by tutors through the University's regional centres.
Given the School's rapid rate of growth, more part-time tutors are needed across the full range of management activities.
What would you do?
The tutor's role is primarily to be the key source of academic and counselling support.
This includes manning tutorials, marking and commenting on assignments, and helping with residential schools.
Who do we need?
People from industry or education with an appropriate level of management experience, both specialists and those with a broader understanding of today's management issues, who have the ability to motivate and direct the study of busy professional people learning at a distance.
What do we offer?
A challenging, interesting job which helps tutors develop themselves as much as their students, and gives the chance to be involved in shaping the managers of tomorrow.
(Tutors interested in teaching at residential weeks or weekends are also welcome.)
Appointments will be made in early autumn for courses commencing November 1990 (Certificate and Diploma).
February 1991 (MBA).
Closing date for applications is 6 July 1990.
To obtain an application package, please send your name and address on a postcard, quoting reference OBS/1 to The Tutor's Office, The Open University, PO Box 473, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK  BJ.
Equal Opportunity is University Policy
The Open University
UNIVERSITY OF WARWICK
WARWICK BUSINESS SCHOOL
CENTRE FOR SMALL AND MEDIUM-SIZED ENTERPRISES
The continued expansion of the S.M.E. Centre's activities has created excellent opportunities for high calibre staff in the following posts:
Lecturer in Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises Management (Re-advertisement)
To take particular responsibility for developing a new undergraduate course in entrepreneurship.
Applicants should have a good Honours degree in Management, Economics or related discipline and/or have professional qualifications.
The person appointed will be expected to supplement Warwick Business School's reputation for excellence in research.
He or she will be expected to participate actively within the Centre's research activities.
Appointment will be on the Lecturer Grade B scale; £16,014–£20,469 p.a. (under review) for three years in the first instance.
Informal enquiries may be made to Professor David Storey on 0203–523692 or the Director of the S.M.E. Centre, Ian Watson on 0203–523741, extension 2233.
Previous applicants need not re-apply
National Westminster Bank PLC Senior Research Fellow
National Westminster Bank have endowed the S.M.E. Centre with a Senior Research Fellowship in Small Business.
The Fellowship will be for three years in the first instance.
The Fellow will work in conjunction with Professor David Storey on an analysis of the characteristics of those individuals starting in business as clients of National Westminster Bank.
The Fellow will be expected to have a strong quantitative background in Industrial or Financial Economics or similar research discipline and be capable of handling very large computerised data sets.
The Fellowship represents an exciting opportunity for a high-profile research career and will appeal to those wishing to join a small and highly motivated research team.
Appointment will be on Research Grade II; £15,372–£20,469 p.a. (under review).
Informal enquiries may be made to Professor David Storey on 0203–523692.
Application forms (returnable by 26th June 1990) and further particulars from the Personnel Office, University of Warwick, Coventry CV  AL.
Telephone: quoting the appropriate reference number (please mark clearly on envelope).
An equal opportunities employer.
MEB
CAPACITY PLANNING FORECASTING & PRICING
HALESOWEN, WEST MIDLANDS
Midlands Electricity plc are responsible for the distribution and marketing of electricity to over 2 million customers across an area of 5000 square miles.
We are now seeking to fill the following key positions within the Planning, Forecasting and Pricing departments:
Capacity Planning Analyst
Using sophisticated computer modelling techniques (therefore previous experience in this area is essential), you will be involved in both medium and long term projects, together with evaluating new contracts.
You will also be instrumental in preparing reports on the effects of immediate and short term changes in electricity supply and demand.
Forecasting Analyst
Highly numerate, you will refine and develop forecasting methodologies with a view to estimating future energy sales in support of the preparation of detailed revenue forecasts to support short, medium and long term planning.
Pricing Analyst
Working within the parameters of the Public Electricity Supply Licence, your role will be to formulate tariff and pricing structures for customers in the Industrial, Commercial and Domestic Markets in line with the Company's business objectives.
For all positions, qualification to degree level in Mathematics, Economics, Business Studies or a related discipline is essential.
Previous experience in a related academic or commercial environment would be a distinct advantage, although recently qualified graduates who are able to demonstrate exceptional talent will also be considered.
In return for your skills, we offer salaries as stated, a comprehensive benefits package and the opportunity for career progression.
Quoting appropriate reference, please send a full CV to: The Personnel Director, Midlands Electricity plc, Mucklow Hill, Halesowen, West Midlands, B  BP.
Closing date 12th June 1990.
Midlands Electricity plc are an Equal Opportunities employer.
MEB POWER FOR THE HEART OF BRITAIN
OXFORD INSTITUTE FOR ENERGY STUDIES
RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS
OIES invites applications for two Fellows to join its research team.
OIES is an international research institute currently specialising in the study of economic and political aspects of world oil and gas, the energy problems of developing countries and the economic development of oil-exporting countries.
The Institute was founded in 1982 by an association of members including Oxford University, the EC, the Organization of Arab Oil Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and government departments or public institutions of the UK, France, Sweden Norway, Mexico, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Canada and Japan.
It is governed by a board consisting of representatives from its founding members.
Its activities are further supported by 21 sponsors including governments, international organisations and corporations.
Members and sponsors provide OIES with a unique and invaluable international network of friends and contacts.
Research projects undertaken at OIES are initiated internally in a fully autonomous manner.
OIES also organises workshops and seminars and has recently launched a debating journal, the Oxford Energy Form .
The first position is for an economist with a proven record in applied research in one of the following fields: industrial or micro-economics, international trade, finance and commodity markets.
Professionals from the oil and gas industry with an interest in research are also welcome to apply.
The second position is for a person in any relevant discipline interested in environmental issues relating to the production and use of energy.
We are looking for persons who can work both individually and in teams, and capable of conducting research from the definition of a project to the final writing up of the results.
Salary in the range £15,400–£25,000 will depend on qualifications and experience.
Applicants are invited to send their curriculum vitae and names and addresses of three referees to: The Director, Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, 57 Woodstock Road, Oxford OX  FA, tel , by Friday 22 June 1990.
ABBEY NATIONAL
THE STIMULUS YOU REQUIRE, THE INFLUENCE YOU DESERVE
SENIOR ECONOMIST CENTRAL LONDON c.32K PACKAGE + CAR
One of the benefits of being a progressive organisation is that Abbey National is able to recruit senior financial sector professionals to roles which truly reflect their status.
Carrying a high level of exposure within the organisation, the Senior Economist will play a crucial role within the Market Planning Department, managing the interest margin of the Company's core business.
Operating at a strategic level and in close liaison with other Group Development divisions, your key accountability will be to analyse and forecast the cash-flow, profitability and market share of major retail products.
Sound judgement, clear, logical thinking and highly developed analytical skills will allow you to provide effective economic intelligence, and you will compound the ability to think conceptually by translating complex issues into business realities.
Candidates must have a minimum of 5 years work experience since graduating in economics.
Ideally, candidates will not only have worked as an applied economist, but will also have gained experience in related areas like planning or finance.
During this time you will have developed the personal credibility to communicate persuasively at top management level.
The position is generously rewarded, with a salary package appropriate to an organisation of Abbey National's standing, including company car, PPP, pension scheme, generous mortgage subsidy along with profit share and restaurant facilities.
Applications can be made in writing, enclosing a full CV to Elaine Kent, Senior Management Recruitment Advisor, Manpower Planning and Development, Abbey National plc, Abbey House, 201 Grafton Gate East, Central Milton Keynes MK  AN.
The closing date for completed applications, which are invited from all sectors of the community, is 8th June 1990.
Likely dates for interviews are 21st and 22nd June 1990.
THE INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL FINANCE, INC
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMISTS
The Institute of International Finance has vacancies for senior international economists.
A good degree in economics and at least five years of experience in country analysis are required, along with experience related to financial institutions and international debt.
Candidates should be conversant with international economic and financial issues and have practical experience using personal computers.
Evidence of analytical writing ability in English is essential and fluency in other languages, particularly French and Spanish, is essential for some positions.
The IIF was established in 1983 by the world's leading commercial banks to improve the timeliness and quality of information on sovereign borrowers.
The IIF provides reports and data on fifty borrowing countries to its member institutions as well as studies on more general issues of interest to the international financial community.
The IIF offers a competitive remuneration package.
Applicants must be willing to travel extensively.
Send letter with curriculum vitae and relevant examples of work to:
Roger N. Eddy, Executive Administrator, Institute of International Finance, Suite 8500, 2000 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20006.
The Queen's University of Belfast
CHAIR OF POLITICS
Department of Political Science
Applications are invited for the chair of Politics, tenable from 1 September 1990 or such other date as may be arranged.
The successful applicant will be required to provide academic stimulus and leadership in the Department of Political Science.
Applicants may have research strength in any area of politics, but interest in one or more of the following areas would be an advantage: Political Theory; Comparative Politics; Relation between State and Nation; Policy Studies; Political Economy.
This chair has been made available under the initiative of the Universities Funding Council New Academic Appointments Scheme (NAAS) from 1 September 1990.
Salary within the professional range with eligibility for USS.
Generous relocation package as appropriate.
Further particulars (please quote ref. 90/E) may be obtained from the Personnel Officer, The Queen's University of Belfast, Northern Ireland, BT  NN (telephone  ext 3044 or Fax ).
Closing date: 22 June 1990.
The University is an Equal Opportunity Employer.
The World bank
ROBERT S. McNAMARA FELLOWSHIPS
The program offers 12-month Fellowships for imaginative and innovative research in the general field of economic development.
For this cycle, research is however, being encouraged in the following areas:
•Development Policies to Benefit Women: Issues of Implementation
•Poverty Alleviation
•The Interaction between the Legal and Institutional Framework for Development
To be eligible to apply, candidates must:
•be nationals of a World Bank member country
•carry out their research in a World Bank member country other than their own
•hold at least a Master's degree or equivalent
•be 35 years of age or under.
This Program does not support degree studies.
The deadline for applications for the 1991–92 cycle is 1 November 1990.
For information and/or the 1991–92 application forms, please contact:
The McNamara Fellowship Program Room M4031 World Bank Headquarters 1818 H Street NW Washington, DC, 20433 USA
R & H
EASTERN EUROPE
Short- and long-term Consultants are required in the following fields:
•Agriculture and Fisheries
•Agro-industries and Food Processing
•Development Banking
•Management Information Systems
•Energy and Environment
In particular experience of project preparation, appraisal, training and international tendering procedures is required.
Rambøll & Hannemann (R&H) are seeking further senior qualified specialists with at least 10 years relevant experience of working abroad to assist with their expanding activities in Eastern Europe.
In addition, R&H would be pleased to hear from other interested persons who have similar experience for undertaking work in Africa and South East Asia.
Please reply, enclosing a current CV, to our UK office: Rambøll & Hannemann, 17/18 Margaret Street, London W1N 7LE, Fax .
Or to our head office: Rambøll & Hannemann, Bredevej 2C, Dk-2830 Virum, Denmark, Fax + .
RAMBOLL & HANNEMANN A/S A Member of the R&H Consultancy Group
R&H is a large Danish consultancy group employing some 1150 staff including agronomists, economists, engineers, sociologists and computer specialists.
IRRIGATION TRAINING INSTITUTE DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT EXPERT
to monitor and guide the development of about 12 irrigation training institutes in a large developing country in South Asia to assure their long-term sustainability, including the promotion of technology transfer activities.
Candidates should have an advanced degree in water resources development (civil engineering), substantial background in management (preferably an MBA), and have held key positions in training/educational institutions in the industrialised and developing countries.
Minimum professional experience: 15 years.
Louis Berger International, Inc 1819 H Street, NW, Suite 900 Washington, DC, 20006
Which?
Research Manager
Up to £30K
Broadcasting, privatisation, British Rail, green labelling, channel tunnel safety, 1992, the police…
These are just some of the example of Which? reports researched and written by our Public Interest Research Group.
The group carries out extensive, original and impartial research on service and monopoly industries and other issues of importance to consumers.
We are now looking for a manager to head this group and develop its work.
This is a particularly important role at a time when systems of monitoring and regulation are changing and consumer concerns need to be effectively represented.
You will need to have an impressive knowledge of research techniques linked with outstanding management skills to manage a young, dynamic team, and develop their work within the organisation's changing structure.
The ability to understand the policy implications of research projects is a must.
Ideally you should have some knowledge of regulation and control systems and how they work, an understanding of central and local government operations, and European experience in a relevant field.
In return we offer an attractive benefits package that includes an excellent pension scheme, free life insurance, 28 days annual leave, and an interest free season ticket loan.
To apply, please send a full CV to the Personnel Department, The Association for Consumer Research, 2 Marylebone Road, London NW  DX.
Business Editor
Fairplay, the leading international shipping magazine, is looking for a person to fill the new position of Business Editor.
The successful candidate will be required to write news and feature articles directed at Fairplay's readers who hold senior management positions.
The position calls for a person with sufficient experience and confidence to interview chief executives and finance directors.
A considerable amount of foreign travel is involved.
Applicants should have a clear understanding of how international business works, and a proven ability to write.
A knowledge of shipping would be an advantage, although not essential.
Applications to: The Editor, Fairplay, PO Box 96, Coulsdon, Surrey CR5 2TE, UK.
WZB
Social Science Research Center Berlin
Research Fellow/European Community Labour Market Evaluation Project
The Labour Market and Employment Research Area of the WZB is seeking to fill a new position in a research project financed by the European Community.
The initial term of appointment is for one year from approximately July/August 1990 to June/July 1991; an extension of two to three years is envisaged, depending on the renewal of external funding.
Salary is based on the schedule for German public service employees (BAT b/11 a).
Duties:
Evaluation of labour market policy measures, regulations and institutional arrangement in the context of an international comparative project with special attention to the effects of the completion of the European internal market (including quantitative impact analyses).
Qualifications:
University degree in economics or social sciences (PhD or comparable qualification) with an excellent background in empirical social science and in mathematical and statistical techniques, experience in international comparative or institutionally oriented policy analysis.
A willingness to participate in interdisciplinary teamwork and proficiency in English are required; knowledge of another foreign language is desirable.
Disabled persons of the same qualifications will be preferred.
The WZB is seeking to increase the number of women researchers on its staff.
Women are especially encouraged to apply.
Please send your application by June 20, 1990 at the latest to  
UNIVERSITY OF ST ANDREWS
ELECTROCHEMISTRY AND MATERIALS CENTRE
Two positions are available, one for a research manager and the other for a research assistant within the Electrochemistry and Solid State Materials Centre at the University of St Andrews.
The University has committed significant resources to the Centre, associated with the transfer of Dr Peter Bruce to St Andrews, and it is equipped with a wide range of electrochemical techniques.
It also supports complimentary techniques such as FTIR, 500 MHz MASNMR, and the state-of-the-art X-ray powder diffraction equipment.
Excellent facilities are available for handling air sensitive materials.
The group's activities are located in new purpose built laboratories.
St Andrews offers an attractive working and residential environment.
RESEARCH MANAGER
This position will involve the day-to-day management of a number of electrochemically based projects being carried out by PhD Students and postdoctoral research fellows, embracing the study of bulk and interfacial properties of both liquid and solid electrodes and electrolytes.
The post, which is at research officer level, will be for two years in the first instance, with the possibility of extension, and the salary will be at the appropriate point on the 1A scale (£  –£18 165 per annum) with USS.
Suitable candidates are expected to hold a PhD in electrochemistry or a related topic; experience at postdoctoral level is desirable but not essential.
RESEARCH ASSISTANT
This post is available for a graduate in chemistry, physics or materials science to investigate materials for use in rechargeable batteries suitable for powering a new generation of consumer products.
The successful candidate will be expected to prepare solids by solid state reaction, and test the function of the materials as electrodes in prototype batteries.
The work is to be carried out in collaboration with major UK industries and is funded under the SERC/DTI LINK scheme; as such close contact with the technological applications of the devices by liaison with industry is anticipated.
The successful candidate must hold a first or second class honours degree.
Salary will be on the RA1B scale (£  –£  per annum) with USS and the position is for two years in the first instance.
Application forms can be obtained from The Director of Personnel Services, College Gate, St Andrews, Fife KY  AJ to whom completed forms, together with a CV and the names of two academic referees, should be returned as soon as possible.
The University operates an Equal Opportunities Policy.
ASBESTOS ANALYSTS
As a NAMAS accredited laboratory we require two qualified analysts for site work with practical experience of air monitoring techniques and current regulations.
The candidates must be excellent communicators and capable of working on their own initiative.
A clean driving licence is essential.
Salary will be commensurate with age and experience, and will reflect the level of responsibility and the unsocial hours required by the post.
Applications with full CV to D. Shah, Invicta Analytical Services, 15A High Street, Chislehurst, Kent BR  AB.
Telephone .
NAMAS Reg 0630.
THE BREWING RESEARCH FOUNDATION
SCIENTIST
The Brewing Research Foundation is a privately funded organisation with an international reputation as a centre of excellence.
A graduate scientist is required in the Measurement and Instrumentation Section to work on a range of projects concerning analysis of beer and its raw materials.
The post would suit those with qualifications in chemistry.
It is envisaged that the successful candidate will have a recent postgraduate qualification or a good honours degree.
Experience and knowledge of near infrared spectrophotometry, computers, gc-ms, and other spectrophotometric techniques would be an advantage.
Conditions of service are good with a contributory pension scheme, subsidised canteen and free life insurance.
The initial salary will be commensurate with age, qualifications and experience.
Applications in writing, enclosing a curriculum vitae and the names of two referees, should be addressed to the administrator, Brewing Research Foundation, Lyttel Hall, Nutfield, Redhill, Surrey RH  HY.
THE college OF NORTH EAST LONDON
Haringey's community college
HEAD OF POLLUTION MONITORING UNIT (SENIOR LECTURER)
To develop commercial environmental consultancy and research activities and undertake some teaching on Environmental Health related courses up to postgraduate level.
Salary scale: Senior Lecturer £  –£  (plus London Allowance of £1500.
Application forms and further details are available from the Staffing Officer at the College of North East London, Tottenham Centre, High Road, London N  RU, to whom they should be returned by 22 February 1991.
HARINGEY IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES EMPLOYER
UNIVERSITY OF WARWICK
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOW
Theory of High Temperature Superconductivity
Department of Physics
To work with N. d'Ambrumenil and Yanmin Li on the theory of high temperature superconductivity.
Experience in the field of strongly correlated electronic systems and Mott insulators would be an advantage.
The post is funded by the SERC initially for two years as part of the University's rolling grant.
Salary is on the Research Range 1A scale: £  –£  pa (under review).
Applicants should enclose a cv, current preprints and a list of publications, and should arrange for two letters of reference to be sent to N. d'Ambrumenil, Department of Physics, at the University.
Application forms (returnable by 7 March 1991) from the Personnel Office, University of Warwick.
Coventry CV  AL.
Telephone  quoting reference 29/A/90/8 (please mark clearly on envelope).
An equal opportunities employer.
Wellcome
Senior Technicians
Cell Biology
Wellcome is an internationally renowned pharmaceutical group engaged in the research, development, manufacture and marketing of human healthcare products.
The newly created Department of Cell Biology is committed to the discovery of novel anti-tumour chemotherapeutic agents targeted against proteins encoded by oncogenes.
Opportunities now exist for Senior Technicians to make a valid contribution in two specific areas of this important field of research.
Molecular Biology
The identification and characterisation of novel receptors as targets for chemotherapy in both cardiovascular and CNS disorders is the aim of the newly formed Molecular section within the Department.
We need a good honours graduate to provide research assistance in the molecular cloning and characterisation of receptors, and in the expression of receptors in systems designed for the screening of pharmacologically active compounds.
A thorough grasp of molecular biological techniques is essential, and experienced in DNA sequencing and cDNA cloning would be advantageous, as would further knowledge of biochemistry or pharmacology.
Although you will work with a team of experienced scientists, you should also be capable of working independently.
Ref. 95/55B
Oncology
As a good honours graduate, you will provide research assistance in the purification and characterisation of proteins as targets for chemotherapeutic agents, and assess interactions between such proteins and inhibitors.
This will call for an aptitude and affinity for laboratory work, both independently and as part of a team.
A knowledge of enzymology and other general biochemical techniques would be useful, while a sound grounding in chemistry would be a further advantage.
Ref. 95/55A
Your expertise will be rewarded not only by a competitive salary, but also by an extensive range of benefits including 5 weeks' holiday, pension and profit share schemes, a subsidised restaurant and first-class sports and social facilities.
Pleas write with full C.V.
quoting the appropriate reference number to Alison Bunn, Personnel Officer, The Wellcome Research Laboratories, Langley Court, Beckenham, Kent BR  BS.
Tel:.
•The Wellcome Foundation Limited •Major International Pharmaceutical Group •Research Centre at Beckenham •Annual Turnover > £1,400m •An Equal Opportunity Employer
EVANS
Evans Medical Limited already has an established reputation in the UK pharmaceutical market in biological products, generics and proprietary medicines.
As a wholly-owned subsidiary of Medeva plc, the Company now intends to become a significant presence internationally and is already successfully penetrating worldwide markets, in particular Europe and the United States, but also the Middle and Far East.
This strategy together with recent acquisitive activity and a continually expanding product range, has created two new opportunities: — 
Registration Professional
a good degree in Biology, Biochemistry, Pharmacy, Pharmacology or Chemistry.
at least 3 years' experience in Registration including the completion of dossiers.
familiarity with the requirements of the international regulatory authorities, particularly in Europe and with the FDA.
an interest in and up to date knowledge of therapeutic trends in modern medical practice.
interdisciplinary skills, understanding and communicative abilities.
Medical Information Scientist
a good degree in a life science, medical science or similar discipline.
a minimum of two years' experience in Medical Information in the pharmaceutical industry.
an interest in and up to date knowledge of therapeutic trends in modern medical practice.
experience in dealing with the learned professions and the controlling authorities.
facility with figures, statistics and sophisticated information recording and retrieval systems.
Salary for these positions will be negotiable in the range £18–15,0000; however this in unlikely to be a limiting factor in the appointment of the exceptional candidate.
Additionally there is a comprehensive benefits package that will include relocation expenses if needed.
Qualified candidates are invited to send a full curriculum vitae to Robert Kilpatrick at: Search And Selection Limited Management Consultants Highway House, 17 London End, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire HP  HN
British Antarctic Survey
ELECTRONIC MICROSCOPIST
TO £16,176
The British Antarctic Survey forms a key component of the Natural Environment Research Council, and we're now looking for an experienced Electron Microscopist to manage the new SEM facility at our Cambridge headquarters.
This facility which includes a Cambridge Instruments 360, fitted with a LINK EDS analysis system, Oxford Instruments cyro stage and a backscatter detector, will be used in support of a wide range of research projects by biologists and earth scientists.
You will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the facility and the provision of supervision and advice to a wide range of users.
You will also be required to provide training for new users and assist with the sample preparation, analytical interpretation and the development of new techniques.
This is a permanent post, based in Cambridge.
Besides a first degree and at least two years' subsequent relevant experience, you'll need to be familiar with all standard SEM techniques, and have experience of either EDS microanalysis or cyrological work.
A flexible approach and the ability to master new techniques quickly is essential and research experience would be an advantage.
In return, you will receive a salary in the range of £11,586 to £16,176 pa depending on qualifications and experience.
For further details and an application form, please contact The Personnel Section, British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB  ET.
Telephone Cambridge , ext. 345/352.
Please quote reference BAS 5/91.
The closing date for application is 7 March 1991.
Post-Doctoral Research Fellowship
KNOWLEDGE BASED SYSTEMS
A$40–$52K package
Division of Building, Construction and Engineering — Melbourne, Australia
We wish to appoint a recent PhD graduate for a term of 3 years to undertake research in the development of generic techniques and artificial intelligence for expert systems and intelligent optimisation of systems and processes with broad application to design, planning and operation of engineering systems and facilities, including construction robotics.
You will need the ability to initiate and carry out original research and to work effectively in a team.
You should have a PhD, awarded not more than 3 years ago, in the field of computer science, mathematics or systems engineering especially in artificial intelligence and mathematical optimisation studies, neural networks, robots and/or geographic information systems studies.
Dr Ron Sharpe can provide more details of the job.
You can telephone Dr Sharpe on 61–3–  or contact him by facsimile on 61–3– .
Ms H. Kenna can provide you with a copy of the duty statement and selection criteria by telephoning 61–3–  or by facsimile on 61–3– .
Please send your application including details of your skills, qualifications and work achievements, quoting Ref No BCE90/10/4(NS), to: The Chief, CSIRO Division of Building, Construction and Engineering, PO Box 56, Highett VIC 3190 Australia.
Closing date for applications: 8 March 1991.
CSIRO AUSTRALIA CSIRO IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER
EMBL
The European Molecular Biology Laboratory, an international research organisation situated in Heidelberg, Germany, has the following vacancies in Heidelberg
ELECTRONICS ENGINEER
(Reference no 90/55)
We are presently recruiting an Electronics Engineer to work in our Electronics Workshop.
Candidates should have a degree in electronic engineering.
Previous experience of state-of-the-art digital & analogue design of board for data acquisition systems is desirable.
Knowledge of electronics production techniques and packaging techniques (PC Boards, PALs GALs.
LCAs) and some prior experience with MS-DOS based microcomputer systems would be an advantage.
and for the outstation in Hamburg
ELECTRONICS TECHNICIAN
(Reference no 91/06)
The position is in the instrumentation group and involves design and maintenance work, and work in support of the activities of the In-house experimental groups and the visiting groups.
The work primarily involves the electronic and computer control of experiments using synchotron radiation.
Candidates should have a training and practical experience in basic electronics.
Some experience in the computer control of on-line experiments would be useful.
We offer an above average salary.
plus certain allowances depending on personal circumstances.
Please write briefly for an application form, quoting appropriate reference number, to the Personnel Section in Heidelberg, Germany.
INSTITUTE FOR ANIMAL HEALTH
Agricultural & Food Research Council
Spongiform Encephalopathy
Compton Laboratory £9,907–£13,262+ non-contributory pension scheme
Scientific Officer
required to join a team involved with developing immunological reagents for use in scrapie and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) research.
The postholder will assist with the preparation of natural and synthetic immunogens and will use these to raise monoclonal and polydonal antisera by a variety of methods.
Candidates with an interest in molecular biology, protein biochemistry and immunology are urged to apply.
Scientific Officer
required to assist with a project researching intracellular events in scrapie-infected cells.
Central to the project is the cellular protein PrP, comparisons will be made of PrP localisation, processing and fate in normal and scrapie-infected neuronal cell cultures.
Training will be given in the requisite biochemical analysis and immunolocalisation techniques.
Scientific Officer
required to join a team developing immunodiagnostic reagents for BSE.
The postholder will be required to extract antigens from infected tissue and to assist with the preparation of synthetic antigens (peptide or recombinant proteins).
They will use these to raise and characterise antisera by a variety of immunochemical and immunocytological techniques.
Qualifications for all posts: Degree in an appropriate subject or HNC with relevant experience.
All posts are funded initially for 3 years.
Application forms are available from the Personnel Officer, Institute for Animal Health, Compton, Newbury, Berkshire RG  NN, quoting relevant reference numbers.
An Equal Opportunities Employer.
INSTITUTE for ANIMAL HEALTH Good science, useful science
HYDROTECHNICA
International consultants in water and environmental management
SENIOR HYDROLOGIST
Hydrotechnica offers high level consultancy services in the fields of water and environmental management and forms part of Robertson Environment, the largest environmental consultancy in Europe.
A vacancy has arisen for a senior hydrogeologist based at our Shrewsbury offices.
The successful candidate will have a research background in hydrogeology with experience of one or more of the following: crystalline rocks, geothermal investigations, hydrochemistry, geophysics.
With 7–10 years' experience, it is essential that he/she has experience of reporting on multi-disciplinary project.
The importance of the position is reflected in the salary and benefits package offered which includes a company vehicle.
Please write enclosing your CV and quoting reference NS/290 to Diane Miller, Administration Manager, Hydrotechnica Limited, Abbey Foregate, Shrewsbury SY  AL.
Environment Division Robertson Group plc
INVERESK RESEARCH INTERNATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES IN MAMMALIAN METABOLISM AND REGULATORY CHEMISTRY
Inveresk Research International (IRI) Ltd is a strong, successful and progressive contract research organisation undertaking scientific studies for pharmaceutical, agrochemical and chemical companies.
Located in Musselburgh and Elphinstone, East Lothian, we are close to Edinburgh in an area offering a quality way of life and a wide range of cultural, social and outdoor pursuits.
To sustain our impressive growth, the following vacancies now exist.
STUDY DIRECTOR, METABOLIC CHEMISTRY
An experienced pharmaceutical metabolic chemist is required to join the area of Mammalian Metabolism.
The successful candidate will have significant experience in performing Regulatory driven studies in the Pharmaceutical sector.
Applicants should be educated to PhD level, preferably in Chemistry, Biochemistry or Pharmacy, plus several years relevant experience.
He/she should be able to demonstrate a commitment to performance of high quality studies to Good Laboratory Practice in a busy commercial environment.
After a short period of induction the successful candidate will be expected to lead (as Study Director) a team of scientists performing radiolabelled (14 C,3 H,125 I) metabolism studies in laboratory animals and man (Ref No 0251).
RESIDUE CHEMIST
An experienced analyst is required to join the residue analysis section of Regulatory Chemistry.
The successful candidate will be expected to lead a team of two to three graduates engaged in the determination of pesticide and agrochemical residues in crops and soils.
The appointment will be made at Study Director level and as such carries responsibilities for planning, negotiation, execution and reporting of these studies.
Applicants should ideally have a minimum of two to three years experience of residue analysis in addition to a PhD in a relevant discipline, though consideration will be given to applicants with appropriate relevant experience (Ref No 0722).
The Company offers a wide range of benefits associated with a modern and progressive employer including:
•Competitive Salaries
•Participation in Bonus Arrangements
•Private Health Care Cover
•Relocation Assistance (if approp.)
•Pension and Life Assurance Plan
Interested candidates should forward a full CV giving an indication of current salary to the Personnel Department, quoting the appropriate reference number.
INVEREK RESEARCH INTERNATIONAL International Class
Metropolitan Police
Graduate Trainees in Computing and Communications
Broad based career opportunities in the service of the public and the police
The computing and electronic engineering teams at the Metropolitan Police provide the largest service in the country with vital communications systems.
Joining our graduate training programme will give you the specialised skills and knowledge needed to work on such sophisticated design and operations.
At the end of the 2 year training programme (one year in certain cases) you will have met the training requirements of the appropriate professional institutions, leading to corporate status.
Most importantly, your input will be quickly recognised and rewarded, and the variety and size of the project workload will ultimately prepare you for full management responsibility.
If you have, or expect to obtain in 1991, a good honours degree or equivalent in electrical, electronic or radio engineering, communications, computer science, mathematics or physics, then we would like to hear from you.
We are currently looking for trainees in the following areas:
Command and Control Group
You will join the group developing and implementing ground-based speech and data-communication computing networks.
This is the team which, in co-operation with police officers, designed and implemented one of the largest service-wide command and control systems of its kind — and there are more major initiatives in the pipeline.
Established in 1978, this group has grown rapidly, and there is considerable opportunity for you to gain management experience.
Operations Technical Support Group
This group provides electronic engineering support in areas such as mobile communication, CCTV, PA systems and security systems.
Your main activity will be supplying the technology for the network of 16,000 radios and 100 channels the police use for communication; this currently involves a re-equipment programme to meet new frequency allocations.
The group also provides other specialised equipment, handling small quantity design and manufacture.
Starting salaries will be in the range £13,890–£15,010 (including Inner London Weighting) depending on qualifications and experience.
Promotion prospects are good and after 2 years' training your salary should rise to £19,680 or more.
If you prove your ability there are good career prospects and, further promotion could soon take your salary up to £22,135.
For further details and an application form (to be returned by 8 March 1991) write to Civil Service Commission, Alencon Link, Basingstoke, Hants RG  JB, or telephone Basingstoke  (answering service operates outside office hours).
Please quote ref: T/8749.
The Civil Service is an equal opportunity employer
Loughborough University of Technology
LECTURESHIP IN OPTICAL ENGINEERING
Required to further strengthen our very active team engaged in the teaching and research of optics and laser technology applied to mechanical engineering.
Preference will be given to candidates who have research interest in the area of optical information processing for industrial application.
The lecturer will also be expected to play a leading part in the development of the newly formed ‘Institute of Optical Engineering’ on campus.
Appointment will be made on the Lecturer A scale £ –or Lecturer B scale £  –£  per annum depending on qualifications and experience.
AFRC
ROTHAMSTED EXPERIMENTAL STATION
TWO SCIENTIFIC OFFICERS
To join a research group funded by the European Commission under its Science and Technology for Environmental Protections Programme.
Ref: 873.
A three year project working on the Chemical Specification and Bioavailability of Zinc and Cadmium to plants, with collaborators from Denmark, Portugal and Germany.
Ref: 874.
A two year project working on Heavy Metal Toxicity to soil microbes with Wye College and laboratories in Spain and Sweden.
QUALIFICATIONS: First or Upper Second Class Honours Degree in Chemistry, Soil or Plant Science for ref: 874 and in Environmental Biology/Soil Science or relevant discipline for ref: 874.
SALARY: On Scientific Officer scale £9907–£ .
Non-contributory superannuation.
Apply by letter with CV and two referees to the Administration Division, AFRC Institute of Arable Crops Research, Rothamsted Experimental Station, Harpenden, Herts AL  JQ, and quoting the appropriate reference No by 8 March 1991.
Informal telephone enquiries to Dr A. P. McGrath,.
An equal opportunities employer.
British Gas
Original thinking, practical solutions
R&D opportunities with the world leader in gas technology
At British Gas, we've won an international reputation for our expertise in the development and use of advanced gas technology.
Despite our success, we continue to move forward, investing substantially in R&D through our network of research centres in the UK.
By 1993, our research programme will centre on a new purpose-built centre at Loughborough, Leicestershire.
Meanwhile, at Watson House in South-West London, our teams concentrate in developing technology to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of gas used on domestic and commercial environments.
Scientists and engineers working here (and at Loughborough from 1993) need to be original thinkers with the ability to translate innovative ideas into practical solutions.
Section Leader — Aerodynamics
£19,000 to £23,200
The Aerodynamics Section provides expertise on the flow of air inside and outside buildings, and on the impact of air flow in energy requirements.
Important projects include the development of advanced mechanical ventilation and heat recovery systems, right through from conception to full commercialisation.
We are looking for a graduate scientist/engineer with the ability to lead and motivate a team of four, generating ideas and carrying work forward, within deadlines and budget, to successful and practical solutions.
You must have experience in air flow, preferably in buildings, and ideally have some team-handling experience and a knowledge of heating and ventilation systems.
Scientists/Engineers
£13,700 to £19,900
We also have vacancies on the following project teams:
Electronic Gas Meter — As this major project moves into its second stage, we need two graduates to help develop the power system for the meter.
Investigating the operational aspects of lithium batteries will be an important aspect of your work which will also include assessing other power sources with potential for wider application in domestic gas systems.
You will need a good degree or equivalent in engineering or physical science and, ideally, experience within an electrical, electrochemical or electromechanical environment.
Appliances for Environmental Conditioning — Working on the team responsible for developing novel domestic appliances for environmental conditioning, you will be responsible for the development of appliances from theoretical concept to advanced working prototypes suitable for field evaluation.
Ideally, you will have a degree in engineering or science with a working knowledge of heat transfer mechanisms.
Flueing Techniques — This team focuses on the development of new flueing techniques and the improvement of current flue testing and design practice.
Work includes full-scale experiments, wind tunnel studies and computational fluid dynamics.
You should, ideally, have a degree in engineering or science.
Salaries, dependent on qualifications and experience, are supported by excellent large-company benefits including profit sharing and sharesaver schemes, 27 days' holiday, pension and generous relocation assistance where appropriate.
If you're an original thinker who can apply practical solutions, please write for an application for, quoting the appropriate reference, to the Assistant Personnel Manager, British Gas plc, Watson House Research Station, Peterborough Road, London SW  HN or telephone  ext 3358.
Closing date for receipt of applications 28 February 1991.
An equal opportunity employer
Recruitment to the Scientific Civil Service
We're looking for Scientists who don't always want to be just Scientists
Part of the beauty of scientific study is that it can take you in a number of different directions, expected and unexpected.
If you have the right skills, the knowledge, the personal qualities and the management potential it could take you from a purely scientific discipline into the most senior scientific managerial ranks within the Civil Service.
As far as the research institute directors and policy makers of tomorrow.
Or further.
But it all depends upon the decisions you make today.
Decisions which will test your drive, commitment and self-motivation.
Our Science Management Trainee Scheme means that you will never be just a scientist.
Individually tailored training programmes and special project work will take you beyond the boundaries of your own scientific discipline into managerial issues across the broader spectrum of science and technology.
You will be what you've always wanted to be.
The individual who initiates and manages change.
We expect you to make the most of these opportunities which exist within the Ministry of Defence, the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Transport.
The specific nature of your training and development will vary according to the department you join, but wherever you go, you are guaranteed to meet the kind of intellectual and practical challenges that will make you a manager not only of your own destiny, but of the nation.
You must have, or expect to obtain in 1991, a good honours degree or higher qualification in a scientific, engineering, mathematical or computing discipline.
Your intellectual resources and personal qualities will be exceptional and we will only appoint those who have the clear potential to succeed.
Salary will be in the range £13,000–£22,000, depending on experience, qualifications and location.
Your salary will grow just as quickly as your skills and responsibilities — and that could be very fast indeed.
For further details and an application forms (to be returned by 1 March 1991) write to Civil Service Commission, Alencon Link, Basingstoke  (answering service operates outside office hours).
Please quote ref: S/957/91/.
The Civil Service is an equal opportunity employer
DowElanco
DowElanco is a worldwide research based agrochemical company.
We are dedicated to improving crop protection while safeguarding the interests of the user, consumer and the environment.
Our European research headquarters are near Wantage in the South Oxfordshire countryside.
ANALYTICAL CHEMIST
South Oxfordshire
A vacancy exists in the Analytical Chemistry Group within the Fungicide Discovery Department.
The successful candidate will be innovative and self motivated, with an aptitude and keen interest in problem solving, method development and validation.
A thorough knowledge of analytical chemistry and experience in chromatographic and spectroscopic techniques is therefore essential.
This position requires strong written and verbal communication skills as it involves close interaction with synthetic chemists, biologists and biochemists in addition to the other members of the Analytical Chemistry Group.
Applicants should have a degree or equivalent qualification in chemistry and relevant post-graduate experience or training in analytical chemistry.
Joining the DowElanco team represents an unparalleled opportunity to develop a career with a major global agrochemical business.
Naturally the rewards are attractive and include competitive salary, pension, life and private health insurance schemes and relocation assistance where appropriate.
DowElanco A NEW COMPANY FOR A NEW ERA
UNIVERSITY OF YORK
DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY Institute For Applied Biology
Project Leader in Applied Biology
The Institute For Applied Biology is the commercial arm of the University of York's prestigious Department of Biology.
As part of its Development Plan, the Institute is now providing the opportunity for an entrepreneurial Project Leader to develop his or her own ideas by creating a strong, self-financing until supported from contract research.
While applications are welcome from candidates in any area of applied biology, preference will be given to those who will provide strong links with existing research groups within either the Institute itself or the Department of Biology.
Potential applicants are encouraged to apply for further particulars.
It is expected that the appointed person will have an excellent record in applied scientific research coupled with a sound understanding of commercial contract research.
This is an exciting career opportunity for the appointed person to join an established, successful research institute in one of the UK's leading Biology Departments.
While the appointment will be for 1 year in the first instance.
It is expected that the project leader will establish an activity that will provide for the expansion and the continuity of employment of its staff.
Four copies of application including full curriculum vitae and the names of three referees, together with details of how you would expect to contribute to the Institute's continuing and successful development should be sent by 6th March, 1991 to the Personnel Office, University of York, Heslington, York YO  DD.
The salary will be commensurate with the qualifications and experience of the applicant and will also relate to the overall quality of the project that he/she intends to lead.
Further details are available (tel:): please quote reference number 5081.
data-star
Data-Star — Customer Services
Data-Star offers over 300 online databases covering information for biomedical research, the pharmaceutical and chemical industries and business intelligence for commerce and industry.
We currently have a vacancy within the Customer Services Team, working London Help-Desk.
As part of the Help-Desk Team you will perform a variety of important tasks, including answering international customer enquiries, and dealing with all telephone sales leads.
You will also share in presenting the full range of Data-Star training courses on a regular basis.
You should have some experience of using Data-Star in a biomedical, pharmaceutical, or chemical field.
Commercial awareness and an interest in sales and marketing would be an added advantage.
We offer a friendly working environment in Central London, 5 weeks annual holiday, private healthcare and additional benefits.
Salary negotiable.
Please send a full C.V.
and details of current salary to:
Tessa Hefferman, Data-Star, Plaza Suite, 114 Jermyn Suite, London SW1Y 6HJ. data-star 
A service of Radio Suisse
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICS — CLARENDON LABORATORY Laser Techniques for Combustion Studies
A postdoctoral research assistant is required as soon as possible to join an active research group working on novel nonlinear optical techniques for combustion diagnostics.
In particular, four wave mixing techniques pioneered by the group are being extensively developed.
The project is being funded by Shell Research (UK) Ltd and the SERC applicants with a background in Chemistry, Physics or Combustion aspects of Mechanical Engineering would be especially welcome and some experience in the use of lasers would be an advantage.
Further particulars may be obtained from Dr P. Ewart, telephone .
The appointment will be for a period of up to two years and will be made on the Research Support 1A salary scale £  to £  per annum.
Applications including a cv and the names and addresses of two referees should be sent to the Deputy Administrator, Department of Physics, Nuclear Physics Laboratory, Keble Road, Oxford OX  RH by 28 February 1991.
The University is an Equal Opportunity Employer
ST MARY'S HOSPITAL MEDICAL SCHOOL (a constituent College of Imperial College of Science, Technology & Medicine)
(University of London) Norfolk Place, London W  PG
RESEARCH ASSISTANTS (1B)
Two positions are available in the Department of Respiratory Medicine to study gene activation in human alveolar macrophages.
Experience in molecular biology, immunology and cell biology would be an advantage.
Applications in form of a full CV with names and addresses of two referees should be sent to the Personnel Department at the above address.
Please quote ref: RA/RS.
UNIVERSITY OF NOTTINGHAM
Department of Materials Engineering and Materials Design
LECTURESHIP IN MATERIALS
The Department of Materials Engineering and Materials Design seeks applications for a full-time position in order to undertake research and teaching in any aspect of materials science and engineering consistent with current multidisciplinary activities.
These are: biomaterials, advanced inorganic materials, composites and near-net shape forming.
The Department is committed to teaching materials in an engineering context and much of its research reflects this attitude.
Specifically this involves the interaction between processing, design and materials.
Salary within the range £  –£  per annum.
Further details and application forms, returnable not later than 25 February, from the Personnel Officer, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG  RD (telephone , ext 3355).
Ref: 1397.
EMBL
BIOLOGISTS
The EMBL Data Library, in collaboration with the GenBank group (U.S.A.) and the DNA Database of Japan, produces databases of nucleotide and protein sequence data.
These databases are distributed to molecular biologists throughout the world, reaching a user community of some 10,000 researchers.
We are seeking biologists to join the team which prepares data for inclusion in the database.
In a cordial team atmosphere, the work involves extracting information such as the biological source of sequences and regions of interest within them (e.g., coding regions, promoters) from scientific reports.
The posts are intended for students who have recently completed a first degree in biology and who wish to acquire some work experience before either continuing their studies or seeking long-term employment.
Candidates should have experience reading and understanding the biological literature.
Experience with computers is useful but not essential.
Applications are encouraged from citizens of the EMBL or EC member states (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Israel, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom) who have a good command of English.
Contracts will be for one year, beginning in Summer 1991.
Extensions for a second year are possible.
EMBL offers a competitive salary and some help with moving expenses (where applicable).
The EMBL Data Library is a group of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory, an international research institute located in Heidelberg, Germany.
It provides a stimulating research environment, and computing resources comprising clustered VAXes, SUN workstations, a network of Macintosh personal computers, and various powerful graphics devices, all connected by Ethernet.
Connections to EARN/BITNET and DATEX-P allow world-wide electronic communication.
Write briefly for an application form, quoting the reference 91/03 to:
Defence Research Agency
Chief Executive
Exceptional Salary Package
The Defence Research Agency is one of the new Executive Agencies being established within the Civil Service to improve efficiency, effectiveness and quality of service through a more business-like approach.
Consisting of the four non-nuclear Defence Research Establishments, the new Agency, with some 12,500 employees and an annual turnover of around £690m, will provide wide-ranging scientific and technical services and internationally recognised quality largely, but not exclusively, to the Ministry of Defence.
A Chief Executive of the highest calibre, who will be personally responsible to the Defence Secretary, is needed to bring about major evolution in the shape, size and culture of the Agency while preserving scientific excellence.
In this role, your priorities will be to:
•fuse the separate Establishments into a single and efficient business organisation with a streamlined asset base,
•introduce a commercial, customer orientated and competitive culture.
•introduce financial management systems and business practices that will enable the Agency to operate on a commercial pricing basis.
You will have substantial freedom in running the Agency to achieve performance and financial objectives, and must have a record of outstanding leadership at a senior level in a large organisation.
Excellent communication skills, vision, personal credibility and the ability to initiate and drive through change on a substantial scale will also be essential.
Although the Agency's business is in leading-edge technological research, a scientific qualification is not essential.
Based at the Agency's Headquarters at Pyestock, near Farnborough, Hants, this appointment will be for a term of 3–5 years, with the possibility of renewal.
In order to secure someone with outstanding qualifications and experience for this demanding appointment, an attractive and fully competitive remunerations package, and substantial performance bonus, will be negotiated.
Relocation assistance may also be available.
For further details and an application form (to be returned by 4 March 1991) write to Civil Service Commission, Alencon Link, Basingstoke, Hants RG  JB, or telephone Basingstoke  (answering service operates outside office hours).
Please quote ref: g/8765.
The Civil Service is an equal opportunities employer
HAZLETON UK
AGROCHEMICALS — SECTION MANAGERS
In order to further develop our services to the Agrochemical Industry we wish to create two appointments at Section Manager level.
PLANT AND SOIL METABOLISM (Ref C15)
To be responsible for managing an expanding team working on environmental fate studies in soil and water.
RESIDUES CHEMISTRY (Ref C16)
To be responsible for method development and analysis of pesticides in crops and environmental samples.
Candidates should have a degree or PhD in Chemistry or Biochemistry and appropriate extensive experience within the Agrochemical or related industry.
The ability to operate as part of a management team and to manage an expanding group is essential.
Development of facilities will be a key feature of both positions.
In return for your commitment, we can offer a competitive salary benefits package.
We also offer relocation assistance to this attractive part of the Yorkshire Dales.
If you are interested in joining us, please write with full CV indicating current salary to: The Human Resources Department, Hazelton UK, Otley Road, Harrogate HG  PY.
Telephone .
Hazelton UK is a major subsidiary of the world's largest provider of chemical and biological contract research and is a leader in the field of product safety evaluation.
HAZLETON UK 
a CORNING Laboratory Services Company
MRC
Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology
RESEARCH ASSISTANT
Applications are invited for the post of Research Assistant to work on the structure, function and assembly of the nuclear envelope.
Applicants should have a degree in biochemistry, molecular biology, cell biology or a similar background.
Experience with recombinant DNA methods would be an advantage.
The applicant will work as part of a small group, studying the structure of the nuclear envelope and the dynamics of its assembly during cell division.
The post will entail primarily the expression and mutagensis of nuclear envelope protein cDNA in E. coli and other systems and the purification of the material produced.
Some involvement in the structural characterisation of these proteins will also be required.
For further details contact Dr Murray Stewart 0223–402463.
The post is available immediately and will be either a Higher Scientific Officer with a salary range of £  –£  per annum or a Scientific Officer with a salary range of £9907–£  per annum.
The grade and salary will depend on the applicant's qualifications and experience.
Optional MRC Pension Scheme providing 4.5% non-superannuable supplement.
Applications, including full CV and names and addresses of two professional referees should be sent by 8 March 1991, quoting reference SS/2331, to The Personnel Officer, Medical Research Council, Hills Road, Cambridge CB  QH.
The Medical Research Council is an Equal Opportunities Employer.
BOEHRINGER INGELHEIM
AN EXCELLENT OPPORTUNITY TO ENTER THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY
Clinical Research Associates
A decision to expand the already extensive and diverse range of international research programmes has created the need for additional Clinical Research Associates.
These are ideal opportunities for people who wish to enter the industry and gain a firm grounding in clinical research work.
The appointments are for a fixed term of 12–18 months on the first instance.
Opportunities are available in the rheumatology and respiratory fields.
Responsibilities will encompass close liaison with hospital physicians, trial initiation and monitoring of clinical trials to Good Clinical Practice standard.
Work is in hand on Phase II and III clinical trials.
These post would suit recent life science graduates or people with a paramedical background, particularly nursing.
Experience in the pharmaceutical industry or relevant therapeutic areas, although advantageous, is not essential as we will provide full training.
Self motivation, initiative, excellent written and verbal communication skills and attention to detail will, however, be vital.
Clearly there is considerable travel within the UK but we would expect you to spend one or two days a week in our offices so you would need to live within a 100 mile radius of Bracknell.
We are offering an attractive remuneration package including a company car and other larger company benefits.
These opportunities provide excellent career openings into the pharmaceutical industry and extensive training will be given on all aspects of GCP.
We would like to fill these positions quickly so please write with full cv to Gwynneth Clay, at Boeringer Ingelheim Limited, Ellesfield Avenue, Bracknell, Berkshire RG  YS by our closing date of 25 February.
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
TWO POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH POSITIONS
PROBABILISTIC AND STATISTICAL MODELLING OF DATA SEQUENCES
These complementary SERC-funded posts, each with an earmarked SUN Sparc-2 workstation, involve the development of theoretical models to gain insight into the structure and evolution of DNA.
The successful applicants will form part of an active research group led by Professor Peter Donnelly, Dr Richard Nichols and Dr David Balding in the Schools of Mathematical and Biological Sciences at QMW.
The posts are funded for up to three years and are available as soon as convenient.
Applicants for the first post should have a background in any of applied probability, statistics, mathematical biology or population genetics.
For the second post, applicants should have experience in measure-valued diffusions and the coalescent approach to genetics.
Salary will be on the RA 1A scale in the range £  up to £  per annum inclusive.
PCL
School of Biological and Health Sciences
Part-time MSc/Postgraduate Diploma in Biotechnology
The CNAA MSc Biotechnology is a seven term, one day per week course starting in October 1991.
Modules in the underpinning discipline of Microbial Technology, Biocatalysts and Gene Manipulation are studied in the first year.
The contributions of these disciplines to the development of biotechnological processes in Plant, Food and Environmental Biotechnology are studied in the second year.
An experimental research project is undertaken in the seventh term, usually at the students place of employment.
The course uses specialists facilities and draws upon the expertise of lecturers at both the Polytechnic of Central London and South Bank Polytechnic.
The Postgraduate Diploma in Biotechnology may be taken by successfully completing the first year and a literature project.
Balancing Studies will run in the summer preceding enrolment and provide refresher/up-dating courses in microbiology, biochemistry and microbial and molecular genetics.
Suggested entrance requirements are a degree or equivalent in an appropriate discipline or HNC/HND with several years' laboratory experience.
Applicants may be required to take one or more Balancing Studies courses as a condition for entering the course.
PCL THE POLYTECHNIC OF CENTRAL LONDON
ANGUS
FINE CHEMICALS LTD, CORK PROCESS DEVELOPMENT — SOUTHERN IRELAND
ANGUS Fine Chemicals Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of ANGUS Chemical Company, Chicago, having established a new substantial fine chemical multi-purpose custom manufacturing facility at Ringaskiddy, Co.
Cork, has vacancies for:
SENIOR CHEMISTS
Qualified to MSc or PhD level, the successful candidates having supervisory potential with relevant in-depth experience, will join an established development group working on fine chemical processes from customer production through bench, pilot and full scale production.
SENIOR CHEMICAL ENGINEERS
The scale of operations and seniority of the positions require qualified chemical engineers with substantial experience in the fine chemical or similar industry.
Assignments will include process development, pilot plant and full scale production, project management and customer interface.
SENIOR ANALYTICAL CHEMISTS
The ideal candidate will have BSc qualifications and will have over two years experience in modern analytical techniques and quality systems requiring FDA and other international standards approval.
While all applications are welcome, nevertheless, it is unlikely that candidates (male or female) under the age of 30 will have the depth or width of experience required for these positions.
Candidates with the necessary qualifications and experience and who are attracted to career opportunities with a company offering competitive conditions, employment with a friendly working atmosphere and in an attractive location, are invited to apply by forwarding a CV or completed application form (phone 021– ) before February 28, 1991:
Bede scientific
require a SOFTWARE SCIENTIST
Bede Scientific are one of the world's leading manufacturers of high resolution X-ray diffraction systems for the semiconductor industry.
We are currently seeking a recent graduate to join our software team, located on the University of Warwick Science Park.
This role will involve the development of the scientific and mathematical aspects of programs for theoretical simulation of x-ray diffraction and topographic imaging, and statistical and other data analysis.
The ideal candidate will hold a good degree in theoretical physics or physical chemistry and have strong mathematical and computing skills.
He/she will be self-motivated and be able to work as part of a team on a variety of challenging projects.
A good starting salary commensurate with qualifications and experience will be offered and a willingness to make a positive contribution to the overall success of this highly innovative and rapidly growing company will be reflected in future remuneration.
There is also the opportunity to register for a part-time PhD degree at the University of Warwick.
RSRE
EXPERIENCED AND NEWLY QUALIFIED ENGINEERS AND SCIENTISTS
Up to £20k+
The Royal Signals & Radar Establishment is at the forefront of research to develop sophisticated Air Defence and Air Traffic Control Systems.
Air Defence is a key capability for the effective defence of the United Kingdom and poses major technical challenges to combat the ever-changing threat.
Air Traffic Control is equally demanding.
RSRE has vacancies for graduates and professionals in a number of expanding programmes involving the following key technology areas: Digital electronics, Communications systems, Radar and Electro-optical Sensors, Microwave circuits, Real-Time Signal Processing, Software Engineering, Modelling and Simulation, and System Engineering.
We are looking for Engineers and Scientists who are keen to make an impact on leading research projects which require novel and cost-effective technical solutions.
Prior experience is desirable but not essential.
You should be a graduate in Electrical/Electronic Engineering, Physics, Mathematics, Computing or a related discipline.
Final year undergraduates and those possessing HNC or HND are also invited to apply.
To maintain and enhance its international reputation, RSRE demands a high-standard of recruit, but in return offers excellent opportunities for a successful and rewarding career.
Training will be provided for recruits who have the ability to adapt their skills to the needs of our programmes.
Career progression is planned and regularly reviewed to ensure promotion potential is recognised.
The working environment is excellent and our project teams enjoy superb facilities, which include sophisticated instrumentation and computing equipment.
Interaction with UK Industry is usually part of each programme, and opportunities are increasing to serve on international collaborative research programmes.
RSRE is situated in idyllic surroundings at the foot of the Malvern Hills with outstanding cultural and recreational amenities.
Salary up to £20,000 plus, depending on experience and qualifications.
Assistance with relocation expenses up to £5000 may be available.
RSE
We are an equal opportunities employer and are fully committed to Equal Opportunity policies.
We positively welcome applications from suitably qualified individuals irrespective of racial origin, sex or disability.
Radar & Microwave Electronics Electro Optics Computer Science Information Fusion Missile Systems Air Traffic Control
CSIRO
Image Analysis
SOLVE REAL PROBLEMS
Division of Mathematics and Statistics, Sydney — Australia
Through our research we aim to develop and improve methods for analysing new types of data for industry.
we wish to appoint several people with outstanding research potential to work on problems in image analysis, particularly pattern recognition in microscopic images, image enhancement and the analysis of spatial data.
You will need a strong desire to use research to solve real problems rather than unrealistic mathematical abstractions.
You should have a PhD with a strong statistical or mathematical emphasis, preferably with experience in the above mentioned areas.
People with excellent undergraduate degrees should not be deterred from applying.
Attractive salaries and working conditions are available for the right scientists.
If you are interested in working on challenging problems please contact the Program Manager Dr Murray Cameron on 61–2–  or fax 61–2–416 9317 or email: murray
syd.dms.csiro.au.
He can provide details of the job, our selection criteria and career opportunities.
Please send your application including details of your skills, qualifications and work achievements, marked ‘Confidential’, to: The Human Resource Manager, CSIRO Division of Mathematics and Statistics, PO Box 93, North Ryde, NSW 2113 Australia.
Closing date for applications: 22 March 1991.
CSIRO IS AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES EMPLOYER
NATIONAL RIVERS AUTHORITY — SOUTHERN REGION
Technical Assistants/Trainee Scientists
The National Rivers Authority is responsible for environmental protection, fisheries, conservation, water resources and flood defence for England and Wales.
In its role as Guardian of the Water Environment the NRA aims to use its extensive statutory powers to control pollution and to improve the quality of rivers, estuaries and coastal waters.
The NRA Southern Region is now looking for Technical Assistants and Trainee Scientists to be based at the new analytical laboratory at Waterlooville in Hampshire which will be the main centre for chemical, biological and microbiological analysis of effluent and surface water samples collected throughout the Region.
As Quality Control/Data Scientists you will be responsible for important quality control and audit procedures for the laboratory's analytical functions, and be involved in the operation and management of laboratory and Regional Data systems.
You will assist in the achievement and enforcement of NAMAS accreditation and the implementation of laboratory safety regulations.
As Investigation Scientists you will be responsible for carrying out a wide variety of environmental monitoring and impact assessment investigations in rivers, estuaries and coastal waters and play an important role in installing and maintaining automatic quality monitoring stations.
You will be required to analyse and report scientific data.
Appointments will be as Technical Assistants or Trainee Scientists.
Technical Assistants (2 posts)
£11,370–£ 
You should have a degree in Chemistry, Biology or a related discipline, with 1–2 years post-qualification experience in an analytical laboratory or of environmental surveys, and be familiar with the use of computer systems or automatic instrumentation.
Trainee Scientists (3 posts) £6,300–£11,370
Candidates should be qualified to degree level or equivalent or to A-level with at least 2 years relevant experience.
All candidates should have a driving licence.
LONDON SCHOOL OF HYGIENE & TROPICAL MEDICINE
BACTERIAL MOLECULAR GENETICS UNIT
DEPARTMENT OF CLINICAL SCIENCES
PCR IN THE DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF LEPROSY
Applications are invited from postgraduate or postdoctoral scientists to join a project on the application of the polymerase chain reaction to leprosy.
Strong overseas links have been developed, and it is envisaged that the successful applicant will eventually test the methodology in the field.
This project will interact with a large number of other research activities on the molecular biology and immunology of mycobacterial diseases.
The project has been funded by the British Leprosy Relief Association, LEPRA, for three years.
Previous experience in PCR or molecular biology techniques would be an advantage.
Salary will be up to £  per annum according to age, qualifications and experience.
THE ROYAL MARSDEN HOSPITAL FULHAM ROAD, LONDON SW  JJ
CHEMICAL PATHOLOGY MLSO 1/TRAINEE MLSO
Required for the Chemical Pathology Department at this post graduate teaching hospital.
The department is equipped with full automated analysers, on line to the hospital main frame computer.
Applicants for MLSO 1 should be State Registered and qualified in Chemical Pathology.
Applicants for Trainee MLSO should be studying for State Registration, or possess a science-based degree in Chemistry of Biology of two ‘A’ levels in Chemistry or Biology.
Benefits include discount holidays, a Superannuation Scheme and a Car Leasing Scheme.
Research Engineer
Development of state-of-the-art wind turbine technology
The Wind Energy Group (WEG) is a jointly-owned Taylor Woodrow Construction and British Aerospace company that designs, builds and operates medium and large-scale wind turbines.
Prominent in the worldwide development of wind power, WEG is currently working on a range of advanced wind turbine designs — from 300 kW to multi-megawatt size — which are supported by a comprehensive R&D programme that includes work on aerodynamics, fatigue, adaptive control systems, transmission and materials testing.
To meet increasing R&D commitments, WEG now requires a Research Engineer to be involved in the planning and management of research projects, the analysis and interpretation of data, and the reporting of results to both the design team concerned and external clients.
Educated to at least degree level (preferably PhD) in a mechanical/aeronautical engineering or other relevant discipline, you should have practical experience relevant to the monitoring of and interpretation of data from prototype wind turbine installations and associated meteorological masts.
The position carries an attractive salary, commensurate with qualifications and experience, and a comprehensive benefits package including BUPA, contributory pension scheme with life assurance, and the possibility of a car.
Above all, it offers an exciting opportunity to help develop the primary UK renewable energy technology.
A British Aerospace PLC and Taylor Woodrow Construction Limited Company
POLYTECHNIC SOUTH WEST
Faculty of Technology — Plymouth
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
1 Research Assistant or 2 Research Students in Mathematics
Salary up to £18,108 per annum— depending on age and experience.
Polytechnic South West is a leading degree-awarding institution — which provides quality higher education to some 11,500 students on four campuses situated in the attractive South West of England.
The area possesses excellent cultural, leisure and recreational facilities.
Applicants should possess or expect to obtain shortly a good Honours Degree in Mathematics.
However, candidates with qualifications in a related Engineering or Science field with a good mathematical background may also be considered.
The successful candidate will be expected to register for a higher degree and will also contribute to the teaching programme.
To commence as soon as possible, the appointment is for an initial period of two years with a possible extension of one further year and includes the following areas:
•The prediction and measurement of surface shear stresses in non-Newtonian fluids.
•The theoretical and experimental study of the rheological properties of visco-elastic materials.
•Modelling the carbon-nitrogen cycle in the ocean and its role in global warming.
Silsoe College
A School of the Cranfield Institute of Technology
Department of Agricultural Water Management
LECTURER IN WATER MANAGEMENT
Following the secondment of a member of staff overseas, a vacancy for the above post has arisen in the Department of Agricultural Water Management.
The successful applicant will be expected to contribute to the teaching of a range of postgraduate and undergraduate programmes.
Existing MSc courses include Soil and Water Engineering, Irrigation Water Management, Irrigation Engineering, Rural Water Supplies, Drainage and Reclamation Engineering, Dryland Farming and Environmental Water Management.
The multi-disciplinary staff are actively involved in research, the provision of short courses and consultancy services.
All the work is internationally based.
Staff are encouraged to take initiatives and to develop new areas of activity.
Applicants should be graduates who have experience in water management issues related to agriculture and/or the rural environment in general, including water quality and pollution.
Preference will be given to candidates with a record of achievement in research supported by publications.
The post is initially for a period of two years, commencing as soon as possible.
Salary will be in the range £  –£  per annum, depending on experience and qualifications.
UCL
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH ASSISTANTSHIP and CASE STUDENTSHIPS in GLOBAL TOPOGRAPHIC MAPPING FROM SPACE
The Earth's topography is the boundary condition on the solid Earth and is the surface on which we live.
Satellite altimeter data from the European Earth Resources Satellite will soon be available to form the core of a global database describing the topography.
Applications are invited from suitably qualified candidates to establish the methods for inverting the satellite observations, that will estimate the topography and quantify the errors.
The post would suit a person with a background in linear mathematics and estimation problems.
There is also an opportunity for a CASE studentship, leading to a PhD in work associated with this project.
The work will be carried out as part of a larger collaboration with the Mullard Space Science Laboratory.
The appointment will be for two years in the first instance.
The post is supported by the RAE.
Applicants for the postdoctoral post should send a curriculum vitae and the names of two referees to Dr D. J. Wingham, Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London WC1E 7JE.
Informal enquiries and applicants for the CASE studentships should approach Dr Wingham on , ext 3055.
Equal Opportunities Employer.
UNIVERSITY OF KENT AT CANTERBURY
Physics Laboratory
RESEARCH STUDENTSHIPS
Applications are invited for SERC, EEC and other research studentships tenable from October 1991, leading to a PhD or MSc in the following areas:
Optics (including optoelectronics) Space Sciences, Astrophysics and Planetology, Condensed Matter Physics (including Neutron and X-ray scattering, NMR computational physics and the theory of fluids), and the theory of Elementary Particles.
Applicants should have, or expect to have, a good honours degree in Physics, Chemistry, Engineering or Mathematics.
Applicants with suitable experience in industry may qualify for special awards.
UNIVERSITY COLLEGE LONDON
Biotechnology Studentships PhD Research Studies
UCL is the SERC Interdisciplinary Research Centre for Biochemical Engineering.
As befits a national centre, the research team is supported by superb equipment for research on fermentation, downstream processing, biotransformation engineering, bioprocess monitoring and control, and process simulation.
Research studentships are available for biochemical, chemical and electronic engineers and for biochemists, microbiologists and others with appropriates training.
PhD projects are integrated with the main Centre programmes and include CASE awards with companies such as British Biotechnology, Pharmacia and SmithKline Beecham.
MSc Course
UCL is a world leader in postgraduate/post-experience teaching of biochemical engineering for graduate chemical engineers and bioscientists.
The College holds SERC Biotechnology Directorate Studentships for postgraduate taught courses, based on the quality of this calendar year course and the demand for its graduates by the pharmaceutical, chemical, food and waste treatment industries and by new biotechnology companies.
Companies also use the course for post-experience training.
INTRODUCTORY EVENING COURSE IN NEUROSCIENCE
This lecture course is intended to provide a basic introduction to Neuroscience across a broad range of topics from molecular neurobiology to behavioural psychology.
Clinical topics on psychiatric and neurological disorders will also be covered.
The course is aimed primarily at research workers (eg PhD students, technicians, postdoctoral researchers and clinicians) working in the neuroscience field but is open to anyone interested in broadening their background knowledge of Neuroscience.
Major topics will be:
•Neuroanatomy and Pathology
•Neurochemistry/Neurophysiology/Neuropharmacology
•Molecular Neurobiology and Neurogenetics
•Behavioural Neuroscience
•Development and Degeneration of the Nervous System
•Vision
•Computer Models of the Brain
•Neurology and Psychiatry
The course will be held at the Institute of Psychiatry on Tuesday evenings (6.00–9.15) in term time from 5 March 1991 to 18 June 1991.
Fees: £200 for academic institutions £400 for industrial and research establishments
For further details please contact The Secretary, Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park, London SE5 8AF.
Telephone:, ext 3259.
HARPER ADAMS
The one year Postgraduate Diploma in Crop Protection (CNAA validated) gives the ideal start to a good career.
Successful completion of the course leads to exemption from the BASIS examinations.
The employment record of the course is excellent.
Applicants should normally have a degree or Higher National Diploma in an agricultural science or related (including geography) subject.
Applications from mature students or other entrants with relevant work experience will be considered.
Search and Selection Limited
STATISTICIAN
Surrey c. £20,000
Our client is a leading international manufacturer of pharmaceutical and consumer products, with an impressive growth record which is based on a major commitment to Research and Development.
Biometrics is a key contributor to their success, and recognition of this has led to an opportunity for a Statistician to complete a team of three.
The Statistician will provide input to the design and analysis of OTC product trials, and act as a consultant to the R&D staff.
He/she should be capable of communicating and presenting statistical concepts in a non-technical manner as well as demonstrating a self-confident and outgoing style.
Qualified to degree and post-graduate level, or alternatively experienced in applied statistics — the preference is for both.
International involvement will require Transatlantic and European travel.
The position carries with it an attractive benefits package and career prospects within the Company are excellent.
Interest applicants should send a full curriculum vitae to Robert Kilpatrick at:
COMMON SERVICES AGENCY
SCOTTISH HEALTH SERVICE SCOTTISH NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE NATIONAL SCIENCE LABORATORY
RESEARCH ASSISTANT
(Chromotography Support)
£  –£ 
Based in the National Science Laboratory in Edinburgh, with links and meeting throughout the UK, you'll join a small team refining methods for the production of blood proteins.
Under the direction of the Laboratory Senior Scientist you'll be involved in chromotographic methods investigation, including the evaluation of innovative synthetic materials, often working in small individual projects.
You should hold a relevant professional qualification and have in depth laboratory experience with the ability to work in a small team.
Experience in HPLC/FPLC, and electrophoresis/electrofocussing would be an advantage.
This is a DTI-link grant funded post of 32 months duration.
COMMON SERVICES AGENCY Working For Health
SOUTH WEST THAMES RHA
offers two training posts with the opportunity to study for an M.Sc at the University of Surrey, Guildford.
A. In CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY, by means of two year sandwich course commencing 1st October 1991.
Applicants should have, or expect to obtain, a good honours degree (or its equivalent) in chemistry, biochemistry or other relevant biological science by that date.
During the parts of the course spent away from the University, students will work in a specified hospital laboratory or laboratories in the Region.
B. Or MEDICAL PHYSICS, by means of a two year block release course commencing the last two weeks in September 1991.
Applicants should have, or expect to obtain, a good honours degree (or its equivalent) either in Physics or with Physics as a principal subject by that date.
During the parts of he scheme spent away from the University, the student will work in specified hospitals within the Region.
Applicants for both schemes are invited from suitably qualified persons already in the National Health Service and from graduates and prospective graduates wishing to enter the Service.
Trainees are paid on Clinical Scientist grade A, which is currently £9,239 p.a. increasing by annual increments.
Where applicable, a London Weighting Allowance of £1702, £1012 or £160 p.a. will also be paid.
In-service applicants may retain their current terms and conditions of service.
Closing date for receipt of applications is Friday 15th March 1991.
Interviews will be held in early May 1991.
Please quote the appropriate reference.
Working Towards Equal Opportunities.
SOUTH WEST THAMES Regional Health Authority
LOTHIAN HEALTH BOARD
Lothian Area Cytogenetics Laboratory Royal Hospital for Sick Children Edinburgh
SENIOR CLINICAL CYTOGENETICIST
(Scale Point B14–16)
A vacancy has arisen in this laboratory for a Senior Grade Cytogeneticist (regraded to Scale Point B14–16).
The laboratory provides a comprehensive diagnostic service for South East Scotland and applicants, who should be at least 1st or 2nd Class Honours Graduates in an appropriate science, should have good experience in all aspects of Clinical Cytogenetics, including processing of Chorionoc Villus biopsies.
Requests to visit the laboratory should be directed to Miss Patricia M. Ellis.
Telephone , ext 272.
CLINICAL CYTOGENETICIST
Grade B (Temporary)
A vacancy has arisen for a Clinical Cytogeneticist (Grade B) in this laboratory, which provides a diagnostic service for South East Scotland.
The post will be held initially on a six month temporary contract.
Applications are invited from 1st or 2nd Class Honours Graduates in the Biological Sciences.
Experience in Clinical Cytogenetics would be valuable but is not essential.
WARD ADVERTISING
DEVELOPMENT PHARMACIST OR CHEMIST
Unusual breadth, genuinely novel presentations, and refreshingly commercial timescales 
Up to £16,000 inc. bonus M4 Corridor
In a company with a substantial reputation for innovative dosage forms, and expertise in their manufacture, the formulation development activity is bound to be intellectually more demanding.
When there is also a close involvement in manufacturing process development, and a culture in which there is a firm commitment to meeting agreed timescales, the task is even richer.
The business operates in a genuinely international context (with a bias towards the USA) which demands sensitivity to world-wide regulatory and market requirements.
More importantly, the company's development people have to be able to handle simultaneously a wide range of projects, often at different stages (feasibility, formulation development, process scale-up) and generally on different major compounds; it is experience which develops both scientific competence and real commercial awareness.
Ideal candidates will be graduate pharmacists or physical chemists with at least two years' experience in developing formulations, a real interest in dosage form innovation and a firm belief that projects can be completed quicker (and probably better).
They'll possess particular skills in communications and be ambitious for a career in which commercial realities will be at least as important as scientific development.
Please send full career details, quoting reference HT/111A, to Dave Denny, Ward Advertising Limited, Academy House, 26–28 Sackville Street, London W1X 2QL 
WARD ADVERTISING LIMITED
Recruitment Advertising
ICI
Mathematical Modelling and Risk Assessment in TOXICOLOGY
ICI's Central Toxicology Laboratory offers the best of both worlds.
A stimulating working environment set in one of England's most attractive rural areas.
With superb research facilities and growing international demand for our expertise, CTL gives you the opportunity to work at the forefront of toxicological research.
We are currently seeking a Postdoctoral Research Fellow for a two year appointment who will be involved in at least one of the following key research areas:
•The development of physiologically based mathematical models of skin absorption.
The work is targeted at identifying the fundamental mechanisms governing dermal penetration of chemicals and developing predictive mathematical models.
This is linked to an existing experimental programme including human studies,
•Developing methods for risk assessment of chemicals which cause toxicity during development.
The central objective being to utilise study data in a reliable and  quantitative manner to predict effects on human health.
Qualified to PhD, you will possess experience of utilising mathematical modelling of physical or biological systems.
Whilst experience of handling data from biological experiments is desirable, an ability to learn a new area of science and to communicate  quantitative ideas to a general scientific audience is essential.
Closing date for applications: 6th March 1991.
ICI is an equal opportunities employer.
GREENPEACE
RESEARCH/ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT
This post is initially for a six month period
The Greenpeace International Atmosphere and Energy Unit (based in the UK office) requires an assistant to provide general administrative support and help co-ordinate the energy research programme.
The assistant will also carry out selected research projects.
The successful applicant will be able to use their own initiative, have good communication skills and previous knowledge of energy/atmosphere issues.
Computer spreadsheet and word processing experience is essential, as is the ability to work under pressure.
Salary scale £  –£  pa (pro rata).
Greenpeace is striving to be an equal opportunities employer.
Amersham
BIOCHEMIST
A DEVELOPMENT ROLE WITH COMMERCIAL END-USERS IN MIND
South Wales
Up to £22,000
Amersham International is a world leader in life sciences.
The excellence of our products has created major markets for us in healthcare, research and industry.
We are currently developing a new range of pharmaceutical testing products.
As part of our continued expansion we now have a vacancy for a highly motivated enzymologist to join this development team.
You should have a PhD in Biochemistry or have relevant practical experience, and possess a keen interest in the application of specific enzymes and receptors.
Candidates should have experience in the assay of receptors/enzymes and the preparation of membranes from biological tissues.
This is a role for a commercially aware innovator who works well in a team.
The working environment is conducive to the achievement of excellence and the work is intellectually challenging.
For this position you'll find a salary to match your experience and the benefits of a major international organisation, including 25 days annual holiday and pension scheme.
Amersham Bringing science to life
THE ASSOCIATION OF THE BRITISH PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY
the industry association for manufacturers of prescription medicines.
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
An opportunity for someone with knowledge of regulatory affairs in the Pharmaceutical Industry to broaden their experience and work on international policy questions affecting the industry up to 1992 and beyond.
This position is in the European and International Affairs Department in the ABPI, although the job will also include responsibility for UK registration affairs.
It involves the analysis of issues affecting the industry, preparation of reviews and reports and the development and use of data management systems.
It also offers opportunities for wide ranges of contacts with the industry and the opportunity to represent the views of the industry to other bodies.
This is an exciting new opening for a scientist with good communication skills who is interested in the future of the pharmaceutical industry.
Applicants must have a degree in science/pharmacy, knowledge of regulatory affairs and a desire to broaden their experience in international affairs.
The salary and fringe benefits will be commensurate with age and experience.
The University of Queensland
Equal opportunity in employment is University policy
Electron Microscope Centre and Department of Mining & Metallurgical Engineering
Research Fellow — Senior Research Fellow (Ceramics, Engineering Materials Design)
Pending final confirmation, a major project is planned to investigate the commercial production of high temperature superconducting oxides using a novel process based on solution chemistry and powder processing/forming.
Accordingly, there will be two positions available for scientists with a minimum of a PhD and research experience in materials science, particularly in ceramics fabrication, inorganic synthesis, engineering materials design or powder processing.
The positions will be available from the date of appointment until December 31st, 1993.
The research team includes highly motivated materials characterisation experts (Drs.
John Barry and Tim White and Professor Gordon Dunlop) with whom the successful applicants are expected to interact on a daily basis.
The research team will be supported by state-of-the-art processing and characterisation tools and extensive workshop and technical assistance within the two departments.
Successful applicants may be eligible for assistance with travel and removal expenses.
Salaries for these positions depend upon experience, but range from $28,792 to $43,096 for Research Fellows and from $43,984 to $51,015 for Senior Research Fellows.
Applicants with experience in high T c superconducting oxides and who are available for employment before May 30th are encouraged to reply immediately by facsimile to Dr Ian D R Mackinnon, Director, Electron Microscope Centre, The University of Queensland, Q, 4072, Australia
THE SOUTH STAFFORDSHIRE WATER COMPANY
RESOURCES OFFICER
WALSALL £12,604–£13,955 per annum Duties include the day to day implementation of the Company's borehole protection policy.
This largely involves the receiving, processing and responding to planning applications from Local Authorities, as well as maintaining records.
You will assist in other aspects including: demand forecasting and management and resource investigations.
You will need to be methodical and able to communicate effectively with the ability to operate largely unsupervised.
You should be educated to honours degree level in an Earth Science.
Recently qualified graduates and suitably qualified, mature candidates will be considered.
MRC
MEDICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
National Institute for Medical Research Division of Physical Biochemistry
SCIENTIFIC OFFICER/HIGHER SCIENTIFIC OFFICER
Applications are invited for the post of Scientific Officer/Higher Scientific Officer to work with Dr Noel Buckley in a research programme aimed at examining the transcriptional control of neurotransmitter receptor gene expression.
The project consists of isolation and analysis of genomic clones encoding neurotransmitter receptor genes and their expression in foreign host cells and in transgenic mice.
Expression will be monitored at the levels of transcription, mRNA and protein using a wide variety of molecular and cellular biological approaches.
Experience in molecular biology, cell culture or receptor characterisation would be useful but not essential since full training will be provided.
Equally important is the candidate's ability and willingness to participate fully and actively in the research programme and to work independently with minimal supervision.
The salary will be on Civil Service Scientific Officer/Higher Scientific Officer scale which rises to a maximum of £  per annum(starting salary is dependent on experience) inclusive of London Weighting with the possibility of additional increments awarded on the basis of performance.
An optional pension scheme providing a 4.5 per cent non-superannuable supplement is available.
Annual leave is 22 days plus public holidays and 2.5 privilege days per annum.
The Institute is situated is pleasant rural surroundings and offers excellent sports, recreational and social facilities.
The closing date for applications is 7 March 1991.
The MRC is an Equal Opportunities Employer.
Smoking is actively discouraged.
PATERSON INSTITUTE FOR CANCER RESEARCH
POSTDOCTORAL SCIENTIST
A three-year appointment is available for studies on the distribution and biological effects of radionuclides in the environment.
Knowledge of some aspects of radiomorphology, toxicology, radiobiology, or physiology would be useful.
This is a collaborative project between the Paterson Institute for Cancer Research and the University of Manchester Medical School.
The study is funded by the United Kingdom Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research.
Salary is within non-clinical scientists grades, up to a starting maximum of £  per annum.
Applicants should note that smoking is strongly discouraged in the Institute.
An Equal Opportunity Employer
UEA NORWICH
LECTURESHIPS IN ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES
Applications are invited for the second of two new lecturer posts awarded by the UFC Review of Meteorology to the School of Environmental Sciences.
Applicants for this post should be interested in modelling studies in atmospheric sciences concerned with changes in the Earth's climate.
Appointments will be made at a point on the Lecturer A scale (£  to £  per annum) with promotion to the B scale (£17 455 to £  per annum ) as appropriate.
UAE is an Equal Opportunities Employer
ICI Seeds
EEC-funded
Post Doctoral Research Scientist
Isolation and Cloning of Antifungal Proteins c. £17,000
We are looking for someone to join an international team working on the identification and cloning of antifungal proteins from plants.
The project is part funded by the EEC under the ECLAIR initiative.
The team is based at ICI Jealott's Hill Berkshire, UK and the University of Leuven, Belgium.
The successful candidate will be involved in the isolation, identification and determination of the biological activity of antifungal proteins of plant origin.
The most interesting example will then be the subject of a gene cloning programme.
The ideal candidate will have experience of protein purification and gene cloning and should have an appreciation of plant defence mechanisms.
The position is for two years.
The successful candidate will be based at Jealott's Hill but will spend an initial period at Leuven.
We offer a good starting salary and a range of benefits, including subsidised staff restaurant and 25 days' annual leave (after qualifying period).
To apply, send your c.v., quoting ref.
MICROBIOLOGY 20/NS to: Mrs Julie King, Personnel Department, ICI Agrochemicals, Jealott's Hill Research Station, Bracknell, Berks RG  EY.
Closing date: 28th February 1991.
ICI is an equal opportunities employer.
ICI Seeds GROWING FOR A BETTER FUTURE
EAMES JONES JUDGE HAWKINGS
Senior Clinical Research Associate
A pioneering international role
London c. £26,000 + car
One of Japan's top ten pharmaceutical companies, which already has a subsidiary in the USA, has recently opened offices in Europe as part of its strategy of internationalisation.
The company is currently establishing its clinical research operation to develop its promising compounds in Europe and the UK.
As Senior Clinical Research Associate you will play a key role in this pioneering phase, assisting in the design and implementation of programmes for clinical research and advising on the establishment of standard operating procedures to set the foundation for the future.
This is a unique opportunity to contribute to building a function from scratch into a high-quality, effective clinical research operation.
A life science graduate already well experienced as a CRA, you should ideally have worked with antibacterial products.
Experience of the cardiovascular and immunology areas would also be an advantage.
Salary and other benefits are excellent and include a company car and help with relocation.
EAMES JONES JUDGE HAWKINGS •PERSONNEL CONSULTANCY •SEARCH & SELECTION •MANAGEMENT CONSULTANCY
Loughborough University of Technology
LECTURER IN MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
To further strengthen our established team researching and teaching engineering applications of microprocessors.
Departmental interests in this area include the design and development of mechatronic products and systems, microprocessor based instrumentation control and signal processing.
Appointment will be made on the Lecturer A scale £  –£  or Lecturer B scale £  –£  per annum depending on qualifications and experience.
NRA Thames Region
Water is a limited resource and its effective management involves the NRA in a variety of activities.
In particular, planning for the future, especially public water supply needs, is a major challenge as demands in the South-East continue to grow.
Recently, plans have been announced regarding the evaluation of major new resource development options for the Thames Region.
This will significantly increase the scale and scope of our activities and to meet this challenge, two new positions have been created within our Water Resources Strategic Planning team.
SENIOR PLANNER
Reading to £19,350
A focus for contact on all issues related to the evaluation and promotion of major new resource proposals, you will co-ordinate with consultants and other departments within the Authority on a variety of projects.
Able to work with initiative and minimum supervision you should be a graduate with a high level of communication skills, several years' experience in water resources and previous experience in dealing with engineering/environmental consultants on water related projects.
PLANNER — Resource Modelling
Reading to £17,436
Responsible for water resource modelling and model development, you will assist in assessing options for future resource developments and in formulation of new operating strategies.
This is a career grade post from which you will gain experience in a range of resource planning projects.
A numerate graduate you should have a working knowledge of FORTRAN computer applications, ideally 1–2 years£ experience in hydrology or water resources.
If you would like to join us please telephone  or write stating the appropriate reference number to the Personnel Department, National Rivers Authority, Thames Region, Kings Meadow House, Kings Meadow Road, Reading, Berks RG  DQ.
The closing date for applications is 4 March 1991.
NRA is an Equal Opportunities employer.
RHM
SENSORY ANALYSIS PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Are you a sensory analyst, with a first degree qualification, who has two or three years experience of sensory analysis and is interested in developing a career in the food industry?
The Ranks Hovis McDougall Group is one of the UK's international food manufacturers, boasting many well-known and successful brand names, such as Mr Kipling, Hovis, McDougalls, Robertsons, Sharwoods and Bisto.
At our central research and engineering centre in High Wycombe, we have a vacancy for a Project Manager in the Sensory Analysis team.
You would be responsible for running sensory analysis projects according to requirements you agree with clients from marketing, technical or production areas, using resources which include up-to-date computerised facilities and support from our Statistics section.
There will also be opportunities to develop or practice consultancy and training skills.
We offer a competitive salary, together with excellent terms and conditions of employment.
RHM RHM RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING LTD
THE UNIVERSITY OF SHEFFIELD in collaboration with THE UNIVERSITY OF MANCHESTER
RESEARCH ASSISTANT
THE INTERNATIONAL DAYLIGHT MEASUREMENT PROGRAMME
Applications are invited for a research assistant to work on a three-year SERC-funded programme based at Sheffield University.
The project involves setting up recording stations for continuous measurement of daylight and solar radiation at Manchester and Sheffield, analysis of the measured data, and development of mathematical models of the sky brightness distributions.
Candidates should be graduates in science or engineering and should hold a PhD.
The salary will be in the range £  to £ .
Further details are available from Professor Tregenza at the address below.
Informal enquiries may be made by telephone , ext 4707).
NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE
SOUTH THAMES BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE
FOR SOME PEOPLE, A CAREER IN MEDICAL SCIENCE IS IN THE BLOOD
Medical Laboratory Scientists
Salary: Inclusive of London Weighting and Local Pay Supplement MLSO1 — £  rising to £  Trainee MLSO (Science Degree)— £  Trainee MLSO (Science ‘A’ Levels)— £  rising to £ 
Medical Laboratory Scientists are the lifeblood of an effective health care service.
Without them, many of today's sophisticated techniques would not be carried out, particularly in the vital field of Blood Transfusion.
A career in this critical and challenging area of Medical Science starts by joining the South Thames Blood Transfusion Service.
The Tooting unit is adjacent to St George's Hospital.
We are the biggest Transfusion Service in Britain, serving the needs of over 8.5 million people and processing over 250,0000 donations a year.
We offer excellent training in all aspects of Transfusion Science and help will be given towards State Registration and/or full professional qualifications with paid course and exam fees and time off for study on day release.
State Registration is the key to the door of a highly rewarding professional career and, after further training, appointment to higher grades is possible.
To enter you must have either an approved Science Degree or 2 ‘A’ Levels (including Chemistry) and another Science or Maths subject.
The need to provide a 24-hour service to hospitals means opportunities may occur to participate in a shift scheme which operates, attracting shift allowance payments.
Our library facilities are excellent, as are those for sport.
A subsidised canteen and interest free season ticket loans are additional benefits.
Closing date for (completed) applications 9 March 1991.
TOWER HAMLETS EDUCATION
GETTING IT RIGHT
TAKING YOUR PLACE IN TOWER HAMLETS EDUCATION
SIR JOHN CASS FOUNDATION AND REDCOAT SCHOOL
LABORATORY TECHNICIAN
Grade C £8,404–£9,997 basic plus £1,749 London Weighting Allowance
The Science department works as a team within which the postholder is responsible to the Senior Technician for the technical service to science.
The science department consists of 5 laboratories, together with ancillary rooms, located on one site and is served by 2.5 technicians.
Duties include preparing apparatus and setting up equipment for use in practical classes.
The technician service to the department is provided in such a way as to support equality of opportunity for pupils taught and also for staff employed in the department.
Tower Hamlets Education
Tower Hamlets has transformed local Government by decentralising service delivery and accountability to seven Neighbourhoods.
What Tower Hamlets is achieving today others will attempt tomorrow.
The commitment, energy, drive and innovation of staff are essential to our success.
Tower Hamlets is committed to effective implementation of its Equal Opportunities Policy.
Applications are considered on the basis of their suitability for the post(s) regardless of sex, sexual orientation, religion, racial origin, marital status, disablement or age.
All jobs are open to jobshare unless otherwise stated.
The Councils recruitment and retention package could mean subsidised car leasing, a relocation package worth up to £6000, bridging loan facilities, free life insurance, subsidised mortgage and travel allowance.
RSPB
Working for conservation
ASSISTANT CONSERVATION OFFICER
SALARY RANGE £  –£ 
The RSPB, Europe's largest voluntary wildlife conservation organisation, has a vacancy for an Assistant Conservation Officer in its Northern Ireland Regional Office.
This challenging post, based in Belfast, will deal with the full range of the Society's conservation work within the region.
Planning matters will form a substantial part of the workload.
Applicants should have a degree in a science or planning related subject and at least two years experience in environmental/land use and planning matters.
A knowledge of, and a commitment to, nature conservation in Northern Ireland is essential.
Closing date for completed applications: Friday 8 March 1991.
THE ROYAL SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF BIRDS.
HSE Health & Safety Executive
HM INSPECTORS OF HEALTH AND SAFETY
Opportunities working throughout the country in a career working for other people's safety, as HM Inspector of Factories or HM Inspector of Agriculture 
UP TO £14, REGIONAL OFFICES
A VITAL AND REWARDING JOB
People at work encounter many hazards, arising from toxic substances, dangerous machinery or the physical environment.
Some are well known but new technology brings new problems.
On farms, building sites, in factories and hospitals there are dangers to be understood and avoided.
Dangers to the general public can also arise at fairgrounds, demolition sites or from the carrying of dangerous substances by road.
VARIETY AND RESPONSIBILITY
HM Inspectors of Factories or Agriculture visit many types of workplace, and have to deal with a wide range of technical and legislative problems.
There is a fascinating variety to the task of providing advice and enforcing legislation, and of persuading management and workers alike in an effort to reduce the misery and cost of accidents and ill health.
As an Inspector you work in a small team and operate from one of more than 20 offices in England, Scotland and Wales.
You need to think on your feet and have sound judgement and determination, because the decisions you make directly affect people's health and safety.
You also need to be a good communicator, able to influence people from the boardroom to the shopfloor.
Early in your career you will be expected to assume considerable responsibility.
COMPREHENSIVE TRAINING — PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATION
Your personal development programme will include on-the-job training in a supportive environment, accompanying senior colleagues on visits and attending residential courses and local tutorials.
Formal training leads to a qualification in health and safety.
Training continues throughout your career and development of individual skills and specialisms is encouraged.
YOUR QUALIFICATIONS
We will be looking at a wide range of candidates — you may be a new graduate, or in mid-career and looking for a change of direction, or returning to employment after a career break.
You will need a good honours degree in any discipline or alternatively a degree, HND or equivalent combined with experience at management level.
Final year students may apply.
You must have, or be able to obtain a full driving licence.
LOCATION AND SALARY
Posts are available in most of HSE's 20 regional offices throughout Great Britain.
Your starting salary will be in the range £11,026 to £14,956 (London) or £10,466 to £14,381 (elsewhere).
There is rapid promotion, normally after 3 years, to the next grade where the salary scale is £15,553 to £23,025.
There are also prospects of further promotion to posts which attract higher salaries.
London posts attract up to £1,750 more.
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE OF UP TO £5,000 MAY BE AVAILABLE.
HOW TO APPLY
For further details and an application form (to be returned by 15th March 1991) write to the Civil Service Commission, Alencon Link, Basingstoke, Hants RG  JB, telephone Basingstoke  (answering service operates outside office hours) or fax .
Please quote ref: G/280/91/1.NS
The Health and Safety Executive is an equal opportunities employer and is formally committed to equal opportunities.
All suitably qualified applicants will be considered on the basis of merit irrespective of sex, racial origin, marital status or disability.
Applications are particularly welcome from women and people from ethnic minorities.
UNIVERSITY OF ST ANDREWS
Department of Chemistry
RESEARCH TECHNICIAN
Applications are invited for the post of Research Technician (Grade C) to investigate the preparation and purification of new precursors for the growth of semi-conductors.
This forms part of a major research programme funded by the SERC, involving collaboration with chemists at UMIST and physicists at St Andrews.
The appointment will be for one year.
Applicants should have a City and Guilds certificate, an ONC or equivalent qualification or a degree in an appropriate subject.
An ability to handle air-sensitive compounds, although not essential, would be an advantage.
Starting salary will be £8405 per annum on the Grade C scale (£8405–£9242).
AMES PERSONNEL
Completing your BSc, MSc, or PhD? or are you a NEW or RECENT GRADUATE in Electronics, Maths, Computer Science, Physics, or similar?
We have vacancies in high technology areas including electronics, software and R&D — fields include maths and physics.
Salaries range from £10k–£18k dependent on qualifications, with relocation packages where applicable.
Please send your CV, listing telephone number for contact, or call us now for an application form.
Our services are free to all applicants.
RHÔNE POULENC
WELCOME TO ALL THOSE WHO WILL TAKE PART ON OUR ADVENTURE…
Our company is rapidly growing with the objective of being one of the top five chemical companies in the world and is using all possible means to achieve it.
There are currently two positions available in the toxicology department in Lyon: these two posts would normally be suitable for toxicologists with a postgraduate qualification.
AGROCHEMICALS TOXICOLOGY
This position involves the supervision of toxicology studies at contract laboratories and at our own laboratory near Nice.
In addition, it will involve the preparation of defence position papers, and discussions with regulatory authorities for registered compounds.
For this position a sound training in toxicology in general is essential and some experience in industry would be desirable.
The ability to speak French is not essential but a willingness to learn would be considered desirable.
INDUSTRIAL CHEMICALS TOXICOLOGY
This position though based in Lyon would involve considerable time spent in Paris with the management of the Chemicals Divisions.
The ideal candidate will already have industrial experience and be well acquainted with the requirements in Europe for toxicology dossiers concerning new and existing chemicals.
A basic level of competence in the French language is essential for this position.
Please send application to Elaine Giraud — Agro — 14/20 rue P. Naizet — 69009 LYON France.
SmithKline Beecham
Training Co-ordinator, Clinical R&D Develop and implement a worldwide training strategy
SmithKline Beecham is a world-leading, research-based pharmaceuticals company committed to innovation and standards of excellence in all that is does.
Clinical R&D represents a key area in the development programme for pharmaceutical products and, with almost 1200 staff distributed internationally, a new position has arisen for a Training Co-ordinator to focus technical training activity in this area on a worldwide basis.
The brief is broad-ranging.
Your starting point will be a comprehensive assessment of the area's technical training needs.
From that you will develop a training strategy and then be responsible for deciding how to implement that strategy.
Working alongside internal or external suppliers, you will develop and present cost-effective programmes such as induction training or operational modules.
This position calls for a thorough knowledge of the pharmaceutical industry and the role and nature of clinical development.
Some training experience would be useful, but more important will be your strong presentation and communication skills.
The ability to speak a second European language would be an advantage.
A competitive salary is accompanied by a comprehensive range of benefits including bonus, pension, private healthcare, share-matching scheme and relocation assistance where appropriate.
If you are interested in this ‘greenfield’ opportunity to make a major contribution to the performance of Clinical R&D, then please send full career details to Christine Hall, Senior Personnel Officer, SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, 47–49 London Road, Reigate, Surrey RH  YF.
SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals
Marxism Today
PRODUCTION VOLUNTEERS
Enthusiastic about Marxism Today?
Looking for production experience?
We need people each month to help us in our lively, action-packed office.
You would be proofreading, chasing facts, figures and photos, writing headlines and captions, and doing a fair amount of legwork.
We don't ask for specific skills or qualifications — just commitment and initiative.
Marxism Today
PROMOTION VOLUNTEERS
We are looking for help in developing our sales, promotion and marketing.
Volunteers are required to assist with all sections of sales and distribution — newstrade, subscriptions and bookshops.
There are also exciting new projects which will require assistance; overseas sales, student network and indexing.
Volunteers need have no experience, just lots of energy and bundles of ideas.
exciting job opportunities
We want to see a country in which women can go about their lives without fear of attack, where the colour of someone's skin is not a virtual guarantee of unemployment, where work — whether social, productive or domestic — would be properly valued and regarded.
A society in which children are freed from abuse and are respected as human beings, a society which values and cares for its older citizens.
We want a modernising society, which uses science and technology to bequeath clear seas and fresh air to future generations.
A society where by limiting our demands on nature and sharing our resources between all peoples we can overcome the divide between first and third worlds.
We want a society in which people have the power and resources to make and remake their own lives.
This is our vision of socialism.
Manifesto for New Times, Communist Party Strategy for the '90s.
The Communist Party is seeking to develop radical socialist politics in Britain.
Its recent congress broke from democratic centralism and Marxism-Leninism.
It agreed to draw on creative Marxism and other traditions and transform itself into an empowering organisation in order to contribute to opening up the new political formulations that will be needed across Europe in the post cold-war era.
We are seeking to appoint two permanent workers who will be centrally involved in this process at the party's busy office.
COMMUNICATIONS OFFICER
£11,500–£12,500 (including London weighting)
This post will involve communicating with the media, taking overall responsibility for personnel matters, including the development and implementation of equal opportunities policies.
The successful candidate will play a vital liaison role inside the organisation, working with officers and elected committees, including minute-taking and the preparation of some documents.
CAMPAIGN OFFICER
£11,500–£12,500 (including London weighting)
This job involves developing the party's main campaigns, currently against the Gulf war (for sanctions and negotiations) and for local tactical voting campaigns.
It also involves facilitating other initiatives.
For details write to the secretary, CPGB, 6 Cynthia Street, London N1 9JF, outlining any relevant experience and indicating clearly which post you are applying for.
Closing date for applications, Friday 1 March.
UNIVERSITY OF NOTTINGHAM SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
SENIOR LECTURER/LECTURERS IN ARCHITECTURE
Applications are invited from suitably qualified candidates with an architectural background for the above posts.
With a new Head, Professor A Peter Fawcett and new staff appointments following the retirement of senior staff, the Nottingham School is responding to the massive changes ahead for architectural education.
The school is situated within the mature park of a campus university and its location offers excellent communications by road, rail and air.
Applicants should demonstrate thorough proven performance in design and/or research, an ability to contribute to the development of teaching and research within the School.
Salary scales — Lecturer £12,086–£22,311 per annum, Senior Lecturer £23,423–£26,471 per annum .
MIT DEPARTMENT OF ARCHITECTURE
Three Faculty Positions
Three faculty positions open in Architecture Studies at MIT: one tenured and two tenure-track as Assistant or Associate Professor.
We seek individuals who will develop and apply principles central to architectural design and its practice under different conditions of society and culture.
Applicant's area of work may be, among others, design studies, housing or city form, technology and methods of design.
Successful candidates must have sophisticated understanding of design, even if specialized in an adjunct field.
MIT IS AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION/EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER
The University of British Columbia
THE SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Building Science/Construction Technology
One full-time, tenure track position is available from July 1, 1991 to a person qualified to teach and direct research in the field of Building Science, specifically Construction and Technology.
Assignments will include teaching and supervising research in a post-professional Bachelor of Architecture degree program.
The appointment will be made at the Assistant or Associate Professor level depending on the experience of the candidate.
Candidates must hold a professional degree in Architecture, an advanced degree, and specialization in the detailed aspects of the building envelope including diagnostic problems and techniques.
Candidates must be capable of applying this special knowledge to student design work.
Preference will be given to candidates with teaching experience, research and publications in the area of specialisation.
History/Theory
One full-time, tenure track position is available from July 1, 1991 to a person qualified to teach and direct research in the history and theory of Architecture.
Assignments will include teaching and supervising research in a post-professional graduate program, and teaching in a three year professional Bachelor of Architecture program.
The appointment will be made at the Assistant or Associate Professor level depending on the experience of the candidate.
Candidates must hold a degree in Architecture and a Ph.D.
degree in the history and theory of Architecture with a specialization in the work of the 19th and 20th century.
They should also be able to teach highly motivated architecture students to improve the rigour and content of their work.
Preference will be given to candidates with teaching experience, research and publications in the area of specialization.
Design
One full-time, tenure track position is available from July 1, 1991 to a person qualified to teach Architectural Design.
Assignments will include teaching and supervising post-professional graduate students, and teaching in a three year professional Bachelor of Architecture program.
The appointment will be made at the Assistant or Associate Professor level depending on the experience os the candidate.
Candidates must hold a post-professional advanced degree in architectural design or have completed a substantial body of high quality works.
Preference will be given to candidates who have achieved recognition for distinction in architectural design, and who have teaching experience in this field.
The salary will depend on rank and experience, and the position is subject to final budgetary approval.
The University of British Columbia is committed to the Federal Government's employment equality program and encourages applications from all qualified individuals.
In accordance with Canadian Immigration requirements, priority will be given to Canadian citizens and permanent residents of Canada.
Box 303 c/o RIBA Journal.
Chartered Architect with over 30 years post graduate experience both in the U.K. and abroad seeks interesting post in the U.K. or abroad.
STATE OF BAHRAIN
Senior Architect
Urban Economics
From US$33,700–$43,200 tax free
The Ministry of Housing of the State of Bahrain has an attractive opportunity for a Senior Architect.
The role will involve providing economic back-up analysis and feasibility studies for planning activities undertaken at all levels by the Physical Planning Directorate.
To quality, you must have a B.Sc.
degree in Architecture or equivalent, together with an M.Sc.
in Urban Economics backed by extensive experience in this discipline.
A knowledge of the use of computers for research work is essential, and relevant experience gained in developing countries would be advantageous.
The State of Bahrain is the banking and commercial centre of the Arabian Gulf, with a large community of expatriates enjoying a relaxed, high standard of living.
Advanced medical services, quality educational facilities, varies sports activities, top hotels and restaurants, traditional and cultural affairs all provide a rewarding life style for the discriminating resident.
The initial contract is for two years, married or bachelor status, renewable annually by mutual agreement.
Benefits include free furnished accommodation, 30 working days annual leave, family airfares, medical care and children's educational assistance.
STATE OF BAHRAIN
Ministry of Housing